A SPEECH, MADE By the right Honorable, JOHN Earl of BRISTOLL, In the high
Court of PARLIAMENT, May 20. 1642.

Concerning an ACCOMMODATION.



LONDON, Printed for RICHARD MARRIOT 1642.

A SPEECH, Made by the right Honorable JOHN Earl of Bristoll, in the high
Court of PARLIAMENT.
May the 20. 1642. My Lords,
I Have spoken so often upon the subject of ACCOMMODATION, with so little
acceptance, and with so ill success, that it was in my intention not to have
made any further essay in this kind; but my zeal to the peace and happiness
of this Kingdom, and my apprehensions of the near approaching of our
unspeakeable miseries and calamities, suffer me not to be master of mine own
resolutions.

Certainly, this Kingdom has at all times many advantages over the other
Monarchies of Europe. As, of Situation, of plenty of rich commodities, of
Power both by Sea and Land: But more particularly at this time, when all our
neighboring States are, by their several interests so involved in War, and
with such equality of power, that there is not much likelihood of their
mastering one another, nor of having their differences easily compounded. And
thereby, we being only admitted to all trades, and to all places: Wealth and
Plenty (which ever follow, where trade flourishes) are in a manner cast upon
us.

I shall not trouble your Lordships by putting you in mind of the great and
noble undertakings of our Ancestors: Nor shall I pass higher then the times
with in mine own remembrance.

Queen Elizabeth was a Princess disadvantaged by her Sex, by her age, and
chiefly, by her want of Issue: yet if we shall consider the great effects
which were wrought upon most of the States of Christendom by this Nation under
her prudent government; (The growth of the Monarchy of Spain chiefly by her
impeached; The United Provinces by her protected; The French in their greatest
miseries relieved; Most of the Princes of Germany kept in high respect and
reference toward her and this Kingdom, and the peace and tranquillity
wherein this Kingdom flourished; and which has been continued down unto us
by the peaceable government of King James of blessed memory, and of his now
Majesty, until these late unhappy interruptions) We cannot but judge this
Nation equally capable, with any other, of Honor, Happiness, and plenty.

Now, if in stead of this happy condition, in which we have been, and might
be, upon a sober and impartial inquiry we shall find our selves to have bin
for some few years last past involved in so many troubles and distractions,
and at the present to be reduced to the very brinke of miseries and calamities;
It is high time for us to consider by what means we have been brought into
them, and by what means it is most probable we may be brought out of them.

This Kingdom never enjoyed so universal a peace, neither has it any visible
enemy in the whole world either Infidel or Christian: Our Enemies are only of
our own house, such as our own dissentions, jealousies, and distractions,
have raised up: And certainly where they are found (especially betwixt a King
and his people) no other cause of the unhappiness and misery of a State need
to be sought after: For civil discord is a plentiful Sourse, from whence all
miseries and mischiefs flow into a Kingdom.

The Scripture tells us of the strength of a little City united, and of the
instabilitie of a Kingdom divided within it self; So that upon a prudent
inquiry, we may assign our own jealousies, and discords, for the chief
cause of our past and present troubles, and of our future fears.

It must be confessed, that by the counsel and conduct of evil Ministers, the
Subject had cause to think their just liberties invaded; And from thence have
our former distempers grown: For it is in the body politic of a Monarchy,
as in another Natural body, the health whereof is defined to be, Partium
Corporis aequa temperies, an equal temper of the parts: So likewise, a State
is well in health and well disposed, when Sovereign power, and common right,
are equally balanced, and kept in an eaven temper by just and equitable rules.

And truly, (My Lords) by the goodness of his Majesty, and by the prudent
endeavor of the Parliament, this State is almost reduced to that equal, and
eaven temper, and our sickness is rather continued out of fancy and conceit
(I mean fears and jealousies) then out of any real distemper or defect.

I well remember, That before the beginning of this Parliament, some Noble
Lords presented a Petition unto the King, and in that Petition did set down
all or most of the grievances and distempers of the Kingdom, which then
occurred to them. To these (as I conceive) the Parliament have procured from
his Majesty such redresses as are to their good satisfaction.

Many other things for the ease, security, and comfort of the subject, have
been, by their great industry, found and propounded, and by his Majesty's
goodness condescended unto. And now we are come so near the happiness of
being the most free and most settled Nation in the Christian world; Our dangers
and miseries will grow greater and nearer unto us every day then other if they
be not prevented.

The King on his part offers to concur with us in the settling of all the
liberties and immunities either for the propriety of our goods, or liberty of
our persons, which we have received from our ancestors, or which himself
has granted unto us; And what shall yet remain for the good and comfort of
his Subjects, He is willing to hearken to all our just and reasonable
propositions: And for the establishing of the true Protestant Religion, he
wooes us to it: And the wisdom and industry of the Parliament has now put it
in a hopeful way.

The rule of his government, he professes, shall be, The Laws of the
Kingdom, And for the comforting and securing of us he offers a more large
and more general pardon then has been granted by any of his Predecessors.

And truly (My Lords) This is all, that ever was or can be pretended unto by us.

We, on the other side make profession, That we intend to make his Majesty a
glorious King, To endeavor to support his dignity, and to pay unto him that
duty and obedience, which, by our Allegiance, several Oaths, and late
Protestation we owe unto him, and to maintain all his just Regalities and
Prerogatives, which I conceive to be as much as his Majesty will expect from
us.

So that (My Lords) we (being both thus reciprocally agreed of that which in
the general would make both the King and people happy) shall be most
unfortunate, if we shall not bring both inclinations and endeavors so to
propound and settle particulars, as both King and people may know what will
give them mutual satisfaction, which certainly must be the first stepp to the
settling of a right understanding betwixt them. And in this I should not
conceive any great difficulty, if it were once put into a way of preparation.
But the greatest difficulty may seem to be, how that which may be settled and
agreed upon may be secured. This is, commonly, the last point in Treaties
betwixt Princes, and of the greatest niceness, But much more betwixt a King
and his Subjects, where that confidence and belief which should be betwixt
them, is once lost: And to speak clearly, I fear, that this may be our case,
And herein may consist the chiefest difficulty of accommodation: For it is much
easier to compose differences arising from reason (yea even from wrongs then it
is to satisfy jealousies, which arising out of the diffidence and distrust,
grow and are varied upon every occasion.

But (My Lords) if there be no endeavors to allay and remove them, they will
every day increase and gather strength; Nay, they are already grown to that
height, and the mutual replies to those direct terms of opposition, That if
we make not a present stop, it is to be feared, it will speedily pass further
then verbal contestations.

I observe in some of His Majesty's Answers, a Civil War spoken of. I
confess it is a word of horror to me who have been an eyewitness of those
unexpressible calamities, that (in a short time) the most plentiful, and
flourishing Countries of Europe have been brought unto by an intestine war.

I further observe, that His Majesty protests against the miseries that may
ensue by a War, and that he is clear of them. It is true, that a
protestation of that kind is no actual denouncing of War, but it is the
very next degree to it, Vltima admonitio, as the Civilians term it, The last
admonition; So that we are upon the very brink of our miseries; It is better
keeping out of them, then getting out of them: And in a State, the Wisdom of
Prevention, is infinitely beyond the Wisdom of Remedies. If for the sins of
this Nation, these misunderstandings should produce the least Act of Hostility,
it is not almost to be believed, how impossible it were to put any stay to our
miseries: For a Civil War admits of none of those Conditions, or Quarter, by
which cruelty and blood are amongst other Enemies kept from extremiries; Nay,
if it should but so happen (which God of his goodness avert) That mutually
Forces, and Armies should be raised, Jealousies and Fears would be so much
increased thereby, that any Accommodation would be rendered full of difficulty
and length; and the very charge of maintaining them, (whilst, first a cessation
of Arms, and then a general Accommodation were in treating) the Wealth of the
Kingdom would be consumed.

And of this we had lately a costly example, For in those unhappy troubles,
betwixt us and Scotland, after there was a stop made to any further Acts of
Hostility, and a desire of peace expressed on both sides, Commissioners
nominated, and all the Articles propounded, yet the keeping of the Armies
together for our several securities, (whilst the cessation at Rippon, and the
peace at London were in treating) cost this Kingdom not much less then a
million of pounds. And if two Armies be once on foot here in England, either a
sudden encounter must destroy one of them, or the keeping of them both on foot
must destroy the Kingdom.

I hope therefore we shall make it our endeavor by moderation, and calmnesse,
yet to put a stay to our so near approaching miseries, and that we shall harken
to the wise advice of our Brethren of Scotland in their late Answer to the King
and Parliament, wherein they earnestly entreat us, That all means may be
forborne which may make the breach wider, and the wound deeper; And that no
place be given to the evil Spirit of division, which at such times works
uncessantly, and rests not: But that the fairest; the most Christian, and
compendious way may be taken by so wise a King and Parliament, as may (against
all malice and opposition) make his Majesty and his posterity more glorious,
and his Kingdom more happy then ever. And in another place they say, That
since the Parliament have thought meet to draw the practice of the Parliament
of Scotland into example, in point of Declaration: They are confident that the
affection of the Parliament will lead them also to the practice of that
Kingdom in composing the unhappy differences betwixt his Majesty and them, and
(so far as may consist with their Religion, Liberties, and Laws) in giving
His Majesty all satisfaction, especially in their tender care of his Royal
Person, and of his Princely Greatness and Authority.

Certainly (My Lords) this is wise and brotherly advice; And I doubt not but we
are all desirous to follow it. We must not then still dwell upon generals (For
generals produce nothing) But we must put this Business into a certain way,
whereby particulars may be descended unto; And the way that I shall offer with
all humility is, That there may be a select Committee of choice persons of both
Houses, who may, in the first place, truly state and set down all things in
difference betwixt the King and the Subject, with the most probable ways of
reconciling them. Secondly, to descend unto the particulars, which may be
expected by each from other, either in point of our supporting of him, or his
relieving of us. And lastly, how all these Conditions, being agreed upon, may
be so secured; as may stand with the honor of His Majesty, and the
satisfaction of the Subject.

When such a Committee shall have drawn up the heads of the Propositions, and
the way of securing them, they may be presented unto the Houses, and so offered
unto His Majesty by such a way as the Parliament shall judge most probable to
produce an Accommodation.

(My Lords) What I have yet said unto you, has been chiefly grounded upon the
apprehensions and fears of our future dangers. I shall say something of the
unhappiness of our present estate, which certainly stands in as much need of
relief and remedy, as our fears do of prevention; For, although the King and
People were fully united, and that all men that now draw several ways, should
unanimously set their hand to the work, yet they would find it no easy task
to restore this Kingdom to a prosperous and comfortable condition: If we take
into our consideration the deplorable estate of Ireland, likely to drain this
Kingdom of men and treasure; If we consider the Debts and necessity of the
Crown, the engagements of the Kingdom, the great and unusual contributions of
the people, the which, although they may not be so much to their discontent
(for that they have been legally raised) yet the burden has not been much
cased: Let us likewise consider the distractions (I may almost call them
confusions) in point of Religion (which of all other distempers are most
dangerous and destructive to the peace of a State.

Besides these public calamities, let every particular man consider the
distructed and discomfortable estate of his own condition, for mine own part, I
must ingeneously profess unto your Lordships, That I cannot find out, (under
the different Commands of the King and the Parliament) any such course of
caution and wariness, by which I can promise to my self security or safety. I
could give your Lordships many instances of the inconsistancy and impossibility
of obeying these commands: But I shall trouble you with only one or two.

The Ordinance of Parliament (now in so great agitation) commands all persons
in Authority, to put it in execution, and all others to obey it according to
the Fundamental Laws of the Land; The King declares it to be contrary to the
Fundamental Laws, against the Subject, and Rights of Parliament; And
commands all his Subjects of what degree soever upon their allegiance not to
obey the said Ordinance, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

So likewise in poin^ of the King, commanding the attendance of diverse of us
upon His Person whereunto We are obliged by several relations of our services
and oaths: In case We comply not with his Commands, We are liable to his
displeasure, and the loss of those places of Honor and Trust, which We hold
under Him: If We obey his Commands without the leave of the Parliament, (which
has not been always granted) We are liable to the censure of Parliament; And
of both these We want not fresh examples; So that certainly, this cannot but be
acknowledged to be an unhappy, and uncomfortable condition.

I am sure I bring with me a ready and obedient heart, to pay unto the King all
those duties of loyalty, allegiance, and obedience which I owe unto him; And I
shall never be wanting toward the Parliament, to pay unto it all those due
Rights, and that obedience which we all owe unto it: But in contrary Commands,
a conformity of obedience to both, is hardly to be lighted on. The
Reconciliation must be in the Commanders, and the Commands, and not in the
obedience, or the person that is to obey. And therefore until it shall please
God to bless us with a right understanding betwixt the King and Parliament,
and a conformity in their Commands, neither the Kingdom in public, nor
particular men in private can be reduced to a safe or comfortable Condition.

I have said thus much to give occasion to others, to offer likewise their
opinions; For if we shall sit still, and nothing (tending to the stay of the
unhappy misunderstanding betwixt the King and his People) be propounded: It is
to be feared; That our miseries will hasten so fast upon us, that the season
and opportunity of applying remedies may be past.

I have herein discharged my conscience, suitable to that duty which I owe to
the King my Sovereign and Master, and suitable to that zeal and affection,
which I shall ever pay to the happiness and prosperity of the Kingdom,
toward which I shall ever faithfully contribute my humble prayers, and honest
endeavors. And I shall no way doubt (whatsoever success this my proposition
may have) it will be accompanied with the good wishes of your Lordships, and of
all peaceable, and well minded men.

FINIS.

