THE CHRISTIANS CABALA, OR, SURE TRADITION: Necessary to be KNOWN and BELIEVED,
By all that will be SAVED. A Doctrine holding forth, Good Tidings of Great Joy,
to the greatest of PENITENT SINNERS. With a CHARACTER of one that is truly
Such. As it was lately held forth to the CHURCH of GOD, at Great YARMOUTH.

By John Brinsley, Minister of the Gospel there.

LONDON, Printed for George Sawbridge, at the Sign of the Bible on
Ludgate Hill, 1662.

To all that Love The Lord JESUS CHRIST in Sincerity, Within the Town of GREAT
YARMOUTH; Grace and Peace.
(Much esteemed in the Lord)
IT is now Thirty seven years, since I was by a Divine Providence, sent to
exercise my Ministerial Function among you; my first entrance within your
Walls, being upon the same day that your late Dread Sovereign KING CHARLES the
First, was there with great Solemnity, and with the Universal Acclamation and
Joy of all that were present, Proclaimed. And of this my entrance, I hope I may
without boasting say unto you, what Paul does of his, unto his Thessalonians, 1
These. 2. 1. that it has not been altogether in vain. It having been my desire
to follow his steps, in making what improvement I might of such liberty and
opportunity as the same providence has been pleased to put into my hand, in
speaking to you the Gospel of God. And that these my poor labors might be the
more effectual, not dying in the ^are, not perishing in the hearing, I have
adventured to expose some of them to a public view; that so, by this Sacrifice
offered up unto God and his Church, being dead, I might yet speak, and preach
being silent. And upon the same account it is that I do now send these
Meditations after them: Wherein you shall meet with a Subject, which (if you
will believe your Apostle) is worthy of all acceptance. Such I am sure is the
matter here held forth* what ever the manner of handling it be; it containing
in it, the sum and substance of the Gospel, which being brought home, as here
it is by this chosen Vessel, by a particular Application, it cannot but bring
abundant Consolation to the Soul of every truly penitent sinner: Such
experience had this our Apostle of it; and so have many others after him. Among
whom I meet with a memorable instance in that renowned Martyr of Christ, Mr.
Thomas Bilney, who in a Letter of his to Cu^bert Tonstall Bishop of London, (as
Mr. Fox in his Martyrology has Related it) gives this account of the manner
and means of his own Conversion. Hearing (says ^e) of the New Testament, which
was first set forth by Erasmus, and understanding it to be eloquently done by
him, being allured rather for the Latin then for the word of God, (for at that
time, I knew not what it meant) I ^ought it even by the good providence of God,
as I do now well understand and perceive. And at the first read^ng (as I
remember) I chanced upon ^his Sentence, (O most sweet and comfortable Sentence
to my Soul) the first Epistle to Timothy the first Chapter, It is a true
saying, and worthy of all men to be embraced, that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners, of whom I am the chief.

This one sentence through God's instruction and inward working, which I did
not then perceive, did so exhilarate my heart, being before wounded with the
guilt of my sins, and being almost in despair, that immediately I felt a
mavelous comfort and quietness, insomuch, that my bruised bones leaped for
joy.

Thus have you a Probatum est affixed to this Receipt, which being taken in,
and rightly digested, I doubt not but it will be found a Sovereign Cordial to
whoever it is that shall make use of it. Only take heed that your Souls be
duly prepared for it, by a true sight and sense of sin, that so you may see and
feel, the need you have of Jesus Christ, and be excited willingly to receive
him, not only as a Savior, but also as a Sovereign; to be Ruled and governed,
as well as Saved by him. Being thus disposed, now let me invite you to come,
and suck this Breast of Consolation, which you have here held forth unto you,
receiving and lodging this Divine truth in your hearts, remembering it,
meditating of it, believing it, applying it to your selves, and practicing what
you are here directed and excited to; which whilst you do, let my prayers go
along with my poor endeavors, that through the concurrence of grace, they may
be made effectual unto you, and who ever else shall make use of them, for that
end for which they have been designed. In the assured hope whereof I rest,

YARMOUTH, March 30. 1662. Your Servant in the Work of the Lord, JOHN BRINSLEY.

READER,
THere is lately Printed a Learned, Pious, and Practical Commentary upon the
whole Gospel of St. Mark; wherein the Text is Logically Analyzed; The meaning
of the Holy Spirit, clearly and soundly Opened; Doctrins naturally Raised; All
seeming differences between this and the other Evangelists Reconciled; And many
important Cases of Conscience Resolved, By Mr. George Petter. Published at the
desire of above 200. Learned Divines, Signified under their Hands.

Also, An Exposition of the whole Epistle to the Hebrews, wherein the Text is
cleared, Theopolitica improved, The Socinian Comment Examined, By Mr. George
Lawson, Rector of More, in the County of Salop.

Also, The Running of the Christian Race with Patience, By Mr. John Brinsley.

Prayer, and Praise. A twofold Tribute to be paid* by all Loyal Subjects, to
their Supreme and Subordinate Sovereign. By Mr. John Brinsley.

The Rich Fool, Being an Exposition of that Parable, Luke 12: 16. 22. By
Nehemiah Rogers, Minister of the Gospel of Christ.

A Posing Question, Put by the wise Man, viz. SOLOMON, to the wisest of Men,
concerning making a Judgment of Temporal Conditions. By Benjamin Baxter, late
Minister of the Gospel in Worcester.

All to be sold, by George Sawbridge, at the Sign of the Bible on Ludgate Hill.

THE CHRISTIANS CABALA* OR, SURE TRADITION, Necessary to be KNOWN, and
BELIEVED, by all that will be SAVED.
1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to sa^e sinners, of whom I am chief.
THis Portion of Scripture, (as I remember, and so I presume do some, if not
many of you) about twenty years since, I took up, and spent some time upon in
this place. I now reassume and take it up again; which I am induced to do, not
so December 29. 1661.
much by the Season, as by the Subject; that being such, as cannot be too much,
or too often spoken of, A word never out of season, containing in it, that
(...), spoken of by the Angel, Luke 2. 10. that joyful News, good tidings of
great joy to all people, even to the greatest of penitent sinners. So this
chosen Vessel, the blessed Apostle, the great Doctor of the Gentiles looked
upon it, who here minds his Timothy, and all others to whom this his Epistle
should come, of a saying, a Doctrine, which, as it was sweet and comfortable to
himself, so it would be to all them, who should make the like use of it that he
had done. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.

In which words (not to spend time about connection, and dependence upon what
went before) we shall take notice of two things; Parts of the Text Doctrine.
Application.


The Doctrine, and the Application.

The Doctrine, which is first commended, then Propounded. Commended by way of
Preface; and that, first from the Verity, then from the Dignity of it. From
the Verity, [ This is a faithful saying]; from the Dignity, [ and worthy of
all acceptation], Propounded, [ Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners]. The Application follows, wherein the Apostle brings home this
General to himself in Particular, ranking himself in the list and number of
these sinners which we had spoken of, yea, in the forefront of them, [ of whom
I am chief]. Let these be the parts of the Text, upon which I shall (through
Divine assistance) insist severally; yet more briefly upon the former, that I
may enlarge upon the latter, the Applicatory part, which in this review, my eye
is chiefly upon.

Begin we with the Doctrine, and therein with The D^ ctrine Commended
the commendation of it; which is the very same with that which we find affixed
to that other Doctrine, Chap. 4. v. 9. of this Epistle, where the Apostle,
holding forth the great advantage that comes unto Christians from true Piety
and Godliness; Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come; he subjoynes, This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance. And so here he makes use of
the same commendation, only in a different order, prefixing it by way of
Preface or Introduction. Not unlike a Trumpet, sounded before the publishing of
a Royal Proclamation, which serves to make way for it, to call people to the
hearing of it, and to command attention to it. Of such use is this Elogium,
this high commendation which the Apostle here gives of this Doctrine, which he
intended to propound, serving to excite Praefati^ haec nobi^ sit insta^ Buccin^
son^ntis ad publicandum gratiae Christi pr^conium. Calv. Com. (...) Text.
all to give the more earnest attendance to it. Which use, Calvin (writing upon
it) wills all to make of it.

And not without cause, does this our Apostle thus ussher in this Doctrine, and
make way for it; it being a Mystery which will not easily pierce, and readily
sink into the heads and hearts of men, to be so received as it ought to be. The
natural man (as he tells his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 2. 15) (...) receives not the
things which are of God. Spiritual mysteries he receives them not into his
understanding rightly to apprehend, or conceive of them; nor into his judgment
thoroughly to be convinced of the truth of them, so as firmly to believe them;
much less into his heart, his will and affections, to close with them, to
embrace them. Such is the Doctrine here propounded and published, even that
great mystery of Godliness, (as the same Pen styleth it, 1 Timothy 3. 16.) The
Doctrine of Salvation by Christ. A Doctrine, though worthy of all, yet finding
little credence and acceptance in the world. And therefore the Apostle, to
prepare the hearts of men for the receiving of it, sets this high commendation
upon it, commending it, first from the Verity, then from the Dignity of it.
Touch upon each. 1. From the Verity of it.


1. For the Verity of it. [ This is a faithful saying] (...), sermo fidelis,
i. e. verus, a true saying. So we have it rendered, Cap. 3. v. 1. of this
Epistle. And so our former Translation reads it here, This is a true saying.
Sermo certus, (as Beza has it); A sure and certain Saying. Such are not all
the sayings of men, not of the wisest, no nor yet of the best of them. What the
Psalmist said in his haste, in his passion, Psalm. 116. 11. I said in my haste,
All men are liars; The Apostle speaks it advisedly, Romans 3. 4. Let God be
true, and every man a liar. Such are men, liars all, Passively and Actively.
Being subject to be deceived themselves, they are subject to deceive others.
Their words, their sayings, are not always (...), true and certain. But such
are all the sayings, all the words which we meet withal in the Word, the
Scripture. The Scripture being (as Saint James calls it, Iam. 1. 18.) (...)
The word of Truth. There is not a saying there but is a true saying, not a
word, but is a faithful word. Such are the words of the Law, and such are the
words of the Gospel; such are the Threatenings, such are the Promises, such are
the Prophecies, which there we meet with; all (...), true words, faithful
sayings. Write (says the Spirit) for these words are faithful and true, Rev.
21. 5. And they must needs be so, being the words of that God, who is the God
of Truth, (as we find him sometimes styled, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Psalm. 31. 5. Isa. 65.
16.) Truth it self. The words of that Word, the Essential Word, the Eternal Son
of God, who is, (as he is called, Rev. 1. 5.) (...), That faithful Witness.
Such is he, and such are his words, all faithful words.

Among all, none deserving this Encomium, The Doctrine of the Gospel, the word
of Truth.
this commendation, more than this Evangelical word, the Doctrine of the
Gospel, the sum whereof we have comprised in these few words in the Text, Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners. Which is, (...) (...) i.* e. (...)
a faithful saying, worthy to be credited, to be believed. So it was by the
Fathers under the Old Testament, who beheld it only a far off in the Promise:
though they dyed before they received it, yet they believed it, living in the
faith of it, and dying in the faith of it. These all dyed in the faith, not
having received the promise, says the Apostle, Heb. 11. 13. speaking of the
Patriarchs, who died in the faith, as firmly believing that Promise concerning
the Land of Canaan, which God had made to them; so that great promise
concerning the Messia, who was to come into the world: whose day Abraham is
said to have seen, (as our Savior tells the Jews) Ioh. 8. 56. In this faith
they lived, and in this faith they dyed. So fully were they assured of the
truth thereof, that they were not afraid to take their death upon it, to dye in
the faith of it. So certain was this saying to them, who beheld it only in the
promise. Whereupon it was, that the Prophet Isay speaking of this, of Christ's
coming into the world, he speaks of it, as a thing already done: To us a Child
is born, to us a Son is given, Isa. 9. 6. How much more* certain then may it be
unto us, who look upon it in the performance, not as a thing to be done, but
done. What was promised to them, is made good to us; what they looked and
waited for, we have received. So as the Apostle might well say, what here he
does, This is a faithful saying, etc.

But I shall not spend time in confirmation Compased about with a cloud of
witneses.
of this truth, which among Christians were but a needless labor. Never was
truth (excepting only that of a deity, that there is a God, which is attested
by every creature) compassed about with such a (...) such a cloud of witnesses
as this. To this truth, gave all the Prophets witness; so Peter tells Cornelius
and his company, Acts 10. 43. And to this truth gave all the Apostles witness.
The one testifying that it should be done, the other that it was done. To this
truth gave all those Types under the Law witness, being all Shadows of this
Substance. To this truth have all the Saints of God in all ages of the world
given witness. All that ever were, before the Law, under the Law, under the
Gospel: Some, and many of them, sealing it with their blood; all of them,
pawning and adventuring their souls, their everlasting happiness upon it. Now
if two or three witnesses be sufficient to establish a word, (which with men
ordinarily they are, as that Text tells us, Mat. 18. 16.) how much more such a
cloud of witnesses? Never was truth more confirmed then this truth, The
Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners. This is a faithful saying. From the Dignity of it


2. And, as faithful, so acceptable; that is the second branch of the
Commendation. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance. So it
cannot be said of all truths. Sometimes (as Aquinas notes upon it) a saying may
be true, and yet a hard saying. Verus sed durus, This is a hard Saying, (say
the Disciples to their Lord and Master, discoursing to them concerning the
Bread of Life, which he said was Himself) Ioh. 6. 60. A true saying. This they
would not, durst not, make any question of, receiving it from his mouth. But a
hard saying, (...), harsh and irksome to be heard, Who can hear it? So it was
to them, because they could not receive it, were not able rightly to apprehend
and understand it; the hardness being Quin potius in illorum cordibus ^rat
durities, non in sermon. Calv. Com. in loc.
(as Calvin well notes upon it) in their hearts, not in the Doctrine delivered.
Thus Sayings may be, and often are, true, but not grateful; such are
Reprehensions for the most part, being like wine poured into a green wound,
which though proper and useful, yet it is searching and smarting: Though they
carry never so much truth in them, yet they are seldom pleasing, seldom
welcome: Paul reprehending his Galatians, he told them nothing but the truth,
yet that truth which was spoken to them, was requited with enmity from them. Am
I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? (so he
expostulates it with them) Gal. 4. 16. Thus it often falls out: Veritas odium
parit, Truth breeds hatred. All truths are not acceptable truths. But such is
this Truth which our Apostle here holds forth, That Christ Jesus is come into
the world to save sinners. It is a Doctrine which has not more Truth then
Sweetness in it; deserving not more Credit than Acceptance. This is a faithful
Saying, and worthy of all acceptance. Worthy of acceptance, and worthy of All
acceptance. So I shall divide the words.

1. Worthy of Acceptance. (...) 1. The Doctrine of the Gospel worthy of
Acceptance. Groecum (...) significat non tantum acceptionem vel acceptationem,
sed and approbationem, Corn a Lapide in Text.
An acceptable word, worthy to be received, (as the former Translation renders
it). And not only received but approved, which (as a Lapide notes) the word
(...) importes.

And well may it be said so to be, it being a good word, a good saying,
containing in it, good matter. My heart is inditing a good matter, (says the
Psalmist, speaking of the Kingly Office of Christ. Psalm. 45. 1.) I speak of the
things which I have made, touching the King, (as it there follows). Such is
the Doctrine of Salvation by Jesus Christ. It is a good word, containing good
matter, (...), Gospel, that is, a good Spell, a good speech, (which is
conceived to be the Notation of the English word Gospel). A good Saying,
containing good tidings. It is that which David says of Ahimaaz, 2 Samuel 18.
27. He is a good man, and he comes with good tidings. Much more truly, may it
be said of Jesus Christ, and his coming into the world. Being himself Good, he
came with good Tidings, tidings of Salvation. And what tidings like unto these
tidings? Good tidings of joy, of great joy! So the Angel tells the
Shepherds at the Birth of this our Savior, Luke 2. 10. Behold, I bring you
good tidings of great joy. Tidings of Salvation, cannot but be tidings of Joy.
Such are the tidings of temporal Salvation. They are good tidings. No words
more sweet, more comfortable to nature than they. The Prophet Zachary, speaking
of the promises of deliverance which God made to Jerusalem at the prayers of
the Angel from their present sufferings, Zach. 1. 13. The Lord (says he)
answered the Angel that talked with me with good words, and comfortable words.
How much more then the word of Eternal Salvation. And this is the word, the
Saying, here held forth in the Text, Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, to be unto them, the Author of Eternal Salvation, (as that Text has
it, Heb. 5. 9.) And how good is this saying? Well may it then be said (what
here it is) to be, (...), worthy of acceptance. 2. Worthy of All Accep^ation
1. To be received by all Men.


2. Yea of All acceptance, (...) a General, an Universal, Acceptance, to be
accepted by all men, and by all means; both, employed in this Expression.

1. Worthy to be accepted by all men. So it is, there being none but has need
of a Savior, all being by nature lost creatures, (as the Father says of his
Prodigal Son, This my Son was lost, Luke 15. 24.) and, without a Savior, a
Redeemer, for ever lost. The news of a Savior, such a Savior, cannot but
deserve a welcome entertainment from them. Behold, I bring you good tidings of
great joy, which shall be to all people, (says the Angel there) Luke 2. 10.
(...), To all sorts of people, of what Nation, or Condition soever; whether
Jews or Gentiles, Bond or Free, Rich or Poor, Prince or Peasant. And to all of
these sorts. There being not any one but comes within this list of sinners,
being so by nature, and by practice, and so justly obnoxious to the wrath of
God, from which, they are no ways able to free themselves, they stand in need
of a Savior; well then might the Apostle here say of this saying, This
Doctrine of Christ's coming into the world to save sinners, that it is worthy of
all acceptance, to be accepted by all men.

2. And as by all men, so by all means. So 2. By all means.
the former Translation here renders it, This is a true saying, and by all
means worthy to be received. And so Estius well explains it, Dignum quod modis
omnibus amplectemur, worthy Estius Com. in Text.
by all ways and means, to be received and embraced. Many ways there are,
whereby a saying may be received. It may be received into the Ear, it may be
received into the Head, it may be received into the Heart. Into the Ear when
men hear what is said; into the Head, when they apprehend, understand, and
believe, what they hear. Into the Heart, when they are affected with it. And
all these ways is this Saying, this Doctrine, worthy of Acceptance.

1. Worthy to be received into the Ear, Into the Ear, worthy to be heard.
by hearing of it, harkening and attending to it. No Doctrine, so worth the
hearing as this Doctrine, the Doctrine of the Gospel, the Doctrine of Salvation
by Christ. No other Doctrine can make the hearers happy; this can do it.
Blessed are your ears for they hear, (says our Savior to his Disciples) Mat.
13. 16. And what was it that they did hear? why that which their forefathers
desired to hear, but could not. Many Prophets and Righteous men, have desired
to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them, Verse 17. And what
was that? why, even this saying here in the Text, That Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners. This the Fathers before Christ, who waited for his
coming, would gladly have heard; but they heard it not. They indeed heard of
his Coming, that he should come; and believing it, they were made happy by it.
But the Disciples, who saw Christ in the flesh, they heard and saw that he was
come. And believing what they saw and heard, this made their eyes and ears,
blessed and happy. No Doctrine, no Tidings, (as I said) can make the hearer
happy but only this. And this can do it, viz. when, being let in by the Ear, it
is conveyed to the Heart. Hereby the Spirit comes to convey it self into the
Soul, by the hearing of this Doctrine. This only would I know, (says Paul to
his Galatians); Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the
hearing of Faith? Gal. 3. 2. (...) ^y the hearing of faith, that is, the
Doctrine of Faith the Gospel Preached unto you, and heard by you. The sum
whereof is wrapped up in this saying, That Jesus Christ came into the world to
savesinners. A saying, worthy to be received into the Ear, by hearing of it,
harkening to it.

2. And as into the Ear, so Into the Head worthy to be studied and believed.
into the Head, worthy to be studied, that it may be rightly apprehended, and
clearly understood. This being a great mystery, as our Apostle calls it, cap.
3. verse last of this Epistle, Great is the Mystery of Godliness, God
manifested in the flesh, etc. (...), The great Mystery, Cabala Heb^aice idem
est quod Acceptio i. e. accepta Doctrina and traditio a radice (...), Kibbet i.
e. accepit, etc. Corn. a lapide in Text.
the true Cabala. Among the Jews there were many Mysteries, Doctrines which
they received from their Fathers by way of Tradition. These they called by that
Name of Cabala, (which imports the same thing with this Greek word in the Text
(...)) signifying acceptio, a receiving of a thing, thereby meaning their
Traditions, such Doctrines as by word of mouth were conveyed unto them from
their Forefathers. And these Mysteries, these Traditions, were of high account
among their Rabbis, their Doctors, and their followers, (even as others of
like kind, are at this day in the Church of Rome), these they studied and were
well versed in them. But our Apostle wills Christians to take notice, q. d.
Iudaei jactant suam (...), i. e. Traditionem and Cabalam, sed nugosam et
fabulosam* ego veram et certam (...), i. e. Traditionem and Cabalam a Christo
ipso acceptam, v^bis trado, etc. a Lap. ibid.
what was the true Cabala, the sure Tradition, which he here holds forth to
them, as worthy of their study above all others; even this great Mystery of
Godliness, That Chri^ Jesus is come into the world to save sinners. This was a
mystery which the Angels beheld not without admiration, as it there follows,
Seen of Angels, i. e. cum admiratione maxima, (as Grotius rightly), with the
highest admiration, as also with great satisfaction and contentment. No Mystery
so worthy the looking into as this. So the Angels apprehended it, who are said
to look into it, with an earnest desire. Which things, (says Saint Peter,
speaking of the Mysteries of the Gospel) the Angels desire to look into, 1
Pet. 1. 12. (...), that is, they desire to pry, and look narrowly into them,
as one that stoopeth and boweth down to look into a thing. So do they look into
this Mystery, desiring still to look further into it, it being an Object, which
they can never be weary of looking upon and into. No mystery so worthy to be
known as this. This is Paul's (...), The excellency of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, (as he calls it) Phil. 3. 8. No Doctrine so worthy to be known. Nor
any more worthy to be believed than this. This being (as you have heard) a
faithful saying, and so deserving credit and belief at the hands of all. Thus
it is worthy to be received into the Head. Into the Heart worthy to be
entertained, with Joy.


3. And so (3dly) to be received into the Heart. Worthy to be embraced, to be
entertained with great joy and gladness, as also with gratitude and
thankfulness. With joy. Thus were the Angels affected with it, though not so
properly concerned in it. Seeing that Christ was come into the world upon this
Errand, how did they rejoice at it, a whole Quire, an Host of them, meeting
together, and singing that Heavenly Anthem, that Hallelujah that we have, Luke
2. 14. Praising God, and saying, Glory be to God in the highest, on earth
peace, good will toward men! How much more joyous then should these tidings be
to the Sons of men, for whose sake, Christ is come into the world? Great cause
have they to rejoice at the hearing of it. So did Abraham the Father of the
faithful, by faith apprehending that Christ should come, Seeing his day, (that
is, his coming in the flesh) he rejoiced at it, (as that Text forecited tells
us, John 8. 56.) And the like, ought all Christians, being his Children, to do.
Hearing of this blessed day, that he is come, they are to entertain this good
tidings with spiritual joy, rejoicing at it.

And as with joy, so with gratitude and With Gratitude
thankfulness. Thus did Zacharias entertain these glad tidings, as we find it
in his Song, Luke 1. 68. Where Prophesying of what he saw to be then nigh at
hand, the coming of Christ, and setting forth this great Mystery of Salvation
by Christ, he breaks forth into that holy and affectionate Gratulation, Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people: and
has raised up a Horn of Salvation, (i. e. a Mighty Savior) for us in the
house of his Servant David, etc. And with like affection we find the blessed
Virgin, the Mother of our Lord, entertaining these tidings, Verse 46. of that
Chapter, where she breaks forth into her Magnificat; My Soul does Magnify the
Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. Such is the Acceptance,
that this saying, this Doctrine here in the Text, is said to be worthy of.

And such let it find at all our hands, who Application.
this day hear of it. Let it be thus received by every of us; in and by these,
and all other ways and means that it is capable of. That should be the
Application, which I should make of what has hitherto been spoken. But this I
shall a little longer deferr, until I have somewhat more fully spoken of the
Doctrine it self, as it is here propounded, which we have in the next words,

Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. A short Sentence, but
yielding plenty of sweet and precious matter; in the whole Scripture, no one
more. For the better handling of it, I shall divide it into two distinct
Propositions or Conclusions, Divided into 2. Conclusions.
1. Christ Jesus came into the world: 2. He came into the world to save
sinners. In the former we have his Iourny, in the latter his Errand. His
Iourny, he came into the world. Christ's Iourny Errand.
His Errand, showing for what he came, and for whom he came. For what, to be a
Savior. For whom, to save sinners. Of each of these severally, though very
briefly, having had occasion, and that lately, in passing through the
Principles of the Oracles of God, (as the Apostle calls them, Heb. 5. 1 ^.)
the Fundamentalls of Christian Religion; to enlarge upon this Subject. Begin
with the former.

Christ Jesus came into the world. For the Christ's Iourny, touching which, 4
particulars opened.
opening and explaining of* which, I might unfold unto you these 4.
Particulars. Who it was that came, How he is said to have come, From whence he
came, and whither he came. But a few words of each.

Q. 1. Who it was that came? A. Christ Q. 1. Who it was that came.
Jesus (says the Text). Two Names given to the world's Savior. The former his
Name of Office, Christ; which word (as the Hebrew Messiah also does) signifies
Anointed. So we find him often called, the Anointed, the Anointed of the Lord,
1 Samuel 2. 35. Psalm. 2. 2, etc. One Anointed by God his Father, (as St. Peter
says of him, Acts 4. 27.) being ordained and appointed by him to a threefold
Office, Sacerdotal, Prophetical, Regal; to be a Priest, a Prophet, and a King
to his Church; and endued with a fullness of all Graces and Abilities, for the
discharge thereof: Having the Spirit poured out upon him, Given unto him not by
measure, (as that Text has it) John 3. 34. (...); that is, Abundantly: He
being Anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, (as the Psalmist
says of him) Psalm. 45. 7. The other his Proper Name, given him at his
Circumcision, as our Christian names (as we call them) are at our Baptism,
Jesus, that is a Savior. So the Angel interprets it, giving unto Joseph the
reason of imposing it, Mat. 1. 27. Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall
save his people from their sins. Here is the Person, of whom the Text says
that he came.

Q. 2. And how is he said to have came? Q. 2. How he came.


A. For Answer, we may take notice of diverse comings of Christ mentioned in
Scripture. Of which there are three most obvious, His coming in the Flesh, His
coming in Spirit, His coming in Glory. His coming in the Flesh, to take our
nature upon him. Every Spirit that confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the
Flesh, is of God, 1 John 4. 2. His coming in the Spirit, to dwell in the hearts
of his people, to have a sweet Communion with them. If any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in unto him, Rev. 3. 20. His coming in Glory.
Behold, he comes with Clouds, Rev. 1. 7. Behold, I come quickly, Rev. 22. 12.
I come to Judgment. Now, it is the first of these which we meet with here in
the Text; The coming of Christ in the Flesh, his taking the nature of Man upon
him, that, in that nature, he might execute the Office, and do the work, of a
Mediator. Thus he came.

Q. 3. But from whence came he? Q. 3. From whence he came.


A. That is the third enquiry, which we find not expressly resolved in the Text,
but employed. So it is, in every Motion, and every Mutation; there are two
terms, the terminus a quo et ad quem, In a journey, a man comes from one place
to another: In a change of condition, a man passes from one state to another.
So was it here, Christ in his Incarnation, he came down from Heaven; So that
Ancient Creed tells us. And it is no other then what Christ himself tells his
Disciples, John 16. 27. I am come forth from the Father. So he did according to
his Divinity, as the Son of God, which yet, is warily to be understood. Not
that he thus came from Heaven, by any local mutation, any change of place; for
as God, he was infinite in essence, filling all places in Heaven, and Earth,
(as the Lord himself tells us, Ier. 23. 24.) and so could not properly be said
to leave the one, or come to the other. But only by a change of state. So it
was, that for a time, he divested and disrobed himself (as it were) of that
Glory and Majesty, which he had with his Father, before the world was, (of
which he speaks, John 17. 5.) putting on the nature of man, taking it into a
personal Union with his Godhead, being manifested in the flesh, (as the Apostle
expresses it) 1 Timothy 3. last. Thus he came down from Heaven, humbling Himself,
taking upon him, the form of a Servant, and being in likeness of man, (as we
have it) Phil. 2. 7. Thus, as to his Divinity, he may be said to have come from
Heaven. The second man, is the Lord from Heaven, (says the Apostle, speaking
of Christ, who in regard of his Godhead, was of a Celestial Original) 1 Cor.
15. 47. But in respect of his Humanity, as Man, he may be said to have come
from the womb of his Mother. There did he lodge for a time, the wonted time
according to the course of nature; which being expired, he came forth, as the
rest of the Sons of men do.

Q. 4. And whither did he come? Q. 4. Whither he came.


A. That is the last Particular; which the Text resolves, He came into the
world. I am come forth from the Father, and am come into the world, (says the
Text forecited) John 16. 28. that is, into this inferior world: where, for a
time, as man, yea, as God-man he lived, and conversed with the Sons of men,
dwelling with them. The word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, John 1. 14.
Thus you see his Iourny.

As briefly of his Errand. Where we shall 2. Christ's Errand.
take notice of those two things; For what he came, and for whom.

1. For what it was that he came; which For what he came: to be a Savior.
was, that he might be a Savior of the world, He came into the world to save
it. This was the proper end of his first coming. To this end did God his Father
send him. We have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent the Son, to be the
Savior of the world, 1 John 4. 14. And to this end, He himself came, making
this his Design. The Son of man is come, to save that which was lost, (says He
of himself) Mat. 18. 11. Not to Judge and Condemn the world. This was neither
his Fathers design, nor His: Not his Fathers, God sent not his Son to condemn
the world, but that the world through him might be saved, John 3. 17. Not His,
I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. This indeed, shall be the
end of his Second coming, to judge the whole world, and to condemn a great part
of it; but the end of his first coming, was to save it. This was the thing,
which he properly and directly intended. True it is, he was, and is an occasion
of the falling and perishing of some. So old Simeon tells Mary, Luke 2. 34.
Behold, this Child is set for the fall and rising again, of many in Israel. And
the like the Apostle St. Peter, (taking it from the Prophet Isay) says of him,
1 Pet. 2. 8. where speaking of Christ, he calls him, A stone of stumbling,
and a rock of offense. But this is only by accident, through the unbelief, and
disobedience of those that will not receive Him, (as he there gives the reason
of it). Hereof Christ is only the occasion, not the cause. This was a thing
not intended by him, in his coming into the world. His Errand was to Save: Had
it not been for this, he would never have left the Bosom of his Father. He came
into the world, to save the world: The world of mankind indefinitely
considered, or the world of his Elect. To Save them, From what? why, from their
Sins. Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their
sins; (says that Text forecited). From the Guilt and Power of them. The
former, by his Merit imputed to them; the latter, by his Spirit imparted to
them. To save them from the wrath of God, and from Eternal Condemnation; and to
obtain for them Everlasting Salvation: In which two, consists this Salvation,
which Christ came to procure for his people. The former part whereof is
Privative, to free them from the wrath of God. [ Even Jesus, which delivered us
from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1. last] and from everlasting Condemnation, [
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1.]. The
latter part is Positive, a procuring of Eternal Salvation. Being made perfect,
he became the Author of Eternal Salvation, unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5.
9. This was the end of Christ's coming into the world, to be a Savior, such a
Savior, a perfect Savior, Christ Jesus is come into the world to save.

2. To save whom? That is the other Particular. For whom he came to save
Sinners.
To save sinners. Such are all men by nature, Jews, and Gentiles, all under
sin. So the Apostle charge, and proves it, Romans 3. 9. All guilty of Original
Sin, having Adams sin imputed to them; In whom all have sinned, (so that Text
may fitly be read, Romans 5. 12.) (...). Being in Him, as Branches in the Root,
they sinned in Him. And have his Corruption, imparted and derived to them. And
as of Original, so of Actual sin. There is not a just man upon earth, that does
good and sins not, Eccl. 7. 20. In many things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2.
None but may be called, as the people of the Jews are by the Prophet Isay, cap.
48. 8. Transgressors from the Womb.

But among these, some are greater sinners Some greater sinners than others.
than others. Not only Peccatores, but Peccatosi. So this word in the Text,
(...) is often rendered by Stephan in his Lexicon; and so it properly
signifies, Habituated Sinne^s, such as live in sin, and make a trade of it;
Notorious Sinners. So Aretius here looks upon it, (...) dicuntur Notorii
Peccatores. And so we find it often used, as where Publicans and Sinners are
put together, (as frequently they are;) by sinners, we are to understand great
sinners, such as the Publicans generally were. And thus that woman (vulgarly
taken for Mary Magdalen) is called a sinner, Luke 7. 39. A woman in the City
which was a sinner, came unto Jesus. A woman of notorius levitie, a bad liver*
Such she had been in truth, and this she was now thoroughly convinced of,
bewailing her condition with tears, wherewith she washed the feet of her
Savior, (as there we find it).

And such are the sinners that Christ is here Christ came to save the greatest
of Penitent sinners.
said to come into the world to save. Sinners, all sinners, being as she was,
convinced of their sinfulness. Now, though the greatest of sinners, yet being
truly penitent, Christ came to save them. This is that which our Savior tells
the Pharisees, Mat. 9. When they were offended (as the story tells us they
were) at his eating, and conversing with Publicans and Sinners; He wills them
to take notice, that this was the end of his coming into the world, to be a
Physician, not to the whole, but to the sick, Verse 12. to call, not the
Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance, Verse 13. As for them, the Pharisees,
they being in their own apprehensions (though nothing less in truth) whole and
sound, just and righteous, no sinners; he had nothing to do with them, neither
must they expect any benefit from him. No, they were sinners, sinners, such as
were sick of sin, seeing and feeling themselves so to be, that he came to Save.
So may we fitly look upon the word, here in the Text, Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners, such sinners.

Thus have I, with what brevity might be, dispatched the Doctrinal part of
these two Propositions or Conclusions. That which now remains is the
Application, which I shall direct three ways, by way of Information,
Consolation, Exhortation. Use 1. By way of Information: 4. Doctrines deduced


1. By way of Information or Instruction, we may from this one Saying, this one
Doctrine, learn many; from hence deducing and collecting diverse truths worth
the taking notice of* As,

1. Touching the two natures in the Person 1. Touching the two natures in
Christ. [ In mundum venit] exprimi^ duplicem naturam, sc. Divinitatis, in qua
erat antequam in mundo appareret; and Humanitatis, in qua apparuit: Aquin. Com.
in Text.
of Christ, (both which Aquinas conceives here to be intimated to us) His
Divinity, his Humanity. His Divinity, according to which he had a subsistence,
a Being, before his Incarnation, before his coming into the world. How else
should He be said to come into it? This imports (as I showed) a change, though
not of place, yet of state. His Humanity, he came into the world, this inferior
world, being there manifested in the flesh, living and conversing there with
men, after the manner of men; which cannot properly be said of his Godhead,
which being Infinite, fills Heaven and Earth, and so is not capable of being
consined to any place. This is proper to his Humanity.

2dly. From hence (as the Jesuit a Lapide 2. The invalidity of the Law. Contra
Iudaeos, significat Legem, and Legis caeremonias inefficaces esse ad salutem;
illam enim attulit Christus, Corn. a Lapide Com. in Text.
well observes) may be inferred the invalidity and inefficacy of the Law,
whether Ceremonial or Moral, for the saving of any. Could Moses have done
this, Jesus Christ should not have needed to come into the world, which he did
upon this very account, to do that for the Sons of men which Moses could not
do; to procure that Justification and Salvation for them, which they could
never have expected by the Law. What the Law could not do in that it was weak
through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
for sin, (or by a Sacrifice for sin, as the Margin in our Translation well
explains it) condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8. 3. 4. So it was: Man being fallen, by his
fall he became weak, not being able now to fulfill the Law, so as to obtain
Justification and Salvation by it. And thereupon it was that Christ took the
Nature of man upon him, that in that Nature, he might do what mere Man could
not do, that so the righteousness of the Law, which could not be fulfilled by
man, might this way be fulfilled in Him.

3dly. In the 3d place, See here (what the foresaid Author al^o minds us of)
the heinous 3. The heinous nature of sin. Hine discimus enormitatem peccati.
Idem ibid.
nature of sin; what a desperate disease it is, that must have a Physician to
come from Heaven to cure it; other way of cure there was none. All the Men and
Angels in the world, could do nothing to it. They were all (as Job says of his
friends, Job 13. 4.) Physicians of no value. But the Son of God must come from
Heaven to undertake this cure. Magnus de coelo venit Medicus (says Augustine)
quia magnus per totum orbem jacebat Augustine Sermon. 9. de verbis Apostoli.
aegrotuus. The great Physician comes down from Heaven, because man* upon
earth was desperately sick, in a hopeless and helpless condition, had He not
stepped in. Which (as the same Father there applies it) should make all that hear
it afraid of sin, as Cum audis Christum venisse in hunc mundum ut peccatores
salvos faceret, noli dormire in dulci strato peccati, sed audi Paulum dicentem,
Surge qui dermis, and illuminabit te Christus. Ibid.
a most deadly disease, not to rest and lie down in it, not to sleep in strato
peccati, in the bed of sin, but to give ear to what Paul says to them, Ephesians.
5. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light.

4ly and lastly, Here (as in a Glass) behold we, (what we can never look too
much, nor 4. The wonderful Grace of God to mankind.
yet enough, upon) the Grace, the wonderful Grace, of God toward the Sons of
men. The Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all men, (says
the Apostle) Tit. 2. 11. The Grace of God, His great Goodness and Mercy; that
brings Salvation, eternal Salvation by and through Christ, has appeared
(...), illuxit, it has shined forth, clearly manifesting it self, and that to
all men, all sorts of men, without distinction of Nation, Sex, Age or
Condition. This it has done, in this coming of Jesus Christ into the world to
save sinners. In nothing more, in nothing so much. Many ways has the Grace
and Favor of God, appeared unto mankind. It did so in his Creation, in making
him little lower than the Angels, and Crowning him with Glory and Honor,
making Him to have Dominion over the works of His hands, and putting all things
under His feet, (as the Psalmist sets it forth) Psalm. 8. 5. 6. In making Him
after his own Image. So God created man in his own Image, in the Image of God
created he Him, Genesis 1. 27. As like unto his Maker, as a Creature could be. But
behold, this Grace shines more clearly in his Redemption, in finding out a
way, such a way and means as he did, for the delivering of him from Hell and
Death, and the procuring of his eternal Salvation. No Grace like this, (...),
this saving Grace of God.

Behold here (what you have lately heard 1. The Grace of God the Father in
sending of Christ.
more largely of, from that Text, Gal. 4. 4.) The Grace of God the Father, in
sending his Son upon this Errand. When the fullness of time was come, God sent
forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were
under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. What an expression
of Love was this? In this was manifested the love of God toward us, that God
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him, 1
John 4. 9. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins, Verse 10. Behold love,
wonderful love! So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
etc. John 3. 16. Such an expression of Love as never was. Herein did his
kindness appear. After that the kindness and love of God our Savior toward
man appeared, Tit. 3. 4. viz. The kindness of God the Father, who is there (as
often elsewhere) called God our Savior; and that, as upon some other accounts,
so chiefly upon this, because He sent His Son upon this Errand, to procure and
effect Salvation for the Sons of men Grotius Annot. in 1 Timothy 1. 1
(as Grotius well expounds it). Herein did His Love, His Kindness appear; His
Grace, His Rich Grace, the exceeding Riches of his Grace! So our Apostle (not
knowing how to speak highly enough of it) sets it forth, Ephesians. 2. 7. That he
might show the exceeding Riches of his Grace, in his kindness toward us in
Christ Jesus, (...), exceeding all our apprehensions. Such was that Grace which
God the Father showed to the Sons of men, in his kindness toward them in
Christ Jesus, in sending him to be a Savior for them.

Many things there are, which do highly Set forth in 3 Particulars.
commend and set forth, this Grace of God to us. Three of which, and three
Principal, we have a hint of in the Text.

1st. Take we notice whom it was that he 1. The Person sent, his Son.
sent, Christ Jesus; his Son, his own son: He spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, Romans 8. 32. Yea, his only Son, his only begotten
Son, (as that obvious Text forenamed has it) Ioh 3. 16. God had many Sons,
some by creation; such were the Angels, whom we find called the Sons of God,
Job 38. 7. Such was Adam, which was the Son of God, Luke 3. last. And he has
many sons by Adoption, to which he Predestined them from Eternity, Ephesians. 1. 5.
But he had but one son by Generation. This was Jesus Christ, (...), the only
begotten Son of GOD. A Jewel more dear than all the World besides. Yet God, his
Father, spared him not, but put him upon this service, to be a Savior to lost
Mankind. And what love was this? Hereby did Father Abraham manifest the
sincerity and height of his Affection to his God, that having but one Son, he
was willing to part with him, to offer him up at his Command. Now I know that
thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thy only Son, from me;
(says the Angel to him) Genesis 22. 12. And in the like way, has God the Father
manifested his Affection to the sons of Men, (that being but a Type of this) in
not withholding his son, his only son, from us; but giving Him for us, to take
our Nature upon him, to do and suffer what he did, for our sakes.

2dly. Take we notice for whom it was that 2. For whom he was sent: for sinners.
Christ was sent, for sinners (says the Text), men who nothing less then
deserved such a favor at the hands of God, they being not only strangers, but
enemies to Him. When we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the death
of his Son, Romans 5. 10. And how does this commend the Love of God to us? God
commends his love toward us, that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for
us, (Verse 8. of that Chapter).

3dly. To these add the Benefit which Christ 3. The benefit to be procured by
Him, Salvation.
came to procure for these sinners, which is Salvation to save sinners. To save
them (as you have heard) from the wrath of God, and from everlasting Damnation.
And to procure for them everlasting Happiness and Blessedness. Salvation, the
greatest of benefits that man was capable of receiving, comprehending under it,
Justification, Sanctification, Glorification. Wonderful was this kindness in
God the Father, thus to send his only Son, for such unworthy creatures upon
such an account. 2. The Grace of God the Son, in coming upon such an Errand.


II. And behold no less in God the Son. That being thus sent, he should come as
he did. That, coming forth from his Father, leaving his Bosom (as it were) in
which he had lain from Eternity; he should come into the world, taking upon
him the nature of man, yea, the form of a Servant, so humbling himself as he
did. What a favor? specially that he should come into such a world, where he
well knew what entertainment he should meet with, how he should be rejected! So
he was by those whom he looked upon as his own people: He came unto his own,
and his own received him not, Joh. 1. 11. The people of the Jews, who were
God's own peculiar people, whom he had chosen out of all Nations of the World,
( You only have I known); yet so ungrateful were they, that when this Son of
God, being sent by his Father upon such an Errand, came to tender his service
unto them, they would not receive him, they would not acknowledge him to be the
Messiah. Thus was this living Stone (the Foundation-Stone) though chosen of God
and precious, yet disallowed of men, (as St. Peter has it, 1 Pet. 2. 4.) He
was despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows acquainted with grief; and
we hid, as it were, our faces from him, he was despised, and we esteemed him
not, (so the Prophet Isay, foreseeing what entertainment the Messiah* the Lord
Jesus, should meet withal, in and from the world, sets it forth) Isa. 53. 3.
Thus was he slighted through the whole course of his life. And in the end of
it how-abused? Crowned with Thorns, Buffeted, Spit upon, and after Crucified;
suffering that painful, shameful, accursed Death of the Cross. Now, all this he
foresaw before he came into the world, as he foretold it when he was come into
it. So he did to his Disciples, Luke 17. 25. The Son of man must suffer many
things, and he rejected of this Generation. And at another time, he gives them
a particular account of what things he should Suffer. So we find it, Mat. 20.
17. where going up to Jerusalem, we read how he took the Twelve Disciples apart
in the way, and said unto them, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of
man shall be betrayed unto the chief Priests, and unto the Scribes, and they
shall condemn him to Death, and shall deliver him to the Gentiles, to Mock, and
to Scourge; and to Crucify him. All this he knew before it came to pass, yea,
before he came into the world, he knew what measure he should meet with, in it.
Yet for all this he came into this world to undertake this service, He came
into the world to save sinners; Such ungrateful wretches as there he met with.
Thus it was, (as Augustine excellently sets it forth). Homines desperate
aegrotabant, etc. Men were desperately Homines desperate aegrotabant, and ipsa
agritudine quia mentes perdiderant, etiam medicum caedebant: Ille autem etiam
cum occideretur medicus erat, etc. August. ubi supra.
sick, and by reason of their sickness having lost their Reason, they fell foul
upon their Physician, striking of him, yea killing him; yet for all this, when
he was thus used by them, he was still a Physician to them. Vapulabat and
curabat, he was beaten by them, yet a curer of them. Patiebatur phreneticum,
nec deserebat aegrotum, He patiently bore with his frantic patient, not
deserting him in his sickness. Tenebatur, alligabatur, percutiebatur,
irridebatur, suspendebatur; and medicus erat; He was held, he was bound, he was
smitten, he was mocked, he was hanged upon the Cross; and yet for all this, he
was and would be a Physician, even to them by whom he was thus used, making a
Medicine of his own Blood, for the curing of them that shed it. And, o what
Clemency, what Love, what Favor was this to every of us, who hear this saying
here in the Text, That Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, such
sinners! Admire we this Grace, this riches of Grace, this exceeding riches of
Grace, which this our Savior has herein showed to such unworthy creatures!
This, by way of Information or Instruction.

In the 2d. place, by way of Consolation: Use 2. Consolation to all, and only
Penitent Sinners.
Is Christ Jesus come into the world, and that upon this Errand, to save
sinners? What comfort does this speak to all truly penitent sinners? Penitent
sinners, I say. Such, and only such they are to whom this Consolation
belongs. Not to all sinners, not to such as are obdurate and impenitent, such
as live and lie in sin, making a trade of it, Let not such snatch at any crumb
of this Bread of Life, any morsel of this Consolation. All the comfort that I
can from hence give unto them, is only this, that there is a possibility of
Salvation for them. Herein are they one degree more happy, or rather less
miserable, than the Devils and damned Spirits, which being cast into the
Prison of Hell, are there fast bound in those everlasting chains of Darkness,
reserved to the judgment of the Great day, (as St. Peter, and St. Jude, set
forth the condition of the fallen Angels, 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude v. 6.) in a
desperate condition past praying for, shut out from all hope, all possibility
of Salvation. So is it not as yet with you, you obstinate sinners. How soon it
may be so, that you know not; going on in your sinful ways and courses, you
may be surprised and snatched away by Death, (as many daily are) and that will
cut off the thread of your hope, putting you into the like condition, beyond
all possibility of Mercy. But as yet, I shall not wholly shut the door of hope
against you. Some hope as yet you have, though not so long as you continue
such. Living and dying without Repentance there is no hope for you. Let not any
such then pervert and abuse this Saying, this Doctrine of Christ's coming into
the World. True, he came into the World to save sinners, but not such as you
are; not obstinate sinners. As for such, What have they to do with Grace? What
have they to do with Mercy? What have they to do with Salvation? Let them look
for that which waits for them, Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish,
which shall be upon every soul of Man that does Evil (as the Apostle tells
them, Romans 2. 8, 9.) This is the portion of Obstinate sinners, such as make
Jesus Christ, and his coming into the world, to be (as it were) a pander to
their Lusts, from hence taking occasion to continue in Sin; let them never look
to have any benefit by his coming. He shall one day come to be their Judge; he
never came to be their Savior. All the comfort which distilleth from this
Breast of Consolation, that springs from this Fountain, this Well of Salvation,
is appropriated to the brokenhearted, truly penitent sinner; to such as being
convinced of Sin, feel the weight and burden of it, being weary, and
heavy-laden under it; desiring earnestly to be freed and delivered from it; and
that not only from the guilt and punishment, but also from the power, and
inbeeing of it; being like affected with this our Apostle, who cries out, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7.
24. Such as desire to be saved, not only from Death and Hell, but also from
sin; To such sinners, all such, and only such, does this faithful Saying speak
abundant and everlasting Consolation. For your sakes did the Eternal Son of God
come into the world, to seek and to save such as you are. Penitent sinners to
apply this Doctrine to themselves.


And therefore lay you bold on this comfort which is here held forth unto you,
not fearing to bring it home, and make Application of it to your selves. It
matters not what your sins have been or are, what for number, what for nature,
how many, how great, let not all this discourage. Behold here a Plaster as
large as the Soar; a Cordial which being taken down, will serve to bear up the
heart against fainting, Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. Let
not thy sins then deter thee from laying hold upon this Salvation; which as it
was merited for thee, so is it held forth and tendered to thee by this thy
Savior. Thou art a sinner, a great sinner, let not this drive thee from Jesus
Christ, but to him. Such they are whom he came to Save. Were thou not such a
one thou could have no benefit by him. This it is that makes thee a Subject
capable of receiving benefit from him. And only they.


As for those righteous persons, who are so in their own eyes, their own
apprehensions, Christ will have nothing to do with them, neither let them
expect to be the happier for him. The proud Pharisee goes as he comes,
whilst the poor self-condemning Publican, goes away justified. I tell you,
(says our Savior, speaking by way of Parable unto certain which trusted in
themselves, that they were righteous, as the 9th verse has it) This man went
down to his house justified rather than the other, Luke 18. 14. The one came
justified, viz. in himself, boasting of his own righteousness, but goes away a
sinner; the other comes a sinner, confessing himself so to be, but goes away
justified, viz. by God, being absolved from all his sins. The one comes empty,
but goes away full, the other comes full, but goes away empty. He has
filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty away,
(says Mary in her Song) Luke 1. 53. Great comfort to all truly penitent,
humbled, broken hearted, selfcondemning sinners. For such as you it was that
Jesus Christ came into the world, to be a Savior unto you.

Only see that you do not judge your selves This Salvation not to be rejected,
or neglected.
unworthy of this Salvation, by neglecting of it. How shall we escape if we
neglect so great Salvation? Heb. 2. 3. much less by rejecting of it, putting it
from you. This was that which Paul and Barnabas charged upon the Jews as a high
contempt; that word which had by them been Preached to them, they put it from
them, so judging themselves unworthy of everlasting Life, Acts 13. 46. This did
they by their rejecting, not receiving of this Doctrine, the Doctrine of
Salvation by Christ, thereby showing themselves to be unworthy of it. And the
like do all they, who hearing this faithful saying worthy of all acceptance,
this saving Doctrine; do not receive it, embrace it, bringing it home to
themselves, and making a right use of it. Such neglect, such contempt, let
every of us beware of, giving unto this Doctrine, this faithful Saying, such
acceptance as it is worthy of, even All acceptance. Use 2. Exhortation.
Receive we this Doctrine.


Let that be the word of Exhortation, which give me leave to press with what
earnestness I may or can; we have all of us, as at other times often, so now
again heard of this faithful Saying, That Christ Jesus is come into the world
to save sinners. This we have received into the Ear, O but suffer we it not to
die there, to vanish in the hearing; but give we unto it (as I said) such
acceptance, as it is worthy of, even all acceptance, receiving it by all
ways and means. Receiving it by all lawful and useful ways.


By all ways (I say), meaning all lawful and useful ways. Such are not all
the ways wherein this Doctrine is by some received. Let me (by the way) give
you a hint of one or two of them, giving you withal a Caveat Some ways not
such: wherein this Doctrine is not to (...) recei^
that you do not so receive this Saying.

1. Receive it not by way of doubtful Disputation. In such a way this our
Apostle forbids Christians to receive their weak brethren, Romans 14. 1. Him
that is weak in the faith receive you, but not to doubtful Disputations. Not
troubling and disquieting them with needless and useless scruples, with
Ambiguities and Perplexities. And in such a way let not us receive Jesus
Christ, nor this 4. Needless and useless Questions touching Christ's coming. 1.
touching the time of his coming.
Doctrine concerning his Coming into the world, by troubling our selves or
others with needless and useless Questions, over-eagerly contending about, what
cannot certainly be determined. Of these, let me take notice of two or three.

1. Such is that Controversy concerning the time of his coming: When it was
that he came into the world, that he was Born, upon what day, or in what week,
or in what month; which, though it has been by learned Heads, with all
possible Industry, searched into, and by some over-eagerly debated; yet can it
not be certainly determined. So, Scaliger de emend Temp.
that great Critic passes his censure upon it, Unius Dei est, non hominis,
definire. This is a thing which God alone can do. And our Church, whilst in
its Liturgy for several days, it still makes use of the same words, That God
gave his Son [ as this day] to be Born of a pure Virgin: It seems to intimate
* Bishop Halls Letter concerning the Feast of the Nati^itie.
unto us, that though it had appointed a day for the celebrating of the
memorial thereof, yet it did not bind us to believe, that that was the precise
day of His birth. Which our late Reverend Bishop yields, not to be certainly
known. This is a Secret which God has thought fitting to be concealed from us
(upon what account, I will not say:) And therefore, Be we not overcurious in
our enquiries after it. Let it be enough for us (which we are sure of) that a
time there was; a time precisely set down, and appointed for his Coming; and
when that fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son (as the Apostle
tells us, Gal. 4. 4.) This is (...), a faithful saying, requiring our firm
Belief. But so does not that circumstance of Time; which being not tanti, of
any great concernment, leave we it as we find it, not troubling our selves, or
others, about it.

2. And, little better is that which some 2. Whether if man had not sinned,
Christ should have come. a) Aquin. Sum. p. 3. Q. ^ A. ^. 3 ( b) Calv. Instit.
lib. 2. cap. 12.
have made a matter of Debate; Whether if man had not sinned, Christ should
have come into the world. This ( a) Aquinas, (and after him Estius) writing
upon the Text takes notice of. Which he, following the generality of the
Fathers and Schoolmen, here and elsewhere, determines Negatively. And so does
our ( b) Mr. Calvin, therein opposing Osiander, who contended for the
Affirmative. And this they do, not without a probable Argument from the Text,
which tells us, That Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. So then,
Cessante sine principali, cessat eff^cius. C. a Lapid. in Text. Nulla causa
fuit ve^ Christo Domino, nisi, percatores salvos facere. August. de verbis
Apost. Sermon. 9. Si homo non periisset, filius hominis non venisset. Ibid. Sermon.
6.
had there been no sin, there had been no need of his coming. Toll morbum, and
medicina non erit opus (says the Gloss upon it) Take away the disease, and
there shall be no need of the Physician, or Medicine. So, take away sin out of
the world, and there should have been no need of Christ's coming into the world.
But this we may well look upon as a Point not worth the debating, inasmuch as
it makes a Supposition contrary to Gods Ordination, according to which all
things, that are, come to pass (as the same Haec Quaestio non est magnae
authoritatis, quia Deus ordinavit fienda secundum quod res fienda crant.
Aquinas in Text.
Author well concludes it.)

3. And such is that other, about the 3. Whether his Coming was Necessary.
Necessity of Christ's coming, Whether it was necessary that he should come, and
undertake this work? Whether some other way might not have been found for the
effecting hereof? A curious and vain enquiry. Sure we are, we could never have
found another way. And this is the way which God, in his infinite Wisdom, has
pitched upon. So as there is none other Name under Heaven given among men,
whereby we must be saved, (as St. Peter tells the Jews, Acts 4. 12.); no other
way or means appointed by God for our Salvation. And here let us rest.

4. And to these I might add that other 4. whether he intended an universal
Redemption.
Debate about the extent of Christ's Death* whether he thereby intended an
Universal Redemption. This we know it lately has been (I wish it may not still
so be) eagerly contended for by Arminius and his followers. And probably among
other Texts of Scripture, they may call forth this for the maintaining of it,
where it is said, That Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. Now
such are all men, and therefore Christ came to save all. A needless contest. It
is enough that he came, to save all such sinners as we have heard of, all truly
penitent sinners? In this we are all agreed; and in this let us rest. In such a
way, Let us not receive this Saying, this Doctrine; not by way of doubtful
Disputation.

Much less (in the 2d place) so receive it 2. Not so, as to abuse it.
as to abuse it to our own Destruction. So do some (as I have hinted already)
and it is to be feared, not a few, who make use of this Doctrine, as a Pillow,
to sleep securely upon in the bed of sin. Hearing that Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners; From hence they take liberty to continue in sin. Far
be this from us. What shall we say then? (says the Apostle) shall we continue
in sin that Grace may abound? God forbid, Romans 6. 1, 2. (...), Let it not be.
Far be it from any of us, to give entertainment to such a thought; thus
Spider-like to suck Poison from this sweetest Flower. This is the readiest way
to shut us out from ever receiving any benefit from Christ, who (as the Text
says) came into the world to save sinners; to save them (as you have heard)
from their sins; and that from the power, as well as from the guilt and
punishment of them. They who are not Saved from the former of these, let them
never look to be saved from the latter. In such ways then, take we heed of
receiving this Saying.

But (now to proceed in the Exhortation This Doctrine how to be received.
propounded) Receive we it in all lawful and useful ways, yielding it such
acceptance as it is worthy of. Having heard it with the outward Ear, now
receive we it into the inward Man, into our heads and hearts. Such
entertainment we are ready to give to our welcome guests; we account our best
rooms mean enough for them; we will not suffer them to stand without, or yet
admit them only into the Hall, but receive them into the Parlour. Now, behold
here the best Guest we can give entertainment to, the Lord Jesus, who came from
Heaven upon the welcome est Errand, the procuring of our Salvation! O suffer him
not to stand without, as Jews, and Turks, Pagans and Infidels do; who being
professed enemies to Christ, will give no entertainment to Him; or yet, as
persons grossly and wilfully ignorant, who hear of Him, but regard not to know
Him; to know what he Was, what he has Done, what he Suffered. Nor yet, think
we it enough to let him into the Hall, the outward room of the Soul, which is
the mode of mere formal Nominal Christians, who content themselves with a
General and Superficial knowledge of this mystery of Godliness; Let us receive
him into the Penetralia, into our inwardmost rooms, setting open all the doors
of our Souls, those everlasting doors (as the Psalmist calls them) Psalm. 24. 7.
doors of Eternity, which is mystically to be understood of the Souls of the
faithful. Set we open these Doors that the King of Glory may enter in;
Receiving Jesus Christ and this Doctrine concerning him, (as I said) into all
the inwardmost rooms of our Souls, into our Understandings, Judgments,
Memories, Wills, Affections; All which, This Saying is worthy of.

1. Into our Understandings, that we may 1. Into the Understanding, having a
clear knowledge of it.
have a right apprehension of the Doctrine of Christ's Incarnation. A Doctrine
necessary to be known by all that would have benefit by Him and by his Coming.
Rest we not our selves contented then, with such a general knowledge as I spoke
of, to know that Christ is come into the world; but seek after a clear and
distinct knowledge of this mystery, to know what that Christ was, how he came,
whence he came, whither he came, to what end he came, and for whose sake he
came, and how he has effected the work he came which about.

2. And understanding this, Labor to be 2. Into the Judgment firmly believing
it.
thoroughly convinced of the truth hereof; so receiving this Truth into our
Judgments looking upon it as a Faithful Saying, yielding a full and firm assent
and consent unto it. Not entertaining any doubtful hesitations concerning it.
All which our Apostle here makes it his design to expectorate, and drive out
of the hearts of Christians, holding forth this unto them as a most infallible
Doctrine, laying it as a sure foundation, which they may safely build upon. And
so do we, taking this for an (...), a Principle of our Religion, the truth
whereof is not to be questioned; Every of us labor thus to get our hearts
established in the belief hereof.

3. Thus receiving it into our Understandings 3. Into the Memory, remembering
it.
and Judgments, Receive we it also into our Memories, lodging and laying it up
there as a most precious Treasure of inestimable value, and singular use.
Remember it, and make use of it as occasion shall be offered. Holding it forth
as a Buckler, for the repelling of those fiery Darts, those Satanical
Temptations, which he is ready to inject, for the disquieting and troubling the
Souls of poor sinners with the apprehension of their sins, The Quantity and
Quality, the Multitude and Magnitude, the Number and Nature of them, which
being let into the Soul without a Divine support, may be enough to sinck it
into the Gulf of Desperation. Against all these, oppose we this faithful
Saying; Remember the Consolation it Proinde quoties nobis i^ mentem veniet ulla
de peccatorum remissione dubitatio, hoc velut clypeo fortiter eam repellere
discamus. Calvin. Com. in Text.
holds forth, That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. A true
Catholicon, a Sovereign Cordial, proper for what ever Faintings the Soul may be
subject to.

4. Thus lodging it in our Memories, Receive 4. Into the Will and affections
we it also into our Wills and Affections, embracing it, resting upon it,
rejoicing in it, and being thankful for it.

1. Embracing it, as the most acceptable, 1. Embracing it.
the most welcome Tidings that ever were brought unto the world. Had not Jesus
Christ come into the world, better we had never come into it. Were it not for
the Sun, what were the world but a Dungeon? And were it not for this Sun of
Righteousness, which is risen upon earth, we must have sat in darkness to all
Eternity. His coming is our reviving. Even as the coming of the Sun in the
Spring time is unto Herbs and Plants, which before were seemingly dead; such
is the coming of Jesus Christ unto us, who, without Him, were in a state of
Death, really dead. How welcome then should the tidings hereof be unto us? How
ready should we receive this Doctrine? O, were this Doctrine to be Preached to
the Spirits in Prison, to the Devils and Damned Souls in Hell, That Jesus
Christ was come to save them, how welcome would it be unto them? And why not
unto us, who, were it not for this Coming, should erelong be in their condition?

2. And thus embracing it, now rest upon 2. Resting upon it.
it; making it the sheat-Anchor of our Souls hope, riding by it in all storms,
flying unto Jesus Christ, receiving him as our Savior, clasping him in the
arms of our Faith, resting upon him for Salvation. This is true justifying
saving faith; not barely to believe him, to believe that Christ is come into
the world, but to believe in Him, and on Him. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish,
Joh. 3. 16. He that believes on him, is not condemned. Verse. 18. He that
believes on the Son has everlasting life; Verse. 36. Still (...), in eum, in
him, on him. As for believing him, this is no more than the Devils do. I know
thee who thou art, the Holy one of God, (says that unclean Spirit) Mark 1. 24.
Will we have any benefit by him, see that we believe on him; receiving him as
our Savior, casting our Souls upon the all sufficiency of his Merit, there
resting for the pardon of all our sins, and the Salvation of our Souls.

3. And thus resting upon him, now rejoice 3. Rejoyceing in it.
in him, in this his Coming. Rejoice greatly, O Daughter of Sion, shout for
Joy, O Daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy King comes unto the he is Just, and
having Salvation, (says the Prophet Zachary to the Church) Zach. 9. 9. This
coming of Christ in the Flesh is a matter of great Joy (as you have heard.) And
so let it be entertained by us. Rejoice we in this our King and Savior.
Rejoicing not with a carnal and sensual joy (such as that joy is wherewith the
memory of this great benefit is by some, and too many, celebrated at this
Season of the year:) but a spiritual joy, suitable to the benefit which he came
to procure for us, which is spiritual and eternal Salvation. In the
apprehension hereof, let all true Believers, who have received Christ into
their hearts, exsult and rejoice; rejoicing in this their God and Savior (as
Mary says she did, Luke 1. 47.) joining in consort with that multitude which,
attending upon him in his Coming to Jerusalem, cried, saying, Hosannah to the
Son of David, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord, Hosannah in
the Highest! Mat. 21. 9.

4. And thus rejoicing in it, Be we thankful 4. Being truly thankful for it.
for it, really thankful; studying how to express our gratitude for so great a
Favor. Not by letting loose the raines to all kind of licentiousness; which
has been, and I fear still is, the practice of too many, who at this Season of
the year, take greater liberty to abuse the Creatures of God, and to waste, and
mis-spend their precious time, in vain, if not sinful, Recreation^ and
Disports, than at any other times; as if the end of Christ's coming had been,
not to bind Satan, but to let him loose; not to save sinners from their sins,
but to indulge them in them. Not so; but by endeavoring to walk answerably to
so great a favor, so as becomes the redeemed of the Lord. All of us taking
out and practicing that Lesson, which our Apostle tells us, this Grace of God
teaches us, Tit. 2. 11. The Grace of God which brings Salvation, has
appeared to all men, (this saving Grace of God, in sending his Son upon this
Errand, which has now under the Gospel appeared to all men, not only Jews, but
Gentiles) teaching us, that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. To this end it was,
(as you have heard) That Christ came into the world to save sinners, to save
them from their sins, from the power as well as from the guilt of them; to
redeem them from all iniquity; Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works, (as we have it) Tit. 2. 14. that, being delivered out of the hands of
all our enemies, (our Spiritual enemies, Sin, Satan, Hell, Death) we might
serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness, before him, all the
days of our life, (as Zacharias has it in his Song) Luke 1. 74, 75.

And thus have I now done with the former part of the Text, the Doctrine as it
is here both commended and propounded. Now pass we to the latter, the
Application which the Apostle here makes of this Doctrine to himself. This is
a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners, [ of whom I am chief.]

The Second Part.
Here have we that which my eye was chiefly Part 2d. Paul's particular
Application of this general Doctrine to himself.
upon, when I now took this Text in hand; wherein our Apostle brings home
this general Truth, which he had before propounded and commended, to himself,
by a particular Application. Therein Obs. A Pattern for our Imitation. Communi
regulae sese involvit: atque hic verus Scripturae usus est ut nobis applicemus
salutaria, quo spem habeamus de salute nostra. Aret. Com. in Text.
(as Aretius well observes) setting us a Pattern for our Imitation, teaching us
what use we are to make of the Scriptures, and of all the sayings therein
contained. And specially of those saving Truths, which there we meet with. Not
contenting our selves with a general notion of them, but bringing them home to
our selves, making them our own, by such a special and particular Application.

Without this, the most saving Truths Reas. Application makes saving Truths
effectual.
will not be saving to us. A Medicine, though never so Sovereign a Plaster,
though never so Sanative, yet if only looked upon, and so laid aside, if not
taken down, if not applied, in an ordinary way it will do the Patient no good.
The most saving Truths, the most cordial and comfortable promises in the Book
of God, if not brought home to a man's self, will be of no avail to him. It is
the Application of these Truths, these faithful Sayings, that makes them
effectual. Particular Persons, receive no benefit from general Doctrines,
without such a particular Application.

This use then make we of all those Truths, Applic.
which we meet withal in the Book of God. The Instructions, Counsels,
Threatenings, Promises, which are there held forth; suffer we them not to lie by
us, think it not enough to read them, or hear of them, and to yield a general
assent to them, but bring them home, make them our own. So does our Apostle
here in the Text, having held forth this Doctrine unto others, of Christ's
coming into the world to save sinners, he reflects upon what he had said,
bringing it home to himself, ranking himself in the list, yea in the forefront
of those sinners, whom Christ came to save. Of whom I am chief, (...), Quorum
Primus ego sum, Paul, the first of sinners.
Of whom I am First.

The First? What then, was Paul the first Q. How said so to be.
of sinners? were there not others before him? Surely yea, Quot homines tot
peccatores, so many men as there had been, so many sinners. The first man, and
the first woman, they were the first sinners. How then says Paul here, that he
was the first?

In Answer to this, Aquinas here tells us of A. An Heretical Dream. Hic dicit
Haereticus, quod anima Adae fuit in Paulo, and transivit de corpore in corpus.
Aquin. Expos. in Text.
certain Heretics, who dreaming of a Pythagorical Metempsuchosis, a
transmigration, a flitting of Souls out of one body into another, they
conceived that the Soul of Adam, the first man, might be transmitted into Paul's
body, and so upon that account, he might say of himself, that he was the first
sinner, having in himself the Soul of the first man. But this is but a Dream
and so we leave it, which (if need were) might be sufficiently confuted (as
that Author observes) from that one Text of the Apostle, Romans 9. 11. where
speaking of Children not born, he describes them to be such as had neither
done good nor evil. So then, the Soul is not before the Body. But letting that
go. A. 2. Paul the first, that is the greatest of sinners.


More genuinely. Paul says here of himself, that he was the first of sinners;
Primus non tempore, sed magnitudine, (so the Author aforesaid, and diverse
others, after Augustine, rightly resolve it:) the first not in time, not * Quid
ergo est primus? antecedens omnes, non tempore, sed magnitudine August. in
Psalm. 70.
in order, but in respect of the magnitude and greatness of his sins. So are
we here to understand the word (as often elsewhere;) (...) being put for (...),
the first, that is, the greatest, the chief of sinners, (as our Translation
has it) Of whom I am chief.

But, so looking upon it, the Question is Q. How Paul says this of himself.
yet unresolved. For, how says the Apostle this? or how could he say it of
himself, that he was the chief of sinners? What, were there not others, who had
been, (or were) as great, or greater sinners than he? How then says he, that
he was the chief?

To this it is answered by some, and diverse; A. Hespeaks Hyperbolically out of
his great Humility. Dictum est (...) ex summa modestia: Grotius Annot. in Text.
Hoc dicit ex humilitate. Aquin.
This he speaks (...), Hyperbolically, out of his great modesty and Humility,
so thinking, and so speaking of himself.

And so looking upon it, Let him herein Obs. Christians to think and speak
meanly of themselves.
again be propounded as a pattern for the imitation of all Christians; teaching
them how to think, and how to speak of themselves, meanly, lowly, preferring
others before themselves. So runs this our Apostles direction, Phil. 2. 3. In
lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better than himself. Ita jussit, ita
gessit. This he would have others do; and this, Himself here does; so not only
giving us a Rule, but setting us a Pattern. Paul, what he was the Churches of
God well know; a Chosen Vessel, an eminent Saint, an eminent Apostle; one of
the choicest Instruments that ever Christ made use of; eminent for Gifts,
eminent for Graces; yet he, when he comes to speak of himself, how does he
undervalue himself? Sometimes professing, and acknowledging himself to be the
meanest of the Apostles, and not worthy of that Honor. I am the least of the
Apostles, that am not worthy to be called an Apostle (says he) 1 Cor. 15. 9.
And sometimes the meanest of Saints. Unto me, who am less than the least of all
Saints, is this grace given, Ephesians. 3. 8. And here he acknowledges himself to be
the chief of sinners. Thus speaking of his Gifts and Graces, he thinks he
cannot speak too meanly of them; but speaking of his sins, he thinks he cannot
speak too highly of them. He is not more in extenuating the one, then in
aggravating the other: Such was his Modesty, such was his Humility. Maximus
Doctorum, maximus peccatorum. Though he was an Apostle, a great Apostle; yea,
without disparagement to any, inferior to none, (which we find him elsewhere
standing upon) being by his Adversaries put upon it, to Vindicate his
Reputation, he sticks not to equalize himself with the very chiefest Apostle: I
suppose (says he) I was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles, 2 Cor.
11. 5. And again chap. 12. v. 11. In nothing am I behind the very chiefest
Apostles; meaning James, and John, and Peter, (whose Disciples and Followers
diverse then professed themselves to be) yet here he reckons himself among the
chief of sinners, nay, of sinners The Chief. Thus was he (as Aretius here says
of him) in peccato maximus, in ministerio minimus, ubique tamen inter homines
magnus; though every where highly esteemed of among men, yet in his own
apprehension, the least of Saints, and the greatest of Sinners. In himself
nothing. So he there tells his Corinthians in the Text last named; where,
whilst he extolleth his Ministry, he debaseth himself. In nothing am I behind
the very chiefest Apostles, though I be nothing. Nothing out of Christ, nothing
in himself, of no worth, no value.

Such mean thoughts should Christians Christians to prefer others before
themselves.
entertain of themselves, thinking more meanly of themselves, than of others.
So does that wise Agur, Prove. 30. 2. Surely (says he) I am more brutish than
any man, and have not the understanding of a man. Agur, a Prophet, divinely
inspired, (as the Verse foregoing there seems to intimate, where those
Sayings of his, in that Chapter, are called his Prophecy) a wise and learned
man, endued with a great measure, not only of Natural and Moral, but of Divine
knowledge; yet see how he undervalues himself, how meanly he thought of
himself. And the like did Asaph, or David (uncertain whether), whom we find
confessing to his God, So foolish was I, and ignorant (says he) I was, as a
Beast before thee, Psalm. 73. 22. And after the same mode did our Apostle here
speak of himself, acknowledging himself to be not only a sinner, or a great
sinner, but the chief of sinners.

In which Expression, let not any think, Paul not speaking otherwise of himself
than he thought.
or suspect, that he spoke of himself otherwise than he meant and thought. It
is Mr. Calvines Caveat which he gives upon it; Cave ne existimes, modestiae
causa Apostolum mentitum esse; Far be it from any to entertain a thought, that
Paul here should, out of modesty, speak otherwise than he thought and meant.

And whilst we do not, nor dare not, censure Christians to beware of such
Complements.
or suspect him upon any such account, see that we our selves be not at any
time guilty of the like. Take heed of such vain, airy, empty complements, as
are too common with some, who will speak (it may be) meanly of themselves, when
as they think nothing less; happily debasing themselves, that so they may draw
the greater and higher commendation from others. Far was this from our Apostle.
Certainly, this Confession of his, had not more modesty than sincerity, not
more humility than reality in it. What he here acknowledges, he did it not
with his Tongue, or Pen only, but with, and from his Heart. A hearty
confession Veram hic non (...) quam humilem confessionem edere voluit, Atque ex
intimo cordis sensu depromptam. Calvin. Com. in Text.
it was, ex intimo cordis sensu deprompta, (as Calvin says of it;) fetched
even from the bottom of his Heart, springing from an inward sense and feeling
of what he confessed.

But if so, the Question will yet run on, Q. Paul was now an eminent Saint.
How could Paul say and think thus of himself, that he was the chief of
Sinners? When he spoke this, he was a Justified person, having his sins
pardoned, and forgiven him; and this he was assured of. Besides, as he was
Justified, so he was sanctified: How then could he say, that he was the chief
of sinners? Of whom I am chief.

To this it is Answered; Paul here speaks A. He speaks of what he had been
before his Conversion.
not of what he now was, but of what he had been: Not of what he now was by
Grace, but what by Nature, and what by Practice, before such time as the Grace
of God met with him. True it was, there was now a great and wonderful change
wrought in him; he was not now the same man that sometime he was. Now I live,
(says he) yet no more I, Gal. 2. 20. No longer that Saul which heretofore he
was, but much changed, and altered! So was that other Saul (King Saul) of whom
we read, how that the Spirit of God coming upon him, (the spirit of Prophecy)
he was turned to another man, (as Samuel tells him it should be done to him, 1 Samuel 10. 6.) And so was this Saul much more, whose name was altered from Saul
to Paul; giving him, and others, to take notice, that he was now turned to
another man, wonderfully changed from what he was. Such a change there was in
him, in respect of his quality and condition. He who was a sinner, a great
sinner, was now a Saint. He who was a Persecuter, was now a Preacher, an
Apostle. But this was the work of Grace in him. So himself looked upon it; By
the grace of God I am that I am, (says he) 1 Cor. 15. 10. That he was Called,
Justified, Sanctified, that he was a Preacher, an Apostle, this he ascribes
all to Free Grace; not to any thing in himself, nor to any thing that he had
done. Of himself he was a sinner, a great sinner: and such he should still have
continued, had not the Grace of God met with him, and wrought such a change in
him. So that here, reflecting upon his former condition, looking upon himself
as he was before his Conversion, he makes this free and ingenuous confession
and acknowledgement, That he was a great Sinner, I, the chief of Sinners. Q.
Paul, before his Conversion was morally righteous.


Q. Why, but yet how could he say this of himself, that he was then the chief
of sinners? Look upon him before his Conversion, and see what we can find in
him that should deserve so severe a Censure: What? was Paul, (or Saul, for that
was then his Name) then a Debauched, Scandalous, Profane, Impious Person? Not
so; his Life and Conversation was not tainted with any foul Vice, or sinful
Enormity. No, clean otherwise; his life was then unblamaeble, nay very strict
and regular; He had then a respect to the Law of his God; yea, a more than
ordinary Respect, being zealous for it, a zealous Professor, and a zealous
Practiser of it. And that not only for the Ceremonial part of it, wherein (as
he tells his Galatians) he was a great proficient, beyond others of his time:
Ye have heard (says he) of my Conversation in time past, how I profited in the
Jews Religion, above many of my equals in my own Nation, being more exceedingly
zealous of the Traditions of my Fathers, Gal. 1. 14. But also for the Moral
part, ordering his Life and Conversation according to that Rule, walking
regularly, and unblameably. So much he tells his Philippians, chap. 3. v. 6.
Touching the Righteousness which is in the Law, blameless. Such he then was, a
man of an innocent and blameless life and Conversation. A. He was then a friend
to the Law, but an enemy to the Gospel.
And not only so, but endued also with many excellent Moral Virtues, as
Justice, Temperance, etc. And what? he the chief of sinners? a man so ordered,
so tempered, so qualified?

To this, Calvin and some others, retur^ Answer well. He was then indeed a
friend, a great friend then to the Law, but an enemy to the Gospel; standing
for the one, but opposing the other; zealous for Moses, but as zealous against
Christ; an Unbeliever, a Persecuter, not embracing but rejecting this excellent
Doctrine, which here he speaks of, the Doctrine of the Gospel, the Doctrine
of Salvation by Jesus Christ. He was then, one of those Antichrists which St.
John speaks of, 1 Ioh. 4. 3. and 2. v. 7. Denying Christ to be come in the
flesh. Not receiving him, not believing on him, but blaspheming him in his
Person, and persecuting him in his Members, in all that professed his Name. So
we have it recorded, Acts 8. where the Story tells us, how he being then
called, Saul consented to Stephen's death, verse. 1. and how he made havoc of
the Church, entering into every house, and, haling men and women, committed them
to prison. And after, chap. 9. v. 1, 2. breathing out Threatenings and
Slaughter, against the Disciples of the Lord, he went unto the high Priest, and
desired of him letters, that if he found any of this way, whether they were men
or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem. Such was his zeal then
against Christ, and against the Doctrine of the Gospel, and all the true
professors of it. And this was the sin which here he charge so heavily upon
himself, as the chiefest of sins, making him the chief of sinners. This it was
that made him think so meanly, so vilely of himself as he did, to account
himself the least of the Apostles, not worthy to be an Apostle, Because (says
he) I persecuted the Church of God, 1 Cor. 15. 9. And so here to call himself
the chief of sinners, in as much as he had been (as he declares in the verse
next but one before the Text, verse. 13.) a Blasphemer, a Persecuter, Injurious.
Thus it was. Nemo acrior inter Persecutores, ergo nemo pejor inter peccatores,
(as Augustine has it). Among August. de verbis Apostoli. Sermon. 9.
all the Persecutors of his time, none more fierce, more eager than he; and
therefore among all sinners, none greater than he.

So it is, Among all sins, there is none greater Obs. No sin like obstinate
Infidelity.
than the sin of Infidelity. This is Calvin's observation, which he from hence
takes up, and not without ground. This is the sin, that brings upon a man
the greatest guilt, His verbis admonemur quam grave sit apud D^um, and ^rox
crim^, Infidelita^: p^sertim ubi acce^t ^bstinatio and saeviendi rabies.
Calvin. Com. in Text.
and makes him one of the greatest sinners, even the sin of Infidelity;
specially when it is accompanied with obstinacy, and contumacie, and
pertinacie (...) as Paul's sin here was): now there is no sin like this sin,
this sin against the Gospel. Sins against the Law may be great sins, some of
them greater than other, some crying sins, of a heinous and horrid nature: But
none of them like this sin against the Gospel, Infidelity, when it is (as I
said) accompanied with obstinacy; when men will not receive Christ, being
offered and tendered unto them, but reject him, and will not believe on him.
This is The sin. When the comforter shall come (says our Savior to his
Apostles), he shall reprove the world of Sin, of Righteousness, and of
Judgment: Of sin, because they believe not on me, Joh. 16. 8, 9. Intimating
this to be the sin, the greatest sin that shall lie most heavy upon the world.
No sin like this sin. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had
sin, (says he of the Jews, in the Chapter foregoing) Ioh. 15. 22. Had not
Christ come unto them, and made himself known to them, they had had no sin
comparatively, not so great sin to answer for, as now they had. This is the
condemning sin. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather than light, Joh. 3. 19. Jesus Christ, who was the
true Light, being clearly revealed, as he is, under the Gospel, the not
receiving, but rejecting of him, This is the condemning sin, laying those that
are guilty of it, under the just sentence of Cond^nation. He that believes
not, is condemned already, (says the verse there foregoing, verse 18.). He is
so, being laid under the sentence of Condemnation, as for his other sins,
Original and Actual, so in special for this, his not believing. No sin like
obstinate Infidelity; when men shall shut their eyes against the Light, will
not receive Christ, and the Doctrine of Salvation by him, but oppose it, and
according to their power persecute it. This was Paul's sin, and it was such a
sin as weighed down all his legal Righteousness, making him, in his own
estimation and account, the worst, the vilest, the greatest, the chief of
Sinners.

Which let it be taken notice of, and seriously Applic.
considered; and that, As by all of us, Persons in some degree guilty of this
sin.
that we may be convinced of the greatness of this sin, this sin of Infidelity,
whereof there is none of us, but in some degree or other stand guilty: So in
special,

1. By mere civil Persons, who look after 1. Mere civil Persons, resting in
their moral righteousness.
nothing but the Righteousness of the Law. So they may but approve themselves
legally, and morally righteous as to the world, they regard not that
Evangelical Righteousness, whereby they may come to stand righteous before God:
So long as they do but yield an outward obedience to the Law, they regard not
the obedience of Faith. Whilst they are just, and sober, and temperate, and
chaste, innocent, and harmless in their lives, they think that shall pl^ for
them, that shall justify them. So did that Young man in the Gospel, who, when
our Savior had repeated to him the duties of the second Table, Thou shall do
no Murder, Thou shall not commit Adultery, etc. He presently replyeth, All
these things have I kept from my youth up, Mat. 19. 20. Having yielded an
external obedience to what the Law required, he thought this was sufficient for
his Justification and Salvation. And so do many others. But alas! herein how
far are they deceived? All this may a man do, and yet for all that, be among
the chiefest of Sinners. An instance whereof we have in the Text. Paul was (as
you have heard) an exact Walker, a strict observer of the Law, blameless in his
Life and Conversation; and yet for all that the chief of sinners.

Which, I beseech you, to take notice of, who build your hopes of Salvation
upon the A man's own Righteousness a sandy foundation.
sandy foundation of your own Righteousness, your good Doings, your good
Meanings; you are not as other men, (as that Pharisee in the Temple said of
himself, thanking God for it, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men
are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, etc. Luke 18. 11.) you are not tainted
and polluted with the crying sins of the Times; you are no Drunkards, no
Swearers, no Unclean or Unrighteous persons; your Lives are Blameless, and your
Conversations Harm^; and you do (it may be) some, and many good Duties, as
giving of Alms, etc. And therefore you hope it shall go well with you, that
God will own, and accept you as righteous. Alas, for all this you may be
sinners, and great sinners still: I, and such you are, if you refuse to yield
obedience to the command of the Gospel. The Gospel-Commandement is the great
Commandment. This is His Commandment, That we should believe on the Name of
his Son, Jesus Christ, 1 John 3. 23. (...), The Commandment, that Commandment
which Christians ought to have a respect to in the first place. And Obedience
to this Command, is the most acceptable obedience. Paul tells his Romans,
that he had received Grace, and Apostleship (i. e. the gift of being an
Apostle) for the obedience of the Faith, Romans 1. 5. that he might be an
instrument to bring the Gentiles to yield obedience to the doctrine of Faith,
the Gospel. Not to yield obedience hereunto, is the greatest disobedience. This
is that which he charge upon the Jews, that they had not obeyed the Gospel,
Romans 10. 16. Many of them had obeyed the Law, seeking Righteousness by their
Conformity thereunto; They followed after the Law of Righteousness, (as he
says of them in the chapter foregoing, ver. 31.) seeking righteousness by
their obedience to the Law. But they had not obeyed the Gospel. And this he
charge upon them as ^he highest Contempt, the greatest Disobedience; that
they, going about to set up, and establish their own Righteousness, did not,
would not, submit themselves to the Righteousness of God, (as he tells them,
chap. 10. ver. 3.) that is, to seek Justification in Gods way; that way which
he had laid out for them, viz. by receiving Christ, and Believing on him.

And is not this the case of some, and I fear too many among us? (Pardon me if
I take liberty a little to insist upon this so Too many harkening more to
Moses, than to Christ.
needful a point.) All their care is to hear what Moses says unto them, to
yield obedidience to the Law; whilst in the mean time they listen not to the
Voice of Christ, the Voice of the Gospel; they regard not the obedience of
Faith, but trample upon Christ, and the doctrine of Salvation by him; not
receiving, not embracing it, not laying hold upon it, not seeking Justification
and Salvation by it. Now as for all such, let them know that it is not all
their legal Righteousness, that shall be able to justify them before God.
Before men it may, (in which sense St. James tells us of a Justification by
works, Jam. 2.) but before God it cannot, it shall not. Having no other
Righteousness but this, they shall still stand as Sinners before him; yea, as
great sinners. In this rank (continuing in this their Infidelity) they will be
found at that great Day. The wicked servant in ^e Gospel, is said to have his
portion appointed him with unbelievers, Luke 12. 46. intimating such to be the
chief of Sinners. Such they will be found at that great day. No sin will then
be more deeply censured than this. Then will it be as easy, nay, more easy,
for Pagans and Painims, who never heard of Christ, than for unbelieving
Christians, who reject Christ, and trample this precious pearl of the Gospel
under their feet. Here is the first sort whom I would have to take notice of
this Doctrine; mere Civil persons.

2. And to these, join we such vainglorious 2. Vainglorious Hypocrites.
Hypocrites, as make a show of Religion, being zealous for the outside, the
Ceremonial part of it, (as Paul was of the Traditions of his Fathers.) None
more observant of external Formalities than they. In the worship Inde colligere
promptum est, quid valiant coram Deo omnes hypocritarum pomp^, dum contumaciter
Christo resistunt. Calvin. Com. in Text.
and service of God, Who seemingly more Devout than they? yet in the mean time,
they are no true friends to Jesus Christ, having no inward acquaintance with
him.

3. But what shall we then say to those 3. Enemies to Christ, persecuting Him,
and His.
that are Enemies to him? not only not receiving him into their Hearts, but
opposing him; yea, and according to their power Persecuting him, and his. This
was Paul's case (as you have heard whilst he was Zealous for the Ceremonies of
the Law, he was an imbittered enemy against Christ, a Blasphemer, a Persecuter,
speaking evil of the Way of Christ, and persecuting all that he found of that
Way. And for this, he here censures, and condemns himself to be the chief of
Sinners. Who ever they are, that in any degree stand guilty in the like kind,
let them take it home to themselves; so as, being convinced of the greatness of
this their sin, they may come to judge themselves for it (as he did), and so by
judging and condemning of themselves, they may prevent the Lords Judgment; and
obtain Mercy, as he also did.

Thus you see, whereupon it was the Apostle passes this Censure upon himself,
confessing and acknowledging, that he was the chief of sinners.

Why, but it may be alleged, that, what Q. Paul sinned ignorantly
Paul herein did, he did it ignorantly. So much he himself asserts in the verse
next but one before the Text, verse. 13. I was so and so, But (says he) I did
it ignorantly; not intending any evil, nor suspecting that what he did was
evil; only he was carried on with a blind inconsiderate zeal, thinking that he
did God good service in that which he did. So he tells Agrippa, Acts 26. 9. I
verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the
Name of Jesus of Nazareth. And might not this have pleaded an excuse for him?

A. Not so: Ignorance, however in some A. Ignorance though it may extenuate the
sin, yet it does not acquit the sinner.
cases it may extenuate the sin, yet can it not acquit the sinner. Especially,
where it is (as it is called) Ignorantia vincibilis, a vincible ignorance; when
a man has means whereby he may come to the knowledge of the Truth. Such was
Paul's ignorance, he might have known that Jesus Christ was the true Messiah.
This he might have learned from the Prophets and Apostles, as also from those
works which did sufficiently testify of him, the Miracles which were wrought
by him, and by his Apostles, for the confirming of that Doctrine which was by
him Preached: So as his ignorance of this Truth was in it self culpable and
inexcuseable; and consequently, could not excuse this sin of his, in opposing
the Truth of God, in Persecuting Christ in his Members, as he did.
Notwithstanding this, yet was he in so doing a sinner, a great sinner, the
chief of sinners.

Which let it be taken notice of, by such who are ready under such a pretense,
to palliate and excuse the like sins in themselves. Applic. Sin not to be
palliated under pretense of Ignorance.
What they did, they did it ignorantly, or they did it out of a good intention,
though rashly and unadvisedly, etc. And therefore they think this shall excuse
them before God and men. Not so. Before men, happily it may, but not so before
God. For all this, they are sinners still. Ignorance may excuse a tanto, but
not a toto; in part, but not in whole. Sins of ignorance, are sins still. The
Apostle tells us, how the high Priest under the Law, offered Sacrifices for the
errors of the people, Heb. 9. 7. (...), super ignorantiis, (as Eras^us, and
the vulgar Latin render it) for their ignorances, their sense of Ignorance.
And therefore let not any think that this plea will hold good at the bar of
Gods Justice, if they shall come to be tried there. True it is, it may make
them more capable of Pardon, upon their suing it out, (as Paul there says of
himself, that he obtained Mercy, because he did what he did, Ignorantly, v.
13.): but it cannot acquit, and discharge them of the Sin. Paul was still a
Sinner; I, in his own apprehension, the chief of Sinners.

But the Knot is not yet untied, the point Q. Were there not others as great,
or greater Sinners than Paul
not fully cleared. Paul was a sinner, a great sinner, let that be granted; yet
how was he the chief of sinners? Were there not others as great, if not greater
than he? What, had there not been many that had been guilty in the very same
kind before him? having as great a hand in opposing and persecuting of Christ,
as ever he had? What say we to Herod, who sought to murder Christ in his
Cradle, upon which account (to make sure of him) he caused all the children in
Bethleem, and the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, to be slain,
Mat. 2. 16? And so to those others, (probably his Instruments) who are there
said to have sought the young child's life, verse. 20. And what say we to the
chief Priests and Scribes, of whom we read, that they sought how they might
kill him, Luke 22. 2? And what to Judas, who (as it there follows) communed
and bargained with them for a sum of money, to betray that his Lord and Master
into their hands; which being engaged in, he sought opportunity to do, v. 4.
6. and afterward did it? And what say we to Herod and Pilate, who had a hand
in condemning him? And what to the Jews, who used him so inhumanely and
barbarously as they did, putting a Crown of Thorns upon his head, reviling and
spitting upon him, buffeting him, and afterward Crucifying him? which, however
some of them did it ignorantly, (as our Savior, making the most charitable
construction of it, says of them, Father forgive them, for they know not what
they do, Luke 23. 34.) yet, can it not be so thought of all: Some of them doing
what they did out of implacable malice. And what, were not these as great, nay
greater sinners than Paul was? who did what he did ignorantly. How is it then,
that he here charge himself so deeply, that he was the chief of sinners?

To this, I find diverse Answers returned. Ans. 1. Paul's sin more general than
theirs.
Some (in the first place) look upon Paul's sin as more general, rea^hing
further than theirs did. Judas his sin in betraying, and theirs in Condemning
and Crucifying of Christ, it was more particular, extending only to his Person;
but Paul's, reaching to Videtu^ quod Judas fuit major. Sed quidam dicunt, quod
peccatum Pauli generalius fuit, quia contra totam Ecclesiam. Aquin. in Text.
the whole Church. Others (in the second place) conceive that Paul might be
more zealous, more active and stirring, more fierce than any of them. Besides
(thirdly) he had more light, at least, greater means of knowledge then the most
of them. But (as Aquinas notes upon it) all these will not resolve Sed hoc
nihil est, quia Paulus in Incredul^tate, and multi Judaei persequebuntur ex
Malitia. Ibid.
the doubt, in as much as Paul's sin was still a sin of ignorance, but some of
theirs of malice.

Aquinas himself therefore (in the Second A. 2. Paul the chief of Saved sinners.
place) he would evade it thus. Paul here calls himself the chief of Sinners;
that is, (says he) not of All sinners, but of Saved sinners. Of such it is
that he here speaks. Maximu^ inter peccatores salvatos. Ibid.
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom (of which saved
sinners) I am chief. As for Judas, and Herod, and Pilate, and other of the
malicious Jews, they had not found the like Mercy that he had done. They were
sinners, but damned sinners, not saved by Christ. Now of all such (says he)
Paul here reckons himself the chief. But neither can this be looked upon as
satisfactory; in as much it lays too great a restraint upon the words of the
Text, which must be understood indefinitely, of all sinners. Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners; tendering, and offering Salvation unto all. A.
3. Paul the chief of sinners in his own apprehension.
And of all these sinners Paul here acknowledges himself to be the chief.

More genuinely then (in the Third place) Paul was the greatest of sinners in
his own apprehension: Being best acquainted with his own sins, and most
sensible of them: Peccata mea certius scio, and gravius pondero (says
Carthusian well), He did more certainly know, and more sensibly feel his own
sins, than the sins of others.

1. More certainly know them. As for the 1. Being best acquainted with himself.
sins of others, he looked upon them at a distance, a far off, knowing them
only by Hearsay; In the mean time, not knowing all the circumstances
accompanying them, which might either aggravate, or extenuate them. But for his
own sins, these he was well acquainted with, his eyes being fully opened, and
having a great measure of Light, which breaking forth into his Soul, he had now
a full discovery of them, so as he was powerfully, and thoroughly convinced of
them: hereby he was made throrowly acquainted, as with the Streams, so with the
Fountain; as with the several Acts of sin which he had perpetrated, and
committed, so with the fountain of corruption from whence they Issued: And both
these he took notice of in himself, which he could not do in others. As for the
outward acts of sin in others, these he might either see, or hear of; but as
for the fountain of Corruption, that mass and body of sin in them, that he
could not be privy to. Thus was he better acquainted with himself, than with
others; and with his own sins, than theirs: having a more clear, and full sight
of the one, than of the other. So he had, whilst (as I said) he beheld the one
near hand, the other afar off. Now things which we behold near hand, we behold
them in their full proportion, whereas things seen at a distance* seem much
less than they are. As a Hawk flying a high pitch, her shape is lessened, being
seemingly far less than when she was upon the Fist, or Perch. Whereas the
Moon, though one of the least of Stars, yet seems far to exceed them in
Magnitude, because not so remote, but nearer to the Earth than they. So was it
with Paul's sins; they were nearer to his eye, than the sins of others, and
therefore seemed greater to him, than the sins of any other.

Besides, they were set off (as I may say) The greatness of Paul's sins set off
by the greatness of Gods Mercy shown to him.
by the greatness of that Grace and Mercy which he had tasted of. Contraries,
they do mutually illustrate each other, as that common Maxim tells us,
Contraria juxta ^e posita magis elucescunt. White and Black being set together,
make each other appear the more. And surely Paul having obtained Mercy, tasted
of those exceeding riches of Grace, which God had shown to him in his kindness
toward him in Christ Jesus, in the Pardoning and Forgiving of his sins, and
receiving him into so great Favor; this made his sins to appear unto him so
much the more sinful. Even as it is with a Traitor having plotted Treason
against his Prince, against his Person or Government, and being Convicted of
it* and condemned for it, if his Prince out of his special Grace shall please,
not only to pardon his Crime, but to receive him into Grace and Favor,
admitting him to some place of trust and nearness about his Person: certainly,
if there be any ingenuitie in such a person, this cannot but make him see the
foulness of his Error, and make the Treason seem more horrid unto him, than
ever the Rigor of the Law, if Executed upon him, would have done. Thus was it
with this our Apostle. Paul had taken up Arms against Christ, and against his
Church, showing himself a Rebel, an enemy to his Person and Government,
exercising all the Acts of Hostility that he could upon his Subjects, and that
for his cause, whom he thus Maligned, that he would even have pulled Him out of
his Throne, if his power would have reached unto it. Now, this sin Christ
pardons unto him, giving him his Pardon under Seal, assuring him of it. And
not only so, but he receives him, into special Grace and Favor with himself,
entertaining him as a Servant, a Servant by Office, admitts him to a place of
near attendance, preferring him to the highest Office in his Court, to be an
Apostle, a chief Apostle, conferring many great and signal Favors upon him: No
wonder then, that he having now a true spirit of Ingenuitie in him, (such is
the Spirit of God) should look upon his former course as most vile, most
sinful, and that he should thus deeply charge himself to be the chief of
sinners. The Story tells us of Peter, how, when at his Masters Command, after
so long labor in vain, having (as he says) toyled all the night and taken
nothing; he had again cast in his Net, and thereupon, haled such a wonderful
draught of Fishes; hereupon beholding the Power of Christ, who hereby showed
that he had all the Fishes of the Sea at his command; When he saw it, he fell
down at his knees, (says the Text) saying, Depart from me, for I am a sinful
man, O Lord, Luke 5. 8. Peter was a sinful man before, and he knew himself so
to be. But now, beholding the Power and Sovereignty of his Lord and Master,
thus wonderfully manifested, this makes him reflect the more upon himself; and
so wrought in him, a greater, a deeper apprehension of his own vileness, his
own sinfulness. And thus was it with this our Apostle St. Paul. Having had
greater experience, as of the Power, so of the Grace and Mercy of Christ, than
others, in pulling him as a firebrand out of the flames, in working so great a
change in him, this makes him to reflect the more strongly upon his former
course, and breeds in him a deeper apprehension of the heinous and horrid
nature of his former Practices, causing him to charge himself so home as here
he does, to accuse and condemn himself as the chief of sinners. Thus, he saw
his own sinfulness, more than the sinfulness of others, being better acquainted
with his own sins, then with the sins of others. 2. Paul felt his own sins.


2. And again, as he saw them, so he felt them. As for the sins of others, he
might see them, or hear of them, but he could not feel them. His own he both
saw and felt. Seeing the foul and horrid nature of them, he also felt the
weight and burden of them, which he did not of others. And this again, made him
think his sins greater than the sins of any other. Cuique gravissimum suum
onus, (says Aretius upon it). Every one thinks his own burden heaviest, which
he carries upon his own shoulders; his own Affliction, the soarest and
greatest. Behold, and see, if there be any sorrow like my sorrow which is done
unto me, wherewith the Lord has Afflicted me, (says the Church) Lam. 1. 12. A
man that is pained in the head, or teeth, or eyes, (as Sicuti qui gravi
dentium, capitis, vel oculorum dolor laborat, dicit nullum dolorem hoc esse
majorem, s^d suum c^nnium esse maximum, quia scit: suum sentit per
experientiam, aliorum vero dolores tantum consider^ per speculationem. C. A.
Lap. in Text.
a Lapide illustrates it) he is ready to say, and think, that there is no pain
like his pain. And he gives this reason for it, Because he knows his own
pain by sense and experience, and others, only by speculation and report. He
hears of the one, but he feels the other; and so he is most sensible of his
own. Even thus was it with the blessed Apostle here. He had without question,
heard of the sins of others, and he saw them to be great sins; I, but he
feels his own. He had felt the burden of his former sins, and he still felt
the weight of that body of sin, which he yet carried about with him. And this
it was that made him thus to think, and thus to speak of himself, as the
greatest, the chiefest of sinners.

Behold here then, the true disposition of Obs. General Observation.
a gracious Soul, a Character of a truly penitent sinner, He is frequent in
remembering, forward in acknowledging, and se^ere in censuring of his own sins.
All these we see in this chosen Vessel, this blessed Apostle here in the Text,
who having occasion to make mention of sinners, he presently reflects upon
himself, calling to remembrance his own sins; and remembering them, he
acknowledges them; and acknowledging them, he censures them and himself for
them, and that most severely; confessing and professing himself to be not only
one of that number, a sinner, but one of the chief of them, a great sinner, nay
the greatest, the chief of sinners. And the like disposition shall we find in
every truly gracious Soul, every true penitent sinner. Having tasted of the
Grace of God in the pardon of his sins, and in changing and renewing of him, he
is ever after a frequent Remembrancer, an ingenuous Confessor, a severe
Censurer of his own Sins. An Observation, which (as you see), is Tripartite,
made up of three distinct Branches; every of Divided into 3. Branches.
which, will yield us some fruit worth the gathering. That I may not grasp too
much at once, I shall single them forth one by one, insisting upon each
severally, and that, both by way of Doctrine and Application. Begin with the
first. 1. Branch The penitent sinner, a frequent Remembrancer of his own sins


A gracious Soul, is a frequent Remembrancer to its self, frequent in
reflecting upon it is own sinful ways and courses. It is the speech of the
Church, Isa. 59. 12. Our Transgressions are with us, and as for our iniquities,
we know them. And the like may be said of every truly penitent sinner; his
Transgressions are with him, and as for his Iniquities, he knows them. Taking
special notice of them, he is frequent in remembering of them. So was it with
the man after God's own heart, holy David, whom we shall find frequently
striking upon this string. His sins were ever and anon in his eye, so as he
took notice both of the number and nature, the multitude and magnitude of them.
Thence are those passionate complaints of his which we meet with, that his
Iniquities were gone over his head, Psalm. 38. 4. That they were more than the
hairs of his head, Psalm. 40. 12. Thus did he keep a remembrance of them, even
of such sins as were long before committed. So he did of the sins of his youth,
which we find him deprecating, earnestly begging of God, that he would not
remember them, Remember not the sins of my youth, Psalm. 25. 7. thereby showing,
that he himself had not forgotten them, he remembered them. So he did some sins
in special, as viz. that foul sin of his in the matter of Uriah; that sin was
never out of his sight. My sin (says he, speaking of that sin) is ever before
me, Psalm. 51. 3. It was ever in his eye and thought.

I, but it may be said: David at this time Obj. Not only in time of distress.
was in great trouble of mind for that sin. And no wonder then, that he should
remember that which he could not forget; that sin of his, lying so heavy upon
his Conscience. And as for his condition at that time, when he complained so of
his sins, that they were gone over his head, he was then under a great
distress, under some soar Affliction, the Arrows of the Almighty stuck fast in
him, and his Hand pressed him soar, (as he complains, Psalm. 38. 2.) And so was
it with the Church in the place forecited; she was at that time in great
calamity and distress, lying under the Judgments of God for her sins, (as she
there sets it forth in the verses foregoing, Isa. 59. 9, 10, 11.) Now, no
wonder that their sins should be brought to their remembrance at such a time.
Joseph's brethren having been for three days in ward, then they remembered the
evil that they had done to their brother, Genesis 42. 21. And no wonder if the
Church, lying under so great Calamity; and David in so great distress, such
affliction of Body and Spirit; should remember and call to mind their sins.
What great matter is this? Who would not do it at such a time? In their
Affliction, they will seek me early, (says the Lord of Rebellious Ephraim and
Judah, the people of Israel) Hos. 5. verse last.

To go further then; God's Saints have A. But in the most quiet condition.
been frequent in remembering their sins, not only whilst God has set them
before them, and made them to possess them, (as Job speaks of himself, Job
13. 26. Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the
iniquities of my youth, that is, Thou bring them to my remembrance, by
dealing so severely with me. Not only at such times, when their iniquities have
took hold of them, so as they have not been able to look up under them, (as
David there says of himself, Psalm. 40. 12.) But when all things have gone well
with them, after such time as they have sued out the pardon of their sins, have
been assured of their Reconciliation with God, and so have enjoyed a quiet and
comfortable condition in all respects: Yet, even then, they have been much in
reflecting upon their sins, in calling them to mind upon all occasions. For an
instance hereof, we shall need no other then this our Apostle. Paul, upon his
Conversion, he had all his sins pardoned, and that Pardon sealed up in his
Soul, so as he was fully assured, that all the wrong that he had done unto
Christ and to his Church, it was now forgotten in Heaven, and should never be
charged upon him. His Cognizance hereof, he expresses in the verse next but
one before the Text, Verse. 13. I was so and so, (says he) but I obtained
mercy, (which he repeats again in the Verse after the Text, Verse. 16.) that is,
to have these, and all other my sins pardoned and forgiven to me. This was Paul
now assured of, that God had blotted out all these sins of his, out of the Book
of his Remembrance, so as they should never be charged upon him. Yet for all
this, he himself cannot forget them. Upon all occasions he reflects upon them,
and takes occasion to speak of them. So we may see it in those obvious Texts,
Act. 22. 4. chap. 26. 10. 11. 1 Cor. 15. 9. Gal. 1. 13. Ephesians. 3. 8. and so
here again in this Chapter, as in the 13. verse, so again in this Text, where
the mentioning of sinners, causes him to reflect upon himself, to remember and
consider, what a one he was before his Conversion. And thus fares it with
truly penitent sinners, how ever God upon their Repentance, blots their sins
out of his own Book, and casts them behind His back, remembering them no more
(as he promises, Isa. 43. 25.) yet does he not blot them out of their book,
the book of their Remembrance, nor cause them to cast them behind their backs.
Still They remember them, and cannot forget them.

True, (you may say) where the sins have Obj. Not only such as have been
scandalous sinners.
been foul, gross, and scandalous sins, heinous and horrid sins; no wonder now
if they stick by a man, and be often brought to his remembrance. Such were
David's sins in the matter of Uriah, Adultery and Murder. And such were Paul's
sins in blaspheming of Christ and persecuting his Saints, crying-Sins. No
wonder if such sins as these did stick by them, and were ever before them. But
this is not the case of all. Some and many there are, who do not stand guilty
of any such sins, their lives have been more innocent and blameless, they have
been kept from such foul and gross evils. What? are they also to have such a
frequent remembrance of their sins?

Surely, Yes. There being (in the Is It. place) A. Few but have fallen into some
such sins.
few or none but at some time or other, have fallen into some such fins, as
they have cause in a special manner, to remember all their days. However,
(2dly) they have a body of sin in them, which they carry about with All have a
body of sin in them.
them, a mass of corruption, strongly enclining them to evil, which is
continually ready to break forth, if it were not by a supernatural power
restrained. Besides, (3dly) they have many secret inordinate lusts, which, Many
inordinate lusts working inwardly
though they do not break forth into the outward act, yet often times they have
inward workings in the Soul. Now these require a frequent reflecting upon, to
be often had in remembrance. So they have been by the Saints of God. John the
Baptist, was an holy man, sanctified in his Infancy, as the Angel tells his
Father Zacharias of him, Luke 1. 15. He shall be filled with the Holy Ghost,
even from his mothers womb; Sanctified (as Jeremy is said to have been, Ier.
1. 5.) before he came forth of the womb. A Saint from his birth. And such,
questionless, he was in his life, holy and blamless, free from grosser evils,
yet was not he unmindful of the corruption of his nature, and the errors of his
life. So much may be collected from that speech of his, to our Savior, who
tendering himself to his Baptism, John tells him, I have need to be baptized of
thee, Mat. 3. 14. (...), Ego necesse habeo, (as Beza translates it), it is not
only expedient, but necessary for me, that I should be baptized of thee. And
why so? why, that by Him he might be washen from all fins, Original and Actual,
which he had then in remembrance.

But I shall not need to seek for any other All these Paul remembered.
instance than this in the Text. This blessed Apostle, he was much exercised
and taken up, not only with the Remembrance of these grosser Sins committed
before his Conversion, but even with the Sight and Sense of his present
Corruption, and daily Failings. So much we may learn from his own mouth: as
elsewhere, so especially in that Seventh of the Romans; where (not personating
any other, but speaking of himself) we find him passionately bewailing, and
bemoaning his condition; not in regard of the Evils of his former course, but
of his daily Infirmities, his sinful Omissions and Commissions, ver. 15. What I
would, that I do not; but what I hate, that I do: ver. 19. The good that I
would, that I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do. And so out of
the strength of Corruption working in him, and sometimes prevailing against
him. I find (says he) a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with
me, ver. 21. I see a Law in my Members, rebelling against the Law of my Mind,
and bringing me into captivity to the law of Sin, which is in my Members. Thus
was this precious Saint much taken up, not only with reflecting upon his
former sins before Conversion, but with considering his present condition. In
the sense and apprehension whereof, he therebreaks forth into that passionate
complaint, Ver. 24. O wretched man that I am, Who shall deliver me from the
body of this Death? And so here in the Text, Jesus Christ came into the world
to save Sinners, of whom I am chief. Not only was, but am, a Sinner, a great
sinner still. Thus were his sins ever before him; sins before Conversion, and
sins after Conversion. And so is it in measure with every Gracious soul, being
truly Penitent for sin; it cannot forget it, it is frequent in the Remembrance
of it.

And it cannot be otherwise, the Eyes of Reas. 1. The Penitent sinner has his
Eyes opened.
such a one being (in the First place) thoroughly opened. The man whose eyes are
open (says Balaam of himself) Numb. 24. 3. Meaning either his Bodily eyes,
which being closed whilst he was in a Trance, were now opened; or rather the
eyes of his Mind, which were now opened, to behold, and foresee those future
events, which before were hid from him, and others. It may be applied to every
true Convert; Every such a one is a man whose eyes were shut, but now they are
open: the eyes of his Understanding being opened, to see the true Nature of
Sin, and to see it in himself; to see the sinfulness of his Nature, and of his
Life.

2. And his Understanding being thus Enlightened, 2. His Conscience awakened.
his Conscience is withal Awakned, so as That does the Office, for which it was
placed in the Soul, being as a faithful Register, recording and remembering the
several Acts of sin.

3. And again, (Thirdly) the True Penitent 3. His Heart pricked.
sinner has been pricked at his heart: As is said of those new Converts, Acts
2. 37. (...), They were pricked in their Hearts; deeply affected with the Sense
of those Sins, whereof they were by Peter's Sermon convinced. And so in measure
are all true Penitent Sinners. Being convinced of their Sins, they are in like
manner affected with grief and sorrow of Heart for them. Now that which goes
near a man's Heart, makes a deep and firm impression upon the Memory, so as it
cannot easily be forgotten.

These, and many other Reasons might be given, Why a Regenerate person should
be so mindful of his own sins: and that more than the sins of others. The
sins of others, however they both may, and ought to affect a Christian, upon
the seeing, or hearing of them; yet they come not so near the Heart, they make
not so deep an Impression upon the Soul, as a man's own Sins do.

Thus have I done with the Doctrinal part of this first Branch: Which now,
bring we home to our selves, by way of Application. Let that be directed only
two Ways;

By way of Conviction, By way of Exhortation*
1st. By way of Conviction. Is this the Disposition Use 1. By way of
Conviction, diverse discovered to be no true Penitents.
of a truly Gracious Soul, a true Penitent sinner? How many then are there, who
may from hence be convinced, that they are none of this number, being such, as
seldom, or never, reflect upon their own sinfulness; or, if they do, they do it
not in a right way and manner. Of these, I shall reckon up four or five several
sorts.

1. Some there are, and many, whose Consciences 1. Such whose Consciences were
never awakened
were never yet awakened, their eyes were never yet opened to see their own
sinfulness, the sinfulness of their natures, and errors of their lives. Such a
dead sleep has seized upon them, that nothing will awaken them.
Notwithstanding that their sins, being (it may be) crying sins, cry loud in
their ears; yet they hear them not. Notwithstanding that the Judgments of God
against those sins, and against them for them, have been by his Ministers
thundered out in their ears, enough to shake and rend the most rocky heart; yet
they stir not them. Notwithstanding, that their sins have taken hold upon them,
and broke forth upon them in many terrible and remarkable Judgments, pointing
out their sins unto them; yet they affect them not. Still they go on in their
way, being stupid and senseless, never brought to consider the state and
condition they are in; never brought to fix a serious thought upon any of their
sins, though never so foul, never so open and scandalous. Others see them, the
world cries shame on them, yet themselves are not at all touched with the
sense of them. Such a dead sleep (as I called it) is fallen upon them. And well
may it so be called. When a man cannot be awakened by hallowing in his ears, by
pricking, and pinching, and smiting of him, we conclude he is in a desperate
Lethargy, a dead sleep. And is not this the case of many stupid Souls among
us? Word, Threatenings, Judgments; Word Pronounced, Threatenings Denounced,
Judgments Executed; yet all stir not them. Still they lie in sin, go on in sin
without sense, without remorse, never reflecting upon themselves, upon their
hearts or lives, to consider the evil of them. This is that which the Lord
complains of in the people of Jerusalem, Jer. 8. 6. I hearkened and heard,
but they spoke not aright, no man repented him of his wickedness, Saying, What
have I done? Every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the
Battle. Such was their general security and stupiditie! none of them had any
remorse, or touch at all in their Consciences for any of their sins, so far
forth, as but to think once seriously with themselves, What it was that they
had done; But like a fierce headstrong horse, which hearing the sound of the
Trumpet, and seeing or smelling the Battle a far off, does with much violence,
notwithstanding what his Rider can do to hold him in, in a full Carier make
toward it, and rusheth into the midst of it. Such was the eagerness of that
people to the pursuit of their sinful ways and courses. And so is it with too
many every where: Whatever can be said or done to them, yet still they will
hold on their course, nothing can bring them to a serious consideration of the
evil thereof. So far are they from that tenderness of Conscience, which was in
this our blessed Apostle, and is to be found in measure in every regenerate
person, (who having tender hearts (as Josiah is said to have, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27.)
the least hint is enough to bring their sins to remembrance) that nothing will
stir, nothing will awaken them. Certainly a fearful state, a desperate
condition, a clear evidence, that they are (as the Apostle says of his
Ephesians before their conversion, Ephesians 2. 1.) dead in trespasses and sins! 2.
Such as seek to lull their Consciences a^ sleep again.


2. A Second sort there are, who have been, and it may be are, in measure
awakened, but they labor what they can, to lull themselves a sleep again. God
has, it may be, at some time, upon some occasion, begun to bring their sins to
their remembrance and to set them before them. Happily, upon the hearing of
some powerful Sermon, upon the feeling or fearing of some terrible Judgment,
their consciences have begun to be awakened, and thereupon their sins have
begun to stare them in the face. They have been in measure convinced of the
evil of their former ways, and have felt some horror of conscience for them.
But hereupon what do they? why presently do what they can to get their
consciences a sleep again; take all the courses they can to charm their sins,
to silence and stay the clamor of them, or to stop their ears against them,
that so they may never hear more of them. To this end they even study the Art
of Oblivion and Forgetfulness.

1. Shunning, as much as may be, all means 1. Shunning all means that might
awaken them.
that might disquiet their consciences, by bringing their sins to their
remembrance. Upon that account declining, as much as they can, a searching, and
a Powerful Ministry. A thing, which they can by no means endure. What have I to
do with thee, thou man of God? Art thou come to call my sin to remembrance? It
is the speech of the Widow of Sarepta, speaking in a passion to the Prophet
Eliah, 1 King. 17. 18. So it is: the Prophets of God, his Ministers powerfully
dispensing the Word, denouncing the Judgment of God, they bring the sins of
wicked men to their remembrance, and therefore they cannot away with them. This
it was, that made Ahab to decline Micaiahs Ministry and to hate his person;
because (as he himself gives the reason of it), he did not prophecy good
concerning him, but evil, 1 King. 22. 8. He would not flatter, and smooth him
up in his sins, (as the rest of his false Prophets did) but dealt plainly with
him, being to him a faithful Remembrancer, to put him in mind of them. And this
it was, that made Faelix so weary of hearing Paul's Sermon, Act. 24. 25. Paul
preaching to him of Righteousness, and Temperance, and Judgment, (a subject
which he liked not to hear of, being conscious to himself of his own flagitious
and wicked Life) put him into a trembling fit, his Conscience beginning to be
awakened; which he could by no means endure. And is not this the case of some,
and too many amongst us? Being desirous to lull their Consciences asleep, and
to go on in their sinful ways and courses without disquietment, they thereupon
baulk, and, as much as may be, decline the powerful Ministry of the Word; at
least, not enduring that their darling sins should be meddled with. I charge
you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor awake my Love till
he please, (says the Spouse concerning her Well-beloved) Cant. 2. 7. And the
like charge could some be content to give to the Lords Watchmen, the Ministers
of Christ, That they should not stir, or disquiet their Beloved Lusts; which if
they do, they cannot bear, they cannot endure it at their hands. Herod could be
content to hear John the Baptist, and in many things he heard him gladly, (as
it is said of him, Mark 6. 20.) but when he comes to meddle with his
Herodias, telling him (as he did, ver. 18.) That it was not lawful for him to
have his brother's Wife; now this must not be endured, John must presently to
the Prison, and at Herodias his request have his Head cut off, (as the Story
there sets it forth). Such is the Genius of too many every where (I wish there
may be none of them found among you), they purposely decline all ways and
means, which might bring their sins to their remembrance.

2. And on the other Hand, they make 2. Using means to put their sins out of
their remembrance.
use of all kind of Opiates; use all the means they can devise, or think of; to
put and keep their Sins out of their Remembrance. To that end, either with
Cain, falling to building of Cities, Genesis 4. 17. they plunge themselves into
all kind of Worldly employments; or with Solomon's fool, running into the house
of Mirth, Eccles. 7. 4. betake themselves to merry Jovial company, give
themselves up to the following of Vain Sports and Recreations; seeking, by this
means, to drive away the Evil spirit of an awakened Conscience, and to drown
the noise and clamor of their Sins; even as those Idolaters are said to have
done the cries of their Children, which they Sacrificed in the Vallie of
Hinnom, with the noise of Drums, or other Instruments, (from whence it had the
name of Topheth, coming from the Hebrew word Toph, which signifies Tympanum, a
Tymbrel, or Drum). Now these are far from Paul's disposition here in the Text,
who was willing to take all occasions to put him in mind of his Sins.

A Third sort there are, who have attained 3. Such as having been awakened are
fallen asleep again.
what the former desired, and endeavored; having been awakened, they are
fallen asleep again. Time was, when their Consciences were Pricked, they were
convinced of the Evil of their ways, which had begun to breed some Repenting
and Relenting thoughts in them; but now they are (as I said) fallen asleep
again, having put away the Remembrance of what they had been for a time
somewhat affected with; so as it has now happened to them, according to the
Proverb, (which St. Peter speaks of, 2 Pet. 2. last) The Dog is turned to his
own Vomit, and the Sow that was washen, to the wallowing in the Mire. They are
returned to their former Course, so as now they go on again as securely as
ever, forgetting the things that are behind. As Paul says of himself in a
clean contrary sense, in his doing of Good, Forgetting those which are behind,
and reaching forth to those things which are before, I press toward the Mark,
etc. Phil. 3. 13. Even so is it with them, in acting and committing of Sin,
they forget the sins which are Behind, the sins of Youth, and the sins of Riper
age, which, it may be, they have been formerly convinced of; and they press
forwards to the making up of the full measure of their Iniquities.

A Fourth sort there are, who do, it may 4. Such as remember their sins, but
seldom, and then against their wills.
be, at sometimes remember their sins, but it is very seldom, and then against
their wills. Never but at such times, as when God is pleased to set their Sins
before them, making them to possess them, bringing them to their Remembrance,
by Writing bitter things against them, inflicting upon them some severe
Judgment. Now, it may be, they cast some glances upon their Sins, looking upon
them as the fuel that have kindled this Fire. Even as that Widow of Sarepta
did in the Text even now cited, 1 Kings 17. 18. Her son being Sick, and the
Prophet coming to her, now she remembers her Sin, which she apprehended might
have brought that threatened Judgment upon her and hers: Art thou come unto me
(says she) to* call my Sin to Remembrance? But no sooner is the storm over,
but they cast their sins behind their backs again, remembering them no more; in
times of Prosperity, never so much as thinking of them. In this, like some bad
Debtors, who never think of what they Owe, but when they are under Arrest, or
at least see the Sergeant.

To these, yet add another sort, worse 5. Such as remember them but are not
humbled for them.
than all the former. They, it may be, do look back, and call their former sins
to their remembrance; but how? not remembering them as they ought to do; not
looking upon them as Sins, to repent of them, and to be humbled for them, to
shame and condemn themselves for them; but only (it may be) as tricks of youth,
(as they call them) and so making light of them. Nay, it may be, remembering of
them to Boast of them, to Glory in them, (as those Idolaters are said to do of
their Idols, Psalm. 97. 7.) or pleasing, and tickling themselves (as it were)
with the thought and remembrance of those sins, which now they want
opportunity, or ability, to act over again. Of all the rest, these are the
worst.

Now to speak a word or two to all of these, A word to awaken secure sinners.
in special to those secure sinners, such as go on in a course of Sin, never
reflecting upon themselves, and such as are so far from this frequent
Remembrance, that they (as I said) study the Art of forgetfulness, accounting
it their happiness to forget their Sins; and consequently cannot endure to be
put in mind of them: Let all such but seriously consider these two things,
which will serve to convince them of the folly and madness of this their Course.

1. That all their sins are Registered, and 1. Their sins are registered in two
Books.
put upon Record. So they are, and that both in Heaven, and upon Earth. In
Heaven in Gods Book, the book of his Remembrance. Upon Earth, in their own
Book, the book of Conscience. In both these Books, are their sins entered and
recorded: And that so as, whilst they hold on this course, they cannot be
Blotted out, they cannot be Forgotten.

1. In Gods Book: As David says of the 1. In Gods book, the book of his
Remembrance.
members of his Natural body, In thy Book are all my members written, Psalm.
139. 16. so may a Wicked man say of his sins, The members of that body of Sin
in him, they are all written in Gods Book, the book of his Remembrance. There
are the Names of all Gods Saints entered, as the Prophet Malachy tell us, Mal.
3. 16. A book of Remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the
Lord, and that thought upon his Name. And there are the Names of all wicked and
ungodly men entered: And, as their Names, so their Sins. Every particular Act,
with every particular Circumstance, being all come up into Remembrance before
God. So the Angel tells Cornelius concerning his Good works; his works* of
Piety and Charity, his Prayers and Alms: Thy Prayers and thine Alms (says
he) are come up for a memorial before God, Acts 10. 4. And so may it be said of
the Wicked works of every wicked and ungodly man; his Swearing, his
Drunkenness, his Uncleanness, etc. they are all come in Remembrance before God,
all Entered into his Book; and that so as they cannot, by any means, be blotted
out, (save only by the Blood of Christ, and the Tears of true Repentance) nor
yet worn out* This being a Record for Eternity. God's Remembrance, is an
everlasting Remembrance. In this remembrance are the Righteous; The Righteous
shall be had in everlasting Remembrance, Psalm. 112. 6. Men may forget them, but
so will not God. And in such a remembrance shall all wicked men and their
wicked works be; they shall be had in everlasting remembrance. So they shall be
with God: however they themselves may forget their own sins, and the world may
forget them; yet God, whilst his Justice is not satisfied, He will not, He
cannot. What a folly then is it in them, to go about to forget them, so long as
God remembers them? Were it so, that they could blot them out of their own
Book, the book of their Conscience; yet as long as they stand upon Record in
God's Book, what will this avail them? What will it advantage a Debtor to cross
his own book, so long as his Debts stand charged in his Creditor's.

2. But (in the 2d. place) the sins of wicked 2. In their own book, the book of
Conscience.
men, as they are entered in God's Book, so in theirs. As in the book of his
Remembrance, so in the book of their Conscience. In this book (I say) they are
entered; I, and so entered, as that they cannot blot them out. Blur them they
may, but blot them out they cannot. Conscience is a Record for Eternity. What
is written there, is written with indelible Characters, such as none but God
alone can blot out. Thence it is that David makes his prayer to God, that he
would blot out his Transgressions, Psalm. 51. 1. This David himself could not
do; as, not out of God's Book, so not out of his own, not out of the book of
his Conscience. No, do what he could, still his sin was before him (as he
complains, verse. 3.). All that men can do in this case, is but to keep this
book shut, (which for a time happily they may); but to blot out what is written
in it, this they cannot do. They may do this, for a time, out of their memory;
but not out of their Conscience. What is written in the Memory, is written
oft-times in Water; but what is written in Conscience, is written in Marble.
Thus are the sins of wicked men, entered and Recorded in these two Books,
whereof, the one is a true Counterpane of the other.

And being thus entered here, these Books ^. Both these Books shall be opened.
(in the 2d. place) shall one day be opened. However, for a time, they may be
shut and closed up, so as men do not take notice of what is written in them;
yet, they shall not ever be so. A time will come, when they shall be both
opened.

1. God's Book shall be opened. However 1. Gods Book.
for a time he may keep silence, seeming to connive at wicked and ungodly men,
as if he took no notice of their sins, or had forgotten them; yet, sooner or
later, he will open his Book, and make them to read what is written there,
setting their sins in order before them. This, the Lord wills every
presumptuous sinner to take notice of, Psalm. 50. 21. These things have thou
done, (says he) and I kept silence; thou thoughtest, I was altogether such a
one as thy self, but I will reproove thee, and set them in order before thine
eyes, Psalm. 50. 21. This will God do, sooner or later. He will open his Book,
and, opening it, he will also open the eyes of all wicked and ungodly men, so
as they shall not but read what is there written. They shall not then be able
any longer, to avoid the looking and thinking of their sins, no more than King
Balshazzer could the beholding of the hand writing upon the wall, Dan. 5. 5.

2. I, and their own Book shall be opened, 2. The book of Conscience.
the book of Conscience. That may be shut and sealed up for a time, but it
shall be opened sooner or later. Conscience, though a sleep for a time, it
shall be awakened. And then it shall do it is office, bringing the most secret
sins of wicked men, to their remembrance; setting their sins before them, so,
as either to drive them to God by Repentance, (as it did David), or to the
Devil by Desperation, (as it did Cain and Judas). What a bootless thing is it
then, for men to study the Art of forgetfulness? to decline the remembrance of
their own sins, when as they are so entered into both these Books, which shall
one day be thus Opened?

Q. But when, when? says the profane Q. When these Books shall be opened.
Wretch, when shall this be?

A. Why, either sooner or later: soon enough, and too soon, to the cost of all
secure sinners.

1. It may be in this life. Happily in time 1. It may be in this life, in time of
Prosperity.
of Health and Prosperity, in the midst of their greatest jollity, when they
least think of it. So was it with Belshazzar, when he was carrowzing in the
midst of his cups, and least dreamed of any such matter, then did the
Handwriting appear to him. And thus God can come unto men, and sometimes does,
in the midst of their outward prosperity, then awakening their Consciences,
then representing their sins unto them*

2. But if not then, yet in time of Affliction, 2. In time of Affliction, at
the hour of Death.
in time of Sickness, at the hour of Death, when the Judgments of God have
seized upon them, and Death, his Sergeant, has laid hold upon them, they being
then under Arrest, ready to be carried to the Prison of Hell, to be brought
before the Tribunal of Jesus Christ, there to give an account of what they have
done in the flesh; then does God often open the Book of Conscience, and make
men to see those Sins, which before they had shut their eyes against, setting
them before them in the most hideous shapes, calling to remembrance all those
sins, which they so long time had studied to forget.

3. But if not so, if the Book of Conscience 3. At the day of Judgment.
be not opened in this life, but men carry it closed and sealed out of the
world with them, (as oft-times it falls out), yet both that and the other
Book, God's Book, shall certainly be opened hereafter; viz. at the Day of
Judgment. At the day of Particular, more fully at the day of the General
Judgment. Then shall these Books be opened. This St. John tells us he saw in a
Vision, Rev. 20. 12. I saw (says he) the dead, small and great, stand before
God, and the Books were opened. And what books were these? why, even both these
Books which I have spoken of, God's Book, and Man's Book; the Book of God's
Remembrance, and man's Conscience: Both shall be opened at that great Day. And
then shall all the sins, that wicked and ungodly men have done, be brought to
their remembrance. Those sins, which here they cast behind their backs, shall
then be set before their faces. Those sins, which here they study to forget,
they shall then remember them. Those sins, which here they turned away their
eyes from, they shall then behold them, yea, and that with open face. That
which the Apostle says of true Believers, and of that clear Vision, which they
shall one day have, of Divine and Heavenly Mysteries, viz. at the last and
great day, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to
face; with open face, beholding things as they are, it may be said of all
wicked and ungodly men, and of their sins. Now they behold them through a
glass, and that a false glass, and they see them darkly; Conniventibus oculis,
winking at them, not willing to behold them in their true colors as they are,
to have a true sight and sense of them. But they shall, at that day, that day
of Wrath, and Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God (as the Apostle
calls it, Romans 2. 5.) thus behold them with open face, having a full sight of
them. Then shall all their sins be set before them, and so set before them, as
that they shall for ever stare in their faces, being unto them, a matter of
horror and terror to all Eternity. O consider this, all you who are now so
loath to look upon your sins, to look upon them as truly penitent sinners do,
but account it your happiness to forget them Be you convinced of the greatness
of your folly herein, and withal of the wretchedness of your state and
condition, being hereby sufficiently discovered. This, by way of Conviction.

In the 2d. place, by way of Exhortation, Use 2. Exhortation, exciting to the
remembrance of Sin.
let all be excited herein, to propound this our Apostle, as a Pattern for
their Imitation; remembering their own sins, as he did hi^. Which, (that it may
take place the better) let it be directed to two sorts of persons; Such as
never yet knew, what it was to remember their sins aright; and such as have
remembered Directed to two sorts of Persons.
them, and repented of them. Begin with the former.

1. Secure and impenitent sinners, such, whose Consciences were never yet
thoroughly 1. Secure Sinners.
awakened, let them be excited to reflect upon themselves* upon their former
sinful ways and courses, to call their sins to remembrance. Which I beseech
you lend an ear unto, all you who are of this number; of which, I fear there
are too many every where.

To excite you whereunto, do but consider Motive 1. This is the only way to
have sins forgotten.
that this is the next, nay, the only way, to have your sins forgotten. For you
to remember them, is the only way to have God to forget them. If you forget
them, he does, and will remember them. If you remember them, he will forget
them.

Only, see that you remember them in a Caution 1 See that it be a right
remembrance.
right way, seriously, with sorrow and shame. This is the right remembrance of
sin, when men remember their sinful ways, and are ashamed of them. This is
that which the Lord says, his people, the people of the Jews should do, Ezekiel.
16. 6. when he should make good his Covenant to them, and establish it with
them, viz. upon their Conversion, Then (says he) thou shall remember thy ways,
and be ashamed, Verse. 61. Remember, and be confounded (as the last verse there
has it). Thus does the tr^y penitent sinner remember his sins, he remembers
them, and is ashamed of them, self-confounded for them, loathing, and abhorring
them, and himself for them. So the Lord says, that his people Israel should
do, when he should bring them again into their own Land, restoring them from
their Captivity, Then (says he) ye shall remember your ways, and all your
doings, wherein ye have been defiled, and ye shall loath your selves in your
own sight, for all the evils which ye have committed, cap. 20. of that
Prophecy, verse. 43. Repeated again, cap. 36. verse. 31. And thus, see that you
remember your sins. Looking back upon them, not as Lot's Wife did upon her
Sodom, which she may be conceived to have left against her will, sorrowing,
that she and it were parted, and that she might not return to it again; for
which cause she was turned into a Pillar of Salt, made a Monument to all
posterity, (as the Story tells us) Genesis 19. 26. Thus do aged sinners, sometimes
look back upon their sins, their sins of youth, which they have left, (or
rather, which have left them) not being ashamed of them, or sorrowing for them,
but pleasing themselves in the remembrance of them, sorrowing rather that they
have been forced to part with them. Thus do they remember their sins, as they
do their friends being dead, mourning over their Graves, lamenting their death,
sorry that they could live no longer with them. Now, as for such a Remembrance,
far be it from every of you. Would you have God to forget your sins, see that
you remember them with sorrow and shame; loathing and abhorring them, and your
selves for them. So look upon them, as a sick Patient does upon his Vomit,
which his stomach being disburdened of, the very sight or smell of it, is
loathsome to him. Remembering them, be ashamed of them, and confounded in your
selves for them.

Taking notice (which let it serve for a Motive 2. The only way to prevent
everlasting Confusion.
second Motive), that this is the only way to prevent everlasting Confusion at
the last and great Day. Those that will not remember their sins here, shall
remember them there; those that will not remember them with shame here, shall
behold them with shame there; those that will not be confounded for them here,
shall be confounded for them at that day, They shall then be ashamed, and also
confounded all of them; they shall go to confusion, (as the Prophet says of
the makers of Idols, Isa. 45. 16.) O then! Be awakened, and stir up your selves
to such a serious remembrance of your sins.

And this do you speedily. Not deferring Caution 2 This to be done speedily.
the remembering of them, as too many do; who, as long as health and strength
are continued to them, they go on securely, not willing to trouble themselves
with the thought of their sins. No, when the evil day comes, then it will be
soon enough to do this; In time of sickness, at the hour of death, this is the
time which they have designed to this work. A time of all other, most improper
for it. So, many a one has found it, and so let them make account to do, who
ever they are, who shall put off the remembrance of their sins till then.
Happily, at that time (1st.) thou may want power to do this, not having the
use of memory. Or (2dly.) having power, thou may want a will; though thou
have a head, thou may want a heart: God often (yea, for the most part)
denying his Grace at that time, to those that have slighted the former offers
of it But (3dly.) though thou have both power and will, yet, how sad and
terrible will the remembrance of thy sins be then unto thee, when thou shall
come to look death in the face, and be under the Arrest of that grim Sergeant,
thy body, ready to be carried to the prison of the Grave, and thy Soul (without
infinite Mercy) to the prison of Hell; there to make satisfaction for those
sins which thou have committed, but not repented of? O sad remembrance of sin!
when, being thus arrested, and called to give up thy account, thou shall
remember thy sins, but can not remember thy repentance; can remember thy
Debts, but cannot show thy Acquittance; shall remember how thou have provoked
God by a continual course of sin, and so made thy self justly obnoxious to his
everlasting Wrath and Vengeance, but can not remember that ever thou suedst
out thy pardon; this will be a sad Remembrance. To prevent the horror and
terror hereof then, Remember your sins now. Now, whilst health and strength
last, now whilst you have time for the suing out your Pardon, Now remember
them.

Which, that you may do, (for Direction Direct. 1. Beg it of God, that he
would bring our sins to our remembrance.
briefly) Beg it of God, that he would open your eyes, that he would in a
kindly way, set your sins in order before you, bringing them to your
remembrance, causing you to know them. This is that which Job desires from his
God in his Passion, Job 13. 23. Lord, (says he) make me to know my
transgression and my sin. And the like do you, upon serious thoughts, beg it
of God, that he would make a full discovery of your sins to you. So it is,
unless He be pleased to do this for you, you will never behold them as they
are, nor remember them as you ought. And therefore be earnest in begging this
Mercy, (A Mercy, which makes way for all saving Mercies, for pardoning Mercy,
healing Mercy,) that the Lord Direct. 2. Wait upon him in the Ministry of his
Word.
would be pleased, to discover your sins unto you, making you acquainted with
your Selves, with the sinfulness of you Natures, Hearts, and Lives.

Which, that he may do, Wait upon him in the use of such means, as whereby he
ordinarily effects this work. The chief whereof, is the public Ministry of
his Word. Hereby does God open the eyes of poor sinners. Paul, was sent by God
unto the Gentiles upon this Errand, To open their eyes, to turn them from
darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God, that they might receive
forgiveness of sins, etc. (as the Lord tells him) Act. 26. 18. And how was he
to do this? Why, by his Preaching, his Preaching of the Word to them. Herein
are God's Ministers his Instruments (as he was) in doing of this work, in
giving sight to the blind; in making men to see and know their sins. This is
the work which the Lord puts his Prophet Ezekiel upon, cap. 16. 2. Son of
man (says he) cause Jerusalem to know her Abominations. And this is the work
of God's Ministers his Interpreters, (as to show unto man his uprightness, of
which Elihu speaks, Job 33. 23; so) to convince him of his sinfulness. And
therefore, that you may come to see and feel this; attend upon this Ordinance
of God, and that with care and Conscience, that you may hear what God will say
to you by his Ministers. Not being offended at them, when they come to touch
upon your sins, as Ahab was with Michaiah, Herod with John the Baptist, and
Foelix with Paul, (of whom I spoke before); but, Be willing to hear of them,
that so you may be convinced of them, and brought to remember them in a truly
penitential way. This for the former sort, such as never yet knew, what it was
to remember their sins aright.

In the second place, for them who have 2. Penitent sinners excited to a
frequent remembrance of their sins.
remembered them, and seriously repented of them, let them also be excited,
frequently to reflect upon them. It is a mistake, if any shall think (what our
Antinomians of late time did) that when once a man has repented of his sins,
and sued out his pardon for them, he should then cast them behind his back, so
as to remember them no more. Our Apostle* St. Paul, he had repented of his sins
committed before his Conversion, his Infidelity, Obstinacy, Blasphemy; his
opposing of Christ, and Persecuting of his Saints. Being hereof convinced in an
extraordinary way, by a Voice from Heaven; Christ himself calling unto him,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9. 4. he had seriously repented of
them. And he had sued out his pardon for them, having it under Seal, being
assured that he had obtained Mercy (as here he declares it once and again, in
the verse next but one before, and the verse after the Text): Yet,
notwithstanding this, upon all occasions (as you have heard), he is ready to
reflect upon those sins, and to call to mind his forepast condition. Let it
not then content any of us, that we have remembered our sins, that we have been
humbled for them, and that by believing on Christ, we have obtained the pardon
of them, but still take all occasions to reflect and look back upon them, to
call them to mind again. Specially our special sins, which have been of
greater magnitude then other. So the Lord tells his people Israel they should
do, when he was pacified toward them for all the evil that they had done,
then, they should remember it, Ezekiel. 16. verse. last.

Why, but it may be said, To what purpose Two Questions resolved.
is this? or, What benefit shall a Christian reap in so doing. Here are two
Queries, to which I shall return Answers severally. In which Answers we shall
fall in, with diverse Arguments and Motives, which will be of use, to press and
set on the Exhortation.

For the former. Wherefore should a Christian Q. 1* Wherefore a penitent sinner
should do this?
do this? Having once repented of his sins, and sued out the pardon of them,
Why should he disquiet himself in calling them to mind again, in rubbing over
an old soar? I Answer, this a Christian is to do upon diverse accounts, for
diverse Ends, and Redsons: Instance in 4. of them.

1. For the making sure of his Repentance, A. For the making sure his
Repentance.
that he may know it to be sound and true. All Repentance is not true
Repentance. It is with sins as with wounds: Wounds may be skinned over, and yet
not healed; Sins may be sorrowed for, yea, and absteined from, yet not truly
repented of. To this end therefore, a Christian should be frequent in
reflecting upon them, to see whether he has truly repented of them or no. Even
as a man, by rubbing and chafing of the soar, he tries whether it be healed or
no; even so by this means, a Christian may come to judge of his Repentance,
whether it was sound or no, by calling his sins to his remembrance, rubbing,
and pressing them, (as it were) by a frequent reflecting upon them; which doing
willingly, it may be to him an evidence that it is so. A wound that is only
skinned over, will not endure the handling; the touching of it, puts the
patient to pain. Where men cannot endure to have their sins touched, by
themselves or others, to be put in mind of them, it is an evidence those sins
are not healed, never truly repented of. Sins healed, will endure the touching.
Upon this account, Christians ought to be frequent in reflecting upon their
sins, for the assuring of the truth of their repentance.

2. And as for the assuring, so (2dly.) for 2. For the renewing and increasing
of it.
the renewing and increasing of it. It is a mistake, if any shall think
Repentance to be only one particular act, the work of an hour, or a day, or
the like (as Papists look upon their Penance). No, it is an habitual work, the
work of a Christians lifetime, and so to be frequently renewed. A work which a
Christian can never do too much, or yet enough Certainly, he that thinks he
has repented enough, never yet repented aright. In this sense, the Repentance
of a Christian may be called, Repentance to be repented of, because not so
perfect as it ought to be. Those, who are the greatest proficients, and have
made the greatest progress in this work, yet they fail in this as in all other
duties, falling short of repenting as they ought to do. And therefore ought to
take all occasions for the renewing of their repentance; and to that end, they
are frequently to call to mind their former sins, that they may mourn over them
afresh, renewing their former sorrow for them. The Remembrance of sin, though
bitter, makes way for sweet joy.


Which, however it may have some bitterness in it for the present, yet it will
make way for great joy and comfort to the Soul. So it is, the joy of a
Christian arises out of sorrow, sorrow for sin; and ordinarily it is
proportioned to it. As it was with Eliahs Sacrifice, 1 King. 18. 33. 38. after
he had caused water in great abundance, three several times, to be poured about
the Altar, then came forth the Fire. Thus, after a Christians sorrow for sin,
his joy arises. And as the one is increased, so oft-times is the other. The
Harvest answers the Seed time. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy,
Psalm. 126. 5. Never a truly penitential tear, that the remembrance of sin
draws from the eye, but ordinarily God answers and recompenceth it with a
suitable proportion of joy and comfort to the Soul.

In the 3d. place, Christians are to be frequent 3. To get assurance of the
pardon of them.
in remembering of their sins, that they may get assurance of the pardon of
them, that they may get their pardon Sealed up unto their Souls. A pardon, is
not ever as soon sealed as granted. A Christian may have his sins pardoned in
Heaven, yet not so in his own Conscience, wanting the assurance thereof. And
upon this account, he ought to have his sins frequentlie in his eye. Upon this
account, among other, he is daily to pray for the forgiveness of them, as our
Savior directs us to do in that form of prayer which he has given us, where
this is one of the six Petitions, Forgive us our Trespasses, meaning not only
our daily sins, (as we pray for our daily bread) but all the sins of our lives
past, that so we may still gain a further and clearer evidence, and assurance
of the pardon of them. This use David made of his sins being ever before him,
it put him upon the earnest seeking of the assurance of his pardon, that, that
cloud being dispelled, the light of God's countenance might come to shine upon
his Soul; which he earnestly sueth for in that Penitential Psalm of his, Psalm.
51. Make me to hear the voice of joy and gladness, verse. 8. Restore unto me the
joy of thy Salvation, verse. 12. Thus are Christians to reflect upon their sins,
that they may get the pardon of them Sealed.

4thly, and lastly, Remember them, that 4. To get them thoroughly healed.
they may get them thoroughly healed; that they may be freed and delivered, as
from the guilt, so from the power of them. A disease may be cured, and yet
there may be some relics of it in the body; which, if not looked to, may
incline it to a Relapse. Thus, a sin may be repented of and pardoned, and yet
there may be some remainders of it in the Soul, which, if not looked unto, may
break forth again. And upon this account a Christian is to remember it, that he
may get strength against it. Such use also David made of his sins being ever
before him, it puts him upon seeking unto God, that he would throwly wash
him from his iniquity, and cleanse him from his sin, Psalm. 51. 2. freeing him
both from the guilt and power of it: And that he would create in him a clean
heart, renewing a right spirit within him, verse. 10. And, that he would
establish him with his free Spirit, verse. 12. Thus are Christians to have a
frequent eye upon their sins, as Patients have upon their soars, to see that
they may not break forth again. To these Q. 2. What benefit redoundeth from
this practice.
ends and purposes (among others) are Christians to be frequent in this
exercise.

Which whilst they are, it will be very beneficial to them, and that diverse
ways. That is the second thing which I propounded to show you, What profit,
what benefit a Christian shall reap from this practice. Much every way. Were
there no other, than what I have made mention of already, the attaining of that
Fourfold end; The knowing of the truth of their Repentance, The renewing and
increasing of it, The getting of assurance of the pardon of their Sins, And
strength against them: These were enough to answer, and recompense, all the
Points A foursold Benefit.
that a Christian shall take in this way. But besides these, take we notice of
Four more: Four considerable benefits accruing from this practice. It will be
of great use unto a Christian, to make him,

1. Humble. 2. Thankful. 3. Watchful. 4. Pitiful.
Humble in Himself; Thankful to his God; Watchful over his Sin; and Pitiful
toward Others. All, benefits of singular Excellency and Worth! Touch upon them
briefly.

Frequent remembrance of a man's own* 1. To make and keep the Soul humble.
Sins will be of special Use, to make, and keep him Humble. So it is, that
there is in the Heart of every man, naturally an accursed root of Pride, which
is very apt to spring and sprout forth, being watered (as it were) with all the
common Favors and Blessings that God pours out upon him, of what kind soever
they be, Good things of Fortune (as they were called), of Nature, of Grace, (I
mean common Grace); Birth, Beauty, Riches, Honors, gifts and endowments of the
Mind; any of these, not being Sanctified, are apt to puff up the Soul, to breed
a Tympany in it. Now the frequent remembrance of Sins will be of special use to
prevent it, to make the Soul humble, and keep it humble. Such Use the Church
tells us she had of it, (as Montanus, and the Vulgar (...)
Latin render the word in that Text, Rebellionis meae, Montan. Transgressionis
meae. V. L.
Lam. 3. 19, 20. Remembering my Affliction, and my misery, (says our
Translation); my Affliction, and my Rebellion, my Transgression, (say they)
which sense the word in the Original will well bear, as we find it rendered, 1 Samuel 20. 30.) the Wormwood, and the Gall, (that is, the bitterness of both) my
Soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me. Incurvatur, it is
bowed down. The soul of man naturally is Proud, apt to be inordinately lift up
in him. Now the Remembrance, as of former Afflictions which he has lain under;
so of former Sins which he has fallen into, will be of special use to humble
it, to make it keep so. This effect it had in and upon this our Apostle, (as
you have heard.) The remembrance of his former Sins made him Vile in his own
eyes. This it was that made him think and speak so meanly of himself, to
account himself the least of the Apostles, unworthy to be one of that number,;
the least of Saints, nay, less than the least of them, (as the Text has it,
Ephesians. 3. 8.) Because (says he) I persecuted the Church of God, 1 Cor. 15. 9.
Thus it was: As the Buffetings of Satan, (of which he speaks, 2 Cor. 12. 7.)
those temptations wherewith he was exercised after his Conversion; so the
remembrance of his former Sins committed before his Conversion, was to him of
great use to keep him from being exalted above measure; a thing which by reason
of the many and great privileges now conferred upon him, he was subject to,
and in danger of. Thus God sometimes suffers his Chosen Vessels, those whom he
purposes to make some special use of, and to confer some signal Favors upon,
to fall into some great Sin, or sins, happily in their Youth, it may be
Afterward, that so the Remembrance of them may be a means to keep their
Spirits in a humble frame and temper, from being inordinately lift up in them;
being to them as the Peacocks black Legs are vulgarly conceived to be unto
him; which looking down upon, he presently lets fall his proud Plumes. Here
is the first of those Benefits, which a Christian may reap from this reflecting
upon his Sins. A benefit of singular Use; there being nothing more dangerous to
the Soul, than this spiritual Tympany.

2dly. As it will be of great Use to make 2. To make Men thankful.
men Humble, so Thankful. As Humble in themselves, so Thankful to their God. A
fruit naturally growing upon this Branch. Remembrance of former sins Repented
of, and Pardoned, it calls to mind two things; Gods Goodness, our own
Unworthiness. Gods goodness in sparing of us; not taking us, as the Scribes and
Pharisees tell our Savior that woman was, whom they brought before him, John
8. 4. (...), in the very Act of sin, and so bringing us to answer (as they
did her) before His Tribunal, for those Sins which we wanted Grace, and space
to Repent of. Nor yet only sparing us, giving us a time to Repent, but also
working that Repentance in us, and, upon our Repenting, Pardoning them; and
instead of punishing us according to our deservings, conferring many special
Graces and Favors upon us; of all which* of the least of which, we were
altogether unworthy. Both these, the remembrance of former sins calls to
mind. And so doing, it cannot but be a special means to raise up the Heart to a
Thankful apprehension, and acknowledgment thereof. Of such Use was it to this
blessed Apostle, as we may take notice from the 12. and 13. verses in this
Chapter, where calling to mind his former sins, he presently breaks forth
into blessing and magnifying of Jesus Christ for his rich Grace and Mercy
toward him; I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has enabled me, for that he
counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry, who was before a Blasphemer,
a Persecutor, Injurious: but I obtained mercy. So again, verse. 17. Having here
confessed himself to be the chief of sinners, and after declared what God had
done for him, how he had made him a Pattern to all that should hereafter believe
on him; he thereupon in the next words breaks forth into that affectionate
Gratulation, Now, unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise
God, be Honor and Glory, for ever and ever, Amen. Thus, the reflecting upon
our sins after that we have obtained Mercy, it will be a means as to cause us
to take shame to our selves, so to give glory to God, the Glory of his Grace
and Mercy in sparing us, in pardoning us, and conferring so many undeserved
favors upon us. It will be of special use to make us thankful.

And (3dly) as thankful, so watchful, watchful 3. To make them watchful over
themselves.
over those and the like sins. The remembrance of dangers formerly escaped will
make men the more wary, they will take heed how they come nigh that fire, in
which they have before been burnt or scorched, or that precipice from which
once they fell, or passing that way wherein they have fallen among Thieves.
Thus, Christians having their sins in remembrance, and mainteining in their
Souls, a sight and sense of them, it will be of special use to them, to make
them more cautelous and wary, to take heed of all the occasions of them of
coming near unto them. As for the Soul, that has banished the sense and
remembrance of it is sins, it cares not, what sins it rusheth upon and runs
into. Paul, speaking of the Gentiles, he says of them, that being past
feeling, (...), postquam dedoluerunt (as Beza renders it) ^aving cast away all
sense of, and sorrow for sin, they then gave themselves over unto
lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19. The best
way then to be kept from sin, is to maintein the sense of it in the Soul. To
which end, the frequent reflecting upon sins past, will conduce much. By this
means it was, that David kept himself from his iniquity, (as he says he did,
Psalm. 18. 23.) from the sin which he was most inclined to, by having it
frequently in his remembrance.

Fourthly and lastly, The frequent reflecting 4. To make them pitiful toward
others.
upon our own sins, will be a special means to make us more pitiful and
charitable toward others. Not to be so ready to epsy their faults, nor so
harsh and rigid, in censuring them for their failings and infirmities. What is
the cause, why Hypocrites are so quick-sighted in espying, and so forward in
judging and censuring of others? Surely, it is the want of reflecting upon
themselves; They see the mo^e that is in their brothers eye, but consider not
the beam that is in their own eye, (as our Savior says of them) Mat. 7. 3.
Surely, were men more busied at home, more taken up with remembering and
considering their own failings, their own sins, what they have been, what they
have done, they would be more pitiful, more tenderhearted toward others. It
is the Apostle's Argument which he puts into Titus his mouth, willing him to
make use of it, in dissuading Christians from being too censorious toward
their Brethren, or any other whosoever, but to induce them to deal tenderly and
gently with them, Tit. 3. 2, 3. Put them in mind (says he) to speak evil of no
man, (that is, wrongfully, or causlesly, whether by aspersing of them, or
detracting from them), to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto
all men; (...), all men: non tantum adversus fidei consortes, sed etiam
adversus contradictores, (as Grotius well explains it) not only such as profess
the same faith with themselves, but such as are adversaries to it. Even these
he would have private Christians, (for of such he there speaks, not of Titus
himself, and the Ministers of Christ, who yet, (as our new Annotator has it)
are to do nothing in rage or passion, but with a spirit of meekness, showing
all meek^ess unto all men, Gentiles as well as Jews, Enemies as well as
Friends; but of private Christians; the word in the Original being of the
plural number, (...)) to deal gently with, not being too rigid in censuring
them, much less in wholly despairing of them. But show meekness, all meekness,
(...), omnem, i. e. summam lenitatem, Great meekness and gentleness toward
them. And why so? For (says he) we our selves were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts, etc. verse. 3. Certainly, the more
a man reflects upon himself, and the better acquainted he is with his own heart
and life, the more pitiful and tenderhearted, the more compassionate he will
be toward others. To proceed no further: These benefits may a Christian reap
from the reflecting upon himself, the frequent remembrance of his own sins.
Which, let it induce every of us, to exercise our selves herein.

Which yet, let it be warily and rightly Caution. Christians not to pore too
much upon their sins so as to give way to inordinate dejections.
understood. Not that I would have Christians to stand continually poring upon
their sins, so fixing their thoughts upon them, that their hearts and spirits
should be inordinately dejected, and cast down in the remembrance of them. This
God requires not, neither ought Christians to give way to it. David was a man,
much in the remembrance of his sins, yet, he would not give way to such
soul-dejections and disquietments, for which, we find him checking himself in
those two Psalms, 42. and 43. where we have the same Expostulation thrice
repeated, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? Why art thou disquieted within me,
etc? Christians, should not so look upon their sins, as that they should give
way to such dejections of Spirit, as may render their condition uncomfortable
to themselves and unserviceable to others. In this case, that of the Preacher
takes place, Eccles. 7. 17. Be not overmuch wicked, that is, judicio tuo (as
Iunius expounds it), in thine own apprehension and judgment. In such a sense it
is, that in the verse there foregoing, he bids us not to be over-righteous
or over-wise; Be not Righteous overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise; that
is, do not think thy self so to be. So, here in this verse, which is subjoyned
as an Antitheton, set in opposition to the former, Be not overmuch wicked,
viz. in thy own apprehension. And let* me apply it unto you, (I mean all, and
only such as are truly penitent sinners); Be not you in this sense wicked
overmuch, stand not poreing too much upon your sins, sorrowing over them, as
the Apostle says, the Heathen did over their dead, 1 These. 4. 13. as having
no hope. Only upon occasions call them to remembrance, making use hereof, to
those ends and purposes which I have now spoken of.

And as we are to do this at other times; so then, more especially, when God
calls, Sins to be remembered in a special way, at special times.
us to the humbling of our Souls before him, and to seek his Face, for the
removing or diverting of some judgment felt or feared. Now, at such a time to
call to mind our sins, is an exercise most fit and proper, being now Opus diei
in die suo, a work done in season. And this, do we all of us now Ian. 22. 1661.
A day of Solemn Humiliation.
this day, being a day of Solemn Humiliation, so appointed to be by public
Authority, wherein, the whole Nation is required to seek God in a Solemn
manner, for the diverting and preventing, as of such other Judgments, which we
may justly fear to hang over the head of the Nation, so in special of that
which is already in part broke forth upon us, (whereof the poor, as elsewhere,
so in this place, not a few of them, are very sensible, whose necessitous
condition, I shall commend to your charitable consideration, desiring you to
extend your free and liberal contributions to their relief, which is also a
work of the day) and does further sadly threaten us, viz. The Judgment of
Famine, which, by reason of the unseasonableness of the Season, may justly be
feared. This is the work of the day. For the furthering whereof, let all of us
now call to mind our own sins. I do remember my faults this day, (says
Pharoahs Butler unto him) Genesis 41. 9. And the like let every of us do. Sure we
are, this is the provokking Cause, as of other Judgments, so of this. He
turns a Fruitful Land into Barrenness, for the Wickedness of them that dwell
therein, Psalm. 107. 34. Call we our selves then every one of us to account for
our sins this day, humbling our selves in the sight and presence of God for
them, that so, we remembering them, God may be pleased graciously to forget
them, and forgive them, so as not to charge them upon the Head of the Nation.
In doing hereof, we shall much promote the service of the Day; and much help
forward the great business both of Church and State, which is now in the hands
of the Great Council of the Land. Certainly the great Stumbling Blocks that lie
in the way of Mercy, they are the Sins of the Nation. O Let every of us, put
to our hands this Day to the removing of them, by taking out of the way, as
much as we can, the sins of others, Humbling our selves for them, and seeking
the Pardon of them; however our own sins, by calling them to mind, Humbling,
Shaming, and Condemning our selves for them; withal, putting them away in the
full purpose and resolution of our Souls, never more to give entertainment to
them. Thus wash we, and make we our selves clean, putting away the evil of our
doings from before the eyes of our God, (as he requires his People to do, Isai.
1. 16.); And then do we, what in the next words he allows them to do, Come,
let us Reason together, etc. begging from him Mercy for our selves, and the
Nation, being hopefully and comfortably assured that the Lord will smell a
Sweet savor of rest from this our Sacrifice; and that both Church and State
shall find it the best service we could perform unto them, which the Lord
enable every of us to do. Thus I have done with the first of these three
Branches, I pass now to the second.

THe truly Penitent Sinner, as he is frequent 2. Branch. The Pe nitent sinner
forward in acknowledging his own Sins.
in Remembering, so forward in acknowledging of his own sins. So was Paul.
Having here occasion to make mention of Sinners, he calls to remembrance his
own sins, and Remembering them, he Acknowledges them; confessing himself to
be a Sinner, a great sinner, yea, the chief of Sinners; Of whom I am chief. The
like disposition and practice we find in the Man after Gods own Heart, holy
David. As his sins were often in his eye, so he was ready to acknowledge
them. I acknowledged my Transgression, and my Sin was ever before me (says
he) Psalm. 51. 3. Such a frequent Remembrancer, and ingenuous Confessor of his
Sins was he: And such are all truly Penitent sinners.

And it cannot be otherwise: Their hearts Reas. 1* His Heart is full with the
sense of Sin.
(in the first place) being full (as it were) with the sight, and sense of
Sin, they must have vent. The Story tells us of Joseph, Genesis 45. ver. 1, 2.
how that, his heart being full, as it was, with the remembrance of what his
Brethren had done to him, and his Affections toward them, he could not
contein, he could not refrain himself before all that stood by him, but he shed
Tears abundantly; yea, (the company being gone) he wept aloud. He could not but
give vent to that affection wherewith his heart was full. And David tells us
the like of himself, Psalm. 39. 3. My heart (says he) was hot within me; while
I was musing, the fire burned: then spoke I with my tongue. So it is with
Affections, (as it is with Fire) the heart being full of them, they will not be
smothered, they will not be kept close; they will seek vent, and be ready to
break forth, as occasion is offered. And so will these Holy Affections in the
heart of a truly Penitent sinner, his Sorrow for sin, his Hatred and
Indignation against sin; his heart being full of them, it will be seeking
vent, ready to break forth in a humble, and hearty Confession and
Acknowledgement of it. Reas. 2. The Bed of Sin is broken in him.


Again, in such a Soul, the Bed of sin (as I may say) is broken. Now, as it
is in the Body, if the bed of Worms be broken, they are ready to come away; and
such tough and viscous humors as are coagulated in the Stomach, being
dissected, they are easily evacuated. Even so in the Soul; If the Bed of
peccant Humors, of sinful Lusts be there once broken, the Works of Satan
dissolved, (as Saint John says, that Christ was manifest to this end, (...),
ut dissolvat, That he might dissolve, (or destroy) the works of the Devil; that
is, our Sins, which are destroyed by dissolving of them, as many things are,
1 John 3. 8.) as in measure they are in every truly Regenerate person, in whom
the Power of Sin is broken; they will now be ready to break forth, and come
away, (as I may say) by way of Confession, and Acknowledgement. Thus you see
that it is so, and how it comes so to be.

For further Explication, and Illustration, Two Questions resolved.
propound we these two useful Enquiries touching this Acknowledgement which
Penitent sinners are so forward in.

1. To whom they are so ready to make this Acknowledgement. 2. What kind of
Acknowledgement it is Q. 1. To whom is he so ready to make this acknowledgement.
that they make.
For the First, To whom they are so ready to make this Acknowledgement.

A. For Answer, Know we that the acknowledgment of Sin, is either unto God, or
Man. The former, to God, either publicly, or privately; the latter, to Man,
either secretly, or openly. Secretly, either to the Ministers of God, or to
other private Christians. Openly, which is either Regular, enjoined by the
Church, or Occasional and Arbitrary. All these ways Sin is confessed and
acknowledged: And all these ways a sinner truly Penitent will be ready to
acknowledge his sins.

1. In the first place unto God. The Prodigal 1. Unto God
son in the Gospel, upon his return to his Father, at his first meeting with
him, after that his father had expressed his fatherly Affection unto him,
presently he breaks forth into a humble acknowledgement of his sins unto him,
Father I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, Luke 15. 21. This is the
first thing that a poor sinner does, when once he is brought home unto God, and
has in any measure tasted of his Grace and Mercy, he presently falls down
before Him, in an humble acknowledgment of his Sins unto him. This will he do
at his first Conversion, and this he is ready ever after to do upon all
Occasions, renewing his Acknowledgements of sin, as sins themselves are
renewed. So did David; I acknowledged my Transgressions, (says he in the Text
forenamed) Psalm. 51. 3. And to whom was it that he acknowledged them? Why,
firstly and principally to his God, whom he had offended. So he explaines it in
the verse following, Against thee only have I sinned; that is, against him
immediately and properly: And therefore to him it is that he acknowledged his
Sin. So he elsewhere declares it, Psalm. 32. 5. I acknowledged my Sin unto
Thee, and mine Iniquity have I not hid; I said I will confess my Transgressions
unto the Lord, etc. And this will every truly Penitent sinner readily do.
Apprehending how he has offended and provoked his God by his sins, he will be
ready to acknowledge them unto him.

And this will he do (as I said) both Publicly Both publicly and privately. ^
and Privately. Publicly, joining with the Congregation in the public
confession and acknowledgment of Sinness; and that both in Confessions ordinary
and extraordinary. And as Publicly, so Privately, when there is no other
witness but God and his own Conscience, then will he be ready to acknowledge
his Sins. And that again, both in his daily, and ordinary Prayers, as also at
other times of extraordinary Humiliation. All these I might show you, how they
have been both enjoined and practiced; enjoined by God, and practiced by his
Saints. But I shall not dwell upon this, the Text leading me rather to that
other kind of Acknowledgement, which is before, or unto, Men.

And thus true Penitents will be ready 2. Unto men
to acknowledge their Sins. And that (as I said) sometimes Secretly,
sometimes Openly.

1. Secretly, or Privately, either unto the 1. Secretly, or Privately.
Ministers of God, or unto private Christians, viz. at such times as they are
by them charged with their Sins, and in a friendly way Admonished of them, or
Reproved for them. In this case, (for I speak not now of that Confession of
Sins, which is after a sort extorted, and drawn from a man by, or through
trouble of Mind, and Conscience, in which Christians not only may, but ought
(when other means avail not) to repair either unto the Ministers of God, as
most fit for such a purpose, being his Interpreters; or else to some wise and
faithful Friend that is able to minister a word of Advice and Comfort to them,
opening and discovering their Sins unto them; even as the Sick man does his
secret troubles to his Physician or Surgeon. I speak not of this now; but
only of the Acknowledgement of Sin unto others, when it is charged upon them
by way of Admonition, or Reprehension. In this case (I say) the Soul that is
truly Penitent for sin, will be ready to confess, and acknowledge it. So was it
with David, Nathan no sooner comes unto him, and charge his sin upon him,
discovering to him the heinousness of it, but presently he makes confeson of
it. I have sinned against the Lord, 2 Samuel 12. 13. This would not Saul do. When
Samuel comes unto him in the like way, charging him with that act of
disobedience of his, in sparing Agag and the best of the spoil, contrary to
God's express Commandment; he was far from any such ingenuous acknowledgment;
but does what he could to hide it, as we may see, 1 Samuel 15. 13, 14, 15. Thus,
wicked and ungodly men, being charged with their sins, they will either hide
them by denying them, or defend them, or excuse them, or extenuate them what
they can; it may be, falling out, and quarrelling with the persons that shall
strike upon this string, meddling with their sins. So did Cain with God himself,
when the Lord came to him, and asked him where his Brother was, whom he had
murdered, he replieth, I know not: Am I my Brothers keeper? Genesis 4. 9. First,
seeking to hide his sin, then quarrelling with his Maker, who came to charge it
upon him. And even so are some (too many) ready to deal with the Ministers of
God, when they come to touch upon their sins, whether publicly or privately,
they are ready to quarrel with them about it, as if they took too much upon
them. So did the people of Israel, upon whom the Prophet Hosea, among other
their great sins that they were guilty of, charge this as the chief, This
people are as they that strive with the Priest, Hos. 4. 4. They would endure no
reproover, no, though it were a Priest, or Prophet, a Minister of God, that had
Authority from him, to do what he did. Thus are some ready to oppose the
Ministers of Christ, who, though they be their spiritual Physicians, yet they
will not endure that they should meddle with their diseases; which if they do,
it may be they will ever after hate and malign them, as Ahab did Micaiah. And
hating them, they will smite them with their tongues, and be ready to contrive
what mischief against them they may. So did the Jews against their Jeremiah, as
himself sets it forth, Ier. 18. 18. Then said they, Come, and let us devise
devices against Jeremiah, etc. Come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and
let us not give heed to any of his words. So is it with presumptuous sinners.
But it is far otherwise with those that are truly penitent. They being in
themselves convinced of their sins, they will be ingenuous in the confessing
and acknowledging of them, when they are charged upon them by way of Admonition
or Reprehension, whether by the Minister of God, or any other. 2. Openly and
Publicly.


And as they will be ready to do this secretly and privately, so also openly
and publicly. And that 1. In a Regular way.


1. In a Regular way, if called thereunto, and required to do it by the
Discipline and Authority of the Church. Thus did that incestuous Corinthian:
being Excommunicated for that great sin of his, he manifests his repentance,
by acknowledging of his sin, and by his abundant sorrow for it. Whereupon,
lest he should be surcharged and swallowed up therewith, the Apostle wills
the Church to forgive him, to receive him to Communion, and to comfort him, 2
Cor. 2. 7. And such a confession and acknowledgment of sin, sinners truly
penitent, (where the Censures of the Church are rightly dispensed according to
Christ's Institution) neither ought to be, nor yet will be, averse from, but
ready to submit unto, that so they may give satisfaction to the Church, by the
confession of their Sins, and profession of their Repentance, which they
have, by their evil Example, offended and scandalized.

2. But leaving that also, the acknowledgment 2. In a spontaneous way.
which the Text leads us more directly to, as it is an open, so an Arbitrary
Acknowledgment. And in this kind and way, we shall find sinners truly penitent,
to be forward, and ready, to acknowledge their sins: And, that both upon their
Conversion, and after it.

1. Upon their Conversion. Thus we read Upon their Conversion.
of the hearers of John the Baptist, how they were baptized of him, confessing
their sins, Mat. 3. 6. Being convinced of their sins, (...) est aperta and
clara voce Conliteri: Paraeus ad loc* Declarat palam profiteri. Beza.
by his Ministry, and his Preaching unto them, they could not contain; but
they came unto John, not only confessing their sins unto him, in a private and
clancular way, (as Maldonate, and other Romish Expositors would have it, making
this a ground for their auricular Confession), but publicly and openly before
the people; which the word in the Original, (...), imports, (as Beza and Pareus
observe). And the like, we read of those Converts at Ephesus, Act. 19. 18.
Being wrought upon, by the Miracle which they had seen; Many of them came
(says the Text) and confessed, and showed their deeds; (...), confessing them,
not secretly but openly. Among whom, some and many of those, who have used
curious (that is Magical) Arts, making Divinations, by Judicial Astrology, They
brought forth their Books, and burnt them before all men, in the presence of
all the people, (as the next verse there has it, verse. 19.). So powerful is
the work of Gods Grace, in the hearts of true Converts, it will make them
willing and ready to acknowledge their sins. Ever after.


2. And this they will be ready to do, not only at their first Conversion, but
ever after. Sins committed before Conversion, or after, they will be forward in
confessing, and acknowledging of them. This we may see in David, Solomon, Paul.
Take we these three Three Eminent Confessors.
Instances. All of them being persons of Eminency, two of them Kings, the
other an Apostle; yet, see how forward they were David.
all of them at this work. David a King, and so subject to no Superior Power,
that could enjoin such an acknowledgment of sin unto him; yet, see how he
takes it upon himself, making a voluntary confession and acknowledgment of
his sin; That great sin of his in the matter of Uriah, whereby he had given
so great scandal to the Church, he makes* a free and open Confession of it
before the Church. To that purpose, compiling and penning that Penitential
Psalm, Psalm. 51. Which he committed and delivered to the Chief Musician, (as
the Title of the Psalm informs us), that by him it might be published in the
Temple, and there ever after kept, and so be not only a Testimony of his
Repentance to the Church in that present age, to which he desired to give
Satisfaction, but a Monument of it in all succeeding Ages, to the end of the
world.

And what David the Father did, the like Solomon.
did Solomon his Son after him. Having fallen foully and scandalously, to the
great Offense of the Church, over which God had made him Supreme Governor; he
afterward penneth, and publishes to the world, that Penitential Retractation,
his Book of Ecclesiastes, wherein, he freely and ingenuously confesses before
all the world, the vanity and sinfulness of his former ways and courses. Thus
did these two Kings, doing that voluntarily, which no power upon Earth could
have compelled them to.

And the same, did this our Apostle Saint Paul.
Paul. Having been before his Conversion, an open and bitter Enemy to the
Truth, speaking evil of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and doing all the mischief
that he could, to all that professed it; being Converted, and brought home to
Christ, he was ever hereafter an Ingenuous Confessor. Having his former sins
ever in his eye, he had them also (as I may say) at his tongues end, ready to
confess and acknowledge them upon all occasions. This we find him doing at
Jerusalem, before the Chief Captain, in a great and promiscuous Assembly of all
sorts of persons, I persecuted this way unto the death (says he), binding, and
delivering into prison, both men and women, Act. 22. 4. etc. And the like he
did again at Cesarea, in a very Solemn Audience, before Festus and Agrippa, and
Queen Bernice, the Chief Captains, and principal Men of the City, Act. 26. 10.
I did many things (says he) against the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, many of the
Saints did I shut up in Prison, and when they were put to death, I gave my
voice against them, and punished them often in every Synagogue, and compelled
them to Blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them
even unto strange Cities; such Cities as were not within the Territories of
Judea; as Damascus, etc. and so therein going beyond his Commission. Thus did
he confess his sins by word of mouth.

And the like he did by Writing, acknowledging them under his hand, making a
public Record of them, that all the Churches of God might take notice of them.
This he does in his Epistle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. 9. and to his
Galatians, Gal. 1. 13. And so here in this Epistle to Timothy, in this chapter,
where we find him not only making a general Confession, which he does in the
Text, charging himself to be the chief of sinners, but particularly, pointing
out his sins what they were, verse. 13. I was a Blasphemer, a Persecutor,
Injurious, etc. Thus free and open was Paul in these acknowledgments, not
regarding who or what they were, that took notice of these his consessions,
whether Friends or Enemies, Good or Bad; nor caring how often he made them:
taking all occasions to do it, as if he had thought he could never do it often
enough. Behold we then in him, and these other Paterns, the true disposition of
a Gracious Soul, o^ a truly penitent sinner; one that has truly repented of
his sins, and has tasted of the grace and mercy of God, in the pardoning and
forgiving of them, he will ever after be ready to confess and acknowledge them;
and that not only to God, but also to Men, and that not only Secretly, Q.
whether all Christians be bound to follow these Paterns.
but Openly, as occasion is offered.

Q. But what, (you will say), Is every Christian bound to imitate these
Paterns, to follow their Example, doing as they did, making such an open
confession and acknowment of his sins?

1. To this I Answer, 1. In some cases A. 1. In some cases they are, as where
the sins have been open.
he may be; as, viz. 1. where the sins have been open. Open sins, as they
call for open Reprehension, Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also
may fear, (so Paul wills Timothy to do) 1 Timothy 5. 20. that is, that do sin
openly, to the public scandal of others, (as Beza, and some others expound
it); so for open Confession, and acknowledgment. peccantes intellige cum
publico offendiculo. Beza. Gr. Annot. in loc.
Such had David's, such had Salomons, and such had Paul's sins been, sins
that all the Churches rung of. You have heard of my conversation in times past,
(says he to his Galatians) Gal. 1. 13. how I did so and so. They had heard of
his Sins, and therefore they shall hear of his 2. Where Gods glory* and the
public good require it.
Repentance, testified and declared by his hearty confession and
acknowledgement of those sins.

2. Again (2dly.), where the Glory of God, or the Public Good requires it,
there, though the sins have been private, and secret, yet the acknowledgement
of them ought to be public, where the glory of God requires it. Upon this
ground Ioshuah requires Achan to make an open Confession of that sin which he
had done secretly. My son, (says he) give glory to God, and confess unto Him,
and tell me what thou have done, Josh. 7. 19. (where the public good requires
it. Upon this ground Jonah confesses and acknowledges his sin unto the
Mariners, for the saving of those that were in the Ship with him: Jonah 1. 12.
I know (says he to them) that for my sake this great Tempest is come upon you.

But (in the second place) we speak not A. 2. Penitent sinners, though bound,
yet ready to make open confessions.
here of what all Christians are bound to do, but, what upon occasion, being
Penitent sinners, they will be ready to do. This was Paul's case in the Text.
This acknowledgement of his was spontaneous, and voluntary, he being induced
thereunto by no other respect, but only out of his desire to take shame to
himself, and give glory to God. In special, the glory of his Grace, which
having been so gloriously manifested in, and upon him, in receiving so great a
sinner to Mercy, he desires to take all occasions to extol and magnify. And
to that end it is, that he makes such frequent mention of his sins; making
such open confessions and acknowledgements of them. And upon this ground great
Sinners specially, having tasted of the like Mercy in pardoning their sins,
they will be ready upon all. occasions to acknowledge them, that so they may
declare, and set forth the riches of Gods Grace exercised toward them. Come,
and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my
Soul (says David) Psalm. 66. 16. And thus a Penitent Sinner having tasted of
saving Mercy, in the pardoning and healing of his Sins, he will be ready
ever-after, to declare, and set forth, what God has done for his Soul. To
which end, as occasion is offered, he will be forward in the confessing and
acknowledging of his Sins.

But, What kind of Acknowledgement is that Q. 2. What kind of acknowledgement
it is that the Penitent sinner makes.
which he makes? That is the second Question propounded. A Question of great
consequence and importance, and that for the differencing and distinguishing of
this from other false, and counterfeit Acknowledgements. Even wicked and
ungodly men may, and sometimes do, upon occasion, confess and acknowledge their
sins. So did, Cain; Mine iniquity is greater than it can be forgiven, (so our
Margin reads it, following Montanus, and others) Genesis 4. 13. So did Pharaoh;
I have sinned (says he to Moses once and again) Exodus 9. 27. 10. 16. So did
Saul. I have sinned against the Lord (says he to Samuel) 1 Samuel 15. 24. And so
did Judas. I have sinned in betraying innocent Blood, (says he to the Chief
Priests) Mat. 27. 4.) And the like, mere carnal men will sometimes be ready to
do. Being charged, and pressed by the Ministers of God, or others, especially
when the Hand of God lies Heavy upon them; now they will be ready to assent
unto what Paul here says of himself, confessing themselves to be sinners,
great sinners; yea, the chief of Sinners. Thus we may sometime meet with Paul's
words, coming out of the mouths of those, who never knew what Paul's spirit
meant. They will, upon occasion, acknowledge their sins, who never knew what
it was to Repent of them. How then shall we distinguish betwixt the one, and
the other? The acknowledgement of a sinner truly Penitent, and that which
comes from a spirit of Hypocrisy in a wicked, or carnal man?

In Answer hereunto, let me present you A. Five Properties of a true
acknowledgement.
with some few properties of this sincere Acknowledgement, whereby it may be
discerned from that which is false and counterfeit. In all which I shall still
have an eye to the Confessor here in the Text, this blessed Apostle,
illustrating each particular from his practice and example. 1. It is Voluntary,
and Free.


The acknowledgment of the true Penitent sinner is (first) Voluntary, and Free.
So it is; though enjoined, yet not extorted, not constreined. Such is the
Hypocrite's acknowledgement for the most part: extorted and drawn from him
against his will, either by some Judgment of God, present or imminent, felt or
feared; or by the Rack of a tormenting Conscience. Such was Pharaohs confession
to Moses, drawn from him (as water is out of a Still, or Lymbick, by the fire
put under it) by the Judgments of God, which he and his people lay under. And
such was Iudas's confession to the Chief Priests, extorted from him by the rack
(as I said) of a tormenting Conscience. In such cases, even the worst of men
will sometimes confess and acknowledge their sins, which at other times, when
their condition is quiet, and prosperous, they will hardly be brought to do;
Like a man that is sick, being at Sea, and so emptieth his stomach freely; but
no sooner comne a Shore, but he is well again, and all is quiet. But it is
otherwise with the True Penitent. In acknowledging of sin, he is a Volunteer,
doing what he does (as Peter would have Ministers to feed their flocks, 1 Pet.
5. 2.) (...), not by constraint, but willingly. Such are Gods People in all the
services they do unto Him, or for Him; they are a willing people. Thy people
shall be willing in the day of thy Power, Psalm. 110. 3. When God exercises his
power, the power of his Grace, upon a poor Sinner, changing and renewing him,
bringing him home to himself, then he comes unto him willingly, freely pouring
forth his Soul before him in a voluntary confession and acknowledgement of his
Sins. Willingly confessing unto God, and not unwillingly unto Men. And this
he is ready to do, not only in times of Distress, but even then when his
condition is, in all respects, most Comfortable. Such is the acknowledgement
which here we meet with in the Text. Paul, when he uttered these words, he was
in a quiet and comfortable condition; under no distress, whether outward, or
inward, in body or mind; yet even then he remembered his sins, and remembering
them, he acknowledges them. Which also, (as I have shown) he was ready to do
upon all occasions, at all other times. His readiness, and forwardness herein,
manisesting, that these his Confessions were not extorted, but voluntary.
Extorted Confessions (such as those upon the Rack) are seldom true; ever
suspicious. True confession, and acknowledgement, whether to God, or Man, will
be free and voluntary.

And so (in the second place) Ingenuous 2. Ingenuous, and Full.
and full. Such is not the Hypocrites confession. If he be drawn to an
acknowledgement of his sins, yet therein you shall find him, for the most
part, very partial, and sparing; as much as may be, concealing and hiding them.
Even as Solomon says of the Sluggard, Prove. 19. 24. He hides his hand in his
bosom, and is loath to put it forth, to bring it to his mouth. Thus deals
the Hypocrite with his sins: his beloved, his darling sins, he hides them
in his bosom, concealing them as much as may be, loath to bring them to his
mouth, to bring them forth by an open acknowledgment of them. Where he cannot
hide them, he will endeavor to excuse them; varnishing, and coloring them
over with some fair and specious pretenses. Where he cannot excuse them, he
will seek to extenuate them, that they may not seem so great and foul as they
are. Where he cannot excuse, or extenuate them, he will endeavor to evade
them, by shifting them off from himself to some other. So little ingenuity is
there to be found in his Confessions. All these we shall find in that
acknowledgment which Samuel drew from King Saul, 1 Samuel 15. The Prophet coming
to him, to charge upon him, that foul act of his, in sparing Agag, and the best
of the Spoil, contrary to Gods express command; he first thinks to hide his
sin, by courting of the Prophet, and by his avowing, and boasting of his
Obedience: Blessed be thou of the Lord, (says he) I have performed the
Commandment of the Lord, v. 13. Therein dealing like Solomon's Adulteress, who
eats, and wipeth her mouth, and says, I have done no wickedness, (as he
says of her) Prove. 30. 20. When this would not serve his turn, but he saw that
his sin was discovered, and found out, the Prophet convincing him of it, by
too plain an evidence, What means then this bleating of the Sheep in my ears,
and the lo^ing of Oxen which I hear? ver. 14. Then he falls to his shifting,
shuffling it off from himself, and laying the blame wholly upon the People,
(even as A^ron also once did, when Moses charged him with making, and setting
up of the golden Calf, he puts it off to the people; Let not the Anger of my
Lord* wax hot, (says he) thou know the people that they are set on
Mischief, Exodus 32. 22. so he) The people spared the best of the Sheep, and of
the Oxen, ver. 15. And thus devolving, and turning it off from himself, withal
he seeks to color over both his Act and theirs, setting a fair gloss upon
it, gilded it over with a pretense of Piety, The people spared the best of the
Sheep and Oxen, to Sacrifice unto the Lord thy God; (as it there follows).
When that would not serve, but that the Prophet, dealing plainly with him, had
both shown him the heinous nature of that sin, calling it Rebellion, and
comparing it to the sin of* Witchcraft and Idolatry, Verse. 23. and charged it
home upon him, telling him, how he had therein rejected the word of the Lord,
for which, he must expect a just Retaliation to be rejected by him; Because
thou have rejected the word of the Lord, he has also rejected thee from being
King, now he is brought to confess and acknowledge his sin, I have sinned, etc.
But see still how he goes about to mince and extenuate it, pleading, that what
he had done, he had done it through fear; I transgressed the Commandment of the
Lord and thy words, because I feared the people, etc. Verse. 24. Whereupon, when
he could no longer plead, Not Guilty, he pleads his Pardon of Course (as it
were): Now therefore, (says he) I pray thee pardon my sin, Verse. 25. So far
was Saul from any Ingenuity in this his Confession! And so shall we still find
it with Hypocrites, in their confessions and acknowledgments. Seldom or never
is it, that they will deal plainly and simply, whether with God or Men in this
case. But deal with both, as Ananias and Sapphira did with the Apostles, Act.
5. 2. They come and bring the price of their possessions, which they had sold,
and lay it down at the Apostles feet, But they kept back part of it. Thus
deals the Hypoerite in his confessions. Being, it may be, drawn to it, he
will come and bring his sins, and lay them down as it were at the feet of God
and Men, in a seemingly humble confession and acknowledgment of them, but it is
with some Reservation; still he keeps back part of them, hiding and
concealing some sins, or at least some Circumstances. But it is otherwise with
the truly penitent sinner. He will be Ingenuous, confessing his sins, and not
hiding them, laying them open before God and Men, in their own colors; so
giving Glory to God, and taking shame to himself. Such a Confessor was this
our Apostle. In his confessions and acknowledgments how ingenuous was he? So we
find him, confessing not only those sins wherein he was Principal; as, his
procuring Letters from the Rulers, to Persecute the Saints, and his Executing
that Commission to the full, with great fury and rage, yea, going beyond it,
which he sets forth (as I have shown you) to the full, in those Texts
forecited, Act. 22. 19. and 26. 10; but even those, wherein he was any ways
Accessarie: As his consenting to the death of some of the Martyrs; When they
were put to death, I gave my voice against them (so it there follows in the
Text last named). And in particular, concerning the Proto-Martyr Stephen. And
when the blood of thy Martyr Stephen was shed, (says he) I also was standing
by, and consenting to his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him,
Act. 22. 20. Thus was he ready to confess what ever he had done in way of
opposition against Christ, wherein he had had a hand or finger, been either
Principal or Accessarie. So ingenuous was he in his acknowledgments, both to
God and Men. And such will the acknowledgment of the truly penitent sinner be,
Ingenuous and Full.

3. And being thus Ingenuous, it will ^. Particular.
also be particular. Not only in a General way. Such, for the most part, are
the acknowledgments of Hypocrites, and of mere Carnal persons. They will (it
may be) sometimes take up Paul's words here in the Text, confessing and
acknowledging, that they are sinners, great sinners, but this is only in a
general way, not with reflection upon any particular sin or sins, that they
charge upon themselves. Herein, not unlike to King Nebuchadnezzar, who had
dreamed a dream, and was much troubled about it, but when his wise Men came to
ask him what it was, he could not give them any account of it, Dan. 2. 5. Even
so faieth it with many poor carnal wretches. In time of sickness, they will
then (it may be) pretend at least to great trouble of mind for their sins,
breaking forth into confessions and acknowledgements, that they are sinners,
great sinners, (the case is ordinary): but come to ask them, What particular
sin or sins, they are that trouble them, that lie so heavy upon their
Consciences, this they cannot tell. Now, as for such a confession of sin; it
may be looked upon but as a Dream, a Delusion, no true Confession. True
Confession will be particular.

Not, but that a good confession may be A good Confession made in general
words, but with reference to particular sins.
made in general words. So runs the acknowledgment here in the Text; [ I am the
chief of sinners]. But still it is in reference to some particular sin or
sins, which are in the eye of the penitent Confessor* whilst he makes that
general confession. Thus was it with our Apostle here in the Text. His
confession, indeed runs in general terms, that he was the chief of sinners,
but it is with a reference and respect unto those particular sins, which he
had confessed and acknowledged by name, but two verses before, I was a
Blasphemer, a Persecutor, etc. This is the confession of a true penitent
sinner: though the tongue may utter that confession i^ general terms, yet the
heart even at the same time particularizeth, having an eye to some particular
sin, or sins, from which that confession immediately arises, and without
which, it could not be a hearty confession. The Maxim is true, not more in
Philosophy* than in Divinity; Genera nec agunt, nec patiuntur, Generalities
never thoroughly affect a man. It must not be merely a general notion* of sin,
but a distinct apprehension of some particular sin, or sins that will work
upon the heart aright, so as to draw from it, a cordial and affectionate
acknowledgment of sin.

And such again is the confession of the 4. Cordial and Affectionate.
true Penitent. sinner, (Take that for a fourth Property) a cordial and
affectionate Acknowledgement: not merely Verbal, and Formal. Such is the
Hypocrite's confession, a Tongue-Confession; an acknowledgement from the
Teeth-outward, merely verbal, and formal. So may the Confessions of Papists,
for the most part, be looked upon, which they make to their Priests, striking
their hands upon their Breasts, and crying out, Mea culpa, mea culpa; My sin,
my sin; whilst their Hearts (it may be) are not affected with what they make
show of. And such, and no better, it is to be feared, are the acknowledgements
of some, and not a few among us, in the Confession of sins, which they make
in the public Congregation. Therein they draw nigh unto God with their Mouth,
and honor him with their Lips, (as the Lord says of his people the Jews,
Isa. 29. 13.) Offering up the Calves of their lips unto him, (as the Prophet
speaks, Hos. 14. 2.) in saying after the Minister, repeating the words of the
Confession. But in the mean time their hearts are far removed, and estranged
from him, being no ways affected with what their Tongues utter, and pronounce.
And even so is it, in their private Confessions. They make them but a
Lip-labor. It may be making use of some Set-form, composed by themselves, or
others, they only repeat the words in a Formal, and Customary way, but without
any inward* affection; their Hearts not being touched with the sense and
feeling of what their Tongues utter, and confess. Now, as for such
Confessions, being heartless Sacrifices, they are odious, and abominable unto
God; who, as he (...) cheth the Heart, so he requires It* without it, not
regarding what ever Sacrifices can be offered up unto Him. Thou desire not
sacrifice, thou delightest not in burnt-offering, (says the Psalmist, not any
service that is merely external): The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a
heart kindly broken with the sense of Sin, Psalm. 51. 16, 17. And such are the
Sacrifices which are offered up by the Penitent Sinner to his God. All his
Prayers, all his Confessions, they come from a broken and a contrite Heart;
being hearty Confessions, ^affectionate Acknowledgements. Such we shall find
the confessions of this our Apostle, which we so frequently meet with,
breathing forth a great deal of inward Affection; expressing both sorrow and
shame, indignation and detestation. And such are the acknowledgements of the
True Penitent, attended, and accompanied with Sorrow and Shame. With sorrow; I
will declare True Confession accompanied with Sorrow and Shame
mine iniquity, (says David) and I will be sorry for my sin, Psalm. 38. 18.
With Shame; the Publican making his confession in the Temple, he does it with
shame: Standing afar off (in some remote part of the outward Court of the
Temple) he would not so much as lift up his eyes unto Heaven, being ashamed of
himself, Luke 18. 13. And so with Indignation and Detestation; Thus Paul
speaking of what he had done, his forwardness in persecuting of the Saints,
Act. 26. 11. I was (says he) exceedingly mad against the Saints: A speech
savouring of great Indignation against himself. And thus Job says that he
Abhorred himself, and Repented in dust and ashes, Job 42. 6. And Paul speaking
of his Corinthians, shows how they showed themselves True Penitents, by their
Indignation, and Revenge; Indignation against their Sin, and Revenge which they
took upon themselves for it, 2 Cor. 7. 11.

And to these is ever joined a serious resolution With a serious purpose of
forsaking the sin confessed.
of abandoning the sin confessed; never more to return to it again, but to
forsake it. Who so confesses, and for saketh his sins, shall have mercy,
(says the Wiseman) Prove. 28. 13. Such was that confession which good Shecaniah
made unto Ezra in* the name of the people, Ezra. 10. 2, 3. We have trespassed
against our God (says he) and have taken strange Wives, etc. Now, therefore
let us make a new Covenant with our God, to put away all these strange Wives,
etc. And thus Elihu, in Job, describes the confession of a true Penitent, Job.
34. 31, 32. Surely, it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement,
I will not offend any more: That which I see not, teach thou, If I have done
iniquity, I will do no more. Such is the confession of the true Penitent,
Cordial and Affectionate. Here is a fourth Property.

Take but one more, and that briefly. 5. Filial.
Being thus Cordial, it is also Filial. Such is the Confession which he makes
to his God; not servile. Such is the confession of the Hypocrite oft-times, a
servile, a slavish confession, the fruit not of love to God, but of fear; and
that not of a Reverential, but a Slavish fear. Such was Balaams Confession
which he makes, Numb. 22. 31, 34. when he saw the Angel stand before him with
a drawn Sword, then he cries out, I have sinned. And so it is with some wicked
and ungodly wretches, being in a strait, (as he was), stopped in their course;
the Angel of the Lord meeting them; (as he did him) with a drawn Sword, some
Judgment of God threatening them, it may be, Death it self staring them in the
face, so as they apprehend themselves ready to drop into Hell; now they will
confess, and acknowledge their sins. But this they do not out of any love to
God, or hatred of their sins, but merely out of a slavish fear: It may be in a
despairing way, as Cain and Judas did. Now, in this the acknowledgment of a
true penitent sinner differs; that, is a filial acknowledgment: Such was that
of the Prodigal Son, who comes unto his Father, as a Father; making his
Confession to him under that Notion, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and
in thy sight, Luke 15. 21. And thus the penitent sinner comes unto his God,
confessing his sins unto him, not simply, as to a Judge, from whom he expects
nothing but severity of Justice, (as Achan did his sin to Joshua, Josh. 7.
20.) but as unto a Father, with some apprehensions of mercy. Thus are the
confessions of a truly penitent sinner, ordinarily attended and accompanied
with some apprehension of mercy; (I say), either with the present sense of it,
as Paul's confession here was, to which he subjoynes, But I obtained mercy. Or
with the hope of it: So runs that confession, which Shecaniah there makes,
Ezra 10. 2. We have transgressed, etc. Yet now there is hope in Israel
concerning this thing.

To proceed no further; Put these together, and hereby may the sincere
confession and acknowledgment of the truly penitent sinner, be discerned from
that which is false and counterfeit. And so you have both these Questions
resolved. That which now remains of this, is the Application. Which I shall
direct, (as in the former Branch) only two ways, by way of Conviction,
Exhortation.

1. By way of Conviction. Is the true penitent Use 1. By way of Conviction.
Many discovered to be no true Penitents not being true Confessors.
such a Confessor, so forward and ready in such a way, to confess and
acknowledge his sins, both to God and Man; how many then from hence may be
convinced, that they are as yet, none of this number; that they are as yet in a
state of impenitency; that they are as yet in their sins, lying under the
guilt and power of them? Diverse sorts there are, who come within the verge and
compass of this Conviction. Let me take notice of some of them. Which whilst I
do, let me desire you, all of you, to go along with me, trying and examining
your selves, whether you be not of this number. 1. Such as were never convinced
of sin.


In the first place, Some there are, who do not, as yet, know themselves to be
sinners; they were never convinced of their sins, never convinced of the
sinfulness of their nature, never convinced of any such remarkable evils,
whether in their hearts or lives, as should need any such serious confession
and acknowledgment. So is it with some moral civil Iusticiaries, whose lives
not having been stained, with such open, such foul and scandalous sins as
they see in others; hereupon they are well opinionated of themselves. They are
not as other men are, (as the Pharisee said of himself, Luke 18. 11.) no
Swearers, no Drunkards, no Adulterers, etc. so as they scarce see wherein they
are sinners, much less great sinners. Very far are they from making any such
confession and acknowledgment of their sins, as Paul here does of his. Now,
as for such, let them know, that not having as yet been convinced of their
sins, they must needs be in them, lying under the power, and under the guilt
of them. This is the first work that the Spirit of God works in the heart of
a regenerate person. It is to him, a Spirit of Conviction; when the comforter
is come, (says our Savior) he shall reprove (or convince (...)) the world of
sin, Joh* 16. 8. This is the work of the Spirit, and it is the first work.
Certainly, the Soul which never yet knew what this work meant, must needs be
far from any such ingenuous acknowledgment, as here we meet with in the Text.
Paul, before he came to make this confession, that he was the chief of sinners,
he had seen a light from Heaven shining round about him; and falling, to the
earth, he heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
(as we have the story) Act. 9. 3, 4. He had a strong, a clear, and powerful
Conviction, discovering to him, and thoroughly convincing him of, the evil of
that course which he then took. And thus must it be with every poor sinner.
Before ever he will be brought to an ingenuous confession and acknowledgment of
his sins, he must see a light from Heaven, discovering them to him; and he
must hear a voice from Heaven, convincing him of the sinfulness of them; and he
must be struck down to the earth, humbled in the sense of his own Vileness,
before ever his heart will be brought to such a frame and temper, as here we
find in this our Apostle; to be ready thus to confess and acknowledge his
sins, both to God and Man, upon all occasions. Certainly, they who never yet
knew what this Spirit of Conviction meant, are as yet, far from being ingenuous
Confessors, and consequently, may conclude themselves to be in a state of
impenitency. 2. Such as being convin ced, will not be brought to confess.


In the second place; Another sort there are who have been convinced of their
sins, which yet, they will not be brought to confess and acknowledge. Convinced
(I say) they have been, being guilty (it may be) of some foul, open, and
scandalous sins, whereof they have been convinced, not only by the light of
the Word, but even by the light of Nature; which light is sufficient to make a
discovery of some, of many sins, specially of those against the second Table.
This is the work of the Law, written in the hearts of men, (as the Apostle
says of it, Romans 2. 15.) which whilst it directs them to many Duties, it
cannot but convince them of many Sins. Rectum est index sui and obliqui. Yet,
for all this, they will not be brought to a confession and acknowledgment of
what they cannot but be convinced of. No, though charged upon them by the
Ministers of God, again and again, yet for all that, they will not be brought
to confess their sins; no, Not unto God.
not so much as unto God. Is it not the case of some, of many profane wretches?
(I wish there may be none of them within the hearing of it, or, if there be,
that it may sink into their hearts); They are such as cannot but be convinced
of their sinful ways and courses, being (as the Apostle says of obstinate
Heretics, Tit. 3. 11.) (...), self-condemned; their own consciences bearing
witness, and their thoughts accusing them, (as he speaks of the Gentiles, Romans
2. 15.) their sins being of a horrid nature, staring them in the face (as it
were); yet for all that, the time is yet to come, that ever they should go into
the presence of God, there to spread their sins before him, (as Hezekiah did
Senacheribs blasphemous Letter, Isa. 38.) to humble themselves at his
footstool, by confessing and acknowledging their sins. This is a course, a
practice, which they are mere strangers to, never yet knew what it meant.

And not confessing their sins unto Much less to Men.
God, they are very far from acknowledging them unto Men; from whom their
main care is to hide them, (as Achan did his Wedge of Gold, and Babylonish
Garment, which he hid in his Tent, Josh. 7. 22). And if they be found out, and
charged upon them, What do they then? Why either deny them, (as Gehazi did his
running after Naman to receive a reward from him, which his Master Elisha had
refused; when his master asked him, Whence come thou? he said, Thy servant
went no whither, 2 King. 5. 25.) so adding sin unto sin. Or else excuse, it
may be defend, what they have done. By no means they will be brought to take
the blame and shame of Sin to themselves. Let such take notice how far they
are from Paul's disposition, who upon all occasions shows himself forward, and
ready, to confess and acknowledge against himself his former sins; that so,
taking shame to himself, he might give Glory to God. Never was he more ready to
take unto himself the praise of his good deeds when he was a Pharisee, than now
he is to take both the blame and shame of his evil ones, being a Christian.
Certainly the Soul that will not be brought to the confessing, and
acknowledging of those sins whereof it is convinced, must needs 3. Such as
confess, but not truly.
be in a state of Impenitency, lying under the power, and guilt of sin.

A third sort there are, (I shall hasten what I may) who it may be at some
times, and upon some occasions, will confess and False Confession tried by a
fivefold Touchstone.
acknowledge their sins; but their acknowledgements are not sincere, but
hypocritical, and counterfeit. And such they will appear to be, if brought to
the Test, tried by the Touchstone of that five-fold Property which I have held
forth to you.

1. Either they are not Voluntary, and They are not voluntary, but extorted.
free, but extorted. They will not confess but when they are brought to the
Rack; never but when they are in some Strait, having some Judgment of God
lying upon them, or threatening them. Then, it may be, God and Men shall hear of
them, and from them, then they will confess against themselves. Whereas at
other times they are wholly silent in this way. 2. Or else (in the second
place) there is Not ingenuous, but partial.
no ingenuity in their Confessions. And thence is it, that, if they be drawn to
confess, and acknowledge ought against themselves, they deal very partially,
hiding their sins what they may, seeking to excuse, color, extenuate, shift
them off to others (as you have heard) not willing to lay them forth open and
naked, and so to deal plainly either with God or Man. Still they will be
keeping back part. 3. Or (thirdly) their Confessions are Only general.
only in the gross, in a general way, without any distinct reflection upon any
particular sins, which draws from them that acknowledgement. 4. Or (in the
fourth place) they are Verbal, and formal.
merely verbal, and formal, without any true inward sense and feeling of the
sins which they confess, and acknowledge. 5. Or else (in the last place) what
they In a despairing way.
do, is altogether in a despairing way, without either sense, or hope of Mercy.
All these (as I have showen you) they are evidences of a false and counterfeit
Acknowledgment. And yet such, and no better, are the Confessions which the
greatest part (it is to be feared) do rest contented 4. Such as in stead of
Confessing, make Profession of their sins, boasting in them.
with. Never regarding to get their hearts brought to such a voluntary,
ingenuous, particular, cordial, and filial Acknowledgment, as might evidence to
themselves, and others, the truth of their Repentance.

There is yet a fourth sort, and that is the worst of all, such as will make
Confession (or rather Profession) of their sins, but not as sins; not
confessing them with sorrow and shame, with indignation and detestation, with a
serious purpose and resolution of forsaking and abandoning of them, (as the
true Penitent does) but rather boasting of them, and glorying in them. I wish
there were none such to be found among Christians at this day; such as glory in
their sins; which they show not, as Beggars do their Soars, to move pity and
compassion in the Beholders, but as Soldiers do their Wounds and Skars which
they have received in some honorable Service; accounting it their Honor,
their Glory, that they have been the chief of sinners. Such monsters of Men
there have been, and I fear yet are, men so hardened in their sinful ways and
courses; so far given over to that (...), to a Reprobate mind, (as the Apostle
says of the Gentiles, Romans 1. 28.) so far past all sense and feeling, (as he
says of some, Ephesians. 4. 19.) as that they are not ashamed to declare their
sins. They declare their sin as Sodom (as the Prophet says of the People
of the Jews, Isa. 3. 9.): Making their boast thereof, as those Idolaters did of
their Idols, Psalm. 97. 7. And as Lamech did of his Cruelty and Bloodshed, Genesis
4. 23, 24. Yea, it may be, boast of that which they never did. Surely, a Damned
Souls, far from such boasting.
greater height of impiety, than is to be found in the Devils Kingdom, in Hell
it self. There, those damned Souls, they complain and cry out of their sins,
and curse the time that ever they committed them. As for boasting of them,
glorying in them, they are far from it. Now, as for such, let them know, that
this their boasting, their glorying, (shall I speak it in the Apostle's
Language to his Corinthians in another case, 1 Cor. 5. 6.) (...), it is not
good? Nay, it is most horrid, most impious. Such an impiety as has a woe, a
most dreadful woe attending upon it. (Hear, and tremble at it, you, who stand
in any degree guilty in this kind). They declare their sin as Sodom, and they
hide it not, (says the Prophet, speaking of the Jews in the Text forecited,
Isa. 3. 9. As they showed it in their deeds, so they spared not to publish it
with their tongues, not in way of confession, as David, Psalm. 32. 5. but in a
way of profession as Lamech, Genesis 4. 23, 24. (as our new Annotator explains
it). Thus did they declare their sins as Sodom, as the men of Sodom; who
openly professed, what they commonly practiced or intended. But what follows?
Woe unto their souls, for they have rewarded evil to themselves: By these
wicked courses, they draw down the Vengeance of God upon their own heads. Oh,
far be this from any one of us! The shameful parts of the body, nature teaches
to hide and cover them. If any shall be so immodest as to discover them to open
view, we should presently conclude him to be either mad or drunk, not himself.
What is it then to uncover the nakedness, and filthiness of the Soul? And not
only to uncover it, but to boast of it, to glory in it. As for such, well may
we say of them, what the Apostle does of those voluptuous belly Gods, Phil. 3.
19. that their glory is their shame. So is it now, and so they shall find it
another day, at that great day, when (as he there says of them) Destruction
shall be their end. Paul, confessing his sins here in the Text, he does it
openly, before God and Men, but he does it upon another account, viz. That he
might take the shame of them to himself.

And herein propound we him, as a Pattern Use. 2. All Exhorted, to be such
Confessors as Paul was
for our Imitation. Be we all of us such Confessors, ready and forward upon all
occasions, to confess and acknowledge our sins, as he was. Let that be the word
of Exhortation, which (as in the former Branch) might be directed to two sorts
of persons; First, to such as never yet knew, what a true confession and
acknowledgment of sins meant. Secondly, to such as have been practisers in
this way. But I shall put them both together, pressing this duty upon all.
Those which never yet did it, let them set upon it. Those who have done it, let
them be frequent in it. This is that, which the Lord calls for from his
people, the people of the Jews, Jer. 3. 13. Only acknowledge thine iniquity.
And this he expects and looks for, at the hands of all those* that look for
mercy from him; that they should confess and acknowledge their iniquities. And
this do we all, and every of us. Sure I am, there is none of us but have just
cause to do it. Though we be not so great sinners as Paul was, yet sinners we
are, and great sinners, all of us. And so looking upon our selves, confess we
our sins.

This do we (in the first place) unto God. 1. Confessing unto God.
This is the confession, which Scripture most urges and calls for, at the
hands of all, as being the most necessary confession. My Son, give, I pray
thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him, (^aith
Joshua to Achan) Josh. 7. 19. I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the
Lord, (says David, Psalm. 32. 5.) Confession unto others, it may be at some
times, and in some cases, useful, and profitable, but this, at all times
necessary. A Doctrine, far differing from that of the Church of Rome; which
runs almost wholly, upon another kind of confession, viz. Auricular
confession (as they Auricular Confession not necessary.
call it) confession made in the ears of the Priest. This is the Confession
which they so much cry up, making it a main part of their Religion; insisting
so much upon it in all their Tracts and Catechisms, calling, and accounting it
a Sacrament, and making it one of the Essential parts of true Repentance,
imposing it strictly upon All, and requiring it as a matter, not only of
Expedience, but of absolute Necessity, (where it may be done); without which,
no man can receive Absolution, or Remission of his Sins, or have any entrance
into the Kingdom of God. In this, the Doctrine of our Church, is (and may it
ever so be) far dissonant from, and contrary to theirs. Which, however in some
cases it allows, and upon good grounds, approves the Confession of sins
unto the Ministers of God, as expedient and useful; yet, Confession unto God,
and only that, it holds to be of absolute Necessity* And so looking upon it,
let every See that it be a right Confession suiting with that fivefold Property.
of us thus confess our sins; confess them unto Him. Which do we, in
Public, in Private; doing it in such a manner, as it may be acceptable unto
Him, and profitable to our selves. To which end, have we an eye to that
fivefold Property which I mentioned before.

1. See that our Confession be Voluntary Voluntary.
and Free. Bring we our hearts willingly to the work. See that our Confession
come from us, like Water out of a Spring; not like Water out of a Still, which
is forced by fire. Not deferring, and putting it off till the Evil day. Better
do it now, than stay till God bring us to the Rack, and so extort a confession
from us. Extorted confessions, being (as I said) ever suspicious, they will
yield little comfort to the Soul: What herein we do, do it willingly. 2. And
(2dly.), do it Ingenously. Acknowledge Ingenuous.
we our sins unto God, and hide them not. A bootlesse and vain attempt, to go
about to hide our sins from him, in whole, or in part, before whose Eyes, all
things are naked and open, (as the Apostle tells us, Heb. 4. 13.). In our
Confessions therefore, deal plainly and openly with him. Showing our selves as
ready to confess our sins unto him, as we would be to receive mercy from him.
Do it ingenuously and fully. 3. And do it Particularly, not resting Particular.
contented with an Implicit Confession, which (as one says) is little better
than an Implicit Faith; not thinking it enough, to confess and acknowledge that
we are sinners, great sinners; but deal particularly and distinctly, producing
our particular sins, laying them before the Lord, specially the chief of
them. 4. And (in the 4th. place) do it Cordially. Cordial.
Let our Confessions, be not only Tongue, but Heart-Confessions. See that we
be inwardly affected with the sense and feeling of those sins which we confess.
5. And (in the last place) let our Confessions Filial.
be Filial, come we unto God, not only as a Judge, but as a Father; laying
hold upon his Mercy in Christ, for the pardon of those sins which we
confess. Thus, confess we our sins unto God.
To excite and stir us up whereunto, Motive. This the only and sure way to
obt^in Mercy.
take we notice, that this is the way to mercy. The only way, and the sure way
to it. Scripture is express for both. The only way, I am merciful (says the
Lord), only acknowledge thine iniquity, Jer. 3. 12, 13. as if he had said,
Other way there is none for thee, or any other, to obtain Mercy at my hands,
but this. The sure way. So much these promises import: He that confesses, and
forsakes his sins, shall have mercy, Prove. 28. 13. If we confess our sins,
God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness, 1 John 1. 9. God having (as it were) bound himself by Promise,
upon Confession of sins, to bestow Remission; now, it stands not only with
his Mercy, but with his Justice to do it. Not that confession can merit pardon
at the hands of God, more than at the hands of men, but only in regard of His
gracious promise, which having made, he will be faithful in the performance of.
This is the way, the sure and only way to find Mercy. A way, which God himself
has laid out; and a way which his people have ever taken for the obteining of
it, both for themselves and others; and a way, wherein they have ever found
what they sought for. All these I might show you, if need were. And besides
this, I might show you diverse other benefits, redounding to the penitent
sinner This, the ready and only way to ea^e the heart
from this practice. This is the ready and only way to ease the heart, being
burdened with sin, thus, to pour it forth before God, in such humble and
hearty confessions and acknowledgments. The opening of our grief unto a friend,
is an ease to the heart, much more to do it unto God. When I kept silence,
(says David) my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long, Psalm.
32. 3. Whilst he hid his sin, he could have no rest; he roared through pangs
of Conscience: but, confessing it, his Soul was quieted; he thereby obtained
what he then sought for, Pardon and Remission; I said, I will confess my
transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, (so
it follows) verse. 5. Let these Motives induce us to be willing to confess our
sins unto God.

And (2dly.), upon occasion, be not unwilling 2. Confess unto Men.
to do it unto Men. 1st. Privately, whether to the Ministers of God or others.
Confess your sins one to another, (says Saint Privately
James, Jam. 5. 16.) that is (say some), to those Elders which were to be sent
for, of whom he speaks in the verses foregoing, or (as others more generally
look upon it) to them, or any other faithful Brethren. This are Christians to
do (as I have showen you) in two cases. 1st. When they feel sin lying heavy
upon their Souls, and find no ease by other endeavors. And (2dly.), when any
sin is charged upon them by others, by way of Christian Admonition or
Reprehension. In these cases, Christians are to deal freely and ingennously,
confessing their sins unto others, such as may be fit to have them
Communicated to them, being Wise and Faithful. By which means, they may come to
have the benefit, as of their Counsels, so of their Prayers. Confess your
sins one to another, and pray one for another, (as it there follows).

2. And as Privately, so also Publicly, Openly.
and Openly; whether it be in a regular way, if justly required so to do by
Lawful Authority; or in a Spontaneous and Voluntary Scandalous sinners, to make
open Confession.
way. Such as have been open, and scandalous Sinners, sinning before others, to
the offending, or endangering of them, let them be, as occasion is offered,
ready to confess their sins before others. That so

1. They may give Glory to God, (as Joshua That they may give glory to God.
in the Text forecited requires Achan to do); the glory of his Justice,
acknowledging him to be Just, and Righteous, in what ever he has done, or
shall do against them, though it were in their everlasting condemnation. O
Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, (so Daniel begins his Confession) Dan.
9. 7. And so the glory of his Grace and Mercy, in sparing them, receiving them
to Mercy. Upon this ground it was, (as I have shown you) that Paul was so
forward, and frequent in his Confessions. Take shame to themselves.
2. And (secondly) that giving glory to God, they may take shame to themselves.
O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face (so
Daniel there goes on). This (as I have showen you) true Penitent sinners will
readily take unto themselves; and upon this account they are so ready to make
these Open confessions. That which deterrs, and keeps off others from it,
brings them off to it. Carnal men, out of a carnal respect which they have to
their credit and reputation in the World, they are averse to it. And hereupon
they will stand upon their Justification, Denying, Excusing, Extenuating,
Evading what they can, (as you have heard). But upon this account, the penitent
sinner is forward in it, that, whilst he gives glory to God, he may take shame
to himself. This is God's due, and his; and so apprehending it, he is willing
thus to give the one, and take the other. 3. And again (thirdly), This let them
Give Satisfaction to those, whom they have offended or in dangered.
do, for the satisfaction of those, whom by their sins they have scandalized,
and offended, or endangered. 4. As also to set a Pattern unto others, who stand
guilty of the like sins. All these, let them be as so many inducements, to
draw them to such free and open Confessions.
Wherein, let them take heed that they Herein to deal sincerely
deal sincerely and uprightly. Not doing this out of any base sinister
respects, as thinking thereby, to gain credit and repute from any, which is
odious Hypocrisy. But doing it, as in the presence of God. Thus did Paul preach
the Gospel of Christ, (as he tells his Corinthians, 2 Cor. 2. last.). And thus
no question he made these open confessions against himself, Not as many, who
deal deceitfully, but as of sincerity, as in the sight of God. And such let all
our confessions and acknowledgments be; to whomsoever they are made, whether to
God or Man. See that they be not merely verbal and formal, much less
Hypocritical, but Sincere and Cordial.

And that we may attain to be such true ^ir. 1. Get a general knowledge of sin.
confessors, (to give you some directions briefly); Let our first work be, to
get a true sight, a right knowledge of sin, a speculative knowledge of the
nature, and kinds of sin, to know what sin is, and what is sin. Now, this
knowledge is not to be attained, but by and from the Law. By the Law, is the
knowledge of sin, (says the Apostle) Romans 3. 20. (...), a clear, distinct,
effectual knowledge, such a knowledge as brings forth an Acknowledgment. So
much the word in the Original is conceived to import, which we find sometimes
so rendered by our Translators, as, 2 Timothy 2. 25. Tit. 1. 1. Acknowledgment.
Now, such a knowledge of sin, [as I said] is not to be attained, but by the
Law, from the Word. As for the light of nature, that may, and will discover
unto man some sins, but this light is insufficient and defective. For,
[1st.], it will not discover all sins. Sins against the Second Table it
may, but not so many of them against the First Table; which are indeed the
greatest sins. Gross sins it may, not other. Actual sins it may, which
are the Branches; but not Original sin, which is the Root of all sin. This
throughdiscovery of all sin, is only by the Law. And therefore says the
Apostle, I had not known sin, but by the Law, Romans 7. 7. Non ita exact
nossem, [saith Grotius], I could never have known it so exactly and fully, as
now I do. Many sins there were, that the light of nature could not have
discovered unto him: Specially that Mother-Sinne, the Root of all Sin, that
sinful Concupiscence, of which he speaks in the words following, I had not
known lust, ((...), Concupiscence), except the Law had said, Thou shall not
lust. Besides, sins against the Gospel, (such as Paul's sins were, which
here he confesses), the light of Nature cannot discover them; this must the
light of the Word do. And again, discovery of sin by the light of nature, is
not an effectual discovery. It never so enlightneth the eye, as that it rightly
affects the heart, affects it with true sorrow for sin, so as to drive
the sinner unto God, to seek and sue for Mercy, in such a way as he may obtein
it. This is proper to the Word. And therefore make we use of this Light,
laboring to get a true understanding of, and insight into, the Law of God,
that so we may attain such a knowledge of sin, to know (as I said), what
sinn^s, and what is sin. Without this, there will be no true Confession.
(...) must go before (...), Cognitio before Agnitio, Knowledge before
Acknowledgement.

2dly. Having attained some measure of 2. A particular Conviction.
this general knowledge, the next work must be, to get a particular Conviction.
Paul had not only a light shining round about him, (as you heard), but he also
heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me, Act. 9. And so it is not enough for a Christian to have the light of the
Word shining round about him, to have a general knowledge of sin, but he must
be particularly convinced of his own sins. To that end, therefore, bring we
our selves to the Law. Behold we our own faces in that Glass. Bring our lives
thither, bring our hearts thither, comparing the one with the other; laying
both to that Rule, that so by the straightness of the one, we may discover the
obliquity and crookedness of the other. Thus did Paul, he brought himself, his
heart and life to the Law, and by that means, he came not only to attain the
knowledge of sin in a general way, but to see his own sinfulness, the
sinfulness of his Nature, and the sinfulness of his Life; as his former sins
acted before his Conversion, so the Body of sin, which still remained in hi^*
In the sense and apprehension whereof, he so passionately cries out in the
close of that Chapter, Romans 7. 24. (...), O wretched man that I am, Who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? Thus, seek we after such a Conviction,
which till we attain, we will never be brought to a right confession and
acknowledgment of sin. Thence was it, that Nathan takes this course with
David: First, convincing him of his sin, which he does, by propounding to him
the Parable of the Ewe-Lamb, and so by that means, brings him to that
Confession which there he made, 2 Samuel 12.

3dly. Being convinced of sin, then (in 3. Compunction and Contrition.
the third place) seek after some measure of Compunction and Contrition, that
so we may not only have a sight, but an inward sense and feeling of our
sins, and so be humbled in the sense of them. Paul, did not only see a light
shining about him, and hear a voice speaking unto him, but he was also struck
to the ground, [as you have heard]. And so must a poor sinner be, before ever
he will be brought to a right confession of his sins. Seek we for this also
in measure. This it was, that drew John the Baptist's, and Peter's, and Paul's
hearers, to those open confessions which they made, they were pricked in the
hearts for their sins.

4thly. Being thus humbled for sin, and 4. Some apprehension of Mercy.
feeling some measure of Compunction, now labor in the next place, to get some
apprehensions of mercy, to raise up the Soul; if not in the sense, yet with the
hope of M^cy. Till this be done, our confession will never be such as it ought
to be. It will never be Voluntary and Ingenuous, till* it be Filial. Fear,
slavish fear, it straitneth the heart, causes the spirits to retire, and run
inward [as it were]. Apprehensions of Mercy, will melt, and enlarge, and
dissolve it [as it were]; and so draw forth the Soul, to free and ingenuous
confessions, and acknowledgments.

5thly. In the fifth and last place, seek we 5. Beg from God, his free Spirit.
unto God for that his free Spirit, [as David calls it, Psalm. 51. 12.] that,
That may be in us a spirit of confession. It is that, which the Lord makes
promise of to his people, Zach. 12. 10. I will pour upon them, the Spirit of
Grace and Supplications. His Spirit, which is the gift of his Grace, [and
therefore called the Spirit of Grace] should so inwardly affect them with the
sense of his Mercies, as that they should freely pour out their Souls before
Him, in true penitent confessions of their own sins, whereof formerly they
had not been sensible. And this Spirit seek we from God. Even such a Spirit of
Grace and Supplications, which may put our hearts into such a confessing frame
and temper, as that they may be ready upon all occasions, to break forth into
humble and hearty confessions and acknowledgments of our sins, both before
God and Men. By this means it was, that Paul was now become such a forward and
ingenuous confessor of his own sins. Which, confessing, he also censureth,
and that severely, acknowledging himself not only a sinner, but a great sinner;
yea, the chief of sinners. That is the third particular Branch, of the general
Observation, to which I now come.

THe Penitent sinner, as he is a frequent Branch 3. The Penitent sinner, a
severe Censurer of himself.
Remembrancer, and a forward Confessor, so also a severe Censurer; severe in
censuring of his own Sins, and himself for them. An Observation which I find
the learned Grotius taking up from that parallel Text, Luke 5. 8. where Peter
makes the like Confession, that Paul here does. Having seen that Miracle which
Christ had wrought, in blessing his labor beyond all expectation, giving him
such a draught of Fishes, as the like he had never before seen or heard of, he
thereupon falls down at his knees, saying, Depart from me, I am a sinful man.
(...), Peccatosus, a sinner, a great sinner. So much that word [as you have
formerly heard] imports; as we may take notice from that Text of Saint Peter, 1
Pet. 4. 18. If the righteous scarsly be saved, where shall the ungodly and
sinner appear? (...). Where the word sinner, being opposed to a Righteous
person, it imports, a wicked and ungodly person, with whom it is there joined,
an habituated sinner. So we find it used by our Apostle in the ninth verse of
this Chapter, whereof the Text is part. Where he says, that the Law was not
made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient; for the ungodly,
and for sinners, for unholy, and profane. Where, by sinners, we are to
understand* such as the rest there spoken of are, wicked, and ungodly; unholy,
and profane persons, such as make a trade of sin, (as Beza there expounds
it), Veluti aliquam peccandi artem exercentes, such as the Poet Hesiod (says
he) calls, (...), such as made sin their work, habituated and notorious
sinners. Now what? Was Peter such a one? Nothing less, he was, then, a truly
pious and godly Man, as appears by his Demeanure to his Lord and Master Christ,
his readiness to do what ever he should command him; which he professes and
practices in the verses foregoing, verse. 5. 6. How was it then, that he should
pass so severe a Censure upon himself, that he was a sinner, such a sinner, a
sinful man? Why, thus it is, none are more ready to pass censures upon
themselves, than those that deserve them least. Probi animi vel maximum ^st
indicium severissimam in se censuram exercere, (says that Author); There is
not a greater Evidence of a Pious and Gracious Soul, than to be severe in
Censuring of it self. Such a one was this our Apostle Saint Paul, (as the same
Author there takes notice of it, paralleling him with Peter, in this
confession which here he makes). Notwithstanding that before his Conversion,
he was morally blameless in his life and conversation, and now an eminent
Saint; yet he passes this Censure upon himself, that he was, (...), the first,
the chief of Sinners.

And such Censurers shall we find other of the Saints of God to have been,
severe in censuring of themselves. Hence is it, that in their Confessions and
Acknowledgements we shall find them aggravating their sins to the height,
endeavoring what they could to express and set forth the Heinousness, the
Greatness of them. So we find David confessing and acknowledging of that sin
of his, in Numbering of the People, 2 Samuel 24. 10. His heart smiting him for
what he had done, he breaks forth into the Acknowledgement of it, confessing
that he had therein not only sinned, but greatly sinned. And David said unto
the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that I have done. And what was it that he
had done? Why, he had caused the People, through his Dominions, to be numbered;
to have a Musterrole taken of all those that were fit to bear Arms, if
occasion should require it. And what, Was this so great a Sin? In appearance
it was not, it being no more than what, out of a Politic respect, he might do;
and what others before him (in likelihood) had frequently and usually done.
But David, knowing his own heart, and being privy to his own intentions and
aims in doing what he did; that he had done it, not only out of a Vain
curiosity, when as there was no need that he should do it, but also out of a
principle of Pride, and carnal confidence, having therein made flesh his Arm,
trusting in the Multitude of his People; hereupon he not only confesses the
sin, but censureth it as a very great sin; withal censuring himself to
have therein done foolishly, very foolishly, as it follows in the close of
that Verse, I have done very foolishly. However, in this action, I seemed to my
self to have been very prudent and politic; yet now I see that it was no
better than extreme folly, seeing I swerved out of the way of thy
Commandments, through pride, and carnal confidence.

And not unlike is that other confession of his, which he makes in the matter
of Uriah, Psalm. 51. where he not only in express terms acknowledges the Fact
which he had done, his going into Bathsheba, (as he calls it in the Title of
the Psalm) his committing Adultery with her; but he aggravateth it to the
full, setting forth the Foulness and Heinousness of it, which he does by
multiplying of words about it, calling it Iniquity, Transgression, Sin, Evil;
an exaggeration of words, serving and tending to the aggravation of his sin.
Withal, he accuses and condemns himself before God, for that sin,
clearing, and justifying of him, as touching what he had already done, in
taking away his Child; so also, touching what he had threatened by the Prophet
Nathan, that he would do unto him, viz. That, the Sword should never depart
from his house, 2 Samuel 12. 10. And so touching whatsoever else he should please
to do unto him, however he should punish him or his, yet, still he
acknowledges, how he had deserved all, justifying of God. This we shall find
in the fourth verse of that Psalm, where confessing how he had therein sinned
against God, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evill-in thy
sight; he subjoyneth, That thou might be justified when thou speak, and
be clear when thou judge Which words are commonly (and I think not amiss)
looked upon as a Reason, why he thus made this confession to his God, viz. That
he might give unto him the glory of his Justice, in what ever he had spoken and
threatened against him, or in what ever judgments and punishments, he should lay
and inflict upon him. Such a severe Censurer was David of his own sins, and
of himself for them.

And the like shall we find in diverse others; As in Daniel, who confessing his
own, and the peoples sins, Da^. 9. he first aggravateth them, to that end,
multiplying of words, (as David there did), making use of variety of
expressions, Verse. 5. We have sinned, and committed iniquity, and have done
wickedly, and have rebelled, etc. thereby, setting forth both the multitude and
magnitude of their sins. Then he censures himself, and them for them,
acknowledging what they had justly deserved thereby, even shame and confusion
of face; O Lord (says he), righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us
confusion of faces, as at this day, v. 7. which he repeats again in the verse
following, with some amplifications. O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face,
to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our Fathers, because we have sinned
against thee.

Such a confession of sin it is that King Solomon prescribes unto all
penitent sinners, 1 King. 8. 47. If they shall repent, and make supplication
unto thee, saying, We have sinned, and done perversely, we have committed
wickedness, etc. As if he should say, We cannot sufficiently express, how
heinous our sins are. And such confession, being truly penitent, they will be
ready to make, We see it in the Prodigal, upon his return to his Father, Luke
15. 21. Father (says he), I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and
am no more worthy to be called thy Son. Where see, how he first aggravateth his
fault, acknowledging that in what he had done, he had sinned against Heaven,
that is, against God, who dwells in the Heavens; not only against his
earthly Father, whom he had immediately offended, by his lewd and extravagant
courses, but also against his Heavenly Father, whose Laws he had transgressed.
Then he passes Censure upon himself, adjudging and acknowledging himself,
worthy to be cast off by his Father, unworthy to be any longer owned by him, as
his Son, I am no more worthy to be called thy Son. So far was he from excusing
himself, or from any ways mincing, or extenuating what he had done. What ever
others might think of it, who might impute it to the levitie of his youth, and
so make leight of it, he censures it, and himself for it, as deserving not
only a frown, or a check from his Father, but an utter abdication and
abjection. So severe will true Penitents be, in Censuring of their own sins,
and themselves for them. Looking upon themselves: as vile unworthy wretches. So
did Job, Behold, I am vile, (says he) Job 40. 4. He was so in his own eyes.
Abhorring themselves, (as he says afterward of himself, cap. 42. verse. 6.)
Loath^ng themselves in their own sight, for all the ^vills which they have
done, (as the Lord ^aith his people should do, Ezekiel. 20. 43. and 36. 31.) viler
than others. Surely I am more brutish than any man, (says wise Agur), Prove.
30. 2. Thus severe are penitent sinners, in censuring of themselves.

Q. And how is it that they are so? Quest.


A. To this I have (as I remember) returned some answer before, giving you the
heads of some Reasons for it. Let me touch upon some of them again.

1st. They are best acquainted with themselves, Resp. 1.. He is best acquainted
with himself.
they know themselves. Know ye not your own selves, (says Paul to his
Corinthians) 2 Cor. 13. 5. This, all Regenerate Persons in measure do. Having
their eyes opened to the beholding, as of what they are by Grace, to which end
the Spirit it given them ( we have received the Spirit of God, that we should
know the things which are freely given us of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12.); so of what
they are by Nature, to the beholding of the corruption of their hearts, and the
errors of their lives. These they know. Our transgressions are with us, and
our iniquities we know them, (says the Church) Isa. 59. 12. And so know them,
as they do not, cannot, know the sins of others. In themselves (as you heard
before) they take notice of the body of sin, the mass of sinful With his own
Heart.
corruption which is in them, which in others they see not, but by reflecting
upon themselves. Thus they may see it. Even (...) in water, face answers to
face, so the heart of man to man, (says Solomon) Prove. 27. 19. The face which
a man sees in the water, or in a glass, it is in all points like unto his own,
of the same feiture, color, complexion. Even such a similitude there is
between the hearts, of one man, and another. How ever Grace makes a change,
making men new Creatures, differing from themselves, and so from others; yet,
by nature there is no difference, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 3. 22. (...),
There is no difference (or distinction), all have sinned, and come short of the
Glory of God. That is, (as some expound it, and as we find these words [ the
Glory of God] used by the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 7.) having all alike sinned
in Adam, they are alike deprived of the Image of God, wherein man was at the
first Created, consisting in Holiness and Righteousness; and consequently, all
alike infected with Original Corruption, which is the Image of Satan, all alike
disfigured and deformed. So as a man reflecting upon himself, he thereby
comes, after a sort, to see what is in another, Ex suo ingenio aliorum ingenia
aestimans, measuring others by himself, guessing at their Corruption by his
own. But this he sees only in a Glass, by reflection from his own heart, and
consequently his knowledge hereof is not so clear and certain, as that which he
has of himself. As for his own corruption, that he is well acquainted with,
being sensible how indisposed he is to what ever is good, how pro^e to all
manner of evil.

And as he knows his own heart, better With his own li^e.
than he does the heart of any other, so also his life, as his inward
Corruption which is the Fountain, so his actual sins which are the Streams.
These he knows better than he does the sins of any others. Many sins he
must take notice of in others, but of more in himself. Mine iniquities are more
than the hairs of my head, (says David) Psalm. 40. 12. This a man may say of
himself, rather than of another, being (as the Penitent sinner is) a diligent
and constant observer of himself, observing his daily slips and infirmities,
his daily commissions and omissions, which he cannot do in another. In others,
he takes notice only of their open sins, in himself, of his secret sins;
which, as they are more in number, so they may be more heinous in nature than
the open sins of others. And besides, observing his own sins, he knows
the nature and quality of them, better than he can do of the sins of others. In
others, he takes notice of the outward Acts of such or such sins, seeing
them, or hearing of them; but in himself, he takes notice also of the
circumstances accompanying The pe nitent sinner weighs his own sins.
his own sins, which many times exceedingly do aggravate them. So as whereas
he does but guess at the greatness of other men's sins, judging them by the
outward appearance, he Weighs his own. Even as the Lord is said to weigh the
ways of men, Isa. 26. 7. Thou most upright do weigh the path of the just.
Pondering all their goings, (as the Wiseman says of him), Prove. 5. 21. The
ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings.
Taking exact notice of all their Actions, weighing them, as Hannah has it in
her Song, 1 Samuel 2. 3. The Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him Actions are
weighed. And as their Actions, so their Hearts and Spirits. The Lord weighs
the Spirits (says the Wiseman), Prove. 16. 2. repeated, cap. 21. 2. Like as the
Goldsmith that weighs his Gold, he takes exact notice of every grain; so
does God ponder and weigh all the actions, words, and thoughts of Men, as their
good works, so their sins; taking notice of every circumstance that may make
them either lighter or heavier, extenuate or aggravate them. And thus does the
true penitent sinner desire to weigh and ponder his own sins, considering not
only the sins themselves, but the circumstances wherewith they are attended,
which oft-times are great aggravations. And so by putting these grains into his
own balance, which he cannot do in another, his own sins in his
apprehension, come to weigh down the sins of others; though happily in
themselves not so heavy as others. Thus is he better acquainted with himself
than with others, with his own heart and life, with his own sins, his own
inward Corruption, the pravity of his Nature, the Rebellion of his own Will,
the Inordinacy of his own Affections, as also with his own actual sins, both
as to the number, and nature of them. And hence is it, that he comes to be so
censorious toward himself, judging his own sins more, and greater than the
sins of others; and so himself, a greater sinner than others. Resp. 2. He
feels them


Besides this, (in the second place) as he sees and weighs his own sins,
so he feels them; Which he does not the sins of others. The sins of
others he takes notice of by the Eye, or Ear; either by hearsay, or at the
most being an eyewitness of them, and so knows them only by speculation,
but his own sins he feels them. Feeling the Body of sin stirring in him,
even as Rebecca selt the two twins stirring and striving in her Womb, Genesis 25.
22. thus does he feel Corruption striving and struggling with Grace (of which
Paul complains, Romans 7.) Besides, he feels his Actual sins, which, it may
be, lie heavy upon his Soul. As David says his sins did upon him. Psalm. 40.
12. Mine iniquities (says he) have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able
to look up; which may be understood, not only of the Judgments of God, which
then lay upon him, whereof his sins were the cause, but even of his sins
themselves, which lay heavy upon his Soul. And so is it in measure with all
true Penitent sinners, they are such as either do feel, or have felt the weight
and burden of their sins, being weary, and heavy laden with them, as our
Savior gives a Character of them. Mat. 11. 29. (...), such as labor under
the sense of sin, feeling it lying upon them as an intolerable burden. And
this again makes them think their own sins greatest. So it did Paul here (as
you have heard). He saw and heard of the sins of others, but they did not lie
upon him as his own did, and therefore he judges himself to be the chief of
sinners. Cuique gravissimum est onus quod suis impositum est humeris, (says
Aretius forecited, upon the Text). Every one is ready to think that burden
heaviest that lies upon his own shoulders, and his own pain to be the
greatest. See if there be any sorrow like my sorrow, (says the Church in the
Text forecited), Lam. 1. 12. That which a man knows by sense and feeling, it
makes a deeper impression upon his heart, than what he knows only by
Speculation.

Many other Reasons might be given, why Resp. 3. His heart is tender*
penitent sinners should have such apprehensions of their own sins. Among
other, their hearts are tender, as Huldah the Prophetess said of good Josiah,
2 Chronicles. 34. 27. Because thine heart was tender, etc. And such in measure is
the heart of every truly penitent sinner. Now, a tender heart is affected with
the least touch.

Besides, (as you have heard before), they Resp. 4. He has tasted of Mercy.
are such as have begun to taste of mercy. Now, that makes their sins to
appear the more sinful to them, even as the tasting of any sweet thing, will
make that which is bitter, to seem more bitter. The sweetness of God's Grace
and Mercy in Christ, being tasted by the Soul in the pardon of sin, it makes
sin to be the more bitter unto it. But I shall no longer dwell upon
Illustration. That which now remains for the closing up of this point is only
the Application, which I shall again direct as in the two former Branches,
only those two ways; By way of Conviction, Use 1. By way of Conviction,
diverse ^ensured to be no true penitents.
by way of Exhortation.

In the first place by way of Conviction. Is this the property of a sinner
truly penitent, to be so severe in censuring of his own sins, and himself for
them; how many upon this ground, may justly be censured as being none of this
number?

1st. Such as instead of censuring, do flatter 1. Such as are ^tterers of
themselves, whilst they are censorious of others.
themselves; and that whilst in the mean time, they are very ready to censure
others. As for others, none are more censorious of them than they, very
quicksighted they are, in prying into their lives, nay into their hearts, ready
to censure both, and that most severely, nay, rigidly and uncharitably. Ready
to pass a sharp censure upon the moates, the least infirmities and failings
which they spy in others. And not only censuring the faults, (which they do
beyond all proportion of merit), but the persons also for the faults sake,
condemning them for Hypocrites. But, in the mean time, they are gross
flatterers of themselves. Not espying the beams in their own eyes, overlooking
many gross evils in themselves, applauding themselves, as if all were well
with them, and that there were nothing in them that should deserve a Censure.
Such were the Pharisees of old, none more ready to censure others than they. So
did he the Publican in the Gospel, blessing God, that himself was not such a
one as he, and others were. God I thank thee, (says he) I am not as other men
are, etc. or even as this Publican, Luke 18. 11. And thus is it with many, too
many, they are very quicksighted toward others. As it is observed of the most
ravenous and mischievous birds, birds of prey, they are usually most
quicksighted: So is it with the worst and wickedest of men, none more ready to
find fault with others, whilst they see none in themselves. Now as for such,
let them take notice how far they are from the temper and disposition of this
our Apostle here in the Text. Paul, whilst he was Saul a Pharisee, no question
he thought as well of himself as any other, he was then, highly opinionated of
his own Righteousness, that he was not as others; if a sinner, yet not so great
a sinner as others were. But now being brought home to Christ, and having his
eyes opened, he comes to see more evil in himself, then in any other;
whereupon he passes this severe censure upon himself, that he was not only a
sinner, but a great sinner, yea, the chief of sinners. Certainly they, who do
not see any thing in themselves that deserve a censure, and that a sharp one,
they may well conclude, that as yet, they have not had their eyes opened, they
have little or no acquaintance with themselves. Did they but thoroughly know
themselves, they would see so much at home, as would make them less censorious
abroad. So is it with a truly gracious Soul; a truly penitent sinner, the more
holy he is, the more humble, the more gracious, the less censorious of others,
where there may be any hope. The Story tells us, Ioh. 8. of those Scribes and
Pharisees, which brought that poor woman taken in the Act of Adultery before
our Savior, however, they were all of them guilty of the like, or of some as
great sins as she was, as appeared by their shrinking and stealing away,
after they had heard what our Savior said to them, He that is without sin
among you, let him first cast a stone at her, verse. 7. Now they which heard it
(says the Text), being convicted by their own Conscience, went out one by one,
verse. 9.) yet how harsh and rigid were they against her, as in accusing, so in
censuring of her; urging the Law, which required that such should be stoned,
which they would have speedily executed, without any further hearing. So rigid
were they against her. But so was not our Savior. However he himself knew no
sin, being free from all sin, both Original and Actual; holy, harmless,
undefiled, separated from sinners, (as the Apostle says of him), Heb. 7. 26.
yet, see how mildely, how gently, how tenderly he was pleased to deal with her,
telling her, that seeing there were no witnesses present, to prove what they
charged her with, he would not condemn her, only willing her to go away and
sin no more, Verse. 11. Certainly, they who are so harsh, and uncharitable, in
censuring and condemning of others, either never considered, or else have
forgotten, what themselves are, or were. Which if they did but seriously think
of, it would teach them that Lesson which the Apostle wills Titus to press
upon his Cretians, and that upon this ground, Tit. 3. 2, 3. Put them in mind
(says he) to speak evil of no man, (that is, not without just cause), but to
be gentle, showing meekness unto all men; For we our selves were sometimes
foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures. This would
make men more severe in censuring themselves than others.

A second sort there are, who (it may be) 2. Such as are sparing in their
censuring of themselves.
will be content to pass a censure upon themselves, but they are very sparing
in it. That they are sinners they will acknowledge, but what? Great sinners?
not so, much less the chief of sinners. Here they will plead what they can for
themselves, for the extenuating of their sins, and excusing of themselves;
making use of diverse Pleas for that end and Diverse Pleas made use of by such,
for the extenuating of their sins.
purpose. I shall instance in three or four of the most usual.

1. Though they be sinners, and have their 1. Others greater sinners than they.
faults, yet, they are not such as others are. There are others as bad, nay,
worse than they. And to make this good, they single out some persons grossly
scandalous, comparing themselves with them, blessing God that they are not so
bad as they. Thus did the Pharisee even now spoken of, comparing himself with
the Publican, one of the vilest sort of persons that then were. So were the
Publicans accounted amongst the Jews, being servants to the Romans, whose yoke
the Jews could not endure, Officers employed by them, for the gathering in of
their tribute, which they did for the most part with greatest rigor, grating
upon the people, by exacting more than their due, and so making what advantage
of their places they could. Hence it was that they came to be of so ill repute
as they were, to be reckoned among the worst of men. Thus we find Publicans and
Sinners put together, Mat. 9. 10, 11. And elsewhere Publicans and Harlots, Mat.
21. 31. intimating them to have been an infamous company. Now, with him does
the Pharisee there compare himself, as also with other notorious sinners. Which
doing, he blesses God that he was not so vile, as he and they. God I thank
thee, I am not as other men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as
this Publican, Luke 18. 11. And the like are many, very ready to plead for
themselves. Comparing themselves with persons notoriously scandalous, they
applaud themselves in this, that they are not so bad as they, none of the chief
of sinners.

2d. A second Plea is, that if they be sinners, 2. They are but as others.
and great sinners, guilty (it may be) of some foul and scandalous sins, yet
therein they are not alone, they are but as others, they have done no otherwise
then some have done before them, and others will do after them. They are flesh
and blood as well as others, and therefore, if they have fallen, they make the
less of it, because it is a thing incident to all. And to this purpose, it may
be, they will not spare to make use of Scripture, perverting and abusing it to
their own destruction; which tells them, how that in many things we offend
all, Jam. 3. 2. And how the just man falls seven times, i. e. often, as into
sufferings, so into sins, Prove. 24. 16. So as there is not a just man that
does good, and sins not, Eccl. 7. 20. Withal, taking up the examples and
instances of holy men, eminent Saints of God, whose sins stand upon Record in
Scripture, some of them very foul and horrid, making use of them, if not for
the excusing, yet for the extenuating of their own.

3. A third of these Pleas is, Though they 3. They have sinned through infirmity
have fallen into such and such sins, yet they did it not willingly, out of
any love or liking they had to the sin, but through infirmity, being, it may
be, entised and drawn into it by evil company, upon whom they are willing to
transfer their sins, that they may shift them off from themselves. So Adam
did his eating of the Apple, which he put upon his Wife, The Woman whom thou
gave to be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat, Genesis 3. 12. And
so did Saul his sparing of Agag, which he puts upon the people, (as you have
heard) 1 Samuel 15. 24.

4. A fourth and a last Plea, (to name no 4. They could not resist Sarans
Temptations.
more) is, They have fallen, and fallen foully, but they could not help it,
being overpowered by Satan, whose temptations were so strong, that they could
not resist them, and so they would charge the fault rather upon him, than
themselves. So did the Woman at the first, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did
eat, Genesis 3. 13. And the like do these her children, by this means, thinking at
least to extenuate their sins, as if they in the acting and committing of
them, had been only Instruments and Accessories.

These, and many the like Pleas and pretenses, Paul, sar from making use of any
such Pleas.
do carnal men oft-times find out, making use of them, if not to defend, yet to
extenuate their own sins, and so to excuse themselves, if not in whole yet in
part; that so they may not seem so vile in their own eyes, as in truth they
are. But in so doing, how unlike are they to the Apostle here in the Text?
Paul, if he would have gone about such a work, the excusing or extenuating of
his sins, how many Pleas might he* have taken up? He was not the first
Persecutor, nor the only Persecutor, no, nor yet the greatest Persecutor.
There were then others besides him, and there had been others before him, some
of them as violent as ever he had been. Besides, what he had done, he had done
it out of Ignorance, not knowing what he did, nor Whom it was that he opposed.
Nay, what he did, he did it out of Zeal for God. Besides, in what he did
against the Church, he was instigated and set on by Satan, who raised those
Persecutions. And as by Satan, who had the chief hand in it, so by others his
Instruments, who put him forward upon that work. But see how he lays all
these aside. However, he took notice of some, if not all of them; As of his
Ignorance, I did it Ignorantly: And of his good Intention, I verily thought
with my self, that I ought to do many things, contrary to the Name of Jesus of
Nazareth, Act. 26. 9. Yet, he is far from making any such use of them, but he
charge his sins home upon himself, Censuring them, and himself for them;
and that most severely, according as the nature of his sins required,
acknowledging himself, to be the chief of sinners.

And herein again, let every of us set Use. 2. Exhortation. Let all Christians,
be such self censurers of themselves.
Him up as a Pattern for our Imitation. Let that be the Word of Exhortation,
wherewith I shall conclude this point. Be we all of us such Censurers of our
selves. As for others, take we heed of being rash and forward in censuring of
them. Judge not, that ye be not judged, (says our Savior in his Sermon upon
the Mount), Math. 7. 1. Which, let it be rightly and warily understood. Not but
that Christians may censure the sins of others. This, Public persons not
only may do, but ought to do, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, whom God has
made Censores morum, Judges and Censurers of the manners of others; yea, and
this may private Christians also in some cases lawfully do. In case the sin
be open and scandalous, they may censure and condemn it for a sin in
whomsoever it is, and that according to the nature of it. But being private
persons, let them be sparing in censuring of the persons of others, specially
in censuring them for such weaknesses and infirmities as they epsy in them.
Taking heed of being rash, or rigid, and uncharitable in their censures of
others, whether of their Persons or Actions. Here let that of the Apostle take
place, Romans 14. 4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? To his own
master he stands or falls; which we have seconded by Saint James, cap. 4.
verse. 12. Who art thou that judge another? In judging and censuring of
others, be we sparing and wary; in the mean time turning our censures upon our
selves. Which, as it will be more safe, so more useful. Be we strict
inquisitors into our own hearts and lives. Bring both to a scrutinie, and to a
censure. And herein spare not to exercise our severity.

Not that I would have Christians to be Yet, not being rash, or overrigid in
these censures.
over-harsh against themselves, so as to pass too rigid censures upon their own
persons or actions. It is the Preacher's advice, (as you heard before), Be not
wicked over much, Eccles. 7. 17. i. e. judicio tuo, in thine own judgment. An
extreme, which sometimes good and gracious Souls are subject to. Out of a deep
apprehension which they have of their own sins, their weaknesses, and their
wants, they are ready to pass harsh censures upon themselves, sometimes
adjudging themselves to be Hypocrites, sometimes charging upon themselves, that
great and unpardonable sin, the sin against the Holy Ghost; which
notwithstanding they are very far from, being such as desire nothing more then
to hearken to the Motions and Dictates thereof. In this, Christians must be
wary and tender; whilst they are not uncharitable toward others, they must
take heed of being so to themselves. In the mean time, let them not forbear to
judge and censure themselves, to pass censure upon their own sins, their
inward and secret corruptions, their outward and actual Transgressions, their
sinful Commissions and Omissions. And herein let them be impartial, not
conniving at any thing in themselves, not looking upon their own sins through
false glasses, but beholding them as they are, let them pass a righteous
judgment upon them, judging and censuring themselves for them, according to
their* demerit. And this let every of us be exhorted to do.

Motives hereunto take one or two instead of many. 1. This is the next, and
only Mot. 1. This the way to prevent God's Censures.
way to prevent Gods Censures. If we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged of the Lord (says the Apostle to his Corinthians) 1 Cor. 11. 31. Hereby
may many temporal Judgments be prevented; However, that Eternal Judgment: As
for Temporal Judgments, they may, and oft-times do befall those who have thus
prejudged themselves. So was it with David; notwithstanding that he had judged
himself for that sin of his in numbering the People, acknowledging that he had
therein sinned greatly, and done very foolishly; yet he has a three-stringed
whip held forth to him, a threefold judgment offered to him to take his
choice of, Famine, Sword, or Pestilence, one of which he must feel of. Yet by
this means we may come to escape that dreadful censure, the sentence of Eternal
Condemnation, which shall be passed upon all those who never thus judged
themselves at the last day. This praejudicium will prevent that Iudicium. Thus
fore-judging our selves, we may prevent the terror of that last Judgment.

Again, this is the way to ease our selves Mot. 2. To ease the Soul of the
burden of sin; and to procure the pardon of it.
of the burden of sin, by thus burdening our selves with it. Allevat penitus
errores, qui ipse se onerat (says Ambrose). He who thus burdens himself, with
charging his sins home upon himself; by so doing, he shall lighten the burden
of sin, that it will not lie so heavy upon his Soul, as otherwise it would.
To be thus Heavy-laden, is the way to Rest, Mat. 11. 28. This is the way, the
next way to obtein Mercy at the hands of God. It was the way which Benhadads
servants took to find mercy from the King of Israel, to come to him with Ropes
upon their heads, 1 King. 20. 31. So censuring and condemning themselves
aforehand as Capital Offenders, having deserved death. No readier way to find
Mercy at the hands of God, than for a man to be thus his own judge, and to be
thus severe against himself. In quan^um non peperceris tibi, in tantum tibi
Deus, creed, parcet. By how much less sparing thou art to thy self, (says
another of the Ancients, Tertullian) by so much the more sparing (believe it*)
thou shall find God to be unto thee. This is the next way to sue forth a
Pardon. So David apprehended it, who makes use of this as an Argument to move
God to show mercy to him, in the pardoning of his sin, his acknowledging that
he had sinned greatly, and done very foolishly. Now, beseech thee O Lord (says
he), take away the Iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly, 2 Samuel 24. 10. A strange Argument one would think to make use of, to such a
purpose, to induce God to show mercy to him, by aggravating his sin in such a
manner. Carnal reason would have thought it might have been a more likely way
to have pleaded some excuse, and to have extenuated his sin what he could.
Not so, David apprehended this as the right way, and so he sound it; not to go
about to hide or extenuate, but to lay open, and to aggravate his sin to the
height. In this the case is different betwixt God and Man. Before men,
offenders are oft-times acquitted by the means of such Pleas, and excuses as
they make use of. It is not so with God. With him, he that covers his sin
(seeks to conceal it, or to excuse it), shall not prosper, (as the Wiseman
tells us), Prove. 28. 13. not prosper in his suit for mercy at the hands of
God. Would we obtein mercy from him, do not deal deceitfully with him. But deal
we impartially betwixt him and our own Souls, charging our selves home, in
giving in our accounts to him. Not taking the like course that that unjust
Steward in the Gospel put his Masters debtors upon, in giving in their accounts
unto him, that for an hundred, one shonld set down fifty, another eighty, (as
we have it in the Parable) Luke 16. 6, 7. This we find there commended in him
as a politic device, tending to his and their advantage; but so will it not be
found in those that shall give in the like accounts to their God. Their
diminishing will be an augmenting of their Debt. And therefore in this case
deal we plainly, charging our selves to the utmost. This is the only way to
procure a gracious, and full discharge from God.

Let these few Motives suffice. To which Directions.
I might also (as before) sub-join some Directions, showing you how Christians
may attain unto this, to be such severe censurers of themselves. In order to
which, the first work to be done, is, to get acquaintance with our selves; to
know our own hearts and lives, to know our sins, what they are; how many, how
great. To which end a serious, and frequent, examination is requisite; taking
special notice of our special sins, as Paul here did of his. And, knowing
them, to feel them; specially to feel that Body of sin within us, that mass
of corruption, which virtually conteins in it the Seeds of all sins. By this
means we shall come to see that in our selves, which will make us ready to pass
such a severe censure upon our selves, as Paul here does, That we are sinners,
great sinners, even the chief of Sinners. But I shall not proceed any further
in the prosecution of this useful Observation, which has taken me up a great
deal more time than I intended to have bestowed upon it, when I first took it
up.

There is yet one thing behind, wherein These words looked upon in reference to
the former.
I shall be Brief. I have hitherto looked upon these words of the Apostle, as
simply considered in themselves. It yet remains, that I should look upon them
in a relative way. This I gave a touch upon, and but a touch, in my entering
upon them. Let me now do it a little more fully, looking upon them, as relating
to what went before, to the words immediately foregoing; Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief: That is, One, and a chief one,
of those sinners whom he came to save. Thus does he bring home that general
Doctrine, (as before I showed you) making it his own by a particular
Application. Therein Obser. The Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, to be
particularly applied.
teaching Christians what they are to do; not to rest contented with a general,
and Speculative knowledge of the Do^ine of the Gospel, the Doctrine of
Salvation by Jesus Christ, to know and believe, that Christ came into the world
to save sinners; but thus to bring it home to themselves, making it their own
by a particular Application. This are they to do, (as you have heard before) by
all such Truths as they meet withal in the Book of God; Precepts, Prohibitions,
Exhortations, Comminations, Consolations; that they may be useful unto them,
they are in such a way, to bring them home to themselves. And this they are to
do in special by this saving Truth, upon the right knowledge whereof, depends
their everlasting Salvation; This is life eternal, that they may know thee, the
only true God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, John 17. 3. That it
may be saving to those that hear it, it must be brought home by such a
particular Application. Such an Application does this our Apostle make of it,
as here in the Text, so elsewhere; as Gal. 2. 20. The life which I now live in
the flesh, I live (says he) by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself for me. Not only who gave himself for us, (as elsewhere he
speaks), Tit. 2. 14. and Romans 4. 25. Who was delivered for our Offenses, and
rose again for our Justification; that is, for us men in General, us believers
in Special, but for me in Particular. Thus does he apply the benefit of Christ's
death and passion to himself in particular; and the like are all true penitent
sinners to do

This is true Faith, that faith whereby a Resp. 1. This is true justifying
says.
sinner comes to be justified before God. Therefore, we conclude that a man is
justified by ^aith, (says the Apostle), Romans 3. 28. And what faith is this?
Why, faith in Jesus Christ, The faith of the Son of God, (as he calls it, Gal.
2. 20.) believing in him, on him. Such a faith it is that Christ calls for at
the hands of his Disciples, Ye believe in God, believe also in me, Joh. 14. 1.
(...), Believe on me. And such a faith it is that God commands at the hands
of all. This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the name of his Son
Jesus Christ, 1 John 3. 23. which is done by applying his merits to our selves.

And again, as a Christian is hereby justified, 2. Hereby a Christian lives
upon earth.
so it is hereby that he lives. That he lives here upon earth. The just shall
live by his faith (says Habukkuk, cap. 2. verse. 4.) His faith in God's word
and promises. This is the Anchor which he rides by in all storms and stresses
which here come down upon him, his Faith resting upon the promises of God;
specially upon this great promise, the promise of Life and Salvation by Christ.
So Paul lived, as he there tells us, The life which I now live in the flesh,
I live by the faith of the Son of God. Whilst he lived in this frail mortal
body, (for so are we to understand that his living in the flesh, not his living
after a carnal and fleshly manner, but his living a natural life here upon
earth) this life he now lived, by the faith of the Son of God, resting and
relying upon him, in all estates and conditions, committing himself unto him,
and by his Faith, drawing Ver* tue from him, whereby he was enabled to live
unto him, to live a spiritual life whilst he was yet in the flesh.

And as a Christian lives by this faith 3. Hereby he shall live here after.
here, so it is by this faith that he shall live hereafter. Understand it
rightly. Not that he shall so live by it in Heaven, as here he does upon Earth.
No, here we live by faith, there by sight, (as the Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 5.
7.) seeing and enjoying what now by faith we hope for. But this is the only
way and means to bring us unto Eternal life, thus to believe in, and on, Jesus
Christ. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, (or on him, (...)) should not perish, but have
everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16. This is the true and only saving faith, Believe
on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, (says Paul to the Iailour) Act.
16. 31. But I shall not enlarge upon it. Briefly, by way of Application.

Where I might take occasion to cast a Use 1. The Doctrine of the Church of
Rome confuted
stone at the dangerous Error of the Church of Rome; which makes faith to be
only a general assent to the truth of what is revealed in the Scripture, and
held forth by the Church. And so for justifying saving faith, they look upon it
as no more but a believing of the doctrine of the Gospel concerning Jesus
Christ, as that he was the Son of God, made man, and that he came into the
world to save sinners, etc. In the mean time, as for such a particular
Application; this they make to be the work not of Faith, but of Hope. But them
I shall pass by, only chargeing that upon them, which our Apostle did upon some
Heretics in his time, who d^nyed the Resurrection of the Dead, 2 Timothy 2. 18.
That, concerning the Truth they have erred, and have overthrown the faith of
some, of such as hearken to them, whom they teach to trust in a broken Reed.
Use 2. Christians to bring home Christ, with his Merits to themselves.


Which let not us do, Let not us rest in such a general faith, but as we desire
to receive any benefit from Christ, bring we him home by such a particular
Application of his Merits to our selves.

Q. But how shall we be able to do this? when as Christ did not intend, that
the Merit of his Death should be effectual to all, Q. How Christians may know
that Christ came to save them A. By being truly Penitent Sinners.
how shall we know that we are in the number of those whom he came into the
world to Save? As for Paul, he might know this, having a special Revelation
for it, but how shall we come to know it, to be assured of it?

A. For Answer briefly; Are we in measure such as Paul was? Truly Penitent
sinners, such as have been thoroughly convinced of our sins, such as have
judged and condemned our selves for them, such as see and feel the need we have
of a Sav^ our, and such as are willing to receive Christ upon Gospel-tearms; to
take him not only as a Savior, but also as a Sovereign, being as willing, and
desirous to be ruled and governed, as to be saved by him? Is it so, that God
has thus revealed his Son to us, and in us, as Paul says he had done to him,
Gal. 1. 16? If so, now stand not to confer with flesh and blood, (as he there
says he did not). Neither be we disobedient to this Heavenly Vision, as he
tells King Agrippa he was not, Act. 26. 19.) But hearken we to the command of
God, ( the Commandment, as St. John there calls it, 1 John 3. 23. This is
the Commandment, (...), that great Gospel-Command) which is, That we should
believe on the Name of his Son In obedience to this Command now come we unto
Jesus Christ, and lay hold upon him, believing on him for Life and Salvation,
being confidently assured, that, He came into the world to Save us.

And being assured hereof, now despair Let not such Despair of Mercy, though
the chief of Sinners.
not of obteining this Benefit by and through Him. It matters not what our
sins have been; what for Number, what for Nature; though never so many, never
so great; though we have been the chief of Sinners, yet Despair not. Such a one
had Paul been, yet Repenting, and Believing on Jesus Christ, he obtained Mercy:
Which he did, (as he says in the words after the Text) That in him Christ
Jesus might show forth all long-suffering for a Pattern to them, that should
hereafter believe on him to everlasting Life. And so let him herein be to every
of us. Only see that we be changed, as he was; changed not only in our Name
(as he was from Saul to Paul) in our outward Profession, but inwardly changed;
changed in our hearts and Lives, that we may be able to say, and make good,
what he there does, Gal. 2. 20. that we now live, yet no longer we; not what
sometimes we were, but made new Creatures, finding Christ dwelling in our
Hearts by Faith, and working in us by his Spirit, conforming us unto Himself in
his Death and Resurrection; so as we daily die to Sin, and rise to newness of
Life. Being such now, what ever we have been, yet comfort we our selves with
the Remembrance of these words of the Apostle; every of us saying after him,
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Christ Jesus
came into the world to save Sinners, of whom I am chief. And thus shall I now
dismiss You and the Text; in the Handling whereof, I have, by a Divine
Providence, found the Loaves multiplied, my Meditations much enlarged, beyond
expectation. My desire now is, and shall be, that they may be sanctified and
blessed unto my Self, and You, for those Ends for which they were intended. For
which let us Pray.

FINIS.
READER,
THere is lately Printed, an Exposition on the Parable of the Rich Fool, Luke
12. 16, 22. By Mr. Nehemiah Rogers. The same Author that formerly has written
upon the Parable of the Lost-Son, Lost-Sheep, and Lost-Groat, Luke 15. Also,
upon the Parable of the Creditor and Debtor, Luke 7. And on the Parable of the
Samaritane, Luke 10. And, on the Parable of the Friend at Midnight, Luke 11.
And, on the Parable of the Fig Tree, Luke 13.

All which are to be sold by George Sawbridge, at the Bible on Ludgate Hill,
1662.

ERRATA.
PAge 43. line 12. for It is, read Is it. P. 45. l. 32. for the work he came
which about, r. the work which he came about.


