ARTICLES Drawn up By the now John Earl of Bristoll and presented to the
Parliament, against George late Duke of Buckingham, in the year 1626.
containing these particulars following.

Concerning the death of King James, on which Articles the Parliament was
dissolved etc.

1 Declaring a secret Plot to draw his Majesty into Spain, that he might be
instructed in the Roman Religion.

2 Showing who were the principal confederates and contrivers of the said
Plot, and that his Majesty went accordingly.

3 What hopes were given to the Spaniard of his Majesty's conversion to the
Romish Religion and what correspondency was held with the Pope concerning the
same.

4 Showing what Letters were written to the Pope, and how he were styled the
Holy Father, etc.

5 That the Pope sent a Bull concerning the Kings conversion.

6 Showing what was the ruin of the Palsgrave.

7 Showing the great miscarriages of the whole affairs concerning Spain, and
King James his Resolution thereupon.

Printed at London, for I. A. 1642.

Articles of the Earl of Bristoll, whereby he charge the Duke of Buckingham.
Dated primo Maij Anno. 1626.
THat the Duke of Buckingham did secretly combine and conspire with the Conde
de Gondomar Ambassador for the King of Spain, before his the said Ambassadors
last return into Spain 1622. to carry his now Majesty then Prince into
Spain, to the end that he might be informed and instructed in the Roman
Religion, and thereby have perverted the Prince, and subverted the true
Religion established in England, from which misery this Kingdom next under
Gods mercies, has by the wise, Religious and constant carriage of his Majesty
bin almost miraculously delivered, considering the many bold and subtle
attempts of the said Duke in that kind.

2 That M. Porter was acquainted with it, and sent into Spain, and such
Messages at his return framed as might serve for a ground to set on foot this
conspiracy, which was done accordingly, and thereby the King and Prince highly
abused, and their consents thereby first gotten to the said journey, that is to
say, after the return of the said M. Porter, which was about the end of
December or beginning of January, 1622. whereas the said Duke had plotted it
many months before.

3 That the Duke at his arrival in Spain nourished the Spanish Ministers, not
only in the belief of his own, being popishly affected, but did (both by
absenting himself from all exercises of Religion constantly used in the Earl
of Bristolls house, and frequented by all the Protestant English, and by
conforming himself to please the Spaniards in diverse rites of their Religion,
even so far as to kneel and adore their Sacraments from time to time) give the
Span^ards hope of the Prince his conversion, which he endeavored to procure by
all means possible, and thereby caused the Spanish Ministers to propound far
worse Questions for Religion than they had been formerly by the Earl of
Bristoll, and sir Walter Asten settled and signed under their Majesty's Hands,
with a clause in the King of Spain his Answer of the twelfth of December, Anno
1622. That they held the Articles agreed upon sufficient, and such as ought to
induce the Pope to the granting of the dispensation.

4. That the Duke of Buckingham having several times in the presence of the
Ea: of Bristoll moved and pressed his late Majesty at the instance of the Conde
de Gondomar to write a letter unto the Pope, and to that purpose having once
brought a letter ready drawn, wherewith the Ea: of Bristoll by his Majesty being
made acquainted did so strongly oppose the writing of any such letter, that
during the abode of the said Earl in England, the said Duke could not attain
it, yet not long after the said Earl was gone, he procured such a letter to
be written from his late Majesty unto the Pope, and to have him styled
Sanctissimus Poter.

5. That the Pope being informed of the Duke of Buckingham his inclination and
intention, in point of Religion, sent unto the said Duke a particular Bull in
parchment for to persuade and encourage him in the pervertion of his Majesty
then Prince.

6. That the Duke's behavior in Spain was such, that he thereby so incensed
the K. of Spain and his Ministers that they would admit of no reconciliation
nor further dealing with them, whereupon the Duke seeing that the match would
now be to his disadvantage, he endeavored to break it, not for any service to
the Kingdom, nor dislike of the match it self, nor for that he found (as
since he has pretended) that the Spaniards did not really intend the same
match, but out of his particular ends and indignation.

7. After that he intended to cross the marriage, he put in practice diverse
undue courses, as namely making uses of the letters of his Majesty then Prince,
to his own ends, and not to what they were intended, as likewise concealing
things of high importance from his late Majesty, and thereby overthrew his
Majesty's purposes, and advanced his own ends.

8. That the D. of Buckingham as he had with his skill and artifices formerly
abused their Majesty's, so to the same end he afterward abused both Houses of
Parliament, by finister relations of the carriage of affairs, as shall be made
apeare almost in every particular that he spoke to the said Houses.

9. As for his scandal given by his personal behavior, as also the employing
of his power with the King of Spayn for the procuring of favors and Offices
which he bestowed upon base and unworthy persons for the recompense and hire
of his lusts, these things as neither fit for the Earl of Bristoll to speak,
nor indeed for the house to hear, he leaves to your Lordships wisdoms, how
far you will be pleased to have them examined, it has indeed been great infamy
and dishonor to this Nation, that a person of the Dukes quality and employment
a privy Counselor, an Ambassador eminent in his Majesty's favor, solely
trusted with the Prince, should leave behind him in a Foreign Court so much
scandal as he did by his ill behavior.

10. That the Duke of Buckingham has been in great part the cause of the ruin
and misfortune of the Palsgrave and his estate, in as much as those affairs had
relation unto this Kingdom.

11. That the Duke of Buckingham in his relation to both Houses of Parliament
wronged the Earl of Bristoll in point of his honor by many sinister aspersions
which he has laid upon him, and in the point of his liberty by many undue
courses through his power and practices.

12. That the Earl of Bristoll did reveal to (...) late Majesty both by words
and letter in what sort the Duke had deceived him, and abused his trust, and
that the King by several ways sent him word that he should rest assured that
he would hear him, but that he should leave it to him to take his own time,
and thereupon few days before his sickness he sent the Earl (...) that he
would hear him against the Duke, as well as he had heard the Duke against him,
which the Duke heard, and not long after, his blessed Majesty sickned and dyed,
having in the interim (...) much vexed and pressed by the said Duke.

FINIS.

