The Effigies of the Lord Digby Son and Heir to the Right Honble John Earl of
Bristoll


ELVIRA: OR, The worst not always true.

A COMEDY.

Written by a Person of Quality.

Licensed May 15. 1667.

Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Brom in Little-Brittain. 1667.

PERSONS.
Don Julio Rocca. Don Pedro de Mendoca. Don Fernando Solis: In love with Donna
Elvira. Don Zancho de Menezes: In love with Donna Blanca. Fabio: Servant to Don
Fernando. Fulvio: Servant to Don Pedro. Chichon: Servant to Don Zancho. A Page.
WOMEN.
Donna Elvira: A beautiful Lady, Don Pedro's Daughter. Donna Blanca: A Lady of
a high Spirit Don Julio's Sister. Silvia: Elvira's disguised Name, when she was
put to wait upon Donna Blanca. Francisca: Donna Blanca's Woman.
SCAENE VALENCIA.

ELVIRA, OR, The Worst not always True.
ACT. I. SCAENE. I. The Room in the Inn.
Enter Don Fernando, and at another door his servant Fabio, both in Riding
Clothes, Booted.
Don Fer. HAve you been with him Fabio, and given him
The Note?

Fabio. I found him newly got out of his bed, (pris'
He seemed much satisfied, though much sur-
With your arrival, and as soon as possibly
He can get ready, he will be with you here.
He says, he hopes some good occasion brings you
To Valencia, and that he shall not be
At quiet, till he know it. 'Twas not fit
For me, without your Orders, to give him
Any more light, then what your Ticket did.

Don Fer. It Is well, go now and see if Donna Elvira
Be stirring yet, for I would gladly have her
A witness, even at first, to what shall pass
Betwixt my friend and me, in her concernments:
If she be still a sleep Fabio, make bold
To knock, and wake her, we have no time to loose.
O here she comes, wait you Don Julio.
Enter Donna Elvira. Exit Fabio.
Don. Elv. Ah, can you think my cares and sleep consistent?
Slumber and tears, have sometimes met in dreams,
But hearts with such a weight as mine oppressed,
Find still the heaviest sleep too light a Guest.

Don Fer. Madam, though such, least pity do deserve,
Who by their own unsteadiness, have drawn
Misfortune on themselves; Yet truly Elvira
Such is my sense of Yours, and my compassion,
To see a Lady of your Quality,
Brought to such sad extremes, in what is dearest,
As makes me even forgit my own resentments,
Granting to Pity, the whole place of Love,
And at that rate I Will serve you. Yet thus far
You must allow the eruption of a heart
So highly injured, as to tell you franckly,
It Is to comply with my own Principles
Of Honor, now, without the least relation
To former passion, or to former favors.

Don. Elv. Those you have found a ready way to cancel;
Your sullen silence, during all our journey,
Might well have spared you these superfluous words,
That had sufficiently instructed me
What power, mere appearances, have had
Without examination to destroy
With an umbragious nature, all that Love
Was ever able on the solid'st grounds
To found and to establish. Yet me thinks,
A man that boast such p^inciples of Honor,
And of such force to sway him in his Actions
In spite of all resentments, should reflect,
That Honor does oblige to a suspense
At least, of judgment, when surprising chances
Yet unenquired into, tempt gallant men
To prejudicial thoughts of those, with whom
They had settled friendship, upon virtuous grounds.
But it is from heaven I see, and not from you,
Elvira must expect her vindication;
And until then submit to the hardest fate,
That ever can befall a generous spirit,
Of being obliged by him that injures her.

Fer. Nay, speak Elvira, speak, You have me attentive,
With a kind of scornful accent. It were a wonder worthy of your wit,
To make me trust my Ears, before my Eyes.

Don. Elv. Those are the witnesses indeed, Fernando,
To whose true testimonies false Inference,
You owe my moderation, and my silence,
And that I leave it to the gods and time,
To make appear both to the world and you,
The Maxim false, That still the worst proves true.
Enter Fabio.
Fabio. Don Julio is without.

Fer. VVait on him in,
Exit Fabio. And now Elvira
If you will be pleased to rest your self a while
Within that Closet, you may hear what passes
Betwixt my friend and me, until such time
As I by some discourse having prevented
Too great surprise, you shall think fit t'appear;
He is the man, (as I have often told you
During my happy days) for whom alone
I have no reserves, and it is to his assistance,
That I must owe the means of serving you,
In the concernments of your safety and honor;
And therefore, Madam, 'twill be no offense
I hope, to trust him with the true occasion
That brings me hither, to employ his friendship,
Observing that respect in the relation, (Colset.
Which I shall always pay you.
Elvira retiring as into the
Don. Elv. There needs no management in the Relation,
I am indifferent what others think,
Since those who ought, to have thought the best, have failed me:
Sir, I obey, resigned up to your conduct,
Till Mistress of my own.
Exit. Enter Don Julio, and Fernando, and he Embrace.
Don. Jul. My joy to have my dear Fernando here
So unexpectedly, as great as it is
Cannot make Jullo unsensible
Of the injury you have done him, to have alighted
And past a night-within Valencia,
At any other place than at his house,
Donna Blanca her self, will scarce forgive it
When she shall know it.

Don. Fer. I hope she is well.

Jul. She is so, thanks to heaven,
But I must bid you expect a chiding from her.

Fer. You both, might well accuse me of a failure,
Did not the occasion of my coming hither
Bring with it an excuse, alas too just,
As you will quickly find.

Don Jul. Nay, then you raise disquiet, ease me quickly,
By telling me what it is; of this be sure
Heart, hand, and fortune, are entirely yours
At all Essays.

Fer. It is not new to you, that I was a Lover
After pawsing a while. Engaged in all the passion, that e're Beauty,
In height of it is perfection, could produce,
And that confirmed by reason, from her wit,
Her Quality, and most unblemish't conduct;
Nor was there more, to justify my love,
Then to persuade my happiness, in her
Just correspondance to it, by all the ways
Of honorable admission, that might serve
To make esteem transcend the pitch of Love.

Don Jul. Of all this I have not only had knowledge
But great participation in your joys;
Than which, I thought nothing more permanent,
Since founded on such virtue as Elvira's.

Don Fer. Ah, Julio, how fond a creature is the man,
That founds his bliss, upon a woman's firmness,
Even that Elvira, when I thought my self
Securest in my happiness, nothing wanting
To make her mine, but those exterior forms,
Without which, men of honor that pretend
In way of Marriage, would be loath to find
Greater concession, where the love is greatest.
As I was sitting with her, late at night,
By usual admittance to her Chamber,
As two whose hearts in VVed-lock Bands were joined,
And seemed above all other care but how
Best to disguise things, to a wayward Father,
Till time, and art, might compass his consent;
A sudden noise was heard in the inner Room
Belonging to her Chamber, she starts up
In manifest disorder, and runs in,
Desiring me to stay, till she had seen
What caused it; I impatient, follow,
As fearing for her, had it been her Father:
My head no sooner was within the Room,
But straight I spied behind a Curtain shrinking
A goodly Gallant, but not known to me.

Don. Jul. Heavens what can this be?

Fer. You will not think that there, and at that hour,
I stayed to ask his Name, he, ready as I,
To make his Sword th'expresser of his mind,
We soon determined what we sought; I hurt
But slightly in the arm, he fell as slain
Run through the body: What Elvira did,
My rage allowed me not to mark; But straight
I got away, more wounded to the heart,
Then he I left for dead.

Jul. Prodigious accident! Where can it end?

Fer. I got safe home, where carefully concealed,
I sought by Fabio's diligence to learn
Who my slain Rival was, and what became
Of my unhappy Mistress, and what course
Don Pedro de Mendoza took to right
The honor of his house.

Don Jul. You longed not more to know it then, then I
Do now.

Don. Fer. All could be learned was this. That my Rival
Whom I thought dead, was likely to recover,
And that he was a stranger lately come
Up to the Court, to follow some pretensions.
His name he either learned not perfectly,
Or did not well retain; As for Elvira,
That none knew where she was, and that Don Pedro
Had set a stop to prosecution
In any public way, with what reserves
Was not yet known.

Don Jul. More and more Intricate.

Don Fer. I must now come to that, you least would look for.
I had but few days past, in my Concealment
(Resentment and Revenge still boiling in me)
When late one evening, as I buried was
In deepest thought, I suddenly was roused
By a surprising Apparition, Julio,
Elvira in my Chamber, speaking to me
With rare assurance, Thus -- Don Fernando
I come not here to justify my self,
That were below Elvira, toward one
Whose action in deserting me has shown
So disobligingly, his rash judgment of me.
I come to mind you of Honor, not of Love:
Mine, can protection seek, from none but yours,
I Have hitherto been sheltered from the Fury
Of my enraged Father, by my Cousin Camilla,
But that is no place you easily may judge
For longer stay, I do expect from you
To be conveyed, where free from violence
And from new hazards of my wounded Fame,
I may attend my righting from the gods.

Don Jul. Can guilt maintain such confidence in a Maid?
Yet how to think her Innocent, I know not.

Don. Fer. 'Twere loss of time to dwell on circumstances,
Either of my wonder, or reply; In short,
What I found honor dictated, I did,
Within two hours I put her in a Coach,
And favored by the night, conveyed her safe
Out of Madrid to Ocana, and thence
In three days, hither to Valencia,
The only place where by your generous aid,
I could have hopes to settle and secure
Her Person and her honor: That once done
Farewell to Spain; I Will to the Wars of Millan
And there soon put a Noble end to cares.

Don Jul. Let us first think how to dispose of Her,
Since here you say she is; That done which presses,
You will have time to weigh all other things.

Don Fer. My thoughts can pitch upon no other way
Decent or safe for her, but in a Convent,
If you have any Abbess here to friend.

Don Jul. I have an Aunt, ruling the U^sulins,
With whom I have full power, and she is wise,
In case that course were to be fixed upon;
But that is not my opinion.

Don Fer. What can your reason be?

Don Jul. Last remedios, in my judgment
Are not to be used, till easier have been tried;
Had this strange accident, been thoroughly
Examined, in all it is Circumstances,
And that from thence, she were convicted guilty,
Naught else were to be thought on, but a Cloister,
But as things stand, imperfectly discovered
Although appearances, condemn her strongly,
I cannot yet conclude a person guilty
Of what throughout so contradictory seems
To the whole tenor of her former life,
As well as to her Quality, and Wit,
And therefore lets avoid precipitation.
Let my house be her shelter for a while,
You know my sister Blanca is discreet,
And may be trusted, she shall there be served
By her and me, with care and secrecy.

Don Fer. The offer's kind but no-wise practicable,
And might prove Hazardous to Blanca's honor,
When it should once break out, (as needs it must)
From servants seeing such a Guest so treated.

Don Jul. That I confess I know not how to answer,
But could Elvira's mind, submit unto it,
I could propose a course without objection.

Don Fer. That she can soon resolve, What is it Julio?

Don Jul. A Gentlewoman who waited on my sister,
Has newly left her servise for a husband,
And it is known, she means to take another,
I have a ready way to recommend one,
By Violante of whose love and mine
You are not ignorant, since that e're this
We had been Married, had not kindred forced us
To wait a Dispensation for it from Rome;
Blanca I Am sure will readily embrace,
Any occasion of obliging her.

Don Fer. That were a right expedient indeed,
Could but Elvira's spirit brook it.
Enter Elvira as from the Closet.
Elv. You have ill measures of Elvira's spirit,
Mistaken Don Fernando: Till heaven's justice
Shall her entirely to her self restore,
The lowlyer shape, her fate shall hide her under
The more it will fit her humor.
Julio starts back as it were amazed
Don Julio, aside. O heavens can guilt with such perfection
And put on such assurance! It cannot be. (dwell!
Don Julio addressing himself to her, and beginning.
Don Jul. Madam!
She holding out her hand and interrupting him.
Elv. Spare complements, and let your actions speak,
Those may oblige both him, and me, your words
Cannot comply with both.
Julio aside, -- -- Did ever yet
Such Majesty with misery combine!
But in this Woman.
To her, -- -- -- Madam, I obey,
And since you are pleased t'approve what I proposed,
No moment shall be lost in the execution.
Exit Julio. Fernando accompanying him and Fabio.
Elvira Sola. O how unkindly have the heavens dealt
With Woman kind, above all other creatures!
Our pleasure, and our glory! to have placed
All on the brink of Precipices, such,
As every breath, can blow the least light of us
Headlong into, past all hopes of Redemption:
Nor can our wit, or virtue, give exemption.
It Is true I loved; But justified therein
By spotless thoughts, and by the objects merit,
I deemed my self above the reach of malice,
When in an instant by another folly,
I am more lost then any by her own.
Accursed Don Zancho, what occasion
E're gave Elvira to thy mad Intrusion?
Unless disdain, and scorn, Incentives are,
To make men's passions more irregular.
Ah, matchless Rigor, of the Powers above;
Not only to submit our honors fate,
Unto the vanity of those we love,
But to the rashness even of those we hate.
Exit. Enter Donna Blanca at one door reading a paper with great marks of
Passion and Dissturbance, and her Waiting Woman Francisca at another, observing
her.
Blan. Ah, the Traitor!

Francis. Aside, -- What can this mean?

Blan. continuing, Was this thy sweet Pretension at Madrid,
Drawn out in length, and hindering thy return?
Thy fair pretense, thou should have said false man.

Fran. For loves sake Madam, what can move you thus?

Blan. For hates sake say, and for revenge Francisca,
And so thou mai'st persuade me to discover
My shame unto thee; Read, read, that Letter:
It Is from your favorite Chichon.
Francisca takes the Letter and reads it. The Letter.
MAdam, To make good my engagements of concealing nothing from you, during this
absence of my Master; I am bound to tell you, that some ten days since, late at
night, he was left for dead, run through the body by another unknown Gallant,
in the Chamber of a famed Beauty of the Court. Whilst the danger continued, I
thought it not fit to let you know either the accident, or the occasion; which
now he is recovered and thinking of his return to Valencia I must no longer
forbear, I hope you will have a care not to undo me for being more faithful to
you, then to the Master you gave me,

Your Creature Chichon.





Blan. Have I not a worthy Gallant think you!

Fran. Madam, this comes of being over curious,
And gaining servants to betray their Masters;
How quiet might you have slept, and never felt
What past with your Don Zancho at Madrid!
His pale and dismal looks, at his return
Though caused by loss of blood, in the hot service
Of other Dames, might fairly have been thought
Effe^ts of care, and want of sleep for you;
And taken so, have past for new Indeerments.
Who ever pryed into another Letter?
Or slyly hearkn'd to another whisper?
But saw, or heard, somewhat that did not please him;
'Twas Eves curiosity, undid us all.

Blan. Away with thy moralities dull Creature,
I Will make thee see, and false Don Zancho feel,
That Blanca's not a Dame, to be so treated.
But who are those I hear without, who e're
They be, they come at an unwell-come hour.
Fran. looks out.
Fran. Madam, it is a Page of Violantes
Ushering a handsome Maid.
Enter a Page with a Letter and Elvira, the Page presents the letter to Blanca,
she adresses her self to Elvira, and she throws up her Vail.
Blan. This Letter is in your behalf fair Maid,
Having read the Letter. There Is no denying such a Recomender,
But such a face as yours is, needed none.
Page, tell your Lady as much; And you Silvia
Turning (For so she says you are called) be confident
You Are fallen into the hands of one, that knows
How to be kind, more as your friend then Mistress,
If your demeanor, and good nature, answer
But what your looks do promise.

Elv. Madam, it is the Noble charity
By the name of Silvia Of those you cast upon me, not mine own,
To which I must acknowledge any advantage
I ever can pretend to, more then what
Fair Violantes mediation gives me.
to Francisca
Blan. She Is strangely handsome, and how well she speaks.
Aside
Fran. So, so, Methinks, you know new comers, Madam,
Set still the best foot forward.

Blan. And know as well that you decaying Stagers
Are always jealous of new comers, Young,
And handsome.

Fran. You may be as sharp upon me, as you please,
I know to what t'attribute your ill humor.

Blan. Francisca entertain her, I Will go write
To Violante, and then rest a while
In hopes to ease the headache that has seized me;
That done, sweet Silvia we shall talk at leisure.
Exit Blanca.
Fran. Sweet Silvia, kind Epithites are for new faces.
Aside.
Silv. Now comes the hard part of my task indeed,
Aside. To act the fellow Waiting Woman right.
But since the Gods already have conformed
My mind to my Condition, I do hope
They Will teach me words, and gestures suitable.
Fran. embraces Silv.
Fran. Let me embrace thee my sweet Sister, and beg you
To be no Nigard of a little kindness:
A very little serves with such a face,
To gain what heart you please.

Silv. If it can help to gain me yours, I Will take it
For the best office, that it ever did me,
And love it much the better.

Fran. Make much on it then, for that 't has done already.

Silv. If you will have me vain enough to think it,
You must confirm it, by the proof of being
My kind Instructor how to please my Lady,
For I am very raw in service.

Fran. -- -- O that
I were so too, and had thy Youth t'excuse it;
But my experience, sister, shall be yours,
By free communication. Come, let us in
And rest us in my Chamber, there I Will give you
First handsell of the frankness of my Nature.
Exeunt Sil. and Fran. Enter Don Zancho and Chichon his man, in riding habit.
Don Zan. I must confess Chichon the very smell
Of sweet Valencia, has even revived my spirits.
There is no such pleasure, as to suck and breath
One's Native air.

Chich. Chiefly after being in so fair a way
As you, of never breathing any more.

Don. Zanc. Prithy no more of that, since I have forgot it,
Methinks thou easily may.

Chich. Faith hardly Sir, whilst still your ghastly face
Does bear, such dismal Memorandums of it,
Apter to raise inquisitiveness in those
Know nothing of the matter, then t'allay
Remembrance in Partakers.

Don Zanc. Heaven shield us from Donna Blanca's queries,
No matter for the rest.

Chich. You would not wish to find her so unconcerned,
I Am sure you would not; Faith, I long to hear
Th'ingenious defeats, I make account
You are prepared to give to her suspicions.

Don Zanch. Let me alone for that: but on thy life
Be sure that nothing be scrued out of thee,
Neither by her, nor by her sly Francisca.

Chich. Be you Sir, sure, that from your true Chichon,
They Will know no more to day, then yesterday,
They did, nor thence, more to the worlds end,
Then what they did, before we left Madrid.

Don Zanc. Truly Chichon, we needs must find the means
To get a sight of her this very night;
I die if I should miss it.

Chich. Last week left gasping for Elvira's love,
And scarce revived, when presently expiring
For Blanca's again; I did not think Don Cupid
Had been a Merchant, of such quick returns.

Don Zanch. Thou art an Ass, and want distinctiveness
T'wixt love and love; that was a love of sport,
To keep the serious one in breath.

Chich. Faith Sir, I must confess my ignorance,
That when I saw you grovelling in your blood,
I thought your Love had been in sober sadness.

Don Zanch. Prithy leave fooling, and let us carefully
Gain the back way into my house unseen,
That none may know of my return, till Blanca
Find me at her feet: and be you industrious
T'observe Don Julio's going forth this evening,
Doubtless he will keep his usual hours abroad
At Violantes, since not married yet.

Chich. I shall observe your orders punctually.
Exeunt. Enter Don Julio and knocks as at Blanca's door.
Don Jul. What Sister! at your Siesta already? if so
You must have patience to be waked out of it,
For I have news to tell you.
Enter Blanca.
Blan. No Brother, I was much more pleasingly
Employed, in serving you; that is, making
My Court to Violante; by receiving
To wait upon me in Lucilla's place,
A Gentlewoman of her recomending.

Don. Jul. Where is she? let me see her.

Blan. -- --, It Were not safe,
She is too handsome; You think now I jest;
But without Rallery, she is so lovely,
That were not Violante very assured
Of her own Beauty, and the strong Idaeas
That still upholds within you, one might question
Her wit, to have set her in her Gallant's way.
But what is the news you mean!

Jul. That our dear friend and kinsman Don Fernando
Is come to Town, and going for Italy:
The secret of it, does so much import him,
It forced him to forbear alighting here,
And lodging with us as he used to do;
But yet he says, nothing shall hinder him
From waiting on you in the dusk of the evening:
I hope you will find wherewith to Regalar him.

Blan. As well as you have drained my Cabinets,
Of late in presents to your Mistress, some
Perfumes will yet be found, such as at Rome
It self, shall not disgrace Valencia.

Don Jul. I know your humor, and that the best present
Can be given you, is to give you the occasion
Of presenting; But I am come in now
Only to advertise you, and must be gone;
Yet not I hope without a sight of One
So recommend, and commended so.

Blan. I should have thought you strangely changed in humor
Should you have gone away so uncuriously.

Fran. Ho.
She knocks. Enter Francisca.
Fran. -- What please you Madam.

Blan. (to Jul.) Prithy tell Silvia I would speak with her.
Exit Fran. Well, clear your Eyes, and say I have no skill
If she appears not to ye exceeding handsome.
Enter Francisco with Silvia, Julio salutes her.
D. Jul. Welcome fair Maid into this Family,
Where whilst you take a servants name upon you
To do my Sister honor, you must allow
It Is Master to be yours, and that by strongest Ties
Knowing who placed you here, and having Eyes.

Silv. I wish my service Sir, to her and you,
May merit such a happy Introduction.

D. Jul. Farewell Sister, till anon, Accompanied
As now you are, I think you will miss me little.
Exit Julio.
Blan. I must confess I never could better spare you
Aside. Then at this time, but not for any reason
That you I hope can guess at.
Francisca, you and Silvia may retire (To them.
Exeunt Silvia and Francisca. And entertain your selves; I Will to my Closet
And try to rest.
-- Or rather to vent freely
My restless thoughts. O the self-torturing part!
Aside. To force complaisance from a jealous heart.
Exeunt.
ACT. II.
SCAENE changes to the Room in the Inn. Enter Don Julio, and Don Fernando.
Don Jul. ALbricias friend, for the good news I bring you,
All has fallen out as well as we could wish.
As to Elvira's settling with my Sister,
So lucky a success, in our first aims
Concerning her, I trust does boad good fortune
Beyond our hopes; yet, in the further progress
Of this Affair.

Don Fer. There Is no such thing in Nature left as better,
Julio, The worst proves always always true with me,
Yet prithy tell, how does that Noble beauty
(Wherein high Quallity is so richly stamp't)
Comport her servile Metamorphosis.

D. Jul. As one, whose body, as Divine as it is,
Seems bound to obey exactly such a mind,
And gently take, what ere shape that imposes.

D. Fer. Ah, let us mention her no more, my Julio
Idaeas flow upon me too abstracted
From her unfaithfulness, and may corrupt
The firmest reason; Above all be sure
I do not see her so transformed, least that
Transform me too, I Will rather pass with Blanca,
Both for unkind and rude, And leave Valencia
Without seeing her.

D. Jul. -- Leave that to me Fernando,
But if you intend the honor to my Sister
It will be time, the night draws on a pace.

Fer. Come let us be gone then,
As they are going out, Enter Fabio hastily.
Fab. Stay Sir, for heaven's sake stay

D. Fer. -- Why what is the matter?

Fab. That will surprise you both, as much me
Don Pedro de Mendoca is below
Newly alighted.

D. Fer. -- Ha, what say thou Sirrah?
Elvira's father?

Fab. -- Sir, the very same,
And he had scarcely set one foot to ground
When he enquired, where lives Don Julio Rocca?

D. Jul. For my house Fabio? It cannot be,
I never knew the man.

D. Fer. The thing does speak it self, and my hard fate
What else can bring him hither, but pursuit
Of me, and of his Daughter, having learned
The way we took; And what so easy Julio
Here at Valencia, as to know our friendship
And then of consequence, your house to be
My likeliest retreat.

D. Jul. -- It Is surely so,
Let us apply our thoughts to best preventives.

D. Fer. Whilst we retire into the inner Room
T'advise together, Fabio be you sure
(Since unknown to him) to observe his motions.
Exeunt omnes. Scene changes to the Prospects of Valencia. Enter Don Zancho and
Chichon as in the street near Don Julio's house.
D. Zanc. -- Newly gone out say you?
That is as luckey as we could have wished,
And see but how invitingly the door
Stands open still.

Chich. An open door may lead to a face of wood,
Aside To Don Zancho. But mean you Sir, to go abruptly in
Without more ceremony

D. Zanc. Surprise redoubles (sool) the joys of Lovers;
But stay Chichon let us walk aside a while
Till yonder Coach be past.
Exeunt. Scene changes to the Room in the Inn. Enter Don Julio and Don
Fernando.
D. Jul. There is no safty in any other way,
You must not stir from hence, until we have got
Some further light, what course he means to steer,
Let Fabio be vigllant, I Will get home,
Down that back stairs, and take such order there
Not to be found, in case he come to enquire,
As for this Night at least, shall break his measures,
And in the morning w'eel resolve together
Whether you ought, to quit Valencia or no.

D. Fer. Farewell then for to night, I Will be alerte,
But see y'excuse me fairly to my Cozen.
Exeunt. Scene changes to Blanca's Antechamber. Enter Donna Blanca and
Francisca.
D. Blan. As well as Silvia pleases me Francisca,
I Am glad at present that she is not well,
She would constrain me else, she has wit enough
To descant on my humor, and from thence
To make perhaps discoveries, not fit
For such new Comers.

Fran. If she has wit she keeps it to her self,
At least from me, of pride, and Melancholy
I see good store.

D. Blan. -- Still envious and detracting?
Enter Don Zancho and Chichon. See who comes there Madam, to stop your mouth.
Donna Blanca casting an Eye that way, and Chichon clinging up close behind his
Master and making a mouth.
Chic. S'has spide us, and it thickens in the clear,
I fear a storm, To his Master.
Goes not your heart pit a pat?

D. Blan. Ah, the bold Traitor! But I must dissemble,
Aside. And give his impudence a little Line,
The better to confound him.
Donna Blanca advancing to him, and as it were embracing him with an affected
cheerfulness.
D. Blan. Welcome, as unexpected, my D. Zancho.

D. Zanc. Nay, then we are safe Chichon.
Aside to Chichon. Incomparable Maid, heaven bless those Eyes,
to Her. From which I find a new life springing in me;
Having so long been banished, from their Rays,
How dark the Court appeared to me without them?
Could it have kept me from their Influence,
As from their light, I had expired long since.

D. Blan. Y'express your love now, in so courtly a Style
I Fear you have acted it in earnest there,
And but rehearse, to me, your Country Mistress.

Don Zanc. Ah, let Chichon but tell you, how he has seen me
During my absence from you.

Chic. I vow I have seen him even dead for Love,
You might have found it in his very looks,
Before you brought the blood into his Cheeks.

D. Blan. E'ne dead you say for Love, but say of whom?

Don Zanc. Can Blanca ask a question so Injurious?
As well to her own perfections, as my Faith.

Don. Blan. I can hold no longer.
Aside to Francisca. My faithful Lover, then it is not you.
To him scornfully.
Chic. She changes tone I like not faith the Key,
Aside to his Master. The music will be jarring.

Blan. [continues.] It Is not then you, Don Zancho, who having changed
His suit at Court, into a love Pretension,
And his Concurrents, into a Gallant Rival,
Fell by his hand, a bloody Sacrifice
At his fair Mistress feet, Who was it then?
Don Zancho stands a while as amazed with folded Arms. Chichon behind his
Master holding up his hands and making a pitiful face, Francisca steals to him,
and holding up her hand threatningly.
Fran. A Blab Chichon, a Pickthank, Peaching Varlet
Aside Nere think to look me in the face again.
To Chichon.
Chic. In what part shall I look thee, have thou a worse?
Aside It is the Devil has discovered it,
To Fran. Some Witch dwells here, I Have long suspected thee.

Fran. I never more shall think thee worth my Charms.

D. Blan. What, struck dumb with guilt? Perfidious Man
That, happens most, to the most impudent
When once detected; Well, get thee hence,
And see thou nere presum'st to come again
Within these Walls, or I shall let thee see
It Is not at Court alone, where hands are found,
To let such mad men blood.
She turns as going away, and Don Zancho holds her gently by the Gown.
Don Zancho. Give me but hearing, Madam, and then if --

Don Jul. What ho, no lights below stairs?
Alowd as below.
Fran. O heavens, Madam, here you not your Brother,
Into the Chamber quickly, and let them
Retire behind that hanging, there is a place
Where usually we throw neglected things.
I Will take the lights, and meet him certainly
His stay will not be long from Violante
At this time of the Night; besides you know,
He never was suspicious.
Don Zancho and Chichon go behind the hanging, and Donna Blanca retiring to her
Chamber says.
D. Blan. Capricious fate, must I who whilst I loved him
Nere met with checking Accident, fall now
Into extremest hazards, for a man
Whom I begin to hate.
Exit. And Francisca at another door with the lights. Francisca reenters with
Don Julio.
D. Jul. Where Is my Sister?

Fran. -- In her Chamber, Sir,
Not very well, she is taken with a Megrum.

D. Jul. Light me In to her.
Exit Don Julio, Francisca lighting him with one of the lights. Chichon peeping
out from behind the hanging.
Chic. If this be Cupids Prison, it is no sweet one,
Here are no chains of Roses, Yet I think
Y' had rather b'in't, then in Elvira's chamber
As gay, and as perfumed as 'twas.

D. Zan. Hold your peace Puppy, is this a time for fooling?
Enter Francisca and Chichon start's back.
Francisca coming to the hanging. Chichon look out, you may, the Coast is clear.
Chichon looks out. Could I my Lady's near concerns but fever,
From yours in this occasion, both of you
Should dearly pay your falsehood.

Cich. You are jealous too, I see, but help us out
This once, and if you catch me here again,
Let Chichon pay for all, faithful Chichon.

Fran. You Are both too lucky, in the likelihood
Of getting off so soon, stay but a moment
Whilst I go down to set the Wicket open,
And see that there be no body in the way.
Exit Francisca.
Chich. It is a cunning Drab, and knows her trade.
Re-enter Francisca and co^es to the hanging.
Fran. There Is now some Witch a wing indeed Chichon,
Julio, that never till this night, forbore
To go to Violantes e're he slept,
And pass some hours there, Julio who never
Inquired after the shutting of a door,
Has locked the Gate himself, at's coming In,
And bid a servant wait below till midnight,
With charge to say, to any that should knock
And ask for him, that he is gone sick to bed;
What it can mean I know not.

Chic. I would I did not, but, I have too true
An Almanac in my bones, foretell's a beating
Far surer then fowl weather, he has us faith
Fast in Lobb's Pound; Heaven send him a light hand,
To whom my fustigation shall belong,
As for my Master, he may have the Honor
To be rebuked at sharp.

Fran. May terror rack this Varlit; But for you Sir,
Be not dismayed, the hazard's not so great,
Yonder Balcon at further end o'the' Room
Opens into the Street, and the descent, is
Little beyond your height, hung by the Arms:
When Julio is asleep, I shall not fail
To come and let you out, I keep the Key,
In the mean while you must have patience.

Chic. It were a nasty hole to stay in long,
Aside. Did not my fear correct it is evil savor.
Dame, you say well for him, with whom I think
To her. You Have measured length, you speak so punctually
Of his dimensions; But I see no care
For me, your prity, not your proper man,
Who does abhor feats of activity.

Fran. I Will help, you, with a halter.
Exit Francisca and (Chichon retires. Scene changes to Blanca's Bedchamber.
Enter Blanca, Silvia, and soon after Francisca as in Blanca's Chamber she
sitting at her Toylet undressing.
Blan. My Brother told me I should see him again,
Before he went to rest.

Fran. I think, I hear him coming.

Blanca to Francisca. He Will not stay long I hope, for I am on thorns
Till I know they are out, In The mean while
We must persuade Silvia to go to bed,
Least some odd chance should raise suspicion in her
Before I know her fitness for such trusts.
Enter Don Julio. Silvia offers to unpin her Gorget.
D Blan. I prithy Silvia, leave, and get thee gone
To Bed, you ha'nt been well, nor are not yet;
Your heavy Eyes betray indisposition:

D. Sil. Good Madam, suffer me, it will make me well
To do you service.

Blan. [to D. Julio.] -- Brother, I ask your help,
Take Silvia hence, and see her in her Chamber,
This night she must be treated as a stranger,
And you must do the honor of your house.
Julio goes to Silvia, and taking her by the hand leads her away.
Sil. [making a low cursie.] Since you will not yet let me begin to serve,
I will begin to obey.

Fran. [bridling.] Quaint in good faith.

D. Jul. [to Silvia as he leads her.] My Sister's kinder then she thinks, to
give me
This opportunity of telling Silvia.
How absolutely Mistress in this place
Elvira is.
Francisca whispers all this while with Blanca.
Silv. Good Sir, forget that Name.
Exeunt Julio and Silvia.
D. Blan. If that be so, what shall we do Francisca?
What way to get them out?

Fran. It is a thing so unusual with him,
It raises ominous thoughts, Else I make sure
To get them off, as well as you can wish,
But if already awakened by suspicion,
Nothing can then be sure.

D. Blan. O fear not that what you have seen him do
Of unaccustomed, I dare say relates
To quite another business.

Fran. Then set your heart at rest, from all disturbance
Arising from this accident.

D. Blan. -- If you are certain,
To get them off so clear, from observation,
'Twill out of doubt be best, I tell my Brother
Don Zancho is returned, and had called here
This evening to have seen him, For my fears
Sprange only from the hour, and the surprise,
Warmed as he then had found me, since you know
How little apt he is to jealousy.

Fran. Madam, You Have reason, that will make all sure,
In case he should be told of's being here
The time of's stay, can hardly have been noted.
Enter Don Julio.
D. Jul. As an obedient Brother I have performed
What you commanded me.

D. Blan. A hard Injunction from a cruel Sister,
To wait upon a handsome Maid to her Chamber.

D. Jul. You see I Have not abused your Indulgence
By staying long, nor can I stay indeed
With you, I must be abroad so early
To morrow morning, therefore Dear good night.

Donna Blanca [as he is going.] Stay Brother, stay, I had forgot to tell you
Don Zancho de Menezes is returned
And called this evening here, to have kiss'st your hands,
Francisca spoke with him.

D. Jul. I hope he is come successful in his suit,
To morrow I Will go see him,
Exit D. Julio.
D. Blan. You see he is free from Ombrage on that Subject.

Fran. I see all is well, and may he sleep profoundly,
The sooner Madam, you are a bed, the better.

D. Blan. Would once my fears were over, that my Rage
Might have it is course.

Fran. -- I shall not stop it,
But after it has had it is full Careere,
'Twill pawse I hope, and reason find an Ear.
Exeunt. Scene changes to the Room in the Inn. Enter Don Fernando and Fabio.
D. Fer. Is he gone out?

Fab. -- No Sir, not as yet,
But seeing the servant he had sent abroad
Newly returned, I listened at his door,
And heard him plainly give him this account.
That he had found Don Julio Rocca's house,
And having knocked a good while at the door,
Answer was made him without opening it,
Don Julio's not at home, where at Don Pedro
Impatient rose, and calling for his Cloak
And Sword, he swore he would rather wait himself
Till midnight at his door, then loose a night
In such a pressing business; This I thought
Fit to acquaint you with, and that he spoke
Doubtfully of his returning to lodge here.

D. Fer. You have done well, but must do better yet
In following him, and being sure to loose
No circumstance of what he does.

Fab. To dog him, possibly might be observed
This Moon light, by his servant, but since Sir,
We Are certain whether he goes, my best course
I think will be to go out the back way,
And place my self before hand in some Porch,
Near Julio's house, where I may see and hear
What passes, and then do as I shall see cause.

D. Fer. It Is not ill thought on, but how late soever
Your return be, I shall expect to see you
Before we go to bed.

Fab. -- I shall not fail.
Exeunt. Scene changes to Donna Blanca's Ante-Chamber. Enter Francisca and goes
to the hanging where Don Zancho and Chichon are hid.
Fran. Ho, trusty servant with his faithful Master,
Come out, the Balcone's open, loose no time,
Julio's a bed, and fast a sleep e're this,
There Is no body in'the street, it is so light
One may discover a mile, therefore be quick.
Scene changes to the Prospect of Valencia. Don Zancho and Chichon come out
from behind the hanging and follow her as leading them to the Balcone. Exeunt.
Enter Fabio as in the street, and settling himself in a Porch. And soon after
Don Zancho and Chichon appear as in the Balcone, and Francisca's head as
peeping out of the door into it.
Fab. Here is a Porch as if 'twere built on purpose.
Fabio looking up perceives them in the Balcone. Ha, here is a vision that I
little dreamed of,
Stand close Fabio, and Mumm.
Don Zancho get's over the Balcone, and letting himself down at Arms and, leaps
gently into the Street, Chichon offers at the like, but takes a fall as he
lights, and rising counterfeits lameness. Francisca retires and locks the
Balcone.
Chic. Curse on the Drab, I think I Have broke my leg.

Fab. The Moon has turned my brains, or I Have seen
That person some where, and that very lately.
He pawses scratching his head. But sure I Am mad, tothink it can be he.
Enter Don Pedro and Fulvio. Exeunt Don Zancho and Chichon as turning down the
next Sreet.
Fabio [retiring into the Porch.] O now I see my men.

D. Ped. This is the Street you say; which is the house?

Fulv. That fair one over against the Monastery;
Shall I go knock?

D. Ped. -- What else?
Fulvio knocks as at Don Julio's door, and no body answers.
D. P. Knock harder.
He knocks again, and one asks as from within who is there.
D. Ped. A stranger, who must needs speak with Don Julio.
Although unknown to him, my business presses.
[From
Who e're you be, and what so e're your business,
You must have patience till to morrow Sir,
within. Don Julio went sick to bed, and I dare not
Wake him.

D. Ped. Fortune takes pleasure sure, in disappointing,
When men are pressed with most impatience,
But since there is no remedy, guide Fulvio,
Unto the lodging you have provided for me,
I hope it is nere at hand.

Fulv. Not above three doors from Don Julio's
[Pointing.
There where it makes the corner of the Street.

Fabio [stealing after them] Here I must follow till I Have harbored them.
Exeunt. Scene changes to the Room in the Inn. Enter Don Fernando alone as in
his Chamber.
D. Fer. It cannot now be long, ere Fabio come,
And it were in vain to go to bed before,
For rest I Am sure I should nor.
He walks about the Room pensively. Ah, my Elvira, [Mine?] thou do infect
My very words with falsehood when I name thee:
Did ever Mistress make a Lover pay
So dear as I, for the short bliss she gave?
What now I suffer in exchange of that,
May make mankind, a feared of joys excessive
But here he comes.
Enter Fabio. -- (To Fabio.
Have you learned any thing,
That Is worth the knowing?

Fab. Two things, I think considerable Sir;
The one, that Julio has found means to gain
This night to cast your business in, without
Admitting of Don Pedro, whose pressures
Might have been troublesome, And urged you
To hasty resolutions, whereas now
You Have time to take your measures. The other Sir,
Is, that Don Pedro lodges here no more,
And consequently has eased you of constraint
Whilst you rest here, and left the way more free,
For intercourse betwixt Don Julio and you,
This more I must observe to you, that Don Pedro
Took special care to have his lodging nere
Don Julio's house, whereby it is evident,
That there he makes account his business lies.

D. Fer. The news you bring me, has been worth your pains
And thanks to you for it, I suppose that is all.

Fer. Say Fabio, what is it?

Fab. -- Pray, Sir, allow me
This night to think, whether it be fit or no
To tell it you, since it is a thing relates not
As I conceive to you, nor to your business,
And yet in the concernments of another
May trouble you.

Fer. Be not overwise, I prithee, I will know
What it is, since you have raised curiosity
By such Grimastos.

Fab. You must be obeyed, but pray remember Sir,
If afterward I Am called fool, for my pains,
Who made me so, but since I do not only
Expect the fool, but ready to be thought
A madman too, e're I have done my story
In this I will be wilful, not to tell it
T'ill you are a bed, that I may run away
So if you long to here it hasten thither.
Exit Fabio as to the Chamber within.
D. Fer. Content in faith, you ask no great compliance.
Exeunt. Scene changes to the Room in Don Zancho's house. Enter Don Zancho, And
Chichon as at home halting.
D. Zan. We Are well come off from danger, would we were it
But half as well, from Blanca's jealousy.

Chic. Speak for your self, I never came off worse,
Apox upon your Venery, it has made me
Another Vulcan.
He halts about grumbling.
D. Zanc. Go rest, to night, or grumble, as you please,
But do not think, limping shall serve your turn
To morrow, faith I Will make you stir your stumps,
Think you a Lover of my temper likely
To sit down by it so?

Chic. I Am sure I am only sit to sit down by it,
Since I can hardly stand.
He makes as if he would sit down, and Don Zancho giving him a kick in the
britch.
D. Zanc. Coxcomb come away.

Chic. To night's, to night, to morrow's a new day.
Exeunt.
ACT. III.
Enter Don Fernando and Fabio. As in the Room in the Inn.
D. Fer. ARe all things ready Tabio? in case
Don Julio when he comes conclude with me
That I should begone presently.

Tab. Horses stand ready for you at the Posthouse.

Fer. It Is well, attend without.
Exit Tabio Enter Don Julio.
To Jul. I see you sleep not in your friends concerns,
You are so early, and since so, the sooner
We fix a Resolution, certainly,
'Twill be the better, 'Twas no small Point gained,
To frustrate for a night Don Pedro's aims,
As Fabio tells me you have done, for he
Nere quitted him an inch last night, until
He had harbored him.

Jul. What, has he left his lodging?

Fer. -- That he has,
And which is more considerable taken one
Close by your house, which evidences clearly
Where his suspicions lie; That being so,
I Am confident, you will be of my opinion
For my dislodging from Valencia
Immediately, For Elvira being
Already so well settled, nothing can
So much endanger her discovery,
As my remaining longer in these parts.

Jul. W'ere I but free as yesterday Fernando,
To think of nothing but Elvira and your
Concernments, I must confess your absence
From hence were to be wished, but Cousin
There Is fallen out this very night, a thing,
Which shows how little I beholding am
To fortune, That having so newly lent me
The means of serving handsomely my friend,
Calls back the debt already, and mak's me
As needing of your aid, as you of mine.

Fer. Ho, Fabio forbid the horses presently.
Fabio looks in.
To Jul. The least appearance Julio of my being
Useful to you, by staying, puts an end
To all deliberation, for my self,
Say, what is the accident? You have me ready.

Jul. Such, and of such a nature, my Fernando,
That as to be communicated to none
But you, another self, so I am sure
It will astonish you with the Surprisal.
Ah! could you think it possible? that Blanca,
Should raise disturbance in the heart of Julio,
As to the honor of his Family.

Fer. Heavens forbid.

Jul. Never was Brother so secure as'I,
Or so unalterable in his persuasion
Of having a Sister, of unmatch't discretion,
Nor e're, could less, then evidence it self,
Have shaken such a confidence.

Fer. -- For Gods sake Julio,
Hold me no longer in such pain of mind;
But sure we shall be better there within,
Free from the noise of the Street.

Jul. You say well.
Exit Julio.
Fernando [as he follows him Aside.] This is what Fabio told me he saw last
night,
Discovered by some accident to Julio,
It can be nothing else, O Women! Women!
Exit Fernando. Enter Don Pedro and Fulvio, As in their new lodgings.
Don Ped. I am glad you have lighted on so fit a place,
For all intend, as this is, Fulvio,
I shall repair the last nights disappointment
By early care this morning, In the mean while,
Fail not of your part in the discovery
Where my Enemy dwells, and in the observation,
Of all his motion's, That Is the important part.

Full. Rely, Sir, on my care and Vigilance.
Exeunt Don Pedro and Fulvio. Enter Don Julio and Don Fernando, As in the
outward Room of the Inn.
Jul. -- It is a Quarter,
Always reserved to my own privacy,
There lying unsuspected, if whilst I
Continue late abroad under pretense
Of being at Violantes, You keep watch
Carefully within, he cannot escape us
So you be sure t'observe punctually
The sign agreed, and boulting of the doors,
When he is once within.

Fer. Since you have so resolved and laid your business,
Dispose of me, and lead the way, whilst I
Give Fabio his instructions what to do
During my absence.
Exeunt Fernando and Julio. Enter Dona Blanca and Francisca As in Blanca's Ante
Chamber.
Fran. Since the black Cloud, that threatened you last night
With such a storm, is luckely blown over,
Without a sprinkling; I hope Madam, you
Will imitate the fates, and grow Serene,
From all those Clouds which so much threatened others.

Blan. Ah! Francisca cans't thou --
She stops seeing Silvia coming. Enter Silvia with a fine Basin of Flowers.
Aside -- -- But here is Silvia,
O the sharp thorns, she brings me at this time
With Flowers in her hand, by the Constraint
Her presence gives me.

Sil. Madam, I wish the ranging of these Flowers
May be to your mind; but alas I fear
I am too dull for works of Fancy.

Blan. It Is me you find too dull to relish them,
Dryly. Anon they may be wellcomer.

Sil. I Will wait that happy hour,
-- -- She Is in ill humor.
Aside. Exit Silvia.
Blan. But tell me now, did ever see Francisca,
So false and bold a Creature? The Impudence
He had to cloth his Treachery with new Courtships,
Provokes me most of all.

Fran. Last night indeed, incens't as you were, Madam,
I fain would know what air so soft and Gentle
He could have breathed, would not have blown the flame
Higher and Higher! but me thinks your Pillow
Should in so many hours have had some power
T'allay and mollify; I then complied
(He present) with your anger, but now, Madam,
You must allow me to speak reason to you,
In his behalf, before you go too far,
And put things, in your passion, past Recall,
Which that once over, you would give your life,
To have again.

Blan. -- Pray think me not so tame.

Fran. So tame say you? I think you wild I swear.
To take so much to heart, what at the most
Deserves but some such sparkling brisk resentment,
As once flash't out, in a few Choleric words,
Ought to expire, in a next Visits Coyness.

Blan. Make you so slight of Infidelity?

Fran. Cupid forbid; I Would have men true to Love.
But, I Would have women too, true to themselves,
And not rebuke their Gallants, by requiring
More than the nature of frail flesh will bear.
I Would have men true as steel; but steel you know
(The purest and best pollish't steel) will ply,
Urged from it is Rectitude, (forsooth) But then
With a smart spring, come to it is place again.

Blan. Come leave your fooling, and speak soberly.

Fran. Why then in sober sadness, you are in the wrong,
I do not say, in being angry with him,
And netl'd at the thing, That Is Natural,
We love no Partners, even in what we know
We cannot keep all to our selves; But, Madam,
To think the worse of him for it, or resolve
A breach of friendship for a slight excursion,
That were a greater fault then his, who has
For one excuse, long absence; And in truth
Another, you would be sorry he wanted, youth.

Blan. You talk as if --
(Francisca interrupting her.
Fran. -- Stay Madam I beseech you.
And let me make an end, I have not yet
Touched the main point in his excuse, A Sure
At Court, enough I trow for any dog trick.

Blan. How like a Goose you talk, A Court protension,
What has that to do one way or other
With his faith to me?

Fran. So, one displeased to find his Crasishes,
Shrivel'd within, and empty, said to his Cook,
(Who laid the fault upon the Wane of the Moon,)
What has the Moon, to do with Crasishes?
Marry she has, it is she that governs shell Fish,
And it is as true, in Courts, that love rules business
By as Preposterous an Influence.

Blan. I prithy make an end, or come to the Point.

Fran. Why then I Will tell you, and you may believe me,
(Having been trained up in my youth you know,
In the best School, to learn Court Mysteries;
An Aunt of mine being Mother of the Maids.)
Love holds the Rudder, and Steers all in Courts;
How often, when great Affairs perplex't the Brains
Of mighty Politicians, to conjecture,
From whence sprung such designs, such revolutions,
Such Exaltations, Madam, such depressions,
Against the Rules of their Misterious Art,
And when, as in suprising works of Nature
Reason confounded, Men cry those are secrets
Of the high Powers above, that govern all,
Grave lookers on, stroking their beards would say,
What a transcendant fetch of State is this;
These are the things, that wisdom hides and hatches,
Under black Cap of weighty jobbernole
I mean Count Olivarez, All the while
We female Macchiavels, would smile to think,
How closely lurking lay the Nick of all,
Under our Daughter Doll's white Petticoat.

Blan. All this I grant you, may be true; And yet
N'ere make a jot, for his excuse; Francisca
His suit, had no Relation to such matters.

Fran. What e're the thing be, it is all one, Do You think,
Suits be they what they will, can be obtained
By such as pass for Fopps, as all young men
Without a Mistress or a Confidence
Are sure to do there; A sharp pointed Hat,
(Now that you see the Gallants all Flat headed,)
Appears not so ridiculous, as Yonker,
Without a love Intreegue, to Introduce,
And sparkefy him there; Madam, in short,
Allow me once to be Sententious;
It is a thing, that always was, and is,
And ever will be, true, to the worlds end;
That, as in Courts of Justice, none can Carry
On business well, without a Procurator,
So none in Princes Courts, their Suits make surer,
Then those that work them, by the best Procurer.

Blanca Well, have, adone Francisca?
[Smiling a little.]
Fran. -- Madam, I have.

D. Blan. -- Then letting pass,
Thy fine reflections Politic now vented,
To show thy skill in Courts, I Will tell thee freely,
I Am not transported in my jealousy
So far, beyond the bounds of Reason, as
Not to know well, the difference, betwixt
Such Escapades of youth, as only spring
From warmth of blood, or Gales of Vanity,
And such engagements, as do carry with them
Dishonor unto those, whose quality,
And love have little to the serious Part,
Once Embarked by them, in a Gallentry.

Fran. I see the Clouds disperse, there is no such Art,
Aside. Of compassing ones ends, with those above us,
As that of working them into good humor,
By things brought in by the by,
Why surely, Madam, unless anger lend you
To her. It Is spectacles, to see things, I cannot think
You judge Don Zancho's fault to be any other,
Then of the first kind; so well stated by you.

Blan. Francisca, were I otherwise persuaded,
I am not of an humor that could suffer
Such Parlies for him, much less Intercession;
But since upon reflection, I find cause
To think what he has done A sally only,
Of Youth and Vanity, when I shall find him
Sufficiently mortified, I may pardon him.

Fran. Heavens bless so sweet a temper, But Madam,
Have a care I beseech you of one thing.

Blan. What Is that?

Fran. -- That whilst your pride of heart
Prolongs his readmission, his despair
Urge him not to some precipitate attempt,
That may expose your honor, safe as yet;
You see what danger the last nights distemper
Had like to have brought you into; Transported Lovers,
Like Angels fallen from their bliss grow Devils.

D. Blan. What would you have me appear so flexible?
-- -- Is It not enough
I tell you I may pardon him in due time?

Fran. Good Madam, be advised I do not press you
For his sake, but your own, Trust my experience,
To women nought's so fatal as suspense;
Whose smartest actions, never did cast such Blot,
On honor, as this, shall I? shall I not?

D. Blan. I Would rather die, then have him think me Easy.

Fran. Your spirit, never can be liable
To that suspicion, Madam leave to me
The conduct of this matter, I beseech you,
If e're you sleep, you do not see the Gallant
Sufficiently humbled at your feet,
Never trust Francisca more.

D. Blan. You are so troublesome, do what you will.
Blanca turns away and Exit as into her Closet.
Fran. -- What gone away?
I Will do what she would have, but dares not say.
Enter Don Julio and Silvia as in Blanca's Chamber.
Don Julio [looking about him.] Where is my Sister Silvia?

Silv. -- -- In her Closet, Sir,
As yet not ready.

Jul. -- -- And where is Francisca?

Silv. She Is with her, dressing her.

D. Jul. -- Why then Elvira,
Let me not Loose this opportunity,
Of telling you, how sad a man I am.
To see you in this posture, and to assure you
How gladly I would lay down life, and fortune,
To serve you in Don Fernando's absence.

Silv. Your generosity I make no doubt of:
But is Fernando gone?

D. Jul. -- I cannot say,
That he is gone, for he was not himself,
With the thought of leaving you, And yet less
Himself, when e're he thought of staying near you,
Tortured by two such contrary passions,
As love, and sharp resentment.

Silv. [Putting her Handkercher to her Eyes.] He is gone then?
She pawses. -- -- Ah! generous Don Julio?
You needs must be Indulgent, to a weakness
Which whilst that he was present Indignation,
And a just Sense of what I am, had power
To keep within my self, but now I find
That check removed, Nature will have it is tribute,
And you must pardon my withdrawing, where
She weeps. Such grief, may pay it, with unwitness't tears.
Exit Silvia.
Jul. Can a demeanor, so composed, so Noble,
And yet so tender, want true Innocence?
It cannot be, It grieves my heart I swear,
To Have given her new affliction, but the Secret
Of Don Fernando's close concealment here
Is so important, it necessitated
My saying what I did, since secrets are
E'ver kept best, by those that know them least.
Enter Blanca and Francisca.
Jul. [To her] Now high dissimulation, play thy Part.
Good Morrow Sister have you rested well?
And do you rise Serene, as does the Sun,
Free from distemper, as the day from Clouds,
Your looks persuade it me, they are so clear,
And fresh this morning.

Blan. The pleasure of seeing you, puts life into them,
Else they would be dull enough, this ugly Headache
Having tormented me all night, you might
Have heard me call Francisca up at midnight,

Fran. That was well thought on, for it is possible
Aside. He may have heard some Noise.

Jul. -- How cunning she is!
Aside. Faith now you put me in mind of it I think
T'wixt sleep and waking, I once heard some stirring.

Blan. The worst of my indispotion is,
That it will I fear hinder me again, to day,
From visiting Violante, to thank her
For Silvia.

Jul. I charge my self with all your Complements,
For this whole afternoon till late at night
I needs must pass with her, to make amends
For yesterdays failings, caused as you know
By Don Fernando's being in Town.

Blan. I must not hope to see you then again
To day, when once gone out.

Jul. Hardly, unless to wait on Violante
In case she come to see you, as it is likely,
When I shall tell her, you are indisposed;
And so farewell.
Exit Julio
Blan. All Is well I see Francisca as to him,
I wish my heart, were but as much at rest
In what concerns Don Zancho.

Fran. -- It shall be
Your own fault, if it be not quickly so,
As I Will order the matter.

Blan. Take heed, you make him not grow insolent
By discovering to him my facillity.

Fran. I Am too well vers't, to need instructions.

Blan. I leave all to you, But how does Silvia
This morning?

Fran. -- I think she has been crying
She looks so dull and moped.

Blan. I Will in and see her.
Exeunt. Scene Changes to Don Zancho's house. Enter Don Zancho and Chichon
limping.
Don Zan. What not yet gone, thou lazy trifling Rascal?

Chic. What juster excuse Sir, for not going
Then is a broken Leg?

D. Zanc. If you find not your own Leg quickly Sirrah,
I shall find you a wooden one.

Chic. Be as angry as you will Sir, I Will not go
Till I have maid my conditions; The true time
For servants to stand upon points, is when
Their Masters stand upon Thorns.

D. Zanc. What are they, Owls face?

Chic. Assurance Sir, but of free air within,
With fair retreat, upon an even Floor,
And that it shall not be in a sluts power,
After having kept me in a nasty place,
To empt' me out at window.

Don Zan. -- Prithy Chichon
Adone and miss not th'oppertunity
By fooling, unless you take Francisca
Just as she comes from Mass, this day is lost,
And I lost with it.

Chic. -- Come, I Will hobble to her,
Expect a sorry account, but yet a true one;
Truth always comes, by the lame Messenger.
Exeunt. Scene changes to a fine pleasant Apartment. Enter D. Julio and knocks
as at the Door of his private Apartment; Fernando opens the door and lets him
in.
Fer. You Have given me here a very pleasant Prison:
But what news my Julio? Are things disposed
For clearing of your doubts? My own concerns
I cannot think on, during your disquiet.

Jul. And I come now so strangely moved with yours,
I scarce have sense or memory of my own,
A heart of Adamant could not be hindered
I think, from liquifaction into tears:
I'have seen, and heard Elvira as I have done,
Upon the occasion of my telling her
That you were gone,
A sense so gallant, and so tender both,
I never saw in Woman.

Fer. Can that high heart, descend to tenderness?

Jul. Not, (whilst you present) Noble pride upheld it;
But Nature once set free from that constraint,
O how pathetique was her very silence!
And the restraint of tears, in her swolen Eyes,
More eloquent in grief, then others torrents:
If she be guilty, all her Sex are Devils.

Fer. O say no more, For were there Room but left
For self deceit, I might be happy yet;
Ah Evidence, too cruel, to deny me that.
A noise without.
Jul. But what can be the noise, I hear without
In the next Room.
Fernando peeps through the Keyhole.
Fer. -- S'life I see Don Pedro
Elvira's father, there is no avoding him,
H'eed not a come up so, without being sure
You are within.

Jul. Further put often, would be of little use,
Since first or last, he must be satisfied,
Being come hither upon such an Arrant,
The sooner now we see what it is, he drives at,
The sooner we shall take from thence our measures;
I Will therefore go out to him, and be sure
To entertain him still, so near the door
That you may hear what passes.

Fer. I shall be attentive, and expect the Issue
With much impatience.
Exit Julio. And the Scene changes to Don Julio's Ante-Chamber. Enter Don Pedro
and his servant, and Don Julio and a Page.
Don Ped. My business, Sir, is to Don Julio Rocca,
[Adressing himself to D. Julio] If you be he I shall desire the favor
Of some few words with you in Private.

Don Jul. Sir, I am he to serve you, Page set Chairs.
He points to the Page, and makes him set the chairs by the door where Don
Fernando is, and then the Page and Don Pedro's man retire. [They sit down.]
D. Ped. Having not the honor to be known to you Sir,
It Is fit this Letter make my Introduction;
It Is from the Duke of Medina.
He gives Don Julio the letter, which he receives with great respect; And going
a little aside reads it. THE LETTER.
DOn Pedro de Mendoca my Kinsman, and most particular Friend goes to Valencia,
in pursuit of one who has highly Injured his family, whose righting I am so
much concerned in, as could it have been done without too much publication of
the thing, I would have accompanied him my self, but my presence will be
needless in a place where you have power; I do therefore conjure you, and
expect from your regard and kindness to me, that you employ it thoroughly in his
behalf, and what service you shall do him, put it upon my account, whom you
shall always find,

Your most affectionate Cousin to serve you The Duke of Medina.




Don Julio giving the Letter to Don Pedro and he taking it.
Don Jul. Sir, it is sit you see how heartily
The Duke has recommended your concernments,
Whose will's a Law to me.
Don Pedro having read it, and restoring it.
Don Ped. He told me indeed how very sure he was
Of your Friendship and dependence.
-- I am proud to find he makes,
So obliging use of it to my advantage.

D. Jul. I do avow my self his Creature Sir;
Therefore the sooner you shall let me know
In what I may be useful to you, the sooner
You Will see my readiness to serve you.

Don Pedro. Your personal reputation Sir, as well
As your relation to the Duke, assured me
Before hand, of what I find, and therefore
As hard a part as it is for a Gentleman
Of my blood and temper, to become
Relator of his own shame, unrevenged
On the Author of it, I shall tell you in short;
I live under an affront of the highest Nature
To the Honor of my Family; And the Person
Who did it, makes Valencia his retreat,
It Is against him, Don Julio,
That your assistance must support me here,
I have already got some notice of him,
And when I shall be acertain'd, I Will repair
Again unto you for your friendly aid,
And for the present trouble you no farther.
Don Pedro offers to rise as going away.
Don Jul. A little patience I beseech you Sir,
I have expressed my readiness, and be sure
I am a man never to fail, where once
I have engaged my word; but Sir, withal,
You must must consider with a fair reflection
That in this place are all my chief Relations,
Of blood and friendship; and though neither shall
Have power t'exempt me from the serving you
In any just pretension; yet you know,
That men of Honor, ever ought to seek,
How to comply with one duty, without
Violating another.

Don Ped. I understand you Sir, and as it is that
Which well becomes a person of your worth,
To have reflected on; so it becomes me,
To satisfy before I engage you further,
Then give me leave to ask you, whither or no
Don Zancho de Menezes be of the number
Of those, toward whom you are under obligation,
Either of blood, or friendship?
Don Julio showing some little surprise but presently recovering.
Don Jul. Don Zancho de Meneses say you?

Don Ped. -- Sir, the same,
He startled at his Name.
Aside.
D. Jul. He is a person I have always lived
In friendly correspondance with, without
Any such tie upon me toward him,
As ought to hinder my frank serving you.

Don Ped. You have revived me; and since I have now named
My Enemy, I can conceal no longer
The Grounds on which he is so; That Don Zancho
About a fourtnight since, was late at night
Found in my house, run newly through the body,
And weltring in his blood, ready to expire;
I by the outcry brought upon the place,
Surpised as you may imagine, and enraged,
Was yet so far Master of my passion,
As to disdain the owing my revenge
To an unknown hand, perhaps as guilty
Toward me, as was the sufferer; I made
Him straight be carried to a Surgeon, where,
I thought it generous to give him life
Then dead, that living I might give him death;
Recovered sooner then I thought, he Fled,
And with him, as I have reason to believe,
My only Daughter, who the very night
Of the accident was missing; O the Curse
Of men to have their Honors Subjected,
To the extravagance of such vile Creatures!

Jul. [sighing.] It Is our hard fate indeed.

D. Ped. I presently employed all diligence
To know what way he took, and having Learned
'Twas toward this place, hither I have pursued him;
Confirmed in my pursuit, by information
A long the Road, that an unknown Gallant
Had with his Servant, guarded all the way
A concealed Lady in a Coach: And thus Sir,
You have the story of my injury,
Whereof I doubt not but your generous heart,
Will wed the just revenge.

Jul. You may rely on it Sir, without reserves,
To the utmost of my power.

Don Ped. -- May the gods reward you,
The life that you Renew to these gray heirs;
I Will take my leave at present, and return to you
As soon as from the diligences used
I shall have Clearer lights.

Don Jul. Here you shall find me waiting your Commands.
Exit Don Pedro, and Don Julio waiting on him out. Scene changes, and Enter Don
Julio, and Don Fernando as in the private Apartment.
Don Jul. I hope you over heard us.

Fer. -- All distinctly,
And with surprising joy at his mistake;
Did ever blood-hound, in a hot pursuit,
Run on so readyly upon the change?

Jul. I hope it boads good fortune in the Rest.

Fer. Were e're two friends engaged in an adventure
So intricate as we, and so Capricious?

Jul. Sure never in this world, me thinks it merits
A special recapitulation.
You at the height of all your happiness
Supplanted with your Mistress by a Rival,
You neither knew nor dreamed of; Evidence
Anticipating jealousy.

Fer. And when that Rival, fallen by my Sword
In her own presance, is by miracle
Revived, and fitter to serve her then I,
That faithless Mistress, with the same assurance
She could have done, had she been true, as fair,
And for my sake exposed to fatal hazards,
Flys to my Arms for her Protection.

Jul. And whilst that you, refining point of Honor,
In spite of Rage expose your self to serve her,
She asks, and takes, with a vowed indignation,
To be beholding to you, new obligations,

Fer. I have recourse unto my only Friend,
To help me in protecting my false Mistress,
And he, at the same time, by heighest Powers
Imposed upon, to be her persecutor.

Jul. Whilst the same friend, and by the self-same Powers,
Is urged to Act, in their revenge, against
The man, on whom you most desire to take it;
And then, to heighten all beyond invention,
That very friend, is forced, even in that instant,
To a dependence on your only Aid,
In his Honors nearest and most nice concerns.

Fer. Heaven sure delights t'involve us in a kind
Of Laberinth, will pose it self to unwind.
Exeunt.
ACT. IV.
Scene changes to the Room at Don Zancho's. Enter D. Zancho, and Chichon at
another door, halting still with a staff.
D. Zan. What here again already? have you spead?

Chichon Lame as I am, you see I have made good speed
In my return, what e're I have had in my Arrant.

D. Zan. Leave fool your quibling, and deliver me
From the disquiet of uncertainly.

Chich. That Is quickly done, set Sir your heart at rest
From the vain hopes of ever seeing Blanca:
Now you are at ease I trow.

Don Zanc. You Will be at little, unless you leave your jesting
With such edged tools; Is banishment from her
Matter of Rallery? say Sirrah, and say
Quickly, what hopes?
-- Prithy if thou love me
kindly, Hold me no longer in suspense Chichon.

Chich. Why, then for fear, the Devil a bit for love,
I Will tell you Sir, That luckely I met
The Drab Francisca at the Capuchins
Lodging, behind her Lady, I think on purpose,
For I perceived, her eager Sparrow-Hawks eye
With her veil down (near stirs a twinkling while
From it is fly peeping hole) had found me straight,
I took my time in the nick, but she out nick't me;
For trudging on, her face an other way,
With such a voice, as some you have seen, have had
The trick to draw, from Caverns of their Belly,
And make one think it came from a mile off;
She made me hear these words about twilight,
Fail not to pass by our door, and ask no more
At this time Varlet. And thus Sir, you see,
That neither she nor I, have been prolixe,
For this is all; You have leave to make your Comment
On a brief text.

Don Zanc. As sweet methinks as short, such words imply
Little less then a demi Assignation.

D. Zanc. All puddings have two ends, and most short sayings
Two handles to their meaning.

Don Zan. I Am sure I Will still lay hold upon the pleasing'st
Till it be wrested from me; in the mean while
If any visitants come this afternoon,
Be sure to tell them I am gone abroad,
That nothing else embarque us at the time;
You shall not go alone.

Chic. -- I thank you for it
Holding up his staff. I cannot go alone.
Exeunt Chichon halting. Scene changes to Don Julio's private Apartment. Enter
Don Fernando and Julio as in the private Apartment.
Don Jul. All things are rightly laid, for Violante
Will pass the afternoon with Blanca, and then
I waiting on her home in the evening, Blanca
Will be secure from me, till late at night,
I shall be where I told you, in full view
Of those two windows: If the Gallant come
Up the great Stairs, he must pass through that Room
And cannot escape your knowledge: If up the back one,
You needs must here him passing through the Entry
Close by that door. If this latter way,
Be sure to set the Candle in that window:
Pointing. If up the other, in that; and in either case
As soon as he is within, fail not to bolt
On the inside the Entry door, that so he may
Find no retreat that way, I coming up
The other.

Don Fern. -- Be assured I shall be punctual
As you direct.
Exeunt. Scene changes to Don Pedro's Lodging. Enter Don Pedro, and his servant
Fulvio.
Don Ped. Are you sure of what you say?

Full. -- As sure, Sir,
As my own Eyes can make me of what I saw,
You cannot doubt my knowing him, since it was I
(You may remember) fetched the Surgeon to him,
And saw his wounds dressed more then once, or twice;
The Tavern where I was, looks into his Garden,
And there I left him walking, to come tell you.

D. Ped. We are well advanced then, toward my just Revenge
I found Don Julio as ready to comply
With all the Dukes desires, as I could wish,
And my great fear is over, That Don Zancho
Might possibly have been some near Relation
Of his own; so that now Fulvio, if you
Keep but a careful Eye upon his motions,
And give me notice, he can hardly escape us.

Full. Doubt not my diligence.
Exeunt. Scene changes to the Garden. Enter Blanca and Francisca as in a fine
Garden with Orange Trees and Fountains.
Don. Blan. You must have your will, but know Francisca
If you expose me to his vanity,
I never shall forgive you.

Fran. I tell you, Madam, I will bring him to you
So mortifyed, he shall an object be
For pity, not for anger, you will need employ
Kindness to erect the poor dejected Knight.

Don. Blan. It fell out luckely that Violante
Came hither, for my Brother now engaged
With her, we are safe till ten a Clock at least.

Fran. But how shall we dispose of Silvia?
It will be hard to escape her observation,
For she has wit, and of the dangerous kind,
A melancholy wit: O the unlucky Star
That leads a Lady, engaged in love intrigues
To take a new Attendant near her Person!

Don. Blan. 'Twas an unluckiness, but Violante
Could not be denied, I having told her
So often that I wanted one; besides
Who could have thought, sh'had one ready at hand,
But we must make the best on it for this night:
'Twill not be hard to busle her, till 't be late
In the perfuming Room. This near occasion
Well over, I think it will not be amiss
Against another, to say some what to her
That may in case she have perceived any thing
Persuade her she is not distrusted.

Fran. Madam take heed of that, when e're you find
It necessary to say any thing,
Be sure to say that, that she may think all;
Take one Rule more from my experience,
Nothing so fatal as a Confidence
By halves in amorous transactions;
But here she comes.

D. Blan. Come Silvia, and take your part of this sweet Place;
This is a day indeed, to taste it is freshness.

Sil. Madam I needs must say, within a Town
I never saw so fine a one.

Don. Blan. -- In truth
I think not many sweeter. Those Fountains
Playing among those Orange trees and Mirtles,
Have a fine mix't effect on all the senses;
But think not Silvia to enjoy the pleasure
Without contributing to make it more.

Sil. How can I be so happy?

D. Blan. Francisca tells me she has overheard you
Warbling alone such Notes unto your self,
As have not only a good voice betrayed,
But skill to manage it.

Sil. -- It is Francisca
That has betrayed, a very ill one Madam.

Don. Blan. Under you Palmtree's shade, there is a seat
That yields to none in the advantages
It lends to Music, let us go sit down there,
For this first time, one Song shall satisfy.

Silv. When you have heard that one, I shall not fear
Your asking me another.
They go and set down under the Palmtree and Silvia sings. THE SONG.
See, O see!
How every Tree,
Every Bower,
Every Flower,
A new life gives to others joys,
Whilst that I,
Grief stricken lie,
Nor can meet
With any sweet,
But what faster mine destroys.
What are all the senses pleasures,
When the mind has lost all measures?
Hear, O hear!
How sweet, and clear
The Nightingal,
And waters fall,
In consort join for others Ears,
Whilst to me
For harmony,
Every Air
Eccho's despair,
And every drop provokes a tear.
What are all the senses pleasures,
When the mind has lost all measures?

Don. Blan. I thank you Silvia, but I Will not allow
One of your youth, to nourish melancholy
By tunes and words so flattering to that passion.

Silv. The happiness of serving you may fit me
In time, for gayer things.

Don. Blan. I will not ask another for the present,
Not for your reason, but because I Will be
More moderate in my pleasures; Now Silvia
I have a task to give you.

Silv. What e're it be, it will be a pleasing one
Of your imposing.

Don. Blan. -- It Is to gather store of
Fresh Orange Flowers, and then carefully
To shift the Oils in the perfuming Room,
As in the several ranges you shall see
The old begin to wither; To do it well
Will take you up some hours; But it is a work
I often perform my self; And that you may
Be sure not to mistake, I Will go thither
With you, and show you the manner of it.

Sil. I hope I shall not fail so well instructed.
Exeunt. Scene changes to the Room at Don Zancho's. Enter Don Zancho and
Chichon.
Chic. You Are so impatient Sir, you will mar all,
I tell you that it is yet too light by half,
The Sun is hardly set; pray fetch a turn
Or two more in the Garden, ear you go.

D. Zan. You must be Governor, I see, to night,
You are so proud o'th'service you have done;
Come away.
Exeunt. Scene changes to the Garden again. Silvia appears in the Garden as
gathering flowers from the Orange Trees, and then with her Apron full going
away says,
Silv. The task enjoined me is a sweet one truly,
But I smell somewhat more in the imposall;
So far I am happy yet in my misfortune
That I am lighted into a Lady's service
Of an obliging humor; But most of all
One that as kind as she is, I see's as glad,
To leave me alone as I to be it, somewhat
There is, misterious in her looks, and conduct:
Such motions just, such inequalities,
Such flatteries to those I trusted least,
Such pretty employments found, to busy those
I would be rid of; And such arts as these
To single out her Confident unnoted,
I well remember would Elvira use,
Whilst the unquiet joys of Love, possessed her,
How innocent soever; And besides,
Francisca's sitting up so late last night,
And going up and down so warily,
Whilst others slept, is evidence enough
What God raigns here, as well as at the Court.
But I forget my self: Let descants cease,
Who serves though she observes, must hold her peace.
Exit Silvia. Scene changes to the Prospect of Valencia. Enter Don Zancho with
his Cloak over his face, and Chichon.
Don Zanc. Advance Chichon, I Will follow at a distance:
It Is the right time, just light enough, you see,
For warned Expectors to know one another;
I hope she will not fail you.

Chic. -- She fail us?
No Sentinel perdu is half so alerte
As she in these occasions.
Enter Francisca veiled peeping, as out of the portal of Don Julio's house.
Fran. There comes the Varlet, and I Am much deceived,
Or that is his Master lagging at a distance,
I Will give them a go by, covered with my vail.
She passes by them heedlesly.
Chic. By that light as little as it is, It Is she,
I Will to her.

Don Zanc. -- And I Will stand close the while,
When you have broken the Ice, I Will take my time.
Chichon going to Francisca lays hold of her vail, and she turns about.
Chic. What signifies a Vail to hide my Doxye?
When every motion of a leg or wing
Darts round perfuming, and informing Airs,
Thou art the very Colly-flower of Women,

Fran. And thou the very Cabbidge-stalk of Men,
That never stunk to me, as does a Blab.

Chic. Curse on thee, hold thy tongue; Do thou not see
Who stands against that wall.

Fran. Away, sawce-Box.
She thrusting him off goes on. Don Zancho sets himself just in her way, and
makes as if he would lie down in it.
D. Zanc. Pass, trample on me, do, trample; But here me.

Fran. These shoo's have been my Ladies, and she would never
Showing her foot. Forgive it, should they do you so much Honor.
[Aside turning to Chichon.
It Is thou have caused all this.

Chic. -- Fire on thy tongue.

Don Zanc. Ah! my Francisca, if their be no hopes
Of pardon, nor of pity; Yet at least
Let Blanca for her own sake, be so just
As not to give me cruel death unheard:
Do you your part at least, and do but give her
This letter from me.
He offers her a Letter, and she starting back.
Fran. -- Guarda. That Is a thing
She has forbidden, with such Menaces,
I dare as well become another Porcia,
And eat red burning coals. I had much rather
Consent, that now she is all alone at home,
You should transportedly rush in upon her
As following me so possibly you might
Attain your end, without exposing me;
Who in that case, know how to Act my Part
So smartly against you, as shall keep her clear
From all supition; But I am to blame
Thus to forget my duty, I Will stay no longer.
He stops her and pulling out a Purse of money, put's it unto her hand.
Don Zanc. Spoak like an Angel.
Francisca offers to rest^re the Purse but yet holding it fast.
Fran. This is you know superfluous with me,
And shock's my humor; But any thing from you:
Be sure you follow boisterously.
She trudges away, and goes in hastily as to Julio's house and Don Zancho
follows her in. Chichon stops at the door.
Chic. I Will bring you no ill luck a second time;
If for sports sake, you have projected me
Another Somerset, from the Balcone,
Make your account, that it is already done,
Here you will find me halting in the street,
Exit Chichon. Scene changes to Donna Blanca's Ante Chamber. Enter Donna Blanca
as in her Ante Chamber.
Don Blan. How true it is, that Nature cheats mankind,
And makes us think our selves the only Tasters
Of pure delight, and bliss; when as indeed,
Oppressing us with pains, and griefs, she makes
Deliverance from them, pass for solid pleasure:
Witness in me those Images of joy
Wherewith she flatters now my expectation:
What will it is highest satisfaction be,
At most, but ease from what tormented me?
Enter Francisca hastily.
Fran. It now imports, you have affected Rage,
As ready at hand as usually you have
Anger, in earnest; But above all, be sure
You discharge it smartly upon me, for here
He presses at my heels.
Enter Don Zancho, and goes to cast himself at Donna Blanca's feet, and she
starting back from him.
Don. Blan. What in'olence is this?
-- Think not Francisca
That I am to be fooled; This is your work,
You shall not stay an hour within these walls;
By all that is good you shall not.

Fran. For heavens sake Madam, be not so unjust
Whining. To an old servant, always full of duty;
But can I govern mad men, would y' have had me
Make all the Street take notice? There he attacqued me
With such transportment, the whole Town had rung on it
Had I not run away; Could I imagine
A man so wild as to pursue me hither
Into your presence?

Don. Blan. -- [Severely and scornfully.]
It is well Don Zancho
Blanca may be thus used; But he that does it
Shall find --
She turns away as going out he holds her by the sleeve.
Don Zanc. Pardon this rudeness Madam; But a man
Made desperate, has nothing more to menage.
Hither I come, to give you satisfaction,
And if my reasons cannot, my heart blood shall;
But you must hear me, or here see me dead.

D. Blan. Since to be rid of him Francisca, I see
Turning to Francisca.] I must the penance undergo of hearing him,
Keep careful watch, to prevent accidents.

Fran. Madam, your Closit will be much more proper
For such a Conference; For in case your Brother
Should come, Don Zancho has a safe retreat
From thence, down the back Stairs. I shall be sure
To give you timely notice.

Don Zanc. And I know perfectly the passage thorough
The Entry, I Have come up more then once that way,
During my happy days.

D. Blan. I think you have reason, since I must have patience
Light us in thither.
[Francisca takes the lights, and going before them, Exeunt omnes.] Scene
changes to the Prospect of Valencia. Enter Don Julio as in the Portal of his
own house.
D. Jul. The light was in the further window, therefore
He went up this way: Now if Fernando
Have not forgot to bolt the Entry Door,
He cannot escape us sure, who ear he be.
-- It Is the only Comfort,
In such misfortunes, when a man has means
To right his Honor, without other help
Then such a friend, as is another self,
And that the shame's even from Domestiques hid
Until it be revenged.
Exit Don Julio as going into his own house. Enter Chichon as coming out of the
Porch before Julio's house.
Chic. S'light it is Don Julio, that I saw go in,
My Master's like to pass his time but ill,
I Will steal in after, and observe, although
My courage cannot steed him, thy wit may,
As things may possibly fall out
Exit Chichon as stealing after Don Julio into his house. Scene changes to
Donna Blanca's Closet. Enter Don Zancho and Donna Blanca as in her Closet.
D. Blan. As fine a story as may be; No Don Zancho,
I Blanca Rocca, am not Carta Blanca,
Fit to receive what e're impression
Your Art --
Enter Francisca hastily.
Fran. -- Your Brother's in the Hall already,
Quick, Quick, and let him find you in your Chamber
Before your Glass, I have set it ready there
[Pointing (to Don Zancho.
Whilst he retires the way that was resolved.
Scene changes to Donna Blanca's Bed chamber. Francisca takes the Candle, and
Exeunt she, and Donna Blanca and D. Zancho another way. Re-enter Donna Blanca
and Francisca as in Blanca's chamber, and she newly seated at her Toilet, and
beginning to unpin. Enters Don Julio.
Don Jul. Blanca I thought you had been a bed ear this,
Have you had company to entertain you,
And keep you up beyond your usual hour?

D. Blan. What Company can I have, you abroad,
As this time of the night?

D. Jul. [Ironically] I fain would find out some such as might please you:
Francisca take a Candle and light me in
To Blanca's Closet.

D. Blan. -- Good Brother what is the matter?
You were not wont to be so curious
As thus to pry into my Privacies.

D. Jul. That you shall know anon: Do as I bid you
Francisca.
Francisca takes one of the Candles, and going before him stumbles and falling
puts out the light. Don Julio taking it up, lights it again at the other on the
Table, and going with it himself toward Donna Blanca's Closet.
D. Jul. These Tropes are lost on me.
Exit.
Fran. Let him go, now we have gained time enough.

D. Blan. Thanks to thy timely fall.

Fran. -- Persons employed
In such trusts, must have their wits about them;
It Is clear that he suspects, but know he cannot,
When once you see all safe, 'twill then import you
To play the Tyrant over him, with reproaches
For this his jealousy.

D. Blan. -- Let me alone for that,
But let us follow him in, that we may mark
His whole demeanor.
Exeunt. Enter Don Zancho in disorder.
D. Zanc. Curse on it, the Entry door's bolted within,
What shall I do?
He pawses. -- I must seek a way
Through the Perfuming Room, into the Garden.
Exit. Enter Don Julio with a Candle in his hand, and passing hastily over the
Stage.
D. Jul. He must be gone this way, there is no other,
The Entry door was bolted.
Enter Donna Blanca and Francisca, and passes over the Stage as stealing after
Don Julio.
Fran. All Is safe, he takes that way, let him a God's name
Follow his Nose, to the Perfuming Room.

D. Blan. He Will fright poor Silvia out of her wits,
But I Will come to her succor, with a peal
I Will ring him.
Exeunt Donna Blanca and Francisca. Scene changes to the Laberatory. Here is to
open a curious Scene of a Laberatory in perspective, with a Fountain in it,
some Stills, many Shelves with Pots of Porcelane, and Glasses, with Pictures
above them, the Room paved with black and white Marble with a Prospect through
Pillars, at the end discovering the full Moon, and by it is light a perspective
of Orange Trees, and toward that further end Silvia appears at a Table
shifting Flowers, her back turned. Enter Don Zancho hastily, and Silvia, that
is, Elvira turning about they both startle, and stand a while as it were
amazed.
D. Zan. O heavens! what is it I see? It Is mere Illusion,
Or it is the Devil in that Angels form,
Come here to finish, by another hand
The fatal work that she begun upon me
By Don Fernando's.

Silvia [(...) Elvira] Good gods Don Zancho here! it cannot be,
Or it is his Ghost come to revenge his death
On it is occasioner; For were he alive;
He could not but have more humanity
Then (having been my ruin at Madrid,
And robbed me of my home, and honor there)
To envy me an obscure shelter here.
Whilst they amazed step back from one another. Enter Don Julio who seeing Don
Zancho with his back toward him drawing his Sword says.
D. Jul. Think not (who ear thou art), by flying thus,
From Room to Room, to escape my just Revenge;
Should thou retire to th'Center of the Earth,
This Sword should find thee there, and pierce thy heart.
Throwing down the Candle he makes toward Don Zancho, but upon his turning
about toward him, he makes a little stop and says.
D. Jul. Nay, then if it be you, I Am happy yet
In my my misfortune; since the gods thus give me
The means at once, and by the self same stroke,
To right my honor, and revenge my friend;
And by that action, fully to comply
With what the Duke requires in the behalf
Of wronged Don Pedro.
Don Julio makes at Don Zancho, he draws and they begin to fight, Silvia, that
is, Elvira crying out help, help, runs to part them, and they stop upon her
interposing. Entor Don Fernando hastily over the Stage, as coming from the
private Apartment.
Don Fer. I hear an outcry, and clattering of Swords;
My friend engaged, must find me by his side.
Exit and reenters at another door. As Fernando comes as to the door of the
Perfuming Room, seeing them at a stand, he stops and stands close.
Don Fer. They are Parlying, let us hear.
Aside. Donna Blanca and Francisca passing over the Stage.
D. Blan. 'Twas Silvia's voice, my heart misgives me somewhat.

Fran. It Is some new accident, or some mistake,
Don Zancho cannot but be safe long since.

Don Blan. However let us in and see.
Exeunt Donna Blanca and Francisca, and reenter as at another door of the
Perfuming Room, and make a stand as surprised with what they see.
Don Blan. We are all undone I fear.

Fran. A little patience.
Chichon stealing over the Stage.
Chic. The noise is toward the Perfuming Room,
I know the back way to it through the Garden.
Exit Chichon, and reenters at the further end of the Laberatory and stands
close.
Don Zan. Wit must repair the disadvantages
Aside. I Am under here, and save my Blanca's honor,
That once secured, there will be time enough
To salve Elvira's.
Whilst this passes Elvira holds Julio by the arm, he striving to get from her.
Zancho to Julio Since by this Ladies interposing thus,
You have thought fit, our Swords should pawse a while,
It may I think consist enough with Honor,
So far to seek your satisfaction Sir,
As to remove mistakes; Know then Don Julio,
That though I have presumed upon your house,
I have not wronged your honor; It is she
With whom you find me, that has brought me hither,
Her I have long adored, and having gor
Intelligence, that she was here concealed,
My Passion I confess transported me
Beyond that circumspection and regard,
Which men of quality use and ought t'observe,
Toward one another's dwellings.

D. Jul. Good gods what an adventure's here? Yet all
Aside. Is well, so Blanca's honor be but safe.
Sir, you surprise me much, can this be true?
To D. Zancho
Blan. Francisca heard'st thou that, Had everman
Aside. So ready a wit, in such an Exigent?

Don Julio to Elvira. What say you Madam?

Fran. We Are surer lost then ever, unless she
Aside. Have wit, and heart, to take the thing upon her.
Madam, make signs to her, and earnestly.
To Blan. Blanca makes earnest signs. Silvia. To Elvira.
Francisca [Aside to Blanca.] She looks this way, as if she comprehended
Your meaning.

Elv. I understand her, and I know as well
Aside. What mischief I may draw upon my self,
But let Elvira still do generously
And leave the rest to fate.
-- Sir, since you press me,
To Julio My humor never could disavow a truth,
Don Zancho's passion, and transportments for me
Beyond all Rules of temper, and discression,
Have been the cause of all my sad misfortunes,
And still I see must be the cause of more.

Jul. Unhappy Creature, how thou have deceived
My prone persuasion of thy Innocence.

Don Zancho [holding out his Sword.] If that suffice not Sir, you have this
ready
To give you satisfaction.

D. Fer. Hell and Furies, but I will yet contain
Aside. My self, and see how far my friend will drive it.

Don Jul. Stay Don Zancho,
And answer me one question, Is this Night
The first of your presuming thus to enter
My house by stealth?

Zan. [Blanca aside to Francisca.] -- The quere is malicious,
Aside. But I must thorough, as I have begun
There was a question, makes me tremble still.

D. Zancho [to Julio.] No Sir, it is not I Will keep nothing from you;
Last Night upon the same occasion.

Jul. -- Hold it suffices.

Francisca [aside hastily to Blanca.] All Is safe, you see, for Godsake lets away
E're Julio perceive us,
Your presence here, can serve for nothing Madam,
But to beget new chances, and suspicions.
Exeunt Blanca and Francisca. Fernando rushes out drawing his Sword.
Fer. Yes, it suffices Julio to make
This hand strike surer then it did before.

Elv. Nothing was wanting to my misery,
Aside. But his being here to over-hear; But yet
I must not suffer the same hand to kill him
A second time, upon a greater error
Then was the first.
Don Fernando making at Don Zancho, Elvira steps between, and Julio also offers
to stay him.
Fer. striving to come at Zancho.] Strive to protect your Gallant from me, do,
Strive, but in vain; The gods themselves cannot:
What you Don Julio too?
Chichon running out from the place where he lurck't, strikes out both the
lights with his hat.
Chic. I have loved to see fighting, but at present,
I love to hinder seeing how to fight.
Knights brandish now your blades, 'twill make fine work
Aloud. Among the Gallipots.
You have me by your side Sir, Let them come
As to his Master. They are but two to two.
Sir follow me, I Will bring you to the Door.
[Aside to his Master and pulling him.]
Don Zanc. There Is no dishonor in a wise Retreat
From disadvantages to meet again
Ones Enemy upon a fairer score.
Chichon pushing his Master before him out of the Door.
Chichon [aside to his master.] There it is, advance Sir, I Will make good the
Rear.
Exeunt Don Zancho and Chichon.
Don Jul. Ho, who is without? bring lights.
He stamps. -- They cannot hear us,
The Room is so remote from all the rest,
What a confusion's this? Recall Fernando,
To Fernando. Your usual temper, and let us leave this place,
And that unhappy Maid, unto it is darkness,
To hide her blushes, since her shame it cannot.
Elvira sola.
Exit Don Julio groping, and drawing Fernando with him. Darkness and horror
welcome, since the gods
Live in the dark themselves; For had they light
Of what is done here below; They would afford
Some Ray to shine on injured Innocence,
And not instead thereof, thus multiply,
Obscuring Clouds upon it, such as the Sun,
Should he with all his Beams illuminate
Men's understandings scarce could dissipate;
I now begin to pardon thee Fernando,
Since what thou have heard, in this enchanted Place,
Carries conviction in it against my firmness,
Above the power of Nature to suspend
My condemnation: Unless wronged virtue might
Expect in thee, a justice so refined
As never was found in man to woman kind.
It Is now I must confess, the lost Elvira,
Fit only for a Cloister, where secure
In her own spotless mind, she may defy
All censures; And without Impiety
Reproach her Fate, even to the Deity.
Exit groaping her way.
ACT. V.
Enter Don Julio talking to himself, and at another door Fernando, who
perceiving it, stands close.
Don. Jul. Blessed be the gods, that yet my Honor's safe,
Amidst such strange perplexities, from which
Fortune, and wit, I think, together joined
With all their strength, could hardly an issue find.
To temper, comfort, or to serve my friend;
What argument? What means? how to assist
Don Pedro in his aims, and to comply
With what I owe the Duke, I see as little,
And less conceive, how to behave my self
As ought a Gentleman toward a Lady,
With whose Protection he has charged himself,
And brought her to his house on that assurance,
Whom to expose, cannot consist with honor,
However she may have exposed her own,
And least of all, how to repair to Blanca
The injury I have done her, whose high spirit
I fear will be implacable. O Heavens!
What a condition's mine?
He stands pawsing, and startles seeing Fernando. Enter Fernando.
D. Fer. Pardon dear Cousin, if to avoid one rudenss
I have another unawares committed.
Whilst fearing to interrupt, I have overheard,
Yet nothing Cousin, but the self same things,
My thoughts have been revolving all this night,
Concerned for you, much more then for my self,
For I upon reflection, find I am
Much easier then I was; By certainty
Freed from the forest weight, Perplexity.
In the first place, You must forgive your friend,
The high distemper of last Nights transportments,
I hope you will find me well recovered from them,
And that my morning resolutions are
Such, as will make amends.

D. Jul. Make no excuse dear friend, such provocations
Surprising, are above Philosophy,
And it is no small experiment of yours,
If after them, you can have brought your self
So soon, to fix a judgment what to do.

Don Fer. I have fixed on that, which I am sure will serve
All Interests but my own, as heretofore
I understood my happiness, but now
I shall no longer place it in any thing
Dependant on the wild Capricho of others.
-- No Julio.
I will be happy even in spite of fate,
By carrying generosity up to the height.
Elvira shall her dear bliss, owe to me,
Not only by desisting, but by making
Her loved Don Zancho marry her, his refusal
Alone, can make me kill him over again.

Don Jul. Since that unhappy Maid, withal her beauty
And that high Quality, has made her self
Unworthy of your Marriage, certainly
None but Fernando, ever could have pitched
Upon so Noble a thought, but think withal
What difficulties are likely to obstruct it.

D. Fer. Say what occur's to you.

D. Jul. Don Zancho is a man of wit, and courage,
And though his passion out of doubt be great,
Since it has made him do so wild an action,
As that of coming twice into my house
After so strange a manner; Yet Fernando
You cannot but imagine, such a One,
Likely to have quite different reflections,
Upon Elvira's conduct for a wife,
From what he has, upon it for a Mistress,
They are two notions very differing:
Besides should the proposal but appear
In the least kind, to spring from your desire,
Whose former commerce with here is not unknown,
It were the only way to drive him off,
Past all recall, I think few have accepted
Wifes recommended to them by their Rival.

D. Fer. In that you have reason I confess; But Julio
Think of the way, for marry her he must
Or die, and by no other hand but mine.
I am thinking of it, and I hope to purpose,
Don Julio pawsing. What Interposer can be found so fit
As Blanca in this business? since Don Zancho
Has long been her particular acquaintance,
And what can be more Natural, then for her
To take to heart, Elvira's chief concernment?
Whom he finds here retired in her misfortune
As to her surest friends.

D. Fer. You Have lighted Cousin on the only way,
And lose no time I beg you.

D. Jul. The least that may be; but you must consider
In what a predicament I am likely
To be with Blanca, at present.

D. Fer. I understand you (since the jealousy
You expressed of her.) But it is to be hoped
The peace will not be long a making.

D. Jul. You little know her spirit, once inflamed,
But as I Will lose no time, so I Will omit
No Art to bring her to a temper, fit
To hear and to advance the Proposition.

D. Fer. Heaven give you good success.

D. Jul. (Julio turning back to Fernando.
I had forgot to tell you, that I think
It will be necessary, that as soon
As I have weathered Blanca's storm, I make
A visit to Don Pedro, to prevent
His coming hither, to disorder us,
Before we have set things Right.

D. Fer. 'Twas not ill thought on; And till your return
I shall keep close in your Apartment;
For Blanca has not seen me, and Elvira
Has too great cares upon her to be curious.
Exeunt. Enter Blanca and Francisca, Blanca with a gay air. As in her
Ante-Chamber.
D. Blan. Say my Francisca, can Romances equal
Our last night's adventure? was there ever
Such a come off? Our Sex has used to boast
Presence of mind in Exigents of Love,
But I believe none of us ever matched
Don Zancho's readiness in an occasion
So sudden and so Critical.

Fran. Ever give me the man of ready Parts.

D. Blan. But prithy, whilst we give Don Zancho his dues,
Let us be just too, to poor Silvia's merit;
Was ever any thing so generous?
Or so obliging to a Mistress?

Fran. So it appears Madam, I must confess,
But the excess of it makes it suspicious.

Don. Blan. Fie, leave this humor of detracting still,
And call her to me, that I may embrace
And thank her; That done consider how
To bring her off, who has brought us off so well.
Offers to go out. Enter Don Julio.
Fran. Stay I beseech you, and compose your self
To act a part quite of another Nature;
Here comes Don Julio, toward whom I hope
You Will tune your self, to a far differing Key
From that of thanks and kindness.

Don Blan. Let me alone for that, I Will play the Dragon.
As Julio advances, Blanca turns from him with a furious countenance, and flies
out of the Room, Julio following her.
D. Jul. Dear Sister stay, and hear me.

D. Blan. Detested Brother leave me.
She makes as if she were going, and he holds her.
D. Jul. Hear me but Blanca, and then vent your passion
Against a Brother, that condemns himself
As much as you can do; But hear me speak.

D. Blan. Your actions Julio, have spoke loud enough
To Echo through the world, your shame and mine;
Has all the tenor of my life been such,
With such exactness, of unblemish't conduct,
That malice might have stained the noon day Sun
More easily, then tarnish't Blanca's honor,
And must that Honor, now be prostitute,
By the Capricho of an unworthy Brother,
Should any other have invaded it,
Had not you righted her, She has a heart
Would have sound ways to right her self; But you
Th'Agressor, What remedy but Rage?
She flings from him, and Exit.
Fran. She acts it rarely.
Aside.
D. Jul. Was ever man so unfortunate as I?
To Francisca. I must confess she has reason, and the sense
She thus expresses of my fault, becomes her,
But it must be your work, my dear Francisca,
To pacify; When once you shall but know
All that has past these Nights, I am certain
You Will say, no humane confidence could ear
Be proof against such circumstances.

Fran. Alas, my offices can signify
As if she were crying. But little, But I Am sure the occasion
Gives me a sad heart, O my dear Lady.

D. Jul. I love good Nature, but I prithy leave
And come in with me, that I may tell thee all.
Exeunt. Enter Don Pedro, and Fulvio as in his lodging.
Don Ped. A God's name Fulvio, what has been thy meaning,
To make me sit up almost all last night
Expecting thee, when such impatience held me?
Thou were not wont to be so negligent
In things of so great weight.

Fulv. Nor have I been it now, It Is over care
Of your commands, has held me so long from you;
You know the orders that you gave me Sir,
To watch Don Zancho's motions; Accordingly,
I sat all day in my observing place
Till about twilight; I saw him and's man
Steal as it were abroad; I as warily,
Dogged them from Street to Street, till Sir, at length
He made a stand up close against a Wall,
Whilst that his Servant entertained a Woman
Close Veiled, who was come out I think on purpose
From an adjacent house; soon after he
Accosted her himself, their Conference
Lasted but little, she made have away
To the house from whence she came, and he as much
To follow her in.

Don Ped. Where wast? and why came thou not presently?
To give me notice as you were directed.

Fulv. At that you will not wonder, when you know
Whose house he entered; But at this you will wonder,
It was Don Julio's

D. Pedro startling.] Ha! Don Julio's say thou?
He pawses. But now I think on it it is no marvel Fulvio,
Since newly come to Town, For I remember
Don Julio told me, that Don Zancho and he
Had always lived in friendly correspondence.

Fulv. Visits Sir, only of fair civility
After long absence, are not usually
Begun by twilight, in such cautious manner;
Nor ushered in, by Female veiled conducters:
But pray Sir, hear the rest.

D. Ped. What can this be? To Fulvio.
say on then quickly,
Aside.
Full. I presently concluded with my self,
That since Don Julio was the friend on whose
Assistance you relied against Don Zancho,
You near would think Sir, attacquing him
As he came out from thence, I judged it therefore
My wisest course to stay, and mark the issue.
And stay I did, till it was after midnight,
About which time, walking from side to side,
That I might see both Issu's of the house,
It being as light almost as day, I saw
The Gallant and his man leap from the wall
Of Julio's Garden, and from thence in have
Make home. (Julio's

D. Ped. God's Death man thou dream'st! Don Zancho from Don
In that manner; Awake fool and speak sense.

Fulv. I say but what I saw, as I see you.

D. Ped. O the Devil, What the same Villain
Found the affronter of my friend too, here
In the same kind? Give me my Cloak and Sword,
I must know the bottom of this.
Exeunt. Enter Blanca and Francisca, as in her Ante-Chamber.
D. Blan. I come from seeing and caressing Silvia,
But with most strange surprise, at her Comportment
Toward me.

Fran. How! Madam.

D. Blan. My words, and Actions both, expressing to her
Not only highest gratitude and kindness,
But a solicitude in the concerns
Of her honor, equal to what she had shown
In mine; They were received with such a coldness,
With such an air of Melancholy pride,
With half replys, and those not half to th'purpose,
As make me with amazment to conclude,
That either she has lost her understanding,
Or that there is somewhat in it we understand not.

Fran. She Is a Maid of an odd composition;
And besides that, I needs must tell you Madam,
That having had my observation freer,
Then you perhaps during last nights adventure,
I remarked some what both in her demeanor,
And in Don Zancho's, makes me confident
They met not there strangers to one another,
As you imagine; But there is time enough
To think and talk of that: What presses now
Is your right ordering of Don Julio:
You have begun, as well as can be wished.

D. Blan. Say did I not do my part?
Jollily.
Fran. -- Beyond imagination,
But take heed now, of over doing it,
It Is time to tack about, to reconcilement.
And thought of drawing those advantages
From the Embroilment, as may for the future
Secure you from like accidents.

D. Blan. -- You say well, but how?

Fran. The first step must atonement be between you,
Of which he has so earnestly conjured me
To be an Instrument, that you consenting
To give him a hearing, through my mediation,
I am made for ever, an settled in the power
Of serving you, by better cozenning him:
Besides he tell's me, he has that to say,
And to propose unt'ee, as shall not only
Excuse him with you, but prevent all danger
Of prejudicial rumors, which might rise
From last night's accident.

D. Blan. -- Agreed, let us in
And play the second part.
Exeunt. Enter Don Zancho and Chichon as in his own house.
D. Zan. Were we not born with Cauls upon our heads
Jollily. Think thou Chichon? to come off twice a row
Thus rarely, from such dangerous Adventures.

Chich. Rather I think with Combs, so often to venture.

D. Zan. Thou Coxcomb say, had I not my wits about me?

Chich. 'Twere too uncomplaizant to deny that,
You know I love not to talk seriously;
But tell me now in earnest, are you satisfied
To have come off so, is there no qualm remaining
Upon your gentle heart, for leaving in the suds
A poor distressed Virgin, who she is
I neither know nor care, but I am sure
Had generous Chichon, to save his life
Played a sweet Innocent Lady such a trick,
He would have past but for a Recreant Knight,
And much the more, she having shown her self
So gallant, as to save her Ladies honor
T'expose her own: Say true Don Galor, say,
Were your part found in a Romance or Play,
Whose Character would it not disluster?

D. Zanc. How soon a fool's bolt's shot, without distinction
Of what is the mark. Thou censurest without knowing
Who th'exposed Lady is. Know then Chichon
And wonder, it is Elvira, that Elvira
For whom I sighed, like to have sighed my last
On her score at Madrid: Don Fedro's Daughter.

Chich. You raise enchanted Castles in the Air,
But were it as you say, that makes the thing
More inexcusable; You had been too blame
To have used a stranger so; But so to have served
A Lady whom you had once professed to love,
Raises the fault above all heightning.

D. Zanc. Nay, then I see I must once play the fool,
In answering a fool seriously,
The things thou say are heightnings indeed,
Not of my fault, but merit in the Action
Toward my Blanca, since to save her honor,
I did not only sacrifice Elvira's,
But thus expose mine own: Time may recover
Elvira's fame, and mine this quickly shall.
Claping his hand on his Sword. Here take this letter, and employ your wit
In finding out the means with secrecy
To give it Don Fernando unobserved,
I shall not stir from home, till I have his answer.

Chic. You found him Sir, a man of quick dispatch
In your last business with him at Madrid.
Exit Don Zancho. How honorable it is to serve a Don.
What Petit Basque on the other side the Mountains,
Durst have aspired to the high dignity
Of carrying a Cartal? A Monsieur
Would sooner have put up a twinge by the Nose,
Then sent a challenge by a serving man.
Exit. Enter Blanca furiously, and running to a Cabinet, takes out thence a
Stiletto, and Francisca earnestly after her as in Blanca's Closet.
Don. Blan. Villains shall find, I am not unprovided
Wrongs to revenge, that cannot be forgiven.

Fran. I thought the strange constraint upon her self
Aside. Wherewith she heard her Brother, would serve in the end
But to make rage, break out with greater fury;
Yet it is well she kept it in so long,
As to get rid of him.
Good Madam, moderate your self a little.
To Blanca.
D. Blan. Preach temper to the damned souls in hell,
'That they may teach the Traitor moderation,
When I have sent him thither with his Devil.

Fran. I do confess the provation such,
As more then justifies all these transportments;
And therefore I beseech you think not, Madam,
In what I say, I can the least aim have
Of saving him; from the extremest fury
Of your resentment; or preserving her,
Who has had the impudence to abuse you so
Under pretense of serving: May they perish,
But let it be in such away, as may not
Draw a more dismal ruin on your self;
Let swift destruction seize them; Yet let not
Madam your hand, but head dispense their fate,
What can the Issue be, of such an action
As that of which I see that shining steel
And flaming Eyes of yours? The threatening Comets,
I beg but the reflection of a moment.
Blanca walking upon the Stage with enraged jestures pawses, at length
sheathing, and putting her Stiletto in her sleeve with a sober composed tone.
Francisca I thank you, for recalling me

Don. Blan. Thus to my self, I will be temperate:
Aside. But it shall be to make revenge the surer.

Fran. Her tone, nor jestures cannot cozen me,
Aside. They both seem to disguise a black design,
But I shall watch you, it is a half gained cause
In furie's course, to have begot a pawse.

D. Blan. Do what I bid you presently Francisca,
Send to Don Zancho, and let him know from me,
I earnestly desire to speak with him.

Fran. Lord Madam, what do you mean?

D. Blan. To make the pleasing proposition to him,
As I told my Brother I would.
-- Say, am I not moderate?
But do without reply, what I command.

Fran. Madam, I shall obey.
-- But observe you so withal,
Aside. As to prevent the mischief if I can.
Exit Francisca.
D. Blan. Ye Gods assist me in my just revenge,
Or you will make an Athist; My first work
Must be before Don Zanho come to speak
With his sweet Mistress, and with words and looks
As false as here is have been, so to delude her
With hopes of what she wishes, that they both
May jointly fall my Honor's sacrifice.
Exit. Enter Don Fernando as in Don Julio's private Apartment.
D. Fer. Since generosity has so far got
The mastery, as to have made me fix
Upon a resolution so unheard of,
I long to see it executed.
-- But stay,
I think, I hear Elvira's voice without,
And Blanca's too, here curiosity
He makes as if he harkn'd, and then To over here, is pardonable.
Exit as to go where he may better hear. Silvia Enter Elvira and Blanca as in
the Ante-Chamber, and Fernando peeping as from behind a door.
D. Fer. Here not a word can escape me.

Silvia Elvira Madam you wrong my zeal, in serving you,
Whilst you attribute to any other motive
My yesterdays behavior.

D. Blan. In a tone that may show what she says to b'forc't.
Such niceties Elvira are out of season,
I seek your satisfaction in a Love,
Wherein it seems you have been long engaged.
Donna Elvira looking round, and Fernando starting back.
D. Fer. I hope she did not see me.
Aside.
D. Elv. My satisfaction say you, in my Love,
Of whom for heaven's sake? If you mean Don Zancho,
You Are very far from guessing at my thoughts.

D. Fer. By heaven S'has seen me, and plays the Devil still.
Aside.
D. Elv. By all that is good, I am far from loving him,
Aside.
I say not worse because I know she loves him.

D. Fer. Ah Elvira! this is too much, yet not enough
To change in me, a Noble resolution.
A noise is heard as of people coming up stairs.
D. Blan. I hear some coming up stairs, should it be
Aside. Don Zancho, I am not yet ready for him,
[To Elvira.
I see we are likely to be interrupted here
Elvira, we shall be better in my Closet.
Exit Blanca.
D. Elv. Madam, I Will follow you.
What can she mean? since that she needs must think,
I know the passion she her self has for him.
Elvira having stayed a while behind, as she is going to follow Blanca. Enter
her Father Don Pedro, and Fulvio, she starts and stands confounded; He seeing
her draws out his Dagger and makes at her.
D. Ped. Vile stainer of my blood, have I here found thee?
Elvira perceiving the door a little open where Don Fernando is, flies thither
and gets in.
D. Fer. This makes it clear she saw me.
Aside as Elvira thrusts in. Don Pedro seizes the door before it be quite shut,
and they struggle, he to pull it open, and Don Fernando to shut it, who after
some contest, Don Fernando gets it close, and bolts it within: Don Pedro as an
enraged person pulls and bounces at the door.
D. Ped. In vain should Mountains interpose, between
Her and her punishment.
He bounces still as to break down the door. Enter Donna Blanca.
D. Blan. What Bedlam have we here? and where is Elvira?

D. Ped. You have one here, will know how to revenge
Conspiracies to affront him; And you Lady
Who ere you are, that seem to take upon you,
You Had best produce the wicked thing you have named,
Or by this Steel --
Donna Blanca cries out.
Don. Blan. Ho! brother, brother, help against a madman.
Enter Don Julio.
D. Jul. Peace, Blanca, peace, you know not what you say,
Don Pedro is Master here.

D. Blan. I know not your Don Pedro, but I Am sure
One to be tide in Chains, could do no more
Then he has done.

D. Jul. Have patience Sister; It Is Elvira's Father,
With cares enough upon him to justify
Any distemper.

Blan. -- -- Precious Elvira's Father;
Nay, then I leave you.
Blanca flings out of the Room.
Jul. O the unluckiness of his coming
Aside. So unseasonably; 'Twas to prevent that,
I went abroad to seek him.

D. Ped. What Is this Don Julio? can a Gentleman
Of Blood, and Honor, use another thus?
What after such engagements to the Duke,
And to my self, to be my friend and helper,
To prove the shelterer of my shame's chief Author;
I do not wonder now, Don Zancho himself,
Should have been here at midnight.

D. Jul. I am hard put to it, help wit to bring us off.
Aside. [To him.
Be as distempered as you please Don Pedro,
It shall not alter me. But yet methinks
It would not ill become your gravity,
To think a while, before you make a judgment,
And rashly frame injurious conclusions,
From things wherein a friend has merited from you:
Do but consider, and then say, what Julio
Could do of more advance to what you wish,
Then having found your Daughter, to have brought her
To his own house, where she might be with honor
Accompanied, and served as such, by Blanca,
Until such time, as things maturely weighed,
You should a final resolution take.
And since Don Zancho's being here last night,
I see's no secrett'ee, methinks you ought
TO have been so just to me, as to believe
That since I admitted him within these walls,
It was in order to the serving you.

D. Ped. Noble Don Julio, you must pity have
Of an old man's distemper in affliction,
I see I was in the wrong, pray pardon it.

D. Jul. O this is more then needs, and now good Sir,
If you will be pleased to walk a turn or two
In The Garden, I Will there give you a full account,
How I have laid things for your satisfaction.

D. Ped. I Will wait on you.

D. Jul. -- Go Sir, there lies your way:
(Turning (to the Page.
And you boy fail not when Don Zancho comes
To give me notice of it in the Garden.
Exeunt. Enter Don Zancho and passes over the Stage with Chichon after him, and
Enter Francisca, and pulling Chichon stays him.
Fran. Stay, stay, Chichon, a word w'e, it imports.
She whispers (with him.
Chic. I hope you are not in earnest.

Fran. -- By my soul I am;
There is no other way, but for us both
To get up the back way, and there to watch
The time to interpose.

Chic. Can she be such a Fury? her looks are
All milk and honey.

Fran. You cannot fancy any thing so Tragique,
But she is capable of executing,
When once provoked in point of Love and Honor,
Beyond her bounds of temper.

Chic. -- Lead the way.
[Aside
I Will have the pleasure to hold up the fright
She Is in, since I am sure there is no danger,
Knowing as I do my Master's mind toward Blanca;
Besides it is to be hoped, that these disorders
May produce somewhat that may put an end
To my Masters Quarrel, or afford me means
To give Fernando his Letter.
Exeunt. Enter D. Fer. Elvira lying upon the Couch in the private A.
D. Fer. This last dissimulation moves me more
partment. Then all the rest, but yet it must not alter
What honor has inspired, see how she lies
And how scarce brought to life from her dismay,
She resumes scorn, to have been saved by me;
But multiply what injuries thou will,
Persidious Maid, thou shall't not disappoint
Fernando of the glory that he aims at,
Of making thy proud heart Elvira, owe
It Is happiness to him.
-- But I hear again
A noise without
He peeps. -- It Is Don Zancho,
And I see Blanca coming toward him;
This falls out luckely, that I may hear
What passes, for certainly their meeting
Avowedly thus, can be no other Subject,
But what Don Julio has proposed to Blanca.
Exit as to go harken. Enter Don Julio and Don Pedro as in the Garden.
D. Jul. That Is all the remedy, that in these cases
The wisest can propose unto themselves,
His fortun's strait it is true.

D. Ped. That Is what I least regard, in this occasion,
So honor be but safe, the less they have,
The more will be her penance for her folly;
But should Don Zancho upon any Umbrage,
From what has past between them, prove so Insolent
As to reject the marriage, Then I trust --

Jul. O say no more of that, Rely upon it,
Should he be guilty of that horrid Outrage,
This Sword should pierce his heart, though the only friend
I have in the world, should interpose his own;
And Sir, to let you see my franck proceeding,
Come along with me, I Will bring you to a place
Where jointly over hearing all that passes
'Twixt him and Blanca, should he play the Villain,
His life may pay for it, ear he stir from thence.

D. Ped. May heaven repay such generous acts of friendship.
Exeunt Enter Don Zancho, and Fernando appears as behind the door.
D. Zanc. For her so suddenly, and so avow'dly
To send for me hither, is very strange,
What can it mean?
Enter Blanca.
D. Blan. Now lend me temper heaven, but for a moment,
Aside Till calmly I have drawn him to pronounce
The sentence of his own too noble death
For such a Traitor.
To him with an affected cheerfulness.
I think you come not without some surprise
Don Zancho, at my sending for you so,
But let us sit down for I have much to say to you.
She takes him by the hand, and seats him in one Chair, and she sets her self
in the other close to him on his right hand, and fumbles in her sleeve.
D. Blan. I Am so well placed I cannot miss the mark.
Aside.
D. Zanc. Good Madam, what is the matter for I see
Disorder in you, put me out of pain.

D. Blan. That I shall quickly do.
-- Know then Don Zancho,
In the first place, you must not interrupt me,
What ever you shall hear; I Will take it ill else
When I have done, then speak your mind at leisure,
I come not to argue, but conclude.

D. Zanc. Your will's a Law to me,
-- [Aside.
But whither tend's all this?

D. Blan. I do for once, allow you to remember,
All that has past between us,
The folly of my Love, The falsehood of yours;
That done, And never to be thought on more.

D. Zanc. For heavens sake Madam --

D. Blan. -- Break not the Rule was set.
Know I instructed am in all your story,
And am so far grown Mistress of my self,
That I who the other day, could scarce over come
The sense of a slight failour at Madrid,
Can here at home suffer Indignities:
And tell you calmly, and with unconcern'dness,
Be you Elvira's, and Elvira yours,
I come to do a part you little looked for
From Blanca's spirit, I must make the marriage,
All things are ready, and her Father here,
Now you may speak Don Zancho, but the thing
Admit's of no delay.

D. Zanc. Pawsing a while.
But can this be in earnest? sure it cannot;
What need these trials of so firm a faith?

D. Blan. Leave triflng, it is no longer time for tricks,
It is not in the power of fare to alter
The resolutions taken.
Don Zancho pawses.
D. Fer. -- She has put it home.
Aside.
D. Zan. Madam, you use me hardly, this demeanor
Passes my skill, to judge from whence it springs;
You say it is not in the power of fate,
To change your resolutions; but I Am sure
If they be such, 'twill less be in it is power
To alter mine; but yet before I die
You must be left without excuse, by knowing
The truth of all.

D. Fer. Here it imports indeed to be attentive.
Aside.
D. Zanc. Madam, it is true, that absent at Madrid,
The custom of the Court, and Vanity,
Embarked me lightly in a Gallantry,
With the most famed of beauties there Elvira;
Those, and no other, the true Motives were,
To all my first adresses, till her scorns
Which should have stopped them, had engaged me more
And made a Love in jest, a point of honor:
I bo^^ all her disdains, without transportment,
'Till having gained her waiting Woman's kindness,
I learned from her, that all Elvira's slightings
She would have thought, had sprung from severe Maxims,
And preciousness of humor, were the effects
Of deep engagement in another Love,
With a young Gallant Don Fernando Solis,
With whom the cruel Dame, was so far gone;
As to admit him almost every night
Into her Chamber.

D. Fer. -- Blessed gods what do I hear?
Aside.
D. Zancho [Continuing.] I scarce believing the thing possible,
Urged my Intelligencer, to do for me
That which her Lady for another did,
And to admit me to her Chamber, where
By being Eye witness of her Lady's actions,
I might transfer my entire love to her self.
She granted my request, and late one Night
Somewhat before the Gallant's usual hour,
She brought me a back way up into her Chamber,
Within Elvira's; my stay had not been long,
When having found the truth of what she had told me,
Converting rage into appearing kindness
To my informer, and expressing it
Uncautiously, we made a sudden noise,
With which Elvira alarmed, and coming in,
Followed by Don Fernando; That fell out,
Which you have heard before.
Don Julio beckning Don Pedro after him, passing over a corner of the Stage.
D. Jul. By this time, I suppose, she will have made
The proposition to the full, and we
Shall come at the just time to hear his answer.
Exeunt Don Pedro and Don Julio.
Don Zancho [Continuing.] If since that hour, I have ever seen
Or thought upon her, till last night's surprise,
May I for ever perish; And methinks
The use I made of that, to your advantage,
Might challenge from you, a more just construction.

Don. Blan. I told you at first, I came not here to argue
But to conclude; say, will you marry her?
Don Julio and Don Pedro peep out as from behind the hanging.
Don Jul. We Are come you see, just as we could have wished.

Don Ped. His fate hangs on his Lips.
To Blanca.
Don Zanc. You are Mistress of your words, and actions Madam,
And may use me as you please; But this hand
Shall sooner pierce this heart, then ere be given
In marriage to Elvira.
Don Pedro and Don Julio rush in with their swords and daggers drawn, and Don
Zancho draws too.
D. Ped. Then Villain die, heaven is too weak to save thee
By any other means.
Fernando draws and rushing out.
Don Fer. -- But here is one that shall,
Or fall by his side.

D. Ped. -- O heaven's! what is this?
Don Fernando Solis protecting him,
Nay, then the whole world conspires against my Honor.

Don. Blan. For heavens sake Gentlemen!
Donna Blanca runs in between.
Chic. Now by my Grandam's Pantable it is pretty,
From behind. I Will brush their Coats if once it come to fighting,
Fernondo's of our side.
Francisca and Chichon with a long Broom run out also from behind the hanging.
Don Jul. What frensie's this Fernando? was it not you
Engaged me to effect the Marriage? sure we are all
Bewitch't.

D. Fer. -- Stay my Don Julio, stay,
And let Don Pedro have patience but to hear me;
It Is true, but you know well upon what grounds
Those are quite changed, by my having over heard
All that has past; For my Elvira, Julio,
Proves spotless in her faith, as in her Beauty,
And I the only guilty, to have doubted:
What have I then to do, but here to prostrate
My self at her offended Father's feet,
And beg his pardon? That obtained, t'implore
His help, to gain me hers, as to a person
In whom respect for him, has always held
Proportion with my passion for his Daughter.

D. Ped. You know Don Julio, when I spoke with you,
The terms of estimation, and respect
Wherewith I mentioned to you this Gentleman,
And therefore since in his adress t'Elvira
There was no other fault, but making it
Unknown to me; And that I see his thoughts
Are truly Noble; Honor thus engaged,
That ought to be forgot, and I to think
My self most happy, in such a Son-in-law:
But where is Elvira?

D. Fer. She Is there within, where I dare not appear
Before her, knowing now such guilt upon me,
If Blanca would employ her Interest
And eloquence, perhaps she might prevail
To get her hither, when she shall have told her
What changes a few minutes time has wrought.

D. Blan. I never went on a more pleasing Arrant.
Exit Don Blanca and Francisca.
Fran. As she goes out.
I am struck dumb with wonder.

D. Fer. Now Blanca is away, I Will take this time
To spare her blushes Julio, and tell you
Though I have broak one marriage for Don Zancho,
You needs must give me leave to make another,
To which unless I Am very much deceived,
You Will find on neither part repugnancy.

D. Jul. I understand you, and I thank the gods
They did not make me understand the wrong,
Till they have made it none, since I observe
Don Zancho's looks joining in your desires.

D. Zanc. A heart so full of love as mine for Blanca,
Does best express it self, when it speaks least.
Enter Donna Blanca, Donna Elvira and Francisca. Elvira casts her self at her
Fathers feet.
D. Elv. Now that the justice of the gods, at length
Has cleared me from suspicions, derogatory
To the honor of your blood, I hope a Cloister
May expiate my fault as to a Father.
Raising her.
D. Ped. Rise Child, The Enclosure I condemn you to
Is Don Fernando's Arms, give him your hand.

D. Elv. It Is yours Sir, to dispose of I confess,
And if it be your will, I must submit;
But let him know, who could suspect Elvira,
She never could be his, but by obedience.

D. Fer. I am Thunder struck.
Elvira giving him her hand.
D. Elv. -- Be not dismayed Fernando.
Since I profess this a mere act of duty,
Another duty may Elvira move,
To re-inflame on better grounds her Love.

D. Jul. [Ironically.] Blanca I fear you will hardly be persuaded
To give yours to Don Zancho; But a Brother.
For once may play the Tyrant; Give it him,
It must be so.
They join hands.
D. Fer. I now renounce old Maxims, having you
Elvira, I am sure, The very best proves true.

Chic. Hold there, I beg you Sir, That will appear
By that time you have Married been a Year.

FINIS.

