THE THIRD SPEECH OF THE LORD GEORGE DIGBY, To the House of Commons, Concerning
Bishops, and the City Petition, the 9th. of Febr: 1640.

Printed for Tho: Walkley. 1640.

The Lord Digbies Speech to the House of COMMONS, concerning Bishops, and the
City Petition the ninth of Febr. 1640.
Mr. SPEAKER,
I Know it is a tender subject I am to speak of, wherein I believe some within
these walls are engaged with earnestness in contrary opinions to mine; and
therefore it will be necessary, that in the first place I beseech the patience
of this House, that they will be pleased to hear me without interruption,
though somewhat I say should chance to be displeasing, I hope there will be
somewhat from me ere I conclude, that may be of service to this House.

Sir, if I thought there were no further design in the desires of some, that
this London Petition should be committed, then merely to make use of it, as an
Index of grievance: I should wink at the faults of it, and not much oppose it.

There is no man within these walls, more sensible of the heavy grievance of
Church government, then my self; nor whose affections are keen to the
clipping of those wings of the Prelates, whereby they have mounted to such
insolences, nor whose zeal is more ardent to the searing them, as that they
may never spring again.

But having reason to believe, that some aim at a total extirpation of
Bishops, which is against my heart, and that the committing of this Petition,
may give countenance to that design, I cannot restrain my self from
laboring to divert it, or at least to set such notes upon it, as may make it
ineffectuall to that end.

Truly Sir, when this Petition was first brought into the House, I considered
it in its nature, in the manner of the delivery in the present conjuncture of
affairs, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, to be a thing of the highest
consequence that any age has presented to a Parliament; and the same thoughts
I have of it still.

I profess, I looked upon it then with terror, as upon a Commet a blasing
star, raised and kindled out of the stench, out of the poisonous exhalation
of a corrupted Hierarchy: Me thought the Commet had a terrible tail with it,
Sir, and pointed to the North, the same fears dwell with me still concerning
it, and I beseech God they may not prove Prophetical: I fear all the
Prudence, all the Forecast, all the Virtue of this House, how unitedly soever
collected, how vigorously applied, will have a hard work of it. Yet to hinder
this meteor, from causing such distempers and Combustions by its influence, as
it then portended by its appearance, what ever the event be, I shall discharge
my conscience concerning it freely, and uprightly, as unbyast by popularity, as
by any Court respects. Sir, I could never flatter, the sense of this House,
which I reverence so much, as to suppress a single no, that my heart dictated,
though I knew the venting of it might cast prejudices upon me, had my fortune
placed me near a King, I could not have flattered a King. And I do not
intend now to flatter a multitude.

I shall desire those worthy Aldermen, and the rest here of the City of
London, not to take any thing I shall say in the least way of disparagement, or
reflection on the City, I look not upon this Petition, as a Petition from the
City of London, but from I know not what, 15000. Londoners, all that could be
got to subscribe.

When this Petition was first presented, there might be more reason for the
Commitment of it, as being then the most comprehensive Catalogue we had of
Church grievance, but now that the Ministers by their remonstrance, have given
us so fair, and full an Index of them without those mixtures of things
contemptible, irrational, and presumptuous, wherewith this Petition abounds, I
do not know I profess to what good end it can be committed, being full of
contemptible things, but first let me recall to your mind the manner of its
deliverie: And I am confident, there is no man of judgment, that will think
it fit for a Parliament, under a Monarchy, to give countenance to irregular,
and tumultuous assemblies of people, be it for never so good an end: Besides,
there is no man of the least insight into nature, or History, but knows the
danger, when either true or pretended stimulation, of conscience, has once
given a multitude agitation.

Contemptible things (Sir) swarm in the 8. 13. 14. 15. 16. ^7. Articles of
this Petition. Did ever any body think, that the gaites of Ovid, or Tom. Caryes
muse, should by 15000. have been presented to a Parliament, as a motive for
the extirpation of Bishops, the scandal of the Rochet, the Lawne sleeves, the
four corner Cap, the Cope, the Surplesse, the Tippet, the Hood, the Canonical
Coat; etc. may pass with arguments of the same weight, only thus much let me
observe upon it (Mr. Speaker) that one would swear the Penners of the Article
had the pluming of some Bishops already, they are so acquainted with every
feather of them. In a word, I know not whether be more preposterous to infer
the extirpation of Bishops from such weak Arguments, or to attribute as they
do to Church government all the civil grievance not a patent, not a
Monopoly, not the price of a commodity raised, but these men make Bishops the
cause of it.

For the irrational part (Mr. Speaker) first they petition us in a Method
only allowable with those, whose Judgment or Justice is suspected, that is
Inquum petere, ut aequum feras; There is no Logic, no reasoning in their
demands: It were want of Logic in me to expect it from a multitude, but I
consider the multitude in this is led by implicit faith, to that which has
been digested, and contrived but by a few, and in them truly I cannot but
wonder at the want of Reconciliation here.

A Petition, Mr. Speaker, ought in this to be a kind of Silogisme, that the
Conclusion, the prayer ought to hold proportion with the premises, that is
with the Allegations, and Complaints, and to be reasonably deduc't from them.

But what have we here a multitude of Allegations, a multitude of Instances,
of abuses, and depravations of Church government: And what inferred from
thence, let the use be utterly abolisht for the abuses sake: As if they should
say, that because Drunkenness and Adultery are grown so epidemicall, as is
alleged in the Petition. Let there be no more use of Wine, nor of Women in
the Land.

Christ's discipline has been adulterated, it is true, the whole Church
inebriated by the Prelates, therefore infer our Petitioners, let not so much
as the chaste, the sober use of them be suffered.

Give me leave to continue one of the Comparisons a little further, should it
be demonstrated unto us, that Wine could not be made use of without
drunkenness, and withal some such liquor presented, as healthy, and as
nourishing, from which no distemper could arise; I should not blame any man for
desiring to pluck up the Vine by the roots. But for the moveable illssake, to
take away the solid good of a thing, is just as reasonable in this, as to root
up a good tree, because there is a Canker in the branches.

For the bold part of this Petition, Sir, what can there be of greater
presumption, then for Petitioners, not only to prescribe to a Parliament, what,
and how it shall do; but for a multitude to teach a Parliament, what, and what
is not, the government according to Gods Word.

Besides, what is the Petition against, is it not against the government of the
Church of England, established by Acts of Parliament? Is it not against the
Liturgy, against several forms of Divine Service, ratified by the same
Authority?

It Is true, Mr. Speaker, the Parliament may mend, may alter, may repeal Laws,
may make new, and I hope in due season we shall do so in point of
Church Government: but in the meanetime let me tell you, Sir, I cannot but
esteem it an irreverence, an high presumption in any to petition point blanck
against a Law, or Government in force.

Representment of inconvenience may be made, (as the Ministers have done) such
as may endure the wisdom of a Parliament, to advise Laws, to rectify, to
repeal them; but it imports the very essence of Parliaments, to keep up the
honor of its former Acts, and not to suffer them to be further blasted from
abroad.

Believe me, Mr. Speaker, all the reverence and authority, which we expect
from future times to our own Acts, hereafter depends upon our upholding the
dignity of what former Parliaments have done, even in those things which in
their due time we may desire, and intend to reverse.

Mr. Speaker, you see in what plain language I have set forth unto you the
faults of this Petition, notwithstanding as great as they are, so they may not
obtain any seeming countenance from us; I find my self willing to have them
past by, especially when I consider how naturally prone all mankind is, when it
finds it self oppressed beyond patience, to fly unto extremes for ease. And
indeed, I do not think, that any people has been evermore provoked, then the
generality of England, of late years, by the insolences, and exorbitances of
the Prelates.

I protest sincerely, Mr. Speaker, I cannot cast mine eye upon this Petition,
nor my thoughts on the practices of the Churchmen, that have governed it of
late; but they appeared to me as a scourge employed by God upon us for the
sins of the Nation; I cannot think of that passage in the Book of Kings,
He that escapes the Sword of Hazael, shall Iehu slay, and he that escapes
Iehu, shall Elisha slay.

Me thinks, the vengeance of the Prelates has been so laid, as if 'twere
meant no generation, no Degree, no Complexion of Mankind should escape it.

Was there a man of a nice and tender conscience? him have they afflicted with
scandal in Adiaphoris, imposing on him those things, as necessary, which he
thinks unlawful, and they themselves knew to be but indifferent.

Was there a man of a legal conscience, that made the establishments by Law,
the measure of his Religion? him have they netled with innovations with fresh
introductions to Popery.

Was there a man of a meek and humble spirit, him have they trampled to dirt
in their pride.

Was there a man of a proud, and arrogant nature, him have they bereft with
indignation at their superlative insolence about him.

Was there a man peaceably affected, studious of the quiet, and tranquillity of
his country? their incendiariship has plagued him.

Was there a man faithfully addicted to the Right of the Crown, loyally
affected to the Kings Supremacy, how has he been galled by their new Oath? a
direct Covenant against it.

Was there a man tenatious of the liberty, and propriety of the subject, have
they not set forth Books, or Sermons, or Canons distructive to them all.

Was there a man of a pretty sturdy conscience, that would not blanch for a
little. Their pernicious Oath has made him sensible, and wounded, or I fear
prepared him for the Devil.

Was there a man that durst mutter against their Insolences? he may inquire
for his Luggs, they have been within the Bishops visitation; as if they would
not only derive their Brandisment of the spiritual sword from S. Peter, but
of the material one too, and the Right to cut off Ears.

Mr. Speaker, as dully, as faintly, as unlively, as in Language these Actions
of the Prelates have been expressed unto you, I am confident there is no man
hears me but is brimfull of Indignation.

For my part I profess I am so enflamed with the sense of them, that I find
my self ready to cry out with the lowdest of the 15000 down with them, down
with them, even to the ground.

But M. Speaker, when I cast mine Eye round upon this great and wise Assembly,
and find my self a part too (though the most unworthy and Inconsiderable) of
that Senate, from whose dispassionate and equal Constitutions, present and
future times must Expect their happiness or Infelicity.

It obliges me to the utmost of my power to divest my self and others of all
those disturbances of Judgment which arise ever from great provocations, and
to settle my thoughts in that temper which I think necessary to all those that
would judge clearly of such things as have incenst them.

I beseech you gentlemen let us not be led on by passion to popular and vulgar
Errors, it is natural (as I told you before) to the multitude to fly unto
Extremes, that seems ever the best to them, that is most opposite to the
presentest object of their hate.

Wise Counsels (M. Speaker) must square their resolutions by another measure,
by what is most just, most honorable, most convenient: Believe me, Sir, great
alterations of Government are rarely accompanied with any of these.

M. Speaker, we all agree upon this; that a Reformation of Church Government
is most necessary, and our happy unity of opinions herein should be one
Argument unto us to stay there, but Sir, to strike at the Root, to attempt a
total Alteration, before ever I can give my vote unto that, three things must
be made manifest unto me.

First, that the mischiefs which we have felt under Episcopal Government
flow from the nature of the function, not from the abuses of it only, that is,
that no Rules, no Bamdaryes can be set to Bishops able to Restrain them from
such Exorbitances.

Secondly, such a frame of Government must be laid before us, as no time, no
Corruption can make liable to proportionable inconveniences with that which we
abolish.

And thirdly, it must be made to appear that this Utopia is Practicable.

For the first, Sir, that Episcopacy a function deduced through all ages of
Christ's Church, from the Apostles times and continued by the most venerable and
sacred order Ecclesiastical; a function dignified by the learning and Piety of
so many Fathers of the Church, glorified by so many Martyrdomes in the
Primitive times, and some since our own blessed Reformation, a government
admired (I speak it knowingly) by the learned of the Reformed Churches
abroad, and lastly a Government under which (till these late years) this
Church has so flourished, so fructified, that such a government, such a
function, should at the faggend of 1640 years be found to have such a Close
Devil in it, as no power can Exercise, no Law restrain appears (Sir) to me a
thing very improbable: I profess I am deceived Sir if Trienniall Parliaments
will not be a Circle able to keep many a worse Devil in order.

For the second, I know not the strength of other men's fancies, but I will
confess unto you ingenuously the weakness of my faith in the point, that I do
not believe there can any other Government be proposed but will in time be
subject to as great or greater inconveniences then Episcopacy, I mean
Episcopacy so ordered, reduct and limited as I suppose it may be by firm and
sollid boundaryes.

It Is true Sir, we cannot so well judge before hand of future inconveniences,
for the knowledge of the faults and mischiefs of Episcopal government
resulting from fresh and bleeding Experience.

And the insight into dangers of any new way that shall be proposed being to
rise only from speculation, the apprehension of the one is likely to be much
more operative then of the other, though perhaps in just reason it ought to be
the weaker with us, it is hard in such cases for us to preserve an equal and
unpropense judgment; since being in things of this world so much too hard for
faith and contemplation: yet as Divine as our inspection is into things not
experimented, if we harken to those that would quite extirpate Episcopacy, I am
confident that instead of every Bishop we put down in a Diocese, we shall
set up a Pope in every Parish.

Lastly M. Speaker, whether the subversion of Episcopacy, and the introducing
of another kind of Government be practiceable, I leave it to those to judge
who have considered the connection and interweaving of the Church Government
with the Common Law, to those who heard the Kings Speech to us the other Day,
or who have looked into reason of state.

For my part (though no Statesman I will speak my mind freely in this) I do
not think a King can put down Bishopps totally with safety to Monarchy; not
that there is any such Alliance as men talk of twixt the Myter and the Crown,
but from this reason; that upon the putting down of Bishopps, the Government
of Assemblies is likely to succeed it. That (to be effectual) must draw to it
self the supremacy of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction that (consequently) the
power of Excommunicating Kings as well as any other Brother in Christ, and if a
King chance to be delivered over to Satan, Judge whether men are likely to
care much what becomes of him next.

These things considered M. Speaker, let us lay aside all thoughts of such
dangerous, such fundamental, such unaccomplished Alterations: and all thought
of countenancing those thoughts in others; let us all resolve upon that course
wherein (with union) we may probably promise our selves, success, happiness,
and security, that is in a through Reformation.

To that, no man's vote shall be given with more zeal, with more heartines then
mine. Let us not destroy Bishopps, but make Bishopps such as they were in the
Primitive times.

Do their large Territories, their large Revenues offend? let them be
retrencht, the good Bishop of Lippo had but a narrow Diocese.

Do their Courts and subordinates offend? let them be brought to Govern, as
in the Primitive times, by Assemblies of their Clergy.

Does their intermedling in secular affairs offend? exclude them from the
capacity, it is no more then what reason and all Antiquity has interdicted
them.

That all this may be the better effected, M. Speaker my motion is that: First,
we may appoint a Committee to collect all greevances springing from the
misgovernment of the Church (to which the Ministers head of Government will be
sufficient without countenancing this Petition by a Comitment) and to represent
it to this house in a Body.

And in the next place that we may (if it stand with the order of Parliaments)
desire that there may be a standing Comittee of certain members of both Houses
who (with a number of such learned Ministers as the Houses shall nominate for
Assistants) may take into consideration all these greevances, and advise of the
best way to settle peace and satifaction in the Government of the Church, to
the comfort of all good Christians and all good Commonwealths men.

FINIS.

