depiction of delivery of petition Sec Thurloe

Sr: These Gentlemen have a Petition for you to deliver to the Council of State

Hugh Peter's

Paulus Van der Parre

The Humble Petition of the States General of the United Provinces

Allard Peter Iongstall.

William Nieuport

Hieronymus van Beverningk

A

Sherwin



The DVTCH Usurpation: OR, A Brief View of the Behavior OF THE STATES GENERAL
Of the United Provinces, Toward the Kings of Great Britain:

With some of their CRUELTIES and INJUSTICES Exercised upon the Subjects of the
English Nation.

AS ALSO, A Discovery of what Arts they have used to Arrive at their late
Grandeur, etc.

By WILLIAM de BRITAIN.

Et genus humanum and Mortalia temnitis arma,
At sperate Deos.
Virg. LONDON: Printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the Three Roses in
Ludgate Street. MDCLXXII.

To His Royal Highness THE Duke of YORK.
SIR,
COuld I but use my Pen, as You Your Sword,
I Would Write in Blood, and kill at every Word:
The Hogans then my Muse's Power should feel,
And find my Verse as fatal as Your Steel.
But sure, Great Prince, none can presume to Write
With such Success as You know how to Fight:
Who carry in Your Looks the Events of War,
Designed like Caesar for a Conqueror.
The World of Your Achievements is afraid,
While Neptune's Watery Kingdoms You Invade;
And that much-courted Mistress the Ocean's now
Not by the Venetian-Duke Espoused, but You.
And now, Great Prince, may You Victorious be,
Your Fame and Arms o'er-spreading Land and Sea:
May You our haughty Neighbors overcome,
And bring Rich Spoils, and Peaceful Laurels Home;
Whilst They, Their Ruin or Your Pardon meet,
Sink by Your Side, or fall before Your Feet.
THE Dutch Usurpation.
The Belgic Provinces.
THe Dominion of the Belgic Provinces being devolved to Philip the second King
of Spain, who designing to Himself the Western Monarchy, and (the best medium
to that end) was to reduce those Provinces to a Kingdom. But they being
fortified with great privileges, and many of them inconsistent with Monarchy;
'twas adjudg'd by sober persons, 'twoud prove a work of great difficulty, and
that He would never effect that he aimed at. Besides, the reformation of
Religion, which then began to grow to some strength, moved the King to reduce
them back to the Church of Rome, by the power and terror of the Inquisition:
Which when the people violently opposed, the King then resolved to bring them
by Spanish Rhetoric (that is by Sword and Cannon) to obedience. To that end
Duke Alva is sent into the Belgic Provinces.

The Bloet-rod settled in the Provinces.


King Philip sends the Duke of Alva, (an old and expert Captain) with a puissant
Army to be his Viceroy amongst them. No sooner was he settled in his new
Government, but he established the Bloet-rod, as they term it, a Council of
Blood, made up most of Spaniards.

Anno 1567. He took off the Heads of the Counts of Horn, Egmont, and of diverse
other persons of quality, The Government of the Provinces altered.
Citadels were erected, and Taxes imposed upon the people to support them. The
Political Government of the Country in many things altered, and the people
spoiled not of their privileges only, but of their liberties. Amongst the
reformed he brought in the Inquisition, and therein behaved himself very
tyrannically. This Five thousand Families leave the Provinces.
powered Oil on the fire, formerly kindled, and put all into a combustion; about
five thousand Families quitted their Country, some flying into Germany, others
into France, and most into England, where they were received with all kindness
and civility; Churches were appointed them, (they being of the reformed
Religion) and many Noble and great privileges were bestowed upon them.

During those Troubles the Prince of Orange and Count Lodowick, his Brother,
were very active, and gave Duke Alva employment

Holland and Zeland for the Prince of Orange.
All Holland (except Amsterdam) followed the Fortune and side of the Prince,
together with all the Towns of Zealand, except Middle-burg.

Anno 1573. Duke Alva was recalled, afterward Don Lewis of Requisens was
appointed Governor. After him, the Prince of Parma, who brought the Hollander
into worse case then ever.

They declare Philip of Spain to be fallen from his Government.
Yet Anno 1581. they declare that Philip of Spain was fallen from His
Government, they renounce and abjure Him for their Sovereign, they break his
Seals, change the Oath of Allegiance, and took a new Oath of the people, never
to return to the Spanish Obedience.

This done, the States (for so they called themselves ever after) chose Francis
Duke of Anjou, to be their Prince; during whose unfortunate Government, the
Duke The Duke of Parma provails much.
of Parma prevailed in all places, especially after the death of William Prince
of Orange, who was traitorously slain Anno 1584.

Now were the Hollanders truly miserable, desperate of pardon from their
enraged Prince, and having no person of courage to head them, none of power to
protect them, but such as were likely to regard their own profit, more than
their Interest. England was the only Sanctuary they had now left, to which they
sue, offering the Queen the Sovereignty of their Provinces. But that Heroic
Queen not intending to Her self any thing, saving Queen Elizabeth takes the
Hollanders into her protection.

Articles concluded between Queen Elizabeth and the States.


the honor of relieving Her distressed Neighbors, Anno 1585. took them into
her protection, and concluded (amongst others) of these Articles.

That the Queen should send them five thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse into
the Netherlands to fight for them.

That they should pay Her Ten Pounds per Cent. for all sums of money, She
should lend them, or disburse for them. And Interest upon Interest.

And likewise five pounds for every English Gentleman, or Officer, which should
dye in their service.

All which sums of money were to be paid unto the Queen at the end of the War.

And that for the reimbursing of the said moneys, the Briel, Flushing, and
Castle of Ramekins were to be delivered unto the Queen, as Caution and Pledges.

Queen Elizabeth sendsover to the States 5000 Foot and 1000 Horse.
The Queen, in performance of Her Agreement, sent them 5000 Foot, 1000 Horse,
Money and a Governor, (The Earl of Leicester) and had the Cautionary Towns
delivered unto Her. The renowned Sir Philip Sidney was the first Government of
Flushing, who died in their service.

Casimir also, the Elector Palatines Son, drew down to the assistance of the
States an Army of fifteen thousand Horse and Foot, at the instance, and great
charges of the Queen.

When the Earl of Leicester came to wait upon the Queen, at his going over to
be their Governor; She strictly commanded the Earl, that he should have a
regard of the English Soldiers, and that they served God, and demean d
themselves religiously. Which they did with such exemplary zeal, that a sober
man might have thought, that the United Provinces then stood in Christendom.
The Christian Religion was first planted in Holland, Zealand and Friesland by
an Englishman.
And that pious Queen did therein well, for the Christian Religion was first
planted in Holland, Zealand, and Friesland by Willibroad, an English man, the
first Bishop of Vtretcht; whence by degrees it gained on the rest of the
Countries. But since (by the ill practices of some amongst them) they are much
fallen from the purity of it.

The Queen now resolves to set all the Royal Signatures of Her favor upon the
United Provinces, and give them the most eminent demonstrations of Her Bounty
and Kindness. The Staple of English Cloth, that The Staple of English Cloth
removed to Delf.
was formerly at Antwerp, She settl d at Delf, in great quantities; by reason of
the great concourse of people, which that Trade brought with it, the Town
became rich, well built, and beautified with spacious Streets.

Flushing, before the English came thither* was a very poor Town, but by the
Countenace of the Queen, the English Garrison there, and the Trade which the
English brought thither, it flourished in a high measure; and by their means,
so did all their great Towns and Cities there.

Queen Elizabeth gives leave to the Hollanders to fish in our British Seas.
She encouraged them in their Trades, protected them in their Navigation, gave
them Licenses to fish upon the British Seas, (which before was not permitted
unto them) and the English did courageously fight for them (to vindicate their
rights) whilst they were employed in Fishing, and in their Manufactures, by
which they increased in Wealth. But one infelicity happened The King of Denmark
seizes 7 0 Ships of the Hollanders.
unto them, that the King of Denmark, having taken some displeasure against
them, laid an Imbargo upon seven hundred of their Ships, which were passing
backward and forward upon the Sound for Corn, by reason whereof the people
there, were now more distressed with fear of a Famine, than with the Sword of
the enemy. But the potent Queen presently gave them relief. For She supplied
them with great quantities of Corn. And by Her Interest (with the disbursment
of some moneys) the Ships were discharged, and came home to their several
Ports, in the United Provinces.

Now they triumph, giving out their Meddals with this inscription, What we are,
we are by Gods Grace and Queen Elizabeth.
Now was the Queen looked upon as their only Patroness, and the English, the
best sinews of their Wars, and the Atchievers of the greatest Exploits amongst
them: Near Newport was fought that memorable Battle 'twixt the Archduke
Albert, and the State. The Victory next under God, was gained for the States,
by the valor of the English, and the excellent conduct of those Noble and
Gallant persons Sir Francis and Sir Horatio Vere.

Ostend defended by the English 3 years, 3 months.
Ostend not walled till the Low Country Wars, and then with a Mud-wall only;
and that not finished till the Archduke set down before it. In so much as the
Arch-Dutchess Isabella is said to have sworn, That She should not shift her
Smock till the Town was taken, Who, had She kept her rash Oath, had been very
-- For the Town being Garrisoned by the English, and under Sir Horatio Vere,
(who was Governor thereof) held out against the Archduke a Siege of 3 years,
and so many The Spaniards lost 100000 men before Ostend.
months. The Spaniard at this Siege lost one hundred thousand men.

Breda, a Town well fortified, and the Barony of the Prince of Orange, from
whom being taken by the Spaniards in the beginning of the Wars, 'twas again
recovered Breda recovered by the English.
by seventy valorous English Soldiers; who, hiding themselves in a Boat covered
with Turf, were conveyed into the Castle, which they easily mastered, and made
the Prince Lord again of all his Dominions and Territories there. The speech of
one of the Soldiers there, upon that occasion, deserves never to be forgotton;
who fearing lest by his violent noise in coughing (though he did repress it) he
should, together with himself, betray his Companions: Kill me (says he)
fellow soldiers, lest we be killed.

The particular Actions, Gallantry, and noble Attempts of the English here,
would deserve a just volume of themselves. By their valor and courage most of
the Spanish Soldiers were so wasted and consumed, that the King of Spain was
enforced (to give a stop to their Conquests) Queen Elizabeth maintained 40000
horse and foot for the Hollanders.
to send fifty thousand veteran Soldiers out of Spain and Italy into Flanders.
And the Queen did supply the States with answerable numbers of men and money,
insomuch as She maintained for them forty thousand Horse and Foot in their
service.

She made many Naval expeditions into America, and Q* Eliz. infests the King of
Spain in America.
there did much infest the King of Spain, sinking his Ships, burning his Towns,
battering down his Forts and Castles, interrupting all his Trade and Commerce
there; and all this to bring that King to Reason and Justice, as to the United
Provinces.

The King of Spain hereat exceedingly incensed, Anno 1588. sends his Invincible
Armado against England, raised a Rebellion in Ireland against the Queen, sent
many Spanish Soldiers to Kingsale to the assistance of the Rebels there,
committed many depredations in Cornwall here; many sanguinary and desperate
persons were encouraged to poison, murder and destroy Her, who made many
attempts upon Her Royal person. So this excellent Queen being incircl'd with so
many infelicities and troubles, and beset with so many calamities, and being
wearied with the Wars in the Netherlands (because they did so exhaust Her
Treasure, and destroy Her brave people) and finding the States to grow
insolent, and to perform no Agreements, and withal, observing their Subjects
to grow rich by the War, (of which they made a Trade and Merchandise) and Her
Kingdoms to be thereby impoverished; She resolved to make peace with the
Spaniard, (being assured the Belgic War was never to be ended by conquest) and
to that purpose She signified Her Royal pleasure unto the States; But finding
her Majesty to be in earnest, (as She had great reason for it) they were much
perplexed. For if She had deserted them, they had lost their chief and only
support; they sent over their The distressed States petition the Queen not to
desert them.
Ambassadors into England, and in the most humble manner that could be,
petitioned Her Majesty, that She would not cast off the Cause of God and man,
and leave sixty Towns, with a poor distressed people, a prey to the malice and
avarice of the barbarous Spaniard. But She earnestly pressed them for the
payment of Her money, adding withal threats, That, if She was not obeyed
therein, She would take such courses, as Her lenity was not used to be
acquainted with: and so dismissed them.

Hereat the States were much disturbed; and thereupon, Anno 1598. the
distressed States sent the Lord Warmond, The States send Ambassadors to Q
Elizabeth.
and others their humble suppliants unto Her Majesty, who in the lowest posture
of humility, did acknowledge themselves obliged unto Her for infinite benefits.

But herein Her Majesty excelled the glory of Her Ancestors, that by how much
She exceeded others in power, by so much Her Majesty excelled them in acts of
Mercy and Piety, by whose means and aid, the French have gained many Victories,
and they more.

As for the Money which the States owed Her, they beseeched Her Majesty to
consider the dangers daily growing upon them, their poverty and disability to
pay, and that by original Agreement with Her Majesty, no moneys were to be
paid, till the Wars were ended.

The Queen di pleased with the S ates.
The Queen understanding their unjust practices and ill dealings with Her, told
them that She had been often deluded by their deceitful supplications,
ungrateful actions, unhandsom cavillings, and pretenses of poverty (when their
rich Cities confuted them) and She hoped God would not suffer Her to be a
pattern to other Princes, to help such a people, who bear no reverence to
Superiors, nor take care for the advantage, reputation, or safety of any but
themselves. And required them to pay Her the money they owed Her. And advised
them for the future, that they should not seek a remedy against growing danger,
from old acounts by compulsion, but rather merit new favors by their gratitude
and thanks for the former.

At these expressions of Her Majesty, the poor distressed Alliance with Q*
Elizabeth was of great advantage to the States.
States thought themselves confounded, both for their former and future charges:
Yet considering the name of Alliance with England, was of exceeding advantage
unto them, they resolved to submit (as they could not avoid it) to such
Conditions as Her Majesty should lay upon them.

The Queen again pressed them for the payment of Her Q. Elizabeth councelled,
and inclined the States to peace.
Money, and for Peace; but She could not incline them to peace (being never
disposed to pay Her Money which must be at the end of the War.) Yet in
compliance with Her Majesty the Account was stated. And the principal Debt
(besides Interest upon Interest, and the loss of Her Subjects The States owed
Q. Elizab* two millions of pounds.
in their Wars) did amount unto 8000000 Crowns: and they did agree to pay Her
Majesty, during the War, 100000 Pounds yearly, and the remainder when peace was
concluded and the Cautionary Towns surrendered; and that in the mean time 1500
English Soldiers should remain in the Garrisons, and that the States should
pay them.

The Queen having Her Debts stated, began to be more friendly to them, and
wished them to follow their Trade of fishing upon the British Seas; (which She
gave them leave to do) that they might be the better able to pay Her, and
support the charges of their War, which they did effectually.

But I could never find that they ever paid unto Her Majesty any of the money
they owed Her. For, it is not to be conceived, that those persons whom Her
Majesty, for so many years, could not bring to an account, would, at the last,
pay Her any thing.

But Her Majesty being grown into years, and those vigorous and great parts She
formerly had somewhat declining; they (that the Queen might not exact of them
the payment of Her money, according to Agreement with Her) continually by
Emissaries (which they had about Her Majesty and their Pensioners) did infuse
Jealousies into Her Head, and what Plots, and secret designs the Cing of Spain
had against Her Majesty, and Her Dominions, which did so amuse Her, that I do
not observe Her Majesty ever pressed them after, for the payment of any money.
But from time to time She supplied them with men as they desired; and ever made
good to them her own Motto, Semper eadem.

Q Eliz. died April. 3. 1603. She lost 100000 men in the States service.
And as Her assistance to them was the first, so it continued to the last, that
is, until April 3. 1603. at which time She died, having lost not fewer than
100000 of Her Subjects in that War: And having spent in Naval expeditions, for
their sakes, against the King of Spain, in America, and elsewhere, above a
Million of money, besides the Debt which the States owed Her.

King James proclaimed King.
King James being proclaimed King, and the undoubted Heir and Successor to the
Queen. The States sent their Ambassadors to the King, and after some
Complements to Him, they signify to His Majesty, That they had lost Her, whose
Goodness and Benefits to them were not to be expressed in words. But they had
found His Majesty, as the Heir of Her Kingdom, so the Imitator of Her Virtues,
and persuaded Him to a War with Spain, and begged supplies of Him.

King James refuses to assist the States.
But King James being a wise Prince, (and not to be taken with their arts and
cunning) told them, that He had no difference with the Spaniard, and also, that
King Philip had voluntarily offered Him His assistance, if any dispute should
have arisen concerning His Kingdoms. And for the Archduke, he made War with
the Queen, not with the Realm.

A League concluded between King James, and the Spaniard.
This highly discomposed the States, But King James treated with Spaniards,
and concluded a League with them. And the States, such kindness had His Majesty
for them, were offered by King James to be comprehended in the Articles of the
Treaty, but they refused; yet, by the mediation of King James a Peace was
propounded to the States from the King of Spain. But they signified unto His
Majesty, The States refuse to treat with the Spaniard, except they be declared
by him Free-States. Peace concluded between the Spaniard and the States. The
Provinces of the States.
that they would not treat with the King of Spain, till they were declared by
him Free States, abstracted from all right and title unto any of the Provinces
or Places by them possessed, which He might pretend unto. All which, by the
great endeavors of King James, were granted unto them by the King of Spain.
And so Anno 1609. a Peace was concluded between the King of Spain and them.

The Provinces in the possession of the States, at the time of the conclusion
of the Peace, were Holland, Zealand, West-Friesland, Overyssell, Groningland,
Vtrecht, Zutphen, three parts of Gelderland, and so some frontier Towns and
Place, of contribution in Brabant and Flanders.

All which Provinces, with their frontier Towns in Brabant and Flanders are not
so big as Yorkshire, one of our Counties in England. And there may be a
greater number of stout and gallant men for War raised out of that one County,
than they can raise out of all their Provinces.

Being now declared Free States, and Peace concluded with the King of Spain;
yet for their own security, they were enforced to maintain an Army in their
Country. The The Charges the States are at to maintain their Co^tries.
charge whereof could not amount to less than six hundred thousand Pounds
yearly, besides other vast expenses, as the preservation of their Dikes, etc.

All, or the greatest part thereof, they raised out of the Fishing of the
British Sear, or on the people by Excise, and taxes upon every Acre of Ground.
Which is such, that the whole Country returns into their hands every third
year, and by other Impositions, so insupportable in themselves (and amongst men
which would be thought to live in a Free State) that should any Prince in
Christendom, lay but half so much upon their Subjects, it would occasion a
Revolt.

So that, whereas one of the first causes of their falling off from their
Prince, was to free themselves from Taxes and Impositions, illegally (as they
said) enforced upon them, they have drawn upon themselves more arbitrary, and
illegal Payments, than any Nation in the world. So true it is, that a Rebellion
once suppressed, the King is more King, and the Subjects more subject. But if
it thrives and happen to be prosperum seelus, and to advance it self to a Free
State (as they call it) Tyranny and Oppression, are the two Pillars which must
support it.

The States being now absolute, and having obtained a Sovereign Dommion, only
the Cautionary Towns stook in their Stomachs, and might prove a curb to them:
But being unwilling to move the King concerning them, by the great sums of
money they then owed Him (and being The projection of the States to get the
Cautionary Towns from King James.
not well able to pay Him) they would, by some projection or other endeavor to
gain them; Thereupon they resolved, as the best expedient, not to pay the
English Soldiers in the Cautionary Towns, who being thereby put to distress and
want, would be enforced to borrow some moneys (for their present support) of
the States of Zealand, which they did; who therewith advised the States
General, at the Hague, they consulting with Sir Ralph Winwood, Ambassador for
His Majesty there, (who was a favorable Instrument to them in this Business)
sent Instructions to the Lord Caroon, then their Ambassador in England, to
acquaint the Lord Treasurer herewith. And in case of no satisfaction from him,
to make his Adresses to the King, which he did. His Majesty being much
incensed, that His Subjects and Soldiers should starve for want of their Pay
in foreign parts, sent for the Lord Treasurer, who drawing His Majesty aside,
and telling Him how empty His Exchequer was, His Majesty told their Ambassador,
that, if his Masters would pay Him His Money they owed Him, He would deliver up
those Towns.

The next day their Ambassador waiting upon the King: to know whether His
Majesty persisted in the same Resolution, His Majesty answered, That He knew
the States of Holland to be His good Friends and Confederates, bot in point of
Religion and Policy; therefore He apprehended not the least fear of any
difference that should fall out between them. In contemplation whereof, if they
would have their Towns again, He would willingy surrender them.

Cautionary Towns delivered to the States.
The States hereupon made up the money presently, and sent it to the King. And
so Anno 1616. the cautionary Towns were delivered unto them.

The King such was his Royal Bounty unto them) remitted the Interest, and five
pounds for every Gentleman, and Officer, which died in their service.

The Treasure and men which the Spaniard spent in the Wars,
Which Sum certainly would have amounted unto treble the Principal. The King of
Spain having spent in those Wars one hundred and fifty millions of Crowns, and
wasted 600000 men; and was plunged so deeply in debt (notwithstanding his Mines
of Mexico and Peru that having taken up money in all the chief Banks of
Christendom, He was forced to publish a Diploma, wherein he dispensed with
himself (as the Holland Stories report) from payment, alleging that he had
employed these moneys for the public Peace of Christendom.

What Sum the King received of them, it is not comporting with the duty of a
Subject to question, or dispute; Yet we may observe the treacherous and
unhandsom practice of the States, to suggest such notoriour untruths to His
Majesty, when they themselves, by Agreement with the Queen, were to pay the
Soldiers in those Towns; however they had been ungrateful, to suffer such
persons who had so highly merited of them) to want; when the States were built
by the English valor, and by their blood united and cemented.

But having gotten the possession of their Towns, (which were the Lock and Key
of their Provinces) and having compounded for those exceeding great sums of
money which they owed His Majesty, (which sober men did think they never had
been able to pay if rightly stated) they presently from Poor distressed People,
are swelled up to those The States declare themselves High and Mighty States.
spreading and magnificent Titles of High and Mighty States. Insolent Boggs!
They might rather have said unto Sedition, Thou art my Father; and unto
Rebellion, Thou art my Mother.

Now they make their Naval Expeditions into America, and other parts of the
World: And by the leave and license of King James, paying some small Tribute,
they The States paying a Tribute, Fish in the British Sas.
fall to their Fishing Trade upon the British Seas. Wherein they did so
exceedingly thrive, that toward the latter end of King James His Reign, they
employed yearly eight thousand four hundred Vessels of all sorts for their
Trade The number of ships the States employ in the Fishing Trade.
of Fishing upon the British Seas, (which number since is vastly increased)
whereby they have a Seminary of Mariners ready for public Service or
Navigation. And upon Computation it appeared, that they made in one year of the
Herrings only, caught upon the British Seas, the sum of five millions of our
pounds; (the Custom and Tenth The riches the States gain by their fishing upon
the British Seas.
of Fish advancing to the Public Treasury no less than eight hundred thousand
pounds) besides the Cod, Ling, Hakes, Pilehard, and other Fish, compated to
amount unto near three millions more.

By reason of those maltitude of Ships and Mariners, they have extended their
Trade to all parts of the World, exporting for the most part, in all their
Voyages, our Herrings and Fish: in exchange whereof, they return the several
Commodities of other Countries, and sell the same at their own prices. Great
part of their Fish they sell for ready money, which commonly they export of the
finest Gold and Silver; and coming home, Re-coin it of a baser Alloy, under
their own stamp; which advance a great profit to them. The returns which they
make for their Fish in other Commodities, amounts to a vast sum: And all this
Wealth, Riches and Grandeur, is derived unto them from the Indulgency and
Bounty of the Kings of Great Britain.

The Hollanders now beginning to be considerable in the World, by reason of the
many Royal Favors wherewith they are enriched by the Crown of England: The
English and they having several Factories and Places in the Isles of
Molluccaes, Banda, Amboyna, and elsewhere in the East Indies, (the English
being some years there settled before the Hollanders had made any discovery of A
League between King James and the States for advance of Trade in America.
those Islands) Anno 1619. there was a Solemn League and Agreement by King James
and the States of the United Provinces, in a strict Alliance, and social
Confederacy of the English East India Company, and that of the United
Provinces, for the better advancing and carrying on of the Trade and Commerce
in those Islands, and elsewhere in the East Indies.

Here are so many marks of Kindness, such ample Demonstrations of Favor, as no
People could have greater Obligations (if any Principles of Honor or Justice
could oblige them) to make returns of Gratitude, and give the greatest
instances of their Sincerity and Faithfulness to the Kings of Great Britain,
and the English Nation. But with them, Favors past are not accounted; they
love no Bounty but what is merely future.

At Amboyna, (one of the Scyndae or Setibe Islands, lying near Seran, and has
many lesser Islands depending upon it, it is of the Circuit of 60 Leagues) an
Island which bears Cloves plentifully, for gathering and buying whereof the
English Company had placed five several Factories: The head of all at the Town
of Amboyna, (so called from the Island the chief Town in it) two at Hitto, and
Larico, in the same Island; and two others at Latro, and Cambello, in the
Island of Seran. But the Hollanders observing the English to be better beloved
by the Natives than themselves, and that they began highly to improve and gain
by their Trade and Traffic, hating that any should thrive but themselves, Anno
1622. upon pretense of a Plot between the English and the Japonesses to betray
their Fortress in the Town of Amboyna, (which was built at the charge of the
English, and for the safety of Trade and Commerce) the Hollanders having about
two hundred Soldiers there, (to the end they might ingross the whole Trade and
Traffic of the said Islands to themselves) most treacherously murdered, and
with Fire and The Massacre of the English at Amboyna.

The States seize the Factories of the English at Amboyna.


Water tortured the English there, (far exceeding the Barbarity of all Nations)
seized upon their Factories and Goods, to the value of four hundred thousand
pounds: All the English and Japonesses which they could meet with, they sent
into their own Islands to be their Slaves.

An Act so horrid! that the Hollanders are infamous to this very day among the
rude and savage Indians, for their barbarous Inhumanity executed upon the
English, (the greatest Patrons, under God, they ever had in the World.) King
James being made acquainted with this barbarous fact, told the States
Ambassador that He never read or heard of a more cruel and impious Act. But I
do forgive them, (said the King) and I hope God will: But my Sons A Prophecy
of King James.
Son will revenge this Blood, and punish this horrid Massacre. The King was a
wise Prince; and believe it, Wisdom is next door to Prophecy.

The States seize upon all the Islands and Plantations of the English in
America.
Having thus murdered the English, (their insolency and ingratitude did not
end there, but) they forcibly seized upon the Islands of Seran, Nero, Waire,
Rosingon, Latyo, Cambello, Nitto, Larica, Lantare, the Islands of Poloroone,
near Neighboring to the Molluccaes, Polaway, and Machasser Islands of Banda;
all which Islands were formerly surrendered by the general consent and act of
the Natives, unto the English, and under the Sovereignty of the Kings of
England They seize upon their Factories and Goods there, possess themselves of
one thousand eight hundred English, which they disposed of into their own
Islands.

By this artifice they gained to themselves Amhoyna, Banda, the Molluoca
Islands, Ternate, Tidor, Manner, Rochian, Machiam, and Botono, with some others:
In all which, the English had their Factories and some Castles, Islands
productive of Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Cinnamon, and other rich Commodities; from
whence the Persians, Turks, Chinois, and Africans fetched them. But by reason
the Hollanders were superior to them in strength, and that horrid act of
Amboyna had made a sad impression upon their spirits, (expecting the same
measure of cruelty from them, as they of Amboyna) were enforced to quit the
said Island and Foctories.

So that these insolent and ungrateful persons have gained to themselves solely
the Trade of the whole World for Spices.

The States drain 400000l. yearly for Spices, out of the Kings Dominion.
By the loss of which Islands, there is dreined yearly by them out of the King
of Englands Dominions for Spices, four hundred thousand pounds, besides the
loss of the Trade in those Islands to the English, (which would have much
improved and enlarged it self into other places) cannot amount unto less than
four millions of pounds sterling yearly, though formerly some inconsiderable
quantities of them did grow in Cupe, Duco, Montio, and Mara, but of The riches
the States gained by seizing of the English Factories.

The stock of the East India Company of England lost.


late not any. The advantage hereof cannot amount unto the Hollander less than
seven millions of pounds sterling yearly: they setting what Rates and Prices
they please upon these Commodities.

By these most unjust practices of the Hollanders, the Stock of the English
Company, which did amount unto about sixteen hundred thousand Pounds was the
greatest part of it lost.

Poloroon delivered by the Natives to King James.
Poloroone, by the general and voluntary act of the chief men of the Country
was surrendered into the power of King James, and the possession thereof was
given to His Majesty's use to Captain Courtrop December. 23. Anno 1616. No other
Nation, at that time, having any Interest in it, or pretension to it, being a
very rich and plentiful Island: from whence the English might have expected
great Treasure and advantages. The Hollanders, notwithstanding their League and
Treaty with King James, Anno 1619. the English being then in possession of it,
with great force entered the said Island, demolished all their Buildings, pulled
up all their Nutmeg-trees, and sent them into their own Poloroon seized by the
States from the English.
Islands to be planted, destroyed all their Factories there, and seized upon all
their Goods, and forced all the English from thence, and to dispeople it, that
it might be of no use to the English for the future, under color of a Plot
that the Oran-keys and Nobles of Poloroone had conspired with the people of
Seran to massacre the Dutch, as well at Poloroone as Poloway: The Dutch
Governor at Poloway sent command to the Oran-keys, that they should come over
to him, a Priest and seventy Oran keys immediately took a Prow, or small
vessel, of their own; and embarked themselves for Poloway. So soon as they were
arrived, they were carried Prisoners to the Castle. Then the Governor with 200
Soldiers went to Poloroone, whence he fetched the rest of the Oran-keys, and
committed them Prisoners to The cruelty of States against the Natives in
Polloroon.
the same Castle: And presently were brought to the Torture with fire and water,
as they served the English at Amboyna. Two of them died in their tortures, the
rest, being 162 were all upon their forced Confessions condemned and executed.
The Priest, when he came to the place of Excention, spoke these words, in the
Mallatian Tongue; All ye, great and small, rich and poor, black and white, look
to it, we have committed no fault: And when he would have spoken more, he was
taken by the head and feet, laid along, and cut in two by the middle. Their
Wives, Children, and Slaves, with all their Goods, were seized by the
Hollanders and sent into their other Islands.

And this the Hollanders did, because the Oran keys had a great love for the
English.

Barbarous Miscreants! was it not enough to exercise their Tyranny upon the
English, but that they must destroy the poor Natives for their sakes?

The States (...) themselves, the sale Trade and Dominion of the East Indies.

And to speak freely, prosperous villainies, are Cardinal Virtues in the States
Ethics.


So that we may perceive the sole design of the Hollanders is, to get the
Riches, Trade, and Dominion of the whole Indies into their own power. And
therefore they think any medium just, subservient to that end.

The Hollanders having forcibly taken the Town and Castle of Mallaca from the
Portugeez, suffer no Ships of any King or Prince in Europe to pass the
Streights of Mallaca, into the South Seas to China, etc. upon pain of seizure
or confiscation of Men, Ships, and Goods.

And to that purpose they grant their Commissions to the Captains of their
Ships, to bring all Ships that pass the The States suffer no ships to pass the
Streights of Mallaca.
Streights of Mallaca, (which Streights were free for all Ships to pass, till
the restraint and Usurpation of the Hollanders) into Mallaca, or else to sink,
or burn by their sides.

This restraint is loss to the English three hundred thousand pounds yearly,
and advantage to the Hollanders five hundred thousand pounds yearly.

Anno 1620. Cabode bon Esperanza was in the possession of the English, and by
them taken for the use of King James. But since the English have been forced
out by the Hollander, where they have a flourishing Plantation.

Two ships of the English seized and confiscated by the States.

Bon Esperanza, a s ip of the English seized by the States.

The Dragon and Katherine two English ships seized by the States, and
confiscated.


Thereupon anno 1620. they seized upon two English Ships, the Bear, and the
Star, in the Streights of Mallaca, going to China, and confiscated Ships and
Goods valued at fifteen hundred thousand pounds.

The Ship Bona Esperanza, an English Vessel, anno 1635. going into China by the
Streights of Mallaca, was violently assaulted by three Dutch Men of War: the
Master and many of his men killed, and brought into Mallaca: and there the Ship
and Goods were confiscated, valued at one hundred thousand pounds.

The Dragon and Katherine, two English Ships of Sir William Cur^een, valued at
three hundred thousand pounds, besides their Commanders, and others, who had
very great Estates therein, anno 1636. were set upon by seven Dutch Men of War,
as they past the Streights of Mallaca from China, and by them taken. The men
tied back to back, and slung over board; the Goods being taken out of the said
Ships, were seized to the use of the States there; and the Ships sunk, that it
might not be known who committed that cruel fact.

Anno 162^. The Factories of the English in Sumatia seized by the States.

The Factories of the English in Siain seized by the States.


In Aru, and Manueado in Sumatia, an Oriental Island, the English had several
Factories there, by the consent of the King and Natives: but by the practice of
the Hollanders anno 1625. they were all enforced to leave their Factories, and
the places.

In Pachane, the chief City of Pachane, one of the Kingdoms of Siain in India,
the English had several Factories there, but by the unjust practices of the
Hollanders, they were compelled to quit the Country, and their Factories, to an
unexpressable loss to the English. Pachane being a great Country for Gold,
Silver, Pearls, Precious Stones, and many other rich Commodities.

The States make War against the King of Bantam, for his love to the English.
The Hollanders anno 1636. made War against the King of Bantam, one of the
Kings of Java major, for that he had a great kindness for the English. And for
that he permitted them to have several Factories in Sunda, and Jambe for
Pepper; And by this art would have driven the English from thence, and their
chief Pepper Trade. And so would have shut them out, both of the Streights of
Sunda and Mallaca.

Which, from these men we may learn, That those which study to be great by any
means, must by all means forget to be good: they must dismiss that puny thing
Conscience; for there is no such Remora to Grandeur, as a coy and squemish
Conscience: And it is observe d by a learned Gentleman, had Alexander boggled at
invading other men's Kingdoms, he had never wept for the scarcity of Worlds.

The oppressions and injuries of these men in India, not only to the English,
but to the Subjects of many of the Kings and Princes in Europe, are not to be
express d (and indeed they are fitter for our wouder than our words.) It were
to be desired that they would set forth a Manifesto to the world of the
particular losses they and their Subjects have sustained by the Insolences and
Usurpations of these men. And then they would be as much scorned, by every good
man in Europe, as they are now hated by the Indians in America: For the
Indians, though they have no kindness for the Spaniard, yet they look upon him
as a Gentleman, but the Hollanders they abhor, for their sordid acts, and
unjust practices.

As they have made themselves Masters of the South Seas, so having Anno 1662.
taken Cochen from the Portuguez, and other Ports upon the coast of Mallabar,
they have the sole command upon the North Seas from Mallabar The States have
the sole command of the North Seas.
to India, Persia, Arabia, Red Sea, Mosambique, all along to Cabo de Bon
Esperanza, so they will in a short time restrain all the Kings and Princes in
Europe, and their Subjects to have a Trade or Commerce in those parts.

And whether it may not by the help of a little Logic be concluded out of
their style; consider, The States General The style of the States in the Indies.
of the United Provinces of Battavia, Amboyna, Tewan, etc* Commanders of all the
Seas of the world; Protectors of all the Kings and Princes in Europe; and
Supreme Moderators of all the affairs of Christendom: For so they style and
write themselves in the East Indies.

Now they are High and Mighty States indeed: Ambition is never so high, but she
thinks still to mount; that station which lately seemed the top, is but a step
to her now; and what before was great in desiring, seem little, being once in
power.

The Method and Arts which the States have used in India to Enlarge their
Dominions, and to exclude others from Trade or Commerce there.
1. THey are in a perpetual state of Hostility, ever Warring upon some Prince
or other; and thereby gain either Tribute or Dominion.

2. When they have to do with any King or Prince, they order their Affairs so,
that he must perform first; and when he has done, they are States, and so are
free.

3. They encourage the Natives upon every small occasion of discontent, to Arm
against their Prince, premising them their assistance, which they exactly
perform. When they have Conquered the King, and taken his Castles and Ports,
(which they first secure, making themselves Masters of the Seas and great
Rivers) then they subdue the Natives: and so Vest in themselves Sovereign
Dominion, and make both King and Natives their Vassals.

4. If the Natives take up Arms against their Prince, (as many times they do)
then they encourage him against his Rebellious Subjects, and give him their
assistance: When the Natives are subdued, then they conquer the King himself,
or else demand so much for their assistance, that he is not able to pay; and so
he must submit himself and his Dominions to their boundless ambition.

5. If there be any Wars between Prince and Prince, they will be sure to fall
in with one of them, and give him their Aid, and so make War in the other
Princes Dominion. When that Prince is subdued, and themselves settled in his
Dominions, then they reduce the other Prince to their Obedience, having some
Castles or Ports in his Dominions, which do command the whole.

6. If they have any places of concern, and the Subjects of any Prince in
Europe have any Factories there, (which they cannot fairly dismiss) then they
lay such great Taxes and Impositions upon the Natives, that they are enforced
to Arms. When they are subdued, then they charge the Subjects of that Prince as
Conspirators and Abetters of the Natives; and so seize upon all their Goods,
Factories, and enforce them to quit the Country, or else send them into some of
their Islands to be Slaves.

7. If any Prince in Europe make any Treaty or League with the States,
concerning any Affairs in India, they send to the States of Battavia private
Instructions, contrary to their public Agreement: So that all Treaties and
Leagues, as to the Affairs of India, are ineffectual.

8. Where they have footing in any Island or Dominion, they claim by Conquest,
and so lay what Taxes they please upon the Natives. And being in by Conquest,
they are Proprietaries; and so exclude the Subjects of any King or Prince from
Trade there.

9. If the Subjects of any King or Prince in Europe have Factories in the
Dominions of any Prince there, (if they begin to be considerable) they take
some occasion to War against that Prince; and upon Treaty, charge those
Subjects to be the cause of the War: so if the Prince will have Peace, he must
seize their Factories and Goods, and banish them his Country.

10. They pretend great kindness to their Neighbor Princes, and enter into a
League Offensive and Defensive with them: And by that means get the favor of
those Princes to have some Ports, or strong Castles for Defense of their Trade,
as they pretend in their Territories. When that is done, they either make Wars
themselves, (and so those Princes must aid them) or else persuade the Princes
his Allies to make War upon another Prince; which they do, and so fight one
Prince against another; and when they are sufficiently enweakned, they Conquer
them all.

11. If they have any difference with any potent King or Prince, they get time:
if it be for their advantage, they give good words, but part with no money.
That done, they make their Addresses to some Favorite of that Prince, (which do
all in the Court of the Indian Kings,) and so with small charges they effect
great matters.

By these steps they have clim'd up to those immense Pyramids of Dominion and
Power in the Indies, that they are become formidable to the greatest Emperors
and Princes there: ever making good in their practice that Lemma of Loyola,
(the Apostle of their State) Cavete vobis The States exclude the Subjects of
the Princes of Europe to Trade in the East Indies.
Principes. They have excluded the Subjects of all Kings and Princes in Europe
from Traffic and Commerce, where they have any Territories or Power. And by
reason of the Dominion they have in the South Seas, and the Conquests and
Fortifications they make upon the North Seas, all their Subjects will finally
be debarred from any Traffic or Trade there.

Of what dangerous consequence this will prove, it is very well beseeming the
Wisdom of the greatest Kings and Princes to consider. For there are a
Generation which are born to be the Plague, Disquiet, and Scourge of Europe;
and they gladly sacrifice the Public Peace of Christendom to their own private
Interest.

If we consider how many brave and large Dominions in the East Indies, were
under the Sovereignty of the Kings of Great Britain, what flourishing Factories
their Subjects had there, how great Kings they might have been in Treasure and
Dominion, how rich their Subjects, it cannot The great los^es which the King of
England and his Subjects have sustained in India by the Vsu^pation of the
States.
but discompose an English Spirit, that his King should be ousted of all those
Dominions, and his Subjects divested of their Riches and Hopes, by a People who
had nothing but the Favor of the King of Great Britain to support them, nor no
Fortress to defend them but that of Amb^yna, and that built by the Moneys of
the English Company.

Well, we may see what Treachery and Perfidiousness can do, being accompanied
with Ambition and Industry: But they will ere long find, that slippery are
those Foundations of Might and Greatness, which are not laid upon the
Principles of Justice, and regulated by the Maxims of Christian Piety.

The In^^lencies of the States to the King of England in Europe.
And as America was the Theater where they Acted these Tragedies, and
unparalled Insolences: so they have not spared to manifest their
Ingratitude, Affronts, and highest Injuries against the Kings of Great Britain,
and the English Nation here in Europe.

Anno 1639. when his Catholic Majesty sent his Armado with some Soldiers into
Flanders, to strengthen his Garrisons there, but by cross Winds were driven upon
the English Coasts; the States Equipped out a great Fleet of Men of War,
charged the Spanish Armado, ravished his The States fight the Spanish Armado
upon the British Seas, against the King of Englands Command.
Ships out of the Harbors of his late Majesty at Dover, and destroyed most of
that Fleet, though in his Majesty's Protection and Dominions, and against his
Majestles express Command: thereby Usurping Sovereignty to themselves, and
giving Laws to his Majesty in his own Dominions. A bold Affront!

And certainly they could not think but his Majesty did highly resent it. But
to keep him busied at home, and that his Majesty might have no opportunity to
bring them to Justice for their Insolency: there being (Anno 1639.) some
Distempers in Scotland, they did greatly promote them, and contributed their
assistance to them, in all manner of Military Provisions.

Monarchy, and with that the Glory of the English Nation, was now departed; the
People model themselves into a Commonwealth, they take a full prospect of the
Usurpations, Injuries, and Oppressions of the States, which had such a horrid
complexion of Injustice upon them, that the new Commonwealth denounce War
against the old States, they obtain many signal Victories, and had much
disabled their Naval Forces. Now the States being not well able to contest with
the English Valor, they project how they might deliver themselves from the
fury of these men: At last, they having by their Emissaries first disseminated
Sedition amongst the People, whereby the Commonwealth became a burden to the
Nation, and wise men began to be troubled at the ill face of affairs, they
adjudged the best expedient was, to set up a single Person, (the States being
now sensible of their former error, in not supporting the English Monarchy, as
their best safety, and greatest Protection) O. as the fittest person for such a
Bold-fac'd Treason, (by their underhand practice, and paying to him some
hundred thousand of pounds) is prevailed with to take upon him the Government
of the Nation. The War is continued against them with great success: yet by
their Interest they obtain a Treaty. And thereupon paying a Million of Pounds
to O. a Peace is concluded; but the most dishonorable and unjust that ever was
to this Nation. But such as it was, it continued till his Majesty's blessed
Restoration.

Difference betwixt the King of England, and his Parliament, and how advanced
by the States.
Anno 1641. there happening some difference betwixt his late Majesty, and his
Parliament, they sent over their Rabbis of Sedition here into England, and
infused their Antimonarchical Principles and dangerous Doctrines into some
giddy heads of the English Nation, who thereby became so intoxicated, that they
were never at rest till (like men infected with the Plague) they infected
others; and thereby a great part of the people became disobservant to the Laws
of the Nation, and Rebels to their King. An Army of these men were raised, they
having their chief Officers and Commanders, and all Warlike Provisions out of
the United Provinces, to bring Destruction to the King, and Desolation to the
Kingdom. Thereby that Great King being reduced to streights,
(notwithwithstanding the many Obligations of the States to his Majesty) they
could never be induced to contribute any Aid or Assistance to redeem that
Excellent Prince from so great Abyss of Misery, or to preserve the Kingdom from
Ruin and Confusion, (which with their Assistance might have been easily
prevented.)

But the States were so far from any Act of Charity or Piety, that Amsterdam
was made the great Emporium or Market for the Rebels to sell those rich and
costly Goods which they had plundered from his Majesty's best Subjects in
England, (whereas no King or Prince in Christendom would suffer them to make
use of any of their Ports to that purpose) and the best Furniture that some of
the States have in their Houses at this very day, are many of those stolen
Goods.

And by this means they brought Poverty and Misery to this Nation, Riches and
Plenty to themselves.

This unfortunate Nation being thus in Combustion, and all befry'd, the Hogan
Mogans with joy, as an ingenious man observed, did warm their hands at those
unhappy flames, which they themselves had kindled, tuning their merry Harps,
when others were weeping over a Kingdoms Funeral. In England there being
nothing but Confusion and Ruin, nothing to be seen but the Convulsions of a
dying State. His now Sacred Majesty, for his own safety and security, withdrew
Himself out of England, and resolved to live for some time (in his Solitudes)
in the Belgic The States afford no kindness to his now Majest(...) being in
their Provinces.
Provinces: But the States were so far from affording Him any comfort, as a
distressed Prince, or yielding Him any kindness, as their best Friend, and
greatest Patron, that if his Majesty had not had timely notice of it, it is
credibly said, that he had been delivered up (in their Territories) as a
Sacrifice to the fury of his cruellest Enemy.

His Majesty, Anno 1660. being restored to his Kingdoms, (forgetting all their
former Unkindnesses and Ingratitudes) his care was to conclude a strict League
with the said States. But no sooner was it concluded, but they return to their
usual practice of breaking of Articles, (who expect an exact observance of them
from others, but perform none themselves.) Thereupon his Majesty, 1664. was
stirred up by the Complaints of his people, and the Unanimous Votes of both
Houses of Parliament, to defend the Rights of his Crown, and the Liberties of
his People, which the States had most notoriously invaded: yet his Majesty to
prevent the effusion of blood, (as Tyrants shed blood for pleasure, Kings for
necessity) spent the whole Summer in Negotiations to bring them to reason, but
all his endeavors proved ineffectual.

The States make Addresses to the King of Great Britain for Peace.
Thereupon, Anno 1665 ensued the War, and continued to the year 1667. Wherein
his Majesty obtained so many signal Victories, that by their humble
Supplications and Addresses to his Majesty for Peace, he was induced to a
Treaty. And his Majesty having the Garranty of the most Christian King, and of
the said States, that no Act of Hostility during the said Treaty should be
attempted by them against his Majesty, or any of his Dominions; thereupon his
Majesty did forbear to Equip his Fleet. Yet the said States, contrary to their
Faith, during the said Treaty, (with their Fleet though not half manned or
Victuall'd The States burn his Majesty's Ships.
for any time) most treacherously invaded his Majesty's Dominions, burnt and
committed Destruction upon several Ships of his Majesty's Navy Royal, in his
own Ports and Harbor. Whereas if his Majesty had set forth his Fleet, they had
not been able to have put to Sea that year for want of Mariners, and other
discouragements upon them, having received so many memorable defeats by the
Valor and Courage of his subjects.

No sooner was there a Peace concluded, but every Article was broken by them.
And no wonder, for it is a Maxim of their State, That all Alliance as to them
is inconsiderable: the foundation of their Greatness and Safety, consists in
their own Power and Strength. Therefore to keep any Article is of no
consideration to them.

Now they invade his Majesty's Fishing upon the British Seas without his Royal
License, they refuse to strike Sail, and dispute his Sovereignty of the British
Seas. Affronts so high, and Indignities so transcendent, that no King or
Potentate (except these men) did ever so much as question any of them.

It does appear by the Records in the Tower, and the Municipal Laws of this
Nation, that the Kings of England have had ever from the time of the Romans an
absolute The Sovereignty of the British Seas, in the King, and the Fishing.
and uninterrupted Right, and exclusive Property in the Sovereignty of the
British Seas, in the Passages and Fishing thereof; and has power to make Laws,
and exercise Supreme Jurisdiction over all Persons, and in all cases within or
upon the said Seas, as 'twas agreed 26 E. 1. by the Agents and Ambassadors of
Genoa, Catoloigna, Spain, Almaine, Zealand, Holland, Friesland, Denmark,
Norway, and diverse other places in the Empire. And by all the States and
Princes of Europe, in a case then in question between the King of England and
his most Christian Majesty; concerning Rayner Grimbold his Admiral exercising
some Jurisdiction upon the British Seas. See the Records in the Tower, 26 E. 1.
de Superioritate Maris Anglici.

The Laws of Olleron which (after the Rhodian Laws were antiquated) have now
near five hundred years been received by all the Christian World for regulating
Sea-Affairs, and deciding of Maritine Controversies, were first declared by
King R. 1. at his return from the Holy Land, and by him caused to be published
in the Isle of Olleron, as belonging to the Duchy of Aquitane.

Licenses granted to Neighbor Princes for their Subjects to fish, paying
tribute.
If the Subjects of any King or Prince have a Right to Fish in the British
Seas, I do, desire to be satisfied, What should be the reason that all
Neighbor Princes have by Treaty obtained license from the Kings of England,
for their Subjects to Fish in those Seas, and have paid Tribute, as it does
appear by the Licenses granted by H. 4. unto the French. By H. 6. unto the
Duchess of Burgundy. To those of Brabant and Flanders by E. 4. To Francis Duke
of Britain for his Subjects. Philip II. King of Spain, in the first year of
Queen Mary, obtained a License for his Subjects to fish upon the North Coasts
of Ireland, for the term of one and twenty years, paying yearly for the same
1000 l. which was accordingly paid into the Exchequer of Ireland.

And the Presidents in R. 1. King John, E. 3. and other Kings, are almost
infinite.

And if any King or Prince could pretend to any right, certainly His Most
Christian Majestic has as good a pretense as any. But that King by the special
License of the Kings of England, and not otherwise, has fished upon the
British Coasts, with a set and limited number of Boats. And that for his own
Family, and being likewise to observe the Laws and Orders of his own Fishermen:
For breach whereof, diverse of his Subjects have been taken and imprisoned in
Dover Castle and elsewhere; as does appear by many presidents in time of E. 3.
H. 4. H. 7. etc. in the Tower.

The Subjects of other Princes pay for their liberty of fishing.
Neither is this singular in the King of England only, for in Russia, many
Leagues from the Main, Fishermen do pay for their fishing great Taxes to the
Emperor of Russia And in most places, other Nations are prohibited to fish.

The King of Denmark does the like, and takes great Tribute both at Wardhouse
and the Sound.

And the like he does now for Norway.

All the bordering Princes of Italy do the like within the Mediterranean Seas.

The States do take an Imposition upon fish, which is taken upon the British
Seas, and within the Streams and Dominions of other Princes.

The Hollanders do allow the tenth Fish, both in Russia, Lappia, and other
places, or pay a Composition for the same: And do also pay a Tribute in the
Sound, for passage to fetch the said Fish.

But I shall not give my self any trouble in a point so clear. I would desire
to know of the Hollanders, by what right or title they fish upon the British
Seas. If they have a right, Why did the Earls of Holland, and themselves after
the said Earls take Licenses from the Kings of England, for their Subjects to
fish and pay tribute? as they have done, as it appears by many ancient
Presidents in the Tower.

But now I remember, it is a Principle of their State, That if they get the
possession of any thing, never to dispute the right, so it be of convenience or
profit to them to keep it.

All passing upon the ^ritish Seas ought to strike sail.
The next is the striking of the Sail, which is nothing but an humble
acknowledgement of His Majesty's Sovereignty of the British Seas, and a
grateful submission for their liberty to pass upon them; for strangers (by the
Law and Custom of the British Seas) being to pass those Seas, either in coming
to England, or going to any other place (without so much as touching upon any
of His Majesty's Licenses of safe Conduct granted by the King of Great Britain.
Dominions) have used to take safe Conducts and Licenses of the Kings of
England, to secure and protect them in their passage. Vide Rot. Franciae, 11.
H. 4 de Salvo conductu. The Presidents are exceeding many amongst the Records
in the Tower. The striking of the Sail, is one of the ancientest Prerogatives
of the Crown of England, For, I observe in the second year of King John, it was
declared at Hastings by the King, with the advice of His Lords Temporal, for a
Law and Custom of the Sea, That if a Lieutenant in any voyage, being ordained
by the King, does encounter upon the Sea, any ship or Vessel laden or unladen,
that will not strike or vail their Bonnets at the Commandment of the Lieutenant
of the King, or of the Admiral of the King, or his Lieutenant, but will fight
against them of the Fleet; that if they can be taken, they be reputed as
Enemies, their Ships, Vessels and Goods taken and forfeited, as the Goods of
Enemies. And that the common people being in the same, be chastised by
Imprisonment of their bodies, for their Rebellion, Inter Leges Marinas, Anno 2
Johannis Regis, amongst the Records of the Tower.

The Hollanders therefore refusing to strike sail, do deny His Majesty's
Sovereignty in the Seas (one of the most precious Jewels of the Crown) and the
principal means of the Trade, Wealth and Safety of this Nation; and The
Sovereignty of the Sea ought to be preserved.

The Hollanders supplant Trade.


which all true English men, with the hazard of their lives and fortunes, are
obliged to preserve and maintain, for Imperator Maris, est Dominus Terrae.

And as they have denied His Majesty's Sovereignty, so they have by their
Artifice supplanted the Trade and Traffic of His Subjects, which are the only
Pillars of Riches and Safety to this Nation.

Consult the Muscovia, Turkey, etc. Companies, enquire at the Exchange, they
will all tell you, It Is gone, whither I know not, but into Amsterdam, and the
United Provinces.

The English are as active and industrious a people as any, but (of a more
generous and noble Allay) they abhor to have Trade, by those base practices, or
to gain it, by those sordid means as the Hollanders do. I doubt not but the
English Nation being sensible of the Injuries and Oppressions done them by
these men, will in short time, by their Sword and Valor reduce them to reason.

The States have scandalized His Majesty by Libels.
And as they have supplanted the Trade of His Majesty's Subjects; so they have
endeavored to make a diminution of His own Glory, by abusive Pictures and
false Libels; not only in their own Territories, but in most of the Dominions
of the Kings and Princes of of Europe, where the name of the King of Great
Britain is renowned. Reputation abroad, and Reverence at home, are the Pillars
of Safety and Sovereignty.

By these Arts they have endeavored, not only to lessen His Majesty,
Reputation abroad, but to bring contempt upon Him, even amongst His own
Subjects at home. Without doubt His Majesty's good Subjects have a great
Sentiment of these Indignities, and will not only carry an Antidote in their
ears, against the poison of these Libels, but with their Swords, Lives and
Fortunes will vindicate His Dignity, and bring these Ungrateful Miscreants to
Justice.

The States having put so many scorns and indignities upon his Majesty, and
abuses upon His Subjects in their Trade (for which His Majesty was more
troubled than for the Indignities done to Himself) He was resolved to have
satisfaction of them. But they to give His Majesty disquiet in His own
Dominions, and for a diversion to Him, made their Addresses to some persons of
the Scottish Nation The States make addresses to some of the Scottish Nation to
rebel.
(with them) for their Brotherly assistance, promising them they should be
furnished with Men, Arms and Money what they pleased. But the Scots (too well
remembering their late sufferings and calamities, and) having as great a sense
of Loyalty and Duty for their King as any people in the world, with the
greatest scorn and abhorrency rejected their most impious and rebellious motion.

Not prevailing there, they set upon some Factories of Sedition in England: and
by their Emissaries here, endeavored to work upon an honest party in this
Nation, (though differing in some minute Ceremonies from the Church) but they
looked upon it, as the greatest Injury and Indignity could be done them, to
tempt them from the Loyalty to so good and gracious a King.

And certainly His Majesty had a very good esteem for them, or else He would
never have granted them that Act of Indulgence: An Act so transcendent, and
exceeding the bounty and grace of all former Kings, that it could not be
obtained of them, though there had been many hundred thousand pounds offered
for the purchase of it. But as His Majesty has granted them Liberty of
Conscience; so (there is no doubt) they will make conscience of their Liberty.

His Majesty of Great Britain, and the Most Christian King, of all Princes in
Europe have most studied and endeavored (for the good of their Subjects) to
advance Trade and Commerce; yet their Subjects cry out they have no Trade, and
well they may, when the Hollanders are the great Supplanters of Trade, and
obstructers of Commerce (to all others but themselves) in the world. And no
wonder, for it is a prime principle of their State, That they must not be like
the Joc-caul, which provide food for the Lion; but they must imitate the
prudent Cat, who mouses only for it self.

Nothing can be more becoming the Majesty of two such Potent Kings, not only
out of charity to deliver the distressed Dutch (an industrous and well meaning
people of themselves) from the Tyranny and Oppression of those insolent States;
but out of Piety toward God, to settle peace in Christendom (which is only by
the power of these two Great Kings to be effected); and to which all The States
have made more disturbance in Europe, than the Turk these 50^ years.
Kings and Princes are obliged to contribute their assistance.

For let it be soberly considered, if these men (if we may so call them) since
the Revolt from their Prince, have not made greater distempers and confusions,
and caused more effusion of blood, and expense of Treasure in Europe, than the
Great Turk has done for these 500 years.

And as they are more powerful by Sea, so they are much more dangerous in their
practice. For, the Turk is a Prince, who with all Potentates does exactly
observe his Leagues, and keeps his Faith: But it is an Apophthegm in their
State, that its for Kings and Merchants to keep their word and Faith: But for
States, no longer then it is subservient to their Interest.

And how exactly they make this good in their actions, I appeal to all the
Kings and Princes of Europe, if ever they kept one Article, or their Faith in
any thing, where The States will prove a greater plague to Christendom than the
Turk.
it was their interest to break it. Certainly these men live, as if great Sins
would merit Heaven by an Antiperistasis.

And its very well becoming the gravest Judgments to consider, if these men
may not prove in a short time, a greater Terror and Plague to Christendom, than
the Turk Himself. Insomuch as his Arms are at a great distance, and only
Landforces, but these men are seated in the Center of Europe, and being so
Potent at Sea, and rich in Treasure, may cast an Army, and with that, blood and
confusion into any Princes Dominion, whom they please to disquiet (especially
being first reduced to poverty, which they labor to effect in all their
Territories by obstructing of Trade) And they can more speedily and powerfully
offend any Kingdom by Sea in one month, than the most puissant Army is able to
to march through in a year.

Well, It Is time to reduce these men to Justice and Reason; Prudence teaches
us to set limits to that Power, which deservedly may be suspected. For as they
grow in Puissance and strength, so the more formidable they will render King of
Spain
themselves to all Kings and Princes. From one great King they have taken so
much blood, that he is fallen into a deep Consumption: And it is adjudged by
some wise Physicians of State, that he will hardly recover.

King of Sweden, King of Denmark.
Did they not lately break the heart of one Potent King, and almost the back of
another? Do they not privately engage Prince against Prince? and by that means
bring misery and calamity to them both; and out of their ruin create riches
and plenty themselves? Do they not undermine the Trade of all Europe, and send
nothing but poverty, misery and complaints into all Princes Dominions?

How dangerous and fatal their Greatness will in few years prove to all the
Kings and Princes of Europe, and to their Subjects (if not timely prevented) a
weak Statist (...) without the help of Galileo s Prospective-glass) may easily
see. Yet there are a People in the World, which contribute their assistance to
them, but let them be assured, that if these States by their Arts shall
extricate themselves from the destruction and calamity which now threaten them,
they must for all their friendly assistance, expect nothing but Polyphemus
courtesy, to be the last that shall be swallowed up. This is too evident by
their Ingratitude and Insolences to the Kings of Great Britain, and to the
English Nation.

Nothing can give a check to their growing Power, but the Naval Forces of the
King of Great Britain, whose Situation, Ports, Strength of Shipping, Courage of
People, and Experince in Sea Fights, have always made him very formidable. And
that Henry the eighth understood so well, that he assumed to himself that
Motto, Cui adhaereo, Praeest.

This Naval Power of the King of Great Britain, is the The Naval power of
England, is the security of Europe.
security and safety of Europe: For if that were broken, they would look upon
all the other as inconsiderable, because they are so far separate, that they
might be destroyed before they could unite; and in case they did, the issue
would be very doubtful.

Then they would sacrifice one Prince after another, and bring nothing but
confusion, poverty, and misery to Prince and People. And whether this be not
more than conjectural, look into their practices in the East Indies: Observe
their Arts and Methods, by which they have reduced so many great Kings, with
their Subjects, Vassals and Slaves, to their vast Ambition.

I have done: Yet I cannot but drop a few Tears for some honest People amongst
them, who must be inwrapt in the Punishment, though innocent as to the Guilt.

Now the most formidable and Potent Kings in Christendom, are drawing their
Forces against them, All their Trade is gone by Sea, nothing but horror and
confusion in their Land; none of their Allies durst appear for them. A mournful
Tragedy. Methinks like wise Patriots, they should seize upon their States (whom
they may thank for all their calamities and miseries) and yield them up to
Justice; set up their Prince, whose Ancestors have spent so much Blood and
Treasure to Vindicate their Rights and Liberties, and not to serve their ends
of him (as all wise men think the States do at this juncture of affairs) for
its an Adage amongst them, that Leo vinciri liber pernegat.

And the States do as certainly hate a Prince, as a Prince does a Free State.
Discite Justitium moniti, etc.

FINIS.

