Reverend Mr. Brightmans Judgment, or Prophesies what shall befall Germany,
Scotland, Holland, and the Churches adhering to them.

Likewise what shall befall England, and the Hierarchy therein.

Collected out of his exposition on the Revelations, Printed above forty years
since. Wonderful to see how they are fulfilled, and in fulfilling, foreseeing
and foretelling what our eyes have seen, and may see, both in the past, present
and future State of our times.

Declaring that the Reformation began in Queen Elizabeth's days, is not
sufficient for us under greater light.

Finishing the work if we now withstand as heretofore, we are to expect, God
has a sad Controversy with the Land.

This faithful Watchman or our English Prophet (as he is called) was persecuted
and banished by the Bishops, and this Commentary condemned by them to the fire;
which they could not effect in Queen Elizabeth's reign, till King James.

Collected for the good of those who want time or coin, to purchase so large a
volume.

LONDON, Printed for R. H. in Queens-head Alley.

Mr. Brightman's Judgment or Prophesies, what shall besall Germany, Scotland
Holland and the Churches adhering to them.
Mr. Brightman in his Book of the exposition on the Revelations, seriously
considering and resolving himself, that the 7 Epistles S. John wrote to the 7
Churches in Asia, were also written and directed to the 7 succeeding Churches
among the Gentiles, of which those 7 were a type or counterpane (omitting for
brevity what he says, concerning the other 4 Churches) we present you with a
brief of what he more immediately applies to our selves.

In general (he says) That there was a terrible storm to be expected, In his
Epistle and in chap. 3. ver. 10.
and it would be such an horrible tempest, that it would terribly shake the
Christian Churches.

Frist, for Germany, there was the bitterest scourge for it that ever had
fallen upon it, that it was to come shortly; Germany should be like a house
that is robbed by furious, Chap. 3. verse 10.
mad and cruel spoylers, that would have no mercy of neither Sex, nor Age; and
the coming thereof should be sudden and unexpected, like a thief in the
night. Which we may see he truly foretold, it being fulfilled in our cares, and
the inhabitants thereof having found it by sad experience; let England take
warning, considering what (he said) was the cause that would bring all this
misery: Because (says he) they took no care for a full and through
Reformation; Chap. 3. ver. 10. v. 12.
therefore by the just judgment of God, they should loose their Citizens and
Inhabitants; and they, with other Churches, should come to nothing, and shortly
it would appear: he calls Germany by the name of Sardis.

Secondly, for Scotland, and Holland, and the other Churches adhering to them;
Chap. 3. verse 7. etc.
(typified by godly Philadelphia) He says, that they shall shut and none shall
open, and they shall open and none shall shut: A Virgin Church, chaste, not so
defiled with Rome's superstition as others; And speaks of a Covenant and
Society they should he joynd in, and bids them, not to be perplexed nor
discouraged, at what the world spitefully prateth of them, as if he had heard
men in our times call them Traitors, Rebels, Seditious, and bids them not to
regard the scoffs of the wicked, who will despise them, because they are
godly, little, lowly and weak in visible power, in comparison of their
enemies; For (says he) no enemy shall shall be able to prevail against them,
and they shall set up a token of victory shortly; and every one shall be
compelled to say, That they are dearly beloved of God: they shall be seen to
prosper so exceedingly; and so marvellously promoted and advanced, beyond all
men's expectation: And when that storm and horrible tempest shall come upon the
Christian Churches; Chap. 3. 7, 8, 9 ver.
these Churches shall stand fast like a pillar, and be preserved from wasting;
when the other Churches which did not take care for a full Reformation (as they
did) shall by the just judgment of God, come (as it were) to nothing: There
shall be (says he) such a miserable hutly burly of all things, that there
should scarce be the form of a Church perceived; but only with holy
Philadephia.

Thirdly, for England, whose counterpane he takes to be Laodicea, tearming it,
Lukewarm, vaineglorious Laodicea; concerning it, he says: He that gathers
the tears of his children into his bottle knows right well; That I could
never with dry eyes take a survey of this Laodiceas lamentable condition, but I
powered out tears and sighs from the bottom of my heart, when I beheld Christ's
loathing of us, and were it not that out of duty, as a watchman, I dare not
betray the salvation of this Chruch, by not giving warning, I would have held
my peace; but my hope is that those which love the truth will hearken and
accept, and think (as the truth is) I envy no man's person, honor or
greatness; Yet when I perceived, that these seven Churches were propounded for
a tipe of all the Churches among the Gentiles; and with all, saw the order,
time, and marveilous agreeing of all things together, I durst not perfidiously
bury the truth in silence.

In that Christ says of this Church, Chap 3. verse 15.
I know thy works, that thou art neither hot nor cold; he observes, that
Christ makes mention of no one good thing that it has, the worst of all the
seven (although there were many faithful in it) yet not any so past hope in
regard of the outward form and government; which comes to pass, not so much
through its own default, as by means of the faulty government of the Angels,
who have so ordered and governed it, that it was tempered and blended together
of strange contraries. A Hoch-potch, not so cold that we would be, all Romish,
and cleaving to superstision altogether; nor yet so hot that we pursue and
admit a full Reformation: And therefore the disease of this Church was more
difficult and desperate.

Therefore from these words; I would thou were either cold or bot, says he, I
would thou were either all Romish, or admit of a through Reformation: blaming
those Angels only, and those that cleave to them, Priests and Laity; who being
bewitched with ambition and covetousness, do scornefully reject this holy
Reformation, not enduring the remedy, but accounting that worse than the
disease.

Therefore he says in plain terms, That the Bishops, which he calls no
better than Lord-Begger, because their riches and honors (for the most part)
they get by fawning, flattering, bribing; being ambitious to get under great
men, and so creep into the Court for preferment. But (says he) both they and
their whole lukewarm Hierarchy, shall quite be overthrown, Chap. 3. verse 14.
and never recover their dignity again: And at their overthrow, they shall
endanger the people, by reason of their consenting to them: Yet the people
shall escape overthrowing, but it is to be feared the people shall feel some
adversity; But God will not suffer the Hierarchy to escape; for they seeking
honors and riches, and not those things which are Christ's, shall have
reproachful Judgments; few or none shall sigh or sob for them, but they and
their Priests shall be vile before the people, and men shall read the reports
concerning them, with delight: And they shall be cast out and spewed up as
vomit out of a corrupted stomach, that no man will be willing to take up
again; Chaq. 3. ver. 16, 17.
from these words, Therefore because thou art lukewarm, and neither hot nor
cold: It shall come to pass that I will spew thee out of my mouth. For thou
say, I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and
know not how thou artwretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked.

The whole State of this Church of Laodicea is worthy of serious consideration,
as M. Brightman applies it to England, in this and diverse other Chapters, for
he speaks of our times as if he were now living.

And further he says in his Epistle and elsewhere in his Commentary, that many
are the miseries the Christian Churches must suffer, for there will be a long
and doleful Tragedy, which will overthrow with scourges, slaughters, death and
ruin; and that the sword of the Lord shall be made drunk in their blood,
except they receive warning and amend.

But yet (says he) Be of good comfort Germany, France and Brittany, and all
you Christian Churches; This is the last Act; for after this Theater and long
Tragedy is past, there will succeed in the room thereof happy days, with
abundance of peace and all good things. And it is his Judgment, (if I may not
say his Prophesy) comparing one Scripture with another, and times with times:
Chap. 19. verse 4.
That before the year 1650, that the Jews shall be called; the whore of Romes
nose shall be slit, and she stripped of all her glorious garments and attire, her
power and sinews cut, and the Pope himself shall run out of Rome into
Avignion, In his Epi
or into Bonia, or thereabout, one of his own Cities; and the City of Rome
shall be burnt with fire.

And that the King of Spain and the King of Ptolony, Chap. 19. verse 19.
and some other Kings shall bewail her, and would feign help her, but dare
not, because they shall be afraid of their own safety, least they be devoured,
or scorched with the same fire.

And further he says; that the Emperor of Germany shall destroy Rome, if he
set to the work, it being most proper for him; but if he does it not, some
other shortly will have the prise of that victory: Chap. 18. verse 10:
Therefore (says he) you godly Princes take the matter in hand, and set to
this work; it shall not be a thing of so great trouble as you think for; fear
not the huge Armies will come to help her; if you think the Spaniard, or the
Frenchman, or any other King, will raise mighty forces against you to defend
her, as being Romes friends; these are altogether vain fears, scare-Crows,
Chap. 17. verse 14.
Goblins, Bugbeares for simple people, for her friends shall stand affarre off
with waiting (testifying their love) sighing and sobbing, but taking no pains,
nor striking a stroke to deliver their Whore, being now an old withered Harlot,
but crying, Alas Alas that great City. And again he further says; Chap. 17.
verse 16.
and you the rest of the Christian Princes, you need do nothing, only be
valiant and of good courage in dispatching your work for the Lord, and matters
shall prosper as happily as you desire; Chap. 18. ver. 10, 11.
and understand at length by what way you may procure, as to your selves honor
and tranquillity, so quietness and joy to the whole Christian world; Therefore
draw your Swords against Rome, for you shall prevail.

And says he, within 45 years after Rome is destroyed; Chap. 19. verse 19.
The Pope once more gathering all his friends together to try his last chance,
shall then be utterly overthrown being about the year 1686, Chap. 13, verse 5.
which will be the longest time he can continue. But Rome being destroyed, and
the Jews called, there will be then to the end, a most happy tranquillity, and
things very great indeed, In his Ep.
and to be admired; the Joy will be so much that it will be strange and
unexpected; for in the place of former troubles, there will be perpetual
peace, Chap. 20. verse 24.
and then Kings and Queens will be nursing fathers, and nursing mothers unto
the Christian Churches.

Then the great Turk shall be 40 years on the decaying hand, Chap. 9. verse
15.
and loose many Countries; but in the year 1696, He also shall be utterly
overthrown: And then Christ shall reign with his Ordinances chief in the
world.

They that please to examine these quotations in the margent, by Master
Brightmans Book on the Revelations, which he wrote above forty years ago,
they shall find every noat either in the same words, or to the same purpose.

Yet not to forget that he says further of England and Ireland. Although
Christ be angry with us, Chap. 11. verse 16.
by reason we are so far from a perfect reformation; and they which labor to
bring in the Popish Ceremonies hated of God, do endanger the overthrow of our
Kingdom; yet he says Christ has begun his Kingdom (at that time he wrote)
which was in the days of blessed Queen Elizabeth, who happily begun and
proceeded in the work of Reformation, according to the time and those days
she lived in; the finishing whereof will be required of this Generation;
otherwise expect God has a sad controversy with this Land, but Christ has
begun his Kingdom both in England, and Ireland, to reign evermore; and the
enemies which shall endeavor many enterprises, yet they shall vanish like
smoke, and they shall never prevail to overthrow Christ his Kingdom begun
here; Chap. 11. verse 15.
for there will never want Christian Princes to maintain His Truth begun;
which he says began from the year 1558. for the Seventh Angel blew his
trumpet for this time, and says he would reign evermore,

And lastly, he says (for the better understanding of what he means) That the
City of Rome is not limited to that City, but extends as far as the Pope has
any dominion; Chap. 11. verse 8.
So that the City of Rome is in destroying, if any of her Dominions be in
destroying; as he interprets the holy Ghosts meaning: but the Pope is to be
quite and fully overthrown at the year 1686. Therefore by computation Rome
must be in destroying at 1641, Chap. 19. verse 19.
in some of his Dominions, So I conclude this brief Relation (of what Master
Brightman largely iusists upon, showing his grounds in his Book why he
affirms these things) with Christ's Counsel to this Church of Laodicea.

I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried by the fire, that thou may be made
rich; and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, that thy filthy
nakedness do nor appear; and to anoint thine eyes with eye salve that thou
may see.
FINIS.

