THREE LINKS OF A GOLDEN CHAIN: OR, Three of the Principal Causes of Man's
Salvation. Viz. God giving his Elect unto Christ, their Coming unto him, his
Receiving of them. Doctrinally Opened, AND Practically Applied. As it was
lately delivered unto the Church of God at Great Yarmouth. By JOHN BRINSLEY,
Minister of the Gospel there.

Luke 14. 17. Come, for all things are now ready. London, Printed by S. Griffin
for Richard Tomlins, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Bible in Pye-Corner.
1659.

To all that call upon the name of Jesus Christ in the Town of Great Yarmouth.
(Dearly beloved of the Lord)
THis Text being by an unknown hand put into mine, with an earnest request that
I would in public handle the latter part of it, I not knowing what providence
there might be in this Motion, nor yet where to pitch upon a moro useful
Subject, undertook the whole Verse, which having passed through in the audience
of some of you, I do now present to the view of you all. Whereunto I have been
induced, as for the furtherance of your faith, by pressing and directing that
greatest of Christian duties, your coming unto Jesus Christ, so for the
confirming and establishing of you in the truth against some of those Errors of
the Times, which having unhappily prevailed in some other places, begin also to
creep in amongst you, I mean those of the Universalists and Free-willers (as
they are vulgarly called.) Against these (as I have heretofore, and that
(through Grace) not without some success done against some other) I have here
(having a just occasion for it from the Text) born witness. And to this I
shall desire you to hearken, that so you may not be carried away with this wind
of Doctrine. So I presume to call that Doctrine, which is so much cried up this
day by some (and those not a few) who understand it not, the Doctrine of
Universal Redemption. A Doctrine at the first hearing very plausible to vulgar
apprehensions (none more) whilst it pretends to elevate, to lift up and
magnify the Grace of God, and Merit of Christ, by such a boundless enlarging
of them. But upon stricter examen, it will be found guilty of what it is here
charged with, of Elevating this Grace, Qui statuunt Christum non magis pro iis
qui salvantur, quam pro iis qui pereunt, mortuum esse, quanquam videntur
extendere meritum Christi, reipsa ^amen id adeo imminuunt, ut omnino nihil ipsi
relinquu^t quod meritus sit. Joh. Cocceius de Foedere Cap. 90. Sec. 163.
and this Merit, in another sense, derogating from them, and extenuating of
them. Upon which (besides many other just grounds) let me persuade you to be
wary how you hearken to it, or give entertainment to those that bring it, Is it
not enough for you, or any other (what is here positively and clearly held
forth in this Text) that Whosoever they are that come unto Jesus Christ
(receiving him as their Savior and Lord) they shall be received by him,
obtaining from him that great benefit of his death? This do ye build your souls
upon, putting them upon this way, and then my soul for yours, they shall not
miscarry. In the mean time, as for any other latitude, or extent of the Fathers
or Sons Intentions, whether, and (if so) in what way, reaching to all, or
confined only to a select company, leave it (as safely you may) to the more
acute disquisition of the Schools, to which there is indulged a liberty of
disputing, what being not so easy for vulgar heads to apprehend, is not so
safe for them to determine. Blessed be God, you have so much of Christ, and of
Gods gracious purpose toward all repenting and believing sinners in and
through him clearly, and convincingly held forth unto you, as that you shall
not need to trouble your heads about any such dubious intricacies, as are by
some (who, it may be, would seem to be somebody) presented to you, and with
some color of zeal obtruded upon you under the notion of important truths. Let
it be my desire and earnest request to you, that you would make much of old
truths, those Doctrines, which you have received, not lightly and readily
receding from any of them, not without clear and s^rong convictions. And among
other not from those concerning Election and Redemption; which have been so
fully vindicated (as in former Ages, so in this last) by diverse eminent, both
for learning and true piety, as that it may well be wondered at, that the
Bucklers should still be held up against them. This that you may do (among
other) is one end of my putting this small Treatise into your hands: Which
commending to the blessing of him, who gave it to me, I rest

Your servant in the Lord, JOHN BRINSLEY.
Great Yarmouth, June 1. An. Dom. 1657.
Three Links OF A GOLDEN CHAIN.
JOHN 6. 37. All that the Father gives me shall come unto me; and him that
comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.
THE words are part of a Sermon Preached by our blessed Savior to some of the
Jews in the Synagogue, Coher^^^^
the public meeting place for religious worship in Capernaum. So much we may
learn from the 59th verse of the Chapter, [These things said he in the
Synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.] In this Sermon he deals with these his
Auditors, as by way of Information and Instruction, showing them who, and what
himself was, and what their duty was in reference to him, viz. to believe on
him, so also by way of Objurgation and Reprehension, taxing and reproving them
(many of them) for not doing what was their duty, not believing, not
acknowledging him to be what he was, notwithstanding that they had seen him and
his works, been eyewitnesses of the admirable effects of his divine power, as
in that miracle which a little before he had wrought, the multiplying of loaves
and fishes, so in many other. This he charge upon them in the verse next
before the Text, v. 36. [But I said unto you, that ye also have seen me, and
believe not.] But how came this to pass, that they should be so blind, so
stupid, as seeing what they did, yet not to acknowledge him to be what he was,
not to believe on him? For this we have a Reason subjoyned in the words which I
have now pitched upon. Thus it was with them, Tantae contumaciae causam esse
dicit quod reprobi sint. Calvin in loc.
in as much as they were not in the number of those that were given to him by
his Father. Which if they had been, there would have been other terms betwixt
him and them than then there were: They would have come unto him after another
manner than now they did; non tantum pedibus. sed and affectibus, not only with
the feet of their Bodies, but also of their Souls, receiving and embracing
him; which if they had done, he would have been as ready to do the like to
them. [ All that my Father gives me shall come unto me; and him that comes
unto me I will in no wise cast out. Quorsum hoc dicatomnes fere consentiunt,
reddi eausam, cur illi quibuscum loquebatur ad se non venirent, i. e. in se non
crederent. Maldonat. Com^in loc.
So Expositors generally, almost universally (as the Jesuit Maldonate, though
against his will, takes notice of it) conceive of the coherence and dependence
of these words with and upon the former.

Going along with them, Division.
take we notice in them of three particulars, three things worthy the taking
notice of, being (as it were) three of the principal hinges upon which our
Eternal happiness depends and hangs, three Links of that Golden Chain (as our
Mr. Perinks calls the Order of the causes of man's Salvation.) The First whereof
is Gods gracious Donation, his giving some amongst the sons of men to his Son
Christ [All that the Father gives me.] The Second, Man's effectual vocation,
his bringing home to Christ [All that the Father gives me, shall come unto
me.] The Third, Christ's ready Acceptance, his receiving and embracing those
who are thus given to him, and thus come to him [And him that comes unto me, I
will in no wise cast out.] Answerably to which Particulars we may draw forth
the Text into three Doctrinal Propositions or Conclusions. 1. There are some
among the sons of men given by God the Father unto his Son Christ. 2. All those
who are so given, shall come unto him. 3. Those who so come he will in no wise
cast out. Three Doctrines of great Importance: Let me crave your best
attentions whilst I deal with them severally. Begin with the first.

There are some among the sons of men given by God the Father unto his Son
Christ.] Prop. 1.
All that the Father gives me ( says the Text. Some given unto Christ by his
Father.
So then, there are some that are given to Christ by his Father.

Ob. Some (you may say) given to him by his father? what, How given to him.
were not all things his before? Christ being the Son, had not he an equal
interest in all things with his Father?

Ans. Yes, he had so, as God* Upon this account we find them making claim to an
universal interest in whatever his Father had, John 16. 15. All things that the
Father has are mine. Christ being the Eternal Son of God by generation, he
communicates with him, as in his Essence, so in all his Properties, and
Interests. All thine are mine, and mine are thine (says he to his Father) John
17. 10. But here in the Text we are to look upon him as Mediator, as God-Man.
And so we shall find him in the capacity of a Receiver; receiving whatever he
has from his Father. Thus he is said to have received life from him, Ioh. 5.
26. As the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have
life in himself; that is, to be the fountain and wellspring of eternal life.
And in like manner he has received Authority and Power from him. The Father
has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of man. (So
it there follows in the next verse) v. 27. As the Son of God he has
Authority in and of himself; but as the son of man he receives it from his
Father. The power which he has as Mediator, is a delegated power, given to
him. All power is given to me in heaven and ^arth, Mat. 28. 18. Given to him by
his Father. Thou have given him power over all flesh, John 17. 2. And thus
giving ^ower and authority to this his Son, he also gives unto him some to be
his subjects, over whom he may exercise that Authority. All that the father
gives me (says the Text.) So then there are some who are given by God the
Father unto his Son Christ as Mediator.

Obj. But the Question still runs on; How only some given to him.
what, only some? Are not all so given to him as Mediator? all men, yea and all
other creatures?

Ans. Yes, in a general way they are so, given to him as to a Sovereign Lord,
to be ordered and disposed of by him as it pleases him. The Father loves the
Son, and has given all things into his hand: (So John the Baptist tells the
Jews) John 3. 35. And our Savior himself takes notice of the same; Jesus
knowing that the Father had given all things into his hand, John 13. 3. All
thing^s are delivered me of my Father, Mat. 11. 27. Thus, as all other
creatures, so all the sons of men are given unto him. But there are some among
them who are given to him in a more peculiar way, to special ends and purposes,
that they may be to him (...), a peculiar people (as they are called, Tit. 2.
14.) given to him not only as a Sovereign, but a Savior, not only to be
governed, but saved by him. Thus are all, and only Gods Elect given unto Christ
by his Father. They being first the fathers, he then gives them to his son
Christ. Mark it; Two particulars. The former of which here is employed, the
latter expressed.

1. They are Gods, God the Fathers, how Gods elect his people:
to his son? So are all the sons of men in a general way. Being his Creatures,
they are in his hands to be disposed of as i^ pleases him. Clay in the hands
of the Potter* That is the similitude made use of by the Prophet Jeremy to set
forth the absoluteness of Gods power in disposing of Nations, Jer. 18. 6.
Behold, as the Clay in the Potters hand, so are ye in my hand,, O house of
Israel. And the Apostle makes like use of it to set forth the same absolute
power of God in disposing of all particular-persons, as to their Eternal
estates, Romans 9. 21. Has not the potter power of his clay (says he) of the
same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor? to make
some vessels for honorable services, for state and ornament, or to eat and
drink in, others for base and servile uses. Gods absolute power over the sons
of men to dispose of them as to their eternal estate. Considered after the fall.
Such an absolute power has God over all the sons of men. They being all one
lump, all alike corrupted in Adam, equal sharers in his Transgression, and
alike heirs of his Corruption, God looking upon them in that estate, it was
now in his power, and at his choice to destinate and appoint them to several
ends, some to everlasting life, others to everlasting shame and contempt. Haud
secus quam si Princeps quisquam flagitiosos aliquot ac morte dignos carcere
concluso teneat, etc. Muscul. Com. in loc.
Even as a Prince (it is Musculus's comparison, writing upon the Text) having a
company of Rebels and Traitors in custody, all alike guilty of death, he
pardons some of them, receiving them (it may be) into grace and favor,
whilst in the mean time he leaves others to the Law, to receive the just
reward of their Rebellion. And who shall herein charge him with injustice? Even
such is Gods dealing with the sons of men in respect of their eternal estates.
They being all involved in the transgression of their first Parent, sinning in
him, and so alike guilty of death, he leaves some to receive their just
demerits, whilst he makes others the objects, not only of his Mercy, but also
of his grace and favor; which he has done merely out of his own will. I will
have mercy on whom I will show mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will
have compassion. So Paul cites that of Moses, Exo. 33. 19. Romans 9. 15. Thus
has God an absolute power and liberty to dispose of all the sons of men, as to
their eternal estates, looking upon them in that corrupt mass, that lapsed
condition.

Yea, Before the fall.
shall we rise higher, and with the Supralapsarians (as some at this day, from
their difference in judgment from others about this point, are called) and look
upon man in his pure naturals, as not yet fallen, merely as Gods creature,
simply and absolutely considered; yet here shall we find that which will
sufficiently vindicate God in his proceedings and dealings with him. It was the
plea of that Householder in the Gospel, when some of his laborers whom he had
hired into his Vineyard, quarrelled with him about the unequal distribution of
their wages, What (says he) is it not lawful for me to do what I will with
mine own? Mat. 20. 1^. So do men look upon that which they have a Property in,
they make account they have power and liberty to dispose of it as it pleases
them. And so indeed they justly might, were that property absolute (which none
of the son^ of men have in whatever they enjoy.) Now such is the Interest which
God has with all the sons of men, who being his Creatures, live and move, and
have their being in and from him, he has an absolute property in them; and
consequently an absolute power over them, so as he may dispose of them, not
only in regard of their temporal, but eternal estates, as it pleases him. And
out of this plenitude of power it is, that he electeth some, whilst he
rejects others; chooses some to be vessels of mercy, predestinating them to
obtain salvation, whilst he passes by others by a Negativ* Reprobation, or
Praeterition, leaving them to themselves, and by a Positive Reprobation
ordering them to just condemnation for sin. Therefore has he mercy on whom he
will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens (so the Apostle concludes it)
Romans 9. 18.

They are the former sort of these we have now to deal with, Gods elect how
called his people.
Gods Elect people, who (as I said) may be called his people, and that upon a
special, a peculiar account. The Lord knows them that are his (his by
Election) 2 Timothy 2. 19. (says our Savior, speaking to his Father of his
Apostles) John 17. 6. Thine, not by a pious kind of disposition (as Grotius
foully corrupts that Text) but by a gracious pre-election. Pietatis quodam
affectu: Grot. Annot* ad loc.
And such are all those who are given to Christ to believe on him, and to be
saved by him; they are Gods chosen ones, a chosen generation (as St. Peter has
it, 1* Pet. 2. 9.) chosen by him out of the world before the world was. As he
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4. And thus
are they his people. Even as the people of Israel were in an outward and
visible way, whom Moses tells, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. Thou art an holy people unto the
Lord thy God; the Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people unto
himself. So are all Gods Elect ones, in an inward and invisible way. God having
set a special love upon them, and chosen them, they are his people.

And being thus his by Election, now (in the Gods Elect gi^ven to Christ.
he gives them to his Son Christ. Thine they were, and thou gave them to
me, (says our Savior there of his Apostles) Ioh. 17. 6. And so is it with all
those who are ordained to eternal life, being God the Fathers by Election, he
gives them unto his Son Christ. So we find believers frequently described; as
in the verse next but one after the Text, v. 39. This is the Fathers will which
has sent me, that of all that he has given me I should lose nothing. And so
in that 17. of John, the Disciples are diverse times set forth under that
Periphrasis [Those whom thou have given me] v. 9, 11, 12. And so all other
believers, all that then did, or afterward should believe on him; Of them
speaks the 24th. v. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me be
with me. All believers are given to Christ.

Quest. But how are they said so to be?

Ans. To this it may be Answered; they may be said so to be two ways,
Intentionally, and Actually. Intentionally before time; Actually in time.

Before time, in Gods eternal purpose and decree. Intentionally, ^^fore time.
In his Decree of Election. God ordaining them to the end, to obtain salvation,
ordains them also to the means, giving them unto his Son Christ, choosing
them in him. So says the Apostle in tha^ Text forecited, Ephesians. 14. As he has
chosen us in him. (...) In Christ, whom God his Father constituted and
appointed to be (as it were) the Head and Root of the Election, into whom his
elect people were by his decree (as it were) ingrafted (as all mankind by
nature was into the sixst Adam) that so they might be made partakers of those
saving benefits by and through him, of Grace here, and Glory hereafter, as
before all men were of sin and death brought in by the first Adam. Thus they
are given to Christ before time.

In time, in the execution of that decree, when they are brought actually to
believe on Christ, Actually, in ^^me.
to receive him as their Savior and Lord. Behold, I, and the children whom the
Lord has given me, says Christ speaking of his Disciples (as that Text is by
many expounded) Isa. 8. 18. And upon this account our Savior says of his
Apostles in some of those Texts forecited, John 17. 9, 11. that they were given
to him by his Father, viz. actually given to bel^eve on him, to follow him, to
own and acknowledge him for their Lord and Master.

Quest. Now of which of these shall we understand our Savior here to speak in
the Text?

Ans. Here Expositors are not all agreed; The former here understood.
Some understanding it of the latter of these. So Grotius, who interprets it of
an effectual giving, (...) his cum affectu aliquo intelligitur. G^ot. ad loc.
Gods preparing men for Christ, and working faith in them, in such (says he)
as have a precious disposition thereunto. And so Carthusian conceives it may be
here looked upon; Tradit autem pater cum effectu Christo eos qui pietati
student. Idem ibid.
All that he gives me] i. e. (says he) such as by his secret inspiration he
inclines to come unto me. And so Maldonate, and some other Romish Commentators
would have it. But this were to confound these two parts of the Text, Quos per
inspirationem internam inclinat ad me. Carthus. Com. in loc. Daria Patre est
docibilem esse Dei. Maldonat. ad Text.

Omne quod dat mihi pater per aternam electionem, and temporalem vocati^nem.
Gorran. Enac. in Text. Dorandi verbum peri^de valet ac si dixisset Christus,
Quos elegit Pater, etc. Calvin in Text. Donat] viz. pro aeterno suo decreto
eligens in me ad vitam aeternam. Piscat. Schol. ibid. Innuit hoc verbum, quod
Deus ab aeterno aliquos elegerit, etc. Ferus ibid. Velquos ab aeterno elegit,
and praedestinavit in me. Carthus. ibid.


Gods gracious Donation, with man's Effectual Vocation, his Giving with man's
coming, which are here set forth as two distinct acts, the one of them
antecedaneous to the other, going before, as in Order, so in Time* All that the
Father gives me shall come unto me* Gods giving goes before man's believing.
Others there are who put both together, Gods Election before time, and his
calling in time: So Gorran. But others, and that more rightly, restrain it
rather to the fo^mer of these, Gods giving before time in his decree of
Election. So our Protestant Divines generally look upon it, not without the
consent of some Romanists. And with them I shall choose to go along, as I
assure my self I warrantably may, hereby understanding (as judicious Diodate,
and our own Annotator^ have it) all Gods Elect; who are given unto Christ by
God his Father before they come to him, before they actually believe on him.
And hence it is that our Savior speaking of the Elect among the Gentiles, he
calls them his sheep, John 10. 16. Other sheep have I which are not of this
fold, them also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice, Though as yet they
were not come into his fold, they did not own him for their Shepherd, yet he
had an interest in them, they were his sheep, given to him by God his Father.

Quest. And wherefore did God thus give his elect people unto Christ? Wherefore
God gave his Elect unto Christ.


Ans. Here, for further illustration I might show you the several ends of his
Donation; the principal whereof is, that he might be a Prince and a Savior
unto them saving and delivering them out of the hand; of all their enemies,
Sin, Satan, Hell, Death, and bringing them to everlasting life. This is the
Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me I should
lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day, John 6. 39. Thou
have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as
many as thou have given him, John 17. 2.

These are the principal Ends, to which there are many other that are
subordinate: God gives his elect unto Christ, that he may perform unto them
that threefold Office, of a Prophet, a Priest, a King. A Prophet, to make
known to them the mind and will of his heavenly Father. A Priest, to reconcile
them unto God by his death, and to keep them in grace and favor with him by
his Intercession* A King, to govern them as his subjects in his Kingdom of
grace, and afterward to bring them to reign as Kings with himself in his
Kingdom of glory. But I shall not give way to any further inlargements upon
this subject, remembering that this first Proposition is here only employed. Make
some Application of it.

Which (in the first place) may be directed by way of Information. Applic.
Information touching the Doctrines.
In which way it may be useful to us for the rectifying and settling of our
judgments in some controverted points concerning those two great Doctrines of
Election and Redemption.

1. Touching Election, we may here take Of Election.


1. That it is not Universal, That it is not universal.
of all Mankind. Election. The very word [Election] imports and signifies a
separating and culling of some from the rest. Elegit qui e multis aliquos
legit. To choose, is to take some out of many. And such is Gods Election; his
choosing of some out of the world of mankind, and giving them to his Son Christ
to be saved by him.

All that the Father gives me (says the Text) clearly intimating that all
were not given unto him, but a part, a select company, some out of mankind.
Election is not Universal.

True indeed, there is (as Augustine somewhere says) Inter electos specialis
quaedam universitas, a kind of special universality among Gods Elect, in as
much as they are gathered out of all conditions of persons, in all Nations,
through all the Ages of the world, out of which is made up this (...), this All
here in the Text. But yet this All is but some, some among mankind. Election is
only of some.

particular individual persons. This Arminians (at least some of them) deny,
Not only indefinite.
making Election to be only Axiomatical, not Personal, a choosing and designing
of the means not of the Persons. God has (say they) made choice of the way
and means to bring men to salvation by, viz. by believing on his Son Jesus
Christ; and he has ordained, that who so they are that shall apply themselves
to the use of that means, they shall be saved. But the Text here speaks
more, All that the Father gives me.] clearly intimating a Personal Election, a
giving of some individual persons unto Christ. Hence was it that some of these
Capernaites, some among the rest, did not believe on him, as some others did,
because they were not given to him as those others were. They were such as God
had no such gracious purpose towar^ds; they did not belong to his Election of
grace. Election is not Universal, nor yet only Axiomatical and Indefinite.

3. Nor yet (in the third place) simply conditional. Arminians would have it;
Nor simply conditional.
that men should be Elected upon the condition pf their believing and
persevering; so as it rests in their power to null and make void the decree.
But the Text here speaks it otherwise. Telling us that those whom God
electeth, he gives unto his Son Christ; gives them unto him, not if they
shall believe on him, but that they may believe on him, and so be saved by him.

4. Again, Election is not only to the End, but also to the Means. God
electing his people unto life, he by the same decree gives them unto Christ,
that they by believing on him, may be saved by him, so ordaining them to the
Means as well as the End.

This for Election, which being the first Link in the Golden Chain, the first
and main wheel in the work of man's salvation, the first in the order of the
Causes thereof, must be set right, rightly apprehended, otherwise the other
links or wheels, the subordinate causes will not rightly and orderly follow.

In the second place, make we the like Observation Redemption, Of Redemption,
which is not universal more than Election.
that it is not any more universal than Election. So indeed some, and not a
few, at this day would have it, who cry up this Doctrine, as if it were the
very Basis and groundwork of all Religion, That Christ died, and died alike for
all. But how will this comply and agree with this Text? where our Savior
speaks of a certain select company, which were given to him by his Father.
All that the Father gives me;] clearly intimating that there were some among
mankind whom God having a gracious purpose toward, gave them to his Son
Christ, that he should undertake for them, do what he did for them, that he
should be a surety for them, making satisfaction for them, redeeming them. Such
was the Fathers intention, his will; not that Christ should die for all; If so,
he would have given all to him, but for some. And this will Christ came to
perform. In the volume of thy Book it is written of me, Lo, I come to do thy
will O God, Heb. 10. 7. I came down from heaven not to do mine own will, but
the will of him that sent me (says he in the verse after the Text, v 38.) That
is, to redeem and save those, all those, and only those, whom God my Father
has given me. Thus it is (as Divines justly determine it) The work of the Son
in Redemption, does not exceed the work of the Father in Election. Such is the
order of working betwixt the Persons in the Trinity, as of being; the Son being
from the Father, works from him. This he does as the Son of God; And the like
he does as the Son of man, as Mediator. His work was to do his Fathers work. I
have finished the work which thou gave me to do (says he to his Father) Ioh.
4. 17. Now what that work was we have seen, viz. he had employed himself for
the good and benefit of those whom his Father had given him, for whom he was
now ready to lay down his life. So then, Redemption is not Universal.

As for those Texts which seem to speak it so, Texts seeming to make Redemption
Universal how to be understood
they admit of a fair construction consistent with this truth. As that of the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 6. where it is said, that Christ gave himself a Ransom for
all. (...), that is, for this [All] here in the Text, All those whom his Father
had given him; who are elsewhere called many, Mat. 20. 28. The Son of man came
to give his life a ransom for many; viz. his Elect: who are also elsewhere
called a world, 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself; that is, the world of his Elect, made up of Jews and Gentiles. And so
look we upon the Text, which of all other (as our last Translation renders it)
seems to speak most fully for the Adversary. Heb. 2. 9. where it is said of
Christ, that he by the grace of God tasted death for every man. (...), for all,
that is, still, for this (...), this All herein the Text, All and every one
whom his Father had bestowed upon him (as Diodate rightly expounds it.) Thus
does this word [All] here, as sometimes elsewhere, denote the universality, not
of Mankind, but of Gods Elect.

For them it was, Christ died ^^tentionally only for the Elect.
and only for them that Christ intentionally died. I lay down my life for my
sheep, says the obvious Text, Ioh. 10. 15. Which (whatever evasions are sought
out to elude it) speaks this truth so clearly, so fully, as puts it beyond
contradiction, whilst it restrains the Intent on of Christ, in laying down
his life, unto a select company, his sheep, viz. those that were given him by
his Father.

Which truth being thus bottomed, I desire you to take notice of, that you may
not be carried away with that wind of Doctrine, that plausible error which is
so taking with many at this day, who cry up the Doctrine of universal
Redemption as the most comfortable truth, and glorious Doctrine that can be
held forth, tending highly (as they apprehend) to the magnifying of the grace
and mercy of God, and merit of Christ, which are thus extended unto all. But
herein how are they mistaken? In thus extending this grace, how do they
extenuate it? Grace extenuated by extending it.
Of all Doctrines I know none that in truth more derogates from this grace of
God in Christ, than this; whilst it asserts alike respect to all, that all
being alike given to Christ by his Father, are alike owned by him; the
Redemption and Salvation of all alike intended by both, of Esau as of Jacob, of
Judas as of Peter, so as the one is not more beholding to God and Jesus Christ
than the other. This (whatever any may conceive) is in truth no small
derogation from, and extenuation of this grace, which being confined (as it
ought to be) to a narrower channel, rises higher. Being restrained only to a
certain number, a small number (comparatively) of Gods Elect, it is thereby
rendered the more glorious.

And so let it be in the eyes of all the Lords people, Use 2.
to whom God has evidenced and made known this his gracious purpose, The grace
of Election glorious grace.
that they are in the number of those whom he has thus given to his Son
Christ, Let them give unto him the glory of this his Grace, Free Grace. Such it
was, as I have shown you: All men being alike in Adam, in the same state and
condition by nature, all alike children of wrath, that God should single out
some, some few, to make them objects of his grace, ingrafting them into another
stock, the stock of the second Adam, giving them unto his Son Christ, to be
reconciled, redeemed, and saved by him, whilst he passed by others, the
greatest part, leaving them to themselves, to work out their own everlasting
condemnation, and to receive the just reward of their demerits; this he did
merely out of his own good pleasure, his free grace, there being no other
motive out of himself that might induce him to it: Let him then have the glory
of it from all those who apprehend their interest in it. Let them acknowledge
the freeness. And as the freeness, so the Greatness of it, admiring and
adoring it, blessing and magnifying God for it. Blessed be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly places (or things) in Christ; According as he has chosen us in him,
Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. Endeavoring to express their thankfulness unto him, by walking
answerably thereunto, living to the praise and glory of God and Jesus Christ.
This is that which the Apostle presses upon his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20
Ye are not your own, etc. Therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
spirit, which are Gods. And so let me press it upon you all you, who lay any
claim to an interest in this blessed privilege, of being thus given to Christ.
Know you now that ye are no longer your own, at your own dispose, so as to
serve what Masters you please; No, you are Christ's. So Paul tells those his
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3. 23. Ye are Christ's. And so are all believers; and that
by a double right, as of purchase (of which he there speaks in that former
Text, Ye are bought with a price, the blood of Christ) so of Donation, being
given unto him by God his Father. And being thus his, now live to him. None of
us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself (says the same Apostle, Romans
14. 7, 8. speaking de jure, what Christians ought to do;) For whether we live
we live unto the Lord, or whether we die we die unto the Lord. And O that all
of us may thus live and thus die; not to our selves, but to Jesus Christ,
showing our selves his loyal subjects, and obedient servants in our lives,
seeking his honor and glory, and then yielding up our selves unto him in our
death, being ready to die for him, if he should call us to that service. This
let all of us do who expect any benefit by him, and that, as upon the account
of what Christ himself has done for us, in redeeming us, so of what God the
Father has done for us, in giving us unto him. Thus I have done with the first
of these Propositions, which holds forth unto us this gracious Donation, Gods
giving of his Elect people unto Christ. Come we now to the second, which
informs us that

All those who are thus given unto Christ by his Father, Prop. 2.
they shall come unto him.] All who are given to Christ shall come to him.
Here is the second Proposition, which sets forth unto us Man's effectual
Vocation following upon Gods Election, as an undoubted consequent of it. So the
Apostle sets it forth in that known Text, Romans 8. 30. Whom he did predestinate,
them also he called. Which in effect speaks the same thing with this of our
Savior here [All that the Father gives me shall come unto me.]

Quest. How come unto him?

Ans. For the explicating of the Phrase, we may take notice of a twofold
coming unto Christ (even as there is a twofold Calling) the one outward and
formal, A twofold coming to Christ.
the other inward and real.

1. There is an outward and formal coming unto Christ, which is common to all
that make Outward and formal.
Thus do Hypocrites and formal Professors come unto him, who being led and
drawn by some sinister respects, hold forth this profession. Thus did these
Capernaites here come unto Christ, they flocked to him, and followed after him.
But wherefore was it? Not out of any true respect they had to his Person or
Doctrine, but for some outward advantage which they expected from him, viz.
that they might be fed by him. So he himself, who knew their thoughts and
intentions, charge it upon them, v. 26. of this Chapter [Ye seek me not
because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves.] It was not
his Doctrine, or works, that they regarded, but their own bellies. And in such
a way there are many that come unto Christ, who were never given to him by his
Father; even all Carnal Gospellers, who professed themselves the followers of
Jesus Christ, take upon them the profession of his name, but it is not ou^ of
any true inward respects which they have unto him, but out of some by and
sinister ends for their own Credit or Profit, or for fashion-sake. Such
followers Christ had many in the days of his flesh. And many such he has
wherever he comes, wherever his Gospel is preached. But let we these go as
they come; not owned by God before they come, nor any more owned for this their
coming.

Inward and Real. Inward and Real.
When men come to him non tantum pedibus, sed and affectibus; not only with the
outward, but inward man; come to him with their hearts and souls, out of an
inward respect and entire affection which they bear unto him. Thus did some of
his followers, his Disciples, at this time come unto him, looking upon him as
the bread of life. And thus do all true Believers come unto him, who come to
him as a Savior and a Lord, receiving him, believing on him. This is the
coming of which our Savior here speaks in the Text. All that the Father
gives me shall come unto me] that is, Believe on me. So the 35th verse
explaines it. He that comes unto me shall never hunger, Coming to Christ,
believing on him.
and he that believes on me shall never thirst;] where the latter word is
Exegetical and Expository to the former. To come unto Christ* is to believe on
him. Such is Faith; as it is the Eye, and Hand, and Mouth, so also the Foot of
the Soul. As the Eye, whereby the soul beholds Christ, looks up unto him,
as they did to their Brazen Serpent; and the Hand, whereby it takes hold of
him; and the Mouth, whereby it feeds on him, eats his flesh, and drinks
his blood; so the Foot, whereby it comes unto him, comes to him as to a
Savior and Redeemer, expecting salvation only by and through him, desiring to
have Union and Communion with him. This it is to believe on Christ, and this it
is to come unto him.

A Metaphorical expression, Faith, the coming of the soul unto Christ.
fitly setting forth the nature of Faith, saving, justifying Faith. Which is
(as I said) A coming of the soul unto Christ. Even as those Patients of his of
whom we read in the Gospel, feeling their own infirmities, and hearing of his
fame, and expecting to partake of the like benefit from him that others had
done, they come unto him, casting themselves down at his feet, imploring his
aid, some of them touching him, as that Haemorrhoisse, that woman with the
bloody issue is said to have done, who coming behind him touched the hem of his
garment (which she did, as with her finger, so with her faith) by which means
she drew from him that sanative virtue by which she was healed, Mat. 9. 20.
Even thus does the soul come unto Christ by faith; being made sensible of its
own wretched condition by reason of sin, and apprehending the fullness that is
in Christ, fullness of Merit, and fullness of Spirit, whereby he is able to work
a perfect cure for it, by taking away both the guilt and power of sin, and
procuring eternal salvation for it, now, renouncing all other confidences, i^
betaketh it self unto him as to an alone all-sufficient Savior, laying hold
upon him, ^esting upon him, that so it may be made par^aker of his Merits, his
Benefits. This it is ^o come unto Christ, thus to believe on him.

And thus do they come unto him who are given to him by his Father. They, All
they, and Only they, both comprehended in this word, [All] All that my Father
gives me shall come unto me.

[All that] (...), Thus all Gods Elect shall come unto Christ.
A word of the Neuter Gender, Omne, or Quicquid, All or whatever. Which some
look upon as Emphatical, importing more exactly an Universality than the
Masculine Gender would. Omne] in Neutro genere exactius Vniversitatem
significat quam in Masculino. Tolet: Vt majorem significet Vniversitatem,
Maldon. Omne, ut ostendat ex variis gentibus venturos ad eum. Ferus in loc.
Cyrill. lib. 3. cap. 39. Insi^^at etiam his verbis multos credituros in
Christum, Tolet; Com. ad loc.
All, whatever] that is, not only Jews, but Gentiles (whose Conversion Cyril
conceives to be hereby insinuated) and that not a few of them, but many. But we
shall not need to stand upon this Criticism. Look we upon the word, as the
generality of Expositors do; the Neuter Gender here put for the Masculine,
(...)] Neutrum pro Masculino, aut Communi. Grot ad Text.
which we shall find to be an usual Enallagie in Scripture. Grotius here gives
us two instances for it. The one, 1 Cor. 1. 27. Where the Apostle speaking of
weak and unwise persons (such as the world accounts so) he calls them (...),
and (...), the foolish things, and weak things of the world. The other, Rev.
21. last, where, speaking of the New Jerusalem, it is said, There shall in no
wise enter into it any thing that defiles. (...), No common, or unclean thing,
i. e. no impure and unsanctified persons. So here, All that, or every thing,
that is, every person, of what Nation, Sex, Quality, and Condition soever;
whether Jew or Gentile, male or female, bond or free, rich or poor. Of such
extent is the Decree of Gods Election, as also of Christ's Redemption, though
neither of them Universal as to singula generum, all particular persons, yet
both of them so as to genera singulorum, All sorts of persons. There is neither
Jew nor Greek (that is, neither Jew nor Gentile) there is neither bond or free,
there is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.
28. These make some difference as to Men, not so to God and Jesus Christ. As
the Father has Elected, so the Son has Redeemed some out of all these. Thou
have Redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and Nation (so sing the 24. Elders) Rev. 5. 9. Of such latitude and
extent is this [All] here in the Text, of which our Savior ^aith, All that my
Father gives me shall come unto me. And that Certainly.


Shall come] and that Certainly. So our Savior here lays it down, Non dicit
ad me venire potest, aut ad me veniat, sed per affirmationem, Ad me veniet.
Mu^cul. in loc.
not as a Probable, but as a Certain, an indubitable truth. (...), Ad me
veniet. Not, venire potest, or veniat; not He may come, or let him come, but he
shall come; asserting and concluding it as a most certain thing.

Quest. But how comes it so to be? Quest.
How comes it to pass that there should be such a certainty herein, The ground
of this certainty.
that all and every of those who are thus given to Christ, should thus come
unto him, that all that are Elected should believe on him?

Ans. For Answer, Ans.
Know that we are not to expect any ground or reason hereof in and from
themselves; Not in themselves.
as if there were any thing in their natural dispositions that should incline
them hereunto rather than others. Non est hoc naturali cuidam dispositioni
dandum. Muscul. ibid.
As if they were of themselves wiser than others to know what belonged to their
eternal welfare. No, herein all are alike. Gods Elect before their Conversion,
are no wiser than others. We our selves also were sometimes foolish (says the
Apostle) Tit. 3. 3. (...), without understanding. Non intelligentes rerum
divinarum (as Grotius well explaines it) having no understanding in divine
matters. So was it with the then believing Gentiles, at whom the Apostle is
conceived there principally to have an eye. But not only with them, but with
the Jews also. Paul (though before his Conversion as intelligent as most of
his time) yet he ranks himself in the number. (...), We. And so is it with all
the Elect people of God, before his Grace come to put a difference betwixt them
and others, there is no difference as to their understanding in divine and
heavenly mysteries. And as for wordly wisdom, if there be a difference,
commonly it lies on the other side. God has chosen the foolish things of the
world (says the Apostle in that Text even now cited) 1 Cor. 1. 27. (...), for
(...), foolish things of the world, that is, foolish persons, so accounted in
and of the world. And in the verse there foregoing he tells us, v. 26. Not many
wise men after the flesh, are called to believe on Christ, men worldly wise.
Herein those who are given to Christ, they sometimes, oft-times, fall short of
others. How is it then that they come unto him, whilst others keep off from
him, being strangers or enemies to him?

Ans. 2. The Ground and Reason hereof, Ans. 2.
being thus wholly out of themselves, But in God the Father, and Jesus Christ.
we shall find it partly in God the Father, and partly in his Son Christ.

In God the Father, In God the Father, who
who has

1. Decreed it, given them to Christ by his Eternal Decree. Now Gods decrees
are (like Laws of the Medes and Persians) unchangeable. Has decreed it.
unalterable. I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3. 6. Men are mutable (the best
and wisest of them) they change and alter their purposes upon second thoughts.
So does not God. His Counsel shall stand, Isa. 46. 10. So shall this his
Eternal Counsel, his Decree of Election. The foundation of God stands sure,
Sicut qui palatia struunt solent firma subjicere fundamenta, ita Deus ^noliens
civitatem illam aeternam, decreta quaedam substravit, velut fundamenta, quae
manent inconcussa. Gro^. in loc.
says the Apostle speaking of this Decree, which is the first groundwork of
Man's salvation laid by God himself, 2 Timothy 2. 19. (...), a sure and steady
foundation, not to be shaken, much less overturned. Gods decrees being passed,
must come to pass. Thus it is, even in things wherein there is the greatest
contingencie as to secondary causes, yet if we look at this first cause, there
is a necessity in that contingencie. Things must happen as they do. All that
are given unto Christ by God his Father, must, and shall come to him; the
absoluteness of Gods decree requires it should be so.

Decreed it, so he effects it. Effects it.
Having elected some to salvation by Christ, he does not only propound and
offer Christ unto them, so leaving it to the liberty of their own will, whether
they will come unto him, believe on him, or no; but he causes them to come
unto him, drawing them. No man comes unto me (says our Savior) except the
Father, which has sent me, draw him, v. 44. of this Chapter; that is,
powerfully and effectually work upon him. For so we are to understand the word
there. Not as if God did offer any violence to any in bringing them to Christ,
in forcing them to come to him against their wills. No, as the will of man
cannot be forced (which if it should be, it should cease to be a will) so
neither does God work upon any in the work of Conversion in any such way; but
in a sweet and swasory way, congruous and agreeable to their liberty and
nature, Drawing them with the cords of a man (as the Prophet has it, Hos. 11.
4.) yet powerfully and effectually, of unwilling making them willing. So much
the word in the Text imports, (...), shall come, viz. willingly. And thus does
God the Father work upon all those whom he has given to his Son Christ, all
his Elect people, making them willing to believe on him. Which he does by
revealing him unto them, and in them. Thus was Paul (that chosen vessel) as he
is called, Acts 9. 15.) brought unto Christ. When it pleased God to reveal his
Son in me (says he) Gal. 1. 16. (...), (...), i. e. (...). Hieron Erasmus,
Grot. in loc.
not only by me (as some have construed it) or yet to me, but in me, that is,
(as Beza, Videtur eo dicendi genere significari dei gratiam coelitus in animum
ipsum illabi ut and Graeca etiam Scholiae Annotarunt. Beza Gr. Annot. ad loc.
after the Greek Scholiasts, explaines it) by an inward and effectual
Revelation, not only to his Ear, but to his Heart. The like does God to all his
Elect people, having by his decree given them to Christ before time; he thus
reveals him to them, and in them in time, teaching and instructing them by
his Word and Spirit. By his Word outwardly, by his Spirit inwardly* And so
teaching them, he draws them, sweetly overpowering their wills, making them
willing to come unto him. So our Savior himself gives the reason of it, v.
45. of this Chapter. It is written in the Prophets, And they shall all be
taught of God (All Gods Elect) Every man therefore that has heard, and has
learned of the Father, comes unto me. Gods Elect, whom he has in his Eternal
Decree given to his Son Christ, being thus effectually taught of him by his
Word and Spirit, revealing Christ to them and in them, now they come unto him.
This it is that makes the Decree to bring forth, even Gods effectual
operation, in calling those whom he has predestined, as the forecited Text
has it, Rom* 8. 30. Whom he predestined, them also he called.] Called, not
only outwardly by his Word, for so many are called who were never chosen (as
our Savior declares it, Mat. 20. 16.) but inwardly, causing them to believe
on his Son. Thus does God call all those whom he has predestined, working
faith in them. Which is his Gift. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that
not of your selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. It] as salvation it self,
so that faith whereby men are saved, it is the gift of God. Though it be in
them, yet not of them. Both Habit and Act are from God. To you it is given not
only to believe (says Paul to his Philippians, intimating that this was given
them) Phil. 1. 29. This is his Gift, and his Work. This is the work of God,
that ye believe on him whom he has sent (so our Savior tells the Jews, v.
29. of this 6th of John.) To (...), The work of God, not only required and
commanded of him, but also wrought by him (as our New Annotator explaines it.)
Which it is in all his Elect; this being not only a Consequent, but a fruit,
depending upon, and issuing from their Election. As many as were ordained to
eternal life, believed, Acts 13. 48. God ordaining to the End (salvation) he
ordains also unto the means, which is faith in Jesus Christ. And having
ordained to it, he works it; so bringing them to Christ whom he has given to
him. And thus you see how the certainty of this Event, of all Gods Elect coming
to Christ, depends upon God the Father, upon his Will and Work; his Will in
appointing them, his Work in causing them to believe on him.

2. And (in the second place) as God the Father has a special Efficiency in
this, so also Son, In Jesus Christ who executes his Fathers Counsels
his Son Christ, who being of Counsel with his Father as God, as Mediator he
sees to execution of his Counsels; specially of this his great Counsel,
touching the salvation of his elect people, who being given unto Christ, they
are known to him, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The Lord (the Lord Christ) knows them that
are his; viz. by Election. So was Paul, though then a Persecutor, yet he was
known to Christ to be a chosen vessel. He is a chosen vessel unto me (so he
tells Ananias concerning him) Acts 9. 15. And so are all others, though before
their Conversion not known to others, nor yet to themselves that they are given
to Christ, yet they are known to him. And being known to him, he takes care of
them, and that first to bring them home unto himself, to bring them as subjects
into his Kingdom, as sheep into his fold. Other sheep have I which are not of
this fold, and them also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice, says he,
meaning his Elect among the Gentiles, whom he would in his time bring into his
Kingdom of grace, causing them to believe on him. And so deals he by all
those who are given him by his Father. They being by nature all of them lost
sheep, wandering in the bypath of sin, leading to destruction, not having so
much as an animum revertendi, any disposition, any inclination of returning, of
coming unto Christ the shepherd of their souls, he seeks them. The Son of man
is come to seek and to save that which is lost, Mat. 18. 11. poor lost sinners.
Such Jesus Christ came to seek. And being in Heaven, he has now an eye to
them, such among them as are given unto him. Whilst they do not seek after
him, yet he seeks after them, drawing them to himself. This does God the
Father, (as you have heard.) And thus also does Christ. When I am lift up
(says he) I will draw all men unto me, John 12. 32. Christ being lift up,
first upon the Cross, then upon the Throne, set at the right hand of his
Father, he then says he would draw all men to himself. What he had before done
to the Jews, he would now do to Jews and Gentiles, drawing his Elect out of
both, bringing them to believe on him. This he has in all Ages done. But now
under the Gospel he does it more vigorously than ever, by setting up his
Standard, holding forth himself in the preaching of the Gospel, and withal
sending forth his Spirit, which accompanying the Word, makes it effectual.
Thus is Jesus Christ as the Loadstone to the Iron, by a secret virtue, the
virtue of his Spirit attracting his Elect people; who being thus drawn by him,
do now willingly come unto him. Draw me, and we will run after thee (says the
Church unto Christ, Cant, 1. 4. promising a willingness in all her members to
follow him upon his putting forth his effectual power in them.) And upon this
ground also it may be concluded, that All those who are given to Christ by his
Father, they shall come unto him. All they.

And (secondly) Only they. So much is here Only Gods Elect come unto Christ.
This being here rendered as the Reason why these Capernaites did not come unto
Christ, did not believe on him,) because they were not given to him by his
Father. Ye have seen me and believe not, How so? why All that the Father gives
me shall come unto me]. All they, and only they. Of which number whilst ye are
not, I cannot wonder that ye do as you do, stand out against me, not coming
into me, not believing on me. A thing which none but those who are given to
Christ by God his Father will or shall ever do.

Quest. And why not? Man cannot come of himself.


Ans. The ground hereof you have heard it already. This is Gods work, which man
cannot do of himself. No not so much as will to come unto Christ. It is God
that works in you both to will and to do (says our Apostle to his
Philippians.) Phil. 2. 13. As the Act of faith, so much more the Habit, is Gods
work his Gift. And this gift he bestows only upon his Elect Thence is it
called their faith; The faith of Gods Elect. Tit. 1. 1. So called, not because
thereby men are made Gods Elect, Per quam homines ^iunt Electi D^i. id* est,
Deo charissimi. Gro^. in lo.
dear unto him (as Grotius foully perverts that Text) but because it is peculiar
unto Gods Elect, saving faith being wrought only i^ them, the Doctrine of
faith, the Gospel, being really embraced only by them. As for others, being
left to themselves, they will not, they cannot come unto Christ, believe on
him. No man comes unto me Except the Father that sent me draw him? Except he
put forth that effectual power of his, which he does not for any but those
upon whom he has set a peculiar love, his Elect ones. But I shall dwell no
longer upon the Doctrinal part come we to make some Application of this Truth.

Which let it be directed (as the former) Information: Applic.
And so it may serve. Information.


Election and Redemption, that neither of them is Universal. The former
Doctrines touching Election and Redemption confirmed. Calvin in Text.
So much Calvin rightly inferrs from hence. Quum dicit venire quicquid datur,
inde colligimus non omnes dari. Whereas Christ here says, that All that are
given to him shall come unto him. From hence we may conclude (says he) that
all are not given to him, Elected in him to be redeemed by him, in as much as
all do not come to him; which were they so given to him, they should certainly
do. An Argument so convincing, as I know not what can be more.

2. In the second place, Predestination not upon the foresight of says.
take we notice from hence, that God does not pred^stinate upon the foresight
of faith. So Arminians would have it, that God foreseeing who they are that
will come unto Christ, receive him, believe on him, he thereupon predestinateth
them to obtain salvation by him. But this Text speaks it otherwise, making
their coming to Christ not the ground or cause of Gods Predestination, but the
fruit and consequent of it. All that the Father gives me. (viz. by way of
Predestination) shall come unto me, to believe on me. Thus are Gods Elect
predestined to believe, not because they believe.

3. Again (in the third place) take we notice from hence, that Faith is not
left as a Faith not contingent. Per hoc ^utem quod dicit. Quod dat mihi pater,
ost endit quoniam non contingens res est credere in Christum. A quinas in Text.
ex Chryso^t. Hom. 44. Quibus verbis intelligit fidem non esse in arbitrio
hominum, ut promis cue vel fortuito hic and ille credant. Calvin ad Text. Hoc
ipso innuit, fidem non oriri ex viribus liberi arbitrii, sed ex gratuita
Electione Dei. Piscat. Analys. in Text.
left to the liberty of men's will, whether they will believe or no. But it is
determined who they are that shall believe, viz. they, all they, and only they,
who are given to Christ by his Father: All, and only Gods Elect, who being
given to Christ before time, they shall certainly come to him in time; believe
on him. All they, and only they.

But here before I go any further, let me cover the pit which some may think I
have now opened. vindicating this Doctrine from some misconstructions which
some possibly be ready to make of it. This Doctrine cleared from
^^sconstructions.
Of these I shall take notice of two or three.

Obj. 1. Is it so that All and Only they shall come unto Christ, whom God his
Father has given to him? Does not this then excuse those who do not come unto
him? No excuse for unbelievers.
May not they justly take up this for their plea, that they were never given to
him?

Ans. To this I find diverse Answers returned (as by Chrysostom, (who moves
this doubt) so by some others, Vide Tolet Annot in Text.
which I shall not trouble you with. In brief (for I do not intend to enlarge
upon any of these Controversies) let it suffice. This can be no just plea for
those who shall take it up and make use of it, in as what herein they do, they
do it willingly. Their rejecting and refusing of Christ being offered and
tendered unto them, is in them a voluntary act, whereunto they are no ways
compelled, and so renders them without excuse. Neither is Gods Decree of
Reprobation, Reprobation not the cause of infidelity.
his not giving them to Christ, properly the Cause of this Infidelity and
Disobedience in them. True it is, it is an Antecedent to it, but not properly
the Cause of it. That instance, which I find made use of by some in this case,
illustrates it well. The absence of the Sun in the night-season, is an
Antecedent to, but not the proper Cause of the freezing of the water, which
comes from the coldness of the Air. Even so is it here. Gods Decree of
Reprobation (as it is called) his not giving some men to Christ, it is
Antecedent to their Infidelity, but not properly the Cause of it, which is
their own Corruption. Their not coming unto Christ, to believe on him, is
indeed a Consequent of Gods Nonelection, his not giving them unto him, but not
properly the effect of it. So as this is no excuse for them, who in refusing of
Christ offered to them, do it voluntarily, and willingly.

Obj. But (in the second place) Is not this a dangerous Doctrine, No ground for
security and carelessness.
tending to make men careless and regardless of their spiritual estates? If it
be so that all that are given to Christ shall certainly come to him, all that
are within the compass of Gods Election shall be made partakers of such an
effectual vocation, why then should any trouble themselves about this? why may
they not take their course, and live as they list? If they be in the number of
those that are given to Christ, If they do belong to Gods Election; they shall
come to him, they shall be brought to him.

Ans. A desperate Inference, A desperate inference.
speaking terror and horror to all those who shall dare to take it up, and make
such use of it. Of all signs and evidences of a man that is not given unto
Christ, that is not within the compass of Gods Election, I do not know a more
fearful one than this, when any one shall thus turn this grace of God into
wantonness. And therefore take heed how you give way to such wretched
reasonings, how you give entertainment to any such a thought. Taking notice
that God does not bring men to Christ against their wills. And they who are not
willing to come unto him when he is offered and tendered to them, what know
they whether ever they shall have a second invitation? Just is it with God to
withhold his grace from those who thus reject it, and to harden their hearts
confirming them in their infidelity, who have first hardened their own hearts
against the tenders of grace and mercy in Christ. This is that which our
Evangelist St. John says of the Jews, John 12. 37. Though Christ had done so
many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him. And why not? how came
they to be so stupid? The reason is rendered, v. 39, 40. Therefore they could
not believe, because Isaias said, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened
their hearts, etc. They had first wilfully shut their own eyes against the
light of the Gospel, maliciously withstanding and rejecting of Christ. And
thereupon God in his most just and righteous judgment gives them over to a
reprobate sense, taking from them those abilities which they had of believing
unto salvation. O take heed that the like do not happen to any of you! which
you may justly expect, shall you dare upon this, or any other pretense
whatever, to reject and refuse the gracious offers of Christ tendered to you.

Obj. 3. But (in the third place) may not this Doctrine minister matter of
despair to some drooping spirits, No ground of Despair.
who may thus reason against themselves. If only they shall come unto Christ
who are given to him by God the Father, then with what confidence can they come
to him, not knowing whether they be of that number, which they fear they are
not* and if so, then all their attempts and endeavors this way will be to no
purpose. Hereupon they fear that they shall never come to him, to receive any
benefit by him and from him.

Ans. For Answer to this, A wrong way of. reasoning to begin with Gods decrees.
know we that this is a wrong way of reasoning, to begin with Gods decrees,
which being secret to us, and hidden from us, until God shall be pleased to
make them known in and by the execution of them, may perplex and trouble, but
no ways profit or advantage any by their immediate enquiries into them. And
therefore let none attempt to unlock that Cabinet, to look into that Ark. Gods
revealed Will man's Rule.
Secret things belong unto the Lord, but revealed things to us and to our
children, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Now what Gods revealed will is, that all either do, or
may know, viz. that they should come unto his Son Christ, that they should
believe on him. This is the Commandment, that we should believe on the name of
his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3. 23. And to this command we have a gracious
promise here annexed. They who so come unto Christ shall not be rejected. [He
that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out.] Now then, wherefore should any
perplex and trouble their spirits in searching after that which they shall
never in any other way find whether they be given to Christ. Temeritatis est
velle pervestigare divini consilii arcanum. Hoc faciendum est quod praecipit
Deus. Praecipit autem credi in Christum.
Why do they not rather in obedience to that great Gospel-command, and in
confidence of so gracious a promise, put their souls upon this way, apply
themselves to the doing of what is so required of them? viz. Ferus Annot. in
Text.
To come unto Jesus Christ.

Which let me now press upon all and every of you by way of Exhortation, Use 2.
that you would come unto Jesus Christ. Exhortation to all to come unto Christ.
This is that which he himself inviteth all to do, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, And again, John 7. 37. In the last day,
that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst,
let him come unto me. And let all hearken to this Invitation, closing with it.

Many Arguments and Mot^ves might I make use of to press this Motion, Motives
to it.
to set on this Exhortation. In no other way is life to be expected. Ye will
not come unto me that ye might have life (says our Savior to the Jews) John
5. 40. They went to Moses, seeking salvation by the works of the Law; but alas,
it was not there to be found. I am the way, the truth, and the life, John 14. 6
Christ is the only true way which leads unto eternal life. This is life
eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent,
Joh. 17. 3. To know God in Christ, this is the saving knowledge. Comin^ unto
Christ, you shall find a fullness in him, so as you shall not need to seek any
thing out of him. He that comes unto me shall never hunger (says the verse
next but one before the Text) v. 35. he shall find a full satisfaction in me.
Here, and only here is true rest and peace to be found. Come unto me ye that
labor, etc. and ye shall find rest to your souls. Here is that wine and milk
to be had, which the Prophet Isai speaks of, Isa. 55. ^. whatever is
requisite for the refreshing and nourishing of the Soul.

But I shall confine my self to that one Argument which I have here put into my
hand. Coming to Christ, an assurance of being given to him.
Hereby shall you come to know that you are given to Christ by God his Father.
This is the one and only way whereby you may come to be assured of Gods
gracious purpose toward you, Adhaerens Christo certus es de praedestinatione
tua Ferus Annor in Text.
that your names are written in the book of life, that you are in the number of
Gods Elect. A thing which it stands all Christians in hand to make sure unto
themselves. Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. (So St.
Peter presses it upon those to whom he writes) 2 Pet. 1. 10. And who is there
among you but would be glad to have this assurance? Now in what way may this be
obtained? Why, in vain it is to think of ascending up into Heaven, there to
search the Rolls and Records of Eternity. Only then put your selves upon this
way of coming unto Jesus Christ. Hereby may a Christian come to be undoubtedly
assured hereof. So much we may learn from the Text. All that the Father gives
me shall come unto me. So then, invert the words. All that do come unto Christ,
are given to him by his Father. Thus may Christians safely pass a Notiore ad
ignotum, from that which is known to what is otherwise unknown, reasoning from
their Vocation to their Election, from their coming to Christ to their being
given to him.

As for their coming unto Christ, Coming to Christ, a thing which may be known.
that is a thing which they may certainly know. The heart cannot be a stranger
to its own Affections, especially if they be intense. Quid enim cordi nostro
perspectius esse po^erit, quam quod non ^isi cord; ^oque ardenti and ^upido
geritur. Musc. Com. in Text.
If there be an earnest desire, a longing of the soul after Christ, an earnest
desire of Union and Communion with him, an intense love to him, so that the
soul is enamoured with him, a serious and ^ixed resolution in the heart to rest
upon him, to trust in him for the pardon of sins and eternal salvation (all
which accompany a true saving faith) the soul cannot be ignorant of it. This is
a thing which upon the enquiry every one may know of his own heart, whether he
has thus come to Christ, thus received him. How else is it that the Apostle
puts his Corinthians upon this trial? 2. Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves
whether you be in the faith. Prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves
how that Jesus Christ is in you? And once knowing this, now may they conclude,
and that certainly, that they are within the compass of Gods gracious Election,
that they are by him given to his Son Jesus Christ.

Which let every of us (I say) labor in this way to make sure to our selves.
Christians make sure their Election by coming to Christ.
The world being divided into two parts, one part given to Christ, the other
part left to Satan, the Prince of this world, see we to which of these it is
that we belong, whether to Christ or Satan. Is it so that we have renounced
Satan, abandoned his service, and given our selves to the Lord Jesus, taking
him for our Savior and Lord, now may we conclude that we are in the number of
them whom God has given to him, appointed to salvation by and through him.

Only see that this our coming to him be Inward and Real. See that this Coming
be real.
Not such as the coming of these Capernaites was, who came unto Christ, but it
was (as I showed you) out of a by and sinister respect. And thus surely do the
greatest part of Christians at this day come unto him. They make a profession
of his name. But wherefore is it? why they do it pro forma, for fashion-sake,
or they expect some outward advantage by it: Vix quaeritur Jesus propter Iesum.
August. in Joh. 6. 26.
They follow Christ, as these Capernaites did for the loaves. Take heed it be
not so with us. If we come unto Christ, see that we come with upright and
sincere hearts, out of an earnest desire of having Union and Communion with
him. So coming unto him, now take this as an evidence of Gods gracious
Donation, that we are by him given to his Son, as also of Christ's gracious
reception. So coming unto him, we shall not be rejected of him. So it follows
in the last branch of the Text.

And him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out.] There have we the
third and last Proposition, or Doctrine.

Those who come unto Christ he will in no wise cast out.] Prop. 3. Casting out,
what.
(...) (or (...). Non ejiciam for as. To open the Phrase, To Cast out, properly
it imports an Ejection, or Expulsion, a casting out of some place or company.
Thus we read how the Jews cast Stephen ont of the City. (...), Act. 7. 58. And
our Savior out of the Synagogue, John 9. 34, 35. They cast him out (says the
Text) (...), viz. out of the Synagogue (as the 22. verse explaines it.)
Augustines Interpre^ation not allowed.
And in such a sense do some here understand it. I will in no wise cast out.]
That is (say some) out of my Kingdom of Glory. Quale est illud intus, unde non
exitur for as; Magnum penetrale, and dulce secretum.
So Augustine here looks upon it. Hither it is that all those who are given
to Christ, all Gods Elect, shall come, they shall come unto him in his Chamber
of presence, his magnu^ penetrale, (as he calls it) that is, August. Tract in
loc.
his Marriage-chamber, and being once entered there, he shall never eject, never
cast them out again. But this Maldonate excepts against, as not being so proper
to this Text, Cum dicit, ad me venit, non significat ad se in coelo, ubi fides
non est.
where Christ's promise is unto those who come to him by faith. Now there is no
room for, no use of faith in heaven, where all shall live by sight. We walk by
faith, and not by sight, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 7. Maldon in Text.
intimating faith to be proper for earth, and sight for heaven, where faith and
hope shall be swallowed up of vision and fruition. And therefore let we that
go, though in it self a truth.

And not unlike is that Interpretation of Cyril, Nor yet Cyrils.
who understands this of the last Judgment, at which time all wicked and
ungodly ones, all unbelievers, shall be cast out. So our Savior tells the
unbelieving Jews, Math. 8. 12. The children of the Kingdom (meaning them who
looked upon themselves as such, being the only people then under a visible
Covenant) shall be cast out into outer darkness. And so shall it be with all
other ungodly persons. Then shall Christ say to the Goats on his left hand,
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, Mat. 25. 41. But so shall it not be with his Elect his Sheep, whom he
shall then set upon his right hand, speaking to them in another language, Come
ye blessed of my Fathtr, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, etc. v. 34. Then
shall not they be cast out, but admitted and received into those everlasting
mansions. Which is also there set forth in the same Chapter under the Parable
of the wise and foolish Virgins; the one of which are said to be kept out, the
other received into the Mariagechamber, v. 11, 12. fitly representing the
different entertainment of believers and unbelievers at the day of the general
Judgment. A truth also, but liable to the same exception with the former (which
also the aforesaid Author puts in.) Non enim illuc homines ad Christum per
fidem venient, de quo adventu his loquebatur.
The coming which our Savior here speaks of, is by faith. B^t so shall not
men come unto him at that day. The souls of Gods Saints being once entered into
their glory, living by sight (which they do being separated from their bodies)
they shall henceforth have no more use of faith. Maldon. in Text.
Now abides faith (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 13. viz. whilst we live
here; not so after death, not so at the last Judgment, when men shall see and
feel what now they do, or will not believe. So then, what our Savior here
says of his not casting forth those that come to him, must be understood of
this life. Those who here come unto him by faith, believing on him, he will in
no wise cast out.

Quest. But yet the Question runs on. How not cast them out here?

Ans. To this Grotius returns an Answer, Grotius's Supposition rejected as
unsound.
that they being thus come unto Christ, he will not for his part cast them out
of his Kingdom of grace, being entered as Scholars into his School (from whence
he conceives this Expression to be borrowed) he will not expel them. Thus
(says he) do froward Schoolmasters sometimes deal by their Scholars, Non
faciam ut morosi Magistri, non expellam eum, nempe si perpetuo voluerit meus
esse, per me non stabit quo minus sit. Grot. Annot. in Text.
expel them without any just desert. But so will not Christ deal by his
Scholars, those that come to him, being once his, they shall ever be so for
all him, continuing and abiding with him if they will. But this savouring
rankly of the Arminians, founding man's perseverance in Grace upon the liberty
of his own will, I reject it as unsound.

More solidly (to hold you no longer in suspense) by Casting out here
understand we rather a Rejection than an Ejection, The true sense of the phrase
here.
a Repelling than an Expelling. [Him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast
out.] Neminem a^ me venientem repellam, omnes admittam, omnes amplectar.
Non repudiabo, non repellam, I will not refuse and reject him, but will
receive and embrace him, bidding and making him welcome. So may we most fitly
look upon the phrase here, Ruper^us ad loc. and Maldon, etc.
as having a (...), a (...) in it, intending more than it speaks, Non
repudiabo, sed benevole excipiam, and in ^ternum servabo. Piscator Schol. in
loc. Two things comprehended under it.
importing a gracious reception, with a loving and lasting entertainment. Thus
will the Lord Jesus Christ receive all those that come unto him by faith, he
will own them, and entertain them as his, and that for ever. Two things
conceived to be comprehended under this Expression.

1. He will receive them, entertain them. [Him that comes unto me I will not
cast out.] Host (says Maldonate) should say the like terms, Christ will
receive those that come to him.
If any man come to me, I will not cast him out, his meaning would be
apprehended to be, Quemadmodum si publicus dicat Hospes, neminem qui ad
hospitium venerit, ejiciam. Mald. ad loc.
not I will not cast him out of my house having once received him in, (whereof
no man would make any doubt) but that he will not refuse any such guests, but
would readily receive them into his house, bidding them welcome, giving
entertainment to them, making provisions for them. And in such a sense
understand we our Savior here, where he makes the like Proclamation, [Him
that comes to me I will in no wise cast out.] That is, I will not refuse nor
reject him, but will readily receive him into my house, my Church, where I will
receive and make him welcome, giving entertainment to him, providing for him
whatever shall be requisite in order to his salvation, applying to him the
merit of my death, making him a sharer in the benefit of my Intercession,
communicating unto him Grace here, and Glory hereafter. Such a Reception it is
that Christ here promises to all those that come unto him, that believe on
him. And this will he certainly perform to them. Whoever they are that come
unto him, they shall not be rejected of him.

So was it with those who came to him in the days of his flesh for the cure of
their bodily infirmities, we do not read that he refused, that he rejected any
of them, or that he sent them away without what they came for. Great multitudes
followed him, and he healed them all (says the Text, Mat. 12. 15.) True
indeed, for that woman of Canaan, who came to him in the behalf of her daughter
(of which you have the story, Math. 15.) at the first he seemed to give her a
repulse, but it was only for the trial and exercise of her faith and patience,
wherein she persevering, he gran^s her request; Be it unto thee even as thou will (says he) v. 28. And the like may they expect who come unto him upon a
spiritual account, for the cure of their soul-maladies, for the taking away the
guilt and power of sin, and for the obtaining of eternal salvation by him, he
will not reject them. However he may for a time, for the like exercise of their
faith, hold them off, yet he will not cast them out; he will receive them, he
will embrace them.

Even as he dealt by those Infants that were brought to him in the arms of
others, And the Infants brought to them.
presented to him for his blessing, He took them up in his arms (says the
Text) and laid his hands upon them and blessed them, Mark 10. ^6. Not
repelling them, as his Disciples did; they looking upon it as a matter of
trouble, and a thing beneath their Master, not suitable to his excellency and
greatness to meddle with young children, they rebuked those that brought them;
But (says the Text) when Jesus saw i^, he was much displeased, and said unto
them, Suffer little children to come unto me and forbid them not, v. 13, 14.
thereby declaring his readiness to receive all those whoever they are that
shall come unto him to seek and receive any spiritual benefit from him. Whoever
they are that desire communion with him, he will have communion with them. This
is that which he tells the Laodicean Angel, Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the
door, and knock, If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to
him, and sup with him, and he with me. Whoever they are that hear Christ
knocking at the door of their hearts and consciences, by his Word, and the
motions of his Spirit, if they shall open unto him, receiving and entertaining
him by faith, he will unite himself to them, vouchsafing to them a sweet
communion with himself. Him that thus comes unto him, to have communion with
him, he will not cast out.

Obj. But what say we then to the guest in the Parable? The Case of the Guest
in the Parable cast out from the Mariage-Supper, resolved.
He came to the Mariage-feast, came to have communion with Christ, yet we find
him cast out. Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into
outer darkness; that is the doom which the King there passes upon him when he
came to see the guest, Mat. 22. 13.

Ans. To this an Answer is soon returned by consulting the verse there next
following, which gives us an account of the ground of this his ejection. For
many are called, but few are chosen, v. 14. Many called outwardly to an outward
visible communion with Christ, who are not truly given to him, are not in the
number of Gods Elect. And in this number was this guest, who here crowded in
for companies sake, a hypocrite joining himself to the visible Church, not
being that in truth which he made profession of. So much we may learn from the
11th verse, which informs us that he had not on the wedding garment; he was one
that was not regenerated, one that had not put on Christ by faith. And
therefore no wonder that he was cast out. So shall all Hypocrites be sooner or
later. But so shall not they who come unto Christ in sincerity. So coming to
him he will receive them.

retain them. Christ receiving those that come to him retains them with him.
So much also is conceived to be implied in this phrase, I will not cast him
out] he shall be with me, dwelling with me, having an everlasting communion
with me. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I
in him (says the 56. v. of this Chapter) whereof the Text is part. Those that
receive Christ by faith (for that is meant by eating his flesh, and drinking
his blood) he will not only come and sup with them, but dwell in them, having a
constant and continued communion with them. Non solum amanter ad se venientes
suscipit, sed susceptos it^ constanter ac perseveranter complectitur, tuetur
and conservat, ut nunquaui illos abjiciat. Aliud est Principum hujus seculi
ingenium, etc. Musc. Com. in Text.
Having once received them into grace and favor with himself (which he does
upon their believing on him) he will never cast them out of it. Herein (says
Musculus) does this our King differ from other Kings and Princes, who are often
inconstant in their affections, loving to day, loathing to morrow. What more
common with them than to cast their favorites out of favor? But so will not
the Lord Christ do by his favorites. Those whom he once affects, he never
rejects. Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the
end (says our Eavngelist) Ioh. 13. 1. Not only his Disciples, but all his
Elect (who are there called his own, in as much as they were given to him by
his Father) having set a peculiar affection upon them, he continued it to them
unto the end, the end of his life, expressing it, as by taking care of them,
keeping them, Whilst I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy Name;
Those that thou gave me I have kept, John 17. 12. so by dying for them. And
like affection does he still bear to all those, who being given to him, come to
him, believe on him. Loving them once, he loves to the end, to the end of
their lives, and to eternity; once affecting them, he will never cast them out
of his affection. Thus you see that it is so. Those that come unto Jesus Christ
he will not cast them out; he will both receive, and retain them as his.

Quest. And why will he do so?

Ans. For this take two or three Reasons, or Grounds.

1. This is his Fathers will, Reas. 1. This is the Fathers will.
that he should thus receive those whom he gives unto him. This is the Fathers
will which has sent me, that of all that he has given me I should lose
nothing (v. 39. of this Chapter. Now with this will does Christ perfectly and
exactly comply. I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will
of him that sent me, v. 38. And hereupon it is, that he so readily and
constantly embraces all those who being thus given to him by his Father, come
unto him.

2. As this is his Fathers will, so his own disposition inclines him to it.
Reas. 2.
He being a gracious, a merciful, Christ's clemency inclining him hereunto.
a tenderhearted Savior, he pitieth the condition of poor perishing sinners.
When he was here upon earth, the story tells us, how when he beheld the City
(of Jerusalem) he wept over it, Luke 19. 41. Taking notice of the sad condition
of it, what a dreadful judgment hung over the head of that people, his heart
melted into tears* And with such an eye of tender pity and compassion does he
look upon poor sinners lying in their natural estate, and thereupon he readily
receives those that come to him, accepting the least beginnings of faith. This
is that which the Prophet Isai fore told of him, Isa. 42. 3. A^ r^ised reed
shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench. Such is the clemency
of Jesus Christ in dealing with poor sinners, that where he sees any good
desires, any beginnigs of grace, though never so weak and slender, he is ready
to accept them. Being herein like that Roman Emperor, of whom it is reported,
that whoever came to him, he never sent them away discontented. Thus whoever
they are that come unto Jesus Christ, come unto him in sincerity, such is his
Cl^mency, his Gentleness, he will in no wise cast them out.

3. Which if he should do in the third place) it would be cross to the end of
his coming into the world, Reas. 3.
his taking upon him the office of a Mediator, To reject those that come, were
cross to the end of his coming.
which was to seek and to save that which was lost (as he tells Zacheus) Luke
19. 10. Now coming to seek after those that seek not after him ( I was found of
those that sought me not, says the Prophet Isay, setting forth Gods preventing
mercy in calling of the Gentiles, Isa. 65. 1.) he will not reject those that
come unto him. This being his work, to bring in lost souls into his Kingdom of
Grace (which it is, Other sheep have I which are not of this fold, them also
must I bring, John 10. 16.) He will not re^use them when they come unto him.
But to dwell no longer upon Doctrinal Confirmation or Illustration, Come we now
to Application.

Where (in the first place) let me again take up that former Motion, Use 1.
pressing what before I propounded, The grand duty p^essed, of coming to Christ.
exhorting and persuading all to come unto Jesus Christ. This is the great and
principal errand about which the Ministers of Christ are, or ought to be
employed. They are the servants sent forth to call the guests unto that great
Supper, their Master putting this word into their mou^hes, Say unto them that
were bidden, Come, Luke 14. 17. their chief work being to persuade men to come
unto Jesus Christ, to have communion with him. And this let me press upon all
you this day. For which, what greater encouragement can you have than that
which Christ himself here holds forth to you? even the assurance of a
gracious Reception. Were subjects assured of the like from the^^ Princes, that
coming to them they should not be rejected, but graciously received, who is
there but would have recourse to them as occasion were offered? Now this
assurance have all poor sinners from Jesus Christ, that coming to him they
shall have a gracious reception from him, he will bid them welcome, Him that
comes unto me I will in no wise cast out.

In no wise] So our last Translation does well express the Emphasis in the
Original. (...), two Negatives, which in the Greek do vehementius negare,
import a more earnest and vehement Negation. Nequaquam ejecerim, I will at no
hand, in no case, in no wise, cast him out. Which let it serve to confirm and
establish the hearts of poor sinnners i^ the assurance of a gracious
acceptance from Jesus Christ upon their coming unto him.

Obj. Obj. 1.
I but (may some say) I am unworthy of any such acceptance, Objections answered.
a poor, vile, miserable, worthless creature, having nothing to commend me to
the world, Man's own unworthiness.
much less unto Christ. Outwardly mean, nay and inwardly vile; a poor sinful
creature, who see nothing in my self but what may justly render me odious and
abominable in the sight of God and Jesus Christ. How then can I hope that I
should find such a welcome from him upon my coming to him?

Ans. Well, be it so as is alleged, yet be not discouraged; for which again
mark the Text. Him that comes unto me] Tov (...), Him] the word is indefinite,
yea universal, comprehending all, excepting none. Be he what he will, of what
nation, sex, quality, or condition soever; Jew or Gentile, male or female, bond
or free, rich or poor, though a dog, scarce worthy to gather the crumbs under
the table, though not worthy of the least common mercies, much more unworthy to
have union and communion with Jesus Christ, yet coming to him they shall be
welcome to him. Herein does he differ from the Common Host which before I spoke
of, who, however he keeps open doors for all comers, yet unless they that
come bring money with them to pay for what they call for, they shall not be
welcome to him. It is otherwise with the Lord Jesus, who not expecting to be
any gainer by those that come to him, will make all that come welcome, though
they bring nothing with them to make them so. For this, that known Proclamation
is express, Isa. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters,
and he that has no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come buy wine and milk
without money, and without price. Thus does Jesus Christ invite all poor
sinners to come unto him, to have a free communion with him. What though they
have neither money nor moneys worth? nothing to purchase their welcome, to make
them worthy, yet let them come unto him. Which doing, let them rest assured
they shall not be cast out.

The truth whereof many great sinners have found upon their own experience.
Experiences of great sinners coming to Christ.
So did that Woman of whom we read in the Gospel, Luke 7. 37. (whether Mary
Magdalen (as it is commonly taken) or rather some other (as is most probable)
is uncer^ain.) Behold a woman in the City, which was a sinner (says the Text)
v. 37. that is, a great, a notorious sinner, a known strumper, a harlot, whom
every one could point at; as the Pharisee, who had then invited Jesus to his
house did, wondering that Christ should not know what manner of woman she was,
This man, if he were a Prophet (says he) would have known who, and what manner
of woman this is that touches him, for she is a sinner, v. 39. A notorious
sinner, a lewd woman; yet coming unto Christ, and expressing her good affection
unto him, how welcome was she to him? receiving from him what she came for, the
forgiveness of her many and great sirs; Her sins which are many, are forgi^^n
(so our Savior there tells Peter) v. ^7.

Obj. I but (may some say) there was a Reason why Christ should bid her
welcome; Obj. 2.
she was one that loved him much (as it there follows) expressing her
affection to him by the Present which she brought him, Having nothing to bring
to Christ.
A Box of precious ^intment, which she bestowed upon him (as the verse there
forego^ng informs us.) But as for me, I have no such present to bring unto him,
no Box of Ointment for him.

Ans. But have thou tears for him as she had? truly peni^tent tear^s? Have
thou a broken and contrite hear^ to present unto him? a heart broken with true
godly sorrow so^^in? If so, stand not upon any other present. Thou desire not
sacrifice, else would I give it; thou delightest not in burnt-offering, The
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and contrite heart O God thou will not despise (says the man after Gods own heart) Psalm. 51. 16, 17. And
have thou such a heart in thy bosom? though thou have nothing in thy hand, yet
come unto Jesus Christ.

Obj. But I have done much against him. Obj. 3.


Ans. And had not Paul done so? Having done much against him.
whom Christ himself from Heaven charge with persecuting of him; Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? Acts 9. And so much he confesses against himself. I
was a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, etc. Whereupon he concludes himself to be the
chief of sinners, 1 ^im. 1. 13, 15. yet coming unto Christ he obtained mercy
from him; which was done (as he there says) that he might be a pattern for
them who should after believe on him.

Obj. I, Obj. 4.
but I have rejected Christ, being offered and tendered unto me again and
again, Rejecting of him being offered.
stopped my ear against his Word, and quenched the motions of his Spirit,
refusing him when he came to me. And may not I look for a just retaliation,
that he should reject me when I come to him?

Ans. Yet still consult the Text. Him that comes unto me] Be he what he will,
though a rebellious and obstinate sinner.

Obj. I, but I am an Apostate, who have cast out Jesus Christ after that I had
^eceived him, Obj. 5.
and given entertainment to him, Apostatizing from him.
having returned to my former sinful ways and courses which I had sometimes
abandoned. Now does not the Apostle exclude all such from any hopes of benefit
by him? What else means that known Text, Heb. 6. ^. where speaking of such, he
says, It is impossible they should be renewed again unto repentance, seeing
they have crucified to themselves the Son of God afresh, etc.

Ans. For this know, that it is spoken of a wilful and universal Apostacy, a
malicious and despiteful contemning and opposing of Christ and his Gospel, by
those who were once convinced of the truth thereof, which is properly the sin
against the Holy Ghost. Now as for such, who thus crucify Christ afresh, and
put him to open shame, doing that in Affection and Conversation, which the Jews
did in Action, Treading under foot the Son of God, counting the blood of the
Covenant, wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy thing, and doing despite to
the Spirit of Grace (as the same Apostle further describes the same sin, Cap.
10. v. 29.) As for such (I say) just it is with God to give them up to an
impenite^t heart, to a reprobate sense, so as that they should never seriously
think of coming to Christ any more. But as for this, it is hoped it is not your
case.

Obj. Yea, Obj. 6.
but I do not know but i^ may be, and I fear it is.

Ans. But why do we fear so? The sin against the holy Ghost by some unjustly
charged upon themselves.
Be not wicked overmuch (says the Preacher, Eccl. 7. 17. viz. in thine own
apprehension (as the Text may be expounded) which some are, whilst they make
their condition worse than really it is. So do not you. But for the cure of all
these fears, put your souls upon this way of coming unto Christ. Which if God
shall incline your heart to do, now take this as an evidence that you are not
under the guilt of that uupardonable sin, but rest assured that upon your
coming to him you shall find mercy from him. Him that comes unto me (though a
Backs^ider, an Apostate, (the worst of Christians, or of men) I will in no wise
cast out. The reason why desperate Apostates receive no benefit by Christ, is
not because he will not receive them, but because they will not come unto him.
Only come unto him, and fear not.

Quest. But how shall I so come unto him, Quest.
as that I may be assured that I shall not be cast out, How to come unto Christ
so as to be received of him.
not rejected by him?

Ans. A useful Question, Ans.
which I wish were in the heart of every of you seriously to propound to your
selves. For Answer whereunto, in brief take these few and plain Directions.

1. That you may come unto Christ, Dir. 1.
you must first hear of him. Hear of him.
Incline your ear, and come unto me (says the Lord) Isa. 55. 3. And this must
they do who would come unto Christ, they must incline their ear, they must be
a^quainted with the Doctrine of the Gospel concerning him. Every man therefore
that has heard, and learned of the Father, comes unto me (says our Savior)
v. 45. of th^s Chapter. In this way ^t ^s that God the Father brings men to
his Son Christ, by teaching and instructing them in the Doctrine of the Gospel.
With out which there is no coming unto him, no believing on him. How shall they
believe on him of whom they have not heard? Romans 10. 14. A necessary
preparation for the soul in coming to Christ; it must first have the eye
opened, the understanding enlightened with the knowledge of him, to know who,
and what he was, and is, what he has done, and what he has suffered, and to
what end, and what benefit they may expect from him, and in what way they shall
come unto him. Thus it is, God does not bring men blindfold to Christ, but he
first opens their eyes, and takes the vail off from their hea^ts, making a
discovery of him to them. As for ignorant souls, who know nothing of Christ,
they are not in a capacity of com^ing to him.

2. Thus hearing of Christ them (in the next place) be convinced of the need
you have of him; Dir. 2.
which till a man be, Be convinced of the need of him.
he will never come unto him. This it was that brought those impotent and
diseased persons unto him in the days of his flesh, even the sense of their
own bodily infirmities. And this it is which puts the soul upon coming to
him, even the sense of its own sinfulness and misery. Which labor you to be
thoroughly convinced of, that you may see and fell your lost undone condition
without him; that you may be truly and thoroughly sensible of the burden of sin.
Such, and only such they are that Christ inviteth to come unto him. Come unto
me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, Mat. 11. 28. viz. under the burden
of sin, groaning under it, earnestly desiring to be freed from it, both from
the guilt and power of it.

3. Being thus in measure fitted and prepared for Christ, Dir. 3.
now hearken to his Invitation and Command, Hearken to his invitation and
command.
calling you to him, requiring you to come to him. This it was that made Peter
so adventurous to come unto his Master upon the water; Lord (says he) Bid me
come unto thee upon the water, Mat. 14. 28. Now, this word every poor sinner
which is in measure prepared, has* he has a command from Christ to come unto
him. Come unto me (says he) which is to be looked upon not only as an
Invitation, but an Injunction.

4. And hearing this Word, Dir. 4.
now forthwith apply your selves to yield a ready obedience to it. Yield a
ready obedience to it.
So did Peter; No sooner did he hear that word from his Masters mouth, Come,
but presently leaving the ship wherein he was, he casts himself into the Sea.
And the like do you. Hearing this word of command from this your blessed
Savior, requiring you to come unto him, now stand not to reason with flesh and
blood, but renouncing all other confidences, betake your selves unto him,
resolving to break through all difficulties, come what will come, to make
toward him. Among other renounce your own righteousness. Man's own
righteousness to be renoun^ed.
Like as the Story tells us of blind Bartimaeus, when sitting by the
high-^ay-side, and crying after Jesus then passing by, he heard him call him to
come unto him, he presently casting away his garments (says the Text) rose and
came to him, Mark 10. 50. Even thus do you, hearing Christ calling you to come
unto him (which he does in his Word) now arise and cast away your garments,
even all impediments, as the garments of sinful lusts, the rotten rags of the
old Adam, so the garment of your own righteousness. This it was that Paul cast
overboard, made loss of his own righteousness, that he might come unto Christ,
that he might win him, Phil. 3 8, 9. The like do you, that you may be clothed
with that white garment, the righteousness of Christ, come naked unto him. That
you may be filled by him, come empty to him, That you may be enriched by him
come poor to him, bring no money with you* Remember that Proclamation
forenamed; Come, buy wine and milk without money.] They who come unto Christ
bringing money in their hands, I mean any thing of their own, whereby they may
think to purchase an interest in him and his benefits, set them expect no
better welcome than what Simon Magus found from Simon Peter, when he came to
him proffering him money to buy the Holy Ghost with, Thy money perish with thee
(says he) Acts 8. 20. Would you be welcome to Christ, so come to him, as to be
received of him; come empty to him, emptied of your own righteousness,
renouncing all confidence in whatever of your selves you have done or can do.

5. And thus making toward him then (in the last place) Cast your selves upon
him, Dir. 5.
give up your selves unto him, Take Christ as Savior and Lord.
receiving him in that double relation of a Savior and a Lord. Thus does God
his Father hold him forth to all that will come to him. And thus do you receive
him, not only as a Savior, believing, resting upon the all sufficiency of his
merit for the pardon of your sins, and eternal salvation, but also as a Lord,
submitting to him, giving up your selves, as to be saved, so to be governed by
him. And so coming unto him, now be you assured of a welcome, a free and
gracious reception.

Only see (what I touched upon by way of Caveat Caveat.
before) that this your coming be Real, not Formal. Make sure our coming to
Christ be real.
Remembering that forenamed Guest in the Parable, who coming to the
Marriage-Supper without a wedding garment, was cast out with disgrace. And so
shall all Hypocrites be sooner or later. However for a time they may pass for
members of the Church, mingling themselves among the people of God, enjoying
the same privileges, having Communion in the same Ordinances with them, yet he
who sees and knows them, will in his time discover them, and discovering,
eject them, to their everlasting shame and confusion. Take heed that none of
you be found in this number. If you come unto Christ, let it be in a
cordialway, in sincerity and truth. And so coming, now take up the Comfort
which our blessed Savior here lets fall.

You shall not be cast out, Use 2.
not by him. Comfort, comers to Christ shall be received by him.
He will not reject, but receive and embrace you, owning you for his, taking
you into his protection and care, so as you shall not miscarry. Committing your
souls unto him, they shall be in safe custody; and he will give entertainment
to you, providing for you whatever shall be requisite in order to your
everlasting happiness.

And will Christ thus receive you, Christ receiving, it matters not who rejects.
What matters it then who they are that reject you? will he take you in, what
matters it ^hen who they are that cast you out? This (i^ may be) does the
World. This is that which the Apostle complains of. We (says he, speaking of
himself and other the Apostles of Jesus Christ) are made the filth of the
world, and are the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4. 13. And such oft-times
is the portion of Gods Saints here. They are the worlds Off all, the worlds
Outcasts (as the Psalmist and the Prophet Isai, speaking of the dispersed
Jews, calls them the Outcasts of Israel, Psalm. 147. 2. Isa. 56. 8.) Yet let
not not this discourage, as long as they are not so to Christ. He has received
them, and having received them, he will not cast them out.

And will not he cast them out? The Father will not reject whom the Son
receives.
why then they may be sure his Father will not. He having Committed all
Judgment to the Son (as we have it, John 5. 22.) he will not reverse what he
does. Those whom his Son acquits, he will not condemn. Those whom his Son
receives and gives entertainment to, he will not cast out. Being welcome to
the Son, they shall for his sake be welcome to the Father. And what matters it
then what they are to others? though others cast them out, out of Church? So
did the Ie^es by all those that made a profession of the name of Christ, they
cast them out of their Synagogues, John 9. 22. Excommunicated them. Causeless
Excommunications not to be regarded.
And the like does that man of sin, that Antichrist of Rome by all the true
Professors of the Gospel, he by his thundering Excommunications casts them
out of the Church. Contra istam utrorumque tam Anabaptistarum, quam Papistarum
temeritatem communiendae sunt praesenti Christi or aculo eorum conscientiae,
qui vel ab illis vel ub is it is excommunicantur.
And the like do other Sects (as the Anabaptists, whom Musculus here instanceth
in) those that are not of their way, that will not join with them, they
pronounce them to be none of Christ's sheep, none of his subjects, no true
members of the Church. But let not Christians be scared with these bruta
fulmina, these mock-thunderbolts. So long as Christ himself owneth them,
Muscul. Com. in Text.
let not them regard whoever they are that cast them out. Co^ing to Christ, and
believing on him, they have communion with him in his Kingdom of Grace here,
and shall have communion with him in his Kingdom of Glory hereafter. This by
way of comfort to all who do come to Christ.

On the other hand (in the third place) here is a word of terror to all those
who will not come to him. Use 3.
All wicked and ungodly persons, Terror to wicked men, they shall be cast out.
such as have Christ offered and tendered to them, and they are invited to come
unto him, yet they refuse and reject him. With those Guests in the Gospel, they
have something or other to take them off from him, so as they do not regard to
seek out after Union and Communion with him. For all such, let them make
account of a just retaliation, to be rejected by him. So much is here
insinuated in the the Text. Him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out.
Intimating, that those who do not come unto him, he will cast them out. Not
coming to him here, he will cast them out hereafter. At that last and great
day, when they, and all others, shall be brought before him, then shall he pass
the sentence of a final Rejection and Ejection upon them. Not owning them. This
is that our Savior gives the Jews to take notice of (as by the aforesaid
Parable of the foolish virgins, Mat. 25. so again) L^ke 13. 25. Where he
shows them how vain a thing it would be for them another day to plead those
privileges which then they stood so much upon. When once the Master of the
house is risen up (says he) etc. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and
drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets (so, as it were
taking acquaintance of him. But mark what follows.) But he shall say, I tell
you I know you not whence you are, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity.
Though they should then court him, yet he tells them he would take no
acquaintance of them. And the like let all wicked and ungodly men, whether
openly or secretly such, not only profane persons, but hypocrites, expect and
look for. When the door of grace and mercy is shut (as after this life it shall
be to them) then may they knock, but in vain; whatever they can plead for
themselves will be to no purpose. All the outward privileges which here they
have enjoyed, will be no advantages to them. That they have lived under
Ordinances, wherein they have had an outward visible Communion with Christ, not
only hearing his Word, but partaking of his Sacrament, there eating and
drinking in his presence, this will make nothing for them, but much against
them. This is that which they must then make account to hear from the mouth of
Jesus Christ, I tell you I know you not, depart from me ye workers of iniquity.
Thus shall he then cast them out, who would not here receive him in. They that
would not here receive him into their hearts, that he might rule there, he will
not then receive them into his house, his Kingdom, there to dwell and reign
with himself, but he shall then cast them out into that outer darkness, where
shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth. And in so doing who shall
charge him of injustice, or yet rigor? That wicked men are excluded and cast
out (as at that day they shall be) they can charge it upon none but themselves.
Not upon Christ. It was not he that first rejected them, he offered himself to
them, and was ready to receive them upon their coming to him. That they are
cast out they may thank themselves. Such was their stubbornness, they would not
come when they might; and therefore their exclusion is just. Thy destruction is
of thy self (says the Lord to Israel, Hos. 13. 9. And so is this their
exclusion. Because thou have rejected the Word of the Lord, therefore he has
also rejected thee. (says Samuel to Saul) 1 Samuel 15. 23. And so may it be said
unto them. Because you rejected the Lord Christ here, would not hearken to him,
would not receive him; therefore he has also rejected you. Here is terror.

In the fourth and last place, Use 4.
having heard what is the mind of Jesus Christ here, Christ a pattern for the
Christians imitation.
let me now propound him as a pattern for imitation to all those who own him,
and desire to be owned by him, let them be like minded with him. Let the same
mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus (says the Apostle to his
Philippians) Phil. 2. 5. And so say I to you, all of you, and whoever they are
that profess the name of Jesus Christ, Be you like-minded with him. And that,
as in other respects, so 1. in In receiving those that are given to him.
of receiving and embracing those who are given to him, and come to him, even
all true believers, such as professing the faith of Christ, walk answerably to
that profession. Seeing Christ is pleased to own them, to receive and embrace
them, so do you. Do not you cast out any of those whom he says he will not
cast out, but receive them into your hearts, and, as occasion is, into your
houses, making much of them, delighting in them. So did David; My goodness
(says he) extends not unto thee, O Lord, but unto the Saints that are in the
earth, the excellent, in whom is all my delight, Psalm. 16. 3. And so let it be
with us. However we converse occasionally with others, the men of this world
which cannot be avoided so long as we are in the world, as the Apostle yields
it, 1 Cor. 5. 10.) yet let our delight be in the Saints. And let our goods also
(according to our abilities and their necessities) extend unto them. They being
near to Christ, let them be dear to us. Let us in no wise cast them out; but
let them have a room in our hearts; which let it be as an open house to receive
all those who have aliquid Christi, any thing of Christ in them. Seeing Christ
has received them, so do we.

It matters not what otherwise they be, Though outwardly mean.
though despicable as to the world, in regard of the meanness of their outward
condition, or inward abilities, yet let them not be so to us. Such they are
whom God oft-times makes choice of to give to his Son Christ. Has not God
chosen the poor of this world (says St. James) Jam. 2. 5. God has chosen ^he
weak things of the world (says St. Paul) 1 Cor. 1. 27. Homines de^plebe,
persons weak as in estate, so in parts. And such they are whom ofttimes we may
see forwardest in coming to Christ. Such they were who most an end followed him
in the days of his flesh, to whom he Preached. Go and show John (says he to
those Disciples of his) the poor have the Gospel Preached unto them, Mat. 11.
5. Persons of inferior rank and quality, the vulgar, common sort of people.
Them, the Teachers of those times, Pharisees and Lawyers, contemned and
vilified, calling them Populum te^rae, the people of the earth, having a
Proverb in use among them (a proud and a foolish one, Proverbium stultum and
superbum, Grot. Annot in Mat. 11. 5.
as Grotius writing upon that Text justly censures it) Spiritum non requiescere
nisi super divitent, The spirit rests only upon the rich man's head; so as
they disdained to teach and instruct them. But so did not our blessed Savior.
He most commonly made choice of them for his Auditors, finding his Ministry
most powerful and effectual among them. And so did h^s servant the Apostle St.
Paul after him, who tells his Corinthians, Not many wise men after the flesh
men carnally and worldly wise) not many mighty, not many noble are called. And
if so, take we heed how we despise any of them upon the account of the meanness
of their outward condition, or inward abilities. If they be dear to Christ
(which they are, if they be such as are come to him, believe on him) let them
be so also to us.

Yea, Though weak in Grace.
though infirm and weak in grace. Though bruised reeds and smoking flax, yet
do not break, do not quench them. This will not Christ do, let not any other
dare to do it. Who has despised the day of small things? (says the Prophet
Zachary, speaking concerning the building of the material Temple) Zach. 4. 10.
This did not God, who favored and intended to bless and prosper those weak
beginnings: And therefore let not any others do it. So say I concerning this
spiritual Temple; which is built in the hearts of those who are given to
Christ, true believers, who are the Temple of God (as the Apostle sometimes
calls them, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17, etc.) Who shall here despise the day of small
things? This will not Jesus Christ do; this let not any of us do. Where there
is any thing of Christ, own it; making much of the least beginnings of grace;
where we apprehend them to be in truth and sincerity.

Which, In special applied to the Ministers of Christ, who are not to reject
any that come to him.
as it concerns all, so in a special manner the Ministers of the Gospel, whom
Christ has made (as it were) his door-keepers in his house, his Church, having
put the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven into their hands, as the key of
Doctrine, so of Discipline, let them see that herein they imitate their Master,
not turning either of these keys against any of those that would come to
Christ. This it was (as I showed you) that our Savior rebuked his Apostles
for, their rebuking of those that would have brought young children unto him,
Mark 10. 14. Let not the like be charged upon any of the Ministers of Christ,
that they should be any ways instrumental in keeping back any that would come
unto him, so as to discourage them by their Doctrine, or repel them by their
Discipline.

Obj. But how is it then that you do so, A Cavil answered about Ministers not
receiving all to Sacramental Communion.
may some happily here say?) How is it that you repel and reject those from
coming to have communion with Christ in the Sacrament of his Supper, who are
willing to come?

Ans. But who are they? It may be such as are not fitting to come to that
Ordinance. Such was that Guest in the Parable forenamed, forward to come to
the Supper, but not fitting. And such it may be are they, persons whose lives
and conversations (being scandalous) do proclaim to the world, that they are
such as have not put on the wedding garment. And being such, if the servants
shall cast them out, the Ministers of Christ refuse and reject them, it is no
more than what their Master both allows and requires them to do.

Reply. Yea, but they are such as Christ himself will not cast out, being such
as the Father has given unto him, and such as are come to him, believing on
him, such as making a Profession of faith walk answerably to that profession.

Ans. But (if such) who is it then that casts them out? Repelling of any fit
for Communion not justly charged upon the Ministers in this place.
Sure I am, not the Ministers in this place. If any such be kept from this
Ordinance, it is not they that have cast them out. No, their desire has been,
and is, that all those who are hopefully such, such as are come unto Christ in
such a way, should come to his Table, to have Communion with him in this
Ordinance. Only they desire they should come to it in an orderly way, not so as
to make a gap for others to break in upon it who have no right to it. So as if
any so qualified want this Ordinance, they must charge it upon themselves, not
us, who desiring to imitate our Lord and Master, shall not willingly cast out
any to whom he says, Come. But having lately had occasion to fall upon this
Vindication; I shall not insist upon it again.

In the second place, whilst we receive Christians to receive what God gives
to them, applied in special.
and come to him, let us also (in imitation of him) receive those who are given
to us, and come to us. Which let it be applied in a special manner to those
whom God has set over others; to Magistrates, Ministers, Parents.

1. For Magistrates, whether Supreme or subordinate, To Magistrates who are not
to eject their subjects.
let them be like-minded toward those whom God gives to them, by his
providence putting them under their Government, themselves also being willing
to submit thereunto, let not them cast them out, out of their protection, but
receive them, and take care of them, improving their Authority and Power for
their security and welfare, both temporal and spiritual, doing Justice to them.
It was Absaloms insinuation to the people, when he aspired to the Crown, O
says he) that I were made Judge in the Lana* that every man which has any
suit or c^use might come unto me, and I would do him justice, 2 Samuel 15. 4.
What he politickly there promises, let all Rulers and Governors really and
cordially perform. Those who come to them for justice, let them do it them,
hearing their grievances, righting their wrongs, not rejecting, not slighting
them, though never so mean. This is that which the Lord calls for from the
Judges of Judah, Isa. 1. 17. Seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
father less, plead for the widow. And this let all Magistrates and Rulers do;
those that are in such a way given to them, committed to their c^arge, and come
unto them; submitting to their Government, let them not cast them out.

Ministers; those whom God has given to them, To Ministers, who are not to
neglect their people.
put under their charge, being such as come unto them, attending upon their
Ministry, professing a voluntary submission thereunto, let not them cast them
out, or cast them off, neglecting their duties toward them. It was that which
Eliab said to his brother David, when he came up to see the Battle; With whom
(faith he) have thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? 1 Samuel 17. 28. so
checking and reproving him for neglecting of his charge. What he spoke to him
by way of disparagement in scorn and contempt, let it be seriously hearkened to
by all the Ministers of Christ. He having made them his Shepherds, committed
his sheep, his people unto them; let them take heed how they neglect or cast
off the care of them, leaving them in the wilderness of this world, exposed to
so many dangers by reason of their spiritual enemies. This will not their
Master do, the Lord Christ the great Shepherd of the sheep, He calls his own
sheep by name, and leads them out (as he says of himself) John 10. v. 3.
that is (as Diodate explaines it) his care is not only for the general body of
his Church, but it extends it self also to every particular member, as need
requires, leading them forth into green pastures, providing for them spiritual
refection and comfort. And (as it there follows) when he puts forth his
own sheep, he goes before them;] that is, guiding and protecting them, being
always present with them, and vigilant over them, going before them in
Doctrine and Example, (as our new Annotation has it.) This Christ did when he
was here upon earth, therein setting a pattern for all his Ministers, his
undershepherds, who according to their ability are to do the like to the sheep,
the people committed to them. Those whom God has given to them, coming to
them, let them not cast them out.

Parents, to whom God has given children, To Parents, who are not to cast out
their children, specially if obedient.
they coming to them in a way of duty and obedience, let not them cast them
out. This David speaks of, as a thing possible and supposable (though himself
had not experience of it) Psalm. 27. 10. When my father and my mother forsake
me] that is though they should. And so it sometimes is, natural Mothers forget
their Children. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget (says the Lord, etc.
Isa. 49. 15. A thing too frequent; but wherever it is found, most unnatural; a
shame to Heathens, much more to Christians, who looking upon their children as
given them of God, are not to cast them out, not to leave them as the Ostrich
does her eggs in the sand, forgetting that the foot may crush them, or that the
wild beast may break them (as the careless nature of that creature is
described) Job 39. 14, 15. but to take care of them for their education and
subsistence, providing for them necessaries and conveniences, specially if they
be such as come unto them in the way of submissive obedience.

Obj. But what if they cast off the^r Parents?

Ans. What to be done to those that are disobedient.
Why yet both Nature and Religion obliges the Parent not wholly ^o cast off
them, but to look after them (as David did after his Absalom) seeking their
return to them. Which if they shall find, then are they to receive them. So did
the Father of the Prodigal, of whom the Parable tells us, When he was afar off,
his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck and kissed
him, Luke 15. 20. Such affections should there be in natural Parents to their
children. Being given to them by God, and coming to them, they are not to cast
them out.

Yet one word more, Christians in all things to comply with the will of their
heavenly Father.
and that for all Christians, who have here also a pattern for their imitation,
teaching them in all things to comply with the will of their heavenly Father.
This let them do in regard of their outward temporal estates. Being confidently
assured of what our Savior here says, that All that their Father gives them
shall come unto them, things shall come to pass according to his alldisposing
providence, Resting contented with what he gives them.
let them quietly and contentedly submit thereunto. Only serving that
providence in the use of lawful means, let them accept what he gives them,
reaches forth to them, resting contented with their Fathers portion. Not
greedily scraping and gathering they care not in what way, by what means, so
laying hold upon that which God never gave them.

A point which Musculus (writing upon this Text) applies in a particular way
to the Kings and Princes of the earth, Applied in special to the Rulers of the
world. Et utinam Principes nostri dictum hoc Christi usurparent, ac vera fide
quisque ips^rum diceret, Omne quod dat mihi Pater ad me veniet; ut modus esset
bellorum istorum, quibus inter se dilatandis regnorum suorum pomaeriis
tumultuantur, and orbem coedibus replent. Muse. Com. in Text.
for whom he wishes that they would all make use of these words, saying with
themselves what their Savior here does, that All tha^ their Father gives them
shall come unto them. And thereupon rest contented with what they have, putting
up the sword into the shea^h, not seeking the enlargement of their Territories
and Dominions (as too often they ^o) whereby they set the world on fire,
filling it with confusion and blood.

And what he says to them in special, In general to all Christians.
let me say unto all Christians in general, wishing that every of them would
make the like use of these words, each one saying within himself, Whatever my
Father gives me shall come unto me; What portion my Father allotteth me I
shall have, and so rest contented therewith, be it more or less.

And making such use of the former part of this Text, This Doctrine how abused
by covetous persons.
let them take heed of abusing the latter, which covetous persons (as Musculus
notes upon it) will be ready to do, who hearing that all that the Father gives
them shall come to them, Cavendum vero ne animus (...) avaritiae suae ac (...)
praet^^tum ex hoc loco colligat, dicens; Quicquid ad me venerit, non ejicio
for as. Mnse. ibid.
they thereupon resolve to get what they can, but to part with as little as
they may, No, that which comes unto them they will in no wise cast out. This
was Nabals resolution, when David's messengers came to him for some relief for
their Master in his straits, what (says he) Shall I then take my bread and my
water, and my flesh which I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men
whom I know not whence they be? 1 Samuel 25. 11. Such Nabals there are too many
every. where, Men not to cast our their estates by wasting of them.
whose resolution is, whatever God gives them not to cast it out in such a
way. True indeed (as the same Author further notes) there is such a use which
may lawfully and warrantably be made of these words, Christianus certe donae
Dei non temere abjiciet. ut etiam hic dicere queat; Quicquid ad me venerit non
ejicio fords.
viz. that those to whom God gives estates, they are not to cast them out by
prodigal and luxurious spending and squandring of them, but in a provident way
to preserve them; yet in the mean time, what God calls for, either for pious
or charitable uses, Idem. ibid.
let them not be unwilling to part with. Interea tamen illa ex fide ergd Deum
in usus necessarios tam proximi, quam suos dispensabit, conteutusque illis
erit, qualia qualia sint, Idem.
So was Abraham with his son, whom God had given to him, yet he was not
unwilling to give him to him again. In like manner are Christians to deal with
their estates; where God calls for them, they are not to withold them; so
resting contented with, and thankful for their fathers portion.

Yea, Christians to be contented with and thankful for their Fathers portion,
though not answerable to their desires.
though happily it be not every ways answerable to what they could desire. It
was a weakness in Abraham, who in the want of one blessing (a Son) seemed to
slight all other mercies. When the Lord by way of encouragement said unto him,
Fear not Abram, I am thy shield, and they exceeding great reward, he presently
and passionately replies, Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go
childless? Genesis 15. 1, 2. Let there not be the like murmuring or repining
thought in any of the Lords people. In the want of some one desired mercy, let
them not cast out all others by a slighting and undervaluing of what they have
received. What they have, let them know it is that which their Father has
given them; and so looking upon it as their fathers portion, let them receive
it contentedly, thankfully.

And what they do as to mercies, Christians to comply with Gods will in their
afflictions and sufferings.
let them do the like also as to Crosses and Chastisements; taking notice that
whatever their Afflictions be, they are no other than what their Father has
given them, laid out for them, let them quietly submit to them. Herein also
has their blessed Lord and Savior set them a pattern, who, however he
deprecated that bitter cup which he saw coming toward him, praying again and
again that it might pass from him, yet still he resolves his will into the
will of his Father* Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will, Math. 26.
39. And again, v. 42. O my Father, if this Cup may not pass away from me, thy
will be done. And afterward, when Peter drew his sword for his rescue, he
takes him off, declaring what his own resolution was, The cup which my Father
has given me shall I not drink it? Joh. 18. 11. And herein let him be a
pattern for us, every of us. Looking upon every Cup of affliction which is put
into our hands, as the Cup which our Father has given to us, let us not cast
it out nor refuse to drink it. Not seeking by any indirect and unlawf^l ways
and means to shut out, or shake off whatever trials the Lord shall be pleased
to exercise us with, but quietly and contentedly submit to his dispensations,
both in regard of the kind, and measure and continuance, not choosing our own
rod, but in all submitting to the will of our heavenly Father: Thus suffering
in an obediential way, as our blessed Savior did, now may we comfortably
expect the like issue that he had, even a gracious supportation under it, and a
happy deliverance out of it.

FINIS.

