THE DAMOISELLE, OR THE NEW ORDINARY.

A COMEDY.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Richard Marriot, and Thomas Dring, and are to be
sold at their Shops in Fleet Street, 1653.

Prologue.
OUR Playmaker (for yet he will not be called
Author, or Poet) nor beg to be installd
^ir Lawreat) has sent me out t'invite
Your fancies to a full and clean delight:
And bids me tell you, That though he be none
Of those, whose towering Muses scale the Throne
Of Kings, yet his familiar mirth's as good,
When it is by you approved and understood.
As if h' had writ strong lines, and had the fate,
Of other Fools for meddling with the State.
Readers and Audients make good Plays or Books,
It Is appetite makes Dishes, it is not Cooks.
But let me tell you, though you have the power,
To kill or save; They Are Tyrants that devour,
And Princes that preserve: He does not aim,
So much at praise, as pardon; nor does claim
Laurel, but Money; Bays will buy no Sack,
And Honor fills no belly, clothes no back.
And therefore you may see his maine intent
Is his own welfare, and your merriment.
Then often come, 'twill make us and him the wetter,
We Will drown the faults of this, in one that is better.
Dramatis Personae.
Vermin, an old Usurer. Dryground, an old decayed Knight. Sir Amphilus, a
Cornish Knight. Bumpsey, an old Justice. Brookeall, a Gentleman, undone by
Vermin. Valentine, Drygrounds Son. Wat, Vermins Son. Freindly, a Templer. Two
Gallants
Oliver, Ambrose,
Trebasco. Sir Amphilus his Footman. Attorney. Mrs. Magdalen, Bumpseys Wife.
Jane, his Daughter. Alice, Vermins Daughter: Frances, a young Gentlewoman:
Phillis, a poor Wench. Elianor. Lawyers. Sergeants. Servants. Rabble:
The Scene LONDON.

THE DAMOISELLE, OR, The New Ordinary.
ACT. I. Scene I.
Vermin, Dryground. Ver. YOU have your Money; full a thousand pound,
Sir Humfrey Dryground.

Dry. And you have my Mortgage.

Ver. All well and good; all well and good. But, now,
Sir Humfrey Dryground, let me counsel you.
You have already spent a fair Estate;
A goodly, great estate: I do not taunt,
Nor tax you for it.

Dry. Because its pumpt into
The purses of such wretches as thy self.

Ver. But give me leave, now, fairly to admonish
You, to a care, how you do part with this.
You spirited men call Money Dirt and Mud.
I say it is the Eele.

Dry. And you the Mud
That foster it.

Ver. It is an Eele, I say,
In such sleek hands, as yours; from whence it glides --

Dry. Into the Mud, oft-times, from whence it came.

Ver. I know you do conceive me. Therefore, Sir,
(As I before was saying) Hold it fast.

Dry. According to the Ballad. [He sings.]

Youth keep thy Money fast,
And tie it in thy Purse:
For that must be thine only Friend,
For better and for worse.
Ver. So so, I see it going already.

Dry. I, to thy comfort. This is the Usurers Scripture;
And all that they pretend Salvation by:
To give good admonition with their Money;
Though, in their hearts they wish the quick subversion
Of all they deal with. This is all they plead
Against the curses of oppressed souls:
Did not I warn you? Did not I say, take heed?
And so, and so forth. I must thank you Sir.

Ver You say, you will make a venture of this Money.

Dry. Yes Mr. Vermin, in a Project, that --

Ver. Out upon Projects. Fie fie, out out out.

Dry. I 'm confident shall set me out of debt,
With you and all the World; and reap, again,
All, that I formerly have sown, with profit.

Ver. Sown! There Is a word! Prodigal wast is sowing.
We shall call Shipwreck, shortly, sowing too.
Hark you Sir Humfrey Dryground, may not I
Be privy to your Project? Will you tell me,
If I guess on it?

Dry. That I will in sooth.

Ver. Is 't not to dreine the Goodwins? To be Lord
Of all the Treasure, buried in the Sands there?
And have a Million yearly, from the Merchants
To clear the passage.

Dry. You have had your blow.
No Sir, my Project is in the behalf
Of the poor Gentleman, you overthrew
By the strong hand of Law, Bribes, and oppression;
Brookall: Do you know him Sir? whose state you sucked*
That wrought him to a poverty that cries
Your sinful Covetise up to the height;
And renders you the Monster of our time,
For avarice and cruelty.

Ver. No more of that.

Dry. You should do well to add a sum, like this
To his releife: To wave the bitter curse
That will in time fall on you and your house.

Ver. O ho! I now remember, you have reason.
That Brookall had a Sister, whom you vitiated
In your wild heat of blood, and then denied
Her promised Marriage; turned her off with Child
A dozen years since, and since that, never heard of*
Ha! Is It not so? Pray, did you know her Sir?

Dry. I wish I could redeem that ruthful fault,
By all expiatory means: But thy
Inhumane cruelty is inexpiable:
Unless (it comes from Heaven into my heart
To move thee to it) thou take a speedy course
To give him threefold restitution.
I Will put thee in the way. He has a Son,
A hopeful Youth, a Student in the Law,
If his poor Fathers want of means have not
Declined his course: Give him thy only Daughter,
And make his Fathers own Inheritance
(By thee unrighteously usurpt) her Dowry;
And pray a blessing may go with it; And then
Thou may regaine a Christian reputation,
Till age shall lead thee to a quiet Grave.
Come, is it a match? Will you bestow your Daughter
On Brookalls Son, and make your way to Heaven by it?

Ver. You have your Money.

Dry. And thou have Adders ears
To all such Counsels.

Ver. If you break your day
I shall think of your counsel.

Dry. Farewell Vermin. Exit.

Ver. And farewell Dryground.
This parcel of thy Land, I Will keep from wetting: The Mortgage.
It Is not in thee to turn an Acre of it
Into pure Liquor, for a twelvemoneths day.
And break that day thy payment, and the Sun
Sets not more sure, then all this Land is mine.
My Daughter! ha! Cannot be in thought of man
To dream of such a Match? A wretch, a Beggar?
Within there! Where*s my Girl? What Ally? Ally? Enter Alice.

Ali. Here Sir --

Vir. Myblessing, and good morn: Now hear me Girl.

Ali. Now for a Speech --

Ver. The care of Children's such a startle-braine,
That had I more then one, I should run Wild-cat,
(Then one I mean, to care for) that*s thy self,
My sober discreet Daughter. Note my care,
Pil'd up for thee in massy sums of wealth;
Too weighty for thy weak consideration
To guess from whence it came, or how together
So laid in mountainous heaps.

Ali. It is indeed
As strange to me, as are the stony wonders
On Salsbury Plain to others. But my duty
Persuades me it was your thrift, and that great blessing
That gives increase to honest Industry,
Drawn on it by your prayers and upright life,
That wrought these heaps together.

Ver. O, Ally Ally,
It Is well if thine with all thy Huswifry
Can keep 'em so. I thank thee for thy judgment
And charitable thoughts. But --

Ali. You had other ways.

Ver. I say, thou art the only Child I care for*
Thy Brother (though I loath to call him so)
Is, now, an utter stranger to my blood;
Not to be named but with my curse, a Wolf
That tears my very bowels out.

Ali. Your Money.

Ver. A riotous Reprobate, that has consumed
His last, already, of my means and blessing.

Ali. But he yet may be turned Sir.

Ver. Out oth' Compter!
May he be so, do think? Could I but dream
His Creditors, that have him fast, could be
So idly merciful, or that his youthful Ghing
Could stretch, to get him out, I Will lay, my self,
An Action on him weightier, then the strength
Of all their poor abilities could lift:
His Jacks, his Toms, his Nams, Nolls, Gills, and Nuns,
The roaring fry of his Blade-brandishing mates
Should not release his Carcass: If they did,
I Would force him to a trial for his life,
For the two hundred Pieces that he pilfred.
Out of my Counting House. He shall up.

Ali. I will not forfeit my obedience Sir,
To urge against your Justice, only I crave
Your leave to grieve, that I have such a Brother.

Ver. Thou shall defy the name of Brother in him,
My only, only Child; and but in one command
Obey me further, all my estate is thine,
It Is that I called thee for.

Ali. I do not crave
More, then your daily blessing; but desire
To know what you will impose upon my duty.

Ver. Thou shall, and style thy self a Lady by it.

Ali. Now Love defend me from the man I fear.

Ver. This day I Will match thee to a matchless Knight.

Ali. The Western Kight Sir, that was here last Term?

Ver. Even he, this day he comes to Town.

Ali. Would I
Were out on it first. A matchless Knight [Aside.]
Indeed, and shall be matchless still for me.

Ver. I like those blushes well: I read his welcome
Upon her cheeks.

Ali. Sir, I have heard, he has
But little Land.

Ver. But he has Money Girl
Enough to buy the best Knights Land, that is
A selling Knight, in the West part of England.

Ali. He Is well in years.

Ver. A lusty Bachelor of two and fifty,
With, O, the husbandry that's in him.

Ali. How came he by his Knighthood? Cost it nothing?

Ver. No: He was one oth' Cobbe-Knights in the throng,
When they were dubd in Clusters. Enter Servant.

Ser. Sir, the Knight,
That you expect this day, is come to Town.
His man has brought's Portmantue.

Ver. Fetch the Man.
The welcomst man alive is come to Town.
Ally, my Girl, my Daughter, Lady Bride!
What title shall I give thee? Now bestirr you,
I know his thrift, he has rid hard to day
To save his Dinner Enter Wat disguised like a Country Servingman.
Welcome honest friend.
And how does the right worshipful Sir Amphilus?

Wat. My Master is in health Sir, praised be Go --
A little weary, or so, as I am of my carriage,
Which I must not lay down, but in the hands
Of your own Worship.

Ver. It Is of weight and locked: I guess the worth;
And warrant him the safety under these Keys.
But where is thy Master?

Wat. At his Inn in Holborne
Telling a little with the Host, till I
Bring word from you.

Ver. No, I will run to him
My self: you shall stay here. his Chamber
Fitted against he comes, Ally, bestirr you,
And think no pains your trouble on this day,
To morrows Sun shall light your Wedding way. Exit.

Ali. Unless some unexpected Fate relieve me,
I shall be hurried to my endless ruin.

Wat. You are sad, me thinks, young Mistress, I can tell you,
My Master, when he comes, will make you merry.

Ali. How? As he is a Fool?

Wat. No: But as he has
The soul of mirth and Music at command;
Money, the all-rejoycing spirit, that
He Will make you merry with: Not that alone,
But Dignity, which Women prise 'bove money,
You are a Lady by it: Mark that. And if
He has a weakness, which you reckon folly;
It lays you open way to Sovereignty;
The thing which is of most esteem. You Will be
His Lady Regent; rule all his, and him.

Ali. This Fellow talks not like a Serving-man:
A forty shilling wages Creature, but
Some disguised spokes-man. What may be the trick o'nt?

Wat. You cannot, in the estate you are, imagine
What it is to be a Wife to such a man.

Ali. No more then you perceive the pains you loose
In fooling for him thus. But spare your breath,
And take this brief taste of his Entertainment.
First know, that J do know the man you speak of,
To be a covetous Miser; old and foolish.
Not worth in my estimation the worst Meal
That ever he himself paid three pence for.

Wat. Who do you mean? Sir Amphilus my Knight.

Ali. Yes Squire, J know him and his qualities;
The ways he got his Wealth by, casual Matches;
Of forty, fifty, and sometimes a hundred
For one. When bounteous Fortune (seldom failing
Men of his Brain) cast all into his mouth,
The Gudgeon gap d for. And how slight a thing
It is, for such base Worldlings to be rich?
That study nothing but to scrape and save.
That have no Faith, but in their ready money,
Nor love to Worldly pleasures above those
Poor Cobblers use.

Wat. Cheap Whores, and Duck-hunting:
There s his delight indeed.

Ali. J hate to think of of such a Dunghill Scarab.
A water-Dog Knight!

Wat. But Wedlock, to his age, will bring him home
To choicer pleasures, and abandon such.

Ali. His Age is fit for nothing, but to rock
Another Child; and to rejoice through Spectacles,
At the strong Guess he has, it is his own.

Wat. You slight him strangely yet: but when you see
Him, and his weighty reasons to confute you. --

Ali. J will nor weigh, nor see him, or his reasons.
And if thou ow'st him so much Service, tell him;
Go back and tell him strait: save him the end
Of his intended Journey. For to come
Hither, will be to drive me hence. And tell
My Father, ere he shall enforce me, take him;
I Will fly into the Arms of one he hates.

Wat. Are you in earnest?

Ali. Yes, by all my hopes.

Wat. These are the arms that must receive thee then.
Nay, be not frighted Sister; look, it is J. Off his Beard, etc.

Ali. Beshrew me but J am. How got you hither?
Could not the Compter hold you?

Wat. So it seems,
My Virtue was not to be so obscured.
Noble Sir Humphrey Dryground, Sister, was
My franck Infranchiser. O, J have wonders
To tell thee Sister. Thou must go with me.
But first, lend me some money. Borrow some;
(And let it be a good Sum) of my Father,
Now in his absence. Come, supply, supply
My Pockets and thine own. For we must hence.
Thou Art made for ever, Sister. Quick, dispatch.

Ali. What Is the meaning of all this?

Wat. Twill be too long to tell it here.
The Rascal fool, to whom my Fathergives thee,
Is come to Town: And should he now surprise thee,
Here in my Fathers power, thy strength might fail thee.
Be therefore at a sure Guard, O, Sir Humphrey,
How are my Sister and my self bound to thee,
That plottest this escape. Dispatch good Ally,
And hear thee rest by the way.

Ali. Why? Wither? What*s the matter?

Wat. Say thou will have that Coxcomb, I Will but kill thee,
And leave the here: And all my care is over.

Ali. I Will sooner dye then have him.

Wat. Why do you not shun him then? O, sweet Sir Humphrey,
Is thy care slighted thus, in my delivery?
In my disguise? In sending out my Father
On Tom-fooles Errant? While a Coach is sent
To the back-doore here; All to save my Sister,
My thanklesse Sister here, from worse then Rape.

Ali. Why, whither would you have me?

Wat. But hard-by.
But till the Wilde-fire of my Fathers Passion
Shall be run out. Slid, J had eene forgot.
Bear money with us, Sister; pretty store.
Who knows occasions? Let him keep in pawn
My rich Portmantue for*t.

Ali. There Is some good stuff in*t.

Wat. More then he ll thank me for. We Will talk in the Coach
In, in, and furnish; and so through the Garden,
And, whirre, we are gone. If we should be prevented;
By this good steel, if J but hear one knock,
Jle make sure work o thee. J can but trusse for t.
There Is a fair end on's both. And what will he
Do with his money then? Look how thou standst.
Jf you respect your Father, or the Dog-Master,
To be your Husband, better then me, then take
You your own course: Mine shall be known next Sessions.

Ali. Better then you, don't you respect your Father
Better then me?

Wat. No, if J do, let me be hanged for nothing:
And that would anger any man I think.
Slid, thou and J had one Mother, (which
We both take after) so had not he and we.
And he takes after no body, that J know.
He loves a stranger better then is own Child:
And that man's money, better then that man,
The Devil 'bove all J think. Thou do not know
What Coals we stand on.

Ali. Who shall look toth' house?

Wat. Wilt loose thy self with keeping that? Is that
All now? Away, away.

Ali. You Are a precious Brother. -- Exeunt.

ACT. I. Scene II.
Bumpsey, Dryground, Valentine, Magdalen, Jane. Bum. ALL this needs not Sir
Humphrey.

Dry. Do but hear patiently, and do your pleasure.
J go not about to stop your course, Mr. Bumpsey.

Bum. Nor J yours, Sir Humphrey; Nor your Sons here; Nor his Wifes there:
Only this Gentlewoman, in mine own right J may be bold withal, while you
depart my house, if you may be entreated, so. Is not this right? Is not this
plain?


Mag. Yet hear his Worship speak, good Bump.

Bum. Good Whirly, what can his Worship speak? Or your wisdom twatle for him,
in this (...) J do not understand already? Has not his (...) wedded our
Daughter? How directly, (...) rectly, who meddles with his match? Nay more, has
he not bedded her? How, directly or indirectly, who meddles with that either?
Let him have and hold, possess (Hmh.) and enjoy; do his worst, and make his
best of her, though she be an Heir, J will not sue him out of her: No, J
protest; were it Ante Copulam, as it is post, J would not cross 'em. Is not
this right and plain enough.


Dry. But good Mr. Bumpsey, Brother Bumpsey, I would call you --

Bum. Keep your Brothers and your Goods to your self, Sir, I have no need of
'em.
You are a Knight, and a man ot Worship --

Val. He will speak all himself.

Bum. J am a plain Fellow, and out of debt.

Mag. J, let him run on.

Bum. J sought none of your Alliance, J --

Val. Has he the speed to run beyond himself?

Ja. Yes, and bring himself about, J warrant you.

Bum. Nor to be joined with houses of great sound,
Whose noise grows from their hollow emptiness.
J could have matched my Daughter here, that was,
But now a Barronettesse in Reversion,
To a substantial Heir of two fair Lordships.

Dry. Perhaps no Gentleman.

Bum. Yet honorable, Land-Lordship's real honor,
Though in a Tradesman Son: when your fair Titles
Are but the shadows of your Ancestry;
And you walk in'em, when your Land is gone:
Like the pale Ghosts of dead Nobility.
Ha! Is It not so? Is not this right and plain?

Dry. Yes like the privilege you use in your own house here.

Bum. Nay I come up to you now Sir Humfry Dryground;
Up in a point of Chivalry. You are a Knight,
A Baronet to boot: Your son is like
T'inherit that dear paid-for title, but
(You Will give me leave to use my plainness)

Dry. Freely.

Bum. Your son (I say) is Heir to your bought honor.
Which may hereafter Ladifie my Daughter:
But where s the Land you once were Lord of? Ha!
The goodly Cornfields, Medows, Woods, and Pastures,
That must maintain the House, the Gowns, the Coach,
With all by complements of Horses, Hawks, and Hounds.

Val. Now he is in.

Bum. Where be the Parks, the Warrens, Herds, and Flocks?
Besides the Gardens, Orchards, Walks, and Fish Ponds?

Dry. For that hear me.

Bum. Ods pity, give me leave,
You, that had all these once, in three fair Lordships,
To be wrought on, and tonyed out of all,
But a small pittance of Trois Cents per Annum,
By Providence intayld upon the Heir,
(Or thad had wasted too) which now maintains you,
In a proportion of Smoke, and Sack,
To wash your mouth with after, where you live
Confined in Milford Lane, or Fullers Rents,
Or who knows where, it skills not --

Dry. Must I hear this too.

Mag. Now he has almost done.

Bum. Can you (I say) think your good husbandry
A lawful Precedent for your Gamesome son
To make my Daughter happy in a Marriage,
Though he had twice my Fortunes?

Ja. Now he is coming:
Bear but with this; and if he offer not
More then you would request, I Will lose your love

Bum. But here is the substance often, you have my Daughter,
Your Son, sir, has my Daughter, that must have,
And shall, my whole Estate at my Decease;
(No Law exacts it sooner) This Estate
You safely may suppose ten thousand pounds,
Which J have got by thrifty Industry.
Only one thousand, J confess, my Wife
Improved my Fortune with, Here Is the just sum*
I give her leave to give it to her Daughter:
She may endow her Husband with it. So,
Is not this plain? Now note me further, sir;
What J have left is my own; and you, sir, may
Which what is theirs take hence your Son and Daughter,
Till you shall hear old Bumpsey is deceast.
Then let him come, and challenge all -- that is left;
Mean time J know my course.

Ja. Now chop in with him, Mother, you know how apt
He is to cross you in these Moods.

Val. Dear, worthy, honored, sir,

Bum. sh't, sh't, sh't; Woman come you with me.

Mag. J Bump. Let us go our way, and let them take theirs agods name.

Val. Pray hear me, sir.

Mag. At this time, sir, he shall not.

Bum. Shall not! He shall sure: Ods pity! shall not: Are you pleased to speak,
sir.

Val. not to offend --

Bum. Not to a Fiddlestick. Shall not! Can you speak or not?
If not, pray yell me so.

Val. J married, sir, your Daughter.

Bum. You may thank her Mother for it, not me.
Well, will you speak?

Val. J married her in a firm hope to win
Your Love and favor.

Bum. Well.

Val. Which, since I have not yet; and time must work it,
I would make this my suit.

Bum. Would I could hear it once.

Val. That you would take
With re-acceptance of this thousand pound
Your Daughter and me into your Family.

Bum. And why the thousand pound; doe's't burn your Fingers?
Give us but meat and lodging for t: My Father,
Out of his little left Estate will give us
A hundred yearly for other necessaries.

Bump. With all my heart.

Val. And as you find my regular life deserve
Your future favor, so extend your bounty,
When Age shall call upon you to dispose
Of all your fair Possessions.

Bum. Humh! A pretty od speech this! I would I knew
The meaning on t.

Val. I mean, Sir, as I speak; that till you find
Strong probability in me to manage
A good estate, you trust me not with any.

Bum. Ha! Is it so? Then J come to a point with you.

Mag. Mark him now, Sir Humfrey.

Bum. You look, Sir, in my Daughters right, to have,
After my death, my whole Estate, by showing
Me, in my life time, your good husbandry, by husbanding of nothing:
Y' have taken off half my purpose; for J meant
To have kept it in my power, whether to leave her
Any, or nothing: And, perhaps (do you hear)
By an odd course, that J was thinking on
To have made all nothing ere J died: But now
Half of that power I Will put into your hands,
I Will try what you can do with something.

Mag. Half? What mean you half?

Bum. Even half of all J have.

Mag. J hope you will not deal so.

Bum. And as he deals with that, I Will use the rest.

Mag. Pray be advised.

Bum. Never by you against this:
I Will give him instantly the free possession
Of half J have: Now mark; if you increase,
Or keep that half, then, doubtless, J shall do,
As well with the other for you: If you diminish
Or waste it all, i will do the like with my part.

Mag. Husband.

Bum. I Will do it: Together we will live:
And I Will along with you in your own course,
And, as you play your game, you win or lose all:
Thrive and i will thrive: Spend you, and J will spend:
Save, and Jle save; scatter, and I Will scatter.

Mag. You will not be mad.

Bum. I Will do it: Let him throw Money
Into the Thames, make Ducks and Drakes with Pieces,
I Will do the like: till he has made a match
Or no match of my Daughter: There Is the point
And the whole substance on it.

Dry. Will you do so?

Bum. Will I? It Is done. I Will make him a good husband,
Or be no husband for him: And so see
What Is mine, out of the danger of his waste,
And have some sport too for my Money: Ha!
I love to do these things.

Mag. Nay, but in one thing, Bump. let me advise you.

Bump. In nothing `gainst this course, good whirly: no,
It Is so set down. I know I shall be counted
An odd old humorous Cockscombe for it by some:
But the truth is, I love to do these things:
And so God gi ye joy.

Dry. I Will take my leave Sir.

Bum. Not so I hope, Sir Humfry.

Dry. I have business,
And go well satisfied with this agreement:
And, Val. take briefly this my Charge: You are now
A Husband, be a good one: Y' have my blessing.
But (hark you) do you remember against the evening?

Val. All Sir, all: I have spread my Nets already.

Dry. Sir, fare you well.

Bum. At your pleasure Sir.

Dry. I Will shortly visit you.

Bum. At your own good time Sir- Exit Drygr.
These shall stay here, I Will blindfold them with Money,
And by a new way try, if they can grope
The right way into the World. Come your way.

ACT. II. Scene I.
Oliver. Ambrose. Ol. ANd why this Gullery to me, good Ambrose?

Am. J swear J am serious, and you may may believe it.

Ol. What, that there can be in the World an Ass
(Were thou a fool to credit it) that would keep
A House, by way of public Ordinary,
For fashionable Guests, and curious stomachs;
The daintiest Pallats, with rich Wine and Cheer;
And all for nothing, but alls paid and welcome?

Am. Vall Dryground told it me, whose truth deserves
So well my credit, that, prove you it false,
I Will pay all Ord'naries and Tavern reckonings
You shall be at this twel'moneth.

Ol. J have heard
Of all the Mockeries, the Ape, the Ram, the Horns,
The Goat, and such tame Monsters, whom poor wits
Have sent wise Tradesmen to, as to a Knight,
A Lord, or foreign Prince; to be his Mercer,
His Tailor, Semster, Millener, or Barber:
When those, that have been mock d, still sent their Neighbors,
Till half the City have be fool-found. Ha!
Is It not some such poor trick?

Am. Here comes my Author. Enter Valentine.

Ol. O Mr. Bridegroom, that stole the wealthy match! How got you loose so
soon? J thought you had been tied up by the Loins, like a Monkey to the
Bed-post, for a fortnight at the least. How does old Bumpsey, that Freecost
Drunkard, thy mad Father-in-Law, take thy stolen Marriage? I am sure he knows
on it.


Val. He found's abed last night in the nick, as we say.
But we are peec'd this morning.

Am. Then he wrangled it out, of himself. J know his singular humor.

Ol. What has he gi'n thee?

Val. Half, of all he has.

Am. How?

Val. On this Condition, that, if J save
That half until he dies, the rest is mine too*

Ol. What if thou spendst thy half?

Val. Heel spend the the other; and the same way, he swears.

Ol. He Will nere keep Covenant.

Val. I Will tell you how he runs at waste already,
This morning the French Tailor brought a Gown home,
Of the fashion, for my Wife. He bought one
Straight, ready made, for his old Gentlewoman,
That never wore so rich in all her life.

Am. O brave old woman! How will she carry it?

Val. I spoke but of a Coach, and he bespoke one.

Ol. Wonder upon wonder! Nam was telling one
Before thou came.

Val. What the new Ordnary?

Ol. Do know the man that keeps it?

Val. They call him Osbright.
A brave old Blade. He was the President
Of the Can-quarrelling Fraternity,
Now called the Roaring Brotherhood, thirty years since,
But now grown wondrous civil, free, and hospitable,
Having had something fallen to him, as it seems.

Ol. That Osbright has been dead these many years.

Val. It was given out so: But he lived beyond Sea.

Ol. There s some strange plot in it.

Val. O thou pollitick Noll.

Ol. Judge thy self, Val, what can the mystery be?
He tells me there is no Gaming, so no Cheating;
Nor any other by-way of expense,
By Bawdry, or so, for privy profit.

Val. Such a suspicion were a sin. But now
I will unfold the Riddle to you. This feasting
Has been but for three days, and for great persons,
That are invited, and to be prepared
To venture for a prize. This very night
There will be some great Rifling for some Jewel,
Or other rare Commodity they say.
I cannot nam t: it is twenty pound a man.

Ol. Is not that gaming prithee?

Val. That's to come:
But, hitherto, nor Dice, nor Cards nor Wench,
Is seen in the house, but his own only Daughter*

Ol. O! has he Daughter there? Mark that Nam.
No gaming say thou? Ods me, and they play not
At the old Game of old there, I dare --

Val. I dare be sworn thou do 'em wrong.

Ol. She Is too stale, is she?
It Is above twenty years since he went over,
And was reported dead (they say) soon after,
In France, I take it: But, then, it seems, he lived*
And got this Damsel there? Is she French borne?

Val. Yes, she was born and bred there: And can speak
English but brokenly. But, for French behavior,
She Is a most complete Damoiselle, and able
To give instructions to our Courtliest Dames.

Ol. She must be seen.

Am. But see who here comes first. Enter Vermin. Servant.

Ver. Thou have undone me Villain.

Ser. Out alas!
I was as ignorant of the deceit,
As your own innocent worship ever was
Of cozening any man of Land or Living.

Ver. Was ever man so cursed in his Children!

Val. It Is the wretch Vermin.

Ol. What makes he here, trow, in the Temple Walks?

Val. What should he do elsewhere, when Law's his Lechery.
The Devils itch dry up his marrow for it.
He undid a worthy Gentleman I know.

Ol. I, Brookall, thrusting him out of his Land.

Am. He Is fitted with an Heir for it; one that can
Justly inherit nothing but the Gallows.

Ol. Where Is Brookalls son? He had a hopeful one;
And, at sixteen, a Student here in the Temple.

Val. Alas his Fathers fall has ruined him.
Mere want of maint'nance forced him to service,
In which he is lately traveled into France.

Ver. Go back to the Recorders: Fetch the Warrant,
I Will search the City and the Suburbs for her. Exit Servant.

Amp. But Vermin has a daughter may prove good,

Val. A good one like enough: I Will lay a wager
He Is poching among the trees here, for a Broker,
To match his daughter to a landed husband.
This is their walk.

Ol. Let Us try if we can fit him.

Val. Thou Wilt nere endure his breath, it stinkes of brimstone.

Ol. I Will take the wind of him: You are well met, Sir.
They say you have a daughter you would match, Sir.

Ver. It may be I have; it may be not; How then?
What Is that to you?

Ol. Pray be not angry Sir.
The worst of us has land, and may deserve her.

Ver. Pray let me ask you first, if you be not
The knaves confederates that stole her from me?

Val. Is she stolen from you Sir? In troth I am glad on it.

Amp. It Is the first news we heard on it.

Ol. Though J assure you
We heard none ill to day: But very good,
As that of the New Ordinary. --

Amp. Then the good success
This Gentleman had lately with a wife --

Val. And lastly, this you tell us; which, but that
It comes from your own mouth, were even too good
For our belief, methinks.

Ol. Pray, is it true Sir?
That your daughter's gone, lost, or stolen, as you say?

Amp. May we report it after you, good Sir?

Ver. What are you? J would know.

Val. Gentlemen, Sir,
That cannot but rejoice at your affliction,
And therefore blameless, that desire to hear it.

Ver. Cannot this place, where Law is chiesly studied,
Relieve me with so much, as may revenge
Me on these scorners? How my Slave stays too!
Yet I may find a time. -- Exit:

All. Ha ha ha. --

Ol. Look, look, what thing is this? --

Enter Amphilus, Trebasco. Amb. Trebasco, Skip-kennel.

Tree.....

Amp. It speaks, methinks.

Ol. Yes, and its shadow answers it in Cornish*

Val. I know him; it is the wise Western Knight, that should
Have married Vermines daughter.

Amp. Skipkennell, you shall turn Footman, now, Skipkennell.
I Will nere keep horse more --

Tree. You must be Footman then your self Sir.

Amp. No nor Mare neither.

Tree. You need not Sir, now you be determined to marry, and live here in the
City altogether. And truly, Sir, she could never have dyed better, nor been
taken from you (as they say) in a better time, so near her journeys end.


Amb. His Mare's dead it seems.

Amp. Was it well done of her, do think, to die to day upon the way, when
she had been i'my purse to morrow in Smithfield: Poor fool, I think she dyed
for grief I would have sold her.


Tree. It Was unlucky to refuse Reynold Pengutlings money for her.


Amp. Would I had taken't now: and she had not dyed mine own, 'twould nere have
grieved me.


Tree. Pray bear it Sir, as they say -- We are all mortal you know, and her
time was come, we must think.


Amp. And't had not been the first loss that ere I had in my life, I could have
born it.


Tree. And grace og (as they say) it shall not be the last.


Amp. I would thou could ascertain me that; but mischiefs are taild to one
another, and I must grieve as well for the what is to come, as the departed.


Ol. We will have a bout with him: Who is departed, Sir?


Amp. My Mare, my Mare Sir: 'Twas the prettiest
Tit -- But she is gone --

Ol. How, is she gone Sir?

Tree. You will not talk to 'em.

Val. How is she gone, I pray Sir?

Tree. Sir, as it were, because she could go no further.

Val. Good angry man give us leave to talk with thy Master.

Ol. Good Sir, a little more of your Mare.

Tree. I would you had her all to do you good Sir:
she lies but a quarter of a mile beyond Brainford.

Val. Did you leave skin and shoes, and all behind Sir?


Tree. Shoes all behind? I thought how wise you were: Come away Master. No,
while she lived, she never wore but two behind Sir.


Ol. Gramercy honest fellow, thou have wit in thy anger.

Amp. Sirrah, answer not the Gentleman so snappishly.

Tree. How can I choose, when they do nothing but make a fool of your Worship
before your Worships face, and your Worship perceives it not.


Val. Good Sir, fall from your man to your beast again.

Tree. There again, another main mock: He would have him fall from a man to a
beast.


Amp. Give me the shoon; let 'em go I say, I will have 'em.


Tree. Pray take 'em then, he will never be wiser.

Amp. These were her shoon Gentlemen, I Will keep 'em for her sake, that little
Tit, my little poor Gonhelly, that would have carried me on this little iron
from Pensans to S. Columb on a day. And that is a way would try a stumbler you will
say, if you know it.


Val. It Is enough, I know you Sir Amphilus, and have fooled enough with you.
Adieu; my business calls me. Gentlemen, will you meet me to night at the
Ordinary* -- Exit.


Ol. Yes, and perhaps, be there before you too*
Come Ambrose -- Exeunt.

Amp. Od Gentlemen, methinks

Tree. Why did you talk with 'em?
What had you to make with 'em?

Amp. True, we have other matters to think on: Your first course Trebasco,
after we come to our lodging, shall be to Turnbull-street, to the Cobbler,


Tree. Your Dog-tutor.

Amp. Yes, and see how my whelp proves, I put to him last Term.


Tree. Yes, Sir.

Amp. And know of him what Gamesters came to the Ponds now adays, and what
good dogs.


Tree. Yes Sir.

Amp. And ask him -- Do thou hear? If he have not done away his own dog yet,
Blackswan with the white foot? If I can but purchase him, and my own whelp
prove right, I will be Duke of the Ducking-pond.


Tree. Never misdoubt, your whelp's right I warrant you; for why, he could lap
before he could well go: And at ten weeks old he could piss under leg.


Amp. He was a fine forward Puppy, true enough: But and that be a sign of
short life, and he should peak away after my Mare now -- Here, prithee take her
shoon again: What should I keep 'em for? They put me too much in mind of
mortality, do 'em away, make money of 'em, and I Will convert it into a Dog-Collar
--


Enter Vermin. Servant. Tree. I Will try the Market with 'em.

Ver. the frumping Jacks are gone. --

Amp. See my Aldermanicall Father-in-Law! How do you do Sir? I am come. I keep
my day you see before I am a Cittiner among you. How does my best beloved I
pray, your daughter? You do not speak methinks.


Ver. Ask you for my daughter? Let me ask you first what was your plot to put
me in this fright, to make me trudge to your Inn, whilst knave your man here.
-- Is not this he?


Ser. I doubt Sir he was taller.

Ver. Having first left a bag of Trumpery with me, stones, and old iron, steals
away the beggage.


Amp. This is abomination! What Inn? and what old iron? I came at no Inn to
day, nor touch old Iron, but that with sorrow enough, my poor Mares shoes, she
left me at her sad decease to Brainford. I had rather have lost the best part of
five Mark J wusse: From whence I came by water, landed here at the Temple, to
leave a Letter to a kinsmans chamber, now right as sure as can be. Say Trebasco.


Tree. He tells you true.

Amp. But is your daughter gone?

Ver. Gone, gone.

Amp. All ill go with her: Did not I say I should hear of more mischief, and
that one was ever tail'd to another?


Tree. You said so indeed: but if she had been tail'd to your Mare, I should
have seen her sure, when I stripped her.


Ver. This is the day of my affliction,
This day I Will cross out of my Almanac
For ever having any thing to do on it.

Amp. Why then, you will not seek her out to day?
Although methinks the day might serve as well
To find her, as to lose her, if luck serve.

Ser. What else did you intend Sir by the warrant?
Best lose no time Sir.
No, no, we will go.

Enter Brookeall. Broo. First take my execration with thee, Monster.

Ver Hell vomits all her malice this day on me.

Broo. Hell sends by me this commendation to thee,
That thou have there a most deserved Possession,
That gapes to entertain thee.

Amp. Who Is this, a Conjurer that knows hell so?

Ser. No, but a certain Spirit, that my Master
Conjured out of his Land.

Amp. If you can conjure,
Here Is money to be got Sir, but to tell us
What may be now be^id of this man's daughter?

Broo. Himself, and his Posterity must all
Sink unavoydably to hell.

Amp. You are most deeply read! May not a Son-in-Law --

Ver. Why talk you to that Rayler?

Amp. Pray Sir, may not
A Son-in-Law escape in your opinion?

Broo. No Sir: it was by Law he made the purchase.
And by his Son-in-Law, or out-lawed, down he must:
If he set ventrous foot, as his Inherltor,
Upon the mould, was got by his oppression.

Amp. Pretty mad reason methinks; where is that
Land?

Ver. Sirrah, I Will tame thy tongue*

Broo. No, wretch, thou can not,
Nor fly out of the reach of my fell curses,
That freedom (being all that thou have left me)
Thou can not rob me of.

Ver. I shall find means
Then to confine it, and your self in Bedlame.

Broo. Thou can not be so just sure, to exchange
Thine own inheritance for mine.

Amp. Have you made
A purchase there too, Father-Law that should be?

Ver. How am I tortured! I will fly this place.

Enter Phillis, a box in her hand. Phil. Nay prithee stay a little, good old
man,
Give something to my box.

Ver. Out on thee Baggage.

Phil. A little something, prithee; but a tester.

Ver. Out, out.

Phil. Thou look like a good Penny-father,
A little of thy money would so thrive here,
'Twould grow, by that I were ready for a husband,
Up to a pretty portion. Pray thee now --

Ver. What can thou be?

Phil. Insooth a Gentlewoman, but a By-blow,
My Father is a Knight, but must be namelesse.

Ver. Can Knights get Beggars?

Phil. Why not? when such as thou get Knights.
Nay, prithee, prithee now gi' me a tester.
I never ask less: My mother's a poor Gentlewoman,
And has no means, but what comes through my fingers.
And this is all my work: Come, wring it out.
Oh how I love a hard-bound Money-master,
Whose countenance shows how loath he is to part with it!
It comes so sweetly from him, when it comes:
Nay, when? I pray thee when? Pish, make an end.

Amp. It is the prettiest merry Beggar.

Ver. Huswife I Will have you whipped.

Phil. J, when I beg in the streets.
I have allowance here, as well as any
Brokers, Projectors, Common Bail, or Bankrupts,
Pandars, and Cheaters of all sorts, that mix here
Among men of honor, worship, lands and money.

Amp. O rare Beggar-wench! Lawyers and others pass over the Stage as
conferring by two and two.

Phil. I come not hither to entrap or cozen.
My work lies plain before me as my way.
With, will you give me? Praythee, hard old man.

Ver. Away, away.

Phil. What though thou come to deal
For this man's Land, or sell another right,
Or else to match thy daughter, if thou have one
To this young Gentleman -- Thou will give me something.

Ver. The Devil haunts me.

Amp. She makes a youth of me.

Phil. Yet I prithee make not
Thy money such an Idol, as to think
Thou shall dishonor't, or impair this bargain,
That match, or whatsoever thou have in traffic,
By parting with a silly silver sixpence.
Shall not i'fecks la, shall not; I Will strike luck to it,
Thy match shall thrive the better. Look, I have got
Here, four and sixpence, Prithee make it a Crown,
Twill nere be mist in thy dear daughters Dowry,
If (as I said) thou have one.

Ver. Hellish baggage!

Phil. He Will gi't me by and by. I prithee find
Thy money out the while. Come out with it man*

Ver. Pull her away,
I fly thee, as I would the Devil that sent thee:

Amp. Yes, let us away, it is time, she begs of me now.

Phil. The Devil is not surer to o're-take thee. -- Exeunt omnes preter
Brookeall.

Broo. Good child I thank thee: Thou have somewhat eased
My pensive heart by his vexation:
She spoke as Divination had inspired her
With knowledge of my wrongs, and his oppression,
To take my part: Take thou a blessing fort
Who ere thou art, whilst I recalculate
The miseries of a distressed man,
Cast out of all. Unhappy chance of Law!
More false and merciless then Dice or Strumpets;
That have into thy Hydra-throated mawe
Gulp'd up my lives supportance; left me nothing;
Not means for one days sustenance, for breath
To cry thy cruelty before my death.
That Law, once called sacred, and ordained
For safety and relief to innocence,
Should live to be accursed in her succession,
And now be styled Supportresse of oppression;
Ruin of Families, past the bloody rage
Of Rape or Murder: All the crying sins
Negotiating for Hell in her wild practice.

Enter Attorney. At. A man I hope for my purpose, and save me a going to the
Church for one: Will you make an Oath Sir?


Broo. An Oath? for what?

At. For two shillings; and it be half a Crown, my Client shall not stand
w'ye; the Judge is at leisure, and the other of our Bail is there already.
Come, go along.


Broo. I guess you some Attorney: Do you know me?

At. No, nor any man we employ in these cases.

Broo. He takes me for a common Bail; a Knight o'th Post,
Thou art a villain, and crop-ear'd I doubt not:
What, dare thou say, thou see upon me, that --

At. I cry you mercy: I must up (I see)
To the old Synagogue, there I shall be fitted -- Exit.

Broo. Can I appear so wretched? or can grief
So soil the face of poverty, which is virtue,
To make it seem that Monster Perjury?
Rather let sorrow end me all at once,
Then virtue be misconstrued in my looks,
Which I will hide from such interpretation. He lies on his face.

Enter Friendly. Friend. Alas he is sore afflicted, and my news,
I fear, will strike him dead; yet I must speak.
Sir, give not misery that advantage on you,
To make your self the less, by shrinking under
The buffetings of fortune.

Broo. I desired you
To seek my son. Have you found him at his Chamber?
Or has not want of fatherly supplies
(Which heaven knows I am robbed of) thrust him out
Of Commons, to the Common World for succor?
Where is he, have you found him?

Fren. No, not him.
But I have found what may be comfort to you,
If you receive it like a man of courage.

Broo. He Is dead then, farewell my tender boy!

Fren. Indeed, Sir, he is not dead.

Broo. Phew --

Fren. Pray, sir, hear me.

Broo. You Will tell me, man nere dies; But changes Life,
And happily for a better. He is happiest
That goes the right way soonest: Nature sent us
All naked hither; and all the Goods we had
We only took on Credit with the World.
And that the best of men are but mere borrowers:
Though some take longer day. Sir, J know all
Your Arguments of Consolation --

Fren. Indeed he is not dead; but lives --

Broo. In Heaven.
J am the surer on it; for that he lived
Not to learn Law enough, to -- hush. No more.

Fren. Substantially he lives in flesh, as we do.

Broo. Speak that again.

Fren. A Gentleman of the next Chamber told me so.
Only, sir, this; if you can brook his absence
Without fear, or mistrust; then he is well.

Broo. How thou playest with me!

Fren. He Is gone to travel, sir. Here comes the Gentleman.

Enter Valentine. Val. J am sure he does not know me. If he could,
J were as sure this Charity would be rejected.
So much J know his Spirit. Is your name Brookeall, sir?

Brook. My losses, wrongs, and sorrows, speak my name.

Val. You had a Son late of this house.

Broo. And do not you infer by that he*s dead?
Good, do not mock me, sir.

Val. If this be gold,
He lives and sent it to you; forty pieces?

Broo. Pray, sir, from whence, or where might he atchieve
So great a Sum? Not in this World, J fear*
A handsome possibility he had once,
Could J have kept it for him.

Val. He Is in a way,
Now to a hopeful fortune. A Noble Gentleman,
Late gone to travel, taken with good affection
Toward your Son, has taken hin to his care:
And like a Father, not a Master, keeps him.
From whose free bounty he received this means.

Broo. Do you think the Boy did well to send it me then:
When it was intended for his Masters honor,
To fly in Silks and Feathers? It Is not Servant like
To wave a Masters meaning so.

Val. J had a Letter too;
Though most unhappily mislay'd.

Broo. What from my Boy?

Val. In his own hand.

Broo. Ha! -- but mislay'd, you say. Ha, ha, ha, --
What is the Gentleman? Or whither traveled?

Val. That Is all J crave excuse for.

Broo. Keep your money.
If you can render me my Son, I Will thank you.

Val. You speak not like a Father: wanting means
Your self for his advancement, would you bar him
The bounty of another full ability?

Broo. J speak more like a Father, then a Beggar:
Although no Beggar poorer. And J fear,
J am no Father: for J would not give
My Son to gain a Province, nor except
This Coin to save my life: If he be lost,
Let me look nearer on you, sir.

Fren. I hope
He will accept the Money. Poverty
Was nere so coy else.

Broo. J cannot remember,
J ever saw this face: But J have seen
(Many years since) one, that it so resembles,
As J could spit defiance on it --

Val. What mean you?

Broo. And charge thee with the Murder of my Son

Val. Pray, sir, collect your self.

Broo. Your name is Valentine.

Val. Right, sir.

Broo. Sir Humphrey Drygrounds Son:

Val. Most true.

Broo. Even so thy Father looked, when, at like years
He was my Rival: For young man, I tell thee
Thou had a virtuous, well deserving Mother.
He won her without loss of my known Friend-ship:
But, since her death, you cannot but have heard,
He basely wronged my Sister, and, in her,
Me, and my Family: Whor'd her, and cast her off,
On the appointed Marriage day.

Val. O, sir.

Broo. You cannot but have heard on it. Nay, it seems,
My Boy has charged thee with it, before his years
Could warrant his ability in Combat,
And so is fallen; Or thou, not daring stand
Trial in such a cause, by treachery
Have cut him off; And come to make thy peace:
Presuming on my Poverty, with money.
Worse then the base Attorneys Project this!

Val. This is mere madness. In an Act so foul,
As your wild Fancy gathers this to be;
Who could escape the Law?

Broo. The Law; Ha, ha, ha.
Talk not to me of Law, Law's not my Friend.
Law is a Fatal to me, as your house.
I have enough of Law; pray stand you off.
Will you, sir, furnish me, but with a Sword;
And bring me to fit ground to end this difference?
Will you do so, and like a Gentleman?

Val. What shall J do for pity? -- Now J have it.

Broo. Talk not to me of Law. [He fenceth.]

Val. Pray hear me, sir.

Broo. Now sir, your will before your end Be brief.

Val. You know me for a Gentleman, though an Enemy.
(I must speak in his phrase) and by that honor
A Gentleman should keep sacred, two hours hence
I Will meet you in this place --

Broo. Pray stand you off -- to Friendly.

Val. From whence we will walk --

Broo. Silent, as nothing were --

Val. As nothing were betwixt us -- to some other Fit ground, (as you
propounded) where we will end the difference.


Broo. By the Sword, no otherwise.
No whinnelling satisfaction.

Val. You shall see, sir.

Broo. Go set thy house in order. Here I Will meet thee, Exit.

ACT. III. Scene I.
Francis -- Wat. Fra. I Shall repent me, sir, that ere I yielded,
In that fair Noble way, if you express
Your self in this regardlesse of my honor.

Wat. I like a Whore, withal my heart, that talks
So like an honest woman.

Fra. Can you expect
A Chaste and constant Wife of her, Whom you
Have wrought to Lewdness before Marriage?
Or may I not as well deserve as well in bringing
A Maidenhead into your Marriage Bed,
As a polluted Body?

Wat. Here Is a coil,
For a poor bit aforehand! Is it so?
'Heart, if a man bespeak a Tavern Feast
For next day Dinner; and give earnest for it
To half the value, (as my Faith and Troth
I think, is somewhat toward your Marriage payment
To be to morrow) Will not the Hostess give him
A Modicum over night to stay his stomach?
Your Father comes: I Will whisper yet more reason.

Enter Dryground disguised. Alice. Dry. Now pretty Mr. Alice, you see the end
I had upon you: All the scope thereof
Tending to your contentment. Are you pleased?

Ali. So well, that could I but shake off the fear
(Which is most dangerous) of a Fathers curse,
I durst prouounce; nay, boast my happiness,
To be above my Virgin hopes, or wishes.

Dry. Let your fear vanish then: And, if this night,
The happiness you are ambitious of,
Together with your Fathers leave and blessing
Crown not your Bed, let all the Infamy
Due to all perjured Wretches, that have wronged
Beauty and Chastity be branded here.

Ali. The fair respect I have, sir, to your Noblesse*
For what you have already shown me, bars
Mine ears against protestation. I dare trust you.

Dry. As I have trusted you with my whole project,
My discreet Alice, further then I dare trust
My Instrument your Brother; though he thinks
He understands it all. Yonder he is,
Profoundly Love-struck too, I make no doubt.

Fry. Fie! Can you be so lewd? Is that your reason?

Wat. Yes; can the Parish Parson give you better?

Fra. His Parish Bull's as civil.

Wat. Well no more.
I Will talk with your Father about it.

Fra. I with your Sister, and to better purpose.

Dry. Now Wat, what think you of my course, and habit?

Wat. As I love mischief, and desire to live by it;
It is the daintiest course. -- O, brave sir Humphrey,
How I am taken with your Shape! Old Osbright,
The Father of the Swindgers; so much talked on
Could nere have borne it up so. Nor his Daughter,
That was French born indeed, could ere have clipped,
And Frenchified our English better, then
She counterfeits to Coxcombes that do Court her:
With her fine Fee-fees, and her Laisse-moys;
Her Prea-awayes; Intrat a you make a me blus^a.
O, I am tickled with it.

Dry. A, ha, my Lad.

Wat. slid I could dote upon you. Had I been
Your Son now, how I could have honored you!
Though I had kept a Precept by t, I care not.

Dry. Notable Reprobate.

Wat. The Devil sure
Ought me a mischief, when he enabled that
Old Wretch, my Father to beget me. Oh,
It Is in my bones; I feel it in my Youth:
I know from whence the Pocks is now descended.
The Gout begets it. There Is no Usurers Son,
But's born with an hereditary spice on it.

Dry. Had I raked Limbo, as I did the Compter,
I were not better fitted with a Copesmate.

Wat. '^light, I could ask you blessing.

Dry. And I think,
That courtesy you have seldom done your Father.

Wat. Nere since I grew to any understanding:
Nor (as I know) before, but whipped and held to it.

Dry. Well Wat. You see how far I have trusted you,
To have the second hand in our great work;
Our Project here. Though you must seem my Servant,
You are like to have the better share, if you agree.
Upon the Match, and make your self my Son.
How like you your new Mistress, sir, my Daughter*
The Maidenhead here, the new Ordinary --
The Damoyselle, or what you please to call her?
What is it a Match Wat? Condescendeth she?

Wat. No man shall be her Husband, but my self;
Who ere she lies withal, before or after.
That she has roundly promised. But she balkes,
And Boggles with me in a less request.

Dry. She shall deny thee nothing. What is it Wat?

Wat. You may command her duty, if you please.

Dry. What is it man?

Wat. 'Troth, sir, but one nights knowledge
Of her aforehand. One word of your mouth,
I know would do it, sir.

Dry. O Devilish Rascal,
That can imagine this a Fathers Office!
Patience good Wat.

Wat. But that I am afeard
My Father would be pleased with it, Il'd take home
My Sister else, and presently.

Dry. In Maids about your work. And hear you Franck
Discharge the Butchers, and the Chandlers Bills.
They wait below. The Baker and the Brewer,
I have made even with.

Fra. And the Vintner too.

Dry. The Bottle-man too, and Tobacco Merchant.
Do as I bid you, go. Now Wat Observe me:
As an ingenious Critic would observe
The first Scene of a Cemedy, for fear
He lose the Plot.

Wat. I do observe you, sir.

Dry. I have, you know, released from your thralldome.
Upon condition you should steal your Sister,
To be at my dispose. You have performed it:

Wat. Honestly, sir.

Dry. Yes* honestly, as you say.
And though it be for her own absolute good;
Yet was your Act so grateful to me, that
I promised you my Daughter.

VVat. Right sir, on.

Dry. I shall be brief: you know my Fortune, VVat
Are sunk, and you have heard, I make no doubt,
Amongst other of my follies, of a Child
I got on Brookealls sister, on the by, Wat.

Wat. And this is she, I love a bastard naturally,
Ah thy are bouncing spirits: Now I love her
More then I did Sir.

Dry. You come fairly on.
But now, my poverty affords no portion.
Now, Wat, to raise a portion!

Wat. J, now, now.

Dry. Now I come to it, Wat: J took this house,
And in this habit here, turned pimping Host,
To make the most of her, and find a Husband
To take her with all faults.

Wat. That Is I, that is I Sir: this has music in it.

Dry. You will be secret Wat.

Wat. No dumb Bawd like me.

Dry. Nay in a plot of villainy I dare trust thee.

Wat. In troth you cannot think how much I love it;
How I am tickled with it! Good Sir, on.

Dry. This I have designed to put her off
(I mean her Maidenhead) at such a rate
Shall purchase Land.

Wat. How, good Sir Humphrey, how?

Dry. She shall be rifled for.

Wat. How! Rifled Sir?

Dry. Yes, rifled Wat; the most at three fair throws,
With three fair Dice, must win and wear her, Wat.
You Will take her with all faults?

Wat. Can you suspect me?
It is the rarest invention, if the Gamesters
Be stiff and strait, that ever was projected!
What is it a man?

Dry. But twenty Pie ces, boy.

Wat. I vow too little, less their number help us.
How many Gamsters have you?

Dry. A full hundred.

Wat. Two thousand pound! A merry portion,
And worth as many Maiden-heads in the sport
A man shall find in spending it* Methinks
I feel my self even flying with it already.

Dry. What art thou thinking, Wat?

Wat. That here may grow
A danger Sir, the Gamesters being so many.

Dry. Why, there is but one must use her.

Wat. Phew, for that
I were indifferent, if'twere all or more
(As it is possible a wench might bear it)
If they come single, and in civil sort,
Allow her breathing-whiles --

Dry. Here Is a ripe Rascal!

Wat. But my doubt is, that such a multitude
May fly into combustion, blow up all
The business and our hopes.

Dry. Now your doubt
Reflects upon my Judgment: did thou note
How quietly those Gallants here to day
Parted with their gold?

Wat. Yes, very gallantly.

Dry. They shall agree as well for the Commodity,
As I have cast it, VVat; so well my boy,
That no distaste shall be or taken, or given,
Anon you will see.

VVat. She knows not on it you say,

Dry* Nor shall she VVat, till at the push I charge her
To be obedient in the undertaking.

VVat. And that is a sweet obedience: I could kneel
Before my wretched Sire in such commands.

Enter Francis. Dry. Anon I Will make^t all plain to you. How now Frank?


Fran. There are two Gentlemen in the next room,
That by all means would speak with you: I have had
The foulest coil with one of 'em, that persuades
Himself you keep a Bawdy House, by somewhat
He gathered Evesdropping, by your discourse here,
While the other held me talking; who is civil,
And loves me with a modest fair affection.

Dry. Where is his sister, Alice?

Fran. Unseen I wrrrant you.

Dry. Then let them enter. Whip into your disguise Wat -- Exit Fran.
And be at call.

VVat. Presto, Anon, anon Sir. Ex. VVat Stands aside.

Dry. Did they Eavesdrop me? I will Eavesdrop too. --


Enter Oliver, Ambrose. Ol. Did not I tell thee't was a Bawdy House?

Am I cannot think so yet: there is some other
Trick in it; the Maid you see is very modest.

Ol. That is the trick on it man, she must seem so.
Her Father deals for her.

Am. Fie! Can there be such Fathers?

Ol. Yes, and such Mothers too: The Towne's too full of 'em.
Come, she is a Juggling whore I warrant thee,
For all her Fee-fees, and her Laisse-moys.
Pox of her counterfeit Gibbrish I Will make her speak
In plainer English, ere I have done with her.

Dry. I have enough. You are welcome Gentlemen.

Ol. He looks like such a Blade. Are you the Master here Sir?

Dry. I am the man that is much rejoiced to see
Such sparkling Spirits underneath this Roof,
Where all you find is yours. Sirrah Varlet.

Ol. Each syllable he speaks bewrays him.

Dry. Varlet I say.

Wat. Here Sir.

Enter Wat with Wine. Dry. Give me the Complement. Gallants,
Wilt please you taste your welcome in a Cup,
The spirit of whose never dying Liquor,
Speaks ore the brim in this high Language to you.
Full six and thirty times has Luna wan'd
The strength she got in six and thirty growths
From Phoebus virtuous beams, into this Juice,
To make it Nectar for Phoebean wits.
It Is this inspires their brains with fire Divine,
By which to write high strains; and herein lurks,
The gift, One has to bounce up his own works.

Ol. Your meaning is good Sack, and three years old.
To put you by your Beverage and your Bombast,
I will nor drink, nor talk of other thing,
But the choice thing of things, your Daughter Sir.

Dry. Thou shall not woo my Daughter, nor ne man for thy sake, Sing.
Unlasse thou come until her by her Daddy naked.
Her Mammy's gone to Heaven Sir. And I pray,
Let Fathers poor breed Daughters as they may.

Ol. Your care, no doubt, is great what will it hold?
The Rifling Sir, I mean. Is your number full?
May not a man put in Sir for a chance?

Dry. What do you mean Sir?

Ol. May not we
Come it adventurers? Here are twenty pieces.

Dry. I find you have overheard me. Call my Daughter. Exit Wat.
Now I Will disclose a secret to you. But Gentlemen,
As you love wit and mirth, censure me mildly.
I am a Gentleman decayed in Fortune.

Ol. And can thou be so base to sell thy Child
To Lust and Impudence?

Dry. Be not too rash.
My Child's as dear in my respect, as you
Were ever to your Father.

Am. Devil thou lie -- Draw.

Ol. Nay, hold, good Ambrose; you even now were angry
With me, that did oppose your fair Construction
Of this good Gentleman and his virtuous Daughter.

Am. My ignorance wrong*d us both.

Ol. Good modest Ambrose,
What do you think of this discovery?

Dry. You had discovered more, if his impatience
Had not prevented me: But now I am dumb to you
In all, but this. If you will be pleased to sup here,
I shall afford you welcome. I have business. Exit.

Ol. What can we make of this?

Am. I know what to do.
If City Justice, grave Authority
Protect it not, I Will surely spoil the sport.

Ol. Can thou be so malicious, that, but now
Did love this Wench so dearly, as to run her
Into the hazard of Correction?
Stay: Here she comes, and the Pimp whiskin with her.
Enter Wat. Fran. Do thou take him in hand. I Will handle her.
Now Madam, twenty pound a man! Nay do not
Coy it too much? Your provident Father left us,
To make our selves more known to you; as your price
Is known to us already: Look upon us.

Fra. Pre ye Sir, have you been ever in France?

Ol. In France? No surely, nor in Doctors hands
Since I was Placket high. Why ask you Lady?

Fra. For, if you could speak Fransh, I could the better
Find what you say. I can no understand
What it is you mean by price. What is that Price,
If it be no Welsh Gentleman?

Ol. I mean
The price of three throws for your Maydenhead,
It Is twenty pieces. If I win it (Hark you)
What will you give me out of your gross sum
To take it neatly off; and like an Operator,
Put you to no pain?

Fra. Parle Francoy Monsieur, Je vou pry.

Ol. Thou art a handsome Hyppocrite: And this
Cunning becomes thee well. I Will kiss thee for it.

Fra. Fee fee Monsieur. O fee! it is no good fashion,
For the young Man and Maid to no ting but kiss!

Ol. It Is not so good indeed; nothing but kiss.
A little of tone with the other will do well.

Fra. Fee fee, you no understand. That Gentleman,
Speaks he no Fransh?

Ol. Yes yes. He speaks no French.

Fra. He Monsieur vou mocque de Moy.

Ol. Owie par ma foy.

Fra. Ha Monsieur vou parle francoy. Je sui' bien aisie.

Ol. Easy! Yes yes, I think you would be easy
To one that knew but how to manage you,
For all the boast of your Virginity.

Fra. Excuse me Sir, I can no understand.

Ol. Me thinks you should. Come prithee leave this fooling,
I know you can good English, if you list.

Fra. Indeed I can. But, in my best, and all
I cannot understand you Sir, nor frame
An answer to your rudeness. When you know me
Better, you will speak in better phrase, and then
It Is like you may find better language from me:
Till when, pray give me leave to leave you Sir.

Ol. Nay hark you Lady, hark you (still more mystical!)
Nay since you can speak English, I must talk w'ye.

Fra. So you will be civil.

Ol. Civil I swear, and private. They go aside.

Am. Does she not know on it, say thou?

Wat. No Sir, no:
Not the least inckling of it: The old man
Carries it so discreetly.

Am. Bless me Heaven?
Discreetly say thou. To betray his Child,
To sale of her Virginity.

Wat. Yes, discreetly.
She dreams of no such business; such intent:
No more then the Cud-chewing Heifer knows
The Butcher, that must knock her down in faith.
O, twill be bravely carried! I my self
Knew nothing till this hour: though I saw
Money put in his hand by diverse Gallants:
Men of great place and worship; which I gather
Are to be of the Riflers.

Amb. Prithee who?

Wat. All must be namelesse. There are Lords among 'em.
And some of civil Coat, that love to draw
New stakes at the old Game, as well as they;
Truckle-breech'd Justices, and bustling Lawyers,
That thrust in with their Motions; Muffled Citizens;
Old Money-Masters some, that seek the Purchase:
And Merchant Venturers that bid for the
Foreign Commodity, as fair, as any.

Amb. Was ever such an outrage! Hark thee fellow -- They aside.

Fra. Sir, I have heard you with that patience
(And with no better) as the troubled Pilot
Endures a Tempest, or contrary winds:
Who, finding nerethelesse his Tackling sure,
His Vessel tight, and Sea-room round about him,
Plays with the waves, and vies his confidence
Above the blasts of Fortune, till he winns
His way, through all her threatenings, to his Port.
You may apply this.

Ol. And you may be plainer.
Is there not such a project for your Maydenhead?

Fra. It deserves no answer.
But to be rid of you, together with
The Devil, that inflamed you to that question;
Know, that knew I of such a plot or project;
Or, that I had a Father (as injuriously
You have suggested) could be so inhumane,
To prostitute my spotless Virgin honor
To Lust for Salary, I would as sure prevent it,
As there is force in poison, Cord, or Steel,
At price of both our lives. Sir, I have said -- Exit.

Ol. This Wench amazes me. Could I believe now
There could be truth in Woman, I could love her.

Amb. Well, I Will make one: Meet me there two hours hence,
And fetch my twenty Pieces.

Wat. I will not fail you. In the Temple Walks -- Exit.

Amb. Where, if I fit you not --

Ol. Nam! What discovery?

Amb. A villainy enough to blow the house up.

Ol. And I have found (I think) a virtue, that
Might save a City: But let us hence. We may
Conferr our notes together by the way. Exeunt.

ACT. III. Scene II.
Bumpsey, Magdalen, Jane, all in brave Clothes. Bum. NAy, nay, I know he is
flown out, and I
Am prettily provided for like flight:
And if I do not pitch as high, and souse
As deep, as he, while there is Game to fly at --
Five hundred Pieces he took out you say?

Ja. And said he would venter't at the Ordinary.

Bum. That's he, that's he! Why this is excellent.

Mag. This was your folly Bump. He was content
To have walked moneylesse you saw, but you
Would force him. At a word you did la' Bump.

Bum. I force him, ha?

Mag. I, at a word, you put it in his head,
And put the Sword into the Madmans hand,
As one would say.

Bum. Good Mrs. At-a-word.
Let not your fine French Frippery, which I bought,
Turned oth' Tailors hands (as one would say)
Huffle you up to Sovereignty: Nor your Coach,
Which I have but bespoak, whirle you away,
Before it is finished) from obedience.

Mag. Good lack fine Gentleman, that wears the Purchase
Of a pawned forfeiture. Must I not speak trow?

Bum. Excellent Magdaten!

Mag. Sir, J will speak; and be allowed to speak.

Bum. And speak allowed too; will you Magdalen?

Mag. J, at a word; Since you have put me to it,
J will uphold the Fashion; Learn, and practice
Behavior and carriage above my' parrell.
J at a word, J will la, that J will.

Bum. This is most excellent! My old Beast is
Infected with the Fashions; Fashion-sick!
Pray Ma-dame take your course, uphold your Fashion:
And learn and practice Carriage to your Clothes:
I will maintain my humor, though all split by it. --

Enter Servant. Ser. Mr. Vermin desires to speak with you.

Bum. In Faith I will Ma-dame. -- [Exit with Servant.]

Ja. My Husband, Mother,
Reports of a rare Creature come to Town,
Of a French breed; a Damoysell, that professes
The teaching of Court-carriage and behavior:
The rar'st he says --

Mag. Can she teach the elder sort?

Ja. All ages from six years to sixty six.
Unless they be indocible he says.

Mag. Indocible! What Is that?

Ja. Stift in the hammes, I think.

Mag. Nay, then we will to her.
I can yet bow my Haunches, come and go
With them, as nimbly as the barren Do.
My Gimboles don't complain for want of Oil yet*
We Will have this Madame; and we will be Madames
Ourselves, or it shall cost us each a Crown
A month the teaching. In a Month we may,
Practicing but one hour in a day,
Be Madames, may we not?

Ja. Yes, if we give our minds to it; and but steal
Fit times to practice.

Mag. We Will find Lecture times:
Or baulk St. Antlins for it the while. But mum.

Enter Bumpsey, Vermin. Bum. Do you wonder at my bravery? Look you here:
This is my Wife; and this my Daughter, sir.
You have lost yours, you say: Perhaps for want
Of Hufty-^usties, and of Gorgets gay.
Ha! is it not so?

Ver. The World's turned prodigal.
You do not well to mock me, when I come
For comfort and advise.

Bum. Shall I be plain w'ye;
My best advise is, since your Daughters gone,
To turn your Son after her. He lies not in
For much above a hundred pound. Pay it,
And let him take his course: If he be not
Got loose already. Then (observe my Counsel)
Spend you the rest of your Estate your self;
And save your Heirs the sin. It is the course
I have in hand, and mean to follow it.
You like it not (it seems) but thus it is,
When men advise for nothing. Had your Lawyer
Now for his fee, given Counsel, might have damned you:
You would have thought it worth your Gold, and followed it.
Will you go with me to an Ordinary?
Venture five hundred or a thousand Pieces,
To begin a new World with.

Ver. Mrs. Bumpsey, I take it you are she.

Mag. An old Ape has an old eye.
He knows me through all my cuts and slashes.

Ver. How long I pray, has my good friend your Husband
Been thus distracted?

Mag. But when I am perfect
In the quaint Courtly carriages, that belong
Unto this habit: in which, I confess,
I am yet but raw; how will you know me then?

Ver. She is as mad as he.

Bum. How Lady-like she talks!

Mag. Or, now my black Bag's on, I hold a penny
You do not know me. Bogh-who am I now?

Ver. Most unrecoverably mad! young Gentlewoman:
Nay, I entreat your favor for an answer?
As you can pity a wronged man's distress.
Give me what light you can of my lost Daughter*
You have been inward always, and partook
The nearest of her Counsels. Tell me fairly
I do beseech you in this gentle way.
Though I profess I have a strong presumption
Against your Husband, and his young Associates
I met to day; and bore their mocks and taunts:
On which I have good ground for a strickt course
To force 'em to examination.
Yet I entreat you see.

Ja. The World is turned
Quite upside down: Else I should wonder
How you could make requests, that (...)
You have (too much) by Rapine and O(...)

Ver. Do you upbraid me?

Bum. What Is the matter Jane?

Ja. The Fox here learns to sing.

Mag. I Will fox him out oth' hole if he sing here.
Will no Prey serve you but new married wives, Fox?

Ver. Why do you abuse me thus?

Ja. I heard you, sir, with too much patience,
Abuse my Husband with your foul Suspicion.
Who is as clear, I know, from wronging you,
As your own Son.

Ver. Your mocks are monstrous.
Were not he fast enough, I would resolve
No other friend had robbed me.

Mag. Is your son a friend? At a word, he is like you.

Enter Sir Amphilus, Servant. Amp. J pray, if my man ask for me, send him to
me, by your Masters leave. By your leave Sir, I made bold to follow a
Father-in-Law of mine that should have been, into your house here, with much
ado to find it. Any good news Sir yet? Have you heard of her? J cry these
Ladies mercy; though you may take me for a Clown, J must not forget I am a
Knight, and give you the courtesy of my lips --


Bum. In the name of Peasantry, what Knight art thou,
If not the Knight of the Plough-share?

Mag. A fine spoken, and a well-bred man, at a word: He called us Ladies. To
see what Apparel can do! How long might I have trudged about in my old coats
before J had been a Lady? And then he would do us the courtesy to kiss us:
Sure, sure, as courtesy makes a Knight, so clothes makes a Lady.


Amp. It seems she is lost then. All ill go with her.

Bum. What old youth can this be?

Amp. Your warrant, perhaps, may find her though.
And J tell you what.
J have sent my man to lay the Ducking Ponds for her.

Bum. Do you think she would drown her self?

Amp. Who knows what toy might take her? Is she not a woman, as other flesh
and blood is? I had another occasion to one that belongs to the Ponds. I tell
you as a Friend, I had not sent else: Come Father-in-Law that should have been;
hang sorrow. You have had but one Loss to day. I have had two. I Will gi't you in
Rhyme.

My Mare and my Mistress I lost on a day,
The One of*em dyed, and the other ran away.

Ja. You are acquainted among the Poets it seems, sir?

Amp. Truly but one that is a Gamster amongst us at the ducking Pond; a Cobbler,
but the neatest Fellow at Poetry, that ever was handicrafts-man; and no
Scholar, to enable him by learning, to borrow of the Ancients: Yet he is a
Translator too. And he makes the sweetest Posies for Privie-houses.


Ja. Ha, ha, ha.

Bum. What a youth's this for a Knight!

Enter Trebasco. Amp. I Will tell ye Ladies -- O Trebasco. Good news at last I
hope.

Tree. J can never find you any where, but jeered and laughed at, and are
fooled, (as I have often told you) to your Worships face, and your Worship
perceives it not.


Amp. To the point, man. How does my Whelp? He is grown a tall Dog by this J
hope: resolve me quickly.


Tree. Why, to put you out of your pain; your Whelp's grown a tall Dog.

Amp. Good

Ja. You said you would tell us, sir; What will you tell us?

Tree. And a handsome Dog.

Amp. Good again.

Ja. What a Dog-trick's is this?

Tree. And h'as learnt, besides the main Game, all the rare tricks and qualities
his Tutor could teach.


Amp. Excellent.

Ja. Will you not tell us, sir, about your Poet?

Amp. Hang him, my Dogs worth 'em all, in ready money.

Mag. I pray, sir.

Amp. I will not give his ears for the swolnst headfull of wit among 'em.
Are not his Ears finely curled Trebasco? Like his Dam Flapses.

Tres Yes, and his Coat all over, sir, they told me.

Amp. Told thee! Did thou not see him? My heart misgives me.

Tree. See him? No indeed, sir; but J pray bear it as well as you may:
And set not your heart too much upon transportable things.

Amp. Ha!

Tree. The Dog is gone, sir.

Amp. How!

Tree. Stolen from School, sir; and sold to a great Monsieur,
And Shipped away four days ago.

Amp. O my heart will break.

J.a Do not faint Knight; Cheer up your heart with your Muse.

Amp. My vein is yet too dull; But I will o ffer at it.
Three Losses I have had; gone, past all help.
My Mare, my Mistress, And (which grieves me most of all) my whelp.

Ia. That line is long enough to reach him.

Amp. I would it were else. -- o --

Bum. Od's pity. Look you, sir, your Son-in-Law, that should have been, is in
much passion too. But you will be ruled by me, you say. And if J lead you not to
comfort, never trust Neigbours counsel while you live. Is not this plain
enough? My own case at this time is as dangerous as yours.


Ver. That Is all that comforts me.

Bum. Neighbourly said. I thank you. Come, Sir, will you join with your
Father-in Law that should have been, and me in a Cup of Wine to order a design.


Tree. There Is a reckoning toward.

Bum. It shall cost you nothing.

Am. To the next Tavern then. Ladies adieu.
To part with such as you to some are crosses.
Yet I Will not put you down among my Losses. Exeunt.

Mag. Daughter while they are gone, let us fall on our project.

Ja: For Courtly carriage and behavior.

Mag. I long to see this French young schoolmistress.
The Damasin do you call her?

Ja. The Damoiselle, I Will wait on you. -- Exit.

ACT. IIII. Scene I.
A Rabble of rude Follows pulling in Wat after them, Valentine, Oliver,
Ambrose, Phillis. Wat. You Rogues, Slaves, Villains, will you murder me?

Rab. To the Pump with him: To the Pump, to the Pump.

Val. Prithee beat off the Curs.

Rab. No, to the Thames, the Thames.

Phil. Why do you use the man so? Is he not a Christian*
Or is he not Christened enough think you, that you would dip him?

Ol. Pray Gentlemen forbear: It is thought fit,
Upon request made by a Noble Friend,
Favoring his Person, not his quality;
That for this time the Pandar be dismis'd,
So all depart in peace.

Enter Rabble. Rab. Away, away, lets go then.
1. A Noble Friend! Pox of his Noble Friendship.
He has spoiled our sport. O! how we would a sous'd him?

Ol. Now, Mr. Hackney-man, if you have so much grace*
Render due thanks,

Wat. I thank you Gentlemen.

Phil. I thank you for him too.

Ol. On both your Knees; unless you hold it better
To kneel yet to the Pump: which you had done,
My most officious Pimp, had not his pity
Prevayl'd against our Justice.

Val. So, arise; enough, enough.

Amb. Troth it is a shame be should get off so easily;
Let him be yet but duck'd, or showed the way
Over the Garden Wall into the Thames.

Val. Good Ambrose, be not so severe* who knows
What need we may of him? We are all
Flesh and blood Ambrose.

Phil. Thou art a Wag I warrant thee.

Amb. Are not you married?

Val. Mass, it was so late, I had almost forgotten it.

Amb. No, it is so late you have not yet forgot
Some Office he has done you in his way.

Ol. Did ever pimp for him? Protest by what thou feared most.

VVat. No, as I hope to escape this Gentleman's fury.

Amb. Go, get the hence, insufferable Villain.
I could even kick thee into twenty pieces, [He kicks Wat.]
Soon, at his Rifling.
Think whilst thou liv'st what it is to be Pandar. --
A Pandar, -- Pandar -- there is for your remembrance.
[He kicks him]
Val. Enough. Amb. This touch, and I have done -- *

Val. Away

Phil. Pray let him go, I Will school him [Exeunt Wat Phillis.]

Val. This may work good upon the Rascal, if he
Have but humanity, although no grace.

Ol. We have discovered the great Rifling Val.
We know the Jewel now; the rich Comodity.

Val. And think you have done wondrous wisely; do you not?
To sneak before me thither. I know all
You have discovered; and how far you are
Mistaken in the old man and his Daughter.
All shall be plain to you soon. Walk off a little.

Ol. We'll leave you till anon we meet at the Ordinary. [Exit. Ol. Amb.]

Enter Vermin -- Amphilus Bumpsey. Amp. I protest, Gentlemen, I have not
drown*d sorrow
With so much merry go-down, these three half years.

Bump. As with your part of three half pintes of Sack.
We had no more amongst us.

Amp. How much was that a piece think you?

Ver. It was enough to show his Prodigality.
In over-wastfull Cost. You were not wont
To be a Boordsend-King; a pay-all in a Tavern.

Bum. But now I love to do these things.

Amp. Now if you could be drawn to the ducking* Pond,
To join your Groat sometimes with me; or twopence*
There were a Recreation indeed*
That Peerlesse Princely sport, that undoes no man:
Though cheating there; and rooking be as free
As there is square play at the Ordinaries.

Bum. Well the point is: My swaggering Son-in-Law,
Appointed to be here among the Trees.
My Daughter told me so. Walk here-about.
If he can give light of your light, he would chide.
Well try what may be done. I Will but step up
Into Ram-Alley-Sanctuary, to Debtor,
That prays and watches there for a Protection;
And presently return to you. -- Exit.

Amp. Let it be so; slid the old angry man!
Enter Brookeall. He Will cross us if he see us walk this [Exit Amp. Vermin.]

Broo. These walks afford to miserable man,
Undone by Suits, leave, yet, to sit, or go,
Though in a ragged one; and look upon
The Giants, that over-threw him: Though they strut [Lawyers and others pass
over the Stage.]
And are swollen bigger by his emptiness.
It Was here, that we appointed, further meeting.
The two hours respited are almost run:
And he engaged his honor in such terms,
As I presume he will come. Honor! From whence
Can he derive that Princely attribute,
Whose Father has descended to a Villainy?
His house was Noble though: and this young man
Had a right virtuous Mother, whom I loved,
Entirely loved: and was in Competition
For marriage with her; when high Providence
Allotted her to him; who since her Death,
Defamed my Sister, and disgraced our house.
My quarrel is not good against his Son
For that: But for my Boy! His doubtful talk
Of him distracts me.

Enter Vermin, and Amphilus. See the Vermin,
That has devoured me living, His Aspect
Adds to my Passion such a bitterness,
That turns me all to gall. I must avoid him, Exit.
Amb. In Troth Father-in-Law that should ha *been, or that
May be yet (come, who knows what luck we may have,
Though the dancing Planets have cut cross Capers over
Out heads.) I like this old fellows humor of chearing up
The heart well! And would I were lost too, after my Mare,
My Dog and your Daughter: If this warm Sack has not
Kindled a desire in me to play the good fellow, so it might
Be of free cost, to drown these dry remembrances.

Enter Valentine. See* one of the jeerers. Is this he, that stole the marriage?
Ver. Yes, and perhaps my Daughter too. His Father's gone
Now, and I know not how to question him.

Amp. Let me alone to question him. Did you see this Gentleman's
Daughter, sir, my Wife, that should have been?

Val. Since when, sir.

Amp. Since she was stolen away, sir. It were good
You would let us have her again; and quickly too,
Ere she be worse for wearing, as we say.

Val. Old Brookall is not come yet.

Amp. Will you answer me?

Val. You are a busy fool.

Amp. I am satisfied. He knows nothing.

Val. You lie, Sir.

Amp. I think I do, You know nothing of her I mean, Sir.

Val. You lie again, Sir.

Amp. I think I do again, Sir. Pray be not so terrible;
Examine him your self, if it please you.

Enter Brookall. Broo. Were his eyes Basiliskes; or did he bear
Upon his hellish Countenance the faces
Of all the Furies (that no doubt attend him)
I Will shun no place for him. Are they acquainted?
O most prodigious!

Ver. What do you know, Sir, of my Daughter, I beseech you?

Val. That she has a wretch, a miserable Caitiff
Unto her Father.

Broo. How is that? -- [aside.]

Val. A villain that has scraped up by oppression
Law-strife and Perjury, a Dowry for her,
So mixed with curses, that it would consume
An Earls Estate to match with it and her.
And leave him cursed in his Posterity.

Amp. How blessed was J to miss her!

Broo. Can he speak thus to him? [aside.]

Ver. Dare thou confront me thus?

Val Dare thou yet keep a Groat of thine extorted Wealth,
And see what Judgments fall one thee already?
Can all thy Gold redeem thy good opinion,
To thine own Son? And though thou would no give
(In case he wanted it) to save his life,
A Hangmans Fee, much less a Judges thanks,
Or price of a Lords Letter to reprieve him;
Yet may this Son survive thee; and hourly he
Unto thy last hour, thine Affliction be.

Amp. O happy condition of a Bachelor!

Broo. I like this well in the young man* -- [aside.]

Ver. How can you say you know this?

Val. Prithee how cannot be otherwise?
Had thou a virtuous Child (as here and there,
Some Mothers win a soul) it would be taken
Dead or alive from thee, unto thy grief too,
To escape the curse might come with a Child's part
Of thine ill-got estate: that is thy Daughters case.

Ver. Oh --

Brro. Brave young fellow!

Val. But show me where an evil Offspring has not
Survived to spurn the dust of such a Father;
And lewdly wast in one or two descents
(Unto their own destruction) what was purchased
At price of souls departed?

Ver. Will you vouchsafe to leave me?

Amp. Pretty odd Doctrine, this!

Val. I have not done w'yee yet.
What corrupt Lawyer, or usurious Citizen,
Oppressing Landlord, or unrighteous Judge,
But leaves the World with horror? and their wealth,
(By rapine forced from the oppressed Poor)
To Heirs, that (having turned their Sires to the Devil)
Turn Idiots, Lunaticks, Prodigals, or Strumpets?
All wanting either wit, or will, to save
Their fatal Portions from the Gulf of Law.
Pride, Riot, Surfets, Dice, and Luxury,
Till Beggary, or diseases turns them after?

Ver. Have you done yet?

Val. A word or two for use; and so an end.

Broo. Not so: It must be amplified a little further.

Ver. Torment and death! Is he come? Let me go;

Amp. Nay pray Sir hear them; though you profit not;
I may perhaps. Methinks it edifies.

Broo. You said, and you said well; His tainted wealth,
Got by corruption, kept by niggardise,
Must fly as ill, through Luxury and Riot:
I add, that they who get it so, shall leave it,
To run at the like waste, through their succession
Even to the Worlds end: it is not one age,
Though spent in prayers, can expiate the wrong
Such an estate was gotten by, though the estate
Be, to a doyt, spent with it: But it shall
Fly like a fatal scourge, through hand to hand;
Through Age to Age, frighted by Orphans cries,
And Widows tears, the groans and Lamentations,
Of oppressed Prisoners, mingled with the curses
Of hunger-bitten Laborers, whose very sweat
Thou robst them of: this charming noise is up
Of many sad, some mad afflicted wretches,
Whose marrow thou have sucked; and from whose bowels,
The nourishment was crushd that fed thee, and
That ravenous Wolf, thy conscience.

Ver. I shall trounce you.

Enter Bumpsey. Bum. What Is here? Worrying of Vermin?

Broo. This noise, I say, of hideous cries and curses,
That follows thine estate, will not be laid
In thy dear life time; nor in theirs, the strangers,
That must be cursed with the division
Of it, when thou art gone: But, still, it shall
Pursue, to all succeeding times, all those,
That entertain least parcels of thy money,
When they shall find at best, it can but buy
Disgrace, diseases, overthrows at Law,
And such dear punishments; until, at last,
All hands, affrighted with the touch of it,
Shall let it fall to earth; where it shall sink
And run into a vein of Ore, shall reach --
To Hell. And they, that shall, hereafter, dig it,
Hundreds of Ages hence, must all compound
With the grand Lord o'th Soil, the Devil, for it.

Amp. So they make hot Purchases!

Broo. Now Sir, you may instruct the Usurer, to make use
Of all he has heard, while I avoid his sight;
Heaven knows I am sick on it: you forget me Sir.

Val. Fear not: I will not fail you.

Bum. No: I Will deliver him the use of all.

Ver. Oh the variety of my vexation --

Bum. And all is this (as I advised before.)
Spend all your felfe, and save your Heirs the sin;
The shame, the sorrows, and the punishments,
That are joynt-heritable with your wealth:
As very learnedly has been related.
And there is the point, and the whole substance on it.

Ver. Bestow your Substance so Sir, if you like it.

Bump. Sir, my condition runs another way.
To the same end perhaps; following my Leader, here.

Amp. Your Son in Law? Trust me, a most fine man:
And, if his life be answerable to his Doctrine,
It Is like heel lead you to a fair end of all.
Doubtless he is a fine young Man indeed.
A proper teacher and an edifying.

Bump. Come Sir, lead on, I hear you are provided
Five hundred thick for this free nights adventure.

Val. I am Sir, here it is.

Bump. I am so too Sir.
And here it is: And here it is, and here and there, and here it is.

Amp. O brave old man.

Bump. I Will make one w'ye at your new Ordinary,
They lay it is excellent.

Val. For rarity and plenty,
There Is no such Pension in all this City.

Amp. And all for nothing?

Val. For less then kiss your Hostess.

Amp. And is there delicate Wine too? I must thither.

Val. The flower of France, and quintessence of Spain
Flow like a Spring-tyde through the House.

Amp. O rare!
And all for nothing?

Bump. Hang nothing. Be it as twill,
I am for any thing; and as well provided,
As you, or any the best Gamester there.

Ver. Sir.

Bum. I love to do these things. But first, pray tell me
Can you tell tale or tidings of his Daughter here?

Val. Not of his Daughter: But I heard his Son
Was freed, this day, from Prison.

Ver. How, how, how?

Enter Brookall, Phillis: Broo. Yonder he is, still, busy.

Phil. I Will among 'em. Walk you back a little,
And, get I any money, I Will lend thee some.

Val. I Will tell you how. Some friend has paid his debt,
The Action is dischargd; and he is releas d.

Ver. You practice my abuse. It Is not in man,
To do me such a mischeife.

Amp. Away Girl.

Phil. Thou art as hard, as this dry crust, here, was.
But he is better minded now, I hope:
Now, old man I am sure thou art for me,
Thou cursedst me before, but now thou will
Bless me, I hope, and not without a Cross
Of a fair Silver Sixpence.

Ver. Hence you Harlot.

Phil. Nay look you, if I could afford it, think you
I Would make two words w'ye: it is but a sixpenny matter
Between us; why will you be so hard: it is but
So little less left among all thy Children;
And I Will bate it them in their prayers for thee,
Though I be at the trouble, my self, to do it.

Val. Troth, she begs prettily. I must give her something.
Here Wench.

Bum. What is it, J will see it.

Phil. It Is a good Shilling, and a vie; will you see it Sir?

Bam. Look you, it is covered.

Phil Gentlemen, will you come in? will you vie it?

Amp. No we deny it.

Phil. You may revye it then, if you please. They come not in to bind it.

Val. Will you come in again Sir?

Bum. Sir, after you, and't be to my last sixpence.
I will keep Covenant w'ye.

Val. A shilling more on that.

Bum. Done Sir: there it is.

Phil. Why, these are Lads of bounty! Have you any mind yet Gentlemen?

Ver. What, to be Bankrupts?

Phil. Troth, thou would fear as much, should thou but break
Thy Porredge Pipkin.

Val. Prithee what is thy name?

Phil. Nell, my Mother calls me. J nere knew Sire, nor Godsire.

Val. Nell?

Phil. Yes: And it is as bonny a Beggars name, as ever came from beyond Trent.

Val. This Girl, methinks, howere necessitated
Into this course, declares she has a spirit
Of no gross air: And J dare think her Blood,
Although, perhaps, of some unlawful mixture,
Derived from Noble veins. One may perceive
Much in her Language, in her Looks, and Gesture,
That pleads, methinks, a duty above pity,
To take her from this way, wherein she wanders
So far from the intent of her Creation.

Bump. Your meaning is, you would buy her out of her Calling.
Is it not so?

Val. Ten Pieces J would give
Toward a new one for her.

Bump. Here Is ten more
To bind you quite from begging. Can you afford it?
If yes, accept it. And let us see your back.

Phil. J make no Curtsies, nor send thanks that way.
No, I Will be forwards in them. May my thanks and prayers
Multiply years and blessings on your heads.
And when J beg again, may Beadles take
Advantage on my back, and lash the skin off,
So Heaven be ever with you --

Val. Stay. Who would not have given this Money? Gentlemen,
Do not move you to give a packing penny?

Phil. Nor move you them for me. J should, now, fear
One of their ill-got pence, here mingled, would
Corrupt and overthrow my righteous Fortune.

Exit Phil. Amp. Ovillanous Vixen.

Ver. Each minute of this day augments my torment,
Yet J have coold it with some patience;
Attending Sir your answer.

Val. For your son.

Ver. J have no Son. J ask you for my Daughter.

Val. Be this your penance for your misbeleife,
Hye you to the Compter: if you find not there
Your son; meet me an hour hence at my Fathers,
I Will tell you news of him; and he perhaps
May tell you of his Sister. This deserves
A fee. Your absence pays it me. Go quickly,
We have some business: And your stay will but
Make the Scene tedious.

Ver. Weel go. Will It please you?

Amp. Yes: we will off in Rhyme. There is no doubt,
Jf Wats be not ^^he Compter, he is out.

Exit Ver. Amp. Bump. Now, what is the next vagary?

Val. Only this Sir.
You have played at small Game with me. Now there is
A greater try all of my Love and Bounty,
Instantly to be made. A Gentleman,
(J stay too long) an intimate Freind's arrested,
But for two hundred pound on execution:
Will you join Charity to fetch him off?

Bump. J would 't had been thine own case two days since.
One of your fine Companions, some poor Shark?
Ha, is it not so?

Val. Will you be pleased to see him?

Bump. J am half sick of this Condition!
J do begin, not altogether, now,
To love these things so well methinks. Humh ha!

Val. Nay, if you go not cheerfully --

Bump. Yes: J go. Exeunt ambo.

ACT. IV. Scene II.
Brookall, Phillis: Broo. GOod Child, thy tale is pitiful; yet it sorts
So with the fell condition of my Fortune,
That J crave more of it.

Phil. J came not to
Discourse of sorrow, but to bring you comfort:
Will you yet have a Crown?

Broo. J prithee keep
Thy Money Child; and forwards with thy story.
Thou saydst thy Mother was a Gentlewoman.

Phil. Jle give you reason. Since J can remember,
She never did a wrong, though suffered much;
Nor the least unjust thing: No, though her poverty
And care of me have pinched her very bowels,
She knew not how to seek another good,
So much as by request. She never durst borrow,
For fear to come so near the danger of
A promise-breach: And, for base ends, to lie
She holds it sacrilege. In Faith she jerk'd
That humor out of me; for J was given
(I tell you as a Friend) a little to it.
It came sure by the Father. God forgive him.

Broo. Thou saydst, thou thoughtst, thy Father was a Knight.
How think thou he could lie then, ^o abuse
A Virgin of that goodness, as it seems
She, that by him became thy Mother, was.

Phil. The Devil, sure, was powerful with him, then.
Nor do you hear me say* all Gentlefolkes
Are of one mind. Alas they could not live
One by another then.

Broo. Peace, stay a little:
How came thy Mother to decline her spirit
So low, as thus to suffer thee to beg?

Phil. Virtue goes often wet-shod, and is feign
To coble it self up to hold out water
And cold necessity: But sure, the quality
Came to me by the Fathers side too: For
It Is a more commendable, and Courtly practice
To beg, then steal. He was perhaps, a Courtier.
J rather would be robbed of all J have,
Then steal one farthing.

Broo. Thou say thy Mother never would reveal
To thee, or any one, her Birth, or Fortune.
Answer me, prithee, how do thou collect
The had such a Father? Or that he has thus
Wrong*d thy poor Mother, by not marrying her?

Phil. Now you come to me indeed old man: How now,
What do you weep?

Broo. The sharpness of the Air
Strikes on mine eyes a little. Prithee say.

Phil. J first, as fain would know the hidden cause
That works this aptness in me, to discover
My Mother and my self to you. J know not
How to look off o'you. I^aith you weep.
I have heard some talk of natural instinct,
But know not what it is. Pray can you tell me?
Or any like reason, why J should
Thus dote, and hang about you? Or tell me this,
Have you not been of better Fortune? Are not you
Some decayed Knight? Be not ashamed, but tell me.
They cannot all be rich, there are so many.

Broo. Oh my heart!

Phil. Yea, are your Conscience struck?
Have at you for a father then: And yet
Methinks you are more old in goodness, then
To be, so late, so wicked, as to wrong
A woman of her sweetness. Yet I Will try you.
Here is a long-kept Paper. This is all
That ere I gathered of my Mothers wrong,
And of my Fathers cruelty, and condition.
It seems this was his hand, and ruthful farewell,
He turned her off withal. See, if you know it.
More then a thousand times I have observed her
Weep over that Paper; ever careful, though,
Her tears might not deface it. If by chance,
As when those tears prevented had her sight,
Some soft ones did on that hard Sentence light,
Her Lips took off the Trespass of her Eye;
And her hot Sighs restored the Paper dry.

Broo. This comes so near a Miracle; that my faith
I fear is staggering. How got'st, thou this paper?

Phil. I stole it from my Mother, (and in Troth
It Is all that ere I stole) because she should not
Weep out her eyes upon it. I do not love,
Although I am a beggar, to lead blind folks.
Do you not find there, that he is a Knight,
Though he subscribes no name? He tells her there,
And tauntingly, he knowess she is more sorry
For the lost Ladyship he promised her,
Then for her Maidenhead. Let me hear you read it.

Broo. Mine eyes, are now, too full indeed; I cannot.

Phil. Are you the man then, whom I must ask blessing?
If you be, speak. I Will have you to my Mother,
Though, I dare swear, she had rather dye, then you,
Or any of your Race, or hers, should see her,
Whilst she has breath. Yet I will undertake
To prattle you both good friends.
And you shall have my Mammy,
And she shall have her Nell (that is J.)
The man shall have his Mare again,
And all shall be well. How do you?

Broo. Prithee forbear me good wench but a little.

Enter Valentine. Val. I have kept my time you see; and shall not fail
In any Circumstance. Here are two Swords,
Pray take your choice. I have bespoke a Boat
Shall land us over the water, where you please;
Though, I Protest, I yet would beg your Love,
Next to my Natural Fathers.

Broo. This I fear d.
And charged the plain way. But't shall not serve.

Val. You took my part of late, against old Vermin

Broo. Prithee who would not? This is another case

Val. Why, if there be no remedy, pray accept
Your forty pounds. The money, Sir, may stead you
For your escape, when you have taken my Life.

Broo. Your money 'wou'ld hang me, Sir. Your life's not worth it.

Val. It Is your own money; sent you by your Son.

Broo. How know I that? Or that I have a Son
By thee unmurther'd.

Val. I told you of a Letter I had mislaid:
Look you. Do you know his hand?

Broo. If it be not,
Much changed, and lately, here is that will match.

Val. Was ever given Gold so weighed, and tried?
What Lawyer, Nay, what Judge would be so scrupulous?
No want corrupts good Conscience: Nor excess
Allaies in bad, the thirst of Cov'tousness.

Phil. What do you think, Sir?

Val. I think you beg again, and would be whipped.

Phil. I fecks, I do not beg; but came to offer
This grieved old man some of my infinite fortune
Found in your lucky money: Lucky indeed;
For I have found a Father by'c. I vow
I think my Father. Is It not a fine old man?
I shall know more anon.

Val. Her money, sure,
Has made her Mad: How do you find it, Sir?

Broo. My wonder now, is, how thou can be Son
Of such a Father! Thou art honest sure.
Here is your Sword, I will accept the money.

Val. Then I shall live, and so may want the money.
Will you forbear it for a day or two?

Broo. Your Sword again.
Now, I profess to you, I have present need on it,
And am as strict, Sir, for my right, as I
Before was to decline it.

Val. Pray, Sir, take it;
And give me leave to beg your charitable
Construction of my Father.

Broo. How is that?

Val. Did you but know the care, the cost, and travel
He has been at a thousand ways, to find
Your injured Sister, to make good his fault,
If possibly he might --

Broo. O fie, O fie!

Val. Till all Opinion gave her dead; and then
The means he has sought to do you Offices
Against your knowledge. For he knew your Spirit
Would not except of his benevolence. --

Broo. Read that, and guess whose deed it is. Stand off Girl.

Phil. Yes forsooth Father, I shall learn in time,
I Will call him Father till he finds me another.
J know he could not shed those tears for nothing.

Val. But does she live, to whom this was directed?

Broo. Speak low: is that your Fathers hand?

Val. It is.

Broo. Along with me then. Girl, lead you the way.

Phil. Anan forsooth Father,

Broo. Show us to your Mother.

Phil. Shall he go too? What will the Neighbors think?
There Is none but Beggars all about us. Ods so,
There'll be a show indeed.

Val. No matter. Will you go?

Phil. Sir, they will hale you to pieces.

Val. Will you deny me?

Phil. How shall I answer't to my Mother? She
Never saw man, nor has been seen by man,
That J know, in my life.

Val. No matter: Will you on?

Broo. I Will save thee blameless.

Phil. Troth I Will venture. -- Exeunt Oes.

ACT. V. Scene I.
Frances, Magdalen, Jane, Alice. Wine on a Table. Fra. TRes bien venue Madames.
You are very welcome.

Mag. Good lack! And is it you, Mrs. Alice? Is It possible: Are you come to
learn Carriage too? I will make bold with the other Glass of Wine. At a word, J
like your French Carriage the better, that it allows elder Women to drink
Wine.


Ali. They have no other drink, except water. And Maids are allowed but that.


Ja. And young wives (they say) wine with their water.

Mag. Mingle your Glass, then, Daughter. This for me. Your father has so
sought you Mrs. Alice.


Ja. My Father has mist us too, by this time.

Mag. But neither of 'em can dream French enough, to direct'em hither, J
warrant you. And does she learn the Carriages very well, Madamsilly?


Fra. Madamoyselle, si vous plaist.

Mag. What do ye cal't? I shall never hit it. *How do you find your Scholar?


Fra. O, she is very good. She learn very well.

Mag. But how much carriage has she learnt? Hark you Mrs. Alice. Have you not
learnt to carry a man? Has not a good Husband stolen you hither?

I can think waggishly I tell you: And an old Ape has an old eye. Go to.


Ali. No such matter, Mrs. Bumpsey.

Fra. What is that you say?

Mag. I ask you how much carriage she has learnt?

Fra. She come but dis day; And she carry both the hands already.

Mag. How say by that. Is It possible? Can she carry both her hands in one day?

Fra. Yes, and before to morrow, she shall carry the foot as well.

Mag. It seems, then, you teach handling before footing in your French way.

Fra. You may learn dat of de leetle Shild. De leetle Shild you see will handle
de ting, before it can set one foot to de ground. Come, let me see you make a
Reverance.


Mag. Reverance! What Is that?

Fra. It Is dat you call a Curtsie. Let me see you make Curtsie.

Mag. Look you hear then.

Fra. O fee, fee -- dat is de gross english Douck, for de swagbuttock'd-wife of
de Pesant.

Mag. How like you this then? There Is a Reverence I warrant you.

Fra. Fee, dat is worse. See how you carry de hands like de Comedien dat act de
shangling.

Mag. Shall I ever hit on it troe? I must take the other Glass.

Ali. Take heed she does not take too much.

Ja. I hope she will not. But there is no crossing her.

Fra. Let me see your hands.

Mag. There they be. They have been a little too familiar with Sea-coale
fires, and much other course houswifry, which J shall utterly abhor, and wash
off, when J have learnt to carry them Courtly.

But shall J ever do it, think you?

Fra. Yes, yes, and all your other parts and members.

Mag. I may win my Husband to love me Courtly then.

Fra. To love, and lie with you Courtly.

Mag. That Is but seldom, I doubt.

Fra. You shall know all de ways to win his Love,
Or any man's, to multiply your honor. --

Mag. J will so multiply then.

Fra. Not only in your looks, your smiles and sweet Caresses.
(Besides the help of Painting) that adorn
The face; But with the motion of each Lineament,
Of the whole frame of your well ordered body.
An Eye, a Lip, a finger shall not move;
A Toe trip unregarded. But your Geat
And your whole graceful Presence shall attract,
(Beyond affection) admiration:
As I Will artifice you.

Mag. I Will be a Nymph. Diana and her Dearlings, dear, dear, dear, etc. [sing.]
But may I paint, say you?

Fra. O most allowably; nay, commendably.

Mag. The Other Glass for that.

Fra. Then for the Art of dressing, setting forth Head, Face, Neck, Breast,;
with which I will inspire you.
To cover, or discover any part --
Unto de best advantage.

Mag. That is to say,
To hide shame, or show all: that is her meaning.

Fra. You shall have no defect perceived, no grace concealed.

Mag. I am for the naked Neck and Shoulders, then.
For (I tell you Mistress) I have a white Skin,
And a round straight Neck: smooth and plump Shoulders,
Free from French Flea-bits, and never a wrinckle
Neare'em, though I say it.

Fra. Thas been suggested by invective men,
Women, to justify themselves that way,
Began that Fashion. As one the other side,
The fashion of men's Brow-locks was perhaps
Devised out of necessity, to hide
All il-grac'd forehead; Or besprinckled with
The outward Symptoms of some inward grief.
As, formerly the Saffron-steeped Linen,
By some great man found useful against Vermin,
Was taken up for a fashionable wearing.
Some Lord that was no Niggard of his Beauty,
Might bring up narrow brims to publish it.
Another, to obscure his, or perhaps
To hide defects thereof, might bring up broad ones.
As questionless, the straight, neat timber'd Leg,
First wore the Troncks, and long Silk-hole: As likely
The Baker-knees, or some strange shamble shanks,
Begat the Ancle-breeches.

Mag. Sure the men
Took that conceit from us. What woman shows
A Leg, that is not a good one? -- [She shows a swadled leg.]

Fra. These among men, are followed for the fashions,
That were invented for the better grace.
(As our Attires) to set off Limb, or face.

Mag. Good lack! What knowledge comes from foreign parts?

Enter Dryground, VVat. Dry. I prithee Wat, have patience for an hour.

Wat. Not for a minute, Sir, I Will not be kicked,
And called base Pandar for your baseness.

Dry. Nay, look you Wat.

Wat. And had almost been pumped,
And made a sport for Watermen in the Thames.

Dry. But Hear me, Wat.

Wat. I Will hear my Father sooner. (Give me hence
My Sister) were he a ravenous Beast, a Wolf,
J would obey him rather then trudge a foot
Further in your base way. Heart J am hip-shot.

Dry. Now, would his Bodies pains convert his Soul,
Twere a good work.

Wat. J am in desperate fear
Of The Mourning of the Chine too with the kicks,
And hunches they o're-said me with. O base!
Without resistance. Give me hence my Sister.

Dry. But how was it my fault?

Wat. Was It not your project?

Ja. What may this mean?

Ali. No harm J warrant you.

Wat. Nay, it shall out. Your base inhumane Project,
To sell your Daughters Maidenhead. (J care not
Who hears me, J.) And cunningly to make me
Your Hackney-jade to fetch your Chapmen in.

Mag. Where are we now?

Ja. What did my Husband mean to wish us hither?

Wat. Baseness! J cannot call it bad enough.

Dry. You were as forward in it as my self,
And wooed me you might have her without all faults.

Wat. Mine eyes are opened now.

Dry. But J believe,
They were almost beaten out first.

Wat. And J vow
Ere J will marry so, I Will take a Beggar,
And join in trade with her, though I get nothing
But -- My name is Vermin already, J
Thank a good Father for it.

Dry. A Beggar-wenches breed would propagate
Your name most numerously.

Wat. Much better then your Sale-ware, and more lasting.
J think J saw her to day must be the woman,
Good Madame Polcat, the trim Schoole-mistriss.
I Will make bold with your Scholar. What! you have more.
I Will carry her and her Virginity
Unto some fitter place of Execution.

Ali. You brought me hither, Sir, and here I Will stay.

Wat. What! in a Bawdy House?

Mag. O dear! and is it so? What are we then?
Is this your boun fashion? Is this the carriage of the Body, that you would
teach us? What, to be Whores? We could learn that at home, and there were
need, without your teaching,


Ja. Mother; what do you mean?

Ali. Mrs Bumpsey; pray fear no harm.

Mag. O good lack! what will become of us? where are we now, Jane?

Betrayed! betrayed! Our honors are betrayed. O my poor Bump. how will thou
take this at my hands, though J carry them never so Courtly?


Dry. 'Sfoot, she is in her Mawdlin fit: All her wine showers out in tears.

Mag. Oh, oh, oh, -- [She falls]

Dry. Pray have her in. Look carefully to her,

Mag. I, I, I.

Dry. In all to the next Room. -- Exeunt Fra. Jane leading out Magdalen.

Wat. Sir, she shall with me. I Will leave her where J found her.

Dry. Sir, no such matter.

Wat. 'Sfoot, Gentlewoman, must I kick you out of doors?

Dry. No, nor depart your self, but by Authority.
J am provided for you. Friends come in. Enter two Sergeants.
And do your Office.

Ser. We arrest you, Sir* Nay, we shall rule you.

Wat. Ha, ha, ha. Why, this is well, and very hospitably done.
Would any man but an old Bawd have done this?

Dry. Sir, J mistrusted your Apostasy.
Since you revolt, J must recall my money;
Or lay you where J found you, as you threatened your Sister here.

Wat. Baser, and baser still. Are you a Knight?
A Knight, a Post-Knight. A Postillion,
That rides a fore-horse, over the Ears in dirt,
Three fingers thick, is not so base. You Varlets,
Do you arrest folks in a bawdy house?

Ser. We do not find it so; Or, if it be,
The place may be as honest as our Office.
Will you walk, Sir?

Wat. Stay; Let me consider,
If now my Father (as some in like cases
Have done) would take a fine submission.
I could affoard to kneel and whine, methinks,
Rather then back to my old Ward again.
Twill nere be handsome though.

Enter Valentine. Val. The business Gentlemen.

Wat. My lucky friend.
Sir, you relieved me lately. Could you now
But add another Favor, it might teach
One, that nere learnt to pray, to pray for you.
Do you not know me, Sir? It Was I you saved
Out of the Temple Sudds.

Val. Have thou been shaved since?

Wat. No, Sir, I was disguised.

Val. Disguised!

Wat. Disguised in villainy, which I recant.

Val. Who knows but he may prove an honest man?
Pray, Sir, a word.

Ser. We do not use to wait dry-fisted; nor dry throated.

Wat. I would you were as wet all over, as I was like to have been: Or, as you
are Catchpoles, I would you had been but in those hands I escaped from.


Dry. You have prevailed, Sir.

Val. Sergeants you shall not out of the House. Here Is for half an hours
attendance. Go into that Room with your Prisoner. You shall have Wine, and
Smoke too.

Be of good cheer friend; if thou can be honest,
I can relieve thee: fear not.

Wat. Sir, get my Father but to say as much,
And you shall be Co-heire with me. I vow you shall have half. [Exeunt Wat,
Sergeants]

Val. VVee'll talk anon. The Youth appears converted.

Dry. There was no other means to work it by,
But that I used; to urged him past his Nature.
He was so free in's Villainy, that I
Giving the Spurs, ran him beyond his speed;
Quite off his Legs, and glad to be led home.

Val. His Father comes on fairly: I have followed
All your Instructions concerning him,
And my fantastic Father 'Law. Both whom
Are hard at hand, with the wise western Knight.
He too's content to go to the best Ordinary,
While it is best cheap he says. Where are the women?

Dry. Your Mother-'Law, after she had got
As much French Carriage, as might serve to furnish
A petty Court; is fallen into a fit,
To overthrow it all again.

Val. The better.
But is the house clear, Sir, of all your Riflers?

Dry. As I could wish; And well satisfied.
For, when they understood the honest end,
My Project aimed at; which, by an Oration
Well charged with virtuous Sentences, I forced
Into the nobler Breasts: they all recanted
The barbarous purpose; and as freely left
Their money for that Charitable use,
To which I pre-intended it. The rest
Purs'd theirs again. But yet I have collected
In this odd uncouth way, five hundred Pounds,
That was laid down at stake for a Virginity,
To make an honest stock for Franck.

Val. It Is good.
I may fetch in my Guests In the mean time
You may be pleased, Sir, to peruse this Baper. -- Exit.

Dry. How now! what is here? How might he come by this?
It is the scorn I sent my injured Love;
My abused Elynor: The hand, that threw
Her from me. O, that at the price of it
I could receive her.

Enter Oliver. Ambrose. Ol. Sir, by your leave,
We come to sup w'yee. Does your Rifling hold?

Amb. What, you are off of the hooks, methinks.

Ol. If there be no such thing, tell us the Riddle?

Dry. You shall know all, and briefly. Franck, come in. Enter Franck.
Now Gentlemen --

Ol. Let us salute her first. -- Salute, then whisper*

Dry. She does not taste of sin. Fair Chastity
Sits crowned upon her Brow, with an aspect,
May beat down Lust to Hell, from whence it rose.

Fra. You profess Nobly, sir.

Ol. I vow, and do not lie to you: If I find
Your Father so inhumane, you against it:
VVee'll be your Rescue, if forty able swordmen
Which we have, at the signal of a finger,
Planted in readiness, can fetch you off:
Do you approve?

Fran. Yes, and admire your goodness.

Ol. Now we are for you, sir:

Dry. Then hear the story; which your late Impatience would not permit.

Amb. You speak not now
In that high Phrase, or tone, as you did then. Enter Valentine. Bumpsey,
Vermin, Amphilus, Brookall, Elynor, Phillis.

Val. Stand here, unseene; and hear attentively.

Dry. I am a Gentleman, that by foul misdeed
(Heaven, Heaven I ask thee pardon) once did wrong
To an unfortunate Family, by rejecting,
After affiance, and her love abused,
A Gentlewoman --

Ol. You got with child, and then denied her Marriage.

Dry. It Was so.

Ely. Ay me!

Val. No passion, gentle Soul.

Phil. If this should prove my Father now! --

Ol. Well Sir, your Gentlewoman!

Dry. She, on the discontent, (poor hapless Soul)
Now foureteen Winters since though sadly burdened,
Fled, and no more is heard of: at the first
My wildness took no sense of this dear Loss;
But drew me through the ways of careless pleasure,
By riotous expense, that mine estate
And Credit ran at waste, and was nigh spent,
Until my trespass cried against my Conscience
To render satisfaction: but in vain
We offer to the dead. My Genius therefore
Prompts me to grateful deeds unto her Blood*

Amb. What can this come to?

Dry. She had a Brother, that lost his estate
By Law --

Br. Means he not me?

Dry. To a Corrupt Oppressor --

Ver. Ha! How Is that?

Dry. Was stripped out of the very Coat he wore,
Had nothing left him, but a Son --

Ol. What Is all this to your Daughter?

Dry. Even all that may be; (see) His Sonne's my Daughter. Discover Franc.
Now do you find my project Gentlemen?
It has at Charge of three days Housekeeping
Put halse a thousand pounds in's purse; Besides
A fair pull for his Fathers Land again:
For he has, by a lawful Churchman, married
The Daughter of his Fathers Adversary.

Ol. Why, here are wonders!

Amb. Bravely, nobly done

Dry. Come Mrs. Alice; and justify your Act. Enter Alice

Ver. My Daughter, ha!

Amp. My sweetheart, hoe!

Fra. Your haes and hoes can not draw her from me, she is my Wife.

Ver. By what witchcraft?

Dry. By stronger Charms, then your Art can dissolve. You know me now, Sir --
And my Project, do you not? Discovers himself.


Ol. Amb. Sir Humfrey Dryground.

Ver. I am struck dum with wonder.

Elin. O it is he, it is he.

Val. Alas she swounes, Sir cheer you up this Lady,
While I appease the rest. A word with you Sir.

Amp. I will not be appeased.

Dry. My love! my Elynor!

Bump. So, cheer her up Sir Humfry. To her again Sir Humfry; your Son and
mine in Law has told me all your story, and reconciled your Brother Brookall to
you before your interview. I know all, the full point and the whole substance;
the flat and plain of the business; and now I love these things again. How
now Sir Amphilus Drowned in Melancholy?


Amp. No: But and I were at the Duckingpond, I know what I know. But when I
drown my self, I Will give you leave to hang me.


Ali. Your pardon, and your blessing, I beseech you.

Ver. Hence. Exit Valentine.

Broo. Was this thy Journey into France my Boy?
High Providence has made it good. But tell me,
Was Love your chief Instructor to this Marriage?

Fran. Indeed it was equal in her and me.

Ali. Pray Sir your blessing.

Ver. Away.

Broo. Turn this way for a blessing then my Daughter,

Bump. Shall I tell you Neighbor? Law has no relief for you; And Conscience
and you have a long time been strangers. Could you be friends and embrace
Conscience now, all would be well. And there is the substance. Is it plain?


Ver. Conscience! do you know where she is?

Enter Val. Wat. Magdalen, Jane. Val. Heeres one has brought her in his true
Conversion.

Wat. Sir, If you can forgive, and can obey you --
I now can better kneel, then speak He weeps

Val. Do you note those tears, Sir? Had you lost your Daughter,
My Father had in this made you amends,
In finding you a Son. His Art converted him.

Ver. Sure, all is but Apparition, or a dream.

Bump. Ha! Think you so? It Is your own flesh and blood: And by your leave and
liking, may prove as honest a Man, as his Father. Is not this plain now?
Forgive and bless e*m all over, and so Kisse'em too. They are your Children.


Mag. O my dear Bump! Art thou there? Thou may kiss, and forgive me all
over too, for any harm, or dishonesty; though the place be as they say-at a
word, Bump. Thou may believe me, I came but to learn Carriage of the Body,
nor to carry no bodies body, but my own body, Bump. No truly, truly Bump. o
-- o -- that ever I did that.


Bump. Peace, peace: All Is well. At least I know your Disease.

Mag. Think me not drunk, good Bump, a little fashion-sick, or so.

Amp. Fashion-sick! a fine civil word. To be drunk, is fashion-sick.

Ver. I am awaked out of the Lethargy
Of Avarice: Blessed may our Friendship be.

Dry. I will not sleep, before the holy Priest
Has done the Office. Blessing on my Girl.

Val, Thou have made me young again: the best
Occurrents in this Project have been thine.
Thy Accidents exceeded my design.

Val. They do not yet cease here: For see, the strife
Betwixt these long continued Adversaries
Perfectly reconciled; and both have given
The young and hopeful married pair their Blessings.

Amp. To which I have given my Consent most freely.
For it was Nolens volens as they say.

Val. They are beholden to you. Mr. Vermin
Restores unto the Son the Fathers Land,
For Dowry with his Daughter: And is taken
So with the good you wrought upon his Son,
The Convertite here; that if he stand firm
Till' the determination of your Mortgage,
Heel cancel it, and send it Gratis to you.

Wat. That Is sure enough. But Sir, the other business.

Dry. What Is that?

Val. The most to be admired of all;
He loves my Sister here; and has done long:
But, now, that he perceaves her worth (being yours)
And, since you promised him your Daughter too,
He makes it his fair suit.

Dry. I Will talk with his Father.
And Wat stand you but firm, and live reformed,
Winning my Daughters love, you shall have mine.

Phil. That Fortune is not blind, that showed me way
To Father, Friends, and Husband in one day.

Dry. This binds us all into a Brotherhood.

Bro. And with a Brothers Love I now salute you.

Dry. So may we with a general embrace,
Create the Heart of Friendship, not the Face.
Come Gentlemen, your Ordinary stays,
Twill prove good fare (I hope) though no rich Feast;
And acceptable to each welcome Guest.

Epilogue.
NO way ambitious yet of vulgar praise,
The writer of these Scenes desires to know,
By your fair leave, though he assume no Bays,
Whether he pulled fair for a leaf or no*
If yes, then let your hands assistant be,
Tincourage him to climb Apollo's tree.
FJNJS.

