A GOLDEN-KEY TO OPEN Hidden Treasures, OR Several great Points, that refer to
the Saints present blessedness, and their future happiness, with the resolution
of several important questions.

Here you have also The Active and Passive Obedience of Christ vindicated and
improved, against men of corrupt minds, etc. Who boldly, in Pulpit and Press,
contend against those glorious Truths of the Gospel.

You have farther Eleven serious singular Pleas, that all sincere Christians
may safely and groundedly make, to those ten Scriptures in the Old and New
Testament, that speak of the general Judgment, and of that particular Judgment,
that must certainly pass upon them all immediately after death,

The Godhead and Manhood of Christ, is here largely proved, and improved
against all Gainsayers, by what names and titles soever they are distinguished
and known among us. Several things concerning Hell, and hellish torments,
opened, cleared and improved against all Atheists, and all others that boldly
assert, that there is no Hell, but what is in us. Some other points of
importance are here cleared and opened, which other Authors (so far as the
Author has read) have passed over them in great silence, all tending to the
confirmation of the strong, and support, peace, comfort, settlement and
satisfaction of poor, weak, doubting, trembling, staggering Christians.

By Tho. Brooks late Preacher of the Gospel, at Margarets-New-Fish-street.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's-Arms in the Poultrey; and at
the Ship and Anchor, at the Bridg-foot, on Southwark side, 1675.

To his much Honored, and Worthily esteemed Friend, Sir NATHANIEL HERNE, Knight.
Sheriff of London, and Governor of the East India Company.
Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied upon you and yours. SIR,
MUch might be said (were it necessary) for the Dedication of Books unto
persons of worth, interest, service and honor; this having been the constant
practice of the best and wisest of men, in all the Ages of the world: And
therefore, I need not make any farther Apology, for my present practice.

What is written is permanent, litera scripta manet, and spreads it self
farther by far, for time, place and persons, than the voice can reach.
Augustine, writing to Volusian, Aug Epist. 1. ad V^^^s.
says, that which is written, is always at hand to be read, when the reader is
at leisure. There are those that think (and as they conceive from Scripture
grounds too) that the glory of the Saints in heaven, receives additions and
increases daily, as their holy walk, and faithful service, when here on earth;
does after they are gone, bring forth fruit, to the praise of God, amongst
those that are left behind them: If this be so, what greater encouragement can
there be, to write, print, preach, and to walk holily in this world?

I must also confess, that, that general acceptance that my former labors
have found, both in the Nation, and It was a saying of (...), concerning his
first portraicture: I^ (...) liked, I will ^raw (...) bei^e (...) this.
in foreign parts; and that singular blessing, that has attended them from on
high, has been none of the least encouragements to me, once more to cast in my
Mite into the common Treasury. Besides I am not unsensible of your candid
esteem of some form endeavors of mine in this kind; neither do I know any
way, wherein I am more capacitated to serve the glory of God, the interest of
Christ, the public good, reproached truths, and the interest of the Churches
in my Generation, than this, as my case and condition, is circumstanced: And I
am very well satisfied, that there is nothing in this Treatise, but what tends
to the advantage, comfort, support, settlement, and encouragement of those,
whose concernment lies in peace and truth, in holiness and righteousness,
throughout the Nations.

Sir, The points here insisted on, are of the greatest use, worth, weight,
necessity, excellency, and utility imaginable; they are such, wherein our
present blessedness, and our future happiness; yea, wherein our very all, both
as to this, and that other world, is wrapped up. It will be D^u^. 30. 15, 19.
cap. 32. 47.
your life, honor and happiness to read them, digest them, experience them,
and to exemplify them in a suitable conversation; which that you may, let your
immortal soul lie always open to the warm, powerful and hourly influences 2
Cor. 5. 9. (...) We ambitiously labor we count it our highest honor and glory
to ^^ accepted of God.
of heaven.

Let it be the top of your ambition, and the height of all your designs, to
glorify God, to secure your interest in Christ, to seve your Generation, to
provide for Eternity, to walk with God, to be tender of all that have Aliquid
Christi, any thing of Christ, shining in them, and so to steer your course in
this world, as that you may give Mat. 25. 21.
up your account at last with joy: All other ambition is base and low. Ambition
(says one) is a gilded misery, B^rnard. Cardinal Burbon, would not lose his
part in Paris, for his part in Paradise: Act. and mon. Fol. 899.
a secret poison, a hidden plague, the Engineer of deceit, the mother of
hypocrisy, the parent of envy, the original of vices, the moth of holiness,
the blinder of hearts, turning medicines into maladies, and remedies into
diseases. In the enthronization of the Pope, before he is set in his chair, and
puts on his triple Crown, a piece of tow, or wad of straw is set on fire before
him, and one appointed to say, sic transit gloria mundi, the glory of this Act
25. 23.
world is but a blaze. St. Luke calls Agrippa's pomp (...), a fantasy or vain
show; and indeed, all worldly pomp and state is but a fantasy, or vain show.
St. Matthew calls all the world's glory, (...), Mat. 4. 8.
an opinion: and St. Paul calls it, (...), a Mathematical 1 Cor. 7. 31.
figure; which is a mere notion, and nothing in substance: The word here used,
intimates that there is nothing of any firmness, or solid consistency in the
creature; it is but a surface, outside, empty thing: all the beauty of it, is
but skin-deep. Mollerus, upon that Psalm. The Roman^ built Virtue's and honors
Temples close together, to show, that the way to true honor, was by Virtue,
Aug.
73. 20. concludes, that men's earthly dignities are but as idle dreams; their
splendid braveries, but lucid fantasies. High seats are never but uneasy, and
Crowns are always stuffed with Thorns; which made one say of his Crown, Oh
Crown, more noble than happy: shall the spirit of God, the grace of God, the
power of God, the presence of God, arm you against all other sins, evils,
snares, and temptations, as you are by a good hand of heaven, armed against
worldly ambition, and worldly glory:

Sir, you know he was a Saul that said, honor me before 1 Samuel 15, 30. 2 King.
10 16.
the people; and he was a Jehu that said, come, see my zeal for the Lord of
hosts: and they were three Irish Kings, that rebelled in Henry the second's
days; being derided for their rude habits and fashions: and they were some of
the worst of Cardinals, that, when they were like to die, would give great
sums of money for a Cardinal's E^asmus writes that he knew some such Cardinals.
hat, that they might be so styled upon their tombs: And they were the Romans,
and other barbarous nations, that were most ambitions of worldly honor and
glory: And he was a Julius Caesar, whose excessive desire of honor, made him
to be mortally hated by the Senators, and all others. God grants no man a
pattent for honor, durante vita, but durante bene-placito (as the Lawyers
speak) during his life, but during his own good pleasure. All worldly honor
and glory is subject to mutability: Honors, Riches and Pleasures, are the
three Deities, that in these days, a world of men adore, and to whom they
sacrifice, morning and evening, their best thoughts; and these, for their
unparalled vanity, may well be called the vanity of vanities: Worldly honors
Ec^l^s. 1. 2.
are but a more conceit, a shadow, a vapor, a feather in the cap, without
substance or subsistence, and yet the most powerful charm of Satan, whereby he
Iulls men to sleep, in the Paradise of fools; to cast them, when they are
awake, into the bottomless pit of eternal woe: For had not Satan hold them to
be the strongest of all his temptations, he had not reserved them for his last
battery, against Mat. 4. 8, 9.
the constancy of our blessed Savior, as he did: And although this roaring
Cannon of his could not prevail against Christ, the Rock of Ages; yet, how many
cap. 16. 18.
thousands in these days, are captivated and deluded, by the glorious
glistering of worldly honors: Men of great honor and worldly glory, stand but
in slippery places: Adonibezek, a mighty Prince, was made fellow-commonner
Judge. 1. 7. Dan. 4. 28.
with the Dogs: And Nebuchadnezzar, a mighty Conqueror, was turned a grazing
among the Oxen: and Herod was reduced from a conceited God, to the most Act.
12. 23.
loathsome of men, a living carrion, arrested by the vilest creatures, upon the
suit of his affronted Creator; the lice did fully confute his Auditory, and
triumph over his Throne. A great Haman is feasted with the King one Hest. 7. 10.
day, and made a feast for Crows the next, In all the Isa. 23. 9.
Ages of the world, God has taken a delight to stain the pride of all the
glory of this lower world: see it in a few instances.

Valerian, The Roman Emperor, fell from being an Sapor, King of Persia, as
often as he took horse.

Bibulus the Consul, riding in his triumphant Chariot; by the fall of a
Tyle-stone from a house, was

Aurelianus, The Roman Emperor, brought Tetricus Zenobia of Palmerina in
Triumph to Rome in Golden chains.

Sejanus, That podigious favorite, on the same day Seneca, speaking of him,
says, that he who, in the morning, was swollen with Titles, ^ere night there
remained not so much as a mammock of flesh for the hang man to fasten his hook
in.

Belisarius, a most famous General under Justinian the Sea Decad. page 649, 650.
Empress Theodora; and at the Temple of St. Sophy, forced to beg: Date panem
Belisario, etc. Give a crust to old blind Belisarius, whom virtue advanced, but
envy has brought into this great misery.

Henry the fourth, Emperor, in sixty two Battles, for Spire, of his own
building, which the Bishop of that place denied him: whereupon, he brake forth
into that speech of Job; Miseremini Job 19. 21.
mei amici, quia manus dei tetigit me: have pity upon me, oh my friends, for
the hand of God has touched me, he died of grief and want.

Bajazet, a proud Emperor of the Turks, whom Tamberlain a Tartarian took
prisoner, and bound him in chains of Gold, and used him for a footstool, when
he took horse; when he was at table, he made him gather crumbs and scraps under
his table, and eat them for his food.

Dyonisus King of Sicily, was such a cruel Tyrant, that Corinth, whee he lived
a base and contemptible life: At last he became a Schoolmaster; so that, when
he could not tyrannize any longer over men, he might over boys.

Pythias was pined to death for want of bread, who, 9. Turk. Hist^ry, page 220.
once was able to entertain and maintain Xerxes his mighty army.

Great Pompey had not so much as room to be buried William the Conqueour's
Corpse lay three days unburied, his interment being hindered by one that claimed
the ground to be his.

Caesar having bathed his sword in the blood of the Senate, Cassius and Brutus.

King Guillimer, a potent King of the Vandals, was 12. Pr^^^ptus reports this
of him.
brought so low, as to enteat his friend to send him a sponge, a loaf of bread,
and a harp; a sponge to dry up his tears, a loaf of bread to maintain bis life,
and a harp to solace himself in his misery.

A Duke of Exeter, who, though he had married Edward 13. Philip^le C^mines saw
him thus beg.
the fourths sister, yet was seen begging bare foot in the Low Countries.

The Emperor Nero promoted Tygelenus to the greatest 14. See Tac^^us in Otho's
Life.
dignities of the Roman Empire, but it was because he had been the private
Agent to his base and lascivious delights, for which he was justly deprived of
his honors and life, by Otho the Emperor.

By all these instances (and many more that might be produced) it is most
evident; that worldly glory is but a breath, a vapor, a ^roth, a phant^sm, a
^^adow, a reflection, an apparition, a very nothing: Like the Incub^s or night
mare in a dream, you imagine it a substance a weight; you grasp at it, and
awake, and it is nothing. Pleasue and wealth will abide a sense or two; the one
a touch or taste, the other a sight of the eyes; but this of glory can neither
be felt, seen or understood. The Philosophers are at strife among themselves,
where to fix it in any being or existence, whether in Honorante, or in
Honorato, the giver or the taker; the inconstancy and slipperiness of it, is
discernable in the instances last cited. It has raised some, but has ruined
more; and those (commonly) whom it has most raised, it has most ruined: Sir,
if there be any thing glorious in the world, it is a mind that divinely contemns
that glory; and such a mind I judge and hope God has given you. I have hinted
a little at the vanity of worldly glory, because, happily this Treatise,
passing up and down the world, may fall into the hands of such as may be
troubled with that Itch; and if so, who can tell but that that little that I
have said, may prove a sovereign salve to cure that Egyptian Botch, and if so,
I have my end.

Sir, Let nothing lie so near your heart in all the world, as these eight
things: 1. Your sins, to humble you, and abase you at the foot of God: 2. Free,
and rich, and sovereign grace, to soften and m^lt you down Col. 1. 10, 11, 12,
13. Phil. 4. 12, 13, 14. ^al. 2. 20. 1 Cor. 15. 10. 2 Cor. 12. 10. Psalm. 119.
105. Amos 6. 3, 4, 5, 6. ^^^. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
into the will of God: 3. The Lord Jesus Christ, to assist, help, strengthen,
and influence you to all the duties and services, that are incumbent upon you:
4. The blessed Scriptues, to guide you, and lead you, and o be a lamp unto you
feet, and a light unto your paths: 5. The afflictions of Joseph, to draw out
your charity, mercy, pity, sympathy, and campassion, to men in misery: 6. The
glory and happiness of another world, to arm you, and steel you against all the
sins, snares, and temptations; that your high places, offices, and
circumstances may lie you open to: 7. The grand points in this Treatise, which,
being laid upon your heart by the warm hand of the spirit, are able to make you
wise unto salvation; and to secure your precious and immortal soul, against
those pernicious and most dangerous (may I not say damnable) errors and
opinions, 2 Pet. 2. 1.
that are preached, printed, and cried up in the vain world: 8. The interest of
Christ and his people, which will be your honor whilst you live, your joy and
comfort, when you come to die, and your Crown of 1 Thessalonians. 1. 19. 20.
rejoicing in the great day of our Lord.

Sir, I shall not so far disgust you, as to tell the world how many several
score pounds of your money has passed through my hands, toward the relief,
refreshment, support and preservation of such; who, for their piety, and
extreme poverty and necessity, were proper objects of your charity; but shall
take this opportunity to tell you (and all others, into whose hands this
Treatise may fall) that of all the duties of Religion, there are none, 1. More
commanded, than this of charity, pity, compassion Prove. 3. 9, 10. Eccles. 11.
1, 2. Gal. 6. 10. 2 Cor. 8. 3, 4, 5. cap. 9. 1, 2. Isa. 58. 7. to the 13.
ponder upon it. Mat. 25. 34, to verse. 41.
and mercy to men in misery, especially to those of the household of faith: 2.
There is no one duty more highly commended and extolled, than this: 3. There is
no one duty, that has more choice and precious promises annexed to it than
this: 4. There is no one duty, that has greater rewards attending it, than
this: Evagrius a rich man, being importuned by Sinesius a Bishop, to give
something to charitable uses, he yielded at last, to give three hundred pounds;
but first took bond of the Bishop, that it should be repayed him, in another
world, (according to the promise of our Savior, Mat. 19. 29.
with a hundredfold advantage:) Before he had been one day dead, he is said to
have appeared to the Bishop, delivering in the bond cancelled, as thereby
acknowledging that what was promised, was made good. It is certain, that one
days being in heaven, will make a sufficient recompense, for whatsoever a man
has given on earth.

Neither shall I acquaint the world with those particular favors and respects,
which you have showed to my self; but treasure them up in an awakened breast,
and be your remembrancer at the throne of grace. Only, I must let the world
know, that I owe you more than an Epistle; and if you please to accept of this
mite in part of payment, and improve it for your souls advantage, you will put
a farther obligation upon me, to study, how I may farther serve the interest of
your immortal soul.

Let the luster of your prudence, wisdom, charity, fidelity, generosity, and
humility of spirit, shine gloriously, through all your places, offices,
abilities, riches, employments and enjoyments; for this is the height of all
true excellency: and that it may be so, remember, for ever, that the eyes of
God, of Christ, of Angels, of Jer. 16. 17. Job 34 21. Prove. 5. 21. Jer. 32. 19.
Heb. 4. 13. It Is a saying of the Schoolmen, quic quid est in deo est in deo
est ipse deus.
Devils, of Sinners, of Saints, of Good, of Bad, are always fixed upon you; God
is all ear to hear, all hand to punish, all power to protect, all wisdom to
direct, all goodness to relieve, all grace to pardon, and he is Totus Oculus,
all eye to observe the thoughts, hearts, words, ways and walkings of the
children of men. As the eyes of a well drawn picture are fastened on us, which
way soever we turn; so are the eyes of the Lord. Zeno a wise Heathen,
affirms, that God behold even the very thoughts of men: Athenodorus, another
Heathen, says, that all men ought to be careful of the actions of their life,
because God was every where, and behold all that was done. Of all men on earth,
Magistrates and Ministers had need pray with David, Teach us thy ^sal. 27. 1.
way, O Lord, and lead us in a plain path, because of our enemies; or nearer
the Hebrew, because of our observers: in all the Ages of the world, there have
been Saul's and Doegs, who have looked upon God's David's with an evil Jer 20. 10.
eye, and watched for their halting: there are multitudes that will be still
eyeing and prying into the practices, offices, carriages and conversations of
Magistrates and Ministers, the more it concerns them to watch, pray, act and
walk like so many earthly Angels, in the midst of a crooked, perverse and
froward Generation. Phil. 2. 15.


Wise and prudent Governors are an unspeakable mercy to a Kingdom or
Commonwealth; which Jethro well understood, when he gave Moses that good
counsel: To make choice out of the people, of grave and able men, such as
feared God, men of trath hating covetousness; Ex^d. 18. 21, 22. (...) tirum in
^^a, is a maximas true as old.
and to make them rulers over thousands, and rulers over hundreds, over
fifties, and over tens: But in the Nations round, how rare is it to find
Magistrates qualified, suitable to Jethro's counsel. Alphonsus, King of Spain,
coming very young to the Crown; some advised, that seven Counselors might be
joined to govern with him; who should be men fearing God, lovers lovers of
Justice, free from filthy lusts, and such as would not take bribes: To which,
Alphonsus replied; if you can find seven such men, nay, bring me but one so
qualified, and I will not only admit him to govern with me, but shall willingly
resign the Kingdom it self to him. Wicked policies are ever destructive to
their Authors; as you may see in Pharaoh, Ex^d. 1. 10, 22. 2 Samuel 16. cap. 23.
23. Est. 7. 10.
in Achitophel, in Haman, etc. As long as the Roman Civil Magistrates, Senators
and Commanders of Armies, were chosen into places of honor and trust, for
their noble descent, their prudence and valor; their State did flourish, and
did enlarge its Dominions, See Livim De^^^^.
more in one Century of years, than it did in three, after these places of
honor came to be venal, and purchased by concession: For then men of no parts,
were for money, promoted to highest dignities: whereupon civil contentions were
fomented, factions increased, and continual bloody intestine Wars maintained;
by which, the ancient Liberties of that State, were suppressed; and the last
Government of it, changed into an Imperial Monarchy. As long as the chief
officers of the Crown of France, and the places of Judicature of the Realm,
were given by Charles the fifth, surnamed the wise, to men of Learning, of
Wisdom, and Valor, in recompense of their Loyalty, virtue and merits, that
Kingdom did flourish, with peace, honor and prosperity; and the Courts of
Parliaments See the History of France.
of France, had the honor, for their Justice and equity, to be the Arbitrators
and Umpires of all the differences that happened in those days, between the
greatest Princes of Christendom: But when these places of honor and trust were
made venal, in the reigns of Francis the second, Charles the ninth, and Henry
the third, and sold for ready money to such as gave most for them; then was
Justice and Equity banished, and that flourishing Kingdom reduced to the brim
of ruin and desolation, by variety of factions, and a bloody Civil War: The
wicked Counsel given by the Cardinal De Lorraign, and the Duke of Guise his
brother, to Charles the ninth, King of See the Massa^^ of Par^^ ^n the
In^e^tory of France.
France, to allure all the Protestants to Paris, under color of the Marriage
of Henry de Bourbon, with Margaret de Valois, the King's sister, to have them
all as in a trap, for to cut their throats in their beds, as they did for the
greatest part; proved fatal to the King, to the Cardinal, and the Duke: For the
King, by the just judgment of God, died shortly after by an Issue of blood,
which came out of his mouth, ears and nostrils, and could never be stopped; and
the Cardinal and the Duke were both slain by the Commandment of Henry the
third, in the Castle of Blois. The barbarous policy of Philip the second, See
the (...)
King of Spain, to banish two or three hundred thousand Mores, with their wives
and children, under color of Religion, on purpose to confiscate all their
Land, and to appropriate the same to his demesns, was fatal to him, and to all
the Spanish Nation; for, by the just judgment of God, he was eaten up of lice,
and the Spanish Nation never thrived since, etc. Were it not for exceeding the
bounds of an Epistle, I might show, in all the Ages of the world, how
destructive the wicked policies of Rulers and Governors, have been to
themselves, and the States and Nations under them, etc. But from such policies,
God has, and I hope, will for ever deliver your soul. Sir, the best policy in
the world, is to know God savingly, to serve him sincerely, to do the work of
your Generation thoroughly, and to secure your future happiness and blessedness
effectually, etc.

Sir, I do not offer you that which cost me nothing, or little, God best knows
the pains, the prayers, and the Mal 1. 13, 14.
s^^dy, that the midwifing of this Treatise into the world has cost me; in the
midst of trials, troubles, temptations, afflictions, and my frequent labors in
the Ministry. The truths that I offer for your serious consideration, in this
Treatise, are not such as I have formerly preached, in Commonly, men preach
those points first, that afterward they print: but not knowing how long the
door of liberty may be open: I have sent this Treatise into the world. Ephesians. 5.
15, 16. ^ol s^ 4. 5. Eccl ^ 9. 10.
one place or another, at one time or another; but such as at several times,
the Lord has brought to hand: and I hope, in order to the service, and saving
of many, many souls. And should you redeem time from your many and weighty
occasions, and live to read it as often over, as there be leaves in it; I am
apt to think, you would never repent of your pains, when you come to die, and
make up your account with God. Sir, I must, and shall say (because I love and
honor you, and would have you happy to Eternity) that it is your greatest
wisdom, and should be your greatest care, to redeem time from your worldly
business, to acquaint your self more and more with the great and main points of
Religion, to serve your God, to be useful in your day, and to make sure and
safe work for your soul to escape hell, and to get heaven. Sir Thomas More, one
of the great wits of that day, would commonly say, there is a Devil called
negotium, business, that carries more souls to hell, than all the devils in
hell beside. Many men have so many Irons in the fire, and ^uk. 10. 40, 41, 42.
When one pre^ented Antipater King of Macedo ^ia, which a book treating of
happiness; his answer was on Scholazo, I am not at leisure. The Duke of Alva
had so much to do on earth, that he had ^o time to look up to heaven.
are cumbred about so many things, that upon the matter, they wholly neglect
the one thing necessary, though I hope better things of you. The stars which
have the least circuit, are nearest the pole: and men that are least perplexed
with a crowd of worldly business, are commonly nearest to God. Sir, as you love
God, as you love your soul, as you love Eternity, as you would be found at
Christ's right hand at last, and as you would meet me with joy in the great day
of the Lord, make much conscience of redeeming time daily from your secular
affairs, to be with God in your closet, in your family, to read the Scriptures,
to study the Scriptures, and such men's writings that are sound in the faith,
and that treat of the great things of the Gospel. It Is dangerous crying cras,
cras, to morrow, to morrow; Mannah must be gathered in the morning, the orient
Pearl is generated by the morningdew: There is nothing puts a more serious
frame into a man's spirit, than to know the worth and preciousness of time.
Time (says one) were a good commodity in hell, Bernard. Blessed Ho^p, was
spare of diet, sparer of words, and sparest of time. And Bradford counted that
hour lost, where in he did not some good, by his tongue, pen or purse. A
Heathen could say, he lived no day without a line: that is, he did something
remarkable every day. Ma^k Cato was wont to say, that there were three things
which he abhored: 1. To commit secrets to a woman: 2. To go by water, when he
might go by land: 3. To spend one day idle. Plutar^h.
and the traffic of it most gainful; where, for one day, a man would give ten
thousand worlds, if he had them. One called his friends thieves, because they
stole time from him; and certainly, there are no worse thieves, than those that
rob us of our praying seasons, our hearing seasons, our mourning seasons, etc.
There was an eminent Minister, who would often say, that he could eat the flesh
off his arm, in indignation against himself for his lost hours.

It was good counsel, that an ancient Christian, that is now triumphing in
glory, gave to another, who is still alive, be either like Christ or Mary: The
first was always doing good, the latter was still a receiving good: this is the
way to be strong in grace, and to be soon ripe for glory. Certainly, time is
infinitely precious, in regard of what depends upon it; What more necessary
than repentance? yet that depends upon time, Rev. 2. 21. I gave her space to
repent of her fornications: What more desirable than the favor of God? This
depends upon time, and is therefore called the acceptable time, Isa. 49. 8.
What more excellent than salvation? this likewise, depends upon time, 2 Cor. 6.
4. Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. Pythagoras says,
that time is anima coeli, the soul of heaven: But to draw to a close, what can
there be of more worth, and weight, and moment, than Eternity? it is the Heaven
of Heaven, and the very Hell of Hell; without which, neither would Heaven be so
desirable, nor Hell so formidable. Now this depends upon time, Time is the
Prologue to Eternity, the great weight of Eternity hangs upon the small wire of
Time: Whether our time here, be longer or shorter, upon the spending of this
depends, either the bliss or the bane of body and soul to all Eternity; This is
our seed-time, Eternity is the harvest; whatsoever seed we sow, whether of sin
or grace, it comes up in Eternity; whatsoever a man sows, Gal. 6. 7, 8. 2.
Cor. 9. 6.
the same shall he reap. This is our market time, in which, if we be wise
Merchants, we may make a happy exchange; of earth, for heaven; of a Valley of
tears, for a Paradise of delights. This is our working time, I must work the
works of him that sent me, the night comes, Joh. 9. 4.
when no man can work; according as the work is we do now, such will be our
wages in Eternity: Though time it self lasts ^ot; yet whatsoever is
everlasting, depends upon it; and therefore, should be carefully improved to
the best advantage for our souls, and for the making sure of such things as
will go with us beyond the grave.

Shall your Lady live to be an honor to God, to be wise 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5. 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. Ephesians. 6. 4. Prove. 31. 1, 2, 3, Gal. 4. 19. 1 Timothy 1. 5, 6. Isa.
44. 3, 4. cap. 59. 21. Psalm. 112. 1, 2. Ephesians. 1. 3.
for Eternity, to be a pattern of piety, humiliy, modesty, etc. to others, to
be a joyful mother of many children, and to bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord; Shall you both live to see Christ formed up in your
Offspring, and to see their souls flourish in grace and holiness, and God
bestowing himself, as a portion, upon them; Shall you all round be blessed with
all spiriual blessings, in Heavenly places, in Christ; and shall you all round,
be crowned with the highest glory, happiness and blessedness in the world to
come; Shall you all live in the sense of divine love, and di^ in the sense of
divine favor. Now, to the everlasting arms of divine protection, and to the
constant influences of free, rich Gal. 5. 22, 23.
and sovereign Grace and Mercy, he commends you all; who is,

Sir, Your much obliged friend, and soul's servant, Tho. Brooks.

TO THE READER,
Christian Reader,
SOme preachers in our days, are like Heraclitus, who was called the dark
Doctor; because he affected dark Heraclitus was a Philosopher of Ephesus, he
was surnamed, (...), Obseurus, because he affected dark speeches. Joh 38. 2.
speeches; so they affect sublime noions, obscure expressions, uncouth phrases;
making plain truths difficult, and easy truths hard, etc. They darken counsel
by words without knowledge: Men of abstracted conceits, and wise speculations,
are but wise fools; like the Lark that soareth up on high, peering and peering,
but at last falls into the net of the Fowler: Such persons commonly, are as
censorious as they are curious; and do Christ and his Church but very, very
little service in this world.

The Heathenish Priests had their Mythologies, and strange canting expressions,
of their imaginary unaccessable Deities, to amaze and amuze their blind
superstitious followers; and thereby to hold up their Popish and apish
Idolatries, in greater Veneration, the prudent reader can tell how to make
application.

If thou affectest high strains of wit, or larded, pompous, and high-flown
expressions, or eloquent trappings, or fine new notions, or such things that
thou may rather wonder at, than understand. I shall not encourage thee to
the perusal of this Treatise. But,

First, If thou would be furnished with sovereign Antidotes, 1. 2 Pet. 3.
16. 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 Ep^st. John 7, 8. 9, 10. 11.
against the most dangerous errors, that are rampant in these days, then
seriously peruse this Treatise.

Secondly, if thou would be established, strengthened, settled, and confirmed
in the grand points of the Gospel; then 2. 1 Pet. 5. 10.
seriously peruse this Treatise. But,

3. Thirdly, If thou would know what that faith is 3. John 1. 12. cap. 3.
16. John 5. 24.
that gives thee an interest in Christ, and in all that fundamental good that
comes by Christ; then seriously peruse this Treatise. But,

Fourthly, If thou would have thy judgment rightly informed 4. 1 Cor. 2. 6,
7. Psalm. 119. 18.
in some great truths, about which, several men of note have been mistaken;
then seriously peruse this Treatise. But,

Fifthly, If thou would know what safe and excellent 5. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb.
9. 27.
Pleas, to make to those ten Scriptures, that refer to the general Judgment,
and to thy particular day of Judgment, then seriously peruse this Treatise.
But,

Sixthly, If thou would have thy heart brought and kept 6. Psalm. 34. 18.
Isa. 57. 15. 2 Chronicles. 34. 27.
in an humble, broken, bleeding, melting, tender frame; then seriously peruse
this Treatise. But,

Seventhly, If thou would always come to the Lord's table, with such a frame
of spirit, as Christ may take a delight to meet thee, to own thee, to bless
thee, to bid thee welcome, Mat. 26. ^6, 27, 28 Luke 22. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11. 23.
to the 30.
and to seal up his love, and thy pardon to thee; then seriously peruse this
Treatise, especially that part of it, where the dreadful and amazing sufferings
of our Lord Jesus Christ, both in body and soul, are at large set forth. But,

Eighthly, If thou would have a clear sight of the length, 8. Ephesians. 3. 18.
Isal. 146. 8.
and breadth, and depth, and height of the love of Christ; then seriously
peruse this Treatise. But,

Ninthly, If thou would have thy love to Christ tried, 9. Cant. 1. 7. cap.
8. 5, 6, 7.
raised, acted, inflamed, discovered and augmented, etc. then seriously peruse
this Treatise. But,

Tenthly, If thou art a strong man in Christ Jesus, and 10. 2 Timothy 2. 1. H^b.
5. 14. 1 ^o^. 2. 6, 7. 1 John 2. 14.
would have thy head and heart exercised in the great things of God, and in
the deep things of God, and in the mysterious things of God, then seriously
peruse this Treatise. But,

Eleventhly, If thou art but a weak Christian, a babe, a 11. 1. Cor. 3. 1. Heb.
5. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 2. 1 John 2. 1, 12, 13.
little child, a shrub, a dwarf, in grace, holiness and communion with God; and
in thy spiritual seize, enjoyments and experiences; then seriously peruse
this Treatise, especially the first part of it. But,

Twelfthly, If thou would know whether thou art an indulger 12. Job 20. 11,
12, 13 14. Mica 6. 6, 7. Romans 13. ult. James 4. 3.
of sin, and if thou would be stocked with singular remedies against thy
special sins; then seriously peruse the former part of this Treatise. But,

Thirteenthly, If thou would be rooted, grounded, 13. 1 Pet. 5. 10. Isa. 53.
Heb. 10. 10, 12, 14 Gal. 4. 4, 5. Romans 8. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
strengthened and settled, in those two grand points of the Gospel, viz. The
active and passive obedience of Christ; and be daily refreshed with those
pleasant streams, with those waters of life, that flow from thence; then
seriously peruse this Treatise. But,

Fourteenthly, If thou would be thoroughly acquainted 14. Isa. 53. cap. 63.
2. 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23, 24. John 10. 11, 15. 17, 16.
with the sufferings of Christ, in his body and soul, with their greatness and
grievousness, etc. And if thou would understand the mighty advantages we
have by his sufferings; then seriously peruse this Treatise. But,

Fifteenthly, If thou would be able, strongly to prove (against the
Socinians, and the high Atheists of the day, and such as make so great a noise
about a light within them) that there is a Hell, a place of torment, provided
and prepared Mat. 25. 41. Psalm. 9 17. Prove. 5. 5.
for all wicked and ungodly persons; then seriously peruse this Treatise. But,

Sixteenthly, If thou would, in a Scripture-glass, see the torments of hell,
and know how to avoid them, and what divine improvements to make of them, and
be resolved in several questions concerning hell and hellish torments; then
seriously peruse this Treatise. But,

Seventeenthly, If thou would be able, strenuously to 17. 1 John 1. 2, 14. 1 Timothy 2. 5.
maintain and defend Christ's Eternal Deity, and Manhood against all corrupt
Teachers and Gainsayers; then seriously peruse this Treatise. But,

Eighteenthly, If thou would be rooted and grounded in 18. Jer. 23. 6. Isa.
45. 24. cap. 61. 10. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
that great Doctrine of the Imputed Righteousness of Christ; and be warmed,
refreshed, cheared, comforted, and delighted, with those choice and singular
consolations, that flow from thence; then seriously peruse this Treatise. But,

Nineteenthly, If thou would be set at liberty from many 19. Psalm. 42. 5,
11. Psalm. 55. 5. 2 Cor. 7. 5.
fears, and doubts, and disputes, that often arise in thy soul, about thy
internal and eternal estate; then seriously peruse this Treatise. But,

Twentiethly, If thou would have all grace to flourish 20. Psalm. 92. 12, 13,
14. Romans 15. 13. Act. 13. 36. 2 Cor. 12. 9, 10. Rev. 12. 1. 2 Cor. 2. 14.
and abound in thy soul, if thou would be eminently serviceable in thy
Generation, if thou would be ripe for sufferings, for death, for heaven, if
thou would be Temptationproof, if thou would be weaned from this world,
and triumph in Christ Jesus when the world triumphs over thee; then seriously
peruse this Treatise.

Reader, if thou would make any earnings of thy reading this Treatise, then
thou must, 1. Read, and believe what Act. 18. 8. cap. 24. 14. Psalm. 1. 2. Psalm.
119. 5, 18. Act. 17. 11. Psalm. 119. 9. John. 13. 17. Psalm. 119. 105, 106.
thou read: 2. Thou must read, and meditate on what thou read: 3. Thou
must read, and pray over what thou read: 4. Thou must read, and try what
thou read, by the touchstone of the word: 5. Thou must read, and apply what
thou read; that plaster will never heal, that is not applied, etc. 6. Thou
must read, and make conscience of living up to what thou read, and of living
out what thou read; this is the way to honor thy God, to gain profit by
this Treatise, to credit Religion, to stop foul mouths, to strengthen weak
hands, to better a bad head, to mend a bad heart, to rectify a disorderly
life, and to make sure work for thy soul, for heaven, for eternity.

Reader, In a fountain sealed, and treasures hid, there is little profit, or
comfort, no fountain to that which flows for common good, no treasures to those
that lie open for public service. If thou gettest any good by reading this
Treatise, give God alone the glory; and remember the Author, when thou art in
the Mount with God; his prayers for thee are, that thou may be a knowing
Christian, a sincere Christian, a growing Christian, a rooted Christian, a
resolute Christian, an untainted Christian, an exemplary Christian, an humble
Christian; and then he knows thou will be a saved Christian in the day of
Christ: so he rests, who is

Thy Cordial Friend, and Souls Servant. Tho. Brooks.

The Interest of Reason in Religion; together, with the Import and Usage of
Scripture Metaphors; and the Nature of the Union between Christ and Believers,
modestly discoursed. All occasioned by some late Writings; particularly, a Book
of Mr. Sherlock's, entitled, Knowledge of God; by Robert Ferguson.

Serious and Weighty QUESTIONS, CLEARLY And Satisfactorily Answered.
The first Question or Case is this.

1. Quest. WHat are the special Remedies, Means, or Helps against cherishing,
or keeping up of any special or peculiar sin, either in heart or life; against
the Lord, or against the Light and Conviction of a man's own Conscience.

Before I come to the Resolution of this Question, I shall promise a few things
that may clear my way.

1. First: When men's hearts are sincere with God; when they don't indulge,
cherrish, or keep up any known Trangression in their hearts, or lives against
the Lord. They may on very good grounds, plead an interest in God, in Christ,
and in the Covenant of Grace, though their Corruptions prevail against them,
and too frequently worst them, and lead them Captive, as is most evident in
these speci^l Scriptures, 2 Samuel 23. 5. Psalm. 65. 3. Romans 7. 23. 25. Isa. 6^.
16, 17, 19. Jer. 14. 7, 8, 9. Hos. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8.

But now when any man's heart does condemn him for dealing deceitfully and
guilefully with God, in this, or that, or the other particular; or for
connivings, or winking at any known Transgression that is kept up, either in
his heart, or life, against the Lord; and against the light of his own
Conscience, which he will not let go, nor in good earnest use the means,
whereby it should be subdued and mortified: It is inot to be expected that such
a person can come to any clearness, or satisfaction about their interest in
Christ, and the Covenant of Grace, and their right to the great things of that
other world; when a person will dally with sin, and will be playing with snares
and baits, and allow a secret liberty in his heart to sin, conniving at many
workings of it, and not setting upon Mortification with earnest endeavors;
though they are convinced, yet they are not persuaded to arise with all their
might, against the Lords Enemies, but do his work negligently, which is an
accursed thing; and for this, God ca^^s such a person into sore straits, and
lets him wander in the dark, without any sight, sense, or assurance of their
gracious estate or interest in Christ, etc. The Is^ac^^^es should perfectly
have rooted out the Canaanites, but because they did it but by halfs, and did
not engage all their power and strength against them, therefore God left them
to be as Thorns in their eyes, and as Goads in their sides. So when men have
taken Christ's Press-money, and are engaged to fight with all their might,
against those Rebels that war against him in their hearts, ways, and walkings;
and to pursue the Victory to the utmost, till their Spiritual Enemies lie dead
at their feet, and yet they do but trifle and make slender opposition against
their sins: This provokes God to stand afar off, and to hide his Reconciled
Face from them.

It Is true, when men are really in Christ, they ought not to question their
state in him; but yet a guilty Conscience will be clamorous, and full of
objections, and God will not speak peace unto it, till it be humbled at his
foot. God will make his dearest Children know that it is a bitter thing to be
bold with sin. Now before I lay down the Remedies, give me leave to show you
what it is to indulge sin, or when a man may be said to indulge or cherish, or
keep up any known Transgression in his Soul against the Lord; now for a clear
understanding of me in this particular, take me thus.

First: To indulge sin, or to cherrish it. It is to make Romans 13. ult. it is to
give the Breast to it, and to feed it, and nourish it, as fond Parents do feed
and humor the sick Child, the darling Child; it must have what it will, and do
what it will; it must not be crossed. Now when men ordinarily, habitually,
commonly, are studious and laborious to make provision for sin, then sin is
indulged by them. But

Secondly: When sin is commonly, habitually, sweet These. 2. 12. You read of
them that had pleasure in Unrighteousness, Isa. 66. 3. And their Soul
delights in their Abominations, Prove. 2. 14. who rejoice to do evil, etc.

Thirdly: When men commonly, habitually side with

Fourthly: When men ordinarily, habitually do yield does any Godly man indulge
any one sin in his Soul. Though sin lives in him, yet he does not live in sin.
Every man that has drink in him, is not in drink. A Child of God may slip into
a sin, as a Sheep may slip into the mire; but he does not, nor cannot wallow in
sin as the Swine does in the mire, nor yet keep on in a Road of sin, as Sinners
do, Psalm. 139. 24. See if there be any way of Wickedness in me. A course, a
Trade of sin is not consistent with the truth or state of grace, Job. 10. 7.
Thou know that I am not Wicked. He does not say, thou know that I am not
a Sinner, or thou know that I have not sinned: No! for the best of Saints
are Sinners, though the worst and weakest of Saints are not wicked. Every real
Christian, is a renewed Christian; and every renewed Christian takes his
denomination from his renovation, and not from the remainers of Corruptions in
him; and therefore such a one may well look God in the Face, and say, Lord,
thou know that I am not Wicked. Weaknesses are chargeable upon me, but
Wickednesses are not chargeable upon me. And certainly, that man gives a strong
demonstration of his own uprightness, who dares appeal to God himself that he
is not wicked.

That no Godly man does, or can indulge himself in any course, or way, or Trade
of sin, may be thus made evident.

First: He sins not with allowance; when he does evil, Romans 7. 15. For that
which I do, I allow not: A Christian is sometimes wherried and whirled away by
sin before he is a ware, or has time to consider of it. See Psalm. 119. 1. 3. 1 John 3. 9. Prove. 16. 12.

Secondly: A Godly man hates all known sin, Psalm I hate every false way. True
hatred is (...), against the whole kind. That contrariety to sin, which is in a
real Christian, springs from an inward gracious nature, or principle, and so is
to the whole species, or kind of sin, and is irreconcilable to any sin
whatsoever. As contrarieties of nature, are to the whole kind, as light is
contrary to darkness, and fire to all water: so this contrariety to all sin,
arising from the inward man, is universal to all sin. He who hates a Toad,
because it is a Toad, hates every Toad; and he who hates a Godly man, because
he is Godly, he hates every Godly man; and so he who hates sin, because it is
sin, he hates every sin, Romans 7. 15. What I hate, that do I.

Thirdly: Every Godly man would fain have his sins Isa. 2. 20 chap. 30. 22.
Hos. 14. 8. Romans 8. 24. Saul hated David, and sought his life; and Haman hated
Mord^cat, and sought his destruction; and Absalom hated Amnon, and killed him;
Julian the Apostate hated the Christians, and put many thousands of them to
death. The great thing that a Christian has in his eye, in all the duties he
performs, and in all the Ordinances that he attends, is the blood, and death,
and ruin of his sins.

Fourthly: Every Godly man groans under the burden Cor. 5. 4. For we that are
in this Tabernacle, do groan, being burdened. Never did any Porter groan more
to be delivered from his heavy burden, than a Christian groans to be delivered
from the burden of sin, the burden of affliction; the burden of temptation, the
burden of desertion, the burden of opposition, the burden of persecution, the
burden of scorn and contempt, is nothing to the burden of sin; ponder upon
that, Psalm. 38. 4. and Psalm. 40. 12. ver. and Romans 7. 24 ver.

Fifthly: Every Godly man combats and conflicts The flesh will be still a
lusting against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, Gal, 5. 17 Romans
7. 22, 23. ^ King. 14. 30. 31. Though sin and grace were not born together, and
though sin and grace shall never die together, yet whiles a Believer lives in
this world, they must live together; and whilst sin and grace do cohabit
together, they will still be opposing and conflicting one with another.

Sixthly: Every gracious heart is still a crying out against Deuteronomy. 22. 25, 26,
27. certainly such as cry out of their sins, and that would not for all the
world indulge themselves in a way of sin; such are guiltless before the Lord.
That which a Christian does not indulge himself in, that he does not do in
divine account. But

Seventhly: The fixed purposes and designs of a Godly man, is not to sin, Psalm.
17. 3. I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress; that is, I have laid
my design so, as not to sin. Though may have many particular failings, yet my
general purpose is not to sin, Psalm. 39. 1. I said, I will take heed to my
ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth with a Bridle, while
the wicked is before me. When ever a Godly man sins, he sins against the
general purpose of his Soul. David laid a Law upon his tongue; he uses three
words in the first and second verses to the same purpose, which is, as if he
should say in plain English, I was silent, I was silent, I was silent; and all
this to express how he kept in his passion, that he might not offend with his
tongue. Though a Godly man sins, yet he does not purpose to sin, for his
purposes are fixed against sin; Holiness is his highway; and as sin is it self
a by-way, so it is besides his way. The honest Traveller purposes to keep
straight on his way; so that if at any time he miss his way, he misses his
purpose. Though Peter denied Christ, yet he did not purpose to deny Christ;
yea, the settled purpose of his Soul, was rather to die with Christ, than to
deny Christ, Math. 26. 35. Peter said unto him, Though I should dye with thee,
yet will I not deny thee. Interpreters agree that Peter meant as he speak. But

Eighthly: The settled Resolutions of a gracious heart, Psalm. 119. 106. I have
sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy Righteous Judgments; Neh.
10. 28, 29, 30, 31. dwell on it, Job. 31. 1. etc. Micha 4. 5. For all people
will walk, every one in the name of his God, and we walk in the name of the
Lord our God for ever and ever. So Daniel and the 3 Children.

Blessed Hooper resolves rather to be discharged of his Bishopric, than yield
to certain Ceremonies.

Jerome writes of a brave Woman, who being upon the wrack, bid her Persecutors
do their worst, for she was resolved that she would rather die then lie.

The Prince of Conde being taken Prisoner by Charles the Nineth of France, and
put to his choice; first, whether he would go to Mass; or second, be put to
Death; or thirdly, suffer perpetual Imprisonment: Answered, as for the first, I
will never do by the assistance of Gods grace; and as for the other two, let
the King do with me what he pleases, for I am very well assured that God will
turn all to the best.

The Heavens shall as soon fall (said William Flower to the Bishop, that
persuaded him to save his life by retracting) as I will forsake the Opinion and
Faith I am in, God assisting of me.

So Marchus Arethusius chose rather to suffer a most cruel Death than to give
one halfpenny toward the Building of an Idol Temple.

So Cyprian, when the Emperor, in the the way to his Execution, said, Now I
give thee space to consider whether thou will obey me in casting a grain of
Frankincens into the fire, or be thus miserably slain: Nay, says he, there
needs no deliberation in the case. There are many thousands of such instances
scattered up and down in History.

Ninethly: There is a real willingness in every gracious Soul to be rid of all
sin, Romans 7. 24. Hos. 14. 2. 8. Job 7. 21. Saving grace makes a Christian as
willing to leave his sin, as a Slave is willing to leave his Galley, or a
Prisoner his Dungeon, or a Thief his Bolts, or a Beggar his Rags. Many a day
have I sought Death with ^cars (says blessed Cooper) not out of impatience,
did ust, or perturbation, but because I am weary of sin, and fearful of
falling into it. Look as the Daughters of Heath even made Rebeccah weary of her
life, Genesis 27. 46. so Corruptions within makes a gracious Soul, even weary of
his life: A gracious Soul looks upon sin with as evil, and as envious an eye as
Saul looked on David when the evil spirit was upon him. O! says Saul, that I
was but once well rid of this David; and O says a gracious Soul, that I was
but once well rid of this proud heart, this hard heart, this unbelieving heart,
this unclean heart, this earthly heart, this froward heart of mine.

Tenthly: Every Godly man complains of his known sins, and mourns over his
known sins, and would be fain rid of his known sins, as might be made evident
out of many scores of ^cripture, 7 Job. 21. 51. Psalm. 14. Hos. 2.

Eleventhly: Every gracious Soul sets himself mostly, Psalm. 18. 23. I was also
upright before him, and I kept my self from mine Iniquity. Certainly that which
is the special sin of a Godly man, is his special burden; it is not delighted
in, but lamented; there is no sin which costs him so much sorrow as that, to
which either the temper of his body, or the occasions of his life leads him.
That sin which he finds his heart most set upon, he sets his heart, his whole
soul most against. The Scripture gives much evidence that David (though a man
after Gods own heart) was very apt to fall into the sin of Lying, he used many
unlawful shifts; we read of his often faultring in that kind, when he was in
straits, and hard put to it, 1 Samuel 21. 2. 8. 1 Samuel 27. 8, 10, etc. but it is
as clear in Scripture, that his heart was set against lying; and that it was
the grief and daily burden of his Soul: Certainly that sin is a man's greatest
burden and grief, which he prays most to be delivered from. O! how earnestly
did David pray to be delivered from the sin of lying, (Psalm. 119. 29.) Keep me
from the way of lying. And as he prayed earnestly against lying, so he as
earnestly detested it; (ver. 163.) I hate and abhor Lying. Though Lying was
David's special sin, yet he hated and abhorred it as he did Hell it self. And he
tells us how he was affected or afflicted rather with that sin, whatsoever it
was, which was his Iniquity, (Psalm. 31. 10,) my life is spent with grief, and
my years with sighings; my strength fails, and my bones are consumed, or
Moth-eaten as the Hebrew has it, (here are deep expressions of a troubled
Spirit;) and why all this? Mark, he gives you the reason of it in the same
verse, because of mine Iniquity: as if he had said, there is a base corruption
which so haunts and dogs me, that my life is spent with grief, and my years
with sighing: He found (it seems) his heart running out to some sin or other,
which yet was so far from being a beloved sin, a bosom sin, a darling sin; that
it was the breaking of his heart, and the consumption of his bones. So Psalm.
38. 18. I will declare mine Iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin. There is no
sin that a gracious heart is more perfectly set against, than against his
special sin; for by this sin God first, has been most dishonored; and secondly,
Christ most crucified; and thirdly, the Spirit most grieved; and fourthly,
Conscience most wounded; and fifthly, Satan most advantaged; and sixthly,
Mercies most imbittered; and seaventhly, Duties most hindered; and eighthly,
Fears and doubts most raised and increased; and ninethly, Afflictions most
multiplied; and tenthly, Death made most formidable and terrible, and therefore
he breaks out against this sin with the greatest detestation and abhorrency.
Ephraims special sin was Idolatry, Hos. 4. 17. he thought the choicest gold and
silver in the world hardly good enough to frame his Idols of: But when it was
the day of the Lords gracious power upon Ephraim, than he thought no place bad
enough to cast his choicest Idols into, as you may see by comparing of these
Scriptures together, Hos. 14. 8. Isa. 2. 20. and chap. 30. 22. True grace will
make a man stand stoutly and steadfastly on Gods side, and work the heart to
take part with him against a man's special sins, though they be as right hands,
or right eyes. True grace will lay hands upon a man's special sins, and cry out
to Heaven, Lord Crucify them, Crucify them; down with them, down with them
even to the ground: Lord do justice, do speedy justice, do signal justice, do
exemplary justice upon these special sins of mine; Lord how down root and
branch; let the very stumps of this Dagon be broken all in pieces; Lord curse
this wild ^ig-tree that never more fruit may grow thereon: But

Twelfthly: There is no time wherein a gracious Soul H^b. 13. 18. Pray for us,
for we trust we have a good Conscience, in all things willingly to live
honestly; gracious hearts affect that which they cannot effect: So Acts 24. 16.
And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward men, in all cases, in all places; by all means, and at
all times: a sincere Christian labors to have a good Conscience, void of
offense toward God, and toward men, Prove. 16. 17. The highway of the
upright, is to depart from evil; that is, it is the ordinary, usual, constant
course of an upright man to depart from evil. An honest Traveller may step out
of the Kings highway into a House, a Wood, a Close; but his work, his business
is to go on in the Kings highway; so the business, the work of an upright man,
is to depart from evil. It Is possible for an upright man to step into a sinful
path, or to touch upon sinful facts; but his main way, his principal work and
business is to depart from Iniquity; as a Be may light upon a Thistle, but her
work is to be gathering at flowers; or as a Sheep may slip into the dirt, but
its work is to be grazing upon the Mountains, or in the Meadows; but

Thirteenthly, and lastly: Jesus Christ is the real Christians only Beloved; he
is the Saints only darling, 2 Can. 3. As the Apple Tree among the Trees of the
Wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons: ver. 8. The v^yce of my Beloved, behold
he comes leaping upon the Mountains, and skiping upon the hills; ver. 9. My
Beloved is like a Roe, or a young Heart, ver. 10. My Beloved spoke, and said
unto me, Rise up my Love, my fair one, and come away, ver. 17. Turn my Beloved,
and be thou like a Roe, or a young Heart upon the Mountains of Bether. Can. 4.
16. Let my Beloved come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant fruits. Seven
times Christ is called the Beloved of his Spouse in the fifth of Canticles, and
twice in the sixth Chapter, and four times in the seventh Chapter, and once in
the eighth Chapter. In this Book of Solomon's Song, Christ is called the
Churches Beloved just twenty times. I might turn you to many other Scriptures,
but in the mouth of twenty Witnesses you may be very clearly and fully
satisfied, that Jesus Christ is the Saints Beloved. 1. When the Dutch Martyr
was asked whether he did not love his Wife and Children, he Answered, Were all
the World a lump of gold, and in my hand to dispose of, I would give it to live
with my Wife and Children in a Prison, but Christ is dearer to me than all. 2.
Says Jerome, If my Father should stand before me, and if my Mother should hang
upon me, and my Brethren should press about me, I would break through my
Brethren, throw down my Mother, and tread under-foot my Father, that I might
cleave the faster and closer unto Jesus Christ. 3. That Blessed Virgin in
Basil, being condemned for Christianity to the fire, and having her Estate and
Life offered her if she would worship Idols, cried out. Let money perish, and
life vanish, Christ is better than all. 4. Love made Hierom to say, O! my
Savior, did thou dye for love of me, a love more dolorous than death, but to
me a death more lovely than love it self. I cannot live, love thee and be
longer from thee 5. Henry Voes said, If I had ten heads, they should all off
for Christ. 6. John Ardley Martyr said, If every hair of my head were a man,
they should all suffer for the Faith of Christ. 7. Ignatius said, Let fire,
racks, pullies, yea, and all the torments of Hell, come on me, so I may win
Christ. 8. George Carpenter being asked whether he loved not his Wife and
Children, when they all wept before them; Answered, My Wife and Children are
dearer to me than all Bavaria, yet for the love of Christ, I know them not. 9.
O Lord Jesus, said Bernard, I love thee more than all my Goods, and I love thee
more than all my Friends, yea, I love thee more than my very self. 10. Austin
says he, would willingly go through Hell to Christ. 11. Another says, He had
rather be in his Chimney-Corner with Christ, than in Heaven without him. 12.
Another cries out, I had rather have one Christ than a thousand Worlds; by all
which it is most evident, that Jesus Christ is the Saints best Beloved, and not
this or that sin.

Now by these 13 Arguments. it is most clear that no gracious Christian does, or
can indulge himself in any Trade, course, or way of sin.

Yea, by these thirteen Arguments it is most evident that no Godly man, has, or
can have any one beloved sin, any one bosom, darling sin, though many worthy
Ministers, both in their Preaching and Writings, make a great noise about the
Saints beloved sins, about their bosom darling sins. I readily grant, that all
Unregenerate persons have their beloved sins, their bosom sins, their darling
sins; but that no such sins are chargable upon the Regenerate is sufficiently
demonstrated by the thirteen Arguments last cited: And O! that this were wisely
and seriously considered of, both by Ministers and Christians; there is no
known sin that a Godly man is not troubled at, and that he would not be rid of.
There is as much difference between sin in a Regenerate person, and in an
Unregenerate person, as there is between poison in a Man, and poison in a
Serpent: Poison in a man's body, is most offensive and burdensome, and he
readily uses all Arts and Antidotes to expel it, and get rid; but poison in a
Serpent, is in its natural place, and is most pleasing, and delightful: So sin
in a Regenerate man is most offensive and burdensome, and he readily uses all
holy means and Antidotes to expel it, and to get rid of it: But sin in an
Unregenerate man is most pleasing and delightful, it being in its natural
place. A Godly man still enters his protest against sin; a gracious Soul, while
he commits sin, hates the sin he commits.

O Sirs! there is a vast difference between a special and a beloved sin, a
darling sin, a bosom-sin: Noah had a sin, and Lot had a sin, and Jacob had a
sin, and Job had a sin, and David had a sin, which was his special sin; but
neither of these had any sin which was their beloved sin, their bosom sin,
their darling sin; that passage in Job 31. 33. is observable. If I covered my
Transgression as Adam, by hiding mine Iniquity in my Bosom. Mark in this Text,
while Job calls some sin or other his Iniquity, he denies that he had any
beloved sin; for says he, Did I h^de it in my Bosom, did I show it any favor,
did I cherrish it, or nourish it; or keep it warm in my Bosom. O! No, I did
not. A Godly man may have many sins, yet he has not one beloved sin, one bosom
sin, one darling sin; he may have some particular sin, to which the
Unregenerate part of his will may strongly incline, and to which his
unmortified affections may run out with violence too; yet he has no sin he
bears any good will to, or does really or cordially effect. Mark, that may be
called a man's particular way of sinning, which yet we cannot, we may not call
his beloved sin, his bosom sin, his darling sin; for it may be his greatest
grief and torment, and may cost him more sorrow and tears than all the rest of
his sins; it may be a Tyrant usurping power over him, when it is not the
delight and pleasure of his Soul. A Godly man may be more prone to fall into
some one sin rather than another; it may be Passion, or Pride, or Slavish fear,
or Worldliness, or Hypocrisy; or this, or that, or the other Vanity; yet are not
these his beloved sins, his bosom sins, his darling sins; for these a^e the
Enemies he hates, and abhors; these are the grand-Enemies that he prays
against, and complains of, and mourns over; these are the potent Rebels that
his Soul cries out most against, and by which his Soul suffers the greatest
violence. Mark, no sin: but Christ is the dearly beloved of a Christians Soul;
Christ, and not this sin, or that, is the chiefest of ten thousand to a
gracious Soul; and yet some particular corruption or other may more frequently
worst a Believer, and lead him Captive; but then the Believer cries out most
against that particular sin: O! says he, this is mine Iniquity; this is the
Saul, the Pharaoh that is always a pursuing after the blood of my Soul. Lord
let this Saul fall by the Sword of thy Spirit; let this Pharaoh be drowned in
the Red Sea of thy Sons blood. O! Sirs, It is a point of very great importance,
for gracious Souls to understand the vast difference that there is between a
beloved sin, and this, or that particular sin, violently Tyrannizing over them;
for this is most certain, whosoever gives up himself freely, willingly,
cheerfully, habitually, to the service of any one particular Lust, or Sin, he
is in the state of Nature, under wrath, and in the way to eternal Ruin.

Now a little to show the vanity, folly, and falsehood of that Opinion that is
received, and commonly avowed by Ministers and Christians, viz. That every
Godly person

First: That this Opinion is not bottomed or founded upon any clear Scripture
or Scriptures, either in the Old or New Testament.

Secondly: This Opinion that is now under consideration,

Thirdly: This Opinion that is now under consideration, has a great tendancy to
harden and strong then wicked men in their sins; for when they shall hear and
read that the Saints, the dearly beloved of God, have their beloved sins, their
bosom sins, their darling sins, what inferences will they not be ready to make:
What are these they call Saints, wherein are they better than us? have we our
beloved sins? so have they Have we our bosom sins? so have they; have we our
darling sins? so have they. They have their beloved sins, and yet are beloved
of God, and why not we? why not we? Saints have their beloved sins, and yet God
is kind to them; and why then not to us, why not to us also? Saints have their
beloved sins, and yet God will save them; and why then should we believe that
God will damn us? Saints have their beloved sins, their bosom sins, their
darling sins, and therefore certainly they are not to be so dearly loved, and
highly prized, and greatly honored as Ministers would make us believe. Saints
have their beloved sins, their bosom sins, their darling sins, and therefore
what Iniquity is it to account and call them Hypocrites, Deceivers,
Dissemblers, that pretend they have a great deal of love to God, and love to
Christ, and love to his Word, and love to his ways; and yet for all

Fourthly: If Christ be really the Saints beloved, then sin is not their
beloved, but Christ is the Saints beloved, as I have formerly clearly proved;
and therefore sin is viz. a Beloved-Christ, and a beloved Lust.

Fifthly: Those supernatural Graces, or those Divine qualities that are infused
into the Soul at first conversion, are contrary to all sin, and opposite to all
sin, and engages

Sixthly: This Opinion may sill many weak Christians with many needless fears,
doubts, and jealousies about their Spiritual and Eternal conditions Weak
Christians are very apt to reason thus; Surely my Conversion is not sound; my
Spiritual Estate is not good; my Heart is not right with God; a saving work has
never yet past upon me in power: I fear I have not the root of the matter in
me: I fear I have never had a through change: I fear I have never yet been
effectually called out of darkness into his mavelous light: I fear I have
never yet been Espoused to Christ: I fear the Spirit of God has never taken up
my heart for his Habitation: I fear that after all my high profession, I shall
at last be found an Hypocrite: I fear the Execution of that dreadful Sentence,
Math. 25. Go ye Cursed, etc. And why all this, O poor Soul? Answer, Because I
carry about with me my beloved sins, my bosom sins, my darling sins. Ministers
had need be very wary in their Preaching and Writing, that they don't bring
forth fuel to feed the fears and doubts of weak Christians, it being a great
part of their work, to arm weak Christians against their fears and faintings:
But

Seaventhly: This Opinion that is now under consideration, is an Opinion that
is very repugnant to sound and sincere Repentance; for sound, sincere
Repentance includes and takes in a divorce, an alienation, a detestation, a
separation, and a turning from all sin, without exception or reservation. One
of the first works of the Spirit upon the Soul, is the dividing between all
known sin and the soul; it is a making an utter breach betwixt all sin and the
soul; it is a dissolving of that old League that has been between a Sinner and
his sins, yea, between a Sinner and his beloved Lusts. One of the first works
of the Spirit, is to make a man to look upon all his sins as Enemies, yea as
his greatest Enemies, and to deal with his sins as Enemies, and to hate and
loath them as Enemies, and to fear them as Enemies, and to arm against them as
Enemies. Seriously ponder upon these Scriptures, Ezekiel. 18. 28. 30, 31. 14. of
Ezekiel. 6. 2. Cor. 7. 1. Psalm. 119. 101. 104. 128. verses. True Repentance is a
turning from all sin, without any Reservation, or exception; he never truly
repented of any sin, whose heart is not turned against every sin. The true
penitent casts off all the rags of Old Adam, he is for throwing down every
stone of the old building; he will not leave a horn, nor a hoof behind. The
reasons of turning from sin, are universally binding to a penitent Soul. There
are the same reasons and grounds for a penitent man's turning from every sin, as
there is for his turning from any one sin. Do you turn from this or that sin,
because the Lord has forbid it, why upon the same ground you must turn from
every sin; for God has forbid every sin as well as this or that particular sin.
There is the same Authority, forbidding or commanding in all; and if the
Authority of God awes a man from one sin, it will awe him from all. He that
turns from any one sin, because it is a Transgression of the holy and righteous
Law of God, he will turn from every sin upon the same account. He that turns
from any one sin, because it is a dishonor to God, a reproach to Christ, a
grief to the Spirit, a wound to Religion, etc. will upon the same grounds turn
from every sin.

Quest. But wherein does a true penitential turning from all sin consist? Answ.
In these six things.

First in the alienation and inward aversation and drawing off of the Soul from
the love and liking of all sin, and from all free and voluntary subjection unto
sin, the heart being filled with a loathing and detestation of all sin, Psalm.
119. 104. 128. as that which is most contrary to all goodness and happiness.

Secondly: In the wills detestation and hatred of all sin, when the very bent
and inclination of the will is set Romans 7. 15. 19. 21. 23. Isa. 30. 22. 14.
Hos. 8. When the will stands upon such terms of defiance with all sin, as that
it will never enter into a league of friendship with any sin, then is the Soul
turned from every sin.

Thirdly: In the judgments, turning away from all sin, by disapproving,
disallowing, and condemning all sin, Romans 7. 15. O! says the judgment of a
Christian, sin is the greatest evil in all the world, it is the only thing God
abhors, and that brought Jesus Christ to the Cross, that damns Souls, that
shuts Heaven, and that has laid the foundations of Hell. O! It is the pricking
thorn in my eye, the deadly arrow in my side, the two-edged-sword that has
wounded my Conscience, and slain my comforts, and separated between God and my
Soul. O! sin is that which has hindered my prayers, and imbittered my mercies,
and put a sting into all my crosses; and therefore I cannot but disapprove of
it, and disallow of it, and condemn it to death, yea, to Hell from whence it
came.

Fourthly: In the purpose and resolution of the soul, Psalm. 17. 3. The general
purpose and resolution of my heart is not to transgress, though particular
failings may attend me; yet my resolutions and purposes are firmly set against
doing evil, Psalm. 39. 1. The true Penitent holds up his purposes and
resolutions to keep off from sin, and to keep close with God, though he be not
able in every thing, and at all times to make good his purposes and
resolutions, etc. But

Fifthly: In the earnest and unfeigned desires, and careful Romans 7. 22, 23. You
know when a prudent, tender, indulgent Father sees hs Child to fail and come
short in that which he enjoins him to do; yet knowing that his desires and
endeavors is to please him, and serve him, he will not be harsh, rigid, sour,
or severe toward him; but will spare him, and exercise much tenderness, and
indulgence toward him; and will God, will God, whose mercies reach above the
Heavens, and whose compassions are infinite, and whose love is like himself,
carry it worse toward his Children then men do carry it toward theirs? Surely
no. God's Fatherly indulgence accepts of the will for the work, Heb. 13. 18. 2
Cor. 8. 12. Certainly, a sick man is not more desirous to be rid of all his
Diseases, nor a Prisoner to be freed from all his bolts and chains, than the
true Penitent is desirous to be rid of all his sins.

Sixthly and lastly: In the common and ordinary declining etc. That royal Law,
1 These. 5. 22. Abstain from all appearance of evil, is a Law that is very
precious in a Penitent man's eye, and commonly lies warm upon a Penitent man's
heart; so that take him in his ordinary course, and you shall find him very
ready to shun, and be shie of the very appearance of sin, of the very shows and
shadows of sin. Job made a Covenant with his eyes, Job. 31. 1. and Joseph would
not hearken to his bold tempting Mistress, to lie by her, or to be with her,
Genesis 39. 10. And David when himself, would not sit with Vain persons, Psalm. 26.
3, 4, 5. Now a true penitential turning from all sins, lies in these six
things, and therefore you had need look about you; for if there be any one way
of wickedness, wherein you walk, and which you are resolved you will not
forsake, you are no true penitents, and you will certainly lose your souls, and
be miserable for ever.

This Opinion that is now under-consideration, is an

First: In a day of common Calamity, when the Sword darling sins (if a Saint
had any such sins) will be very apt to fill his soul with fears, dreads, and
perplexities: Surely now God will meet with me, now God will avenge himself on
me for my beloved sins, my bosom sins, my darling sins: O! how righteous a
thing is it with God, because of my beloved lusts, to sweep me away by these
sweeping Judgments that are abroad in the Earth? On the contrary, how sweet and
comfortable a thing is it, when in a day of common Calamity, a Christian can
appeal to God, and appeal to Conscience, that though he has many weaknesses,
and infirmities that hang upon him, that yet he has no beloved sin, no bosom
sin, no darling sin, that either God or Conscience can charge upon him. O! such
a consideration as this, may be as life from the dead to a gracious Christian,
in the midst of all the common Calamities that does surround him; and that
hourly threaten him.

Secondly: In the day of personal Affections, when the etc. O! now the
remembrance of a man's beloved sins, his bosom sins, his darling sins, (if a
Saint had any such sins) will be as the hand writing upon the Wall (Dan. 5. 5,
6.) that will make his counteance to be changed, his thoughts to be troubled,
his joints to be loosed, and his knees to be dashed one against another. O! now
a Christian will be ready to conclude, O! it is my beloved sins, my bosom sins,
my darling sins that has caused God to put this bitter cup into my hand, and
that has provokt him to give me gall and wormwood to drink, Lam. 3. 19. Whereas
on the contrary, when a man under all his personal trials, though they are
many, and great, yet can lift up his head and appeal to God and Conscience,
that though he has many sinful weaknesses, and infirmities hanging upon him,
yet neither God nor Conscience can charge upon him any beloved sins, any bosom
sins, any darling sins: O! such a consideration as this, will help a man to
bare up bravely, sweetly, cheerfully, patiently, and contentedly, under the
heaviest hand of God, as is evident in that great instance of Job: who so
sorely afflicted as Job? and yet no beloved sin, no bosom sin, no darling sin,
being chargable upon him by God or Conscience (Job. 10. 7. chap. 31. 33.) How
bravely, sweetly, and Christianly does Job bear up under those sad changes and
dreadful providence that would have broke a thousand of such men's hearts, upon
whom God and Conscience could charge beloved sins, bosom sins, darling sins? But

Thirdly: In the day of death; Death is the King of terrors, as Job speaks; and
the terror of Kings, as the Philosopher speaks: Oh how terrible will this King
of terrors be to that man upon whom God and Conscience can charge beloved sins,
bosom sins, darling sins: This is certain, when a wicked man comes to die, all
the sins that ever he committed don't so grieve him, and terrify him, so sad
him, and sink him, and raise such horrors and terrors in him, and put him into
such a hell on this side Hell, as his beloved sins, his bosom sins, his darling
sins; and had Saints their beloved sins, their bosom sins, their darling sins,
Ah what a Hell of horror and terror would these sins raise in their souls, when
they come to lie upon a dying Bed! But now when a Child of God shall lie upon a
dying Bed, and shall be able to say, Lord thou know, and Conscience thou
know, that though I have had many and great failings, yet there are no
beloved sins, no bosom sins, no darling sins, that are chargeable upon me. Lord
thou know, and Conscience thou know: 1. That there is no known sin that I
don't hate and abhor. 2. That there is no known sin that I don't combat and
conflict with. 3. That there is no known sin that I don't grieve and mourn
over. 4. That there is no known sin that I would not presently, freely,
willingly, and heartily be rid of. 5. That there is no known sin that I don't
in some weak measure endeavor in the use of holy means to be delivered from.
6. That there is no known sin, the effectual subduing and mortifying of which,
would not administer matter of the greatest joy and comfort to me. Now when God
and Conscience shall acquit a man upon a dying Bed, of beloved sins, of bosom
sins, of darling sins, who can express the joy, the comfort, the peace, the
support that such an acquittance will fill a man with?

Fourthly: In the day of Account, the v^ry thoughts of which day, too many, is
more terrible than Death it viz. That the Saints have their beloved sins, their
bosom sins, their darling sins; such cannot but greatly fear, and tremble to
appear before the Tribunal of God. O! says such poor hearts, how shall we be
able to answer for beloved sins, our bosom sins, our darling sins, as for
infirmities, weaknesses, and follies that has attended us, we can plead with
God, and tell him; Lord, when Grace has been weak, Corruptions strong,
Temptations great, and thy Spirit withdrawn, and we off from our Watch, we have
been worsted and captivated. But what shall we say as to our beloved sins, our
bosom sins, our darling sins; O these fill us with terror and horror, and how
shall we be able to hold up our heads before the Lord, when he shall reckon
with us for these sins. But now when a poor Child of God thinks of the day of
Account, and is able, through grace, to say, Lord, though we cannot clear our
selves of infirmities, and many sinful weaknesses, yet we can comfortably
appeal in thee, and our Consciences, that we have no beloved sins, no bosom
sins, no darling sins. O with what comfort, confidence, and boldness, will such
poor hearts hold up their heads in the day of Account, when a Christian can
plead those six things before a Judgment seat, that he pleaded in the third
particular, when he lay upon a dying Bed? how will his fears vanish, and how
will his hopes and and hopes and heart revive, and how comfortably and boldly
will he stand before a Judgment Seat? But

Ninethly: This opinion that is now under consideration, duties of Religion,
viz. 1. Praising of God. 2. Delighting in God. 3. Rejoicing in God. 4. Admiring
of God. 5. Taking full content and satisfaction in God. 6. Witnessing for God,
his Truth, his Ordinances and ways. 7. To self-tryal and self-examination. 8.
To the making of their Calling and Election sure. I cannot see with what
comfort, confidence, or courage, such souls can apply themselves to the Eight
duties last mentioned, who lie under the power of this opinion, viz. That
Saints have their beloved sins, their bosom sins, their darling sins: But now
when a Christian is clear, and he can clear himself, (as every sincere
Christian can) of beloved sins, of bosom sins, of darling sins, how is he upon
the advantage ground to fall in roundly with all the Eight duties last
mentioned? But

Tenthly and lastly: This opinion that is now under sins, no bosom sins, no
darling sins that they carry about with them: How comfortably and confidently
may they expect that God will make that great Ordinance a blessing to them, and
that in time all those glorious ends for which that Ordinance was appointed,
shall be accomplished in them, and upon them? Now by these ten Arguments, you
may see the weakness, and falseness, yea, the dangerous nature of that opinion
that many worthy men have so long Preached, Maintained, and Printed to the
World, viz. That the Saints have their beloved sins, their bosom sins, their
darling sins; neither do I wonder that they should be so sadly out in this
particular, when I consider how apt men are to receive things by Tradition,
without bringing of things to a strict examination; and when I consider what
strange definitions of Faith many famous, worthy men have given, both in their
writings and Preachings; and when I consider what a mighty noise many famous
men have made about legal preparations, before men presume to close with
Christ, or to give up themselves in a Marriage Covenant to Christ; most of them
requiring men to be better Christians before they come to Christ, than commonly
they prove, after they are implanted into Christ, etc.

Now though I have said enough, I suppose to lay that Opinion asleep that has
been last under consideration, viz. That the Saints have their beloved sins,
their bosom sins, their darling sins; yet for a close of this discourse,
promise with me these five things.

First: That all Unconverted persons have their beloved Jews was Idolatry: The
beloved, the bosom, the darling sin of the Corinthians, was Uncleanness,
Wantonness, 1 Cor. 6. 15. 20. The beloved, the bosom, the darling sin of the
Cretians, was Lying, 2 Titus 12. Jeroboams beloved sin was Idolatry, and Cains
beloved sin was Envy, and Corahs beloved sin was Gain saying, and Esaus beloved
sin was Profaneness, and Ishmaels beloved sin was Scossing, and Baalams
beloved sin was Ambition; Simoon and Levios beloved sin was Treachery, Manasses
beloved sin was Cruelty, and Nebuchadnezars beloved sin was Pride, and Herod's
beloved sin was Uncleanness, and Judas his beloved sin was Covetousness, and
the Young man's beloved sin in that 19th. of Matthew was Wordly-mindedness, etc.

Secondly: Promise this with me, that the Elect of Manass^s beloved sin was
Cruelty, and Ephraims beloved sin before Conversion was Idolatry, Hos. 4. 17.
and Zacheus, his beloved sin before Conversion, was worldly-mindedness and
defrauding of others; and Paul's beloved sin before Conversion, was Persecution;
and the Jaylors beloved sin before Conversion, was Cruolty; and Mary Magdolens
beloved sin before Conversion, was Wantonness and Uncleanness, etc.

Thirdly: Premise this with me, viz. That after Conversion, Hos. 14. 8. 2. Isa.
20. chap. 30. 22. And all Christians experience confirms this truth; but of
this more before.

Fourthly: After Conversion, a Christian endeavors Sin, his bosom Sin, his
darling Sin. Zacheus his boloved Sin was Worldliness and Defrauding, but being
Converted, he labors to excel in restitution and liberality: The Jaylors
beloved Sin was Severity and Cruelty, but being Converted, he labors to excel
in pity and courtesy: Paul's beloved sin was Persecution, but being Converted,
how mightily does he bestir himself to Convert souls, and to edify souls, and
to build up souls, and to strengthen souls, and to establish souls, and to
encourage souls in the ways of the Lord; he gives it you under his own hand,
That he labored more abundantly than they all, 2 Cor. 11. 23. Austins beloved
Sin, his bosom Sin, his darling sin, before his Conversion, was Wantonness and
Uncleanness; but when he was converted, he was most careful and watchful to arm
against that Sin, and to avoid all temptations and occasions that might lead
him to it afterward. If a man's beloved Sin before Conversion has been
Wordlinesse, then after conversion he will labor above all to excel in
Heavenly-mindedness; or if his Sin, his beloved Sin, has been Pride, then he
will labor above all to excel in Humility: or if his beloved Sin has been
intemperance, then he will labor above all to excel in temperance and
sobriety; or if his beloved Sin has been Wantonness and Uncleanness, then he
will labor above all, to excel in all Chastity and Purity; or if his beloved
Sin has been Oppr^ssing of others, then he will labor above all, to excel in
Piety and Compassion toward others; or if his beloved Sin has been Hypocrisy,
then he will labor above all to excel in sincerity, etc. But

Fifthly: Though no Godly man, though no sincere David speaks in Psalm. 18. ver.
23. Now the main power of grace and of uprightness is mainly seen and exercised
in a man's keeping of himself from his Iniquity. Now that specal, that peculiar
Sin, to which a gracious soul may be most p^one and addicted to, may arise, 1.
From the temperament and constitution of his body; the complexion and
constitution of a man's body may be a more prepared instrument for one vice
rather than another: or 2. It may arise from his particular Calling; Christians
have distinct and particular Callings that incline them to particular Sins. For
instance, the Soldiers Calling puts him upon Rapine and Violence, Luke 3. 14.
Do Violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your
wages. And the Trades-mans Calling, puts him upon Lying, Deceiving, Defrauding,
and overreaching his Brother. And the Ministers Calling puts him upon
Flattering of the Gallants and great ones of his Parish, and upon pleasing the
rest, by speaking of smooth things, Isa. 30. 10. and by sowing of Pillows under
their Elbows, Ez^k. 13. 18, 20. And the Magistrates, Judges, and Justices
Employments lays them open to Oppression, Bribery, Injustice, etc. If
Christians are not very much upon their watch, their very Callings and Offices
may prove a very great snare to their souls: Or 3dly, It may arise from his
outward state and condition in this world, whether his state be a state of
Prosperity, or a state of Adversity; or whether he be in a Marriage state, or
in a single state. Many times a man's outward state and condition in this world,
has a strong influence upon him, to incline him to this* or that particular
sin, as best suiting with his condition: or 4thly, It may arise from distinct
and peculiar Ages; for it is certain, that distinct and peculiar Ages do
strongly incline persons to distinct and peculiar Sins; Youth enclines to
Wantonness and Prodigality; and Manhood, to Pride, and Ambition; and Old Age,
to Covetousness and Frowardness. Common experience tells us, that many times
Wantonness is the Sinners darling in the time of his youth, and Worldliness his
darling in the time of his age; and without controversy, Christians distinct
and peculiar Ages may more strongly incline them to this or that Sin, rather
than any other: or 5thly, It may arise from that distinct and particular way of
Breeding and Education which he has had. Now to arm such Christians against
their special Sins, their peculiar sins (whose Sins are advantaged against
them, either by their constitutions and complexion, or else by their particular
Calling, or else by their outward state and condition, or else by their
distinct and peculiar ages, or else by their particular way of Breeding and
Education) is my present work and business; for though the reigning power of
this, or that special peculiar Sin be broken in a man's Conversion, yet the
remaining life and strength that is still left in those corruptions, will by
Satan be improved against the growth, peace, comfort, and assurance of the
soul: Satan will strive to enter in at the same door, and by the same Dalilah,
by which he has betrayed and wounded the soul, he will do all he can to do the
soul a further mischief; Satan will be still a reminding of the soul of those
former sweets, pleasures, profits, delights, and contents that have come in
upon the old score; so that it will be a hard thing, even for a Godly man to
keep himself from his Iniquity, from his special or peculiar Sin, which the
Fathers commonly call, (though not truly) peccatum in delitiis, a man's special
darlin and beloved Sin. Well Christians, remember this once for all, viz. That
sound Conversion includes a noble and serious revenge upon that Sin which was
once a man's beloved, bosom, darling Sin, 2 Cor. 7. 11. Yea, what clearing of
your selves; yea, what Indignation; yea, what fear; yea, what vchement desire;
yea, what zeal; yea, what revenge. You see this in Cranmer, who when he had
subscribed with his right hand, to that which was against his Conscience, he
afterward, as a holy revenge, put that right hand into the flames; so Mary
Magdalen takes that hair of hers. Of all Sins; (says the sound Convert) I am
resolved to be avenged on my once beloved, bosom, darling Sins, by which I have
most dishonored God, and wronged my own precious and immortal soul, and by
which I have most endangered my everlasting Estate.

Having thus cleared up my way, I shall now endeavor to lay before you some
special remedies, means, or helps against cherishing or keeping up of any
special or peculiar Sin, either in heart, or life, against the Lord, or against
the light and conviction of a man's own Conscience.

First: Cherrishing or keeping up of any special or peculiar

First, It will abate the degrees of our Graces, and so make them more
undiscernable. Now grace rather in its degrees, than in its sincerity, or
simple being only, is that which gives the clearest evidence of a gracious
estate, or of a man's interest in Christ. Sin, lived in, is like a Vermin to the
Tree, which destroys the fruit; Grace cannot thrive in a sinful heart: In some
soil, Plants will not grow: The cherrishing of Sin, is the withering of Grace:
The casting of a favorable eye on any one special Sin, hinders the growth of
Grace: If a man has a choice Plant or Flower in his Garden, and it withers and
shrevils, and is dying, he opens the ground, and looks at the root, and there
finds a Worm gnawing the root; and this is the cause of the Flowers fading: the
Application is easy.

Secondly: The cherrishing of any special peculiar of a lively Faith, and of a
gracious state, and of a man's Interest in Christ: Grace is never apparent and
sensible to the soul, but while it is in action; therefore want of action must
needs cause want of assurance. Habits are not felt immediately, but by the
freeness and facility of their acts, of the very being of the soul it self,
nothing is felt or perceived, but only its acts. The fire that ly^th still in
the flint, is neither seen nor felt; but when you smite it, and force it into
act, it is easily discernable. For the most part, so long as a Christian has
his graces in lively action, so long he is assured of them: He that would be
assured that this sacred fire of grace is in his heart, he must blow it up, and
get it into a flame. But

Thirdly: The cherrishing of any special Sin, or the etc. Sometimes men in
riding, raise such a dust, that they can neither see themselves, nor their
dearest Friends, so as to distinguish one from another; the Application is
easy. The Room sometimes is so full of smoke, that a man cannot see the Jewels,
the Treasures that lies before him; so it is here. But

Fourthly: Cherrishing of any special or peculiar Sin, You may walk long en^ugh
without comfort and assurance, Lam. 1. 16. The Comforter that should relieve my
Soul, is far from me; so in that 1 John 3. 21. It is supposed, that a
self-condemning heart, makes void a man's Confidence before God. The precious
Jewel of Faith can be holden in no other place, but in a pure Conscience, that
is the only Royal Palace, wherein it must and will dwell, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Holding
Faith and a good Conscience, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart,
in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
Conscience. He that comes to God with a true, honest, upright heart, being
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, may draw near to God in full assurance of
Faith; whereas guilt, clouds, clogs, and distracts the soul, that it can never
be with God, either as it would, or as it should; Conscientia pura, semper
secura, A good Conscience has sure confidence. Conscience is mill testes, a
thousand Witnesses for, or against a man. Conscience is Gods Preacher in the
bosom. It Is better with Euagrius to lie secure on a bed of Straw, than to have
a turbulent Conscience on a bed of Down. It was a Divine saying of (Seneca) a
Heathen, viz. That if there were no God to punish him, no Devil to torment him,
no Hell to burn him, no man to see him; yet would he not sin, for the ugliness
of sin, and the grief of his own Conscience. But

Fifthly: Cherrishing of any special or peculiar sin, or God is departed from
me, and he answers me not, neither by Dream, nor Vision, neither this way,
nor that, 1 Samuel 28. 15. But

Sixthly: The greatest and most common cause of the which men give
entertainment, or at least, which they do not so vigorously oppose, and
heartily renounce as they should and might, hinc illae lachrymae, and this is
that which casts them on sore straits and difficulties; and how should it be
otherwise, seeing God, who is infinitely wise, holy, and righteous, either
cannot, or will not reveal the secrets of his love to those who harbor his
known Enemies in their bosoms? the great God either cannot, or will not regard
the whinings and complainings of those who play or dally with that very sin
which gauls their Consciences, and connive and wink at the stirrings and
workings of that very Lust, for which he hides his face from them, and writes
bitter things against them. Mark, all fears, and doubts, and scruples, are
begotten upon sin, either real, or imaginary: Now if the sin be but imaginary,
an enlightened rectified judgment, may easily and quickly scatter such fears,
doubts, and scruples as the Sun does mists, and clouds, when it shines in its
brightness; but if the Sin be real, then there is no possibility of curing
those fears, doubts, and scruples arising from thence, but by an unfeigned
Repentance, and returning from that sin. Now if I should produce all the
Scriptures and instances that stand ready pressed to prove this, I must
transcribe a good part of the Bible; but this would be labor in vain, seeing
it seems to have been a notion, engraven even on natural Conscience, viz.
That sin so defiles persons, that till they be washed from it, neither they,
nor their services can be accepted; from whence arose that custom of setting
water-pots at their entrance into their Temples, or places of worship. Let him
that wants assurance, comfort, peace, and a sight of his interest in Christ,
cast out every known sin, and set upon a universal course of Reformation; for
God will not give his Cordials to those that have a foul Stomach; those, that
against light, and checks of Conscience, dally and tamper with this sin, or
that, those God will have no commerce, no communion with; on such, God will not
lift up the light of his countenance, Rev. 2. 17. To him that overcomes, will
I give to eat of the hidden manna, and I will give him a white stone, and in
that stone, a new name written. These are all Metaphorical expressions, which
being put together, do amount to as much as Assurance; but mark, these are
promised. (...), to him that overcomes, to him that rides on conquering, and
to conquer. O that Christians would seriously remember this The dearer it cost
any one to part with his sins, the more sweet and comfortable will it be to
call to mind the Victory, that through the spirit of grace he has got over his
sins. There is no comfort, joy, or peace to that which arises from the
conquests of sin, especially of special sins. When Goliath was slain, what joy
and triumph was there in the Camp? So here,

Seventhly: Cherrishing of any special or peculiar sin, etc.

Eighthly: Seriously consider of the several assertions

First: A man (says one) can have no peace in his

Secondly: Another says, A man is in a damnable

Thirdly: So long (says another) as the power of

Fourthly: Another says, A good Conscience stands not with a purpose of
sinning, no not with irresolution against sin; this must be understood of
habitual purposes, and of a constant irresolution against sin.

Fifthly: The rich and precious box of a good Conscience

Sixthly: Where there is but any one sin (says another) Dike, of the
deceiptfulness of the heat, chap. 16.

Seventhly: Most true is that saying of Aquinus, That all sins are coupled
together, though not in regard of conversion to temporal good, for some look to
the good of gain, some of glory, some of pleasure; yet in regard of aversion
from eternal good, that is God: So that he that looks but toward one sin, is
as much averted and turned back from God, as if he looked to all; in which
respect St. James says, He that off^ndeth in one, is guilty of all, 2 Jam. 10.
Now that ye may not mistake Aquinas, nor the Scripture he cites, you must
remember that the whole Law is but one copulative, Exodus 16. 18. Ezekiel. 18. 10,
11, 12, 13. v Mark, he that breaks one Command, habitually breaks all; not
so actually. Such as are truly Go^ly, in respect of the habitual desires,
purposes, bents, byasses, inclinations, resolutions, and endeavors of their
Souls, do keep those very commands that actually they daily break. But a
dispensatory Conscience keeps not any one Commandment of God; he that
willingly and wilfully, and habitually gives himself liberty to break any one
Commandment, is guilty of all: That is 1. Either he breaks the chain of
duties, and so breaks all the Law, being copulative; or, 2. With the same
disposition of heart, that he willingly, wilfully, habitually breaks one, with
the same disposition of heart he is ready pressed to break all. The Apostles
meaning in that, Jam. 2. 10. is certainly this, viz. That suppose a man should
keep the whole Law for substance, except in some one particular; yet by
allowing of himself in this particular, thereby he manifests that he kept no
precept of the Law in obedience and conscience unto God; for if he did, then he
would be careful to keep every precept: thus much the words following import,
and hereby he manifests that he is guilty of all. Some others conceive, that
therefore such a one may be said to be guilty of all, because by allowing of
himself in any one sin, thereby he lies under that Curse which is threatened
against the transgressors of the Law, Dan. 27. 26.

Eighthly: Every Christian should carry in his heart

Ninethly: One flaw in a Diamond (says another) takes away the luster and the
price. One puddle, if we

Tenthly: One turn may bring a man quite out of the Giddcon had seventy Sons,
but one Bastard, and yet that one Bastard destroyed all the rest, Judge. 8. 13.
One sin (as well as one Sinner) lived in, and allowed, may destroy much good
says another.

Eleaventhly: He that favors one sin, though he forgo many, does but as Ben
adab recover of one disease,

Twelfthly: Satan, by one Lie to our first Parents, made fruitless what God
himself had Preached to them immediately before, says another.

Thirteenthly: A man may by one short act of sin* bring Ham did when he saw his
Father Noah Drunk, Genesis 9. 24, 25. And Noah awoke from his Wine, and knew what
his younger Son had done unto him, and he said, Cursed is Canaan, a Servant of
Servants shall he be unto his Brethren. Canaan was Hams Son: Noah (as Gods
mouth) Prophesied a Curse upon the Son for his Fathers sin. Here Ham is cursed
in his Son Canaan, and the curse entailed not only to Canaan, but to his
Posterity. Noah Prophesies a long series and chain of curses upon Canaan and
his Children; he makes the cur^e Hereditary to the Name and Nation of the
Canaanites: A Servant of Servants shall he be unto his Brethren, that is, the
vilest and basest Servant; for the Hebrews express the superlative degree by
such a duplication (as Vanity of Vanities) that is most vain; (a Song of
Songs,) that is a most excellent Song So here, a Servant of Servants; that is,
the vilest, the basest Servant: Ah heavy and prodigious Curse, upon the account
of one sin. But

Fourteenthly: Satan can be content that men should

Fifteenthly: Though all the parts of a man's body be

Sixteenthly: Observe (says another) that an unmortified Herod's high esteem of
John and his Ministry, and his reverencing of him, and observing of him, and
his forward performance of many good things, are all given over and laid aside
at the instance and command of his master-sin, his reigningsin. John's head must
go for it, if he will not let Herod enjoy his Herodias quietly. But

Seventeenthly: Some will leave all their sins but one; Jacob would let all his
Sons go but Benjamin: Satan can hold a man fast enough by one sin that he
allows and lives in; as the Fowler can hold the Bird fast enough by one wing,
or by one claw.

Eighteenthly: Holy Policarp, in the time of the fourth Four-score and six
years have I endeavored to do God Service, and all this while he never hurt
me; how then can I speak evil of so good a Lord and Master who has thus long
preserved me: I am a Christian, and cannot swear; let Heathens and Infidels
swear if they will, I cannot do it, were it to the saving of my life

Nineteenthly: A willing, and a wilful keeping up, either

Twentiethly: The keeping up of any known transgression

Twenty-one: The keeping up of any known transgression

Twenty-two: The keeping up of any known transgression

Twenty-three: The keeping up of any known transgression

Twenty-four: The keeping up, either in heart or Lam. 1. 16. A man will have no
more comfort from God, than he makes Conscience of sinning against God. A
Conscience good in point of Integrity, will be good also in point of
Tranquillity If our hearts condemn us not, then have we considence toward God
(and I may say also toward men, Act. 24. 16) Oh what comfort and solace has a
clear Conscience, he has something within to answer accusations without. I
shall conclude this particular with a notable saying of one of the Ancients.
The joys of a good Conscience are the Paradise of Souls, the delight of Angels,
the Garden of delights, the Field of blessing, the Temple of Solomon, the Court
of God, the habitation of the Spirit: Bernard.

Twenty-five: The keeping up of any known transgression, Ahashuerus, that great
Monarch said concerning Haman, when coming in, he found him cast upon the
Queens bed, on which she sat; What (says he) will he force the Queen before
me, in the house, Esth. 7. 8. There was the killing Emphasis in the words,
before me; Will he force the Queen before me? What, will he dare to commit such
a Villainy, and I stand and look on? O Sirs! to do wickedly in the sight of God,
is a thing that he looks upon as the greatest affront and indignity that can
possibly be done unto him. What (says he) whilt thou be Drunk before me, and
Swear, and Blaspheam before me, and be wanton and unclean before me, and break
my Laws before my Eyes. This then is the killing aggravation of all sin, that
it is done before the Face of God, in the presence of God, whereas the very
consideration of Gods Omnipresence, that he stands and looks on, should be as a
B^r, a Remora, to stop the proceedings of all wicked intendments, a disswasive
rather from sin, than the least encouragement thereunto. 'Twas an excellent
saying of Ambrose; If thou can not hide thy self from the Sun, which is Gods
Minister of light, how impossible will it be to hide thy self from him whose
Eyes are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun, Ambrose. offic. l. 1. c. 14.
Gods Eye is the best Marshal to keep the Soul in a comely order. Let thine Eye
be ever on him, whose Eye is ever on thee. The Eyes of the Lord are in every
place, beholding the evil and the good, Prove. 15. 9. There is no drawing of a
Curtain between God and thee. God is totus Oculus, all Eye; He sees all
things, in all places, and at all times. When thou art in secret, consider
Conscience is present, which is more than a thousand Witnesses; and God is
present, which is more than a thousand Consciences. It was a pretty fancy of
one that would have his Chamber painted full of eyes, that which way soever he
looked, he might still have some eyes upon him; and he fancying himself
according to the Moralists advice, always under the eye of a Keeper, might be
the more careful of his carriage. O! Sirs, if the eyes of men, makes even the
vilest to forbear their beloved lusts for a while; that the Adulterer watches
for the twy-light; and they that are Drunken, are Drunken in the Night. How
powerful will the Eye and Presence of God be with those that fear His Anger,
and know the sweetness of his Favor? The thought of this Omnipresence of God
will affrighten thee from sin. Gehezi durst not ask, or receive any part of
Nahamans Presents in his Masters presence, but when he had got out of Elisha's
sight, then he tells his Lie, and gives way to his Lusts. Men never sin more
freely, then when they presume upon secrecy; They break in pieces thy people O
Lord, and afflict thy Heritage. They slay the Widow and Stranger, and murder
the Fatherless, yet they say, The Lord does not see, neither shall the God of
Jacob regard it, Psalm. 94. 5, 6, 7. They, who abounded in abominations, said,
The Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the Earth, Ezekiel. 8, 9, 12. The
wise man disswadeth from wickedness upon the consideration of Gods Eye and
Omniscience. And why will thou my Son be ravished with a strange Woman, and
embrace the bosom of a Stranger; for the ways of man are before the Eyes of the
Lord, and he pondereth all his goings, Proverbs 5. 20, 21. Joseph saw God in
the Room, and therefore durst not yield; but his Mistress saw none but Joseph,
and so was impudently alluring and tempting him to folly. I have read of two
Religious men that took contrary courses with two lewd Women, whom they were
desirous to reclaim from their Vicious course of life: One of the Men, told one
of the Women, that he was desirous to enjoy her Company, so it might be with
secrecy; and when she had brought him into a close room, that none could pry
into, he told her, All the bars and bolts here cannot keep God out. The other
desired the other Women to company with him, openly in the streets, which when
she rejected as a mad request; he told her, It was better to do it in the eyes
of a multitude, than in the eyes of God. O why shall not the presence of that
God, who hates sin, and who is resolved to punish it with Hellflames, make us
ashamed or afraid to sin, and dare him to his face.

Twenty-six: There have been many a Prodigal, who by Moses came within the
sight of Canaan, but for one sin, not sanctifying Gods Name, he was shut out;
and no less will it be to any man, that for living in any one sin, shall be for
ever shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven; not but that there may be some
remainders of sin, and yet the heart taken off from every sin: but if there be
any secret closing with any one way of sin, all the profession of Godliness,
and leaving all other sins, will be to no purpose, nor ever bring a man to
happiness.

Twenty-seaven: As the Philosopher says, a Cup, or in the state of grace, no
man can have a full interest in Christ, till all sin, that is, all reigning,
domineering sin be rooted out.

Thus you see the concurrant judgments of our most famous Divines, against men's
allowing, indulging, or retaining any one known sin against their light and
Consciences; but that these Sayings of theirs may lay in more weight and power
upon every poor soul that is entangled with any base Lusts; be pleased
seriously and frequently to consider of these following particulars.

First: It Is to no purpose for a man to turn from some Jam. 1. 26. If any man
seem to be Religious, and bridle not his tongue, but deceives his own heart,
this man's Religion is in vain. This at first sight may seem to be a hard
saying, that for one fault, for one fault in the tongue, all a man's Religion
should be counted vain; and yet this you see the Holy Ghost does peremptorily
conclude. Let a man make never so glorious a profession of Religion, yet if he
gives himself liberty to live in the practice of any known sin, yea, though it
be but in a sin of the tongue, his Religion is in vain, and that one sin will
separate him from God for ever. If a Wife be never so officious to her Husband
in many things, yet if she entertains any other Lover into his Bed besides
himself, it will for ever alienate his affections from her, and make an
everlasting separation between them: The Application is easy, to turn from one
sin to another, is but to be tossed from one hand of the Devil to another; it
is but with Benhadad, to recover of one disease, and die of another; It is but
to take pains to go to Hell. If a Ship spring three leaks, and only two be
stopped, the third will sink the Ship; or if a man have two grievous wounds in
his body, and takes order only to cure one, that which is neglected will
certainly kill him. It Is so here. Herod, Judas, and Saul, with the Scribes and
Pharisees, have for many hundred years experienced this truth. But

Secondly: Partial obedience, is indeed no obedience, it is only universal
obedience, that is true obedience, Exodus 24. 7. All that the Lord has said,
will we do, and be obedient. They only are indeed obedient, who have a care to
do all that is commanded: For to obey, is to do that which is commanded,
because it is commanded; though the thing done be commanded, yet if it be not
therefore done, because it is commanded, it is no obedience. Now if this be the
nature of obedience, then where obedience is indeed, it is not partial but
universal; for he that does any one thing that is commanded, because it is
commanded, he will be careful to do every thing that is commanded, there
being the same reason for all. They that are only for a partial obedience, they
do break a sunder the bond and reason of all obedience; for all obedience is to
be founded upon the Authority and will of God, because ^od (who has Authority
over all his Creatures) does will and command us to obey his voice, to walk in
his Statutes; for this very reason do we stand bound to obey him; and if we do
obey him upon this reason, then must we walk in all his Statutes, for so has
he commanded us; and if we will not come up to this, but will walk in what
Statutes of his we please, then do we renounce his Will, as the obliging reason
of our obedience, and do set up our own liking and pleasure as the reason
thereof. God has so connexed the duties of his Law one to another, that if
there be not a conscientious care to walk according to all that the Law
requires, a man becomes a transgressor of the whole Law, according to that of
Saint James, chap. 2. 10. whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
one point, is guilty of all, the bond of all is broken, the Authority of all is
slighted, and that evil disposition, that sinful frame of heart, that works a
man to venture upon the breach of one command, would make him venture upon the
breach of any command, were it not for some infirmity of nature, or because his
purse will not hold out to maintain it, or for shame, or loss, or because of
the eyes of Friends, or the sword of the Magistrate, or for some other sinister
respe^ts. He that gives himself liberty to live in the breach of any one
command of God, is qualified with a disposition of heart to break them all.
Every single sin contains vertually all sin in it. He that allows himself a
liberty to live in the breach of any one particular Law of God, he casts
contempt and scorn upon the Authority that made the whole Law, and upon this
account breaks it all. And the Apostle gives the reason of it in c^^r. 11. For
he that said, Do not commit Adultery, said also, Do not k^ll: Now if thou
commit no Adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the
Law, not that he is guilty of all distributively, but collectively; for the Law
is copulative, there is a chain of duties, and these are all so likned one to
another, that you cannot break one link of the chain, but you break the whole
chain. No man can live in the breach of any of any known command of God, but he
wrongs every command of God, he has no real regard to any of the Commandments
of God, that has not a regard to all the Commandments of God. There is one
and the same Lawgiver in respect of all the Commandments, he that gave one
command, gave also another; therefore he that observes one Commandment in
obedience unto God, whose Commandment it is, he will observe all, because all
are his Commandments; and he that slights one Commandment, is guilty of all,
because he does contemn the Authority of him that gave them all. Even in those
Commandments which he does observe, he has no respect to the Will and
Authority of him that gave them; therefore as Calvin does well observe upon
Jam. 2. 10, 11. That there is no Obedience toward God, where there is not an
uniform endeavor to please God, as well in one thing as in another.

Thirdly: Partial obedience tends to plain Atheism; of God is his Will, and it
is holy, spiritual, just, and good, Romans 7. 12, 14. and contrary to our sinful
Lusts; and if this be the reason why such and such Commandments of God wont
down with you, then by the same reason none of them must be of Authority with
you.

Fourthly: God requires universal Obedience, Deuteronomy. etc. Jer. 7. 23. Walk ye in
all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto you, Math. 28.
20. Teaching them to observe all things that I have Commanded you etc.

Fifthly: Partial Obedience is an audacious charge against God himself, as to
his Wisdom, or Power, or etc. as the rest, O what a Blasphemous charge is this
against God himself, in prescribing unto him any thing that is not righteous
and good, etc. and likewise in making his will, (which is the rule of all
righteousness and goodness) to be partly righteous, and partly unrighteous; to
be partly good, and partly bad.

Sixthly: God delights in universal Obedience, and in Deuteronomy. 5. 29. O that there
were such a heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my
Commandments always; upon this account Abraham is called the friend of God in
Scripture, three times, Isa. 41. 8. 2 Chronicles. 20. 7. James 2. 3. and upon the
very same account, God called David, A man after his own heart, Act. 13. 22. I
have found David the Son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall
fulfill all my Will. (...). All my wills, to note the universality and
sincerity of his Obedience.

Seventhly: There is not any one Statute of God, but ergo, we should walk in
all his Statutes, Deuteronomy. 5. 25. Ye shall walk in all the ways which the Lord
your God has commanded you; that you may live, and that it may be well with
you; what one path has, the Lord commanded us to walk in, but as it concerns
his own glory, so likewise it concerns our good?

Is it not good for us to love the Lord, and to set him up as the object of our
fear, and to act faith on him, and to worship him in spirit and in truth, and
to be tender of his glory, and to sanctify his day, and to keep off from sin,
and to keep close to his ways. But

Eighthly: Universal Obedience, is the condition, upon Ezekiel. 18. 21. If the
wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all his
Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall
not die:

Ninethly: Our hearts must be perfect with the Lord Deuteronomy. 18. 13. Thou shall be
perfect with the Lord thy God, and Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me, and be thou
perfect. Now how can our hearts be said to be perfect with God, if we do
prevaricate with him; if in some things we obey him, and in other things we
will not obey him; if we walk in some of his Statutes, but will not walk in all
his Statutes; if in some part we will be his Servants, and in other part of our
lives, we will be the Servants of sin. But

Tenthly: If the heart be found, and up-right, it will Psalm. 119. 80. Let my
heart be sound in thy Statutes, that I may not be a shamed, and v. 6. Then
shall I not be ashamed when I have respect to all thy Commandments; by these
verses compared together, it appears, that then the heart is sound and sincere,
when a man has respect unto all Gods Commandments: without a universal
Obedience, a man can never have that hope which makes not ashamed. But

Eleventhly: Either we must endeavor to walk in all the Statutes of God, or
else we must find some dispensation or toleration from God to free us, and
excuse us, and hold us indemnified, though we do not walk in all of them. Now
what one Commandment is there from Obedience, whereunto God excuses any man?
or will not That whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one
point, he is guilty of all, Jam. 2. 10. If he prevaricates with God, as to any
one particular Commandment of his, his heart is naught, he is guilty of all,
he has really no regard of any of the rest of Gods Laws. But

12thly: The precious Saints and Servants of God, whose examples are recorded,
and set forth for our imitation; they have been very careful to perform
universal Obedience; will you see it in Abraham, who was ready to comply with
God in all his Royal Commands. When God commanded him to leave his Country, and
his Fathers House, he did it, Genesis 12. When God Commanded him to be
Circumcised, though it were both shameful and painful, he submitted unto it,
Genesis 17. When God commanded him to send away his Son Ishmael, though when Sarah
speak to him about it, the things feemed very grievious unto him, yet as soon
as he saw it to be the Will of God, he was Obedient unto it, Genesis 21. When God
commanded him to Sacrifice his Son Isaac, his only Son, the Son of his Old age,
the Son of the Promise, the Son of his ^elight; yea, that Son from whom was to
proceed, that Jesus in whom all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed; and
though all this might seem to cross both Nature and Grace, both Reason and
Religion, yet Abraham was willing to obey God in this also, and to do what he
commanded, Genesis 22. so David was a man after Gods own heart, which fulfilled
all his Wills, as the original runs in Acts 13. 22. And it is said of
Zacharias, and Elizabeth, that they walked in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord, etc. Luke 1. 6. 1 These. 2. 10. Ye are Witnesses, and
God also, how holily, and justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves among
you that believe.

13thly: Universal Obedience speaks out the strength of our love to Christ, and
the reality of our friendship Joh. 15. 14. Ye are my Friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you. That Child shows most love to his Father, that
observes all his precepts; and that Servant shows most love to his Master, that
observes all his Masters commands, and that Wife shows most love to her
Husband, that observes all he requires in the Lord: So here, etc.

14thly. Universal Obedience will give most peace, Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace
have they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. But

15thly: Man's holiness must be conformable to Gods Ephe. 5. 1, 2. Be ye
followers of God as dear Children, Math. 5. 48. Be ye perfect, as your Heavenly
Father is perfect. Now God is Righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works, and so ought all to desire and endeavor to be, that would be saved, 1
Pet. 1. 15. As he who has called you is Holy, so be ye also holy in all manner
of Conversation. v. 16. because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy. But

16thly. The holiness of a Christian must be conformable Be ye followers of me,
as I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Now Christ was holy in all things. It behooves
us (said he) to fulfill all Righteousness. And this should be the care of every
one that professes himself to be Christ's, to endeavor to be holy as Christ
was holy, 1 John 2. 6. He that says he abides in him, ought himself to walk
even as he walked. But

17thly. Servants must obey their earthly Masters, not Tit. 2. 9. Exhort
Servants to be obedient to their own Masters, and to please them well in all
things. What Master will be content that his Servant should choose how far forth
he will observe and do those things which he does require of him? much less may
we think that such arbitrary and partial performances will please that God who
is our Heavenly Master.

18thly: The promises of mercy, both spiritual and King. 6. 12, 13. Deuteronomy. 28.
1, 2, 3, Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22, 27, 28. turn to all these promises and dilate on
them, etc.

19thly. One sin never goes alone, as you may see in Adam and Eve, Lot,
Abraham, Noah, Jacob, Joseph, Job, David, Solomon, Peter, Ahab, Judas,
Jeroboam; one sin will make way for more; as one little Thief can open the door
to let in many great ones: Satan will be sure to nest himself, to lodge himself
in the least sins, (as Birds nest and lodge themselves in the smallest branches
of the Tree) and there he will do all he can to hatch all manner of wickedness.
A little wedge makes way for a greater; and so do little sins make way for
greater.

20. The reasons of turning from sin, are universally binding to a gracious
soul. There are the same reasons etc. But

21stly One sin allowed, and lived in, will keep Christ

22dly. One sin allowed, and lived in, will unfit a person lay down his life
for Christ that cannot, that will not lay down a Lust for Christ. But

23dly. One sin allowed and lived in, is sufficient to deprive Genesis 3. 4, 5.
One fly in the box of prccious Ointment, spoils the whole box: One Thief may
Rob a man of all his treasure; one Disease may deprive a man of all his health;
and one drop of Poison will spoil the whole glass of Wine: and so one Sin
allowed, and lived in, will make a man miserable for ever. One Mill stone will
sink a man to the bottom of the Sea, as well as a hundred: it is so here. But

24thly. One Sin allowed, and lived in, will eat out

25thly. and lastly: The Sinner would have God to etc.

Object. But it is impossible for any man on Earth to walk in all God's
Statutes, to obey all his Commands, to do his will in all things, to walk
according to the full breadth of Gods Royal Law. Sol. I Answer, there is a
twofold walking in all the Statutes of God; there is a twofold Obedience to
all the Royal Commands of God.

First: One is legal, when all is done that God requires; For in many things
we offend all, Jam. 3. 2. So Eccles. 7. 20. There is not a just man upon the
Earth, that does good, and sins not, 1 King. 8. 46. For there is no man that
sins not, Prove. 20. 9. Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure
from my sin, Job. 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, not
one, 1 John 1. 8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us.

Secondly: Another is Evangelical, which is such a

First: In the Approbation of all the Statutes and Romans 7. 12. The Commandment
is holy, and just, and good. ver. 16. I consent unto the Law that it is good;
there is both assent and consent, Psalm. 119. 128. I esteem all thy precepts
concerning all things to be right. A sincere Christian approves of all Divine
Commands, though he cannot perfectly keep all Divine Commands. But

Secondly: It consists in a Conscientious submission unto Psalm. 119. 161. My
heart stands in awe of thy Word. A sincere Christian stands in awe of every
known Command of God, and has a spiritual rega^d unto them all, Psalm. 119. 6.
I have respect unto all thy Commandments. But

Thirdly: It consists in a cordial willingness, and a cordial desire to walk in
all the Statutes of God, and to obey all the Commands of God, Romans 7 18. For to
Will is present with me, Psalm. 119. 5. O! that my ways were directed to keep
thy Statutes, ver. 8. I will keep thy Statutes. But

Fourthly: It consists in a sweet complacency in all Gods Commands, Psalm. 119.
47. I will delight my self in thy Commandment which I have loved, Romans 7. 22.
I delight in the Law of God after the inward man. But

Fifthly: He who obeys sincerely, obeys universally, Psalm. 119. 97. O how I
love thy Law. Such a pang of love he felt, as could not otherwise be vented;
but by this pathetical exclamation, O how I love thy Law, ver. 113, 163, 127,
159, 167. ponder upon all these verses. But

Sixthly: A sincere Christian obeys all the Commands Psalm. 119. 72, 127, 128.
Psalm. 19. 8, 9, 10, 11. Job 23. 12. But

Seventhly: A sincere Christian is universal in his Obedience, Psalm. 119. 106.
I have sworn, and will p^rform it, that I will keep thy Righteous Judgments,
Psalm. 17. 3. I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. But

Eighthly: A sincere Christian is universal in his Obedience. King. 8. 57, 58.
2 Chronicles. 30. 17, 18, 19, 20. Psalm. 119. 112. I have inclined my heart to
perform thy Statutes always, oven to the end. But

Ninethly and lastly: Their Evangelical keeping of all the commands of God
consists in their sincere endeavor to keep them all; they put out themselves
in all the ways and parts of obedience; they do not willingly and wittingly
slight or neglect any Commandment, but are striving to conform themselves
thereunto; as a Dutiful Son does all his Fathers commands, at least in point of
endeavor. So your sincere Christians make Conscience of keeping all the
Commands of God, in respect of endeavors, Psalm. 119. 59. I turned my feet unto
thy Testimonies. God esteems of Evangelical Obedience, as perfect obedience;
Zacharias had his failings, he did hesitate through unbelief, for which he was
struck dumb; yet the Text tells you, That he walked in all the Commandments of
the Lord blameless, Luke 1. 6. Because he did cordially desire and endeavor to
obey God in all things. Evangelical Obedience is true for the essence, though
not perfect for the degree. A Child of God obeys all the Commands of God, in
respect of his sincere desires, purposes, resolutions, and endeavors; and this
God accepts in Christ for perfect and complete obedience. This is the glory of
the Covenant of Grace, that God accepts and esteems of sincere obedience as
perfect obedience. Such who sincerely endeavor to keep the whole Law of God,
they do keep the whole Law of God in an Evangelical sense, though not in a
legal sense. A sincere Christian is for the first Table as well as the second,
and the second as well as the first; he does not adhere to the first, and
neglect the second, as Hypocrites do; neither does he adhere to the second, and
contemn the first, as profane men do. O Christians, for your support and
comfort, know, that when your desires and endeavors are to do the Will of God
entirely, as well in one thing as another, God will graciously pardon your
failings, and pass by your imperfections. He will spare you as a man spares
his Son that serves him, Mal. 3. 17. Though a Father see his Son to fail, and
come short in many things which he enjoins him to do; yet knowing that his
desires and endeavors are to serve him, and please him to the full, he will
not be rigid and severe with him, but will be indulgent to him, and will spare
him, and pity him, and show all love and kindness to him. The Application is
easy, etc.

The second Question or case is this, viz: What is that Faith that gives a man
an interest in Christ, and in all those blessed benefits and favors that comes
by Christ? or whether that person that experiences the following particulars,
may not safely, groundedly and comfortably conclude that his ^aith is a true
just^fying, saving faith, the faith of Gods E^ac^, and such a faith as clearly
evidences a gracious Estate, and will certainly bring the Soul to Heaven? Now
in Answer to this important Question, we may suppose the poor Believer is ready
to experess himself thus:

First: Upon search, and sad experience, I find my Ephe. 2. 1, 2, 5, 12. Colos.
2. 13. Romans 8. 7, Luke 19. 10.

Secondly: I am convinced that it is not in my self to etc.

Thirdly: I am convinced that it is not in Angels or etc. or my soul can never
be saved; and I know it is not in Angels or Men, to do any of these things for
me.

Fourthly: I find that I stand in absolute need of a Savior These. 1. 10. to
save me from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 10. 13. and to save me from infernal
slames, Isa. 33. 14. so that I may well cry out with those in Act. 2. 37. Men
and Brethren what shall we do: And with the Jaylour, Act. 16. 36. Sirs, what
shall I do to be saved?

Fifthly: I see and know (through grace) that there is Act. 4. 12. Neither is
there Salvation in any other, for there is no other name (that is, no oother
person) under Heaven, given among men, by which we must be saved. I know there
is no Savior that can deliver me from eternal death, and bring me to eternal
life and glory; but that Jesus, of whom it is said, that he shall save his
People from their sins, Luke 1. 21. and therefore I must conclude that there is
an utter impossibility of obtaining Salvation by any other person, or things,
etc. But

Sixthly: I see and know (through grace) that Jesus Psalm. 89. 19. I have laid
help upon one that is mighty, Isa. 63. 1. I that speak in Righteousness, mighty
to save, Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost,
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.
I know that the Lord Jesus is mighty to save me from that Wrath, and from that
Curse, and from that Hell, and from that Damnation that is due to me, by reason
of my sins: And that he is mighty to justify me, and mighty to pardon me, and
mighty to reconcile me to God the Father, and mighty to bring me to glory, as
the Scripture does every where testify. But

Seventhly: I know (through grace) that Jesus Christ Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3, 4. Luke
4. 17. 18, 19, 20, 21. Math. 1. 20, 21. John 6. 27. Certainly were Jesus Christ
never so able, and mighty to save, yet if he were not anointed, appointed,
fitted, and furnished by the Father for that great office of saving poor lo^t
Sinners; I know no reason why I should expect Salvation by him. But

Eighthly: (I know through grace) that the Lord Jesus etc. for all them that
close with him, that accept of him, as he is offered in the Gospel of grace,
Gal 3. 19, 20. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Heb. 8. 6. Heb. 9. 14, 15. chap. 12. 24. Heb. 10.
12, 14. Math. 3. 15. Romans 8. 1, 2, 3, 4. 33, 34. chap. 5. 8, 9, 10. Act. 13. 39.

Ninethly: I find that Jesus Christ is freely offered in the Gospel to poor
lost undone Sinners, such as I am. I Mark. 16. 15. And he said unto them, Go ye
into all the World, and preach the Gospel unto every Creature; and what is it
to preach the Gospel unto every Creature, but to say unto them as the Angels
did to the Shepherds? Luke 2. 10, 11. I bring you good tidings of great joy,
which shall be to all people; for unto you is born this day, in the City of
David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, etc.

Tenthly: I know (through grace) that all sorts of Sinners Isa. 55. 1, 2. Math.
11. 28, 29. Joh. 7. 37. Rev. 3. 20. and chap. 22. 17. etc. But

Eleventhly: Through grace I do in my understanding Joh. 5. 10, 11, 12. The
report that God the Father has made concerning the Person of Christ, and
concerning the Offices of Christ, and concerning the work of Redemption by
Christ, I do really and cordially assent unto, as most true and certain, upon
the Authority of Gods Testimony, who is truth it self, and cannot lie. Now
though this assent alone is not enough to make a saving reception of Christ,
yet it is in saving faith, and that without which, it is impossible there
should be any saving faith. But

12thly. I can say (through grace) that in my judgjudgment, I do approve of the
Lord Jesus Christ, not only as a good, but as the greatest good, as a universal
good, as a matchless good, as an incomparable good, as an infinite good, as an
eternal good, and as the most suitable good in Heaven and Earth to my poor soul,
as these Scriptures do evidence, Psalm. 73. 25, 26. Cant. 5. 10. 45. Psalm. 1, 2.
Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Timothy 1. 15. I know there is every thing in Christ that
may suit the state, case, necessities and wants of my poor soul; there is mercy
in him to pardon me, and power in him to save me, and wisdom in him to counsel
me, and grace in him to enrich me, and righteousness in him to cloth me, etc.
and therefore I cannot but approve of the Lord Jesus, as such a good as exceeds
all the good that is to be found in Angels and Men; the good that I see in
Christ does not only counterpoise, but also excel all that real or imaginary
good that every I have met with in any thing below Christ. Christ must come
into the will, he must be received there, else he is never savingly received.
Now before the Will will receive him, the Will must be certainly informed that
he is good, yea, the best, and greatest good, or else he shall never be
admitted there. Let the understanding assent never so much to all propositions
concerning Christ, as true, if the judgment does not approve of them as good,
yea, as the best good, Christ will never be truly received; God in his working,
maintains the faculties of the Soul in their actings, as he made them.

13thly. So far as I know my own heart, I am sincerely Hos. 2. 19, 20. 2 Cor.
11. 2. Isa. 54. 5. Isa. 61. 10. Isa. 62. 5. Cant. 3. 11. etc. Through grace I
am,

First: Sincerely willing to take the Lord Jesus Christ I know my own heart, I
do through mercy, give my hearty consent, that Christ, and Christ alone shall
be my Savior and Redeemer. It is true, I do duties, but the desire of my soul
is to do them out of love to Christ, and in obedience to his Royal Law and
Pleasure. I know my best Righteousnesses are but as filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6.
And woe would be to me, had I no other shelter, or Savior, or resting place
for my poor soul, than rags, than filthy rags. And so far as I know my own
heart, I am sincerely willing to give up my self to the guidance and government
of Jesus Christ, as my sovereign Lord and King, desiring nothing more in this
world, than to live and die under the guidance and government of his Spirit,
Word, and Grace. But

Secondly: I am willing, through grace, to give a

Thirdly: I am sincerely willing, through Grace, to

Fourthly: So far as I know my own heart, I am sincerely John 12. Secondly, to
receive him in all his Offices, as King, Prophet, and Priest, Col. 2. 6. Acts
5. 31. Thirdly, To receive him into every room of my soul; to receive him into
my understanding, mind, will, affections, etc. Fourthly: To receive him upon
his own terms, of denying my self; taking up his Cross, and following of him
wherever he goes, Math. 16. 21. Rev. 14. 4. etc.

Fifthly and lastly: So far as I know my own heart, I etc.

Certainly that Christian that has and does experience the particulars last
mentioned under the second question, that Christian may safely, groundedly,
boldly, and comfortably conclude that his faith is a true, justifying, saving
Faith, the Faith of Gods Elect, and such a Faith as clearly evidences a
gracious Estate, and will never leave his Soul short of Heaven.

Now how many thousand Christians are there, that have this Faith that is here
described, which is doubtless a true, justifying, saving Faith, that gives a
man an interest in the person of Christ, and in all the blessings and benefits
that comes by Christ, who yet question whether they have true faith or no,
partly from weakness, partly from temptations, and partly from the various
definitions that are given of Faith by Protestants, both in their Preachings
and Writings; and it is, and must be for a lamentation, that in a point of so
great moment, the Trumpet should give such an uncertain sound.

The third Question, or case is this, viz. whether in the great day of the
Lord, the day of general Judgment, or Eccles. 11. 9. cap. 12. 14. Matthew. 12.
36. cap. 18. 23.
in the particular Judgment that will pass upon every soul immediately after
death, which is the stating of the soul in an Eternal estate or condition,
either of happiness or misery; whether the sins of the Saints, the follies and
Luke 16. 2. Rom 14. 10, 12. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb. 9. 27. cap. 13 17. 1 Pet. 4 5.
vanities of Believers, the infirmities and enormities of sincere Christians
shall be brought into the judgment of discussion and discovery, or no? Whether
the Lord will either in the great day of account, or in a man's particular day
of account or judgment, publicly manifest, proclaim, and make mention of the
sins of his people, or no? This question is bottomed upon the ten Scriptures in
the Margent, which I desire the Christian Reader to consult; and upon the sad
and daily complaints of many dear sincere Christians, who frequently cry out,
O! we can never answer for one evil thought of ten thousand, nor we J^^. 9. 3.
Psalm 19. 12. Psalm 143. 2. Ezr 19. 6.
can never answer for one idle word of twenty thousand; nor we can never answer
for one evil action of a hundred thousand, and how then shall we stand in
Judgment? how shall we look the Judge in the Face? how shall we be ever able to
answer for all our Omissions, and for all our Commissions; for all our sins of
Ignorance, and sins against light and knowledge; for all our sins against the
Law, and for all our sins against the Gospel, and for all our sins against
sovereign Grace, and for all our sins against the Remedy, against the Lord
Jesus, and for all the sins of our Infancy, of our Youth, Heb. 9 27.
and of old Age, etc. What account shall we be able to give up, when we come to
our particular day of Judg-ment, immediately after our death, or in the great
and general day of account, when Angels, Devils, and Men shall stand before the
Lord Jesus; whom God the Father has ordained to be the Judge of Quick and
Dead, Act. 17. 31.

Now to this great Question I Answer, that the sins of the Saints, the
infirmities and enormities of Believers shall never be brought into the
Judgment of discussion and discovery, they shall never be objected against
them, either in their particular day of Judgment, or in the great day of their
Account. Now this truth I shall make good by an induction of particulars thus.

First: Our Lord Jesus Christ, in His judicial proceedings in the last day,
which is set down clearly and largely in Math. 25. 34. to ver. 42. does only
enumerate the good works they have done, but takes not the least notice of the
spots and blemishes of the infirmities or enormities Deuteronomy. 32. 4, 5, 6. Dan. 9.
24.
of the weaknesses or wickednesses of his people. God has sealed up the sins of
his people, never to be remembered or looked upon more. In the great day, the
book of Gods Remembrance shall be opened, and publicly read, that all the good
things that the Saints have done for God, for Christ, for Saints, for their own
Souls, for Sinners; and that all the great things that they have suffered for
Christ's sake, and the Gospels sake, may be mentioned to their everlasting
praise, to their eternal honor. And though the choicest and chiefest Saints on
Rom 7. 23, 24. Gal. 5. 17.
Earth have, 1. Sin dwelling in them: 2. Operating and working in them. 3.
Vexing and molesting of them, being as so many Goads in their sides, and Thorns
in their eyes. 4. Captivating and prevailing over them, yet in that large
Recital which shall then be read of the Saints lives, Math. 25. There is not
the least mention made either of sins of Omission, or Commission; nor the least
mention made, either of great sins, or of small sins; nor the least mention
made, either of sins before Conversion, or after Conversion. Here in this world
the best of Saints have had their buts, their spots, their blots, their specks,
as the fairest day has its Clouds, the finest Linen its spots, and the
richest Jewels their specks; but now in the judicial process of this last and
universal Assizes there is not found in all the Books that shall then be
opened, so much as one unsavory but, to blemish the Rev. 20. 12. Dan. 7. 10.
Number. 23. 21.
fair Characters of the Saints. Surely he that sees no Iniquity in Jacob, nor
perverseness in Israel, to impute it to them whilst they live, he will never
charge Iniquity or perverseness upon them in the great day. Surely, he who has
fully satisfied his Fathers Justice for his peoples sins, and who has by his
own Blood balanced and made Isa. 53.
up all Reckonings and Accounts between God and their souls, he will never
charge upon them their faults and follies in the great day. Surely he, who has
spoken so much for his Saints, whilst he was on Earth, and who has continually
interceded for them since he went to John 17. Heb. 7. 25.
Heaven, he will not (though he has cause to blame them for many things) speak
any thing against them in the great day. Surely Jesus Christ, the Saints
Play Master, Heb. 10. 10, 12, 14. Matthew. 18. 24. Col. 2 14.
who has discharged their whole debt at once, who has paid down upon the nayl
the ten thousand Talents which we owed, and took in the Bond, and nailed it to
the Cross; leaving no back-reckonings unpaid, to bring his poor Children, which
are the travail of his soul, afterward Isa. 53. 11.
into any danger from the hands of Divine Justice; he will never mention the
sins of his people; he will never charge the sins of his people upon them in
the great day. Our dear Lord Jesus, who is the Righteous Judge of Heaven and
Earth in the great day of account, He will bring in Omnia been, in his
presentment all fair and well, and accordingly will make Proclamation in that
High-Court of Justice, before God, Angels, Devils, Saints, and Sinners, etc.
Christ will not charge his Children with the least unkindness, he will not
charge his Spouse with the least unfaithfulness in the great day; yea, he will
represent them before God, Angels, and Men, as complete in him, as all fair and
spotless, as without spot or wrinkle, as without fault before the Throne of
God; as holy and Col. 2. 10. Cant. 4. 7. Ephe. 5. ^7 Rev. 14 5.
unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight; as immaculate as the Angels
themselves, who kept their first Estate. This honor shall have all the Saints,
and thus shall Christ be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all 1 Th^s. 2.
10
them that believe. The greatest part of the Saints by far, will have past
their particular judgment long before Heb 9. 27.
the general judgment, and being therein acquitted and discharged from all
their sins, by God the Judge of the quick and dead, and admitted into Heaven
upon the credit 2 Timothy 4. 1.
of Christ's Blood, Righteous satisfaction, and their free and full
justification. It cannot be imagined that Jesus Christ, in the great day, will
bring in any new charge against his Children, when they have been cleared and
absolved already. Certainly when once the Saints are freely and fully Absolved
from all their sins by a Divine Sentence, then their sins shall never be
remembered, they shall never be objected against them any more. For one Divine
Sentence cannot cross and rescind another: the Judge of all the world had long
since cast all their sins behind his back, and will he now set them before his
face, Isa. 38. 17.
and before the faces of all the world? surely no, he has long since cast all
their sins into the depths of the Sea, (bottomless depths of everlasting
Oblivion) that they might Micah. 7. 19.
never be buoyed up any more! He has not only forgiven their sins, but he has
also forgotten their sins: And Jer. 31. 34.
will he remember them, and declare them in the great day? surely no: God has
long since blotted out the transgressions Isa 43. 25.
of his people. This Metaphor is taken from Creditors, who when they purpose
never to exact a Debt, will blot it out of their Books. Now after that a Debt
is stricken out of a Bill, Bond, or Book, it cannot be exacted; the Evidence
cannot be pleaded, Christ Col. 2. 14.
having crossed the debt-Book with the red lines of his Blood. If now he should
call the sins of his people to remembrance, and charge them upon them, he
should cross the great design of his cross: Upon this foundation stands the
absolute impossibility that any sin, that the least sin, yea, that the least
circumstance of sin, or the least aggravation of sin should be so much as
mentioned by the Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, in the process of that
judicial Trial in the great day, except it be in a way of absolution, in order
to the magnifying of their pardon. God has long since blotted out as a thick
Cloud Isa. 44. 22.
the transgressions of his people, and as a Cloud, their sins. Now we know that
the clouds, which are driven away by the winds, appear no more; nor the Mist
which is dried up by the Sun, appears no more, other Clouds, and other Mists
may arise, but not they which are driven away and dried up. Thus the Sins of
the Saints being forgiven, they shall no more return upon them; they shall
never more be objected against them.

Further, The Lord says, Though your sins be as Scarlet, Isa. 1. 18.
they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be
as Wool: Pardon makes such a clear riddance of sin, that it is as if it had
never been; the Scarlet Sinner is as white as Snow, Snow newly fallen from the
Sky, which was never sullied: The Crimson Sinner is as Wool, Wool which never
received the least tincture in the Dye-fat: you know Scarlet and Crimson are
double and deep dies, dies in grain; yet if the Cloth dyed therewith, be as
the Wool before it was dyed, and if it be as white as Snow, what is become of
those dies? are they any more? is not the Cloth as if it had not been dyed at
all? even so, though our sins by reiterating them, by long lying in them, have
made deep impressions upon us, yet by Gods discharge of them, we are as if we
had never committed them.

Again, The Psalmist pronounces him blessed, whose Psalm. 32. 1.
sin is covered. A thing covered is not seen; so sin forgiven, is before God as
not seen: The same Psalmist pronounces him blessed, to whom the Lord imputes
not sin. Psalm. 32. 2.


Now a sin not imputed, is as not committed. The Prophet Jeremiah tells us,
That the Iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and
the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found. Now is not that fully Jer. 50.
20.
discharged which shall never be found, never appear, never be remembered, never
be mentioned. Thus by the many Metaphors used in Scripture, to set out
forgiveness of sin, pardon of sin, you plainly and evidently see, that Jer. 31.
34. Ezekiel. 18. 22.
God's discharge is free and full, and therefore he will never charge their
sins upon them in the great day. But

Some may object and say, that the Scripture says, that God shall bring every
work into Judgment, with every Eccles. 12: 14.
secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil: How then can this be,
that the sins of the Saints shall not be mentioned, nor charged upon them in
the great day.

I Answer: This Scripture is to be understood Respective, etc. with a just
respect to the two great parties Matthew 25 3^, 33.
which are to be judged, Sheep and Goats, Saints and Sinners, Sons and Slaves,
Elect and Reprobate, Holy and Profane, Pious and Impious, Faithful and
Unfaithful; that is to say, all the Grace, the Holiness, the Godliness, the
Good of those that are good, shall be brought into the Judgment of mercy, that
it may be freely, graciously, and nobly rewarded, and all the wickedness of the
Wicked shall be brought into the Judgment of Condemnation, that ^t may be
righteously and everlastingly punished in this great day of the Lord. All
Sincerity shall be discovered and rewarded; and all Hypocrisy shall be
disclosed and revenged. In this great day, all the works of the Saints shall
follow them into Heaven; and in this great day, all the evil works of the
Wicked shall hunt and pursue them into Hell. In this See Wisd. 2. th^ough^u^,
and cap. 5. from the first verse to the tenth.
great day, all the hearts, thoughts, secrets, words, ways, works, and walkings
of Wicked men, shall be discovered and laid open before all the world, to their
everlasting shame and sorrow, to their eternal amazement and astonishment. And
in this great day, the Lord will make mention (in the years of all the world)
of every Prayer that the Saints have made, and of every Sermon that they have
heard, and of every Tear that they have shed, and of every Fast that they have
kept, and of every Sigh and Groan that ever they have fetched, and of all the
good words that ever they have spoke, and of all the good works that ever they
have done, and of all the great things that ever they have suffered. Yea, in
this great day, they shall reap the fruit of many good Services which
themselves had forgot. Lord, when saw we Thee Hungry, and fed Thee; or Thirsty,
and give Math 25 34. 41.
Thee drink; or Naked, and Clothed Thee; or Sick, or in Prison, and Visited
Thee? They had done many good works, and forgot them; but Christ records them,
remembers them, and rewards them before all the World. In this great day, a bit
of Bread, a cup of cold Water, shall not pass without a reward. In this great
day, the Saints shall reap a plentiful and glorious crop (as the Matthew 10. 24.
25. ^ecles. 11. 16.
fruit) of that good seed, that for a time has seemed to be buried and lost.
In this great day of the Lord, the Saints shall find that Bread which long
before was cast upon the waters. But my

Second Reason is taken from Christ's vehement protestations, That they shall
not come into Judgment, Joh. 5. 24. Verily, Verily, I say unto you, he that
hears my Vide Aqu^^ 87. Sup^l. est. in l. 4. S^^. did. 47.
Word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not
come into Condemnation, but is passed from death unto life. Those words, shall
not come into Condemnation, are not rightly translated; the Original is (...),
shall not come into Judgment, not into Damnation, as you read it in all your
English Books: I will not say, what should put men upon this Exposition, rather
than a true translation of the Original word; further, it is very observable,
that no Evangelist uses this double asseveration but St. John, and he never
uses it, J^h. 1. 51 chapter 3. 3, 11 chap. 6. 26. 32, 47, 53, etc.
but in matters of greatest weight and importance, and to show the earnestness
of his Spirit, and to stir us up to better attention, and to put the thing
asserted, out of all question, and beyond all contradiction; as when we would
put a thing for ever out of all question, we do it by a double asseveration,
verily, verily, it is so, etc.

Thirdly: Because his not bringing their sins into Judgment, does most and best
agree with many precious and glorious expressions that we find scattered (as so
many shining, sparkling Pearls) up and down in Scripture; As

First: With those of Gods blotting out the sins of his people. I, even I am
he, that blotteth out thy transgressions, Isa. 43. 25. Isa. 4^. 22.
for my own sake, and will not remember thy sins. I have blotted out, as a
thick Cloud, thy transgressions, and as a Cloud, thy sins.

Who is this that blots our transgressions? he that has the keys of Heaven and
Hell at his girdle; that opens and no man shuts; that shuts and no man opens;
he that has the power of life and death, of condemning and absolving, of
killing and making alive; he it is that blotteth out transgressions: If an
Under-Officer should blot out an Indictment, that perhaps might do a man no
good; a man might for all that, be at last, cast by the Judge; but when the
Judge, or King, shall blot out the Indictment with their own hand, then the
Indictment cannot return; now this is every Believers case and happiness.

Secondly: To those glorious expressions of Gods not remembering of their sins
any more, Isa. 43. 25. And I Jer. 31. 34.
will not remember thy sins: And they shall teach no more every man his
Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, Know ye the Lord, for they shall
all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord,
for I will forgive their Iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. So
the Apostle, For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, Heb. 8 12.
and their sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more.

And again; The same Apostle says, This is the Covenant that I will make with
them; After those days, Heb. 10. 17. That which Cicero said flatteringly of
Caesar, is truly affi^med of God, Nihil obliv^sci solet praeter injurias, he
forget^eth nothing but the wrongs that daily are done him by his.
says the Lord; I will put my Laws into their hearts, and in their minds will
I write them, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.

The meaning is, their iniquities shall be quite forgotten, I will never
mention them more, I will never take notice of them more, they shall never hear
more of them from me: though God has an Iron memory to remember the sins of
the wicked, yet he has no memory to remember the sins of the righteous.

Thirdly: His not bringing their sins into Judgment, does most and best agree
with those blessed expressions, of his casting their sins into the depth of the
Sea; and of his casting them behind his back. He will turn again, he Mic. 7. 19.
will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will
cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea. Where sin is once Pardoned, the
Remission stands never to be repealed; pardoned-sin shall never come in account
against the pardoned man, before God any more; for so much does this borrowed
speech import: If a thing were cast into a River, it might be brought up again;
or if it were cast upon the Sea, it might be discerned and taken up again; but
when it is cast into the depths, the bottom of the Sea, it can never be buoyed
up again.

By the Metaphor in the Text, the Lord would have us to know, that sins
pardoned shall rise no more, they shall never be seen more, they shall never
come on the account more; he will so drown their sins, that they shall never
come up before him the second time.

And so much that other Scripture imports; Behold, Isa. 38. 17.
for Peace I had great bitterness; But thou have in love to my Soul delivered
it from the Pit of Corruption; for thou have cast all my sins behind thy back*
These last words are a borrowed speech, taken from the manner of men, who are
wont to cast behind their backs, such things as they have no mind to see,
regard, or remember. A gracious soul has always his sins before his face, (I
acknowledge Psalm. 51. 3.
my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me) and therefore no wonder if
the Lord cast them behind his back. The Father soon forgets, and casts behind
his back, those faults that the Child remembers, and has always in his eyes;
so does the Father of Spirits.

Fourthly: His not bringing their sins into Judgment, does best agree with that
sweet and choice expression of Gods pardoning the sins of his people.

And I will cleanse them from all their Iniquity, whereby Jer. 33. 8.
they have sinned against me; and I will pardon all their Iniquities, whereby
they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me. So in Micah,
Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons Iniquity, and passes by the
transgressions of Mic 7. 18.
the remnant of his heritage (as though he would not see it, but wink at it) He
retains not his Anger for ever, because he delights in Mercy. The Hebrew
word, (Nose from Nasa) that is here rendered, pardoned, signifies a taking
away; when God pardons sin, he takes it shier away; that if it should be sought
for, yet it could not be found, Jer ^0. 20.
as the Prophet speaks; In those days, and in that time, says the Lord, the
Iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins
of Judah, and they shall not be found, for I will pardon them whom I reserve;
and these words, and passes by, in the (afore-cited) seventh (...) Gnab^^, he
passed over.
of Micah, and the 18th. according to the Hebrew (Vegnober Gnal) is and passes
over, God passes over the transgression of his heritage; that is, he takes no
notice of it; as a man in a deep muse, or as one that has have of business;
sees not things before him, his mind being busied about other matters, he
neglects all to mind his business.

As David, when he saw in Mephibosheth the feature of his friend Jonathan, took
no notice of his lameness, or any other defect, ot deformity: So God beholding
in his people, the glorious Image of his Son, winks at all their ^sa. 40 1, 2.
faults and deformities; which made Luther say, Do with me what thou will,
since thou have pardoned my sin; and what is it to pardon sin, but not to
mention sin?

Fifthly: His not bringing their sins into the Judgment of Discussion and
Discovery, does best agree to those expressions of forgiving, and covering;
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. In the
Original, Psalm. 32. 1.
it is in the plural Blessednesses; so here is a plurality of Blessings, a
chain of Pearls.

The like expression you have in the 85th. Psalm, and the second v. Thou have
forgiven the Iniquity of thy people, thou have covered all their sin. Selah.
For the understanding of these Scriptures aright, take notice, that to Cover,
is a Metaphorical expression; Covering is such an action Sic vel^^tur, ut in
judicio non r^vel. ntur.
which is opposed to disclosure; to be covered, it is to be so hid and closed,
as not to appear. Some make the Metaphor from filthy, loathsome objects, which
are covered from our eyes, as dead carcasses are buried under the ground; some
from Garments, that are put upon us to cover our nakedness; others from the
Egyptians that were drowned in the red Sea, and so covered with water; others
from a great Gulf in the earth, that is filled up, and covered with earth,
injected into it; and others make it in the last place, an allusive expression
to the mercy-seat, over which was a covering.

Now all these Metaphors in the general, tend to show this, that the Lord will
not look, he will not see, he will not take notice of the sins he has
pardoned, to call them any more to a judicial account.

As when a Prince reads over many Treasons, and Rebellions, and meets with such
and such, which he has pardoned, he reads on, he passes by, he takes no
notice of them, the pardoned person shall never hear more of them, he will
never call him to account for those sins more. So here, etc. When Caesar was
painted, he puts his finger upon his scar, his wart. God puts his fingers upon
all his peoples scars and warts, upon all their weaknesses and infirmities,
that nothing can be seen but what is fair and lovely; Thou art all fair, my
Love, and there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4. 7.

Sixthly: It best agrees to that expression of not imputing of sin. Blessed is
the man to whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no
guile. So Psalm 32 2.
the Apostle in that, Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. Now not to impute Iniquity, is not to
charge Iniquity, not to set Iniquity upon his score, who is blessed and
pardoned, etc.

Seventhly and lastly: It best agrees with that expression that you have in the
113. Psalm, and the 11, and 12. Verses, For as the Heaven is high above the
Earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him; as far as the East is
from the West, so far has he removed our Transgressions from us. What a vast
distance is there betwixt the East and West? of all visible latitudes, this is
the greatest; and thus much for the third Argument. The

Fourth Argument that prevails with me, to judge that Jesus Christ will not
bring the sins of the Saints into the judgment of discussion and discovery in
the great day, is, because it seems unsuitable to three considerable things,
for Jesus Christ to proclaim the infirmities and miscarriages of his people to
all the world.

First: It seems to be unsuitable to the glory and solemnity of that day, which
to the Saints will be a day of refreshing, a day of Restitution, a day of
Redemption, a day of Coronation, as has been already proved; now how suitable
to this great day of solemnity, the Proclamation of the Saints sins will be, I
leave the Reader to judge.

Secondly: It seems unsuitable to all those near and dear relations, that Jesus
Christ stands in toward his; Isa. 9. 6^ Heb 2. 11, 12. Eph^ 1. 21, 22. Rev.
19. 7. Joh. 15. 1. Joh. 2. 1, 2.
he stands in the Relation of a Father, a Brother, a Head, a Husband, a Friend,
an Advocate: Now are not all these by the Law of Relation, bound rather to
hide, and keep secret (at least from the world) the weaknesses, and infirmities
of their near and dear Relations; and is not Christ, is not Christ much more?
By how much he is more a Father, a Brother, a Head, a Husband, etc. in a
spiritual way, than any others can be in a natural way, etc.

Thirdly: It seems very unsuitable to what the Lord Jesus requires of his in
this world; the Lord requires that his people should cast a Mantle of Love, of
Wisdom, of Silence, and Secrecy over one another weaknesses and infirmities,
etc.

Hatred stirs up strifes, but Love covers all sins: Loves mantle is very
large; Love will find a hand, a plaster to clap upon every sore. Flavius
Vespacianus, Prove. 10 12. 1 Pet 4: 8:
(the Emperor) was very ready to conncal his friends Vices, and as ready to
reveal their Virtues: So is Divine love in the hearts of the Saints, If thy
Brother offend thee, go and tell him his fault between him and thee alone; If
he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother. As the Pills of Reprehension
are to be gilded and sugared over Mat. 18. 15.
with much gentleness and softness; so they are to be given in secret; tell
him, between him and thee alone, Tale-bearers, and Tale-hearers are alike
abominable.

Heaven is too hot, and too holy a place for them, Psalm. 15. 3. Now will Jesus
Christ have us carry it thus toward offending Christians, and will he himself
act otherwise? Nay, is it an evil in us to lay open the weaknesses and
infirmities of the Saints to the World? and will it be an excellency, a glory,
a virtue in Christ, to do it in the great day, etc.

A fisth Argument, is this, It is the glory of a man to pass over a
Transgression, The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory
to pass over a transgression, Prove. 19. 11.
or to pass by it, as we do by persons or things, we know not, or would take no
notice of. Now, is it the glory of a man to pass over a transgression, and will
it not much more be the glory of Christ, silently to pass over Non (...) quen-^
quam nisi offendam, said a Heathen.
the transgressions of his people in that great day? The greater the Treasons
and Rebellions are, that a Prince passes over, and takes no notice of, the more
is his Honor and Glory: and so doubtless it will be Christ's in that great day,
to pass over all the Treasons and Rebellions of his people; to take no notice
of them, to forget them as well as to forgive them.

The Heathens have long since observed, that in nothing man came nearer to the
Glory and Perfection of God himself, than in Goodness and Clemency; Surely, if
it be such an honor to man, to pass over a Transgression, it cannot be a
dishonor to Christ, to pass over the Transgressions of his people, he having
already buried them in the Sea of his blood. Again, says Solomon, It is the
glory of God to conceal a thing. And why it should not make Prove 25. 2.
for the Glory of Divine Love, to conceal the sins of the Saints, in that great
Day, I know not: And whether the concealing the sins of the Saints in the great
day, will not make most for their joy, and wicked men's sorrows, for their
comfort, and wicked men's terror and torment, I will leave you to judge, and
time and experience to decide; and thus much for the resolution of that great
question.

Now from what has been said, in answer to this third Question, a sincere
Christian may form up this first plea as Eccles. 11 9. cap. 12. 14. Math. 12.
14. cap. 18. 23. Luke 16 3. Rom 1^. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb 9. 27. cap. 13. 17. 1
Pet. 4 5
to the ten Scriptures in the Margent, that refer either to the general
judgment, or to the particular judgment that will pass upon every Christian
immediately after death. O blessed God, Jesus Christ has by his own blood
balanced and made up all reckonings and accounts that were between thee and
me; and thou have vehemently protested, that thou will not bring me into
Judgment; that thou will blot out my Transgressions as a thick Cloud, and that
thou will remember my sins no more; and that thou will cast them behind thy
back, and hurl them into the depth of the Sea; and that thou will forgive them,
and cover them, and not impute them to me, etc. This is my Plea, O Lord, and by
this plea I shall stand; Well, says the Judge of Quick and Dead, I own this
plea, I accept of this plea, I have nothing to say against this plea; the plea
is just, safe, honorable and righteous, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

Secondly: Every Sinner at his first believing and closing with Christ, is
justified in the Court of glory from all his sins, both guilt and punishment.
Justification Act. 13. 39.
does not increase or decrease, but all sin is pardoned at the first act of
believing. All who are justified, are justified alike; there is no difference
amongst Believers, as to their justification, one is not more justified than
another, (for every justified person has a plenary Remission of his sins, and
the same Righteousness of Christ imputed) but in Sanctification there is
difference amongst Believers. Every one is not sanctified alike, for some are 1
Cor. 12. 19, 1^, 14. 1 John 2 1. 12, 13, 14.
stronger and higher, and others are weaker and lower in grace: As soon as any
are made Believers in Christ, all the sins which they have committed in time
past, and all the sins which they are guilty of, as to the time present, they
are actually pardoned unto them in general, and in particular. Now that all the
sins of a Believer are pardoned at once, and actually unto them, may be thus
demonstrated.

First: All phrases in Scripture imply thus much, Esa. 43. 25. I, even I am he,
which blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember
thy sins, Jer. 31. 34. I will forgive their Iniquity, and I will remember their
sin no more, Jer. 33. 8. And I will pardon all their Iniquities whereby they
have sinned, and whereby they have Transgressed against me, Ezekiel. 18. 22. All
his Transgressions, that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto
him, Heb. 8. 12. I will be merciful unto their Unrighteousness, and their sins,
and their Iniquities I will remember no m^re; ergo, all is pardoned at once. But

Secondly: That Remission of sins that leaves no Condemnation to the party
offending, is the Remission of all sins; for if there were any sin remaining, a
man is still in 2. At a sinners first Con^ersion his sins are truly and
perfectly pardoned 1. All as to sin already past 2. All as to the state of
Remission; they had a perfect right to the pardon of all their sins part,
present, and to come, though not an equal (...).
the state of Condemnation; but Justification leaves no Condemnation; Romans 8.
1. verse. There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, and ver 33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies;
and ver. 38, 39. Nor things present, nor things to come, shall be able to
separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord; and Joh.
5. 24. He that hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into Condemnation, but is passed from
death to life: ergo, all sins are pardoned at once, or else they were in a
state of Condemnation, etc. Thus you see it evident, that there is no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; therefore there is full
remission of all sins to the soul at the first act of believing. But

Thirdly: A Believer (even when he sins) is still united to Christ, Joh. 15.
1. 6. Joh. 17. 21, 22, 23. Cor. 6. 17. And he is still Clothed with the
Righteousness of Christ which covers all his sins, and discharges him from
them, so that no guilt can redound to him, Isa 61. 10. Jer. 23. 6. 1 Cor. 1.
30. Phil. 3. 9. etc. But

Fourthly: A Believer is not to fear Curse, or Hell, at all, which yet he might
do if all his sins were not pardoned at

Fifthly: Our Lord Jesus Christ, by once suffering, suffered for all the sins
of the Elect, past, present, and to Isa. 53. 9. Heb. 12. 14. chap. 10. 9, 10,
12, 14. If Christ had suffered for ten thousand worlds, he could have suffered
no more than he did; for he suffered the whole infinite wrath of God the
Father; the wrath of God was infinite wrath, and the sufferings of Christ were
infinite sufferings; ergo, Look as Adam's sin was enough to infect a thousand
worlds, so our Saviors merits are sufficient to save a thousand worlds; those
sufferings that he suffered for sins past, are sufficient to satisfy for sins
present, and to come. That all the sins of Gods Isa. 54. 5, 6.
people (in their absolute number, from first to last) were laid upon Christ,
who in the days of his sufferings, did meritoriously purchase perfect remission
of all their sins; to be applied in future times to them, and by them is most
certain. But

Sixthly: Repentance is not at all required for our justification (where our
pardon is only to be found) but only

Sevently: If the Remission of all sins be not at once, Psalm. 1 30. 3. v. If
thou, Lord, should mark Iniquities? O Lord, who shall stand, ver. 4. But
there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. Forgiveness makes
not a Christian bold with sin, but fearful of sin, and careful to obey, as
Christians find in their daily experience: By this Argument it appears clear,
that the forgiveness of all sins is made to the soul at once, at the first act
of Believing. But

Eighthly: If new sins were not pardoned until you do repent, then we should be
left to an uncertainty whiles for it may be long ere we repent, as you see in
David, who lay long under the guilt of Murder and Adultery before he repented;
and you know Solomon lay long under many high sins before he repented, etc. and
it may be more long ere we do, or can know that we do truly repent of our sins.
But

Ninethly: If all sins were not forgiven at once, then justification is not
perfect at once, but is more and more

Tenthly: All agree, that as to Gods eternal decree or purpose of forgiveness,
all the sins of his people are forgiven.

Thirdly: Consider, that at the very moment of a Believers dissolution, all his
sins are perfectly and fully forgiven; debts were then discharged, all scores
were then crossed; so that in the great day, when the Books shall be opened and
perused, there shall not one sin be found, but all blotted out, and all
reckonings made even in the blood of Christ.

Indeed, if God should pardon some sins, and not others, he would at the same
time be a friend and an enemy, and we should be at once both happy and
miserable, which are manifest contradictions; besides, God does nothing in
vain: But it would be in vain for God to pardon some sins, but not all! for as
one leak in a Ship, unstopped, will sink the Ship; and as one sore, or one
disease, not healed, nor cured, will kill the body, so one sin unpardoned will
destroy the soul.

Fourthly: God looks not upon those as Sinners, whose sins are pardoned, Luke
7. 37. And behold a Woman in the City which was a sinner: A notorious sinner, a
branded sinner; mark, it is not said, behold a Woman which is a sinner, but
behold a Woman which was a sinner; to note, that sinners converted and
pardoned, are no longer reputed sinners. Behold a Woman which was a sinner:
look as a man, when he is cleansed from filth, is as if he had never been
defiled; so when a Sinner is pardoned, he is in Gods account, as if he had
never sinned. Hence those phrases in Cant. 4. 7. Thou art all fair my love, and
there is no spot in thee, Col. 2. 10. And ye are complete in him who is the
head of all principality and power; as though he had said, Because in himself
he has the Wellhead of Glory and Majesty, the which becomes ours; in that he
is also the head of his Church, Col. 1. 21. And you that were sometime
alienated, and Enemies in your mind, by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled, ver. 22. In the body of his flesh, through death, to present you
holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight; that is, by his
Righteousness imputed and imparted; Ephe. 5. 27. That he might present it to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but
that it should be holy and without blemish. The word present, is taken from the
custom of solemnizing a Marriage; first the Spouse was woed, and then set
before her Husband adorned with his Jewels, as Rebecca was with Isaacs; Rev.
14. 5. And in their mouth was found no guile, for they are without fault,
before the Throne of God. 1. They are without fault by imputation. 2. By
inchoation. Hence Job is said, to be a perfect man, Job 1. And David to be a
man after Gods own heart; Act. 13. 22. The forgiven party is now looked upon,
and received with that love and favor, as if he had never offended God, and as
if God had never been offended by him, Hos. 14. 1, 2, 4. Isa. 54. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Jer. 31. 33, 34, 36, 37. Luke 15. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Here the sins of the
Prodigal are pardoned, and his Father receives him with such expressions of
love and familiarity, as if he had never sinned against him; his Father never
so much as objects any one of all his high sinnings against him. Hence it is
that you read of such sweet, kind, tender, loving, comfortable expressions of
God toward those whose sins he had pardoned, Jer. 31. 16. Refrain thy voice
from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, verse 20. Is Ephraim my dear Son, is
he a pleasant Child? Math. 9. 2. Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven
thee. The Schools say, that the remission of sins is not only oblativa mali,
but collativa boni, a remotion of guilt, but a collation of good. Look as he
that is legally acquitted of Theft, or Murder, is no more reputed a Thief or
Murdeter; so here, Isa. 50. 20. In those days, and in that time, says the
Lord, the Iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and
the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found; for I will pardon them whom I
reserve. Pardoned sin, is in Gods account no sin; and the pardoned sinner in
Gods account is no sinner, as the pardoned debtor is no debtor. Where God has
pardoned a man, there he never looks upon that man as a siner, but as a just
man. Pardon of sin is an utter abolition of it, as it does reflect upon the
person making him guilty, and obliging him actually to condemnation; in this
respect the pardoned man is as free as if he had never sinned. Therefore the
Believer, the Penitent person has insinite cause of rejoicing, that God has
perfectly pardoned his sins, and that he looks upon him no more a sinner, but
as a just and righteous person. O Sirs, what can the great God do more for your
comfort and consolation; and therefore never entertain any hard thoughts of
God, as if he were like those men, who say, they forgive with all their hearts,
and yet retain their secret hatred and inward malice as much as ever, but for
ever live in the says of this truth, viz. That when God does pardon sin, he
takes it so away, as that the party acquitted is no more looked upon as a
sinner. Now upon this consideration, what a glorious plea has every sincere
Christian to make in the day of account. But

Fifthly: Forgiveness takes off our obligation to suffer eternal punishment; so
that look as a forgiven Debtor Aristotle says, To forgive sin, is not to
punish it. And Austin says, To forgive sin, is not to inflict the punishment
due unto it. And the Schools say, To remit the sin, is not to impute the
punishment. When a King pardons a Thief, his theft now shall not prejudice him.
The guilt obliging, is that whereby the sinner is actually bound to undergo
the punishment due to him by the Law, and passed on him by the Judge for the
breach of it; this is that which by the Schools is called the Extrinsecal guilt
of sin, to distinguish it from the intrinsecal, which is included in the
deordination of the act, and which is inseparable from the sin. And if you
would know wherein the nature of forgiveness; immediately, and primarily
consists, it is in the taking off this Obligation, and discharging the sinner
from it. Hence it is that the pardoned sinner is said not to be under the Law;
Romans 6. 14. and not to be under the Curse, Gal. 3. 13. and not to be under the
sentence of Condemnation. And according to this notion, all Scripture-phrases
are to be construed, Romans 8. 1.
by which forgiveness is expressed. God, when he forgives sin, he is said to
cover them, Psalm. 32. 1. Psalm. 85. 2. Romans 4. 7. to remember them no more, Isa.
43. 25. Jer. 31. 34. Heb. 8. 12. To cast them behind his back, Isa. 38. 17. To
throw him into the depth of the Sea, Mica. 7. 19. To blot them out as a Cloud,
Isa. 4^. 22. And to turn away his face from them, Psalm. 51. 9. By all which
expressions we are not to think that God does not know sin, or that God does
not see sin, or that God is not displeased with sin, or that God is not
displeased with Believers for their sins; but that he will not so take notice
of them, as to enter into judgment with the persons for them. So that the
forgiven sinner is free from Obligation of the punishment as truly, as surely,
as fully, and as perfectly, as if he had never committed the sin, but were
altogether innocent In every sin there are two things considerable; First, The
offense which is done to God, whereby he is displeased: Secondly, The
Obligation of the man so offending him to eternal Condemnation. Now remission
of sin does wholly lie in the removeing of these two; so that when God does
Will neither to punish, or to be offended with the person, then he is said to
forgive. It is true, there remains paternal and medicinal Chastisements after
sin is forgiven, but no offense or punishment strictly so taken: And is not
this a noble plea for a Believer to make in the day of account? But

Sixthly: Consider that all the sins of Believers were laid upon Christ their
Surety, Heb. 7. 21, 22. What Is Isa. 53. 5, 6. Our Salvation was lai upon one
that is mighty, Psalm. 89. 19. Isa. 63. 1. As Judah became a Surety to Jacob for
Benjamin, he engaged himself to his Father, I will be Surety for him, of my
hand shall thou require him; if I bring him (...) unto thee, and set him before
thee, then let me bear the blame for ever, Genesis 43. 9. Herein he was a Type of
Christ (that came of him) who is both our Surety to God for the discharge of
our debt and duty, and Gods Surety to us for the performance of his Promises.
Father, says Christ, I will take upon me all the sins of thy people; I will be
bound to answer for them; I will Sacrifice my self for them; at my hands do
thou require satisfaction for their sins, and a full compensation unto thy
justic^; I will dye, I will lay down my (...), I will make my soul an offering
for sins; I will become a Curse, I will endure thy Wrath. O what unspeakable
comfort is this, that there is a Christ to answer for that which we could never
answer; Christ is a Surety in way of satisfaction, undertaking for the Debts,
the Trespasses, the Sins of his Elect; in this respect it is that Christ is
most properly called a Surety, in regard of his taking upon him the sins of his
Elect, and undertaking to answer and make satisfaction unto the justice of God
for them. Christ interposeth himself betwixt the wrath of God and his people,
undertaking to satisfy their debts, and so to reconcile them unto God. Christ
had nothing of his own to be Condemned for; nothing of his own to be ac^uitted
from; He was Condemned to pay your Debt, as your Surety, and therefore you
cannot be Condemned too; He was acquitted from it being paid as your Surety,
and therefore you cannot but be acquitted too. He appeared the first time with
your sin to his Condemnation, He shall appear the second time without your sin,
unto your Salvation, Heb. 9. 28. God the Father says to Christ, Son, if you
would have poor Sinners pardoned, you must take their Debts upon your self, you
must be their Surety, and you must enter into Bonds to pay every farthing of
that Debt poor Sinners owe; you must pay all if you will undertake for them;
for I will never come upon them for it, but on you. Certainly these were some
of those transactions that were between God the Father, and God the Son from
all Eternity, about-the pardoning of poor sinners; If ever thy sins be
pardoned, Christ must take thy Debts upon Himself, and be thy Surety, 2 Cor. 5.
21. He made him to be sin for us that knew no sin. Christ was made sin for us;
1. By way of imputation, for our sins were made to meet upon him, as that
Evangelical Prophet has it, Isa. 53. 6. And secondly by Reputation, for he was
reckoned among Malefactors, ver. 12. The way of pardon is by a translation of
all our sins upon Christ, it is by charging them all upon Christ's score. That
is a great expression of Nathan to David; The Lord has put away thy sin: But
the Original runs thus, The Lord has made thy sins to pass over; that is, to 2 Samuel 12. 13.
pass over from thee to his Son; he has laid them to his charge.

Now Christ has discharged all his Peoples Debts and Bonds. There is a
twofold debt which lay upon us, one was the debt of Obedience unto the Law;
and this Christ did pay by fulfilling all Righteousness, Math. 3. 15. The other
was the debt of punishment, for our transgressions; and this debt Christ
discharged by his Death on the Cross, Isa. 53. 4, 10, 12. and by being made a
Curse for us, to redeem us from the Curse, Gal. 3. 13. Hence it is, that we are
said to be bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. chap. 7. 23. and that Christ is
called our Ra^som. Lutron. Math. 20. 28. and Antilutron, 1 Timothy 2. 6. The words
do signify a valuable price laid down for another Ransom. The Blood of Christ
(the Son of God) was a valuable price, a sufficient price; it was as much as
would take off all Enmities, and take away all Sin, and to satisfy Divine
Justice, and indeed so it did; and therefore you read, That in his blood we
have Redemption, even the forgiveness of our sins, Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14, 20.
and his death was such a full compensation to divine Justice, that the Apostle
makes a challenge to all, Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods Elect, and verse. 34. Who is he that Condemns, it is Christ that dyed. As
if he had said, Christ has satisfied and discharged all. The Greek word
Antilutron is of special Emphasis: The vulgar Latin renders it Redemptionem,
Redemption; Beza Redemptioms precium, a price of Redemption; but neither of
them fully expressing the force of the word, which properly signifies a
counter-price, when one does undergo in the room of another, that which he
should have undergone in his own person. As when one yields himself a Captive
for the Redeeming of another out of Captivity; or gives his own life for the
saving of another. There were such Sureties among the Greeks, as gave life for
life, body for body; and in this sense the Apostle is to be understood, when he
says, that Christ gave himself (...), a Ransom, a counter-price, paying a
price for his people. Christ has laid down a price for all Believers; they are
his dear bought Ones, they are his choice redeemed Ones, Isa. 51. 11. Christ
gave himself Antilutron, a counter-price, a Ransom, submitting himself to the
like punishment that his redeemed Ones should have undergone. Christ, to
deliver his Elect from the Curse of the Law, did subject himself to that same
Curse of the Law, under which all mankind lay. Jesus Christ was a true Surety,
one that gave his life for the life of others, as the Apostle says of Castor
and Pollux, that the one redeemed the others life with his own death. So did
the Lord Jesus, he became such a Surety for his Elect, giving himself an
Antilutron, a Ransom for them, Joh. 6. 51. Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 18. Rev. 1. 5.
chap. 5. 9. O what comfort is this unto us to have such a Jesus, who himself
bare our sins, even all our sins, left not one unsatisfied for! laid down a
full ransom, a full price, such an expiatory Sacrifice, as that now we are out
of the hands of Justice, and Wrath, and Death, and Curse, and Hell, and are
reconciled, and made near by the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, the Blood
of Christ (as the Scripture speaks) is the Blood of God, Act. 20. 28. So that
there is not only satisfaction, but merit in his Blood; there is more in
Christ's Blood than mere payment or satisfaction; there was merit also in it, to
acquire and procure, and purchase all spiritual good, and all eternal good; for
the people of God, not only immunities from sin, Death, Wrath, Curse, Hell,
etc. but privileges and dignities of Sons and Heirs; yea, all Grace, and all
Love, and all Peace, and all Glory; even that glorious Inheritance purchased by
his Blood, Ephesians. 1. 14.

Remember this once for all, that in justification our debts are charged upon
Christ, they go upon his accounts; you know that in sin, there is the vicious
and staining quality of it, and there is the resulting guilt of it, which is
the obligation of a Sinner over to the Judgment Seat of God to answer for it.
Now this guilt (in which lies our debt) this is charged upon Christ. Therefore
(says the Apostle) God was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself, not
imputing their Trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5. 19. And has made him to be sin
for us, who knew no sin, ver. 21. You know in Law, the Wifes Debts are charged
upon the Husband; and if the Debtor be disabled, than the Creditor sues the
Surety. Fide jussor, or Surety and Debtor, in Law, are reputed as one person.
Now Christ is our Fide jussor, He is made sin for us, says the Apostle; for
us, that is in our stead. A Surety for us, one who puts our scores on his
accounts, our burden on his shoulders; so says that Princely Prophet Isaiah,
Isa. 53. 4, 5. He has born our griefs, and carried our soroows; how so? He was
wounded for our transgressions; he was bruised for our iniquities; that is, he
stood in our stead, he took upon him the answering of our sins, the satisfying
of our debts, the clearing of our guilt; and therefore was it, that he was so
bruised, etc.

You remember the Scapegoat, upon his Head, all the Iniquities of the Children
of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins were confessed and
put; And the Goat did b^ar upon him all their Iniquities, Lev. 16. 21, 22. What
is the meaning of this? Surely Jesus Christ, upon whom our sins were laid, and
who alone died for the ungodly, Romans 5. 6. and bear our burdens away. Therefore
the Believer in the sense of guilt should run unto Christ, and offer up his
Blood unto the Father, and say, Lord it is true, I owe Thee so much, yet Father
forgive me; remember that thine own Son was my Ransom, his Blood was the price,
he was my Surety, and undertook to answer for my sins; I beseech thee accept of
his Atonement, for he is my Surety, my Redemption: Thou must be satisfied; but
Christ has satisfied thee, not for himself; what sins had he of his own? but
for me, they were my debts which he satisfied for; and look over thy book, and
thou shall find it so; for thou have said, He was made sin for us, and that he
was wounded for our transgressions. Now what a singular support, what an
admirable comfort is this, that we our selves are not to make up our accounts
and reckonings; but that Christ has cleared all accounts and reckonings
between God and us. Therefore it is said, That in his blood we have Redemption,
even the forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 1. 7.

Quest. Whether it were not against the justice of God, that Q.
Christ, who was in himself innocent (without all sin; a Lamb without a spot)
should bear and endure all th^se punishments for us who were the offending, and
guilty, and obnoxious persons only: Or if you please thus,

Whether God was not unjust, to give his Son Jesus Christ Q.
to be our Surety, and Mediator, and Redeemer, and Savior? for as much as
Christ could not be any one of these, for, and unto us, but by a willing
susception of our sins upon himself, to be for them responsible unto the
justice of God, in suffering those punishments which were due for our sins.

I shall speak a few words to this main Question. I say then, that it is not
always, and in all cases unjust; but it is sometimes, and in some cases very
just to punish one who is himself Innocent; for him, or those, who are the
^nocent, and guilty; Grotius in his Book, de satisfactione, gives diverse
instances; but I shall mention only two.

First: In case of Conjunction where the innocent party, and the nocent party
do become legally one party; and therefore, if a Man Marries a Woman indebted,
he thereupon becomes obnoxious to pay her debts, although absolutely
considered, he was not obnoxious thereunto. But

Secondly: In case of Surety-ship, where a person knowing the weak and
insufficient condition of another, does yet voluntarily put forth himself, and
will be bound to the Creditor for him, as his Surety to answer for him; by
reason of which Surety-ship the Creditor may come upon him, and deal with him,
as he might have dealt with the principal Debtor himself; and this course we do
ordinarily take with Sureties for the recovery of our right, without any
violation of justice. Now both these are exactly applicable to the business in
hand; for Jesus Christ was pleased to Marry our Nature unto himself; he did
partake of our flesh and blood, and became man, and one with us: And besides
that, he did both by the Will of his Father, and his own free consent, become
our Surety, and was content to stand in our stead or room, so as to be made sin
and curse for us, (that is) to have all our debts and sorrows, all our sins and
punishments laid upon him; and did engage himself to satisfy God, by bearing
and suffering, what we should have born and suffered. And therefore, although
Jesus Christ (absolutely considered in himself) was innocent, and had no sin
inherent in himself, which therefore might make him liable to Death, and Wrath,
and Curse; yet by becoming one with us, and sustaining the office of our
Surety, our sins were laid on him; and our sins being laid upon him, he made
himself (therefore) obnoxious, (and that justly) to all those punishments which
he did suffer for our sins. I do confess, that had Christ been unwilling, and
forced into this Surety-ship, or had any detriment, or prejudice risen to any
party concerned in this transaction, than some complaint might have been made
concerning the Justice of God. But

First: There was a willingness on all sides for the passive work of Christ;
First, God the Father (who was (Thy Will be done,) Math. 26. 42. Act. 4. 25,
26, 27, 28.) Secondly, We poor Sinners (who are the offending party) are
willing. We accept of this gracious and wonderful Redemption, and bless the
Lord, who so loved us, as to give his Son for us. And thirdly, Jesus Christ was
willing to suffer for us; Behold I come, Psalm. 40. 7. And shall I not drink of
the Cup which my Father has given me to drink, Joh. 18. 11. I have a Baptism
to be Baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished, Luke 12.
50. He calls the death of his Cross a Baptism, partly because it was a certain
immersion into extreme calamities, into which he was cast; and partly, because
in the Cross, He was so to be sprinkled in his own Blood, as if he had been
drowned and Baptized in it; the Greek word (...), that is here rendered
strained, signifies to be pained, pressed, or pent up, not with such a grief as
made him unwilling to come to it, but with such as made him desire that it were
once over. There seems (says Grotius) to be a similitude employed in the
Original word, taken from a Woman with Child, which is so afraid of her
bringing forth, that yet she would fain be eased of her burden, Joh. 10. 11. I
am the good Shepherd: The good Shepherd gives his life for the Sheep; Christ
is that good Shepherd by an excellency, that held not his life dear for his
Sheeps safety, ver. 15. I lay down my life for the Sheep, verse. 17. Therefore
does my Father love me, because I lay down my life; verse. 18. No man takes it
from me, but I lay it down of my self. A necessity there was of our Saviors
death, but it was a necessity of immutability (because God had decreed it, Act.
2. 23.) not of coaction; He laid down his life freely, He dyed willingly. But

Secondly: No parties whatsoever were prejudiced or lost by it; we lost nothing
by it, for we are saved by his Luke 24. 26. The Captain of our Salvation is
made perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2. 10. You may see Christ's glorious
Rewards for his sufferings in that, Isa. 53. 10, 11, 12. And God the Father
lost nothing by it, for he is glorified by it; I have glorified thee on Earth,
I have finished the work which thou gave me to do, Joh. 17. 4. Yea, he is
fully satisfied and repaired again in all the honor which he lost by our
sinning: I say he is now fully repaired again by the sufferings of Christ, in
which he found a price sufficient, and a Ransom, and enough to make peace for
ever. In the day of account, a Christians great plea is, that Christ has been
his Surety, and paid his debts, and made up his accounts for him.

Now from what has been said last, a Christian may Eccles. 11. 9. cap. 12 14.
Math. 12. 1^. cap. 18. 23. Luke 16. 3. Romans 14. 10. 2 Cor. 6. 10. Heb. 9. 27
cap. 13. 17. 1 Pet 4. 5.
form up this second plea to the ten Scriptures in the Margent, that refer
either to the general Judgment, or to the particular Judgment that will pass
upon every Christian immediately after death. O blessed Lord! upon my first
believing and closing with Jesus Christ, thou did justify me in the Court of
glory, from all my sins, both as to guilt and punishment. Upon my first act of
believing, thou did pardon all my sins, thou did forgive all my iniquities,
thou did blot out all my transgressions; and as upon my first believing,
thou did give me the Remission of all my sins, so upon my first believing
thou did free me from a state of Condemnation, and interest me in the great
Salvation. Upon my first believing, I was united to Jesus Christ, and I was
clothed with the Rom 8. 1. Heb. 2 3.
Righteousness of Christ, which covered all my sins, and discharged me from all
my transgressions; and remember, O Lord, that at the very moment of my
dissolution thou did really, perfectly, universally, and finally forgive all
my sins; every debt that moment was discharged, and every Score that moment was
crossed, and every Bill and Bond that moment was cancelled; so that there was
not left in the book of thy remembrance one sin, no not the least sin standing
upon Record against my soul: And besides all this, thou know, O Lord, that
all my sins were laid upon Christ my Surety, and that he became responsible
Heb. 7. 21. 22.
for them all; he did dye, he did lay down his life, he did make his soul an
offering for my sins, he did become a curse, he did endure thy infinite wrath,
he did give complete satisfaction, and a full compensation unto thy Justice for
all my sins, debts, trespasses: This is my plea, O Lord! and by this plea I
shall stand: Well, says the Lord, I allow of this plea, I accept of this plea,
as just, honorable, and righteous, Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. But

Seventhly: Consider, that what ever we are bound to do, or to suffer by the
Law of God; all that did Christ do, and suffer for us, as being our Surety and
Mediator. Now the Law of God has a double challenge or demand upon us; one is
of active obedience, in fulfilling what it requires; the other is of passive
obedience, in suffering that punishment which lies upon us, for the
transgression of it, in doing what it forbids. For as we are Created by God, we
did owe unto him all obedience which he required; and as we sinned against God,
we did owe unto him a suffering of all that punishment which he threatened, and
we being fallen by transgression, can neither pay the one debt, nor yet the
other; we cannot do all that the Law requires. (Nay of our selves we can do
nothing,) neither can we suffer, as to satisfy God in his Justice wronged by
us, or to recover our selves into life and favor again; and therefore Jesus
Christ, (who was God made man) did become our Surety, and stood in our stead,
or room; and he did perform what we should, but could not perform; and he did
bear our sins and our sorrows; he did suffer and bear for us, what we our
selves should have born and suffered; whereby he did fully satisfy the justice
of God, and made our peace, and purchased life and happiness for us. Let me a
little more clearly and fully open this great truth in these few particulars.

First: Jesus Christ did perform that active obedience Gal. 4. 4. To be made
under the Law, that he might redeem them that were under the Law; So far was
Christ under the Law, as to redeem them that were under the Law. But redeem
them that were under the Law, he could not, unless by discharging the bonds of
the Law in force upon us; and all those bonds could not be, and were not
discharged, unless a perfect righteousness had been presented (on our behalf,
who were under the Law) to fulfill the Law. Now there is a twofold
Righteousness necessary to the actual fulfilling of the Law; one is an internal
Righteousness of the Nature of man; the other is an external Righteousness of
the Life or works of man: both of these do the Law require. The former, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. which is the sum of the
first Table: And thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, which is the sum of
the second Table: the latter, Do this and live, Levit. 18. 5. He that
continues not in all things, which are written in the book of the Law, to do
them, is Cursed, Gal. 3. 10. Now both these Righteousnesses were sound in
Christ; First, the internal, Heh. 7. 26. He was holy, harmless, undefiled,
separated from sinners, chap. 9. 14. And offered himself without spot to God, 2
Cor. 5. 21. He knew no sin. Secondly, External, 1 Pet. 2. 22. He did no sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth, Joh. 17. 4 I have finished the work which
thou gave me to do, Math. 3. 15. He must fulfill all Righteousness, Romans 10.
4. Christ is the end of the Law, for Righteousness to every one that believes.
Now concerning Christ's active obedience, to the Law of God these things are
considerable in it.

First: The universality of it, he did whatsoever his Gal. 4. 4. Subject, or
obnoxious to it, to all the precepts or commands of it. Christ was so made
under the Law, as those were under the Law, whom he was to Redeem. Now we were
under the Law, not only as obnoxious to its penalties, but as bound to all the
duties of it; that this is our being under the Law, is evident by that of the
Apostle, Gal. 4. 2^. Tell me, ye that desire to be under the Law; surely it was
not the penalty of the Law they desired to be under, but to be under it in
respect of obedience; so Math. 3. 15. Here Christ tell you, That it became him
to fulfill all Righteousness, (...), all manner of Righteousness whatsoever;
that is, every thing that God required, as is evident from the Application of
that general Oxiome to the Baptism of John. But

Secondly: The exactness and perfection of it. He kept the whole Law exactly;
as he was not wanting in matter,

Thirdly: The constancy of it. Christ did not obey by Joh. 8. 29.

Fourthly: The delight that he took in doing the Will of his Father, Psalm. 40.
8. I delight to do thy Will, O my God; (or in the midst of my bowels, as the
Hebrew runs,) by the Law of God we are to understand all the Commandments of
God; there is not one Command which Christ did not delight to do. Christ's
obedience was without murmuring or grudging; his Fathers Commandments were not
grievous to him; he tells his Disciples, that it was his (...) to do the Will
of him that sent him, and to finish his work, John 4. 34. But

Fifthly: The virtue and efficacy of it, for his obedience, his righteousness
never returns to him void, but it always accomplishes that which he pleases,
and prospers in the thing whereto he ordains it, and that is the making others
Righteous, according to that of the Apostle, Romans 5. 19. For as by one man's
disobedience, many were made sinn^rs; so by the ^^bedience of one, shall many
be made Righteous, 2 Cor. 5. 21. God made him to be sin for us, who knew no
(...), that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him; and accordingly
we are, for of God he is made unto us Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

The perfect, complete Obedience of Christ to the Law, is certainly reckoned to
us; that is an everlasting truth: If thou will enter into life, keep the
Commandments, Math. 19. 17. The Commandments must be kept either by our
selves, or by our Surety, or there is no entering into life; Christ did obey
the Law, not for himself, but for us, and in our stead, Romans 5. 18, 19. By the
Righteousness of one, the free-gift came upon all men unto justification of
life; By the Obedience of one, many shall be made Righteons. By his Obedience
to the Law, we are made Righteous; Christ's Obedience is reckoned to us for
Righteousness. Christ, by his Obedience to the Royal Law, is made Righteousness
to us, 1 Cor. 1. 30. We are saved by that perfect Obedience, which Christ, when
he was in this world, yielded to the blessed Law of God. Mark, what ever Christ
did as Mediator, he did it for those whose Mediator he was; or in whose stead,
and for whose good he executed the Office of a Mediator before God; this the
Holy Ghost witnesses, Romans 8. 3, 4. What the Law could not do, in that it was
weak, through the flesh. God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that the Righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us. The word Likeness, is not simply to be referred
to flesh, but to sinful flesh, as Basil well observes; for Christ was like unto
us in all things, sin only excepted: If with our justification from sin, there
be joined that active Obedience of Christ, which is imputed to us, We are just
before God, according to that perfect form which the Law requires. Because we
could not in this condition of weakness, whereinto we are cast by sin, come to
God, and be freed from Condemnation by the Law, God sent Christ as a Mediator
to do, and suffer what ever the Law required at our hands; for that end and
purpose, that we might not be condemned, but accepted of God. It was all to
this end, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us; that is,
which the Law required of us, consisting in duties of obedience, this Christ
performed for us: This expression of the Apostle, God sending his own Son in
the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh; if you
will add to it that of Gal. 4. 4. That he was so sent forth, as that he was
(...), made under the Law; that is, obnoxious to it, to yield all the obedience
that it does require, compares the whole of what Christ did, or suffered; and
all this, the Holy Ghost tells us, was for us, verse. 4. He that made the Law as
God, was made under the Law as God-Man, whereby both the obligations of the Law
fell upon him, 1. Paenal. 2. Praeceptive. First, The paenal Obligation to
undergo the Curse, and so to satisfy Divine Justice. Secondly, The
praeceptive Obligation, to fulfill all Righteousness, Math. 3. 15. This
Obligation he fulfilled by doing, the other by Dying; Mark, this double
Obligation could not have befallen the Lord Jesus Christ, upon any natural
account of his own, but upon his Mediatory account only, as he voluntarily
became the Surety of this New and better Covenant, Heb. 7. 22. so that the
fruit and benefit of Christ's voluntary subjection to the Law, redoundeth not at
all to himself, but unto the persons which were given him of the Father, Joh.
17. whose Sponsor he became; for their sakes he underwent the paenal Obligation
of the Law, that it might do them no harm, He being made a Curse for us, Gal.
3. 13. and for their sakes he fulfilled the praeceptive Obligation of the Law;
do this, that so the Law might do them good. This the Evangelical Apostle
clearly asserts, Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness, to every one
that believes, Romans 10. 4. Christ is the end of the Law, (...), what end?
why sinis perfectiuus, the perfection and accomplishment of the Law; he is the
end of the Law for Righteousness; that is, to the end, that by Christ, his
active obedience, God might have his perfect Law perfectly kept, that so there
might be a Righteousness extant in the humane nature, every way adaequate to
the perfection of the Law: And who must wear this Garment of Righteousness,
when Christ has finished it? Surely the Believer, who wanted a Righteousness
of his own; for so it follows, for Righteousness to every one that believes;
that is, that every poor naked Sinner, believing in Jesus Christ, might have a
Righteousness; wherein being found, he might appear at Gods Tribunal, but his
nakedness not appears. But as Jacob in the Garment of his Elder Brother Esau,
so the Believer in the Garment of his Elder Brother Jesus, might inherit the
blessing, even the great blessing of Justification.

The only matter of man's Righteousness, since the fall of Adam, wherein he can
appear with comfort before the justice of God; and consequently, whereby alone,
he can be justified in his sight, is the obdience and sufferings of Jesus
Christ, the Righteousness of the Mediator; there is not any other way
imaginable, how the Justice of God may be satisfied, and we may have our sins
pardoned in a way of justice, but by the Righteousness of the Son of God, and
therefore is his name Jehovah, Tridkenna The Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23.
6. This is his name; that is, this is the prerogative of the Lord Jesus, a
matter that appertains to him alone, to be able to bring in an everlasting
Righteousness, and to make reconciliation for Iniquity, Dan. 9. 24. It is by
Christ alone, That they who believe, are justified from all things, from which
they cannot be Eccl^s. 11 9. cap 12. 14 Matthew. 1^. 14. cap. 18. 2^. Luke 16. 3.
Romans 1^. 10. 2 (...) 10. Heb 9. 27. cap. 13. ^7. 1 Pet. 4. 5.
justified by the Law of Moses, Act. 13. 39.

Now from the active obedience of Christ, a sincere Christian may form up this
third plea as to the ten Scriptures in the Margent, that refer either to the
general judgment, or to the particular judgment that will pass upon every
Christian immediately after death. O! blessed God, thou know that Jesus
Christ, as my Surety, did perform all that active obedience unto thy holy and
righteous Law that I should have performed; but by reason of the in-dwelling
power of sin, and of the vexing and molesting power of sin, and of the
captivating power of sin, could not. There was in Christ an habitual
righteousness, a conformity of his nature to the holiness of the Law; for 1
Pet. 1. 19.
he is a Lamb without spot and blemish; the Law could never have required so
much righteousness as is to be found in him; and as for practical
righteousness, there was never any aberration in his thoughts, words, or deeds.
H^b. 7. 26.
The Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me. John 14. 30.
The Apostle tells us, That we are made the Righteousness of God in him; he
does emphatically add that clause, (...) 2 Cor. 6. 21.
in him, that he may take away all conceit of inherence in us, and establish
the Doctrine of imputation: As Christ is made sin in us by imputation, so we
are made righteousness in him by the same way. Augustines place which Beza
cites is a most full Commentary; God the Father (says he) made him to be sin,
who know no sin, that we might be the Righteousness of God, not our own; and in
him, that is in Christ, not in our selves; and being thus justified, we are so
Righteous, as if we were Righteousness it self. O! holy God, Christ my Surety
has universally kept thy Royal Law, he has not offended in any one point;
yea, he has exactly and perfectly kept the whole Law of God, he stood complete
in the whole will of the Father; his active obedience was so full, so perfect,
and so adaequate to all the Laws, demands, that the Law could not but say, I
have enough, I am fully satisfied; I have found a Ransom, I can ask no more.
Neither was the obedience of Christ fickle or transient, but permanent and
constant; it was his delight, his meat and drink; yea, his Heaven to be still a
doing the will of his Father. Assuredly; whilst our Lord Joh. 4. 33, 34.
Jesus Christ was in this world, he did in his own person fully obey the Law;
he did in his own person perfectly conform to all the holy, just, and righteous
commands of the Law. Now this his most perfect and complete obedience to the
Law, is made over to all his Members, to all Believers, to all sincere
Christians; it is reckoned to them, it is imputed to them, as if they
themselves, in their own persons had performed it. All sound Believers being in
Christ, as their head and Surety, the Laws righteousness is fulfilled in them
legally, and imputively, though it be not fulfilled in them formally,
subjectively, inherently, or personally suitable to that of the Apostle, That
the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us; mark, not by us, but in
us; for Christ in our Nature R^m 8 4. (...), which Beza well tenders, (...)
legis, that the right of the Law might be fulfilled in us.
has fulfilled the right of the Law, and therefore in us, because of our
communion with him, and our ingrafting into him, God has condemned sin the
flesh of his Son, that, all that which the Law by a right could require of us,
might be performed by him for us; so as if we our selves, had in our own
persons performed the same. The Law must have its right before a Sinner can be
saved; we cannot of our selves fulfill the right of it: But here is the comfort,
Christ our Surety has fulfilled it in us, and we have fulfilled it in him.
Certainly, whatsoever Christ did concerning the Law, is ours by imputation, so
fully, as if our selves had done it. Does the Law require obedience? says
Christ, I will give it. Does the Law threaten Curses? says Christ, Math 3 15.
cap. 5, 17, 18,
they shall be borne. The precept of the Law, says Christ, shall be kept, and
the promises received, and the punishments endured, that poor Sinners may be
saved. Our Righteousness and Title to eternal life do indispensably depend upon
the imputation of Christ's active obedience to us; there must be a perfect
obeying of the Law, as the condition of life, either by the Sinner himself, or
by his Surety, or else no life, which does sufficiently evince the absolute
necessity of the imputation of Christ's active obedience to us; the Sinner
himself being altogether unable to fulfill the Law, that he may stand Righteous
before the great and glorious God. Christ's fulfilling of it must necessarily be
imputed to him in order to righteousness. There are two great things which
Jesus Christ did undertake for his redeemed ones; the one was to make full
satisfaction to Divine Justice for all their sins. Now this he did by his Blood
and Death, the other was to yield most absolute conformity to the Law of God,
both in nature and life; by the one, he has freed all his Redeemed ones from
Hell, and by the other he has qualified all his Redeemed ones from Heaven. This
is my Plea O Lord, and by this plea I shall stand. Well, says the Lord, I
accept of this plea as honorable, just, and righteous, Enter thou into the joy
of thy Lord.

Secondly: As Jesus Christ did for us, perform all that active obedience which
the Law of God required; so he Cor. 2. 22. To be made sin for us, 1 Pet. 2. 24.
Himself to bear our sins in his own body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 3. 18. For Christ
also has once suffered for sin, the just for the unjust, that he might bring
us to God, Phil. 2. 8. To humble himself and to become obedient unto death,
even the death of the Cross, Gal. 3. 13. To be made a Curse, an Exceration for
us, Ephe. 5. 2. To give himself for us an Offering and Sacrifice unto God, Heb.
9. 15. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament; that by
means of Death, for the Redemption of the transgressions that were under the
first Testament, they which were called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. Now concerning the passive obedience, or suffering of Christ, I
would present unto you these conclusions.

First: That the sufferings of Jesus Christ were free and voluntary, and not
constrained or forced. Austin says, that Christ did suffer quia voluit, and
quando voluit, and quomodo voluit, Joh. 10. 17. I lay down my life, ver. 18. No
man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it
down, and I have power to take it again, Gal. 2. 20. Who gave himself for me.
Christ's sufferings did rise out of obedience to his Father, Joh. 10. 18. This
Commandment have I received of my Father, and Joh. 18. 11. The Cup which my
Father has given me, shall I not drink it? And Christ's sufferings did spring
and rise out of his love to us, who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.
20. so Ephe. 5. 25. As Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. And
indeed, had Christ's sufferings been involuntary, they could not have been a
part of his obedience, much less could they have mounted to any thing of merit
for us. Christ was very free and willing to undertake the work of man's
Redemption; when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and Offerings
thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me; Then said I, H^b. 1^. 5.
Lo, I come to do thy Will O God, It Is the expression of one overjoyed to do
the Will of God; So Luke 12. 50. I have a Baptism to be Baptized with, and how
am I straightened till it be accomplished. There was no power, no force to compel
Christ to lay down his life, therefore it is called the offering of the body of
Jesus, Heb. 10. 10. Nothing could fasten Christ to the Cross, but the golden
link of his free Love. Christ was big of love, and therefore he freely opens
all the pores of his body, that his blood may flow out from every part, as a
precious Balsom to cure our wounds. The heart of Christ was so full of love,
that it could not hold, but must needs burst out through every part and member
of his body into a bloody sweat, Luke 22. 44. At this time it is most certain,
that there was no manner of violence offered to the body of Christ; no man
touched him, or came near him with Whips or Thorns, or Spears, or Lances.
Though the Night was cold, and the Air cold, and the Earth on which he kneeled
cold, yet such a burning love he had in his breasts to his people, as cast him
into a bloody sweat. It Is certain that Christ never repented of his sufferings,
Isa. 53. 11. He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied.
It is a Metaphor that alludes to a Mother, who though she has had hard labor,
yet does not repent of it, when she sees a Child brought forth. So though
Christ had hard Travel upon the Cross, yet he does not repent of but thinks all
his sweat and blood well bestowed, because he sees the Man-child of Redemption
is brought sorth into the world. He shall be satisfied, the Hebrew word (...)
signifies such a satiating as a man has at some sweet repast, or banquet. And
what does this speak out, but his freeness in suffering.

But here some may object, and say, that the Lord Jesus, Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me, (and that three times over,) Math. 26. 39,
42, 44.

Now to this Objection I shall Answer, first more generally;

First, in the general: I say that this earnest prayer of O Father, whatsoever
becomes of me, of my natural f^ar, or desire, I am content to submit, to the
drinking of this Cup, thy Will be done. But

Secondly, and more particularly I Answer, that in vox nature, the voice of
nature; Let this Cup pass from me. 2. There is vox officii, the voice of his
Mediatory office; (...)less, not as I will, but as thou will.

The first voice ((...) this Cup pass) intimates the velleity of the inferior
part of his Soul; the sensitive part proceeding from unnatural abhorrency of
death as he was a Creature. The latter voice (Nevertheless, not as I will, but
as thou will) expre^^ the full and free consent of his will, complying with the
will of his Father in that grand everlasting design of bringing many Sons unto
glory, by making the Captain of their Salvation perfect through sufferings,
Heb. 2. 10.

It was an Argument of the truth of Christ, his humane Nature that he naturally
dreaded a dissolution. He owed it to himself as a Creature, to desire the
conservation of his being, and he could not become unnatural to himself, For no
man ever yet hated his own Flesh, Ephe. 5. 29. Phil. 2. 8. But being a Son, he
learned submission, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the
Cross; that shameful, cruel, cursed death of the Cross; the suffering whereof
he owed to that solemn Astipulation, which from everlasting passed between his
Father and himself, the third person in the blessed Trinity, the Holy Ghost
being witness. And therefore, though the Cup was the bitterest Cup that ever
was given man to drink, as wherein there was not death only, but wrath, and
curse: Yet seeing there was no other way left of satisfying the justice of his
Father, and of saving Sinners, most willingly he took the Cup, and having given
thanks (as it were) in those words, The Cup which my Father has given me,
shall I not drink it: Never did Bridegroom go with more cheerfulness to be
Married to his Bride, than our Lord Jesus went to his Cross, Luke 12. 20.

Though the Cup that God the Father put into Christ's hand, was bitter, very
bitter, yea, the bitterest that ever was put into any hand, yet he found it
sweetened with three Ingredients. 1. It was but a Cup, it was not a Sea. 2. It
was his Father (and not Satan) that mingled it, and that (...) in all the
bitter Ingredients that were in it. 3. It was a gilt, not a Curse, as to
himself; The Cup which my (...) gives me; he drank it, I say, and drank it
(...) every drop, leaving nothing behind for his Redeem(...) of Love and
Salvation; in the Sacramen^^ Cup of his own Institution, saying, This Cup is
the New Testament in my Blood, for the Remission of sins; This (...) in
remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 11. 25. Math. 26. 28. Thus (my Friends) look upon
Christ as Mediator (in which capacity only, he covenanted with his Father for
the Salvation of mankind;) and there was not so much as a shadow of any
receding from, or repenting of what he had undertaken. But

Secondly: As the sufferings of Jesus Christ were very free and voluntary, so
they were very great and heinous; Isa. you may read of despising, rejected,
stripes, smilings, wounds, sorrows, bruising, chastisement, oppression,
affliction, cutting off, putting to grief, and pouring out of his soul to
death; all these put together, speaks out Christ to be a very great sufferer;
he was a man of sorrows, as if he were a man made up of sorrows, (as the man of
sin, as if he were made up of sin) as if He were nothing else: He knew more
sorrows than any man, yea, than all men ever did; (...) Iniquity (and
consequently the sorrows) of all men met in him, as if he had been their
center, and he was acquainted with griefs; he had little acquaintance else,
grief was his familiar acquaintance, he had no acquaintance with laughter; we
read not that he laughed at all, when he was in the world; his other
acquaintance stood afar off, but grief followed him to the Cross, from his
Birth to his Death; from his Cradle to the Cross; from the Womb to the Tomb; he
was a man of sorrows, and never were sorrows like his; he might say, Never
grief or sorrow like mine: It Is indeed impossible to express the sufferings and
sorrows of Christ; and the Greek Christians used to beg of God, (...), that for
the unknown sufferings of Christ, he would have mercy upon them: Though Christ's
^^rings are abundantly made known, yet they are but little known; eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, nor has it, or can it enter into the heart of man to
conceive what Christ suffered, who has known the power of Gods wrath? Christ
Jesus knew it, for he underwent it, his whole life was made up of sufferings;
He was no sooner born, but sufferings came trooping in upon him; He was born in
an Inn, yea, in a Stable, and had but a Manuger for his Cradle. As soon as his
Birth was noised abroad, Herod, under a pretense of worshipping of him, had a
design to murder him, so that his supposed Father was fain to fly into Egypt
to secure his life; he was persecuted before he could (after the manner of men)
be sensible of persecution; and as he grew up in years, so his sufferings grew
up with him; Hunger and Thrist, Travel and Weariness, Scorns and Reproaches,
false Accusations and Contradictions still waited on him, and he had not where
to lay his head, 1 Pet. 3. 18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins.
This is the wonderment of Angels, the happiness of fallen man, and the torment
of Devils, etc. that Christ has suffered. The Apostles words look like a
Riddle, Christ has suffered; as if he should say, read thou if thou can what
he has suffered; as for my part they are so many, that in this short Epistle I
have no mind to Record them; and they are so grievous, that my passionate love
will not suffer me to repeat them, and therefore I content my self thus abruptly
to deliver them. Christ has sufferd; Christ's sufferings were unspeakable, His
sufferings were unutterable; and therefore the Apostle satisfies himself with
this unperfect broken speech, Christ has suffered. O what woes and
lamentations, what cries and exclamations, what complaints and sorrows, what
wringing of hands, what knocking of breasts, what weeping of eyes, what wayling
of tongues belong to the speaking and hearing of this doleful Tragedy? Even in
the Prologue I tremble, and at the first entrance I am as at a nonplus, that I
know not with what woeful gesture to act it, with what moanful voice to
pronounce it, with what mournful words, with what pathetical speeches, with
what emphatical phrases, with what interrupted accents, with what passionate
compassionate plaints to express it. The multiplicity of the plot, and the
variety of the acts and scenes is so intricate, that my memory falls to
comprise it; the matter so importent, and the story so excellent, that my
tongue sail^ to declare it; the cruelty so savage, and the massacre so
barbarous, that my heart even fails to consider it. Wherefore I must needs
content my self (with the Apostle here) to speak, but unperfectly of it, and
thinks this enough to say, Christ has suffered; and well may I think this
enough, for behold, what perfection there is in this seeming imperfect speech.
For

First, To say indefinitely, he suffered without any limitation That he was a
man of sorrows, Isa. 53. 3. His whole life was filled up with sufferings. But

Secondly: To say only he suffered, and nothing else; what is it, but to say,
that he patiently suffered; he never He was led as a Sheep to the slaughter;
and as a Lamb dumb before the Sheerer, so opened he not his mouth, Act. 8. 32.
Isa. 53. 7. And when he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he
threatened not, 1 Pet. 2. 23. But

Thirdly: To say precisely he suffered, and no more; what is it, but to say
that he freely suffered, that he voluntarily I lay down my life, no man takes
it from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and I
have power to take it again, Joh. 10. 17. But of this before.

Fourthly: To say plainly he suffered; what is it, but to say that he
Innocently suffered, that he wrongfully suffered? was executed; but he was full
of Innocence, he was holy and harmless; and so it follows in that 1 Pet. 3. 18.
The just for the unjust. But

Fifthly: To say peremptorily he suffered, what is it but to say that he
principally suffered, that he excessively He suffered. That lamentation of the
Prophet, Lam. 1. 12. (is very applicable to Christ.) Behold and see if there be
any sorrows like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his fiorce anger. Now is it not enough for the
Apostle to say that Christ has suffered; but will you yet ask what? But pray
Friends be satisfied, and rather of the two, ask what not? for what sufferings
can you think of, that Christ did not suffer. Christ suffered in his Birth, and
he suffered in his Life, and he suffered in his Death; he suffered in his Body,
for he was diversely tormented; he suffered in his Soul, for his Soul was heavy
unto death; he suffered in his Estate, they parted his Raiment, and he had not
where to rest his head; he suffered in his good Name, for he was counted a
Samaritan, a Devilish Sorcerer, a Wine-bibber, an Enemy to Caesar, etc. He
suffered from Heaven, when he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? He suffered from the Earth, when being hungry, the Figtree proved fruitless
to him: He suffered from Hell, Satan assaulting and encountering of him, with
his most black and horrid temptations: He began his life meanly and basely, and
was sharply persecuted; He continued his life poorly and distressedly, and was
cruelly hated: He ended his life woefully and miserably, and was most grievously
tormented with Whips, Thorns, Nails, and (above all) with the terrors of his
Fathers wrath and horrors of hellish agonies.

Ego sum qui peccavi: I am the man that have sinned; but these Sheep, what have
they done? said David, when he saw the Angel destroying his people, 2 Samuel 24.
17. And the same speech may every one of us take up for our selves, and apply
to Christ, and say, I have sinned, I have done wickedly; but this Sheep, what
has he done? yea, much more cause have we than David had, to take up this
complaint. For

First: David saw them dye, whom he knew to be Sinners, knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.
21. But

Secondly: David saw them dye a quick speedy death, He was a dying from six to
nine, Math. 27. 45, 46. Now in this three hours darkness, he was set upon by
all the powers of darkness with utmost might and malice; but he foiled and
spoiled them all, and made an open show of them (as the Roman Conquerors used
to do) triumphing over them on his Cross, as on his Chariot of State, Col. 2.
15. attended by his vanquished Enemies, with their hands bound behind them,
Ephe. 4. 8. But

Thirdly: David saw them dye, who (by their own confession)

Fourthly: David saw the Lord of glory destroying Cor. 2. 8. O how much more
cause have we then to say as David, I have sinned, I have done wickedly; but
this Innocent Lamb, the Lord Jesus, what has he done, what has he deserved,
that he should be thus greatly tormented. Tully, though a great Orator, yet
when he comes to speak of the death of the Cross, he wants words to express it.
(Quid dicam in crucem tollere,) What shall I say of this death, says he. But

Thirdly: As the sufferings of Christ were very great, so the punishments which
Christ did suffer for our sins, these were in their kinds, and parts, and
degrees, and proportion, all those punishments which were due unto us, by
reason of our sins, and which we our selves should otherwise have suffered:
Whatsoever we should have suffered as Sinners, all that did Christ suffer as
our Surety and Mediator, (always excepting those punishments which could not be
endured without a pollution and guilt of sin^) The chasrisement of our peace
was upon him, Isa. 53. 5. (And including the punishments common to the nature
of man, not the personal arising out of imperfection, and defect, and
distemper. Now the punishments due to us for sin, were corporal, and spiritual.
And again, they were the punishments of loss, and of sense; and all these did
Christ suffer for us, which I shall evidence by an induction of particulars.

First: That Christ suffered corporal punishments, is Pet. 2. 24. Who himself,
in his own body on the Tree bare our sins, 1 Cor. 15. 3. Christ dyed for our
sins, according to the Scriptures, Rev. 1. 5. And washed us from our sins in
his own Blood, Col. 1. 14. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, even
the forgiveness of sins, Math. 26. 28. For this is my Blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. Christ suffered
derision in every one of his Offices.

First: In his Kingly Office: They put a Scepter in his Hand, a Crown on his
Head, and bowed their Knees, Hail King of the Jews Matthew. 27. 29.

Secondly: In his Priestly Office: They put upon him a gorgeous white Robe,
such as the Priests wore, Luke

Thirdly: In his Prophetical Office: When they had blindfolded him, Prophecy,
say they, who it is that smites thee, Luke 22. 64. Sometimes they said, Thou
art a Samaritan, and have a Devil, Joh. 8. 48. And sometimes they said, He is
beside himself, why hear ye him, Mark. 3. 21.

And as Christ suffered in every one of his Offices, so he suffered in every
member of his Body; in his Hearing by their reproaches, and crying, Crucify
him, Crucify him. In his sight by their Scoffings, and scornful gestures. In
his Smell, in his being in that noisome place G^lgotha, Math. 27. 33. In his
Taste, by his tasting of Vinegar mingled with Gall, which they gave him to
drink, Math. 27. Osorius writing of the sufferings of Christ, says, That the
Crown of Throns bored his head with seventy-two wounds. To see that Head
(before which, Angels cast down themselves and worshipped (as I may say) Crowned
with Throns, might well amaze us. To see those Eyes that were purer than the
Sun, put out by the darkness of death: To see those Ears, which hear nothing
(to speak to capacity) but Hallelujahs of Saints and Angels, to hear the
Blasphemies of the multitude: To see that Face which was fairer than the Sons
of men (for being born and conceived without sin, he was freed from the
contagious effects of it, Deformity, and was most perfectly beautiful, Psalm.
45. 2. Cant. 5. 10.) to be spit on by those beastly wretched Jews. To see that
Mouth and Tongue, that spoke as never man spoke, accused for false Doctrines,
nay Blasphemy. To see those Hands, which freely swayed the Scepter of Heaven,
nailed to the Cross. To see those Feet, like unto fine brass, Rev. 1. 15.
nailed to the Cross for man's sins. Who can behold Christ thus suffering in all
the members of his Body, and not be struck with astonishment. Who can sum up
the horrible abuses that were put upon Christ by his base Attendants. The
Evangelist tells us, that they spit in his Face, and buffeted him; and that
others smote him with the palms of their hands, saying, Prophecy unto us, thou
Christ, who is he that smote thee? Math. 26. 67, 68. And as Luke adds, many
other things Blasphemously speak they against him, Luke 22. 65. What those many
other things were, is not discovered, only some ancient Writers say, That
Christ in that night suffered so many, and such hideous things, that the whole
knowledge of them is reserved only for the last day of judgment. Mallonius
writes thus, After Caiphas and the Priests had sentenced Christ worthy of
death, they committed him to their Ministers, warily to keep till day, and they
immediat^ly threw him into the Dungeon, in Caiphas house; there they bound him
to a stony pillar, with his hands bound on his back, and then they fell upon
him with their palms and fists. Others add, That the Soldiers, not yet
content, they threw him into a filthy, durty puddle, where he abode for the
remainder of that night; of which the Psalmist seems to speak, Thou have laid
me in the lowest pit, in darkness, and in the deeps, and I sink in the deep
mire, where there is no standing, Psalm. 88. 6. Psalm. 69. 2. But that you may
clearly see what horrible abuses were put upon Christ by his Attendants:
Consider seriously of these particulars.

First: They spit in his Face, Math. 26. 67. Now this was accounted among the
Jews, a matter of great infamy and reproach, Numb. 14. And the Lord said to
Moses, If her Father had spit in her Face, should she not be ashamed seven
days. Spitting in the face, among the Jews, was a sign of anger, shame, and
contempt, Job. 30. 10. They abhor me, they fly far from me, and spare not to
spit in my Face. The face is the table of beauty or comeliness, and when it is
spit upon, it is made the feat of shame. Spitting in the face, was a sign of
the greatest disgrace that could be put upon a person; and therefore it could
not but be very bitter to Job, to see base Beggars spit in that Face that was
wont to be honored by Princes: But this we are not to wonder at, for there is
no indignity so base and ignominious, but the choicest Saints may meet with it,
in and from this evil world. Afflicted persons are sacred things, and by the
Laws of Nature and Nations, should not be misused and trampled upon, but rather
pitied and lamented over: But barbarous Miscreants, when they have an
opportunity, they will not spare to exercise any kind of cruelty, as you see by
their spitting in the very Face of Christ himself. I hid not my Face (says
Christ) from Isa. 50. 6. 2.
shame and spitting, thou I was sairer than the Children of men, Psalm. 45. 2.
yet I used no Mask to keep me fair, though I was white and ruddy, the chiefest
among ten thousand, Cant. 5. 10. yet I preserved not my Beauty from their nasty
spittle. O that, that sweet and blessed Face of Jesus Christ, that is so much
honored and adored in Heaven, should ever be spit upon by beastly wretches in
this world.

Secondly: They struck him, Joh. 18. 22. One of the Officers which stood by,
struck Jesus with the palm of his Answerest thou the high Priest so? Because
our Savior gave not the High Priest his usual titles, but dealt freely with
him, this impious Apparitor, or Serjant, to curry favor with his Master,
strikes him with his hand, with his rod say some, with his stick say others;
like Master, like Man. O that that holy Face, which was designed to be the
object of Heaven, in the beholding of which, much of the Celestial glory does
consist; that that Face which the Angels stare upon with wonder, like Infants
at a bright Sunbeam, should ever be smitten by a base Varlet in the presence
of a Judge. Among all the sufferings of Christ, one would think that there was
no great matter in this, that a vain Officer did strike him with the palm of
his hand; and yet if the Scriptures are consulted, you will find that the Holy
Ghost lays a great stress upon it. Thus Jeremy, He gives his Check to him
that smites him, he is filled full with reproach, Lam. 3. 30. Christ did
patiently and willingly take the stripes that vain men did injuriously lay upon
him; he sustained all kinds of vexations from the hands of all kinds of ungodly
ones. Thus Micah speaking of Christ, says, They shall sinite the Judge of
Israel with a rod upon the cheek, Mica. 5. 1. Hngo, by this Judge of Israel,
understands our Lord Jesus Christ, who was indeed at his passion
contumeliously buffeted and smitten with rods upon the cheek, Math. 26. 67. By
smiting the Judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek, they express their scorn
and contempt of Christ. Smiting upon the face, the Apostle makes a sign of
great reproach, 2 Cor. 11. 20. If a man smite you on the face, there is nothing
more disgraceful (says Chrysostom) than to be smitten on the check, Christ.
Hom. 82. in Joh. c. 18. And the diverse reading of the original word does fully
evidence it. He struck him with a rod, or he struck him with the palm of his
han (...). Now the word (...), say some, refers to his being struck with a rod,
or club, or shoe, or plantofle; others say, it refers to his being struck with
the palm of men's hands: Now of the two, it is generally judged more disgraceful
to be struck with the palm of the hand, than to be struck with either a rod, or
a shoe; and therefore we read the Text thus, He struck Jesus with the palm of
his hand, that is, with open hand, or with his hand stretched out.

Some of the Ancients commenting on this cuff, say, Let the Heavens be afraid,
and let the Earth tremble at Christ's Crysost^m Hom. 81. in John c. 18.
patience, and this Servants impudence. O ye Angels! how were ye silent? how
could you contain your hands, when you saw his hand striking at God? If we
consider him Aug. in Trall. 13.
(says another) who took the blow, was not he that struck him, worthy to be
consumed of fire, or to be swallowed up of Earth, or to be given up to Satan,
and thrown down into Hell. Bernard says, that his hand that struck Christ, was
Ber. ser. de pas. vinc. Sermon. de pas. Ludo de vita Christi.
armed with an iron glove: And Vincentius affirms, That by the blow, Christ was
felled to the Earth: And Ludovicus adds, that blood gushed out of his mouth,
and that the impression of the Varlets fingers remained on Christ's cheek with a
tumor and wan color. If a Subject should but lift up his hand against his
Sovereign, would he not be severely punished? but should he strike him, would
it not be present death? O what desperate madness, and wickedness was it then
to strike the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, whom not only men, but the
Cherubims, and Siraphims, Rev. 17. 16.
and all the Celestial powers above adore and worship? Heb. 1. 6. Those
Monsters in that Math. 26. 67. did not only strike Christ with the palm of
their hands, but they buffeted him also. Now some of the Learned observe this
difference betwixt (...) and (...), the one is given with the open hand, the
other with the fist shut up; and thus they used him at this time; they struck
him with their fists, and so the stroke was greater and more offensive, for by
this means they made his face to swell, and to become full of bunches all over.
One gives it in thus, by these blows of their fists, his whole head was
swollen, his face became black and blew, and his teeth ready to fall out of his
jaws. Very probable it is, that with the violence of their strokes, they made
him reel and stagger, they made his mouth, and nose, and face to bleed, and his
eyes to startle in his head.

Now concerning Christ's sufferings on the Cross; I shall only hint at a few
things, and so close up this particular concerning Christ's corporeal
sufferings; take me thus.

First: The death of Christ on the Cross; It was a bitter death, a sorrowful
death, a bloody death; the bitter thoughts of his sufferings put him into a
most dreadful agony, Luke 22. 24. Being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly,
and his sweat was as great drops of blood falling to the ground. The Greek word
that is here used (...), signifies a striving or wrestling against, as two
combatants or wrestlers do strive each against other. The things which our
Savior strove against, was not only the terror of death, as other men are
wont to do, (for then many Christians and Martyrs might have seemed more
constant and courageous than he) but with the terrible justice of God, pouring
out his high anger and indignation upon him, on the account of all the sins of
his chosen that Isa 53 4, 5, 6.
were laid upon him, then which nothing could be more dreadful. Christ was in a
vehement conflict in his soul, through the deepest sense of his Fathers wrath
against sinners; for whom he now stood as a Surety and Redeemer, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
And for a close of this particular, let me say, that Gods justice which we have
provoked, being fully satisfied by the inestimable merit of Christ's passion, is
the surest and highest ground of consolation that we have in this world; but
for the more full opinion of this blessed Scripture, let us take notice of
these following particulars.

First: His sweat was as it were blood: Some of the Ancients (sicut guttae
sanguinis,) as it were drops of blood. Now to this I answer.

First: If the Holy Ghost had only intended that sicut for a similitude or
hyperbole, he would rather have expressed

Secondly: I answer that sicut, as in Scripture Phrase, does not always denote
a similitude, but sometimes the

Secondly: He sweat great drops of blood, clotty blood issuing through flesh
and skin in great abundance. (...), sweat of Christ, blood came not from him in
small dews, but in great drops, they were drops, and great drops of blood,
crassy and thick drops: Some read it droppings down of blood, that is blood
distilling in greater and grosser drops; and hence it is concluded, as
preternatural; for though much may be said for sweating blood in a course of
Nature, according to what Aristotle affirms, Arist. (...) 3. de hist. Animal.
c. 29 August. h. 14. de civit dei. c 24.
and Austin says, that he knew a man that could sweat blood, even when he
pleased; and it is granted on all hands, that in faint bodies, a subtle thin
blood like sweat may pass through the pores of the skin; but that through the
same pores crassy thick and great drops of blood should issue out; it was not,
it could not be without a miracle: Certainly the drops of blood that fell from
Christ's body, were great, very great, yea, so great, as if they had started
through his skin to outrun the streams and rivers of his Cross. But

Thirdly: These great drops of blood did not only di(...)llare, drop out, but
decurrere, run down like a stream so Wherefore art thou red in thy Apparel; and
thy garments like him that treads the Wine-fat? O what a sight was here! his
Isa. 63. 2.
head and members are all on a bloody sweat, and this sweat trickles down, and
bedecks his garments which stood like a new firmament studded with stars,
portending an approaching storm: Nor stays it there, but it falls down to the
ground. Oh happy garden, that was watered with such tears of blood! Oh how much
better are these rivers than Abana, and Pharpar, rivers of Damas^us, yea, then
Bernard.
all the waters of Israel; yea than all those rivers that waters the Garden of
Eden? so great was Scanderbegs ardor in Battle, that the blood burst out
Bucholeer.
of his lips; but from our Champions, not lips only, but whole body burst out a
bloody sweat: Not his eyes only were Fountains of tears, or his head waters, as
Jeremy wished, but his whole body was turned, as it were, into Jer. 9 1.
Rivers of blood. A sweet comfort to such as are cast down for that, that their
sorrow for sin is not so deep and soaking as they could desire.

Christ's blood is put in Scripture (by a Synecdoche of the part) for all the
sufferings which he underwent for the sins of the Elect, especially his bloody
death with all its concomitants, so called. First, Because death, especially
when it is violent, is joined with the effusion of blood: If we had lived in
the days of our Fathers, we would Math 23. 30.
not have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets: And so again,
Pila^e said, I am Innocent of the Math. 27. 24.
blood of this just person, that is, of his death. Secondly: Herein respect is
had to all the Sacrifices of the Law, whose blood was poured out when they were
offered up. H^b. 9. 22.
Almost all things are by the Law purged with blood; and without shedding of
blood, there is no remission; so that the blood of Christ is the Antitype
aimed at in the blood of those Sacrifices that were slain for Sinners sins. But

Secondly: As the death of Christ, on the Cross, was a bitter death, a bloody
death, so the death of Christ on the Cross, was a lingering death: It was more
for Christ to suffer one hour, than for us to have suffered for ever; but his
death was lengthened out, he hung three hours on the Cross, he dyed many deaths
before he could dye one; from the sixth hour till the nineth hour (that is,
from twelve, till three in the Afternoon) there was darkness over Math. 27. 45.
all the Land: About twelve when the Sun is usually brightest, it began now to
darken; And this darkness was so great, that it spread over all Luke 23. 44.
the Land of Jewry; yea, some think over all the world; so we translate it in
Luke, And there was darkness over all the Earth, to show Gods dislike of their
horrid cruelty: He would not have the Sun give light to so horrid an act; the
Sun as it were, hid her face, that she might not see the Sun of Righteousness
so unworthily, so wickedly handled. It was dark: 1. To show the blindness,
darkness, and ignorance of the Jews in crucifying the Lord of glory. 2. To show
the detestation of the fact. 3. To show the ^vileness of our sins. This
darkness was not a natural Eclipse of the Sun; for first it cannot be so total,
so general: Nor Secondly, It could not be so long, for the interposed Moon
goes swiftly away. Certainly this was no ordinary Eclipse of the Sun, seeing
the Passover was kept at the full Moon, when the Moon stands right opposite to
the Sun on the other side of the Heaven, and for this cause cannot hinder the
light of Exodus 10. 12.
the Sun; but a supernatural work of God coming to pass by Miracle, like as the
darkness in Egypt. The Moon being now in the full (it being the midst of the
Lunar month, when the Passover was killed) and so of necessity the body of the
Moon (which uses to Eclipse the Sun by its interposition, and being between us
and the Sun) must be opposite to, and distant from the Sun, the diametrical
breadth of the Hemisphere, the Full Moon ever rising Suid. in vi^ae. 5. Dion.
at the Suns setting; and therefore this Eclipse could never be a natural
Eclipse. Many Gentiles, besides Jews, observed this darkness as a great
Miracle. Dionysius the Areopagite (as suidas relates) could say at first sight
of it, Amos 8. 9.
Either the World is ending, or the God of Nature is suffering of this
darkness. Amos long before had Prophesied; And it shall come to pass in that
day, that I will cause the Sun to go down at Noon, and I will darken the Earth
in the clear day. The opinion of Authors, concerning the cause of this
darkness, are various; some think that the Sun by Divine power, withdrew and
held back its beams; others say, that the obscurity was caused by some thick
Clouds which were miraculously produced in the Air, and spread themselves over
all the Earth: Others say, that this darkness was by a wonderful interposition
of the Moon, which at that time was at full; but by a Miracle interposed it
self betwixt the Earth and Sun. Whatsoever was the cause of this darkness, it
is certain that it continued for the space of three hours as dark as the
darkest Winter Math. 27. 46.
Nights.

About three (which the Jews call the nineth hour) the John 19. 28 30.
Sun now beginning to receive his light, Jesus cried with a loud voice, Eli,
Eli Lama sabachthani, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And then that
the Scripture might be sulfilled, he said, I thirst; and when he Luke 23. 46.
had received the Vinegar, he said, It is finished; and at last, crying with a
loud voice, he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit; and having
said thus, he gave up the Ghost. Christ's words were ever gracious, but never
more gracious than at this time: You cannot find in all the books and writings
of men, in all the Annals and Records of time, either such sufferings, or such
sayings as were these last words and wounds; sayings John 19. 30.
and sufferings of Jesus Christ. And having said thus, he gave up the ghost; or
as John relates it, He bowed his head, and gave up the ghost: Christ would not
off the Cross till all was done that was here to be done; Christ Emisit n^n
amisit Ambrose.
bowed not because he was dead, but first he bowed, and then dyed; that is, he
dyed freely and willingly without constraint; and he died cheerfully and
comfortably, without murmuring or repining. O what a wonder of love is this,
that Jesus Christ, who is the Author of life, the Fountain of life, the Lord of
life, that he should so freely, so readily, so cheerfully lay down his life for
us, etc.

About four in the Afternoon he was pierced with a Spear, and there issued out
of his side both blood and water. John 19. 34.
And one of the Soldiers with a Spear pierced his side, and forthwith came
thereout blood and water: Out of the side of Christ, being now dead, there
issues water and blood, signifying that he is both our Justification and
Sanctification.

Thus was fulfilled that which was long before foretold: Zach. 1^. 10. 1 J^^.
(...) Zach. 12 1.
They shall by water and by blood: Thus was there a Fountain op^^ed to the
house of David, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem (even to all the Elect) for
sin, and for uncleanness. The Soldiers malice lived when Christ was dead. The
water and blood forthwith issuing out as soon as 'twas pierced with a Spear,
did evidently show that he was truly dead. The Syriack paraphrase, says he,
pierced his rib, that is the fifth rib, where the pericardium lay. It is very
likely that the very Pericardium was pierced; now the Pericardium is a film or
skin, like unto a Purse, wherein is contained clear water to cool the heat of
the heart. The blood, says one, signifies the perfect expiation of the sins of
the Church, and the water, the daily Ambrose on Luke ^^.
washing and purging of it from the remainder of her corruption. Water and
blood issued ont of Christ's side, says another, to teach us that Christ
justifies none by his merit, but such whom he sanctifies by his Spirit.
Christ was pierced with a Spear, and water and blood presently issued out of
his side, that his Enemies might not object that he rose again, because he was
but half dead on the Cross; and being so taken down, he revived, to testify
the contrary truth: John so seriously affirms the certainty of his death, he
being an eyewitness of the streaming out of Christ's blood as he stood by
Christ's Cross. O Gates of Heaven! O Windows of Paradise! O Palace of Refuge! O
Tower of strength! O Sanctuary of the just! O flourishing Bed of the Spouse of
Solomon! Methinks I see water and blood running out of his side more freshly
than these golden streams which ran out of the Garden of Eden, and watered the
whole world. But here I may not dwell, etc.

But to shut up this particular, about five (which the Jews call the eleventh,
and the last hour of the day) Christ was taken down and Buried by Joseph and
Nichodemus. But

Thirdly: As the death of Christ on the Cross was a

First: His Legs and Hands were violently racked and pulled out to the places
fitted for his fastenings, and then very tender; his pains could not but be
very acute and sharp.

Secondly: By this means he wanted the use both of his

Thirdly: The longer he lived, the more he endured; My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? The Justice of God was now inflamed and heightened to its full
(...) Romans 8. 32. God spared not his Son; God would not abate one farthing of
the debt. But

Fourthly: He dyed by piece-meals, he dyed by little Andrew the Apostle was two
whole days on the Cross, before he dyed; and so long might Christ have been a
dying, if God had not supernaturally heightened the degrees of his torment.
Doubtless when Christ was on the Cross, he felt the very pains of Hell, though
not locally, yet equivalently. But

Fourthly: As the death of Christ on the Cross was a in medio positus, he hung
between two Thieves, as if he had been the principal Malefactor. Math. 27. 38.
Here they placed him, to make the world believe that he was the great
ringleader of such men. Christ was crucified in the midst as the chief of
Sinners, that we might have place in the midst of Heavenly Angels; the one of
these Thieves went railing to Hell, the Zach. 3 7.
other went repenting forth right to Heaven, living long in a little time.

If you ask me the names of these two Thieves, who Q.
were crucified with Christ, I must answer, That although the Scripture
nominates them not, yet some Writers give them these names, Dismas and G^smas;
Dismas the happy, and Gesmas the miserable Thief, according to the Poet:

Gesmas damnatur, Dismas ad astra levatur; That is

When Gesmas died, to Dives he was sent:
When Dismas died, to Abraham up he went.
Well might the Lamp of Heaven withdraw its light, and mask it self with
darkness, as blushing to behold the Sun of Righteousness hanging between two
Thieves; He shall be an Apollo to me, that can tell me which was the greater,
The blood of the Cross, or the shame of the Cross, Heb. 12. 2. It was a mighty
shame that Saul's Sons were 2 Samuel 21. 6.
hanged on a Tree. O what a shameful death was it for Christ to hang on a Tree
between two notorious Thieves But

Fifthly and lastly: As the death of Christ was a shameful Cursed is every one
that hangs on a Tree. The death on Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
the Tree was Accursed above all kinds of death; as the Serpent was Accursed
above all Beasts of the field, both for Genesis 3. 14.
the first transgression; whereof the Serpent was the instrument, the Tree the
occasion. Since the death of any Malefactor might be a Monument of Gods Curse
for sin, it may be questioned, why this brand is peculiarly set upon this kind
of punishment; that he that is hanged, is Accursed of God? To which I Answer,
that the reason of this, was, because this was esteemed the most shameful, the
most dishonorable and infamous of all kinds of death, and was usually
therefore the punishment of those that had by some notorious wickedness
provoked God to pour out his wrath upon the whole Land, and so were hanged up to
appease his wrath, as we may see in the hanging of those Princes that were
guilty of committing Numb. 25. 4.
Whordom with the Daughters of Moab; and in the hanging of those Sons of Saul
in the days of David, when 2 Samuel 21. 6.
there was a Famine in the Land, because of Saul's perfidious oppressing of the
Gibeonites; nor was it without cause that this kind of death was both by the
Israelites and other Nations esteemed the most shameful and accursed; because
the very manner of the death did intimate, that such men as were thus Executed,
were such execrable and accursed wretches, that they did defile the Earth with
treading on it, and would pollute the Earth if they should dye upon it; and
therefore were so trussed up in the Air, as not fit to live amongst men; and
that others might look upon them as men made spectacles of Gods Indignation and
Curse, because of the wickedness they had committed, which was not done in
other kinds of death: And hence it was that the Lord God would have his Son,
the Lord Christ, to suffer this kind of death; that even hence it might be the
more evident, that in his death, he bare the Curse due to our sins, according
to that of the Apostle. Christ has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law,
being made a Curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs
on a Tree. The Gal. 3. 13.
Chaldee translateth, For because he sinned before the Lord, he is hanged. The
Tree whereon a man was hanged, the Stone wherewith he was stoned, the Sword
wherewith he was beheaded, and the Napkin wherewith he was strangled, they were
all Buried, that there might be no evil memorial of such a one, to say, This
was the Tree, Sword, Stone, Napkin, wherewith such a one was Executed. This
kind of death was so execrable, that Constantine made a Law that no Christian
should dye upon the Cross; he abolished this kind of death out o^ his Empire.
When this kind of death was in use among the Jews, it was chiefly inflicted
upon Slaves, that either falsely accused, or treacherously conspired their
Masters death: But on whomsoever it was inflicted, this death in all Ages,
among the Jews, has been branded with a special kind of ignominy; and so much
the Apostle signifies, when he says, He abased himself to the death, even to
the Phil. 2. 2.
death of the Cross. I know Moses's Law speaks nothing in particular of
Crucifying, yet he does include the same under the general of hanging on a
Tree: and some conceive that Moses in speaking of that Curse, sore-saw what
manner of death the Lord Jesus should die; and let thus much sussice concerning
Christ's sufferings on the Cross, or concerning his corporal suffering^.

I shall now in the second place speak concerning Christ's

First: Express Scriptures do evidence this, Isa. ^3. When thou shall make his
Soul an offering for sin, he shall see his Seed, etc. Joh. 12. 27. Now is my
Soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father save me from this hour; but for
this cause came I unto this hour, Math. 26. 37. 38. He began to be sorrowful
and very heavy. (These were but the beginings of sorrow) he began, etc. Sorrow
is a thing that drinks up our spirits, and he was heavy, as seeling an heavy
load upon him, v. 38. My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. Christ
was as full of sorrow as his heart could hold; every word is Emphatical, My
Soul; his Psalm. 6^. 1. 2.
sorrow pierced his Heaven-born Soul. As the Soul was the first Agent in
transgression, so it is here the first Patient in affliction. The sufferings of
his body, were but Christ's Soul was beleagured, or compassed round, round with
sorrow, as that word (...). sounds. 26 Math. 28
the body of his sufferings; the soul of his sufferings, were the sufferings of
his Soul, which was now beset with sorrows, and heavy as heart could hold.
Christ was sorrowsul, his Soul was sorrowful, his Soul was exceeding sorrowsul,
his Soul was exceeding sorrowful unto death; Christ's Soul was in such extremity
of sorrow, that it made him cry out, Father, if it be possible, let this Cup
pass; and this was with strong cryings and tears: To cry, and to cry Heb. 5. 7.
with a loud voice, argues great extremity of sufferings, Mark. 14. 33. Mark
says, And he began to be amazod, (...).
and to be very heavy: or we may more fully express it thus, according to the
original. He begun to be gastred with wondersul astonishment, and to be
satiated, filled brim full with heaviness; a very sad condition. All the sins
of the Elect, like a huge Army, meeting upon Christ, made a dreadful onset on
his Soul, Luke 22. 43, 44. It Is said, He was in an Agony. That Is a conflict, in
which a poor Creature wrestles, with deadly pangs, with all his might, mustring
up all his faculties and force to grapple with them, and with-stand them. Thus
did Christ struggle with the Indignation of the Lord, praying once and again
with more intense fervency; O that this Cup may pass away; if it be possible
let this Cup pass away, while yet an Luk 22 42, 43.
Angel strengthened his outward man from utter sinking in the conslict. Now if
this weight that Christ did bare, had been laid on the shoulders of all the
Angels in Heaven, it would have sunk them down to the lowest Hell; it would
have cracked the Axel-tree of Heaven and Earth: It made His blood startle out of
his body in congealed cloddered heaps: The heat of Gods fiery Indignation, made
his blood to boil up till it ran over; yea, Divine wrath affrighted it out of
its wonted Channel. The Creation of Ge^. 1.
the world cost him but a word; he spoke and the world was made; but the
Redemption of Souls cost him bloody sweats, and Soul-distraction. What
conflicts, what struglings with the wrath of God? the powers of darkness; what
weights? what burdens? what wrath did he undergo, when his Soul was heavy unto
death; beset with terrors, as the word implies, when he drank that bitter cup,
that cup of bitterness? that cup mingled with curses, which made him sweat
drops of blood? which if men or Angels had but sip'd of, 'twould have made them
reel, stagger, and tumble into Hell. The Soul of Christ was over-cast with a
Cloud of Gods displeasure. The Greek Church speaking of the sufferings of
Christ, calls them (...), unknown sufferings. Ah Christians! who can speak out
this sorrow? The spirit of a man will sustain P^ov. 18. 11.
his infirmity, but a wounded spirit, who can bear? Christ's Soul is sorrowful;
but give me that word again, his Soul is exceeding sorrowful; but if that word
be yet too low, then I must tell you, That his Soul was exceeding sorrowful,
even unto death: not only extensively, such as must continue for the space of
seventeen or eighteen hours, even until death it self should finish it; but
also intensively, such, and so great, as that which is used to be at the very
point of death, and such as were able to bring death it self, had not Christ
been reserved to a greater and heavier punishment; of this sorrow is that
especially spoken, Behold Lament. 1. 12.
and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto me,
wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger. Many a sad
and sorrowful Soul has, no question, been in the world; but the like sorrow to
this was never since the Creation; the very terms, or phrases used by the
Evangelists speaks no less. He was sorrowful and heavy says one, amazed, and
very heavy says another; in an Agony says a third; in a Soul-trouble says a
fourth. Certainly the bodily torments of the Cross were much inferior to the
Agony of his Soul; the pain of the body, is the body of pain: Oh but the very
soul of sorrow, is the Souls sorrow; and the very soul of pain, is the Souls
pain.

Secondly: That which Christ assumed, or took of our nature, he assumed to this
end, to suffer in it; and by suffering, to save and redeem it. But he took the
whole nature of man, both body and soul; ergo, He suffered in both, first the
assumption is evident, and needs no proof, that Christ took upon him both our
soul and body; the Apostle assures us, where he says, That in all things it
became Heb. 2. 17.
him to be like unto us, therefore he had both body and soul, as we have.
Secondly: Concerning the proposition, viz. That, what Christ took of our
nature, He took it by suffering in it properly and immediately to Redeem us. Now
this is evident by that blessed word, where the Apostle says, Christ took part
with them that he might destroy, verse. 14, 15.
through death, him that had the power of death, that is the Devil; and deliver
them, who through fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage.
Hence I reason thus, that wherein Christ delivered us, he took part with us in;
but he delivered us from fear of death: Ergo, he did therein communicate with
us. Now mark, This fear was the proper and immediate passion of the Soul,
namely, the fear of death, and God's anger. And the Text gives this sense,
Because the fear of this death kept them in bondage, but the sear only of the
bodily death, does not bring us into such bondage, witness that Song of
Zachery; That we being delivered from the hands of our Enemies, Luke 1. 74.
should serve him without fear; this then is a spiritual fear, from the which
Christ did deliver us: Ergo, He did communicate with us in this fear; for the
Apostle says, Heb. 2. 18.
In that wherein he suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted. Certainly that fear which fell on Christ, was a real fear, and it
was in his Soul, and did not arise from the mere contemplation of bodily
torments only, for the very Martyrs in the encountering with them have feared
little. Assuredly there was some great matter that lay upon the very Soul of
Christ, which made him so heavy, and sorrowsul, and so afraid, and in such an
Agony.

But if you please, take this second Argument in another form of words, thus;
What Christ took of ours, that, He in suffering offered up for us, (for His
assuming of our Nature, was for this end, to suffer for us in our Nature,) but
he took our Nature in Body and in Soul, and he delivered our souls as well as
our bodies; and the sins of our souls did need his Sacrifice, as well as the
sins of our bodies; and our souls were Crucified with Christ as well as our
bodies. Men's mea in Christo Crucisixa est, says Ambrose. Surely, if our whole
man was lost, then our whole man did need the benefit and help of a whole
Savior; and if Christ had assumed only our flesh, our body, then our souls
adjudged, adjudged to punishment, had remained under transgression without hope
of pardon. Several sayings of the Ancients does further strengthen this
Argument, take a taste of some. Si totus homo periit, totus benesi^io salvateris
indiguit, etc. If the whole man perished, August. ^ont. Feli^i n. c. 13.
the whole man needed a Savior. Christ therefore took the whole man body and
soul; if he had taken only flesh, the soul should remain addict to punishment
of the first transgression, without hope of pardon. By the same reason, Christ
must also suffer properly in soul, because not by taking our soul, but by
satisfying in his soul, our soul is delivered.

Suscepit animum meam, Suscepit corpus meum. Ambrose. Ambrose.


He took all our passions, or affections, to sanctify them Dama^cene. H^b. 5.
9.
all in himself; but Christ was Sanctified and Consecrated by his death, and so
does he consecrate us. For by one offering, he has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified: Heb. 10. 14.
Ergo, By his offering of our soul, and suffering in our soul, has he
consecrated our soul and affections.

Suscepit affectum meum, ut emanduret: He took my affection to amend it, etc.
Now he has amended it; in that he consecrated it by his offering (Heb. 10.
14.) I^llud pro nobis suscepit, quod in nobis amplius p^riclitabatur: He has
taken that for us, which was most in danger for us, etc. that is, our soul as
he expounds it, de incarnat, c. 7. But Christ has not otherwise delivered us
from the danger, but by entering into the danger for us; this danger of the
soul, is the fear and feeling of Gods wrath.

Thirdly: Christ bore our sorrows, Isa. 53. 4. Now what sorrows should we bear,
but the sorrows due unto us for our sins; and surely these were not corporal
only, but spiritual also, and those did Christ bear in his soul. The same
Prophet says, ver. 10. He shall make his soul an offering for sin: Ergo,
Christ offered his Soul, as well as his Body. Again, Our Savior himself says
My Soul is Math. 26. 38.
very heavy unto death. Certainly it was not the bodily death which Christ
seared, for then he should have been weaker than many Martyrs, yea, than many
of the Romans, who made no more of dying, than of dining; therefore Christ's
Soul was verily and properly stricken with heaviness, and not with the
beholding of bodily torments only, as some dream. But

Fourthly: That whereby Adam and we ever since do Adam, made satisfaction
properly for our sin; but Adam did, and we all do properly commit sin in our
souls, our bodies being but the instruments: Ergo, Christ, by, and in his soul,
has properly made satisfaction. First: The truth of the proposition is
confirmed by the Apostle. As by one man's disobedi^nce, we are made Sinners, so
by the Romans 5 19.
obedience of one, many shall be made Righteous: Christ then satisfied for us
by the same wherein Adam disobeyed. N^w Adams soul was in the transgression as
well as his body, and accordingly was Christ's very soul in his sufferings and
satisfaction, and Christ obeyed; that is, in his soul; for obedience belongs
to the soul, as one observes upon those words of the Apostle, Phil. 2. 8. He
became obedient unto death even the death of the Cross: Who Agatho Epist. ad
Constantin. upon Phil. 2. 8.
does not understand (says the same Author) that obedience does belong to the
humane will.

That there is a kind of dying in the soul, when it is pierced with grief,
besides the death of the soul, either by sin or damnation is not disagreeing to
the Scripture. Sim^on says to Mary, A sword shall pierce through thy soul:
Luke 2 35.
Look as then the body dies, being pierced with a sword, so the soul may be
said to dye or languish, when it is pierced with grief; what else is
Crucifying, but dying? Now the soul is said to be Crucified, as is evident by
that passage of the Apostle; I am Crucified to the World, when as yet his body
was alive. So Ambrose doubts not to say, Gal. 6. 14.
Men's mea in Christo Crucifixa est, My soul was Crucified Amb^ose, lib. 5. ^^
Luc.
in Christ, that is, Christ in His Soul was Crucified, which he calls our
soul, because he did assume our soul and body; or else where he says, Mea est
voluntas, quam suam dixit, Ambr^se, lib. 2. de sid. c. 3.
etc. It is my will, which he calls his; it is my heaviness, which he took
with my affections; yet was it properly and personally Christ's Soul and Will,
but ours by community of nature.

Secondly: For the Assumption. 1. Howsoever it be Ambrose says upon those
words of Christ, Ambrose de Incarnat. cap. 7.
My Soul is heavy to death; Ad rationabilis assumptionem animae, etc. naturae
humanae refertur affectum: It is referred to the assumption of the reasonable
soul, and humane affection.

Pride, Ambition, Infidelity began in Adams soul, and had their determination
there; in the committing of those sins, the body had no part; indeed with the
ear, they heard the suggestion of Satan; but it was no sin, till in their minds
they had consented unto it: Wherefore, seeing the first sin committed, was
properly and wholly in the soul, for the same the soul must properly and wholly
satisfy.

Because sin took beginning from Adams soul, the satisfaction also must begin
in Christ's Soul, as Ambrose says, Inciplo in Christo vincere, unde in Adam
victus sum. Ambrose. lib 4. in Luc.
I begin there to win in Christ, where in Adam I was overcome: Then it
follows, that the sufferings of Christ's soul took beginning there, and were
not derived by simpathy from the stripes and pain of the body. We infer then,
that therefore Christ's Soul had proper and immediate sufferings, besides those
which proceeded from simpathy with his body, and all Christ's sufferings were
satisfactory: Ergo, Christ did satisfy for our sins properly and immediately in
his soul.

But if you please, take this fourth Argument in another form of words, thus,
The punishment which was pronounced against the first Adam, (our first Surety)
and in him against us; that same did Christ, the second Adam, (our next and
best Surety) bear for us, (or else it must still lie upon us to suffer it.) But
the punishment threatened and denounced against Adam, for transgression, was not
only corporal, respecting our bodies, but spiritual also, respecting our souls.
There was a spiritual malediction due unto our souls, as well as a corporal,
etc.

Look as God put a Sanction on the Law and Covenant of works made with all of
us in Adam, that he and his should be liable to death, both of body and soul
(which Covenant being broken by sin, all Sinners became obnoxious to the death
both of body and soul) so it was necessary that the Redeemed should be
delivered from the death of both, by the Redeemers tasting of death in both
kinds, as much as should be sufficient for their Redemption. O Sirs, as sin
infected the whole Man, soul and body, and the Curse following on sin, left no
part nor power of the man's soul free; so Justice required that the Redeemer,
coming in the room of the persons Redeemed, should feel the force of the Curse
both in body and soul. But

Fifthly: He shall see of the travel of his soul, Isa. 53. And he shall bear
their Iniquities. But

Sixthly: Christ gave himself for his peoples sins, Gal. 1. 9. 6. Ephe. 5. 25.
1 Timothy 2. 6.
Who gave himself for our sins, Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he
might Redeem us from all Iniquities, etc. but the body only is not himself,
ergo; The Apostle says Phil. 2. 7. Christus (...), Exinanivit, Christ did
empty or evacuate himself; or as Tertullian expounds it, Exhausit, Te^t^llian,
Con^ra Marcian. lib. 5.
He drew out himself, or was exhaust, which agrees with the Prophesis of
Daniel, chap. 9. 26. M^ssias shall have nothing, being brought to nothing by
his death, without life, strength, esteem, honor, etc. Hence we conclude, that
if Christ were exhaust upon the Cross, if nothing was left him; that he
suffered in body and soul; that there was no part within or without free from
the Cross, but all was emptied and poured out for our Redemption.

Again: We read That Christ, through the eternal Spirit, Heb. 9. 14
offered himself to God; Whatsoever was in Christ, did either offer, or was
offered; His eternal Spirit only did offer, ergo, His whole humane Nature, both
Body and Soul was offered. Thus Origin witnesses in these words, Origin. ^om.
9 in Levit.
Vide quo modo verus pontifex Jesus Christus adsumpt^ batillocarnis humanae,
etc. See how our true Priest, Jesus Christ, taking the censor of his humane
flesh, putting to the fire of the Altar; that is, His magnificent Soul;
wherewith he was born in the flesh; and adding Incense, that is, an immaculate
Spirit, stood in the midst between the living and the dead. Thus you see that
he makes Christ's soul a part in the Sacrifice.

Seventhly and lastly: Christ's love unto man, in suffering for him, was in the
highest degree, and greatest measure that could be; as the Lord says, What
could I have done any more for my Vineyard, that I have not done unto it? But
if Christ had given his Body only, and not his Soul for us, he had not done for
us all he could, and so his love should have been greatly empaired and
diminished; ergo, He gave his Soul also together with his Body, to be the full
price of our Redemption; and certainly, the travail and labor of Christ's Soul
was most acceptable unto God, Isa. 53. 12. Therefore I will give him a Portion
with Isa. 35. 12.
the great, because he has poured out his Soul unto death, etc. and bare the
sins of many. Doubtless, the sufferings of Christ in his Soul (together with
his Body) does most fully and amply commend and set forth Gods great love to
poor Sinners. Before I close up this particular, take a few Testimonies of the
Fathers, which do witness with us for the sufferings of Christ, both in Soul
and Body.

Christ has taken off us, that which he should offer as Ambrose. de Incarnat.
c. 6.
proper for us, to Redeem us; and whatsoever Christ took off us, he offered;
ergo, He offered Body and Soul, for he took both.

Another upon these words, My Soul is heavy; says Anima Council. Hispalens. 2.
c. 13.
passionibus obnoxia, divinitas libra; His Soul was subject to passions, his
Divinity was free, etc. If nothing were free but his Divine Nature, than his
Soul was subject to the proper and immediate passions thereof.

Perspicuum est, sicut corpus flagellatum, ita animam vere Hierom in 35. cap.
Isa.
doluisse, etc. It is evident, that as his body was whipped, so his Soul was
verily and truly grieved; lest some part of Christ's sufferings should be true,
some part false; ergo, Christ's Soul as properly and truly suffered, as his
Body; the Soul had her proper grief, as the Body had whipping; the whipping
then of the body, was not the proper grief of the soul: Whole Christ gave
himself, and whole Christ offered himself; ergo, He offered his soul not only
to suffer by way of compassion with his body, as it may be Fulgen^ius ad
Th^a^maud. lib. 3.
answered, but he offered it as a Sacrifice, and suffered all passions
whatsoever incident to the soul: The same Author expounds himself further,
thus, Because this God took whole man, therefore he showed in truth, in himself
the passions of whole man; and having a reasonable soul, what infirmities
soever of the soul, without sin, he took and bare. If Christ then did take and
bare all the passions of the soul, without sin, then the proper and immediate
grief and anguish thereof, and not the compassion only with the body. To these
let me add the consent of the reformed Churches; French Confess. Christ did
suffer Harm p. 59. Sect. 6.
both in body and soul, and was made like unto us in all things, Sin only
excepted.

Thomas grants, that Christ, Secundum genus, passus est 3. Par. qu 46. Artic.
5.
omnem passionem humanam, in general, suffered all humane sufferings; as in his
soul heaviness, fear, etc.

Now the Testimonies of the Fathers, and the consent of the reformed Churches,
affirming the same, that Christ was Crucified in his soul, and that he gave his
soul a price of Redemption for our souls: Who can then doubt of this, but that
Christ verily, properly, immediately suffered in his soul, in all the proper
passions thereof, as he endured pains and torments in his flesh; and if you
please, this may go for an eighth argument to prove that Christ suffered in his
soul.

Secondly: That the sufferings of Christ in his soul, were very high, and
great, and wonderful, both as to the punishment of loss, and as to the
punishment of sense; all which I shall make evident in these four particulars.

First: That Jesus Christ did suffer dereliction, of God really; that he was
indeed deserted and Forsaken, 1. By denying of protection. 2. By withdrawing of
solace. Non solvit unionem, sed subtraxit vision^m. Leo. The Union was not
desolved, but the beams, the influence was restrained.
forsaken of God, is most evident, Math. 27. 46. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me: But to prevent mistakes in this high point, seriously consider. 1.
That I do not mean that there was nay such desertion of Christ, by God, as did
desolve the union of the Natures in the person of Christ. (For Christ in all
his sufferings still remained God and Man.) Nor 2. Do I mean an absolute
desertion in respect of the presence of God. (For God was still present with
Christ in all his sufferings, and the Godhead did support his Humanity in, and
under his sufferings) but that which I mean, is this. That as to the sensible
and comforting manifestations of Gods presence, thus he was for a time left and
forsaken of God; God for a time had taken-away all sensible consolation, and
f^lt joy from Christ's humane soul, that so divine justice might in his
sufferings be the more fully satisfied. In this desertion, Christ is not to be
looked upon simply, as he is in his own person the Son of the Father, in whom
he is always well pleased, but as he stands in the room of Sinners, Surety
and Cautioner, Math. 3. 17. Mark. 1. 11. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me. Christ spoke these words, that thereby he might draw the Jews to a serious
consideration, and a nim adversion of his death and passion, which he
underwent, not for his own, but for our sins. Pet. Gal. lib. 8. c. 18. page 343.
paying their debt; in which respect it concerned Christ to be dealt with, as
one standing in our stead, as one guilty, and paying the debt of being forsaken
of God, which we were bound to suffer fully, and for ever, if he had not
interposed for us. There is between Christ and God. 1. An eternal Union natural
of the person. 2. Of the Godhead and Manhood. 3. Of Grace and Protection: In
this last sense, he means forsaken, according to his feeling: Hence he said,
Not my Father, my Father, but my God, my God; which words, are not words of
complaining, but words expressing his grief and sorrow. Our Lord Christ was
forsaken, not only of all Creature comforts, but (that which was worse than
all) of his Fathers favor to his present apprehension, left forlorn and
destitute for a time, that we might be received for ever. Christ was for a time
left and forsaken of God, as David (who in this particular was a type of
Christ's suffering) cried out, Psalm. 22. 1. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? why art thou so far from my help? He was indeed really forsaken of
God; God did indeed leave him in respect of his sense and seeling. So was
Christ truly and really forsaken of God, and not in color or show, as some
affirm. (Athanasius speaking of Gods forsaking of Christ, says, All things
were done naturally, and in truth, not in opinion or show.) Though God did
still R li^qu^t De^s dum n^n p^^^, ^a^h T^^u^^n
continue a God to David, yet in David's apprehension and feeling, he was
forsaken of God. Though God was still a God to Christ, yet as to his feeling,
he was left of God, to wrestle with God, and to bear the wrath of God, due unto
us. Look as Christ was scourged, that we Ambrose.
might not be scourged, so Christ was forsaken, that we might not be forsaken.
Christ was forsaken for a time, that we might not be forsaken for ever.

Fevardentius absolutely denies that Christ did truly complain upon the Cross,
that he was forsaken of God; Fevarden. page ^73. Con(...).
and therefore he thus objecteth and reasons. If Christ were truly forsaken
of God, it would follow that the Hypostatical Union was dissolved, and that
Christ was personally separated from God, for otherwise he could not be
forsaken.

To what he objects, we thus reply first. If Christ had been totally and
eternally forsaken, the personal union must have been dissolved; but upon this
temporal and partial rejection, or dereliction, there follows not a personal
dissolution, or general dereliction: But secondly: As the Body of Christ, being
without life, was still Hypostatically united to the Godhead, so was the soul
of Christ, though for a time, without feeling of his favor; the dereliction of
the one, does no more dissolve the Hypostatical Union, than the death of the
other. If life went from the body, and yet the Deity was not separated in the
personal consecration, but only suspended in operation. So the feeling of Gods
favor, which is the life of the soul, might be intermitted in Christ, and yet
the Divine Union not dissolved.

Thirdly: Augustine does well show how this may be August, lib de (...) divin.
when he says (Passio Christi dulcis fuit, divinitatis somnus,) That the
passion of Christ was the sweet sleep of his Divinity; like as then in sleep
the soul is not departed, though the operation thereof be deferred; so in
Christ's sleep upon the Cross, the Godhead was not separated, though the
working power thereof were for a time sequestered. Look as the Elect Members of
Christ may be forsaken, though not totally or finally; but ex part in part,
and for a time, and yet their Election remain firm still; the same may be the
case of our head, that he was ex part de relictus; only in part forsaken, and
for a time always beloved for his own Innocence, but for us and in our person,
as our pledge and Surety, deserted.

There are two kinds of dereliction, or forsaking; one is for a time, and in
part, so the Elect may be, and so Christ was forsaken upon the Cross; another
which is total, final, and general; and so neither Christ nor his Members never
was, nor never shall be forsaken. Christ in the deepest anguish of his soul is
upheld and sustained by his Faith, My God, my God; whereby he shows his
singular confidence and trust in God, notwithstanding the present sense of his
wrath.

But how can Christ be forsaken of God himself, being God; for the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost are all three but one and the same God? Yea, How can he be
forsaken of God, seeing he is the Son of God? and if the Lord leave not his
Children, which hope and trust in him, how can he forsake Christ his only
begotten Son, who depended upon him and his mighty power?

First: By God, here we are to understand God the Father,

Secondly: Our Saviors complaint, that he was forsaken, and Manhood were
never severed from the first time of his Incarnation, but the Godhead of
Christ; and so the Godhead of the Father did not show forth his power in his
Manhood, but did as it were lie a sleep for a time, that the Manhood might
suffer.

Thirdly: Christ was not indeed utterly forsaken of My God, my God; as also
from his Resurrection the third day.

Fourthly: Divines say, that there are six kinds of dereliction

Secondly: That Jesus Christ did feel and suffer the wrath of God which was due
unto us for our sins. The Prophet Isa. 53. 4. says, That he was plagued and
smitten of God; and ver. 5. The chastisement of our peace was upon him. To be
plagued and smitten of God, is to feel and suffer the stroke of his wrath: And
so to be chastified of God, as to make peace with God, or to appease him, is so
to suffer the wrath of God, as to satisfy God, and to remove it. And truly,
how Christ should possibly escape the feeling of the wrath of God, incensed
against our sins, he standing as a Surety for us, with our sins laid upon him,
and for them fully to satisfy the justice of God, is not Christianly, or
rationally imaginable.

And whereas some do object, that Christ was always the beloved of his Father,
and therefore could never be the object of Gods wrath.

I answer: By distinguishing of the person of Christ, Romans 5. 9. Much more
being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath by him: 1 These. 1.
10. And to wait for his Son from Heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even
Jesus which deliverod us from the wrath to come.

It is a groundless conceit of some learned heads, who deny the cause of
Christ's Agony, to be the drinking of that Cup of wrath that was given to him by
his Father; saying, That the sight of it only, and of the peril he saw we were
in, was the cause of his Agony; for the Cup was not Joh. 18. 11.
only showed unto him, and the great wrath, due to our sins set before him,
that he should see it, and tremble at the apprehension of the danger we were
in, but it was poured not only on him, but into him; that he for the sins of
his Redeemed Ones should suffer it sensibly, and drink it, that the bitterness
thereof might affect all the powers of his soul and body: for the Scripture
does sufficiently testify, that not only upon the sight and apprehension of
this wrath and curse coming on him, the holy humane Heb. 5. 7.
Nature did holily abhor it; but also that he submitted to receive it upon the
consideration of the divine decree and Math. 26. 38, 39, 42, 44. 1 Cor. 6. 20.
cap. 7. 23.
agreement made upon the price to be paid by him, and that upon the feeling of
this wrath, this Agony in his soul, and bloody sweat of his body was brought on.

But how could the pourings forth of the Fathers wrath, upon on his innocent
and dear Son, consist with his Fatherly love to him, etc?

Even as the innocence and holiness of Christ could well

Thirdly: That Jesus Christ did feel and suffer the very I readily grant that
Jesus Christ did not locally descend into Hell, to suffer there amongst the
damned, neither did he suffer Hellish darkness, nor the flames of Hell, nor the
Worm that never dies, nor final despair, nor guilt of Conscience, nor gnashing
of teeth, nor impatient indignation, nor eternal separation from God; these
things were absolutely inconsistent with the holiness, purity, and dignity of
his person, and with the office of a Mediator and Redeemer. But yet I say that
our Lord Jesus Christ did suffer in his Soul for our sins such pain, horror,
terror, agony, and consternation, as amounted unto cruciatus infernales, and
are in Scripture called The sorrows of Hell. The sorrows of Hell did compass me
about, (or the Psalm. 18. 5.
cords of Hell did compass me about, such as wherewith they bind Malefactors
when they are led forth to Execution.) Now these sorrows, these cords of Hell,
were the things that extorted from him that passionate expostulation, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me. Math. 27. 46.
Christ's sufferings were unspeakable, and somewhat answerable to the pains of
Hell. Hence the Greek Letany, By thine unknown sufferings, good Lord deliver
us. Funinus an Italian Martyr, being asked by one, why he was so (...). Romans
and Mon. fol. 853.
merry at his death, since Christ himself was so sorrowful; Christ, said he,
sustained in his soul, all the sorrows and conflicts with Hell and death due to
us; by whose sufferings we are delivered from sorrow and the fear of them all.
It was a great saying of a very learned man, that setting Iniquity and Eternity
of punishment aside (which Christ might not sustain) Christ did more vehemently
and sharply feel the wrath of God, then ever any man did or shall, no not any
person reprobated and damned excepted; and certainly, the reason annexed, to
prove this expression, is very weighty, because all the wrath, that was due for
all the sins of the Elect (all whose sins were laid on Christ) Isa. 53. 6.
was greater than the wrath which belonged to any one sinner, though damned for
his personal sinning: and besides this, if you do seriously consider those
sufferings of Christ in his Agony, in the Garden, you may (by them) conjecture
what hellish torments Christ did suffer for us. In that Agony of his, he was
afraid, and amazed, and fell Math. 14. 33. verse. 34.
flat on the ground: He began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy; and
says unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death; and his sweat was as
it were great Luk 22. 44.
drops of blood falling down to the ground: He did sweat clotted blood, to such
abundance, that it streamed through his apparel, and did wet the ground; which
dreadful Agony of Christ, how it could arise from any other cause than the
sense of the wrath of God, parallel to that in Hell I know not.

Orthodox Divines do generally take Christ's sufferings in his soul, and the
detaining his body in the grave (put in as the close and last part of Christ's
sufferings) as the true meaning of that expression, He descended into Hell; not
only because these pains which Christ suffered both in body and soul, were due
to us in full measure, but also, because that which Christ in point of torment
and vexation suffered was in some respect of the same kind with the torment of
the damned. For the clearing of this, consider, that in the punishment of the
damned, there are these three things. 1 The perverse disposition of the mind of
the damned in their sufferings. 2. The duration and perpetuity of their
punishment. And 3. The punishment it self, tormenting soul and body: Of these
three, the first two could have no place in Christ: Not the first, Because Heb.
9. 14. Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8. Act. 2. 24. 1 Pet. 2. 24. 1 Cor. 6. ult.
he willingly offered himself a Sacrifice for our sins, and upon agreement paid
the Ransom fully: Not the second, Because he could no longer be held under
sorrows and sufferings, than he had satisfied Divine Justice, and paid the
price that he was to lay down. And his infinite excellency and glory made his
short sufferings to be of infinite worth, and equivalent to our everlasting
sufferings. The third then only remains, which was the real and sensible
torments of his soul and body, which he did really feel and experience when he
was upon the Cross. O Sirs, What need you question Christ's undergoing of
Hellish pains, when all the pains, torments, curse, and wrath, which was due to
the Elect, did fall on Christ, and lie on Christ, till Divine Justice was fully
satisfied. Though Christ did not suffer eternal death for sinners, yet he
suffered that which was equivalent, and therefore the justice of God is by his
death wholly appeased.

It is good seriously to ponder upon these Scriptures, Psalm. 18. 5. The sorrows
of Hell did compass me about, Psalm. 88. 3. My soul is filled with evil, and my
life draws near to Hell, Psalm. 86. 13. Thou have delivered my Soul from the
nethermost Hell. In these places the Prophet speaks in the person of Christ;
and the Papists themselves do confess that the Hebrew word Sheol, that is here
used, is taken for Hell properly, and not for the Grave; therefore these places
do strongly conclude for the hellish sorrows or sufferings of Christ. So Act.
2. 27. Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell. If Christ's soul be not left or
forsaken in Hell, yet it follows, it was in Hell; not that Christ did feel the
sorrows of Hell, after death, but that he did feel the very sorrows of Hell in
his soul while he lived. Certainly the whole punishment of body and soul which
was due unto us, Christ our Redeemer was in general to suffer and satisfy for
in his own person; but the torments and terrors of Hell, and the vehement sense
of Gods wrath, are that punishment which did belong to the soul; ergo, Christ
did suffer the torments and terrors of Hell: By the whole punishment, you are
to understand the whole kind or substance of the punishment, not all the
circumstances; and the very same manner, the whole punishment, then is the
whole kind of punishment; that is, in body and soul, which Christ ought to have
suffered, though not in the same manner and circumstance. 1. neither for the
place of Hell Locally: Nor 2. For the time Eternally: Nor 3. For the manner
Sinfully. When we say Christ was to suffer our whole punishment, all such
punishments as cannot be suffered without sin, as desperation, final
reprobation are manifestly excepted. Christ did bear all our punishment, though
not as we should have borne it; that is, 1. Sinfully. 2. Eternally. 3.
Hellishly: But he did so bear all our punishment, as to finish all upon the
Cross; and in such sort as Gods justice 2 Col 14. 15.
was satisfied, his Person not disgraced, nor his Holiness defiled, and yet
man's Salvation fully perfected. We H^b. 9. 4 cap. 10. 15.
constantly affirm that Christ did suffer the pains of Hell in his Soul, with
these three restrictions. 1. That there be neither indignity offered to his
Royal Person. 2. Nor injury to his Holy Nature. 3. Nor impossibility to his
glorious work: All such pains of Hell then as Christ might have suffered: 1.
His Person not dishonored. 2. His Nature with sin not defiled. 3. His work of
our Redemption not hindered, we do steadfastly believe were sustained by our
Blessed Savior. Consider a few things.

First: Consider the adjuncts of Hell, which are these etc.

Secondly: Consider the effects (or rather the defects) etc. Now the necessity
of the work of Christ does exempt him from these effects; for if he had been
either void of grace, or possessed with vice, he could not have been the
Redeemer of poor lost souls; for the want of Virtue he could not have Redeemed
others; for the presence of sin he should have been Redeemed himself; and from
fretting Indignation, and fearful Desperation, the piety and sanctity of his
Nature does preserve him; who being without sin, could neither by Indignation
displease his Father, nor by Desperation destroy himself. So that if you
consider either the adjuncts of Hell, or the effects, then I say we do remove
all them as far off from the holy soul of Christ, as Heaven is from Hell, or
the East from the West, or darkness from light, etc.

Thirdly: Consider the punishment it self. Now concerning the whole punishment
of body and soul in general, that was due unto us, for the same which we should
have endured, if he had not satisfied for it; and so consequently we affirm,
that he felt the anguish of soul, and horror of Gods wrath, and so in soul
entered into the torments of Hell for us, sustained them, and vanquished them:
One spaking in honor of Christ's passion, says, Cum iram Dei Calvin, in Math.
2^. 39.
sibi propositum videret, When he saw the wrath of God set before him,
presenting himself before Gods tribunal, laden with the sins of the whole
world, it was necessary for him to fear the deep bottomless pit of death. Again
Calvin, in Math. 27. 46.
says the same Author, Cum species Christo objecla est, etc. Such an object
being offered to Christ's view, as though God being set against him, he were
appointed to destruction; he was with horror affrighted, which was able an
hundred times to have swallowed up all mortal Creatures; but he by the
wonderful power of his spirit, escaped with Victory. What dishonor was it to
our Savior Christ (says another) to suffer that which was necessary for Fulk.
in Act 2. Sect. 11.
our Redemption, namely, that torment of Hell which we had deserved, and which
the Justice of God required, that he should endure for our Redemption: Or
rather, what is more to the honor of Christ, then that he vouchsafed to
descend into Hell for us, and to abide that bitter pain which we had deserved
to suffer Eternally; and what may rather be called Hell, then the anguish of
soul which he suffered; when he being yet God, complained that he was forsaken
of God. O Sirs, this we need not fear to confess, that Christ bearing our sins
in himself, upon the Cross, did feel himself, during that combat, as rejected
and forsaken of God, and accursed for us, and the flames of his Fathers wrath
burning within him; so that to the honor of Christ's Passion, we confess that
our blessed Redeemer refused no part of our punishment, but endured the very
pains of Hell so far, as they tended not, neither to the derogation of his
Person, deprivation of his Nature, destruction of his Office, etc.

Here it may be query'd whether the Lord Jesus Christ underwent the idem, the
very self-same punishment that we should have undergone? or only the tantundem,
that which did amount, and was equivalent thereunto? To which, I Answer, That
in different respects, both may be affirmed. The punishment which Christ
endured, if it be considered in its substance, kind, or nature, so 'twas the
same with that the Sinner himself should have undergone; but if it be
considered with respect to certain circumstances, adjuncts, or accidents, which
attend that punishment, (as inflicted upon the Sinner) so 'twas but equivalent
and not the same. The punishment due to the Sinner, was death, the curse of the
Law (upon the breach of the first Covenant,) now this Christ underwent, For
Gal. 3. 13.
he was made a Curse for us. The adjuncts attending this death, were the
Eternity of it, Desperation going along with it, etc. These Christ was freed
from (the dignity of his Person supplying the former, the sanctity of his
Person, securing him against the latter;) therefore in reference unto these
(and to some other things already mentioned) it was but the tantundem, not the
idem; but suppose there had been nothing of sameness, nothing beyond
equivalency in what Christ suffered; yet that was enough, for it was not
required that Christ should suffer every kind of Curse, which is the effect of
sin, but in the general accursed death. Look as in his fulfilling of the Law
for us, it was not necessary that he should perform every holy duty that the
Law requires; for he could not perform that obedience which Magistrates, or
Married persons are bound to do: Its enough that there was a fulfilling of it
in the general for us. So here it was not necessary that Jesus Christ should
undergo in every respect the same punishment which the offender himself was
liable unto; but if he shall undergo so much as may satisfy the Laws
threatenings, and vindicate the Lawgiver in his Truth, Justice, and Righteous
government, that was enough. Now that was unquestionably done by Christ.

But some may object, and say, How could Christ suffer the pains of the second
death, without disunion of the Godhead from the Manhood, for the Godhead
could not dye? Or what interest had Christ's Godhead in his humane sufferings,
to make them both so short, and so precious, and satisfactory to Divine justice
for the sins of so many Sinners; especially when we consider that God cannot
suffer?

I Answer: It follows not, that because Christ is United Joh. 10. 17.
Therefore my Father Isa 53. 12. Psalm. 40. 7, 8. Heb. 10. 9, 10.
loves me, because I lay down my life, ver. 18. No man takes it from me, but I
lay it down of my self. If Christ had been constrained to suffer, then both men
and Angels might fear and tremble; but as one says well, Voluntas Bernard
sponte morientis, placuit Deo; The willingness of him that dyed, pleased God,
who offered himself to be the Redeemer of fallen man.

But secondly: I Answer from 1 John 3. 16. Hereby

Thirdly: I answer thus; Albeit the passion of the humane Person, that it may
truly be said, that God suffered, and by his blood bought his people to
himself; for albeit, the Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 6. 20. cap.
7. 23.
proper and formal subject of physical sufferings, be only the humane Nature;
yet the principal subject of sufferings, both in a physical and moral sense, is
Christ's Person, God and Man; from the dignity whereof, the worth and excellency
of all sorts of sufferings, the merit and the satisfactory sufficiency of the
price did flow.

O Sirs, you must seriously consider, that though Christ as God, in his
Godhead could not suffer in a physical sense, yet in a moral sense he might
suffer, and did suffer: For he being in the form of God, thought it not robbery
Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8.
to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of men; and being found in
fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross. O! who can sum up the contradictions, the railings, the
revilings, the contempts, the despisings and calumnies that Christ met with
from Sinners, yea from the worst of Sinners.

But how could so low a debasing of the Son of man, or of the humane nature
assumed by Christ, consist with the

We must distinguish those things in Christ, which are

Object. How could Christ endure Hellfire, without etc.

I Answer: That we may walk safely, and without offense,

Secondly: Final Rejection and Desperation, Blasphemy, Who was a Lamb without a
spot, and therefore we do not, we dare not ascribe them to him. Heb. 9. 14. 1
Pet. 1. 19.
But

Thirdly: Destruction of body and soul, which is the

Fourthly and lastly: Blasphemy and Despair are no Rev. 16. 9. 11.
held fast his integrity and innocence. Despair is an unavoidable Companion,
attending the pains of the second death, as all Reprobates do experience.
Desperation is an utter hopelesness of any good, and a certain expectation and
waiting on the worst that can befall; and this is the lot and portion of the
damned in Hell. The wretched sinner in Hell, seeing the sentence passed against
him, Gods purpose fulfilled, never to be reversed, the gates of Hell made fast
upon him, and a great Gulf fixed Luke 16. 26.
betwixt Hell and Heaven, which renders his escape impossible; He now gives up
all, and reckons on nothing but uttermost misery. Now, mark this despair is not
an essential part of the second death, but only a consequent, or (at the most)
an effect occasioned by the sinners view, of his irremediless woeful condition;
but this neither did, nor could possibly befall the Lord Jesus; He was able by
the power of his Godhead, both to suffer, and to satisfy, and to overcome,
therefore he expected a good issue, and Psalm. 16. 9, 10. Act. 2. 26, 27, 28, 31.
knew that the end should be happy, and that he should not be ashamed, Isa. 5.
6, 7. etc. Though a very shallow stream would easily drown a little Child,
there being no hope of escape for it, unless one or another should step in
seasonably to prevent it. Yet a man that is grown up, may groundedly hope to
escape out of a far more deep and dangerous place, because by reason of his
stature, strength, and skill, he could wade or swim out. Surely, the wrath of
the Almighty manifested in Hell, is like the vast Ocean, or some broad, deep
River; and therefore when the sinful Sons and Daughters of Adam (which are Romans
5. 6.
without strength) are hurled into the midst of it, they must needs lie down
in their confusion, as altogether hopeless of deliverance, or escaping; but
this despair could not seize upon Jesus Christ, because (although his Father
took Isa. 63. 1, 2, 3.
him, and cast him into the Sea of his wrath, so that all the billows of it
went over him, yet) being the mighty God, with whom nothing is impossible, he
was very able to pass through that Sea of wrath and sorrow which would have
drowned all the world, and come safe to shore.

Object. But when did Christ suffer Hellish Torments; they are inflicted after
death, not usually before it; but Christ's soul went strait after death into
Paradise; how else could he say to the penitent Thief, This day shall thou be
with me in Paradise. Now to this Objection I shall give these following Answers.

First: That Christ's soul, after his Passion upon the

First: All the Evangelists; and so Luke among the rest, 1. Luke 1. 3.
intending to make an exact Narrative of the life and death of Christ, has set
down at large his Passion, Death, Burial, Resurrection, and Ascension; and
besides, they make rehearsal of very small circumstances; therefore we may
safely conclude, that they would never have omitted Christ's local descent into
the place of the damned, if there had been any such things; besides the great
end, why they penned this History, was, That we might believe that Jesus Christ
is the Son of God; and that thus believing, J^h. 20. 31.
we might have life everlasting. Now there could not have been a greater matter
for the confirmation of our Faith, than this, that Jesus, the Son of Mary, who
went down to the place of the damned, returned thence to live in all happiness
and blessedness for ever. But

Secondly: If Christ did go into the place of the damned, This day shall thou
be with me in Paradise; which words of Christ must be understood Luke 23. 43.
of his Manhood or Soul, and not of his Godhead, for they are an answer to a
demand, and therefore unto it they must be suitable. The Thief makes his
request, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom; verse. 42.
to which, Christ Answers, Verily, I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with
me in Paradise; I shall (says Christ) this day enter into Paradise, and there
shall thou be with me. Now there is no entrance, but in regard of his Soul or
Manhood, for the Godhead, which is at all times in all Psalm. 139 7 13. Jer
23. 23, 24.
places, cannot be properly said to entertain into a place. But

Thirdly: When Christ says, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise, He does
intimate (as some observe) a resemblance which is between the first and second
Adam. The first Adam quickly sinned against God, and was as Genesis 3.
quickly cast out of Paradise by God. Christ the second Adam, having made a
perfect and complete satisfaction Heb 9. 26, 28 cap. 10. 14.
to the justice of God, and the Law of God, for man's sin must immediately enter
into Paradise. Now to say that Christ, in Soul, descended locally into Hell, is
to abolish this Analogy between the first and second Adam. But

Secondly: It Is not impossible that the pains of the second Pet. 1. 8. Whom
having not seen ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye
rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, or glorious; either because
this their rejoicing was a taste of their future glory, or because it made them
glorious in the eyes of men; the original word (...), is glorified already; a
piece of Gods Kingdom, and Heavens happiness aforehand: Ah, how many precious
Saints, both living and dying, have cried out, O the joy! the joy! the
inexpressible joy that I find in my Soul, Ephe. 2, 6. He has made us sit
together in Heavenly places, in Christ Jesus. What is this else, but even while
we live, by Faith to possess the very joys of Heaven on this side Heaven. Now,
look as the true joys of Heaven may be felt on this side Heaven, so the true,
though not the full pains of Hell, may be felt on this side Hell; and
doubtless, Cain, Judas, Julian, Spira, and others have found it so. That Father
hit the mark, who Genesis 4. 13.
said, Judicis in mente tua, sedet ibi Deus, ad est accusator conscientia,
tortor timor; The Judges Tribunal seat is in Augustine. in Psalm. 57.
thy soul, God sits there as Judge, thy Conscience is the Accuser, and fear
is the tormentor. Now if there be in the soul a Judge, an Accuser, and a
Tormentor, then certainly there is a true taste of the torments of Hell, on this
side Hell.

Thirdly: The place Hell is no part of the payment; the laying down of the
price makes the satisfaction; this is all that is spoken and threatened to Adam,
Thou shall dye Genesis 2. 1^. Peter says, the Devils are cast down to Hell, and
kept in chains of darkness. 2 Pet. 2. 4: And Paul calls the Devil, the Prince
that rules in the Air. Ephe. 2. 2. The Air then is the Devils Hell; well then,
seeing this air is the Devils present Hell, we may safely conclude, that Hell
may be in this present world; and therefore it is neither impossible, nor
improbable? that the Cross was Christ's Hell.
the death, and this may be suffered here. The wicked go to Hell as their
Prison, because they can never pay their debts, otherwise the debt may as well
be paid in the Market, as the Goal. Now Christ did discharge all his peoples
debts in the days of his flesh, when he offered up strong cries and tears, Heb.
5 7. and not after death. Look as a King entering into Prison to loose the
Prisoners Chains, and to pay their debts, is said to have been in Prison; so
our Lord Jesus Christ, by his souls sufferings, which is the Hell he entered
into, has released us of our pains and chains, and paid our debts, and in this
sense he may be said to have entered into Hell, though he never actually entered
into the local place of the damned, which is properly called Hell; for in that
place there is neither virtue nor goodness, holiness nor happiness, and
therefore the holiness of Christ's person would never suffer him to descend into
such a place, in the local place of Heaven and Hell. It is not possible for any
neither to be at once, nor yet at sundry times successively, for there is no
passing from Heaven to Hell, or from Hell to Heaven, Luke 16. 26. The place of
suffering, is but a circumstance in the business; Hell (the place of the
damned) is no part of the debt, therefore neither is suffering there locally
any part of the payment of it, no more than a Prison is any part of an earthly
debt, or of the payment of it. The Surety may satisfy the Creditor in the
place appointed for payment, or in the open Court, which being done, the Debtor
and Surety both are acquitted, that they need not go to Prison; if either of
them go to Prison, it is because they do not, or cannot pay the debt; for all
that Justice requires, is to satisfy the debt, to the which, the Prison is
merely extrinsical: Even so the Justice of God cannot be satisfied for the
transgression of the Law, but by the death of the Sinner; but it does not
require that this should be done in the place of the damned. The wicked go to
Prison, because they do not, they cannot make satisfaction; otherwise Christ
having fully discharged the debt, needed not go to Prison.

Object. But the pains and torments that are due to man's sins, are to be
everlasting; and how then can Christ's short sufferings countervail them?

Answ. That Christ's sufferings in his soul and body Math. 18 28. 35.
ever kept in Prison. Look as eternal death has in it eternity and despair
necessarily in all those that so die, so Christ could not suffer, but what was
wanting in duration was supplied; 1. By the immensity of his sorrows
conflicting with the sense of Gods wrath, because of our sins imputed to him;
so that he suffered more grief, then if the sorrows of all men were put
together. Christ's Hell, sorrows on the Cross were meritorious and fully
satisfactory Isa. 53.
for our everlasting punishment; and therefore in greatness were to exceed all
other men's sorrows, as being answerable to Gods justice. 2. By the dignity and
worth of him that did suffer; Therefore the Scripture calls it the blood of
God. The damned must bear the wrath of God to all Eternity, because they can
never satisfy the justice of God for sin; therefore they must lie by it world
without end: but Christ has made an infinite satisfaction in a finit time, by
undergoing that fierce battle with the wrath of God, and getting the Victory in
a few hours, which is equivalent to the Creatures bearing it, and grapling with
it everlastingly. This length, or shortness of durance, is but a circumstance
not of any necessary consideration in this case. Suppose a man indebted a 100
l. and likely to lie in Prison till he shall pay it, yet utterly unable; if
another man comes, and lays down the money on two hours warning, is not this as
well, or better done; that which may be done to as good or better purpose, in a
short time, what need is there to draw it out at length? The justice of the Law
did not require that either the Sinner, or his Surety should suffer the
Eternity of Hells torments, but only their extremity; it does abundantly
counterpoise the eternity of the punishment, that the person which suffered was
the eternal God. Besides, it was impossible that he should be detained under
the sorrows of death, Act. 2. 24. And if he had been so detained, Then he had
not spoiled principalities and powers, nor triumphed over them, Col. 2. 15. but
had been overcome, and so had not attained his end. But

Secondly: The pains of Hell which Christ suffered, secundum tempus, Ambrose in
5. ad Romans 6.
in time, or according to time; Tempora in mundo sunt, etc. Times are in the
world where the Sun rises and sets; unto this time he dyed; but where there
is no time, there he was found, not only living, but conquering. Christ,
God-Man, suffered punishment in measure infinite, and therefore there is no
ground why he should endure it eternally; and indeed it was impossible that
Christ should be Act. 2. 24.
holden of Death, because he was both the Lord of life, and the Lords holy One,
1 Cor. 2. 8. Act. 2. 27. But

Thirdly: If the measure of a man's punishment were infinite, an infinite God. O
Sirs, continual imprisonment in Hell, arises from man's not being able to pay
the price; for could he pay the debt in one year, he needs not lie two years in
Prison. Now the debt is the first and second death, and because sinful man
cannot pay it in any time, he must endure it eternally; but now Christ has laid
down ready pay upon the nail, to the full for all his chosen Ones; and
therefore it is not re^uired of him that he should suffer for ever neither can
it stand with the holiness or justice of God to hold him under the second
death, he having paid the debt to the utmost Farthing. Now that he has fully
paid the debt himself, witnesses Joh. 19. 30. saying, when he had received the
Vinegar, It is finished; so verse. 28. After this, Jesus knowing that all things
were accomplished. Though there are many interpretations given of this place by
Augustine, Chrysostom, Jansenu^, and others; yet doubtless, this alone will
hold water, viz. That the heavy wrath of the Lord which did pursue Christ, and
the second death which filled him with grievous terrors, is now over and past,
and man's Redemption finished; he speaks here of that which presently should
be, and in the yielding up his Ghost was accomplished.

And thus you see that Jesus Christ did feel and suffer the very torments of
Hell, though not after a Hellish manner; and you see also that Christ did not
locally descend into Hell: Shall we make a few inferences from hence.

First then: O! how should these sad sufferings of Psalm. 136. 17, 18.
prize him; how should we honor him; how should we love him; and how should we
be swallowed up in the admiration of him? as his love to us has been matchless,
so his sufferings for us has been matchless. I have read of Nero, that he had a
Shirt made of a Salamanders skin, so that if he did walk through the fire in
it, it would keep him from burning. So Christ is the true Salamanders skin that
will keep the soul from everlasting burnings; Isa. 33. 14.
and therefore well may Christians cry out with that Martyr, None but Christ,
none but Christ. Tigranes in Zenophon, Lambert.
coming to Redeem his Father and Friends, with his Wife, that were taken
Prisoners by Cyrus, was asked among other things, what Ransom he would give for
his Wife; he answered, He would Redeem her liberty with his own life; but
having prevailed, as they returned together, every one commended Cyrus for a
goodly man; and Tygranes would needs know of his Wife, What she thought of him;
Truly, said she, I cannot tell, for I did not so much as look on him, or see
him; whom then, said he, (wondering) did you look upon? Whom should I look upon,
replied she, but him that would have Redeemed my liberty with his own life. So
every Believer should esteem nothing 1 Cor. 6. 20. Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 1. 18,
19. Plutarch in vita Tit. Flam
worth a looking on, but that Jesus who has Redeemed him with his own blood.
Plutarch tells us, That when Titus Flaminius had freed the poor Graecians from
the bondage with which they had been long ground by their oppressions, and the
Herald was to proclaim in their Audience the Articles of peace he had concluded
for them; they so pressed upon him (not being half of them able to hear) that
he was in great danger to have lost his life in the press; at last reading them
a second time, when they came to understand distinctly how that their case
stood, they so shooted for joy, crying (...), a Savior, a Savior, that they
made the very Heavens ring again with their acclamations, and the very Birds
fall down astonished. And all that night the poor Graecians with Instruments of
Music, and Songs of praise, danced and sang about his Tent, extolling him as a
God that had delivered them: But O then what infinite cause have we to exalt
and cry up our dear Lord Jesus, who by the Hellish sorrows that he suffered for
us, has freed us from that more dreadful bondage of sin, Satan, and wrath that
we lay under. O! prize that Jesus; O! exalt that Christ; O! extol that Savior,
who has saved you from that eternal wrath that all the Angels in Heaven, and
all the men on Earth could never have saved you from. The name of Jesus (says
one) has a thousand Chrysostom. Dulce namen Christi
Treasures of joy and comfort in it, and is therefore used by Paul five hundred
times as some have observed. The name of a Savior (says another) is Honey in
the Mouth, and Music in the Ears, and a Jubilee in the Heart. Were Bernard.
Christ in your bosom as a flower of delight, for he is a whole Paradise of
delight (says one.) I had rather (says Justin Martyr. L^ther.
another) be in Hell with Christ, than in Heaven without him, for Christ is the
Crown of Crowns, the glory of glorys, and the Heaven of Heaven. One says, That
he Austin.
would willingly go through Hell to Christ: Another says, He Bernard.
had rather be in his Chimny corner with Christ, than in Heaven without him.
One cried out, I had rather have one Christ than a thousand worlds. Jesus in
the China tongue, signifies the rising Sun, and such a rising Sun was he to
Julius Palmer, that when all concluded that he was dead, Mal. 4 2.
being turned as black as a coal in the fire, at last he moved his scorched
lips, and was heard to say Sweet Jesus. It was an excellent answer of one of
the Martyrs, when he was offered riches and honors if he would recant; Do but
(said he) offer me somewhat that is better than my Lord Jesus Christ, and you
shall see what I will say to you. Now, O! that the Hellish sorrows and
sufferings of Christ for us, might raise in all our hearts such a high
estemation, and such a deep admiration, as has been raised in those worthies
last mentioned. It was a sweet prayer of him who thus prayed, Lord make thy Son
dear, very dear, exceeding dear, and only dear and precious to me. When ever we
seriously think of the great and sore sufferings of 2. All the Hell Socinians
grant is Annihilation, by reason it is said, they shall be destroyed, vide.
Socinus, Racoucat. Crellius. Bidle, Richardson, etc.
Christ, it will be good to pray as he prayed. But

Secondly: If Jesus Christ did feel and suffer the very torments of Hell,
though not after a Hellish manner, then let me infer, that certainly there is a
Hell, a place of torment provided and prepared for all wicked and ungodly
persons. Danaeus reckons up no less than nineteen several sorts of Heretics
that denied it; and are there not many erroneous and deluded persons that
stoutly, and daily assert that there is no Hell but what men feel in their own
Consciences: Ah how many are there that rejoice Jer. 11. 15. Prove. 2. 14. Isa.
65. 3. 2 These. 2. 11. Math. 25. 41. Isa. 30. 33.
to do evil, and delight in their abominations, and take pleasure in
unrighteousness: But could men do thus, durst men do thus, did they really
believe that Hell was prepared and fitted for them, and that the fiery Lake was
but a little before them. Heaven is a place where all is joyful; and Hell is a
place where all is doleful; in Heaven there is nothing but happiness; and in
Hell there is nothing but heaviness, nothing but endless, easeless, and
remediless torments. Did men believe this, how could they go so merrily on in
the way to Hell? Cato once said to Caesar, (credo quae deniferis dicuntur falsa
esse existimas.) I believe that thou think all that is said of Hell to be
false and fabulous. So I may say to many in this day, Surely you think that all
that is spoken, and written of Hell, is but a story. Don't you look upon the
people of God to be of all men the most miserable, and your selves of all men
the most happy. Yes; O! but how can this be? did you really believe that there
was a Heaven for the Righteous, and a Hell for the Wicked. It Is an Italian
Proverb, (Qui venetias non vidit, non credit, etc. He who has not seen Venice,
will not believe; and he who has not lived some time there, does not
understand what a City it is; this in a sense is true of Hell: But now for the
Q^d sit, that there is a Hell, that there is such a place of misery prepared
and appointed for the wicked I shall briefly demonstrate against the high
Atheists and Socinians of this day, and therefore thus,

First: God Created Angels and Men after his own Image. Genesis 1. 27.
man in his own Image, in the Image of God Created he him. Sometimes likeness
alone; In the day that God created man, in the holiness of God made he him,
sometimes Genesis 5. 1.
both Let us make man in our Image, after our likeness; Genesis 1. 26.
which makes a prudent Interpreter think, that when they are joined, it is by
Hendiadys, and that the Andr. Rivet, in Genesis Exer(...). Nihil est in
macrocosm(...) number praeter microcosmum. ^avo^inus. There is nothing in the vast
world of Creatures truly great, except the little world of man
Holy Ghost means an Image most like his own. It is exceeding much for man's
honor, that he is an Epitomy of the world, an abridgement of other Creatures,
partaking with the stones in being, with the Stars in motion, with the Plants
in growing, with the Beasts in sense, and with Angels in science. But his being
made after Gods Image is far more. You know, when great men erect a stately
building, they cause their own picture to be hung upon it, that spectators may
know who was the chief founder of it. So when God had created the Fabric of
this world, the last thing he did, was the setting up his own Picture in it,
Creating man after his own Image. When the great Creator went about that noble
work, that prime piece of making of man, He does as it were call a solemn
Counsel of the sacred persons in the Trinity; And God said, Let us make Man in
our Image, Gen 1. 26. Man (says one) in his Creation, is Angelical; in his
Corruption Diabolical; in his Renovation Theological; in his Translation,
Majestical; an Angel in Eden, a Devil in the World, a Saint in the Church, a
King in Heaven.
etc. Man before his Fall was the best of Creatures, but since his Fall, he is
become the worst of Creatures: He that was once the Image of God, the glory of
Paradise, the worlds Lord, and the Lords darling, is now become an abomination
to God, a burden to Heaven, a Plague to the World, and a slave to Satan. When
Man first came out of Gods Mint, he did shine most gloriously, as being
bespangled with Holiness, and clad with the royal Robe of Righteousness; his
Understanding was filled with knowledge; his Will with uprightness; his
Affections with holiness, etc. But yet being a mutable Creature, and subject to
temptations, Satan quickly stripped him of his happiness, and cheated, and
cousened him of his Imperial Crown (as we use to do Children) with an Apple. If
God had created Angels and men immutable, he had created them Gods, and not
Creatures; but being made mutable, we know they did fall from their primitive
purity and glory; and we know that out of the whole Host of Angels, he kept
some from falling; and when all mankind was fallen, he Redeemed some by his
Son. Now mark, as he shows mercy upon some in their Salvation, Romans 7. 21, 22,
23.
so it is meet that he should glorify his justice upon others in their
Condemnation: And because there must be distinct places for the exercise of the
one, and for the execution of the other, which are in God equally infinite by an
irrecoverable decree from the foundation of the world; a glorious habitation
was prepared for the one, and a most hideous Dungeon for the other. These shall
go into everlasting punishment, and the Righteous into Math. 25. 6.
life Eternal; yea, so certain are both these places, that they were of old
prepared for that very purpose. Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world; and so, Depart ye Cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Look as God foresaw verse. 41.
the different estates and conditions of Men and Angels, so he provided for
them distinct and different places. Doubtless Hell was constituted before
Angels or or Men fell; Hell was framed before sin was hatched, as Heaven was
formed and fitted before any of the Inhabitants were produced. But

Secondly: That there is a Hell, both the Old and New Psalm. 9. 17. The wicked
shall be turned into Hell, Sheol is often put for the Grave, Psalm. 16. 10. but
not always.
and all the Nations that forget God; in the Hebrew, there are two into's,
into, into Hell; that is, The Wicked shall certainly be turned into the
nethermost Hell; yea, they shall forcibly be turned into the lowest and darkest
place in Hell. God will, as it were, with both hands thrust him In tenebras ex
tenebris infelicit ex exclusi in felicius, excludendi. August.
into Hell. If Sheol here signify the Grave only, what punishment is here
threatened to the Wicked, which the Righteous is not equally liable to.
Doubtless Sheol here, is to be taken for that prison or place of torment where
Divine justice detayns all those in hold, that have all their days rebelled
against him, scorned his Son, despised the means of Grace, and dyed in open
Rebellion against him. The Psalmist, says my Author, declares the miserable
Mollerus.
condition of all those who live and dye in their sins. Aeternis punientur
paenis, They shall be everlastingly punished. And Masculus reads the place
thus, Animi impiorum cruciatibus, debitis apud inferos punientur. The souls of
the ungodly shall be punished in Hell with deserved torments: Certainly, the
very place in which the wicked shall lodge, and be tormented to all Eternity,
viz. Hell, the bottomless Pit, a Dungeon of darkness, a Lake of fire and
brimstone, a fiery Furnace will extremely aggravate the dolefulness of their
condition. O Sirs, were all Vide Bellarm. de Eter. Fael^.
the Water in the Sea, Ink, and every pile of Grass, a Pen, and every hair on
all the men's heads in the world, the hand of a ready Writer, all would be too
short graphically to delincate the nature of this Dungeon, where all lost souls
must lodge for ever. Where is the man, who to gain a world, would lodge one
night in a Room that is haunted with Devils; and is it nothing to dwell in Hell
with them for ever. So Solomon, Prove. 5. 5. says By death and Hell, is in this
place meant not only temporal death, and the visible grave, but also eternal
death, and hell it self, even the place of the damned. The Dutch Annotations.
of the Harlot, That her feet go down to death, her steps take hold on Hell;
here Sheol is translated Hell, and in the judgment of Lavator is well
translated to. Foveam vel infernum passus ejus, tenebunt; which (says he) is
spoken not so much of natural death, as of spiritual, and that eternal
destruction which follows thereupon; and he gives this for a reason, why we
should understand the place so, Because Whordom being an abominable sin
defiling the Members of the Body of Christ, dissolving and making void the
Covenant between God and Man, must needs be accompanied with an equivalent
judgment; even excluding those that are guilty thereof, without Repentance, 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Rev. 21. 27. Heb: 13. 4.
the Kingdom of Heaven, into which pure and undefiled place no unclean thing
can enter: And mark those words of the Apostle, Whore-mongers and Adulterers
God will judge. If men will not judge them, God himself will, and give them a
portion of misery answerable to their transgression. Though the Magistrate be
negliligent in punishing them, yet God will judge them: Sometimes he judges them
in this life, by pouring forth of his wrath upon their Bodies, Souls,
Consciences, Names and Estates; but if he don't thus judge them in this life,
yet he will be sure to judge them in the life to come, which Bishop Latimer
well understood, when he presented to Henry the Eighth for a New-years-gift, a
New Testament Act. and Mon. 1594.
with a Napkin, having this Posie about it, Whoremongers and Adulterers God
will judge; yea, he has already adjudged them to the Lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Rev. 21. 8. ver. Nothing (says
one) has so much enriched Hell as beautiful fa^es. The Germans have a Proverb,
That the pavement of Hell is made of the skulls of shaved Priests, and the
glorious (...) of Gallants; their meaning is, that these sorts of persons being
most given up to fleshly Lusts and pleasures, they shall be sure to have the
lowest place in Hell. It Is a Carachrestical Metaphor, they are sure to bring her
thither, as a man has that in possession on which with much delight he takes
fast hold. Rev. 2. 22.
The Harlots feet go down to death, and her steps take hold on Hell^:
Wantonness brings men to Hell: Whoremongers shall have their part in the Lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, Revel. 21. 8. For Fornication and
Uncleanness, the Wrath of God comes on the Children of disobedience, Col. 3.
5, 6. The Adulterer her self goes thither, and is it not fit that her
Companions in sin, should be her Companions in misery? I will cast her into a
bed, and them that commit Adultery with her into great tribulation; She hastens
with Sails and Oars to Hell, and draws her Lovers with her; all her courses
tend toward Hell; Strumpets are the foundations and upholders of Hell, they
are the Devils best Customers. O the thousands of men and women that are sent
to Hell for Wantonness; Hell would be very thin and empty, were it not for
these; other sins are toilsome and troublesome, but Wantonness is pleasant, and
sends men and women merrily to Hell. I have read a story, that one asking the
Devil, which were the greatest sins? he answered, Covetousness and Lust; the
other asking again, whether Perjury and Blasphemy were not greater sins? the
Devil replied, that in the Schools of Divinity, they were the greater sins,
but for the increase of his Revenews, the Beda in Prove. c. 30.
other were the greater. Beda therefore styles Lust, Filiamdiaboli, the
Daughter of the Devil, which brings forth many Children to him. O that all
Wantons would take that Counsel of Bernard. Ardor gehennae extinguat Bern.
Sermon. 23. ad soror.
in te ardorem luxuriae, major ardor minorem superet; let the fire of Hell
extinguish the fire of Lust in thee; let the greater burning overcome the
lesser, ponder upon that, Prove. 9. 18. But he knows not that the dead are
there, and that her Guests are in the depths of Hell. To wit, those that 1 Timothy
5. 6.
are spiritually dead, and that are in the high way to be cut off, either by
filthy diseases, or by the rage of the jealous Husband, or by the Sword of the
Magistrate, or by some quarrels arising amongst those that are Rivals in the
Harlots love, and are as sure to be damned as if they were in Hell already. A
Metaphor from a Dungeon. He knows not that the dead are there, and that her
guests are in the depths of Hell, Aben Ezra will have the original word (...)
ibi, Aben Ezra. in hunc verse.
there to be referred to Hell; and the meaning of the whole verse to be more
plainly thus, he knows not, that her guests being dead are in the depth of
Hell. But the Hebrew word here used and translated, dead, is Rephaim, which
word (Rephaim) properly signifies Giants, and to that sense is always rendered
by the seventy (...). The meaning of this place, seems to be no other, but that
the strange Woman will bring them who are her Guests to Hell, to keep the
Apostate Giants company. Those mighty men of renown of the old world, whose
wickedness Genesis 6. 4. 5.
was so great in the Earth, that it repented and grieved God that he had made
man, and to take Vengeance on whom he brought the general Deluge upon the
Earth, and destroyed both Man and Beast from the face thereof. These Giants are
called in Hebrew Nephilim, such as being fallen from God, fell upon men, and by
force and violence, made others fall before them, even as the Beasts of the
Field do fall before the roaring Lions. These great oppressors were first
drowned, and then damned, and sent to that accursed place which was appointed
for them: Now to that place and condition, in which they are, the Harlot will
bring all her wanton Lovers. Take one Scripture more, Prove. 15. 11. Hell and
destruction are before the Destruction is put as a^ adjunct or Epithet of Hell.
Lord; how much more then the hearts of the Children of men? Some think the
latter is exegetical of the former; some by Sheol understand the Grave, and by
Abaddon Hell. There is nothing so deep, or secret, that can be hid from the
eyes of God; He knows the souls in Hell, and the bodies in the Grave, and much
more men's thoughts here in this place, Prove. 15. 11. The Jews take the word
Abaddon, which we render destruction, for Gehenna, that is, Elliptically for
Beth-Abaddon, the house of destruction. Though we know not where Hell is, nor
what is done there; though we know not what is become of those that are
destroyed, nor what they suffer, yet God does; and if the secrets of Hell and
Devils are known to him, then much more the secrets of the hearts of the
Children of men. The Devil who is the great Executioner of the wrath of God, is
expressed by this word; as Hell is called destruction in the abstract, so the
Devil is called a destroyer in the concrete. And they had a King over them,
which is the Angel of the bottomless pit, (or Hell,) whose name in Rev. 9. 11.
the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue has his name Apollyon,
both the one and the other; the Hebrew and the Greek signify the same thing, a
destroyer. The Devil, who is the Jailer of Hell, is called a destroyer, as Hell
it self is called destruction. O Sirs, Hell is destruction; they that are once
there are lost, yea, lost for ever. The reason why Hell is called destruction,
is because they that are cast to Hell, are undone to all Eternity. Rev. 14. 11.
If Hell (said one) were to be endured a thousand years, methinks I could bear
it, but for ever, that amazeth me. Bellarmin out of Barocius, tells us of a
learned man, De art been mo^iendi.
who after his death, appeared to his Friend, complaining that he was adjudged
to Hell Torments, which (says he) were they to last but a thousand thousand
years, I should think it tolerable, but alas they are eternal. The fire in
Hell is like that stone in Arcadia I have read of, which being once kindled,
could not be quenched. There is no Estate on Earth so miserable, but a man may
be delivered out of it; but out of Hell there is no deliverance. It is not the
prayer, no not of a Gregory, though never so great (what ever they fable) that
can rescue any that is once become Hells Prisoner. I might add other Scriptures
out of the old Testament, but let these suffice.

That there is such a place as Hell is, prepared for the torment of the bodies
and souls of wicked and impenitent Siners, is most clear and evident in the New
Testament, as well as in the Old: Amongst the many that might be produced, take
these for a taste, Mat. 5. 22. But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with
his Brother, without a cause (rashly, vainly, and unreasonably) shall be in
danger of the Judgment; and whosoever shall say to his Brother, Raca, shall be
in danger of the Council; but whosoever shall say, thou Fool, shall be in
danger of Hellfire. Gr to, or in the Gehenna of fire.

In this Scripture our Lord Jesus does allude to the custom of punishing
Offenders, used among the Jews; now there were three degrees of punishments
that were used among the Jews.

First: In every Town where there were a hundred and twenty Inhabitants, there
was a little Council of three, which judged smaller matters, for which,
whipping, or some pecuniary mulct was imposed.

Secondly; There was a Council consisting of three and twenty; seven of these
were Judges, fourteen Assessors, Josephus.
who were mostly of the Levites; and to these were added two supernumeraries
which made the twenty-three, which the Hebrews generally say, was the number
that made up this second Council. Now this Council sat in the Gates of the
City, and did judge of civil matters, having also power of life and death.

Thirdly: There was the great Synedrion, or High-Court Beza.
Sometimes they convented before them the High Priest, and sometimes false
Prophets, yea, sometimes a whole Tribe, as my Reverend Author thinks. Now look
as there is a gradation of sin, so there is a gradation of punishment pointed
at in this Scripture; for the opening of which, consider you have here three
degrees of secret murder, or of inward heart-murder. And

1. The first is Rash anger: Now this brings a man in danger of the Judgment.
By the judgment, he means not the judgment of the three, who judged of
mony-matters; but by judgment, he means the Counsel of the three and twenty
men: Now they are called the Judgment, because they judged of Murders, and
inflicted death, etc. Now he that shall rashly, vainly, causelessly,
unseasonably be angry with his Brother, he shall be liable to the punishments
that are to be inflicted by the Judges. Look what punishments they in the
Sanhedrim inflicted upon actual and apparent Murderers, the same were they
liable to, and did deserve at the hands of God, who were guilty of this secret
kind of Murder, viz. Rash Anger. From the different degrees of punishments
among the Jews, Christ would show the degrees of punishment in another world,
according to the greatness of men's sins; as if he should say, Look as among you
Jews, there are different offenses, some are judged in your little Counsel of
three, and others are judged in your Counsel of three and twenty, and others in
your great Sanhedrim, So in the high Court of Heaven, some sins, as Rash Anger,
are less punished; and others are more sorely punished, as when your Rash Anger
shall break forth into railings, etc. In these words, Whosoever is angry with
his Brother without a cause, shall be in danger of Judgment. You may see that
Christ gives as much to Rash Anger, as the Jews did to Murder; as if he should
have said, You Pharisees exceed all measure and bounds in your anger, and with
a malicious heart, you rail upon the most innocent persons, upon me and my
Disciples; but I would have you take heed of Rash Anger, for you shall have
greater torments in Hell for your Rash anger, than those that Murderers suffer
by your Counsel of three and twenty: But these words, he shall be in danger of
Judgment, do contain the reward and punishment of unlawful anger; as if our
Savior had said, Rash Anger shall not escape just punishment, but shall be
arraigned and summoned before Gods Tribunal at the dreadful day of Judgment,
when the angry man shall not be able to answer one word of a thousand.

The second kind of secret Murder is to say to our Brother 2. Whether the word
Raca be Hebrew or some say, as Syriack as others say, or Chaldee, it matters
not; for all agree in this, that it is a word that notes scorn and contempt,
etc. Lapide. Vide, Weemes on the judicial Law of Moses, and Dr. Field of the
Church. Michael Maronita.
Raca, that is say some, O vain man; others say it signifies a brainless
Fellow; and the learned Tremellius says, it signifies one void of judgment,
reason, and brains. Some will have this word Raca come of the Greek, (...).
Racos, Cloth, as though one should call a man a base patch, or piece of cloth,
or beggarly: Raca, signifies an idle head, a light brain; for so (Rik) in the
Hebrew, (to which the Syriack word Racha agrees both in sound and sense)
signifies light or vain: Racha is a Syriack word, and signifies say some,
these three things: 1. Empty, as empty of wealth, or poor; or as some empty of
brains, or wit; or as others, a light head, or cock-brain, wide and empty of
wisdom or understanding. 2. It signifies spittle or spit upon, to signify that
they esteemed one another no better than the spittle they spat out of their
mouths. 3. It signifies contemned, vile, despised, abject, and in this
signification, one in his Proeme of the Syriack Grammar, thinks it to be taken.
The Ethiopian expounds Racha thus, He that shall say to his Brother, be poor by
contempt, and of torn Garments, shall be guilty of the Counsel; such a one
says our Savior, Shall be in danger of the Counsel; that is, contract as
great guilt unto himself, and is subject to as severe a judgment in the Court
of Heaven, as any capital crime that is censured in the Sanhedrim, or
High-Court of the Jews. But

The third kind of secret Murder, is an open reviling and But whosoever shall
say thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hellfire. Thou Fool, this is a word of
greater disgrace than the former. (...) signifies unsavory, or without relish;
a Fool here is by a metaphor, called insipid, Hebrew (...) Sote, which we call
Sot, shall be in danger of Hellfire, or to be cast into Gehenna; Gehenna comes
from the Hebrew word Gettinnom, that is the Valley of Hinnom, lying near the
City of Jerusalem, in which Valley, in former times the Itolatrous Josh. 15. 8.
Jews, caused their Children to be burned alive between the glowing arms of the
brazen Image of Moloch, (imitating vide 2. King. 23 10. Jer. 7. 31. Jer. 32.
35. Jer. 19. 4, 5, 6.
the Abominations of the Heathen.) And hence the Scripture often makes use of
that word, to signify the place of eternal punishment, where the damned must
abide under the wrath of God for ever. There were four kinds of punishments
exercised among the Jews. First: Stranglings. 2. The Sword. 3. Stoning. 4. The
Fire. Now this last, they always judged the worst, as Beza affirms upon this
very place. In these words, Shall be in danger of Hellfire, Christ alludes to
the great Sanhedrim, and the highest degree of punishment that was inflicted by
them, namely, to be burned in the Valley of Hinnom, which by a known Metaphor
is transferred to Hell it self, and the inexpressible torments thereof: For, as
those poor wretches being enclosed in a brazen Idol-heat with fire, were
miserably tormented in this Valley of Hinnom. So the wicked being cast into
Hell, the Prison of the damned shall be eternally tormented in unquenchable
fire. This Valley of Hinnom, by reason of the pollution of it with slaughter,
blood, and stencth of Carcasses, did become so execrable, that Hell it self did
afterward inherit the same Name, and was called Gehenna of this very place.
And that 1. In respect of the hollowness and depth thereof, being a low and
deep Valley. 2. This Valley of Hinnom was a place of misery in regard of those
many slaughters that were committed in it through their barbarous Idolatry. So
Hell is a place of misery, and infelicity, wherein there is nothing but sorrow.
3. Thirdly: By the bitter and lamentable cries of poor Infants in this Valley,
is shadowed out the cries and lamentable torments of the damned in Hell. 4. In
this Valley of Hinnom was another fire which was kept continually burning for
the consuming of dead Carcasses, and filth, and the garbidge that came out of
the City. Now our Savior, by the fire of Gehenna, in this Mat. 5. 22. has
reference principally to this fire, signifying hereby, the perpetuity and
everlastingness of Hellish pains: To this last judgment of the Sanhedrim, viz.
Burning: Does Christ appropriate that kind of Murder, which is by open reviling
of a Brother, that he might notify the heynousness of this sin; mark in this
Scripture, Judgment, Council, and Hell fire do but signify three degrees of
the same punishment, etc.

See also Matthew. 5. 29, 30. And if thy right Eye offend thee, pluck it out, and
cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee, that one of thy Members
should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into Hell: And if thy
right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee; for it is profitable
for thee, that one of thy Members should perish, and not that thy whole body
should be cast into Hellfire. Julian taking these commands literally, mocked at
Christian Religion, as foolish, cruel, and vain, because they require men to
maim their members. He mocked at Christians, because no man did it; and he mocked
at Christ because no man obeyed him; but this Apostate, might have seen from
the scope, that these words were not to be taken literally, but figuratively.
Some of the Ancients, by the right hand, and the right eye, do understand,
Relations, Friends, or any other dear enjoyments, which draws the heart from
God. Others of them, by the right eye, and the right hand, do understand such
darling sins that are as dear to men, as their right eyes, and right hands.
That this Hell here spoken of, is not meant of the Grave, into which the body
shall be laid, is most evident, because those Christians, who do pull out their
right eyes, and cut off their right hands, (that is, mortify those special
sins which are as dear and near to them, as the very members of their bodies)
shall be secured, and delivered from this Hell, whereas none shall be exempted
from the Grave, though they are the choycest persons on Earth for grace and
holiness. Death, like the Duke of Parma's Sword, knows no difference twixt
Robes and Rags twixt Prince and Peasant. All flesh is grass: The Isa. 40. 6.
flesh of Princes, Nobles, Counselors, Generals, etc. is grass, as well as the
flesh of the meanest Beggar that walks the Streets, The mortal Sithe (says
one) is master H^rat. l. 1. Oct. 28.
of the Royal Scepter, it mows down the Lillies of the Crown, as well as the
Grass of the Field. Never was there Orator so Eloquent, nor Monarch so Potent,
that could either D^aths Motto is Nulli cedo.
persuade, or withstand the stroke of death when it came. It is one of Solomon's
sacred Aphorisms, The Rich and the Poor meet together, sometimes in the same
Bed, sometimes Prove. 22. 2.
at the same Board, and sometimes in the same Grave. Death is the common Inn of
all Mankind; There is no defense against the stroke of death, nor no discharge
in that H^b 9. 27. Eccles. 8. 8.
War. Death is that only King, against whom, there is no rising up. If your
Houses be fired, by good help they Prove. 30. 31.
may be quenched; if the Sea break out, by art and industry it may be repaired.
If Princes Invade by power and policy, they may be repulsed: If Devils from
Hell shall tempt by assistance from Heaven, they may be resisted. But Death
comes into Royal Palaces, and into the meanest Cottages, and there is not a
man to be found that can make resistance against this King of terrors, and
terror of Kings: Deaths Motto is Nemini parco, I spare none. Thus you see,
that by Hell, in Math. 5. 29, 30. You may not, you cannot understand the Grave,
and therefore by it, you must understand the place of the damned. But if you
please, you may cast your eye upon another Scripture, viz. Math. 10. 28. Fear
not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather
fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell. The word (rather)
is not a comparative, but an adversative. We should not fear man at all, when
he stands in competition with God. So Victorian, the Pro-Consul of Carthage,
being solicited to Arrianism by the Ambassadors of King Hunnerick, answered
thus, Being assured of God, and my Lord Christ, I tell you, what Victor,
Uticens. l. 3. Wand^l. perfecat.
you may tell the King, Let him burn me, let him drive me to the Beasts, let
him torment me with all kind of torments, I shall never consent to be an
Arrian; and though the Tyrant afterward did torture him with very great
tortures, yet he could never work him over to Arianism. The best remedy against
the slavish fear of Tyrants, is to set that great God up as the object of our
fear, who is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell. Mark, He does not say,
to destroy soul and body simply, or absolutely; so that they should be no more
(for that many that love their Lusts, and prize the World above a Savior,
would be contented withal, rather than to run the hazard of a fierce, hot
persecution,) but to punish them eternally in Hell, where the Worm never dies,
nor the Fire never goes out. Now by Hell in this, Math. 10. 28. The Grave
cannot be meant, because the soul is not destroyed Eccles. 12 7. Phil. 1. 3.
with the body in the Grave, as they both shall be (if the person be wicked)
after the Morning of the Resurrection in Hell. From the immortality of the
soul, we may infer the Eternity of man's future condition, the soul being
immortal, it must be immortally happy, or immortally miserable. It was Luthers
complaint of old, We Luther. Tim. 4. 33. 4.
more fear the Pope with his Purgatory, than God with his Hell; and we trust
more in the Absolution of the Pope from Purgatory, than in the true Absolution
of God from Hell; and is it not so with many this day, who bears their heads
high in the Land, and who look, and long for nothing more, than to see Room
flourishing in the midst of us?

Take one Scripture more, viz. 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. By which also he went and
Preached unto the Spirits in Prison, Spirits, that is, the Souls departed, not
Men, but Spirits, to keep an Analogy to the 18th. ver. Christ suffered, being
made dead in the flesh, and made alive by the Spirit; in which Spirit he had
gone and Preached to them that are now Spirits in Prison, because they
disobeyed, when the time was, when the Patience of God once waited in the days
of Noah. Broughton in his Epistle to the Nobility of England. August, lib. 1.
de civ. dei. cap. 17.
which sometimes were disobedient. When once the long suffering of God waited in
the days of Noah. That is, Christ by his Spirit, in the Ministry of Noah, did
Preach to the men of the Old World, who are now in Hell: In Noah's time they
were on Earth, but in Peter's time they were in Hell. Mark, Christ did not
Preach by his Spirit, in his Ministry, or any other way to Spirits, who were in
Prison (or in Hell) while he Preached to them. There are no Sermons in Hell,
nor any Salvation there. The loving kindness of God is abundantly declared on
Earth, but it shall never be declared in Hell. Look as there is nothing felt in
Hell but destruction, so there is nothing found in Hell of the offers of
Salvation. One offer of Christ in Hell, would turn Hell into a Heaven. One of
the Ancients has reported the opinion of some in his time, who thought, that
thou there be destruction in Hell, yet not eternal destruction, but that
Sinners should be punished, some a lesser, others, a longer time, and that at
last, all shall be freed; And yet (says he) Origin was more merciful in this
point than these men, for he held that the Devil himself should be saved at
last. Of this opinion I shall say no more in this place, then this one thing
which he there said. These men will be found to err by so much the more foully,
and against the right words of God so much the more perversely, by how much they
seem to themselves to judge more mercifully; for indeed the justice of God in
punishing of Sinners, is as much above Isa. 55. 7, 8, 9.
the reach of man's thoughts, as his mercies in pardoning them are. O let not
such, who have neglected the great Heb. 2. 3.
Salvation when they were on Earth, ever expect to have an offer of Salvation
made to them when they are in Hell; consult these Scriptures, Math. 25. 30.
Math. 13. 41, 42. Rev. 9. 2. (...) Rev. 14. 19, 20. Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3, 7. I must
make have, and therefore may not stand upon the opening of these Scriptures,
having said enough already to prove both out of the Old and New Testament that
there is a Hell, a place of torment, provided and prepared for all wicked and
ungodly men. But

The third Argument to prove that there is a Hell, is this. The beams of
natural light in some of the Heathens have made such impressions on the heart
of natural Conscience, that several of them have had confused notions of a
Hell, as well as of a Judgment to come. Though the poor blind Heathens were
ignorant of Christ and the Gospel, and the great work of Redemption, etc. yet
by the light of Nature, and reasonings from thence, they did attain to the
understanding of a Deity, who was both just and good; as also, that the soul
was immortal, and that both rewards and punishments were prepared for the souls
of men after this life, according as they were found either virtuous or
vicious. Profound Bradwardine, and Bradw. de causa dei. l. 1. c 1. etc.
several others have produced many proofs concerning their apprehensions of
this truth. What made the Heathen Emperor Adrian, when he lay a dying, cry
out, O animula vagula blandula, etc. O my little wretched wandering soul,
whether art thou now hasting, etc. Oh what will become of me? live I cannot,
dye I dare not, but some discoveries of Hell, of wrath to come. Look as these
poor Heathens did feign such a place as the Elizean Fields, where the Virtuous
should spend an Eternity in pleasures; so also they did feign a place called
Tartarum, or Hell, where the Vicious should be Eternally tormented. Tertullian,
and after him, Chrysostom affirms, that Poets and Philosophers, and all sorts
of men, speaking of a future retribution, have said, that many are punished in
Hell. Plato is very plain, that whoever are not expiated, but profane, shall
go into Hell to be tormented for their wickednesses, with the greatest, most
bitter and terrible punishments for ever in that Prison in Hell. And Jupiter
speaking to the other Gods concerning the Grecians and Trojans, says

If any shall so hardy be,
To aid each part in spite of me;
Him will I tumble down to Hell,
In that Infernal place to dwell.
So Horace speaking concerning Joves Thunderbolts, says,

Quo bruta tellus and vaga slumina,
Quo styx, and invisi horrida Taenari scdes, etc.
With which Earth, Seas, the Stygian Lake,
And Hell, with all her furies quake.
And Trismegistus affirms concerning the souls going out of the body defiled,
that it is tossed too and fro with eternal punishments; nor was Virgil ignorant
thereof, when he said

-- Dent ocyus omnes.
Quas mervere patisic stat sententia poenas.
-- They all shall pack,
Sentence once past, to their deserved rack.
The horror of which place, he acknowledges, he could not express.

Non mihi si centum linguae sint, oraque centum.
Omnia paenarum percurrere nomina possum.
No heart of man can think, no tongue can tell,
The direful pains ordained, and felt, in Hell.
It was the common opinion among the poor Heathen, that the wicked were held in
chains by Pluto (so they called Alcoran, Mahom. c. 14. p. 160. and c. 20 p. 198.
the Prince of Devils) in chains which cannot be loosed. To conclude, the very
Turks speak of the House of Perdition, and affirm, that they who have turned
the grace of God into impiety, shall abide eternally in the fire of Hell, and
there be eternally tormented. I might have spent much more time upon this head,
but that I don't Judge it expedient, considering the persons, for whose sakes
and satisfaction I have sent this piece into the world. But

Fourthly: The secret checks, gripes, stings, and the amazing horrors and
terrors of Conscience that do sometimes Suae quemque ex agitant fu^iae. Every
man is tormented with his own fury, (that is his Conscience) says the
Philosopher. Dan. 5. 5, 6.
astonish, affright, and even distract; Sinful wretches do clearly and
abundantly evidence that there is a Hell, that there is a place of Torments
prepared and appointed for ungodly Sinners. Doubtless, it was not merely the
dissolution of Nature, but the sad consequent that so startled and terrified
Belshazzar, when he saw the handwriting on the wall: Guilty Man, when
Conscience is awakned, fears an after-reckoning, when he shall be paid the
wages of his crying sins, proportionable to his demerits.

Wolsius tells you of one John Hufmeister, that fell Sick Wolf. lect. Memor.
Tom. 2. etc.
in his Inn, as he was Traveling toward Auspurg in Germany, and grew to that
horror, that they were fain to bind him in his Bed with Chains, where he cried
out, That he was for ever cast off from before the Face of God, and should
perish for ever, he having greatly wounded his Conscience by Sin, etc.

James Abyes, who suffered Martyrdom for Christ's sake, and the Gospels, as he
was going along to Execution, he gave all his Money and his Clothes away to one
and another, to his Shirt; upon which, one of the Sheriffs Attendants,
scoffingly said, That he was a mand man, and a Heretic: But as soon as the
good man was Executed, this Wretch was struck Mad, and threw away his Clothes,
and cried out, That James Abyes was a good man, and gone to Heaven, but he was
a wicked man, and was damned; and thus he continued crying out until his death.

Dionysius was so troubled with fear and horror of Conscience, Cicero.
that not daring to trust his best Friends with a Razor, he used to sindge his
Beard with burning coals.

Bossus having slain his Father, and being afterward Plut. de sera vindict.
Banqueting with several Nobles, arose from the Table, and beat down a
Swallows Nest which was in the Chimney, saying, They Lied, to say that he slew
his Father; for his guilty Conscience made him think that the Swallows, when
they chattered, proclaimed his Parricide to the world.

Theodoricus the King, having slain Boethius and Symmachus, Sigonius de occid.
Imper.
and being afterward at Dinner, began to change Countenance; his guilty
Conscience so blinding his eyes, that he thought the head of a Fish, which
stood before him, to have been the head of his Cozen Symmachus, who bit his lip
at him, and threatened him; the horror whereof did so amaze him, that he
presently dyed.

Nero, that Monster of Nature, having once slain his Mother, had never-more any
peace within, but was astonished with Horrors, Fears, Visions, and Clamours
which his guilty Conscience set before him, and suggested unto him, Imo latens
in praedio, familiares suspectos habuit, Xiphil in Nerone, etc.
vocem humanam horruit, ad (...)latratum, galli cantumi, rami exvento motum
terr^batur; loqui non ausus, ne audiretur; He suspected his nearest and dearest
Friends and Favorites; he trembled at the barking of a Puppy, and the crowing
of a Cock, yea, the wagging of a Leaf, and neither durst speak unto others, nor
could endure others to speak to him, (when he was retired into a private House)
lest the noise should be heard by some who lay in wait for his life.

Now, were there not a Hell, were there not a place of torment where God will
certainly inflict unspeakable miseries, and intolerable torments upon wicked
and ungodly men. Why should their Consciences thus amaze, torture, and torment
them? Yea, the very Heathen had so much light in their natural Consciences, as
made such a discovery of that place of darkness, that some of them have been
terrified with their own inventions concerning it, and distracted with the very
sense of those very torments which their own persons have described. As
Pigmalion doted on his own picture, so were they amazed with their own
Comments. The very flashes of Hellfire, which Sinners do daily experience in
their own Consciences in this world, may be an argument sufficient to satisfy
them that there is a Hell, a place of torment provided for them in another
world.

Fifthly: Those matchless, easeless, and endless torments, that God will
certainly inflict upon the bodies and souls of all wicked and ungodly men, after
the Resurrection, does sufficiently evidence that there is a Hell, that there
is a place of torment provided, prepared, and fitted by God, Wherein he will
pour forth all the Vials of his Wrath upon wicked and ungodly men, Isa. 30. 33.
For Tophet is ordained of old, yea, for the King it is prepared; he has made
it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the
Lord, like a stream of Brimstone does kindle it. This place that was so famous
for Judgment and Vengeance, is used to express the torments of Hell, the place
of the damned. Tophet was a place in the Valley of Hinnom; it was the place
where the Angel of the Lord destroyed the Host of Sennacherib, Isa. 30. 31, 33.
King of Assyria; and this was the place where the Idolatrous Jews were slain
and massacred by the Babylonian Armies, when their City was taken, and their
Carcasses Jer. 7. 31, 32, 33. and chap. 19. 4, 5, 6.
left for want of room for Burial, for meat to the Fowls of Heaven, and Beasts
of the Field, according to the word of the Lord, by the Prophet Jeremy. And
this was the place where the Children of Israel committed that abominable
Idolatry in making their Children pass through the fire to Moloch; that is,
burnt them to the Devil; 2 King. 23. 10. 2 Chronicles. 33. 6.
for an eternal destruction whereof, King Josiah polluted it, and made it a
place execrable, ordaining it to be the 2 King 33. 8.
place whither dead Carcasses, Garbage, and other unclean things should be cast
out: For consuming whereof, to prevent annoyance, a continual fire was there
burning. Now this place being so many ways execrable for what had been done
therein, especially having been as it were the gate to eternal destruction; by
so remarkable judgments and Vengeance of God, there executed for sin, it came
to be translated to signify the place of the damned, as the most accursed,
execrable, and abominable place of all places. The Spirit of God, in Scripture,
by Metaphors of all sorts of things that are dreadful unto sense, sets forth
the condition of the Damned, and the torments that he has reserved for them in
the life to come. Hells punishments do infinitely exceed all other punishments;
no pain so extreme as that of the damned: Look as there are no joys to the joys
of Heaven, so there are no pains Psalm. 116. 3.
to the pains of Hell. All the Cruelties in the World cannot possibly make up
any horror comparable to the horrors of Hell. The Brick-kilms of Egypt, the
Furnace of Babel, are but as the glowing sparkle, or as the blaze of a
brush-Faggot to this tormenting Tophet that has been prepared of old, to punish
the bodies and souls of Sinners with; hanging, zacking, burning, scourging,
stoning, sawing a sunder, fleaing of the skin, etc. are not to be named in the
day wherein the tortures of Hell are spoken of. If all the pains, sorrows,
miseries, and calamities that have been inflicted upon all the Sons of men,
since Adam fell in Paradise, should meet together, and center in one man, they
would not so much as amount to one of the least of the pains of Hell. Who can
sum up the diversity of torments that are in Hell; in Hell there is 1.
Darkness; Jude 13. Psalm. 116. 3. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6. Psalm. 116. 3. Mark 9. 44.
Rev. 20. 15. Math. 13. 41, 42. Math. 25. 41. Math. 24. 51. cap. 25. 30. Math.
13 42, 53. Who would give (says Bernard) to my eyes a Fountain of tea^s, that
by my weeping here, I may prevent weeping and gnashing of teeth hereafter. Some
devout Personages have caused this Scripture to be writ in letters of gold upon
their Chimney pieces. B of Betty in France, in his Draught of Eternity.
Hell is a dark Region. 2. In Hell there are Sorrows. 3. In Hell there are
Bonds and Chains. 4. In Hell there is pains and pangs. 5. In Hell there is the
Worm that never dies. 6. In Hell there is a Lake of fire. 7. In Hell there is a
Furnace of Fire. 8. In Hell there is the Devil and his Angels; And O how
dreadful must it be, to be shut up for ever with those roaring Lions. 9. In
Hell there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Certainly, did men believe the
torments of Hell, that weeping for extremity of heat, and that gnashing of
teeth that is there for extremity of cold, they would never offer to fetch
Profits or Pleasures out of those flames. 10. In Hell there is unquenchable
fire, Math. 3. 12. He will burn the Chaff with unquenchable fire; in Hell there
is everlasting burnings, Isa. 33. 14. The Sinners in Zion are afraid,
fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites, who among us shall dwell with Genesis
4. 17. Amos 6. 7. Job. 21. 12. Dan. 5. 2^. Amos 6. 4.
the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Wicked
men, who are now the only jolly Fellows of the time, shall one day go from
burning to burning; from burning in Sin, to burning in Hell; from burning in
flames of Lusts, to burning in flames of Torment, except there be found true
Repentance on their sides, and pardoning grace on Gods. O Sirs! In this
devouring fire, in these everlasting burnings Cain shall find no Citys to
build, nor his Posterity shall have no Instruments of Music to invent there;
none shall take up the Timbrel or Harp, or rejoice at the sound of the Organ.
There Belshazar cannot drink Wines in bowls, nor eat the Lambs out of the
Flock, nor the Calves out of the midst of the Stall: In everlasting burnings
there will be no merry Company to pass time away, nor no Dice, nor Cards to
pass care away; nor no Cellers of Wine, wherein to drown the Sinners grief. By
fire in the Scriptures last cited, is meant, as I conceive, all the positive
part of the torments of Hell; and because they are not only upon the soul, but
also upon the body; as in Heaven there shall be all bodily perfection, so there
shall be also in Hell all bodily miseries. Whatsoever may make a man perfectly
miserable, shall be in Hell; therefore the wrath of God, and all the positive
effects of this wrath is here meant by fire.

I have read of Pope Clement the Fifth, that when a Nephew of his (whom he had
loved sensually and sinfully) died, he sent his Chaplain to a Necromancer to
learn J^c Reu. Hist. Pontif, Romans 199.
how it fared with him in the other world; the Conjurer showed him the Chaplain
lying in a fiery bed in Hell; which when it was told the Pope, he never joyed
more after it; but, within a short time after, dyed also. Out of this fiery
bed, there is no deliverance; when a Sinner is in Hell, shall another Christ be
found to dye for him, or will the same Christ be Crucified again? Oh no?

O Sirs, the torments of Hell will be exceeding great and terrible, such as
will make the stoutest Sinners to quake and tremble. If the handwriting upon
the Wall, Mean, Mean, Tekel, Upharsin, made Belshazars countenance Dan. 5 5, 6.
25.
to change, his thoughts to be troubled, and his joints to be loosed, and his
knees to be dashed one against another.

O how terrible will the torments of Hell be to the damned? the torments of
Hell will be universal torments, all torments meet together in that place of
torment; Hell is the center of all punishments, of all sorrows, of all pains,
of all wrath, and of all vengeance, etc. One of the Ancients says, that the
least punishment in Hell, is more grievous than if a Childbearing woman should
continue Bernard.
in the most violent pangs and throws a thousand years together, without the
least ease or intermission.

An Ancient Writer mentioned by Discipulus de tempore, Tytius, his Vulture,
though seeding on his Liver, is but a Fle^-biting to the gnawing Worm that is
is Hell. ^xion, his wheel, is a place of rest, if compared with those billows
of wrath; and that wheel of Justice which is in Hell, brought over the ungodly.
The lash of Danaeus his Daughters (...) but a^port compared to the torture of
the damned in Hell.
goes much further, affirming that if all the men which have been from Adams
time, till this day, and which shall be to the end of the world; and all the
piles of grass in the world were turned into so many men, to augment the
number; and that puntshment inflicted in Hell upon any one, were to be divided
amongst all these, so as to every one might befall an equal part of that
punishment; yet that which would be the portion of one man, would be far more
grievous than all the cruel deaths and exquisite tortures which have been
inflicted upon men ever since the world began. A Heathen Poet, speaking of the
multitude of the pains and torments of the wicked in Hell, affirmed, That
although he had a hundred mouths, and as many tongues, with a voice as strong
as Iron, yet were they not able to express the names of them. But this Poet
spoke more like a Prophet than a Poet. The Poets tell you of a place called
Tartarum, or Hell, where the impious shall be eternally tormented, This
Tartarum the Poets did set forth with many fictions to affright people from
vicious practices, such as of the four Lakes of Acheron, Styx, Phlegethon, and
Cocytus; over which, Charon, in his Boat, did wast over the departed souls of
the three Judges, Aecus, Minos, and Rhadamanthus, who were to call the Souls to
an account, and judge them to their state of the three Furies, Tisophone,
Megaera, and Alecto, who lashed guilty souls to extort confession from them; of
Cerberus the Dog of Hell, with three heads, which would let none come out when
once they were in; and of several sorts of punishments inflicted, as iron
chains, horrid Purchase his Pilgrim. 3d. (...). page 407. 408.
stripes, gnawing of Vultures, Wheels rolling great stones, and the like. In
the Chapel of Ticam, the China Pluto, the pains of Hell were so desciphered,
that could not but strike terror into the beholders, some roasted in Iron beds,
some fried in scalding Oil, some cut in pieces, or divided in the middle, or
torn of Dogs, etc. In another part of the Chapel, were painted the Dungeons
of Hell, with horrible Serpents, Flames, Devils, etc.

In Hell, says Mahomet, there is the floor of Brimstone, Alchoran, etc.
smoakie, pitchy, with stinking flames, deep pits of scalding pitch, and
sulphurous flames wherein the damned are punished daily. There the Wicked shall
be fed with the Tree Ezecum, which shall burn in their Bellies like fire; there
they shall drink fire, and be holden in Chains of seventy Cubits. In the midst
of Hell, they say, is a Tree full of fruit, every Apple being like to the head
of a Devil, which grows green in the midst of all those flames called
Zoaccum Agacci, or the Tree of bitterness; and the souls that shall eat
thereof, thinking to refresh themselves, shall so find them, and by them and
their pains in Hell, they shall grow mad, and the Devils shall bind them with
chains of fire, and shall drag them up and down in Hell, with much more which I
am not free to transcribe. Now, although most of those things which you may
find among many Poets. Heathens and Turks, concerning the torments of Hell, are
fictions of their own brains; Yet that there is such a place as Hell, and that
there are diversity of torments there, the very light of nature does witness,
and has forced many to confess, etc.

And as there are diversity of torments in Hell, so the torments of Hell are
everlasting. Mark every thing that is conducible to the torments of the damned
is eternal. 1. God himself, that damns them is Eternal, Deuteronomy. 33. 27. 1 Timothy 1.
17. 2. The fire that torments them is Eternal, Isa. 30. 33. cap. 66. 24. Jud.
7. 3. The Prison and Chains that holds them are Eternal, Jude 6. 7, 13. 2 Pet.
2. 17. Melancthon calls it a Hellish fery.
4. The Worm that gnaws them is Eternal, Mark 9. 44. 5. The sentence that shall
be passed upon them shall be Eternal^; Math. 25. 41. Depart from me ye Cursed,
into everlasting fire. You know that fire is the most tormenting Of this fire,
see more in my Londons Lamentation on the late fiery dispensation, part 2 page
105. to page 131.
Element. Oh the most dreadful impression that it makes upon the flesh.
Everlasting fire! There is the vengance and continuance of it, You shall go
into fire, into everlasting fire that shall never consume it self, nor consume
you. Eternity of Eternity, is the Hell of Hell. The fire in Hell is like that
stone in Arcadia, which being once kindled could never be quenched. If all the
fires that ever were, or shall be in the world, were contracted into one fire,
how terrible would it be? Yet such a fire would be but as a painted fire upon
the wall, to the fire of Hell. For to be tormented without end, this is that
which goes beyond all the bounds of desperation. Grievous is the torment of the
damned, for the bitterness of the punishments, but it Dionys. in 18. Apocalypse.
fol. 301.
is more grievous for the diversity of the punishments, but most grievous for
the eternity of the punishments. If after so many millions of years as there be
drops in the Ocean, there might be a deliverance out of Hell, this would yield
a little ease, a little comfort to the damned. O but this word Eternity,
Eternity, Eternity; this word Everlasting, Everlasting, Everlasting; this word
for Ever, for Ever, for Ever, will even break the hearts of the Damned in ten
thousand pieces. O that word Never, said a poor despairing Creature on his
Deathbed, breaks my heart. The Reprobate shall have punishment without pity;
Drexel.
misery without mercy, sorrow without succor, crying without compassion,
mischief without measure, and torment without end. Plato could say, That
whoever are not expiated, but profane, shall go into Hell to be tormented for
their wickedness with the greatest, the most bitter and terrible punishments
for ever in that Prison of Hell. And Trismegistus could say, that souls going
out of the body defiled, were tossed too and fro with eternal punishments: Yea,
the very Turks speaking of the House of Perdition, do affirm, That they who
have turned Gods grace into Wantonness, shall A^^wan. Mah^m. c. 14. p. 160.
etc. c 20. p. 198, etc.
abide eternally in the fire of Hell, and there be eternally tormented. A
certain Religious man going to visit Olympius, who lived Cloistered up in a
dark Cell, which he thought uninhabitable, by reason of heat, and swarms of
Gnats and Flies; and asking him how he could endure to live in such a place, he
answered, All this is but a light matter, that I may escape eternal torments: I
can endure the stinging of Gnats, that I might not endure the stinging of
Conscience, and the gnawing of that Worm that never dies; this heat thou
think grievous, I can easily endure, when I think of the eternal fire of
Hell, these sufferings are but short, but the sufferings of Hell are eternal.
Certainly, Infernal fire is neither tolerable nor terminable. Impenitent
Sinners in There is no Christian which does does not believe the fire of Hell
to be everlasting. Dr. Jackson on the Creed. l. 11. c. 3.
Hell, shall have end without end, death without death, night without day,
mourning without mirth, sorrow without solace, and bondage without liberty; the
damned shall live as long in Hell, as God Himself shall live in Heaven; their
imprisonment in that land of darkness, in that bottomless pit, is not an
imprisonment during the Kings pleasure, but an imprisonment during the
everlasting displeasure of the King of Kings. Suppose, say some, that the whole
world were turned to a Mountain of Sand, and that a little Wren should come
every thousand year and carry away from that heap one grain of Sand, what an
infinite number of years (not to be numbered by all finite beings) would be
spent and expired, before this supposed Mountain could be fetched away. Now if a
man should lie in everlasting burnings so long a time, and then have an end of
his Woe; it would administer some ease, refreshment and comfort to him; but
when that immortal Bird shall have carried away this (supposed) Mountain, a
thousand times over and over, alas, alas, sinful man shall be as far from the
end of his anguish and torment as ever he was; he shall be no nearer a coming
out of Hell, then he was the very first moment that he entered into Hell. If the
fire of Hell were terminable, it might be tolerable; but being endless, it must
needs be easeless, Bellar de art mo^iendi. l. 2. c. 3.
and remediless: we may well say of it, as one does, O killing Life, O immortal
death.

Suppose (say others) that a man were to endure the torments of Hell as many
years, and no more, as there be Sands on the Seashore, drops of water in the
Sea, Stars in Heaven, Leaves on Trees, Piles of Grass on the ground, Hairs on
his head; yea, upon the heads of all the Sons of Adam that ever were, or are,
or shall be in the world, from the beginning of it to the end of it, yet he
would comfort himself with this poor thought, Well there will come a day when
my misery and torment shall certainly have an end. But woe and alas, this word,
Never, Never, Never, will fill the hearts of the Damned with the greatest
horror and terror, wrath and rage, amazement and astonishment.

Suppose, say others, that the torments of Hell were to end, after a little
Bird should have emptyed the Sea, and only carry out her bill full once in a
thousand years. Suppose, say others, that the whole world, from the lowest
Earth, to the highest Heavens, were filled with grains of Sand, and once in a
thousand years an Angel should fetch away one grain, and so continue till the
whole heap were spent. Suppose, say others, if one of the Damned in Hell,
should weep after this manner, viz. That he should only let fall one tear in a
thousand years, and these should be kept together, till such time as they
should equal the drops of water in the Sea; how many millions of Ages would
pass, before they could make up one River, much more a whole; and when that
were done, should he weep again after the same manner, till he had filled a
second, a third, and a fourth Sea; if then there should be an end of their
miseries, there would be some hope, some comfort, that they would end at last;
but that they shall Never, Never, Never end. This is that which sinks them
under the most tormenting terrors and horrors.

You know that the extremity and eternity of Hellish torments, is set forth by
the Worm that never dies; and it is observable, that Christ, at the close of
his Sermon, makes a threefold repetition of this Worm, Mark 9. 44. where their
Worm dies not, and again, ver. 48. where their Worm dies not, and their fire
goes not out. Certainly those punishments are beyond all conception, and
expression, which our Lord Jesus does so often inculcate within so small a pace.

Now if there be such a diversity, extremity, and eternity of Hellish pains and
torments which the great God will certainly inflict upon the bodies and souls of
all impenitent persons, after the day of Judgment, then there must certainly be
some Hell, some place of torment, wherein the wrath of God shall be executed
upon wicked and ungodly men. But

Sixthly: The greatest part of wicked and ungodly men, escape unpunished in
this world; the greatest number of men do spend their days in Pride, ease,
pleasures, and delights in Lust and Luxury, in Voluptuousness Psalm. 73 3. to
the 13. ver. Job. 21. 12. Amos 5. 6.
and Wantonness. They take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of
the Organ. They chant to the sound of the Vial, and invent themselves
Instruments of Music; They drink Wine in bowls: They lie upon beds of verse. 3
Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the
Flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the Stall; and therefore there will
be a time when these shall be punished in another world.

God does not punish all here, that he may make way Rom 2. 4, 5. 2 Pet. 3 9.
15. verse.
for the displaying of his mercy and goodness, his patience and forbearance.
Nor does he forbear all here, that he may manifest his Justice and
Righteousness, lest the World should turn Atheist, and deny his Providence. He
spares that he may punish, and he punishes, that he may spare. God smites some
Sinners in the very acting of their sins, as he did Korah, Dathan, and Abi^am
Number. 16.
and others, not till they have filled up the measure of their sins, as you see
in the men of the old World. Genesis 6. 5, 6, 7.
But the greatest number of sinners God reserves for the Math. 7. 13
great day of his Wrath. There is a sure punishment, though not always a
present punishment for every Sinner. Eccles 8 12, 13.
Those wicked persons which God suffers to go uncorrected here, He reserves to
be punished for ever hereafter. 2 These. 1 7 8, 9, 10.
Sinners, know your Doom, you must either smart for your sins in this world, or
in the world to come. That Ancient hit the mark, that said, Many sins are
punished in this World that the providence of God might be more Augustine.
Epist. 54.
apparent; and many, yea, most reserved to be punished in the World to come,
that we might know that there is yet Judgment behind.

Sir James Hambleton having been Murdered by the Mr. Knox in his History of
Scotland.
Scottish Kings means, he appeared to the King in a Vision, with a naked Sword
drawn, and strikes off both his arms, with these words; Take this before thou
receivest a final payment for all thy impieties; and within twenty-four hours
two of the Kings Sons dyed. If the Glutton in that Historical parable being in
Hell, only in part, to wit, in Luk 16. 22, 23, 24.
soul, yet cried out, That he was horribly tormented in that flame, what think
we, shall that torment be when body and soul come to be united for torture? It
being just with God, that as they have been like Simcon and Levi, Brethren Gen
49. 5.
in Iniquity, and have sinned together desperately, and impenitently, so they
should suffer together jointly, eternally. The Hebrew Doctors have a pretty
Parable to this purpose. A man planted an Orchard, and going from home, was
careful to leave such Watchmen, as both might keep it from Strangers, and not
deceive him themselves; therefore he appointed one blind, but strong of his
Limbs, and the other seeing, but a Cripple; these two in their Masters absence
conspired together, and the Blind took the Lame on his Shoulders, and so
gathered the fruit; their Master returning, and finding out this subtlety,
punished them both together. So shall it be with those two sinful Yoke-fellows,
the soul and the body, in the great day, They have sinned together, and they 2
Cor. 5. 10, 11.
shall suffer at last together. But now in this world, the greatest number of
Transgressors do commonly escape all sorts of punishments, and therefore we may
safely conclude that there is another World wherein the Righteous God will
revenge upon the bodies and souls of Sinners the high dishonours that have been
done to his Name by them. But

Seventhly: In all things natural, and supernatural, Luke 16. 22.
glorified God, and adorned their Profession. And Hell a place of horror and
confusion, whither the evil Angels do hurry the souls of wicked incorrigible,
and impenitent wretches, when they are once separated from their bodies. The
Rich man also dyed, and was buried; and in ver. 22, 23.
Hell he lifted up his eyes, being in torments; and these shall go away into
everlasting punishment, and the Righteous into life Eternal. In these words we
have described the different Estate of the Wicked and the Righteous Math. 25.
46.
after Judgment: They shall go away into everlasting punishment, but these into
life eternal. After the sentence is past, the Wicked go into everlasting
punishment, and the Righteous into life eternal. Everlasting punishment, the
end thereof is not known, its duration is undetermind. Hell is a bottomless
pit, and therefore shall never be fathomed. It is an unquenchable fire, and
therefore the smoke of their torments does ascend for ever and Rev. 14. 11.
ever. Hell is a Prison, from whence is no freedom, because there is no Ransom
to be paid; no price will be accepted for one in that Estate. And as there is
no end of the punishments of Hell, into which the wicked must enter, so there
is no end of the joys of Heaven, into which the Saints must enter. In thy
presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right Psalm. 16. 11.
hand there are pleasures for evermore. Here is as much said as can be said for
quality, there is in Heaven joy and pleasures; for quantity, a fullness, a
torrent; for constancy, it is at Gods right hand; and for perpetuity it is for
evermore. The joys of Heaven are without measure, mixture, or end. Thus you see
that there are two distinct ends, two distinct places, to which the wicked and
the righteous go. And indeed, if this were not so, then Nero would be as good a
man as Paul, and Esau as happy a man as Jacob, and Cain as blessed a man as
Abel. Then as Believers say, If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we
are of 1 Cor. 15 19.
all men most miserable. (Because none out of Hell ever suffered more, if so
much as the Saints have done.) So might the wicked say, If in this life only,
we were miserable, Job. 21.
we were then of all men most happy. But

8thly, and lastly: You know that all the Princes of the Rev. 19. 16. Rev. 1 5.
Dan. 2. 21.
and Lord of Lords; He, who is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth; He, who
removes Kings, and sets up Kings; shall not He have his Royal Palace, a
glorious Heaven, where He and all his Noble Attendants, Angels, and Saints
shall live for ever? Shall not the great King have his Royal and Magnificent
Court in that upper World, as poor petty Princes have theirs in this lower
Ephe. 2. 3. John 14. 1, 2, 3, 4. Luke 12. 32. Neh. 9. 6 1 King. 8. 27. Heb 8.
1. Rev. 3. 21.
world? Surely he shall, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the
Margent together. And shall not the same great King have his Hell, his Prison,
his Dungeon, to secure and punish impenitent Sinners in? surely yes, and
doubtless, the least glimpse of this Hell, of this place of torment, would
strike the proudest, and the stoutest Sinners dead with horror. O Sirs! they
that have seen the flames, and heard the roarings of Aetna, the flushing of
Vosuvius, the thundering, and burning flakes evaporating from those Marine
Rocks, have not yet seen, no, not so much as the very glimmering of Hell. A
painted fire is a better shadow of these, than these can be of Hell Torments,
and the miseries of the Damned therein. Now these 8 Arguments are sufficient to
demonstrate that there is a Hell, a place of torment, to which the wicked shall
be sent at last. Now certainly, Socinians, Atheists, and all others, that are
men of corrupt minds, and that believe that there is no Hell, but what they
carry about with them in their own Consciences; these are worse than those poor
Indians that hold that there are thirteen Hells. According Purchass, his
Pilgrimage, 5 Vel. p 491.
to the differing demerits of men's sins, yea, they are worse than Devils, for
they believe and tremble, Jam. 2. 19. (...), This Greek word signifies to Roar
as the Sea; from thence (says Eustatius) it is translated to the hideous
clashing of Armor in the battle: The original word seems to imply an extreme
fear, which causes not only tremblings, but also a roaring and shriking out:
Ma^k. 6. 49. Act. 16. 29.
Their hearts ache and quake within them, they quiver and shake as men do when
their teeth chatter in their heads in extreme cold weather. The Devils
acknowledge four Articles of our Faith, Math. 8. 29. And behold, they cried out,
saying, what have we do do with thee, Jesus thou Son of God? Art thou come
hither to torment us before the time, 1. They acknowledge God. 2. Christ. 3.
The day of Judgment. 4. That they shall be tormented then. They who Piscat.
scorn the day of Judgment are worse than Devils; and they who deny the Deity
of Christ are worse than Devils. The Devils are as it were, for a time,
respited and reprived, in respect of full torment, and they are suffered as
free Prisoners to flutter in the Aair, and to course about the Earth till the
great day of the Lord, which they 2 Pet. 3.
tremble to think on; and which they that mock at, or make light of, are worse
than Devils. The Devils knew that torments were prepared for them, and a time
when these torments should be fully and fatally inflicted on them, and loath
they were to suffer before that time. Ah Sirs, shall not men tremble to deny
what the Devils are forced to confess? Shall I now make a few short inferences
from what has been said, and so conclude this head.

First then: O labor to set up God as the great object Fear not them which
kill the body, but art not able Math. 10. 28.
to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and
body in Hell, yea, I say unto you, fear him. Luke 12 5.
Christ doubles the precept, that it might stick with more life and power upon
us. As one fire, so one fear drives out another; both the punishment of loss,
and the punishment of sense may be the objects of a filial fear, the fear of a
Son, of a Saint, of a Soul that is Espoused and Married 2 Cor. 11. 2. H^s. 2.
19, 20.
to Christ. The fear of God, and the fear of Sin, will drive out the fear of
death, and the fear of Hell. O Sirs, will you not fear that God, that has the
Keys of Hell and Death in his own hand, that can spoke you into Hell at
pleasure, that can by a word of command bring you to Rev. 1. 18
dwell with a devouring fire, yea, to dwell with everlasting burnings.

Ah Friends, will you fear a burning Fever, and will you not fear a burning in
Hell? Will you fear when the House you live in is on fire, and when the Bed you
lie on Isa. 33. 14.
is on fire, (though it may be quenched) and will you not fear that fire that
is unquenchable, when men run through the Streets and cry Fire, Fire, Fire? How
do your hearts quake and tremble in you, and will you not fear the fire of
Hell, will you not fear everlasting fire. Sir Francis Math. 3. 12. Math. 25. 41.
Bacon, in his History of Henry the Seventh, relates, how it was a byword of
the Lord Cords, (who was a profane, Popish, Atheistical French Lord) that he
could be content to lie seven years in Hell, so he might win Callice from the
English; but had this Popish Lord lain but seven minutes under unsupportable
torments, he would quickly have repented of his mad bargain. It was good
Counsel that one of the Ancients gave, Descendamus in infernum viventes, ne
descendamus morientes, Let us go into Hell while we are alive, by a serious
meditation, and holy consideration, that we may not go into it Bernard.
when we be dead by real miseries. God can kill, and more than that, He can
cast into Hell; here is both temporal and eternal destruction, both Rods and
Scorpians. He can kill the body, and then damn both body and soul, and cast
them into Hell; and therefore it becomes every one to set up God as the great
object of their fear. Yea, I say unto you, fear him; yea, I say unto you fear
him. This redoubling of the speech adds a greater enforcement to the
admonition: It Is like the last stroke of the hammer, that rivets and drives up
all to the head. Thus David uses this ingemination. Thou, even Thou art to be
Psalm 76. 7.
feared, and who may stand in thy sight; when thou art Angry, thou can look
them to Death, yea, to Hell. And it is worth the observing, that this
ingemination, and reinforcement here annexed, is to the affirmitive clause, not
to the negative. Our Savior says not, Yea, I say unto you, fear not them; but
he places the reduplication upon the affirmative precept. I say unto you, fear
him. O Sirs, temporal judgments are but the smoke of his Anger, but in Hell
there are the flames of his Anger, that fire burns fiercely, and there is no
quenching of it. Excuse me (says the Father) thou breakest bonds and
imprisonments, O Emperor, but God's threatenings are much more terrible; He
threatens Hell Torments and everlasting damnation; and certainly, where there
is the greatest danger, there it is fit that there should be the greatest dread.
But

Secondly: Then flee from the Wrath to come. 2. Math. 3. 7. Though destruction
by the Romans is not here excluded, yet the principal thing that he means by
Wrath to come, i^ Hellfire, Math. 23. 33.
Oh Sirs, that you would seriously and frequently dwell upon these short hints.

1. Wrath to come is the greatest Wrath, it is the greatest Evil that can befall
a Soul. Who knows the power of thy Wrath, Psalm. 19. 11. Wrath to come, is such
Wrath as no man can either avoid, or abide, and yet such is most men's
stupidity, that they will not believe it till they feel it. As God is a great
God, so his Wrath is a great Wrath. I may allude to that which Zebah and Nahum.
1. 16. Judge. 8. 21.
Zalmunua said to Gideon, As the man is, so is his strength. So may I say, as
the Lord is, so is his Wrath. The wrath of an earthly King, is compared to the
roaring of Prove. 19. 12.
a Lion. Heb. of a young Lion, which (being in his prime) roars most terribly;
he roars with such a force, that he amazes the Creatures whom he hunts so, as
that they have no power to fly from him. Now if the Wrath of a King be so
terrible, Oh how dreadful must the Wrath of the King of Kings then be. The
greater the Rev. 17. 14.
evil is, the more cause we have to flee from it, Now, Wrath to come, is the
greatest evil, and therefore the more it concerns us to flee from it. But

Secondly: Wrath to come, is Treasured up Wrath. Romans 2. 5.
2. Lying hid. 3. Bringing out again as there is occasion.

Whilst wicked men are following their own Lusts, they think that they are
still adding to their own happiness; but alas, they do but add Wrath to Wrath,
they do but heap up Judgment upon Judgment, punishment upon punishment. Look as
men are daily adding to their Treasure more and more. So impenitent Sinners are
daily increasing the Treasures of wrath against their own souls. Now who would
not flee from Treasures of Wrath. But

Thirdly: Wrath to come, is pure Wrath, It Is Judgment 3. Jam. 2. 13.
without Mercy; the Cup of Wrath which God will put into Sinners hands at last,
will be a Cup of pure Wrath, all Wrath, nothing but Wrath, Rev. 14. 10. This
drinking of the Wine of the Wrath of God, without mixture, notes su^ mam paerae
severitat^m.
The same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out
without mixture, into the Cup of his Indignation; and he shall be tormented
with Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the Holy Angels, and in the presence
of the Lamb. Look as there is nothing but the pure glory of God, that can make
a man perfectly and fully happy, so there is nothing but the pure Wrath of God
that can make a man fully and perfectly miserable. Reprobates shall not only
sip of the top of Gods Cup, but they shall drink the dregs of His Cup; they
shall not have at last one drop of Mercy, nor one crumb of Comfort; they have
filled up their Life time with sin, and God will fill up their Eternity with
torments. But

Fourthly and lastly: As Wrath to come is pure wrath, Rev. 14. 11. And the
smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever. Would to God (says one)
men would every where Chrysostom.
think and talk more of Hell, and of that Eternity of Extremity, that they
shall never else be able to avoid, or to abide. See the Scriptures in the
Margent. The Damned (says 2 These. 1. 8. Jude 9 6. Math. 25. 46. Isa. 33. 14.
etc.
Gregory) shall suffer an end without end, a death without death, a decay
without decay; for their death ever lives, their end ever begins, their
decay never cease, they are ever healed to be new wounded, and always
repaired to be new devoured; they are ever dying, and never dead, eternally
broyling, and never burnt up; ever roaring in the pangs of death, and never rid
of those pangs; for they shall have punishment without pity, misery without
mercy, sorrow without succor, crying without comfort, mischief without
measure, and torment without ease, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is
never quenched. The Torments of the Damned shall continue as many Worlds, as
there be Stars in the Firmament, as there be grains of Sand on the Seashore,
and as there be drops of Water found in the Sea; and when these Worlds are
ended, the pains and torments of Hell shall not cease, but begin, a fresh; and
thus this Wheel shall turn round without end.

O! the folly and vanity, the madness and baseness of poor wretched Sinners,
who expose themselves to everlasting torments for a few fleshly momentary
pleasures. O Sirs, who can stand before his Indignation, and who can abide in
the fierceness of his Anger* His fury is poured Nah^m. 1. 6.
out liky sire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him. Now how should these
things work poor Sinners to flee from Wrath to come, by fleeing to Christ, Who
alone is able to 1 These. 1. 10.
save them from Wrath to come. Themistocles understanding that King Admcius was
highly displeased with him, he took up the Kings young Son in his Arms, and so
treated Pl^tarch in vi^a.
with the Father, holding his Darling in his Bosom, and by that means pacified
his wrath. Ah Sinners, Sinners, the King of Kings is highly offended with you,
and there is no way to appease his Wrath, but by taking up Christ in your Arms,
and so present your suits to him But

Thirdly: If there be a Hell, then don't let fly so fiercely ^.
against those faithful Ministers, who seriously and conscientiously do all
they can to prevent your droping into Hell; don't call them legal Preachers,
who tell you that 2 Cor. 5 20. 2 Cor. 12. 15. Chrysostom. Hom. 44. in Matthew.
there is a Hell, and that there is no torments to Hellish torments; if either
you consider their extremity or eternity, be not so hot, nor so angry with
those Ambassadors of Christ, who are willing to spend and be spent, that they
may keep you from running headlong to Hell. To Look as he said that nothing
but the eloquence of Tully could sufficiently set forth Tulle^'s eloquence, so
none can express these everlasting torments, but he that is from everlasting to
everlasting. Millions of years multiplied by millions, make not up one minute
to this E^ernity; but who consider^^t, who believes it, etc
think of Hell (says one) preserves a man from falling into it, and says the
same Author. Vtinam ubi que de Gehenna disseretur. I could wish men would
discourse much, and often of Hell. It was a saying of Gregory Nyss^n, who lived
about thirteen hundred years ago. He that does but hear of Hell, is without any
further labor or study taken off from sinful pleasures: But what Minister can
say so now? Surely men's hearts are grown worse since, for how do most men run
headlong to Hell, and take a pleasure to dance hood-wicn't into everlasting
burnings. O had but the desperate Sinners of this day, who swear and curse,
drink and drab, and drown themselves in fleshly pleasures; but one sight of
this Hell, how would it charm their mouths, apale their spirits, and strike
fear and astonishment into their hearts.

I cannot think that the high Transgessors of this day, durst be so highly
wicked as they are, did they but either see or foresee what they shall one day
certainly feel, except there be sound and serious repentance on their sides,
and pardoning grace on God's. Bellarmine was of opinion, that one glimps of
Hell, were enough to make a man, not only turn Christian, and sober, but Monk
too; to live after the strictest rule that may be: And yet, he tells us of a
certain Advocate of the Court of Rome; who, being at the point of death,
stirred up by them that were about him, to repent and call upon God for mercy:
he, with a constant countenance, and without sign of any fear, turned his
speech to God, and said, Bellar. de art moriendi, l. 2. c. 10
Lord, I have longed much to speak to thee, not for my self, but for my wife
and children; for I am hasting to Hell, I am now a going to dwell with Devils;
neither is there any thing that I would have thee to do for me: and this he
spoke, says Bellarmine (who was then present, and heard it.) (Animo tam
tranquillo ac si de itinere, ad villam loqueretur) With as pacate, serene and
tranquil a mind, as if he had been speaking of going to the next town or
village: Ah, who can read or write such a relation without horror and terror.
But,

Fourthly, If there be a Hell, then do not fret, do not 4. Psalm. 37. 1, 2.
Psalm. 73. 21. Prove. 3. 31. Psalm. 9. 17.
envy the prosperity and flourishing estate and condition of wicked and ungodly
men; for God has given it under his hand, that they shall be turned into Hell;
The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.
'Twas a wise saying of Marius, to those that envy great men their honor, let
them (says he) envy them their burdens. I have read a story of a Roman, who
was by a Court-marshal, condemned to die for breaking his rank to steal a bunch
of Grapes; and as he was going to execution, some of the soldiers envied him,
that he had Grapes, and they had none: says he, do you envy me my Grapes, I
must pay dear for them. Ah sirs, do not envy wicked men's grapes, do not envy
their riches, their honors, their greatness, their offices, their dignities;
for they shall one day pay dear for these things; high seats to many are
uneasy, and the down fall terrible. How art Isa. 14. 12.
thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning: it is spoken of the
Chaldean Monarch; who, though high, yet had a sudden change befell hm. It is
not a matter of so great joy to have been high and honorable, as it is of
grief, anguish and vexation to be afterward despicable and contemptible: Come
down, and sit in the dust; Babylon Isa. 47. 1.
was the Lady of Kingdoms; but, says God, sit in the dust: Take the
millstones, and grind: The Lord of hosts ^ers. 2. ^sa. 23. 9.
has purposed it to stain (Heb. to pollute) the pride of al glory; and to
bring into contempt, all the honorable of the earth: He shall bring down their
pride together: Woe to the Isa. 25. 11. ^sa 28. 1. verse. 3.
crown of pride: the crown of pride shall be trodden under feet. God will bring
down the Crown of pride, to the dust, to ashes, yea, to hell; and therefore, do
not envy the Crown of pride. Croesus was so puffed up with his Crown of pride,
with his great riches, and worldly glory, that he boasted himself to be the
happiest man that lived: But Solon told him, that no man was to be accounted
happy before death: Croesus little regarded what Solon had said unto him, until
he came by miserable experience, to find the uncertainty of his riches, and all
worldly glory, which before he would not believe: For when he was taken by King
Cyrus, and condemned to be burned, and saw the fire preparing for him, then he
cried out, O Solon, Solon! Cyrus asking him the cause of the outcry; he
answered, that now he remembered what Solon had told him in his prosperity; Nemo
ante obitum foelix; that no man was to be accounted happy before death. Who can
sum up those Crowns of pride, that in Scripture and History, God has brought
down to the dust, yea, to the dunghill. Have not some wished, when they have
been breathing out their last, that they had never been Kings, nor Queens, nor
Lords, nor Ladies? etc. Where is there one of ten thousand, who is advanced,
and thereby any thing bettered! Solus Imperatorum Vespasianus ^n melius
mutatus: Few men believe what vexations lie under the pillows of Princes. You
look upon my Crown and my Purple Robes, says Artaxerxes; but did you know how
they were lined with thorns, you would not stoop to take them up. Damocles
highly extolled Dionysius his condition; Dionysius, to convince him of his
mistake, provides a royal feast, invites him to it, commands his servants to
attend him; no meat, no mirth, no music is wanting; but withal, caused a sharp
sword to be hung over his head by an horse hair: which made Damocles tremble,
and to forbear both meat and mirth: Such, even such, says Dionysius the
Sicilian Tyrant, is my life, which thou deemest so pleasant and happy. O sirs!
there is a sword of wrath, which hangs over every sinners head, even when he is
surrounded with all the gay and gallant things of this world.

Outward prosperity is commonly given in wrath, as you may see by comparing the
Scriptures in the margin Hos. 13. 11. Psalm. 73. Psalm. 78. 30, 31. Prove. 1. 32.
Luke 12. 16. to the 22. Eccl^s. 5. 12, 13.
together: Prosperity kills and damns more than adversity. The Germans have
this proverb, That the pavement of Hell is made of the glorious Crests of
Gallants. It had been infinitely better for the great men of this world, that
they had never been so great; for their horrid abuse of God's mercy and bounty,
will but increase their misery and damnation at last. That Ancient hit it, who
said, because they have tasted so liberally of God's kindness, Augustine.
and have employed it only against God's glory; their felicity shall be short,
but their misery shall be endless: and therefore, to see the wicked prosper and
flourish in this The whole Turkish Empire is nothing else but a crust, cast by
our Father to his dogs; and it is all they are likely to have; let them make
them merry with it, said Luther.
world, is matter, rather of pity than envy; it is all the heaven they must
have. These are as terrible Texts as any in the whole book of God, Mat. 6. 2.
Verily I say unto you, they have their reward: Luke 6. 24. Woe to you that are
rich, for you have received your consolation: James 5. 1, 2, 3. Go to now, ye
rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you: Your riches
are corrupted, and your garments are moth-eaten; your gold and silver is
cankred, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat
your flesh as it were fire. Gregory being advanced to places of great
preferment, professed that there was no Scripture that went so near his heart,
and that struck such a trembling into his spirit, as that speech of Abraham to
Dives, Luke 16. 25. Son, remember thou in thy life time, receivedst thy good
things: They that have their heaven here, are in danger to miss it hereafter.
It is not God's usual way (says one) to remove a deliciis, ad delicias; from
delights, J^rom.
to delights: to bestow two Heavens, one here, and another hereafter: and
doubtless, hence it was that David made it his solemn prayer, Deliver me from
the wicked, from men of the world, which have their portion in this life, Psalm.
17. 14.
and whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure. It is a very hard thing to
have earth and heaven too: God did not turn man out of one Paradise, that he
should here provide himself of another. Many men, with the Prodigal, cry out,
give me the portion that belongs to me, give Luke 15. 12.
me riches, and give me honor, and give me preferment, etc. and God gives them
their desires, but it is with a vengeance; As the Israelites had Quails to choke
them, and afterward a King to vex them* and a Table to be a snare Psalm. 78.
24. -- 32.
unto them: when the Israelites had eaten of their dainty dishes, Justice sent
in a sad reckoning, which spoiled all. Ah friends, there is no reason why we
should envy the prosperity of wicked men: Suppose (says one) that a man
Chrysostom.
one night, should have a pleasant dream, that for the time might much delight
him; and for the pleasure of such a dream, should be tormented a thousand years
together, with exquisite torments: would any man desire to have such a dream
upon such conditions. All the contentments of this life are not so much to
Eternity, as a dream is to a thousand years: And oh, how little is that man's
condition to be envied, who, for these short pleasures of sin, must endure an
Eternity of torments! Oh sirs, do wicked men purchase their present pleasures
at so dear a rate, as eternal torments! and do we envy their enjoyment of them
so short a time? would any envy a man, going to execution, because he saw him
in prison, nobly feasted, and nobly attended, and bravely courted? or because
he saw him go up the ladder, with a Gold chain about his neck, and a scarlet
Gown upon his back? or because he saw him walk to execution, through pleasant
fields; or delightsome gardens? or because there went before him, Drums
beating; Colors flying, and Trumpets ^ounding? etc. surely no: Oh, no more
should we envy the grandeur of the men of the day; for every step they take, is
but a step to an eternal execution; the sinner is cursed, and Isa. 65. 20. Man.
2. 2.
all his blessings are cursed, and who in their wits, would envy a man under a
curse! oh, how much more worthy of our pity, than envy, is that man's
condition, who has all his happiness confined to the narrow compass of this
life, but his misery extended to the uttermost bounds of an everlasting
duration. But,

Fifthly and lastly, if there be a Hell, then, Christians, spend may be able to
comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth and length, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19.
and depth and height of that love of Christ, which passes knowledge, of that
love of Christ, that put him upon these corporeal and spiritual sufferings,
which were so exceeding great, acute, extreme, universal, and continual, and
all to save us from wrath to come: Christ's outward and inward miseries, 1
These. 1. 1^.
sorrows and sufferings, are not to be parralell'd; and therefore Christians
have the more cause to love themselves in the contemplation of his matchless
love. Oh bless Christ, oh kiss Christ, oh embrace Christ, oh welcome Christ,
Psalm. 1^3. 1, 2. Psalm. 2 12. Can^. 3 4. Rev. 14. 4, 5. Psalm. 63. 8. Genesis 6. 9.
Cant. 8. ult.
oh cleave to Christ, oh follow Christ, oh walk with Christ, oh long for
Christ* who, for your sakes, has undergone insupportable wrath and most
hellish torments, as I have evidenced at large before, and therefore a touch
here may suffice. Oh, look up to dear Jesus, and say, oh blessed Gal. 3. 13.
Jesus; thou wast accursed, that I might be blessed; thou wast condemned, that
I might be justified; thou did Isa. 53. Romans 8. 30, 34. Psalm. 16. 11.
for a time undergo the very torments of Hell, that I might for ever enjoy the
pleasures of Heaven; and therefore, I cannot but dearly love thee, and highly
esteem thee, and greatly honor thee, and earnestly long after thee; and this
is all I shall say by way of Inference. But for a close you will say, ubi sit;
where is hell, where is this place of torment, where is that very place that is
so frequently called Hell in the Scripture? That there is a Hell, you have
sufficiently proved; but pray, where is it, where is it? Now, to this I answer,

First, That it becomes all sober, serious Christians, to

Secondly, I answer, curiosity is one of the most dangerous 2. Curious
enquirers have always layen under the lash of Christ, as you may see by
comparing these Scriptues together, Joh. 21. 22. Act. 1. 6, 7. Luke 13. 22, 24.
Engines, that the Devil uses to undo souls withal. When Satan observes, that
men do in good earnest, set themselves to the obtaining of knowledge, then he
strives to turn them to vain enquiries, and curious speculations; that so, if
they will be knowing, he may keep them busied about unprofitable curiosities.
The way to make us mere fools, is to affect to know more than God would have
us: Adam's tree of knowledge made him and his posterity fools: Curiosity wa the
bait, whereby the Devil caught our first Genesis 3. 5, 6.
parents, and undid us all: Curiosity is the spiritual Adultery of the soul:
Curiosity is spiritual drunkenness; so August. Epist. 77.
that, look as the Drunkard, be the cup never so deep, he is not satisfied,
unless he see the bottom of i; so the curious searcher into the depths of God,
he is unsatisfied till he comes to the bottom of them, and by this means, they
come to be mere fools, as the Apostle says. Adam Romans 1. 22.
had a mind to know as much of God, as God himself; and by this means he came
to know nothing. Curiosity is that Green sickness of the soul, whereby it longs
for novelties, and loathes sound and wholesome truths: it is Basil says diverse
questions may be made about a very Fly, which no Philosopher is ever able to
answer: how much rather about heaven, hell, or the work of Grace.
the Epidemical distemper of this Age: Ah, how many are there, who spend their
precious time in nice and curious questions. As, what did Christ dispute of
among the Doctors? where did Paradise stand? in what part of the world is Local
Hell? what fruit was it that Adam eat, and ruined us all? what became of Moses
his body? how many orders and degrees of elect Angels are there? etc. O! that
we could learn contentedly to be ignorant, where God would not have us knowing,
and let us nor account it any disparagement to acknowledge some depths in Gods
Counsels, Purposes, Decrees and Judgments, Romans 11. 33.
which our shallow reason cannot fathom. It Is sad when men will be wise above
what is written, and Romans 12. 3. 1 Cor. 4. 6.
love to pry into Gods secrets, and scan the mysteries of Religion by carnal
reason: God often plagues such pride and curiosity, by leaving that sort of men
to strange and fearful falls. When a curious Inquisitor asked Austin what God
did before he created the world, Austin told him he was making Hell for such
busy Questionists, for such cuious inquirers into Gods secrets: such handsome
jerks are the best answers to men Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
of curious minds. But

Thirdly, I answer, I concerns us but little, to know whether Hell be in the
Air, or in the concave of the 3. Let us not be inquisitive where Hell is, but
rather let our care be to escape it, says Chrysostem.
earth, or of what longitude, latitude, or profundity it is; Let Hell be where
it has pleased God in his secret counsel to place it, to men unknown, whether
in the North, or in the South, under the frozen Zone, or under the burning
Zone, or in a pit or a gulf: Our great care should be to avoid it, to escape i,
and not to be curiously inquisitive about that place, which the Lord in his
infinite wisdom has not thought fit clearly to reveil, or make known to the
sons of men.

In Hell there is nothing heard, but yells and cries.
In Hell the Fire never slacks, nor Worm never dies. A Pentel^gia, dolor inserm.

But where is this Hell placed? (my Muse) stop there:
Lord show me what it is, but never where.
To worm and fire, to torments there, Prudentius the Poet.

No term he gave, they cannot wear.
Look as there are many that please themselves with discourses of the degrees
of Glory, whilst others make sure their interest in Glory. So many please
themselves with discourses of the degrees of the torments of Hell, As in Heaven
one is more glorious than another, so in Hell one shall be more miserable than
another. Augustine.
whilst others make sure their escaping those torments; and look as many take
pleasure to be discoursing about the place where Hell is, so some take pleasure
to make sure their escaping of that place; and certainly they are the best and
wisest of men, who spend most thoughts, and time, and pains how to keep out of
it, than to exercise themselves with disputes about it. But

Fourthly, I answer, That it has been the common Infernum est locus
subterraneus. Teriu. lib. 3. de Anim.
earth; yea Christ and the blessed Scriptures, which are the highest authority,
do strongly seem to favor this opinion, by speaking of a Descent unto Hell, in
opposition unto Heaven; and therefore we may as well doubt whether Heaven be
above us, as doubt of Hell being beneath us: Among other Scriptures ponder upon
these, Psalm 140. 10. Let them be cast into the deep pits, that they rise not up
again. Bring them down into the pit of destruction. Prove. 9. 18. Her Guests are
in the depths of Hell. Prove. 15. 24. The way of life is above to the wise, that
he may depart from Hell beneath. Sheol is sometimes taken for a pit, sometimes
for the Grave, and sometimes, and that significantly too for Hell, all
downwards. One says, that Sheol generally signifies all Mercerus upon Genesis 37.
places under the earth; whence some conclude, that Hell is in the heart of the
earth, or under the earth; without doubt it is below, because it is every where
opposed to Heaven which is above: it is therefore called Abyssus, a deep pit, a
vast gulf; such a pit as by reason of the depth thereof may be said to have no
bottom. The Devils entreated Christ, that he would not send them to this place,
Luke 8. 31. in Abyssum, which is, says one, Immensae profunditatis vorago,
quasi absque fundo: Beza upon Mat.
A Gulf of unmeasurable depth, etc. The Apostle 2 Pet. 2. 4. speaking of the
Angels that sinned, says God cast them down into Hell: So Beza in his
Annotations tells us, the Greeks called that place which was ordained for the
prison and torment of the damned: And reason it self does teach us, that it
must needs be opposite and contrary to that place, in which the spirits of just
men Heb. 12. 23.
made perfect, do reside, which on all hands is granted to be above, and Hell
therefore must needs be below, in the center of the earth, say some, which is
from the Superficies three thousand five hundred miles, as some judge. Hesiod
says, Hell is as far under the earth, as Heaven is above it: Some have been of
opinion, that the pit spoken of, ino which Corah, Dathan and Abiram went Number.
16. 3^.
down alive, when the earth clave asunder, and swallowed them up, was the pit
of Hell into which both their souls and bodies were immediately conveyed: As we
know little in respect of the height of Heaven, so we know as little in respect
of the lowness of Hell. Some of the upper part of the earth is to us yet (terra
incognita) an unknown land; but all of the lowest part of Hell is to us an
unknown land: Many thousands have traveled thither, but none have returned
thence, to make reports, or write Books of their travels. That piece of
Geography is very imperfect. Heaven and Hell are the greatest opposites, or
remotest extremes: Thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto Heaven, shall be
Matthew. 11. 23.
brought down to Hell. Heaven and Hell are at furthest natural distance, and
are therefoe the everlasting receptacles of those who are at the furthest moral
distance, Believers and Unbelievers, Saints and Impenitents: And it is
observable, that as the heighthe of Heaven, so the depth of Hell is ascribed to
wisdom, to show the unsearchableness of it. O the depth (as well as O the Romans
11. 33.
height) of the wisdom of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out! Certainly Gods depths, and Satan's depths, and Hells
depths lie far out 1 Cor. 2. 10. Rev. 2. 24.
of our view; and are hard to be found out; though I ought religiously to
reverence the wonderful wisdom of God, and to wonder at his unsearchable
judgments; yet I ought not curiously and profanely to search beyond the
compass of that which God has reveiled to us in his word. The Romans had a
certain Lake, the depth whereof they knew not; (this Lake they dedicated to
Victory) doubtless Hell is such a Lake, the depth whereof no man knows, it is
such a bottomless pit that no mortal can sound. But

Fifthly and Lastly, I answer, Some of the Learned are 5. 2 Pet. 3. 10. 11. 12.
13.
of opinion, that Hell is without this visible world, (which will pass away at
the last day) and removed at the greatest distance from the seeds Bea^orum, the
place where the righteous shall for ever inhabit. Matthew. 8. 12. In tenebras ex
tenebris, intelicit^r ex^^usi inf^l. ^ius exclu ^endi. Augus^m.
But the children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness. Matthew.
22. 13. Then said the King to his servants, bind him hand and foot, and take
him away, and cast him into outer darkness. Matthew. 25. 30. And cast ye^ the
unprofitable servant into outer darkness: Into a darkness, beyond a darkness,
into a Dungeon beyond and beneath the prison. The darkness of Hell is compared
2. Pet. 2. 4. Ju^le ver^^ 6. Acts 12. 10. This pri^on was without the gate near
mount ^al^^ry, and it was the loathso^est and vilest prison of all, for i^ it
the Thieves who were carried to Calvary to be executed were kep't; and Christ
alludeth to this prison in that Matthew. 8. 12. and that Matthew. 22. 13. and that
Matthew. 25. 30. Cast him into utter darkness: Which allusion could not be
understood, unless there had been a dark prison without the City, where was
utter darkness.
to the darkness of those prisons, which were often times out of the City: By
outer darkness, the Holy Ghost Would signify to us that the wicked should be
in a state most remote from all heavenly happiness, and blessedness; and that
they should be expulsed out of the blessed presence of God, who is mentium
Lum^n. It is usual among the Greeks, by a comparative to set forth the
superlative degree; by outer darkness we are to understand the greatest
darkness that is, as in a place most remote from all light: They shall be cast
into outer darkness, that is, they shall be cast into the corporal and palpable
darkness of the infernal prison; Immediately after death Sinners Souls shall be
cast into the infernal prison, and in the day of judgment, both their souls and
their bodies shall be cast into outer darkness: Darkness is no other thing than
a privation of light.

Now Light is twofold, viz. 1. Spiritual, as Wisdom, Grace, Truth, now the
privation of this light, is internal darkness and ignorance in the spirit and
inward man. 2. There is a sensible and corporal light, whose privation is outer
darkness; and this is the darkness spoken of in the three Scriptures last
cited: For although there be fire in hell, yet it is a dark, and smoaky fire,
and not clear, except only so as the damned may see one another, for the
greater increase of their misery, as some write. Now I shall leave the
ingenious Reader to conclude as he pleases, concerning the place where Hell is;
desiring and hoping that he will make it the greatest business of his life, to
escape Hell, and to get to Heaven, etc.

Thirdly and Lastly, If Jesus Christ did feel and suffer Bellar. de Christ.
Anim^. lib. 4. cap. 10. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Te^. 1. Vide Calvin in
Institu^. lib. 2. cap. 16. Sect. 9.
Bellarmine takes a great deal of pains to make good this assertion, but this
great Champion of the Romish Church may easily be confuted: First, because that
limbus patrum, and Christ's fetching the fathers from the skirts of Hell, (about
which he makes so great a noise) is a mere fable, and not bottomed upon any
solid grounds of Scripture. Secondly, because upon Christ's dying, and
satisfying for our sins, his soul went that very day into Paradise; as Adam
sinning, was that very day cast out of Luke 23. 43. Genesis 3. 23, 24. John 18.
30. Heb. 9. 12. 1 Th^s. 1. 10. Ephesians. 4. 8. Heb. 2. 14. 15. Coloss. 2. 14. 15.
It Is a plain allusion to the Roman Triumphs, where the Victor ascended to the
Capitol in a Chariot of State, the prisoners following on foot with their hands
bound behind them, etc.
Paradise, and his soul could not be in two places at once. Thirdly, because
this descent of Christ's Soul into Hell, was altogether needless, and to no end;
what need was there of it, or to what end did he descend? not to suffer in
Hell, for that was finished on the Cross; not to redeem, or rescue the Fathers
out of Hell; for the elect were never there, and Redemption from Hell was
wrought by Christ's death, as the Scriptures do clearly evidence; not to triumph
there over the Devils, etc. For Christ triumphed over them when he was on the
Cross: Christ in the day of his solemn inauguration into his Heavenly Kingdom,
triumphed over Sin, Death, Devils, and Hell; when Christ was on the Cross, he
made the Devils a public spectacle of scorn and derision, as Tamerlane did
Bajazet the great Turk, whom he shut up in an Iron Cage, made like a Grate, in
such sort, as tha^ Turk. Hist. 220.
^e might on every side be seen, and so carried him up and down all Asia, to be
scorned and derided by his own people. By these few hints you may see the
vanity and folly of the Papists, who tell you that Christ's soul in substance
went really and locally into Hell. I might make other inferences, but let these
suffice at this time.

Fourthly, As Jesus Christ did feel and suffer the very Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the Law, Gala. 3. 13.
being made a curse for us: for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs
on a tree. He says not Christ was cursed, but a curse, which is more; it shows
that the curse of all did lie upon him. The death on the tree, was accursed
above all kinds of deaths, as the Serpent was Genesis 3. 14.
accursed above all the beasts of the field. This Scripture Not that all that
are hanged should be damned, for the contrary appears in that Luke 23. 43.
Neither is hanging in it self, or by the law of nature, or by civil law, more
execrable than any other death.
refers to Deuteronomy. 21. 33. His body shall not remain all night upon the tree; but
thou shall in any wise hury him that day: for he that is hanged, is accursed of
God. The holy and wise God appointed this kind of punishment, as being the most
cruel and reproachful, for a type of the punishment, which his Son must suffer
to deliver us from the curse. Hanging on a tree was accounted the most
shameful, the most dishonorable, the most odious, and infamous, and accursed
of all kinds of death, both by the Israelites and other nations, because the
very manner of the death, did intimate that such men as were thus executed,
were such execrable, base, vile and accursed wretches; that they did defile the
earth with treading on it, and would pollute the earth if they should die upon
it; and therefore were hanged up in the air, as persons not fit to converse
amongst men, or touch the surface of the ground any more. But what should be
the reason why the ceremonial Law affixed the curse to this death, rather than
any other death: I answer first, because this was reckoned the most shameful
and dishonorable of all deaths, and was usually therefore the punishment of
those, that had by some notorious wickedness provoked God to pour out his wrath
upon the whole land, and so were hanged up to appease his wrath; as you may see
in the hanging of those Princes, that were guilty of committing whoredom with
the Daughters of Moab: And in the hanging of Readiness seven Number. 25. 4.
sons in the days of David, when there was a Famine 2 Samuel 21. 6. 7. 8, 2.
in the land, because of Readiness perfidious oppressing of the Gibeonites: And in
Joshuah's hanging of the five Kings of the Amorites. But secondly and mainly,
it was Josh. 16. 26.
with respect to the Death Christ was to die: God would have his Son the Lord
Jesus to suffer this kind of death, that hence it might be the more evident,
that in his death he bare the curse due to our sins, according to that of the
Apostle, Gala. 3. 13. Christ was certainly made that curse which he redeemed us
from, otherwise the Apostle does not reason either soundly or fairly, when he
tells us we are redeemed from the curse, because Christ was made a curse for
us; he remitteth that curse to us, which he received in himself. That Father
hit the Bela in 3. ad Galat.
mark, who says, Christus supplicium nostrum sine reatu suscepit, ut solveret
reatum, and finiret supplicium: Christ has taken our punishment without guilt,
to loose the guilt, and end the punishment. We were subject to the curse,
because we had transgressed the Law, Christ was not subject because he had
fulfilled it: Eam ergo execrationem Oecumenius in 3. ad Galat.
suscepit, cui obnoxious non erat, quum suspensus suit in ligno, ut execrationem
solveret, quae adversus nos erat: He therefore took that curse to the which he
was not subject, when he hanged upon the tree, to loose the curse which was
against us. Such a curse or execration was Christ made for us, as was that from
which he redeemed us; and that curse from which he redeemed us, was no other
than the curse of the Law, and that curse of the Law included all the
punishment, which sinners were to bear, or suffer for transgression of the Law,
of which his hanging on the Cross, was a sign and symbol; and this curse was
Christ made for us, (that is) he did bear and suffer it to redeem us from it:
Christ was verily made a curse for us, and did bear both in his body and soul
that curse, which by reason of the transgression of the Law was due to us: And
therefore I may well conclude this head with that saying of Hierome. Injuria
Domini, nostra Hierom. in 3. ad Galat.
Gloria: The Lords injury is our Glory. The more we ascribe to Christ's
suffering, the less remains of ours; the more painfully that he suffered, the
more fully are we redeemed; the greater his sorrow was, the greater our solace;
his dissolution is our consolation, his Cross our Comfort; his annoy, our
endless joy; his distress in soul, our release, his calamity our comfort; his
misery our mercy, his adversity our felicity, his Hell our Heaven. Christ is
not only accursed, but a curse; and this expression is used both for more
significancy; and usefulness to note out the truth and realness of the thing;
and also to show the order and way he took, for bringing us back unto that
blessedness, which we had lost. The Law was our righteousness, in our innocent
condition, and so it was our blessedness; but James 1. 24.
the first Adam falling away from God by his first transgression, plunged
himself into all unrighteousness, and so inwrapped himself in the curse: Now
Christ the second Adam, that he may restore the lost man into an estate of
blessedness, he becomes that for them, which the Law is unto them; namely a
curse: beginning where the Law ends, and so going backward to satisfy the
demands Romans 10. 4.
of the Law to the uttermost, he becomes first a curse for them, and then their
righteousness, and so their blessedness. Now Christ's becoming a curse for us,
stands in this, that whereas we are all accursed by the sentence of the Law,
because of sin, he now comes in our room, and stands under the stroke of that
curse, which of right belongs to us; So that it lies not now any longer on the
backs of poor sinners, but on him for Heb. 7. 22.
them, and in their stead, therefore he is called a Surety: The Surety stands
in the room of a Debtor, Malefactor, or him that is any way obnoxious to the
Law, such is Adam and all his posterity. We are by the doom of the Law, evil
do^rs, Transgressors, and upon that score, we stand indebted to the Justice of
God; and lie under the stroke of his wrath: Now the Lord Jesus seeing us in
this condition, he steps in, and stands between us and the blow; yea, he takes
this wrath and curse off from us unto himself, he stands not only, or merely,
after the manner of a Surety among men, in the case of debt; For here the
Surety indeed enters bond with the principal, for the payment of the debt; but
yet he expects that the debtor should not put him to it, but that he should
discharge the debt himself, he only stands as a good security. No, Christ Jesus
does not expect that we should pay the debt our selves, but he takes it wholly
to himself: As a Surety for a Murderer or Traitor, or some other notorious
Malefactor, that has broken prison, and is run away; he lies by it body for
body, state for state, and undergoes whatsoever the Malefactor is chargeable
withal for satisfying the Law: Even so the Lord Jesus Christ stands Surety for
us runnagate Malefactors; making himself liable to all that curse, which
belongs to us, that he might both answer the Law fully, and bring us back again
to God: As the first Adam stood in the room of all mankind fallen; so Christ
the second Adam stands in the room of all mankind, which is to be restored; he
sustains the person of all those which do spiritually descend from him, and
unto whom he bears the relation of a Head: Ephesians. 1. 22. 23.
Christ did actually undergo, and suffer the wrath of God, and the fearful
effects thereof, in the punishments threatened in the Law. As he became a
debtor, and was so accounted, even so he became payment thereof; he was made a
sacrifice for sin, and bare to the ^ull, all that ever Divine Justice did, or
could require, even the uttermost extent of the curse of the Law of God, he
must thus undergo the curse, because he had taken upon him our sin. The Justice
of the most High God reveiled in the Law, looks upon the Lord Jesus as a
sinner, because he has undertaken for us, and seiseth upon him accordingly,
pouring down on his head the whole curse, and all those dreadful punishments,
which are threatened in it against sin, for the curse follows sin, as the
shadow the body; whether it be sin inherent, or sin imputed; even as the
blessing follows righteousness, whether it be righteousness inherent, or
righteousness imputed. But

Fifthly, He that did feel and suffer the very torments God and man, God-man,
such a Mediator sinners needed, no Mediator but such a one who has interest in
both parties, could serve their turns, or save their souls; and such a one is
the Lord Jesus, he has an interest in both parties, and he has an interest in
both natures; the Godhead and the man hood. The blessed Scriptures are so
express and clear in these points, that they must shut their eyes with a
witness against the light, that cannot see Christ to be God man, to be God and
man. I shall first speak something of Christ, as he is God: Now here are
fathomless depths, and bottomless 1 Pet. 1. 12. (...). The word signifies to
look wishly and intently, as the Cher^bi^^s of old looked into the Mercy-Seat.
Exodus 25. 18, 19 It signify, prying into a thing over-veiled and hidden from
^ight, to look as we say wishly at it, as if we would look even through it.
bottoms, if I may so speak; here are stupendous and amazing mysteries,
astonishing and confounding excellencies, such as the holy Angels themselves
desire to pry into. God is (...), dwelling in accessible light: 1 Timothy 6. 16.
Here are such beauties and perfections that had I (as the Poet speaks) a
hundred tongues, a hundred mouths, and a voice of steel, yet I could not
sufficiently describe them: Nevertheless give me lieve to say something
concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, who is one eternal God with the Father, and
with the Holy Ghost; I might produce a cloud of witnesses in the case, but it
is enough that we have the Authority of the sacred Scriptures, both in the Old
and New Testament, confirming of it; and therefore I shall lay down some proofs
or demonstrations of the eternal Godhead of Christ, which I shall draw out of
the blessed Scripture. This is a point of high concernment, that Christ is God;
so high, as whosoever builds not upon this, builds upon the Sands. This is
the rock of our Salvation, The word was God. Concerning John 1. 1.
this important point, consider

First, That the Godhead of Christ is clearly asserted, Isa. 43. 10. 11, 12.
That ye may know Compare these Scriptures of the Old Testament with these in
the New. Heb. 1. 2, 3. 1 John 1. 7. A^s 4. 12. Ephesians. 4. 8. R^m. 9. 30. Jer. 33.
23. Psalm. 6. 68, 18, 19, 20.
and believe, and understand that I am he, I, even I am Jehovah, and besides me
there is no Savior. And Isa. 41. 21. 22, 23, 24, 25. There is no God else
besides me: A just God and Savior, there is none besides me. Look unto me and
be ye saved all the ends of the earth, for I am God, and there is none else. To
me every knee shall bow, -- In Jehovah have I righteousness -- In Jehovah shall
the seed of Israel be justified: Compare this with Romans 14. 10, 11. And the
Socinians may as safely conclude, that there is no other God but Jesus Christ,
as they may conclude that there is no God, but God the Father, from the
seventeenth of John: But they and we ought to conclude from these Scriptures,
that Jesus Christ is not a different God from the Father, but is one and the
same God with him; so he is called The mighty God, The everlasting Father. Isa.
9. 6. Take a few clear places out of the New Testament; as that in Romans 9. 5.
Of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all God blessed for
ever more. Christ is here himself called God blessed for ever. So Tit. 2. 13.
Looking for that hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ: Who is it that shall appear at the last day in the
clouds, but Christ? who is called the great God and our Savior? God blessed
for ever, says Paul to the Romans, The great God, says Paul to Titus; 1 John
5. 20. And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true: and we are in him that is
true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life.
Phil. 2. 6. He was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal
with God: And Coloss. 2. 9. In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily.
John 20. 28. My Lord, and my God. 1 Timothy 3. 16. God manifested in the flesh. To
which of Heb. 1. 1.
the Saints, or Angels did God say at any time, thou art my Son, The Heir of
all things, the illustrious brightness of my Glory, and lively character of my
person. Thy Throne oh God is for ever and ever, and all the Angels of God shall
worship thee: Certainly he who is Gods own, proper, natural, consubstantial,
coessential, only begotten Son, he is God: where ever this Sonship is, there is
the Deity or the Divine Essence. Now Christ is thus Gods son, therefore he is
God: What the Father is, as to his nature, that the Son must also be; now the
first person the Father of Christ is God; whereupon he too, who is the Son,
must be God also. A Son always participates of his Fathers essence, there is
betwixt them evermore an Identity and oneness of nature; if therefore Christ be
Gods Son (as is most evident throughout the Scripture he is) then he must needs
have that very nature and essence which God the Father has, insomuch that if
the second person be not really a God, the first person is but equivocally a
Father. These Scriptures out of the Old and New Testament are so evident, and
pregnant to prove the Godhead of Christ, that they need no illustration, yea,
they speak so fully for the Divinity of Christ, that all the Arians and
Socinians in the world, do but in vain go about to elude them. But

Secondly, Let us ponder seriously upon these Scriptures: John 3. 13. And no
man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son
of man, which is in Heaven. v. 31. He that comes from above, is above all: he
that comes from Heaven is above all. John 8. 23. Ye are from beneath, I am
from above. John 16. 28. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the
world: and again I leave the world, and go to the Father. Now from these
blessed Scriptures we may thus argue; He who was in Heaven, before he was on
the earth; and who was also in Heaven, whilst he was on the earth, is
certainly the eternal God; but all this does Jesus Christ strongly assert
concerning himself, (as is evident in the Scriptures last cited) therefore he
is the eternal God blessed for ever. But

Thirdly, Christ's eternal Deity, Coequality, and

First, Jehovah is one of the incommunicable names

The Jews observe that in Gods name Jehovah, the Exodus 15. 3. Genesis 2. 4. The
Jews call it Nomen Dei inessabile: But this name Jehovah is not unspeakable, in
regard of the name, but in regard of the essence of God, set forth by it, as
Zanchy notes. This name was always thrice repeated, when the Priest blessed
the people. Number. 6. 24, 25, 26.
Trinity is implied. Je signifies the Present tense, Ho the praeterperfect
tense, Vah the future. The Jews also observe, that in his name Jehovah, all the
Hebrew letters are literae quiescentes, that denote rest, implying that in God,
and from God is all our rest: Every gracious soul is like Noah's Dove, he can
find no rest nor satisfaction but in God: God alone is the godly man's Ark of
rest and safety. Jehovah is the incommunicable name of God, and is never
attributed to any but God: Psalm. 83. 19. Thou whose name alone is JEHOVAH.
Jehovah is a name so full of Divine mysteries, that the Jews hold it unlawful
to pronounce it. Jehovah signifies three things.

1. That God is an eternal independent being of himself.

2. That he gives being to all creatures. Acts 17. 28.


3. That he does, and will give being to his promises. God tells Moses, Exodus
6. 3. That he appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of
(El Genesis 22. 14. Abraham called the name of the place Jehovahlireh, the Lord
will see, or provide: Besides the Fathers of old are said not to have known God
by his name Jehovah, in comparison of that which their posterity knew
afterward: for to them God made himself more clearly and plenarily known.
Shaddai) God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them. The
name Jehovah was known to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but not mysterium nominis,
the mystery of the name: This was reveiled to Moses from God, and from Moses to
the people: It is meant of the performances of his great promises made to
Abraham. God did promise to give the land of Canaan to Abraham's Seed for an
inheritance, which promise was not performed to him, but to his seed after him;
so that this is the meaning, God appeared to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, El
Shaddai, God Almighty, in protecting, delivering and rewarding of them, but by
his name Jehovah, he was not known to them; God did perform his promise made to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, but unto their seed and posterity after them. This
name Jehovah is the proper and peculiar name of the one, only true God, a name
as far significant of his nature and being, as possibly we are enabled to
understand; so that this is taken for granted on all hands, that he whose name
is Jehovah, is the only true God, when ever that name is used properly, without
a Trope or figure, it is used of God only.

Now this glorious name Jehovah; that is so full of mysteries, is frequently
ascribed to Christ. Isa 6. 1. He is called Jehovah, for there Isaiah is said to
see Jehovah sitting upon a Throne, etc. And John 12. 41. This is expressly by
the holy Evangelist applied to Christ, of whom he says, That Isaiah saw his
glory, and spoke of him. Exodus 17. 1. The people are said to tempt Jehovah, and
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. 9. Let us not tempt Christ, as some of them also
tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents. It is said of Jehovah, Of old have
thou laid the Psalm. 102. 25. 26.
foundation of the earth, and the Heavens are the works of thy hands: they
shall perish, but thou shall endure, etc. And the Apostle clearly testifies,
Heb. 1. 10. That these words are spoken of Christ. So Jehovah rained fire and
brimstone from Jehovah out of Heaven. Genesis 19. 24. That is Jehovah the Son of
God, that stayed with Abraham, Genesis 18. rained fire and brimstone from Jehovah
the Father, and Christ is called Jehovah Tsidkenu, the Lord our righteousness,
and in that Zach. 13. 7. Christ is called the Fathers fellow. The Lord Christ
is that Jehovah, to whom every knee must bow, as appears by comparing Isa. 45.
21, 22, 23, 24, 25. with Romans 14. 9, 10, 11, 12. and Phil. 2. 6, 9, 10, 11. I
might further insist upon this argument, and show that the title of Lord so
often given to Christ in the New Testament, does answer to the Title of Jehovah
in the Old Testament. And as some learned men conceive, the Apostles did
purposely use the Title of Lord, that they might not offend the Jews, with
frequent pronouncing of the word Jehovah. Thou shall fear Jehovah thy God:
Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Deuteronomy. 10. 20. is rendered by the Apostle, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God. And so Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Thou shall love Jehovah thy God, is rendered
Matthew. 22. 37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God. Thus you see that in several
precious Scriptures Jesus Christ is called Jehovah, and therefore we may very
safely and confidently conclude, that Jesus Christ is very God. God blessed for
ever. But

The second Name or Title which denotes the essence 2: The Hebrew Ehieh asher
Ehieh properly signifies I will be that I will be: The Septuagint renders it
(...). I am he that is, and in that Rev. 16. 5. God is called, he that is, and
that was, and that will be.
of God is Ehieh, I am that I am, or I will be, what I I will be. Exodus 3. 14.
It has the same root with Jehovah, and signifies that God is an eternal,
unchangeable being: some make this name to be Gods extraordinary name.
Damascene says this name contains all things in it, like a vast and infinite
Ocean without bounds. This Glorious name of God, I AM THAT I AM, implies these
six things. 1. Gods incomprehensibleness, as we use to say of any thing we
would not have others prye into, it is what it is; so God says here to Moses,
I AM WHAT I AM. 2. It implies Gods Immensity, that his being is without any
limits; Angels and men have their beings; but then they are bounded and limited
within such a compass, but God is an immense being, that cannot be included
within any bounds. 3. It implies that God is of himself, and has not a being
dependent upon any other: I am, that is, by and from, and of my self. 4. It
implies Gods eternal, and unchangeable being in himself: It implies God's
everlastingness; I am before any thing was, and shall for ever be: There never
was, nor shall be time wherein God could not say of himself, I am. 5. It
implies, That there is no succession of time with God. And 6. It implies that
he is a God, Every creature is temporary and mutable, no creature can say, Ero
qui ero, I will be that I will be.
that gives being to all things. In short, the reason why God names himself, I
AM THAT I Am, or will be that I will be, is because he is the being of beings;
subsisting by himself, as if he should say; I am my being, I am my essence; my
existence differs not from my essence, because I am that I am, and as I am,
so will I be to all eternity, the same yesterday, to day and for ever. There is
no shadow of chage, no variableness at all in me

Now this Glorious Name is given to Jesus Christ, Rev. 1. 8. I am Alpha and
Omega, the beginning In this verse you have a clear and pregnant proof of
Christ's Deity.
and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come,
the Almighty. This kind of speaking is taken from the Greek Alphabet, in which
Language John wrote this Book: A called Alpha by them, being their first
letter: and O which they call Omega the last. The sense is, I was before all
creatures, and shall abide for ever, though all creatures should perish, or I
am he, from whom all creatures had their beginning, and to whom they are
referred, as their uttermost end. Christ in calling of himself Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and the end; and that absolutely, does therein assume unto
himself absolute Perfection; Power, Dominion, Eternity and Divinity; which is,
and which was, and which is to come: Christ assumeth all those Epithetes here
to himself; by which John ver. 4. described God; and what wonder is it, if
Christ who is God does take to himself, what ever is due to God. The Almighty,
this is another Epithete proper to God, which Christ also takes to himself,
showing that he is the true, eternal and omnipotent God, in all things equal,
and coessential with the Father, and the Holy Ghost. This being the seventh
argument which John makes use of, to prove the Deity of Christ, is three times
repeated: He is the first and the last, which is, was, and is to come, and the
Almighty; and therefore he is without a peradventure, God eternal; for so
Jehovah says of himself, I the Lord the first and the last, I am he: I am the
first, and I am the last, Isa. 41. 4. cap 44. 6. Genesis 17. 1.
and besides me there is no God: I am God Almighty. But Christ does challenge
as due to himself, all these Divine Attributes; therefore he is Jehovah that
one, eternal and omnipotent God with the Father, and the Holy Ghost; O the
Stateliness and Majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ; what an excellent and stately
person is he? there being not a property attributed to God, but is agreeable to
Christ: Every word in this Rev. 1. 8. Is a proper Attribute of God. He is
infinite in Power, sovereign in Dominion, and not bounded as creatures are. And
that this is clearly spoken of Christ, is most evident, not See Rev. 21. 6. and
cap. 22. 13.
only from the scope (John being to set out Christ, from whom he had this
Revelation) but also from the eleventh and seventeenth verses following, where
he gives him the same Titles over again, or rather if you please, Christ
speaking of himself, takes and repeateth the same Titles: Heb. 13. 8. Jesus
Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever: Yesterday, that is the
time past, before his coming in the flesh: To day, while in the flesh: And for
ever, that is, after. The same aforetime, in time, and after time: Jesus Christ
the same, that is, unchangeable in his essence, promises and doctrine; Jesus
Christ was always the same, and is still the same, and will abide for ever the
same; as being one self same God and one self same Mediator, as well in the
Old, as in the New Testament, John 8. 58. Jesus said unto them, verily verily I
say unto you, before Abraham was, I am. Mich. 5. 1.
According to my Divine nature, which is from everlasting, before Abraham was,
I am: I who according to my humanity, am not above fifty years old, according
to my Divine Nature am eternal, and so before Abraham and all the creatures: I
have a being from all eternity, and so before Abraham was born; and therefore
as young as you take me me to be in respect of my age here: I may well have
seen and known Abraham, though he died above two thousand years since. But

The third name or Title, which denotes the Essence Elohim, which signifies the
persons in the Essence. It Is a name of the plural number expressing the Trinity
of persons in the unity of Essence: and therefore it is observed by the
learned, that the Holy Ghost begins the story of the Creation with this
plural name of God, joined with a Verb of the singular number; as Elohim Bara,
Dii oreavit, the mighty Gods, or all the Genesis 1. 1, 2.
three persons in the Godhead created. So Genesis 3. 22. And Jehovah Elohim said,
behold the man is become as one of us: it is a holy irrision of man's vain
affectation of the Deity. God upbraids our first parents for their vain
affectation of being like unto him, in that ironical expression, Behold, the
man is become as one of us, to know good and evil; meaning that by his sin he
was become most unlike him. This name Elohim, by which God expresses his
nature, denotes the power and strength of God; to show us that God is strong
and powerful, and that he can do great things for his people, and bring great
desolations and destructions upon his and his people's enemies. O Sirs, God is
too strong for his strongest enemies, and too powerful for all the powers of
Hell. Though Jacob Isa. 41. 10, 13, 14.
a worm in his own eyes, and in his enemies eyes, yet Jacob need never fear;
for Elohim, the strong and powerful God will stand by him, and help him.

Now this name is also attributed unto Christ, 45. Psalm. 6. Thy throne, O God,
is for ever and ever; the scepter of thy kingdom is a right scepter. Thy
throne, O God, Heb. (...) Gods, Thy throne, O Gods, Elohim; it fignifies the
Trinity of persons in the unity of Essence (as I have before noted) the Prophet
directs his speech, not to Solomon, but to Christ, as is most evident by the
clear and unquestionable Testimony of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 1. 8. But unto the
Son he says, thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a scepter of
righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom. Christ is called God not by an
excellency only, as the Angels Psalm. 8. 5. compared with Heb. 2. 6, 7, 8. Psalm.
82. 16.
are; nor by office and Title only, as Magistrates are called Gods; nor
catachrestically and Ironically as the Heathen Gods are called; nor a
diminutive God, inferior to the Father, as Arrius held, but God by nature
every way co-essential, coeternal, and coequal with the Father and the Holy
Ghost. Hold fast all truth, but above all, hold fast this glorious truth, that
Jesus Christ is God blessed for ever.

The Eourth name or Title which denotes the Essence of El Gibbor, The strong
and mighty God: God is not only strong in his own Essence, but he is also
strong in the defense of his people, and it is he that gives all 2 Chronicles. 16.
9.
strength and power to all other creatures: There are no men, no powers, that
are a match for the strong God.

Now this Title is also attributed to Christ, Isa. 9. 6. El Gibbor the strong
God, the mighty God. The word (...) signifying God, does also signify strong;
he is so strong that he is almighty, he is one to whom nothing is impossible.
Christ's name is God, for he is the same Essence with God the Father: this
Title, the mighty God, fitteth well to Christ, who has all the names of the
Deity given to him in Scripture: and who, by the strength and power of his
Godhead, did satisfy the justice of God, and pacify the wrath of God, and
make peace, and purchase pardon and eternal life for all his Elect.

The Fifth name or Title which denotes the Essence of El Shaddai, God
omnipotent, or all-sufficient; he wants nothing, but is infinitely blessed
with the infinite Genesis 17. 1.
perfection of his glorious being: by this name God makes himself known to be
self-sufficient, all-sufficient, absolutely perfect: certainly that man can
want nothing who has an all-sufficient God for his God; he that loses his all
for God, shall find all in an all-sufficient God. Mat. 19. ^9.
Esau had much, but Jacob had all, because he had the Genesis 33. 9. 11.
God of all: Habet omnia, qui habet habentem omnia: what are Riches, Honors,
Pleasures, Profits, Lands, Friends, Augustine, This name Shaddai belongs only
to the Godhead, and to no creature no not to the humanity of Christ.
yea millions of worlds to one Shaddai, God Almighty, God All-sufficient. This
glorious name Shaddai, was a noble bottom for Abraham to act his faith upon,
though in things above nature, or against it, etc. He that is El Shaddai is
perfectly able to defend his Servants from all evil, and to bless them with all
spiritual and temporal blessings, and to perform all his promises which concern
both this life and that which is to come.

Now this name, this Title Shaddai, is attributed to Christ, as you may clearly
see by comparing Genesis 35. 6, 9, 10, 11. and Genesis 32. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30. with Hosea, 12. 3, 4, 5. That Angel that appeared to Jacob See my Treatise
on Closet-Prayer, opening that, Genesis 3^. and that 12. H^s. page 48, 49, 50, 51.
where you have four Arguments to prove that Jesus Christ is the Angel, the man,
that is there spoken of etc.
was Christ, the Angel of the Covenant. Mark, you shall never find either God
the Father, or the Holy Ghost called an Angel in Scripture: nor was this a
created Angel, for then Jacob would never have made supplication to him: but he
was an uncreated Angel, even the Lord of Hosts, the almighty God who spoke with
Jacob in Bethel. He that in this divine story is said to be a man, was the Son
of God in humane shape, as is most evident by the whole narration. The Angel in
the Text is the same Angel that conducted the Israelites in the Wilderness, and
fought their battles for them, Exodus 3. 2. Act. 7. 30. 1. Cor. 10. 4, 5, 9.
even Jesus Christ who is styled once and again the Almighty, Rev. 1. 8. cap. 4.
8. In this last Scripture is acknowledged Christ's Holiness, Power and
Godhead. Ah Christians when will you once learn to set one Almighty Christ
against all the mighty ones of the world, that you may bear up bravely and
stoutly against their rage and wrath, and go on cheerfully and resolutely in
the way of your duty.

The sixth name or Title is Adonai my Lord. Though Adonai be given sometimes
analogically to creatures, yet properly it belongs to God above: this name is
often used in the old Testament, and in Mal. 1. 6. it is used in the plural
number to note the mystery of the holy Trinity; If I be Adonim Lords, where is
my fear: some derive the word Adonai from a word in the Hebrew that (...).
signifies judicare to judge, because God is the Judge of the world: others
derive it from a word which signifies Basis a foundation intimating that God is
the upholder of all things as the foundation of a house is the support of the
whole building,

Now this name is given to Christ, Dan. 9. 17. Cause thy face to shine upon thy
sanctuary that is desolate, for Adonai (the Lord Christ) sake. Daniel pleads
here no merits of their own, but the merits and mediation of the Messiah, whom
God has made both Lord and Christ. So A^^s 2. 36. Luke 1. 4^. cap. 2. 11, 12.
Heb. 1. 13.
Psalm. 110. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand until I
make thine Enemies thy footstool. Christ applies these words to himself as you
may see in that Mat. 22. 24. Jehovah said, that is, God the Father said, (...)
La-adoni; unto my Lord, that is, to Christ; sit thou at my right hand, sit thou
with me in my Throne, it notes the Math. 28. 13. John, 3. 35.
advancement of Christ, as he was both God and man in one person to the
supremest place of power and authority, of honor and heavenly glory: God's
right hand notes a place of equal power and authority with God, even that Ep^^.
1. 21. Heb. 1. 3. Luke 22. 69.
he should be advanced far above all principallity, and power, and might, and
dominion. Christ's reign over the whole world is sometimes called The right hand
of the Majesty, and sometimes the right hand of the power of God; until I make
thine enemies thy footstool. This implies, 1. That Jesus Christ has ever had,
and will have enemies, even to the end of the world. 2. Victory a perfect
Conquest over them; Conquerours used to make their enemies their footstool.
Those proud enemies of Christ, who now set up their Crests, face the heavens,
and strut it out against him, even those shall be brought under his feet. 3. It
implies ignominy, the lowest subjection, Sapores King of Persia overcoming the
Emperor Valerian in battle, used his back for a stirrup when he got upon his
horse: and so Tamberlane served Bajazet. 4. The footstool, is a piece of
State, and both raises and eases him that sits on the the Throne: so Christ
will both raise himself and ease himself by that vengeance that he will take on
his enemies, etc.

Now from th^se divine Names and Titles which are given to Jesus Christ, we may
thus argue, He to whom the incommunicable Titles of the most high God are
attributed, he is the most high God: but the incommunicable Titles of the most
high God are attributed unto Christ, ergo, he is the most high God. But,

Fourthly, Christ's eternal Deity, Coequality and Consubstantiality

First, with the Eternity of God, God is an eternal God. 1. Eternity is taken
three ways: 1 Pro^^^^, pre^^rly, so it n^teth to be without beginning and end,
so God only is eternal. 2. Improprie, imp^^perly, so it notes to have a
beginning but no ending; so Angels, so the souls of me^ are eternal. 3.
A^usive, so some things are said to be eternal which have had a beginning, and
shall also have an end; they are called eternal in respect of their long
continuance and duration: so ci^^^^^i^on, and other Mosaical ceremonies were
called eternal or everlasting.
From everlasting to everlasting thou art God, Psalm. 90. 2. The eternal God is
thy refuge, Deuteronomy. 33. 27. He inhabits eternity, Isa. 57. 15. He is called the
Ancient of days, Dan. 7. 9. And he is said to be everlasting, and to be King of
old Psalm. 74, 12. this shows he had no beginning. In respect of his eternity,
after time, he is called the everlasting God, Romans 16. 26. An everlasting King,
1 Timothy 1. 17. That there is no succession, or priority, or posteriority in God;
but that he is from everlasting to everlasting the same, we may see, Psalm. 102.
26, 27. The heavens shall perish, but thou shall endure; yea all of them shall
wax old like a garment, and as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall
be changed; but thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end: There is no
succession or variation in God, but he is eternally the same. Eternity is an
interminable being and duration before any time, and boyond all time, it is a
fixed duration without beginning or ending. The Eternity of God is beyond all
possible conception of measure or time; God ever was, ever is and ever shall
be. Though the manifestations of himself unto the Creatures are in time, yet
his Essence or being never did nor shall be bound up by time: look backward or
forward, God from eternity to eternity, is a most self-sufficient, infinite,
perfect, blessed being, the first cause of our being, and without any cause of
his own being; an eternal infinite fullness, and possession to himself, and of
himself: what Gid is, he was from Eternity; and what God is, he will be so to
eternity: O this glorious attribute drops mirth and mercy oil and honey.

Now this attribute of eternity is ascribed to Jesus Christ John, 1. 1. In the
beginning was the word, (was) notes some former duration, and therefore we
conclude that he was before the beginning, before any creation or creatures,
for it is said he was God in the beginning, and his divine nature whereby he
works is eternal, Heb. 9. 14. He is the first and last, Rev. 1. 17. hence it is
that he is called the firstborn of every creature, because he who created all,
and upholds all, has power to command and dispose of all as the first born had
power to command the family or kingdom, Colos. 1. 15, 16, 17. compare Isa. 44.
6. with Rev. 22. 13. Joh. 17. 5. (Father glorify thou me with thine own self,
with the glory I had with thee before the world was:) Such glory had the Lord
Christ with his father, viz. in the heavens, and that before the world was;
this he had not only in regard of Destination, being predestined to it by God
his father (as Grotius would evade it) but in regard of actual possession. (The
Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way (says Christ the son of God)
Prove. 8. 22. And as his father possessed him, so he John, 8. ^8. John 17. 24.
Rev. 1. 8. 17. Heb. 1. 10. 11. 12. cap. 7. 3. Isa. 9. 6. etc. Christ is without
beginning of days or end of time, and without all bounds of precession or
succession.
was possessed of the self-same glory, with his Father before the world was,
from Eternity. (His goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting, from
the days of Eternity, says the Prophet Micah, speaking of the Messiah, Mic. 5.
2. See the Eternity of Christ farther confirmed by the Scriptures in the
margent. But,

Secondly, As the Attribute of Eternity is ascribed to Christ, so the Attribute
of Omniscience is ascribed to 2. Chrysostom.
Christ; and this speaks out the Godhead of Christ, he knows all things John,
21. 17. Lord thou know all things, (...), all things present and future;
what I now am, and what I shall be, says one on the words, John, 2. 25. He
needed not that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in man. Shall
Artificers know the nature and properties of their works, and shall not Christ
know the hearts of men, which are the work of his own hands, Rev. 2. 23. And
all the churches shall know, that I am he which searches the reins and hearts.
Now of all a man's inwards, the heart and the reins are the most inward; Christ
is nearer to us than we are to our selves, the Greek word (...), that is here
rendered, searches, signifies to search with the greatest seriousness,
exactness, and diligence that can be, the word is metaphorically taken from
such as use to search in Mines Mat. 9. 24. and cap. 12. 25. Luke 5. 22. cap. 6.
18. Luke 11. 17. and cap. 24. 38. etc.
for Silver and Gold. He is also frequently said to know the thoughts of men,
and that before they bewrayed themselves by any outward expressions. Now this
is confessedly God's peculiar: God which knows the hearts, 15. 8. He is the
wisdom of the father, 1 Cor. 1. 24. He knows the father, and does, according to
his will, reveal the secrets of his father's bosom, the bosom is the seat of
love and secrecy, John, 1. 18. men admit those into their bosoms, with whom
they impart all their secrets, the breast is the place of Counsels: that is,
Christ reveals the secret and mysterious Counsels, and the tender and
compassionate affections of the father to the world; Being in the bosom
implies communication of secrets, the bosom is a place for them: it is a
speech of Tully to a friend that had betrusted him with a secret, creed mihi
etc. believe me, says he, what thou have committed to me, it is in my bosom
still, I am not ungirt to let it slip out. but Scripture adds this hint too,
where it speaks of the bosom as the place of secrets, Prove. 17. 23. A wicked
man takes a gift out of the bosom, to pervert the ways of judgment; speaking
of a bribe, Prove. 21. 14. A gift in secret pacifieth Anger, and a reward in the
bosom expiateth wrath. Here is secret and bosom all one, as gift and reward are
one. So Christ lies in the fathers bosom, this intimates his being conscious
to all the father's secrets, But,

Thirdly; as the Attribute of God's omniscience is asscribed Mat. 18. 20. where
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them,
and chap. 28. ult. I am with you always, even to the end of the world, he is not
contained in any place, who was before there Prove. 8. 22. J^h. 1. 1. 3.
was any place, and did create all places by his own power whilst Christ was on
earth in respect of his bodily presence, he was in the bosom of his father;
which must be understood J^^. 1. 18. 2. ^oh. 3. 13. 2. Psalm. 139. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11.
of his divine nature and person: he did come down from heaven, and yet
remained in heaven: Christ is universally present, he is present at all times
and all places, and among all persons he is repletively every where,
inclusively no where. Diana's Temple was burnt down when she was busy at
Alexander's birth, and could not be at two places together; but Christ is
present both in paradise and in the wilderness at the same time, ubi non Greg.
in Ez^. ^^ m. 8. Aug. m di^. c. 29. where two are sitting together, and
conferting about the Law, there is Sh^inah (the di^ine Majesty) among them;
Gr^ti^^ on Mat. 18. 20.
est per gratiam, adest per vindictam, where he is not by his gracious
influence, there he is by his vindictive power. Empedocles could say, that God
is a circle, whose center is every where, whose circumference is no where: the
poor blind heathens could say thar God is the soul of the world: and thus, as
the soul is tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, so is he, that his ^ye is
in every corner, etc. To which purpose they so portraied their Goddess Minerva,
that which way soever one cast his eye she always beheld him. But,

Fourthly, as the attribute of God's omnipresence is ascribed See Col^s. 1. 16,
17. Psalm. 102. 26. compared with Heb. 1. 8. 10. Joh. 1. 10.
Christ, All power is given unto me, in heaven and in earth, Mat- 28. 18. John,
5. 19. What things soever the father does, these also does the son; Phil. 3.
21. he is called by a metonymy the power of God; 1 Cor. 1. 24. He is the
almighty; Rev. 1. 8. He made all things; Joh. 1. 3. He upholds all things; Heb.
1. 3. He shall change our vile body (says the Apostle) that it may be like
unto his glorious body, according to the mighty working whereby he is able to
subdue all things to himself; Phil. 3. ult. Now from what has been said we may
thus argue, He to whom the incommunicable properties of the most high God are
attributed, he is the most high God; but the incommunicable properties of the
most high God, are attributed to Christ; ergo, Christ is the most high God. But;

Fifthly, Christ's eternal deity, coequality, and consubstantiality divine
works: The same works which are peculiar to God, are ascribed to Christ; such
proper and peculiar; such divine and supernatural works as none but God can
perform, Christ did perform. As 1. Election, the Elect are called his Elect,
Mat. 24. 31. Joh. 13. 18. I know whom I have chosen, Joh. 15. 16. I have chosen
you, and ordained you, that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your
fruit should remain: verse. 19. But I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you. 2. Redemption, 1 These. 1. ult. Gal. 3. 13. Romans
6. 14. cap. 8. 1. Luke 1. 68-80.
O Sirs, none but the great God could save us from wrath to come, none but God
blessed for ever could deliver us from the curse of the Law, the dominion of
sin, the damnatory power of sin, the rule of Satan, and the flames of hell: ah
friends, these enemies were too potent, strong, and mighty for any mere
creature, yea for all mere creatures to conquer and overcome; none but the most
high God could everlastingly secure us against such high enemies. 3. Remission
of sins, Mat. 9. 6. The son of man has power to forgive sins: Christ here
positively proves that he had power on earth to forgive sins, because
miraculously, by a word of his mouth, he causes the Palsey-man to walk, so that
he arose and departed to his house immediately; Christ he forgives sin
authoritatively, Preachers forgive only declaratively, as Nathan to David, the
Lord has put away thine iniquity. I 2 Samuel 12. 7. John 20. 23.
have read of a man that could remove mountains, but none but the man Christ
Jesus could ever remit sin: All the persons in the Trinity forgive sins, yet
not in the same manner; The Father bestows forgiveness, the Son merits
forgiveness, and the Holy Ghost seals up forgiveness, and applies forgiveness. 4.
The bestowing of eternal life, Joh. 10. 28. My sheep hear my voice, and I give
unto them eternal life: Christ is the Prince and principle of life, and Colos.
3. 3, 4, 2.
therefore all out of him are dead whilst they live; eternal life is too great
a gift for any to give but a God. 5. Creation, Joh. 1. 3. All things were made
by him, and verse. 10. The world was made by him, Colos. 1. 16. By him were all
things created, that are in heaven, and that are in the earth, visible and
invisible. Now the Apostle tells Just. Mart. quoteth two Greek verses out of
Py^hagoras to prove there is but one God, (...), etc. says Pythagoras: If any
will assume to himself and say, I am God except only one, let him lay such a
world as this is to stake, and say this world is mine; then I will believe him
not otherwise; Heb. 1. 2. (...), not propter quem as Gretius would evade the
Text) [For] whom he made the worlds; but pe^ quem, by whom; so the Apostle to
put it out of all doubt, puts them together, C^los. 1. 16. All things were
crea^ed by him and for him. (...).
you He that hu^^t all things is God; Christ built all things, ergo, Christ is
God. The Argument lies fair and undeniable. The all things that were created
by Christ Paul reduces to two heads, visible and invisible, but Zanchius
adds a third branch to this distinction, and makes it more plain by saying,
That all things that were made are either visible, or invisible, or mixed:
visible as the Stars, and Fouls, and Clouds of Heaven, the Fish in the Sea, and
Beasts upon the Earth: Invisible things, as the Angels; they also were made:
Then there is a third sort of creatures, which are of a mixed nature, partly
visible in regard of their bodies, and partly invisible in regard of their
souls, and those are Men; Ephesians. 2. 9. who created all things by Jesus Christ,
Heb. 1. 2. He has, in these last days spoken to us by his son, whom he has
appointed heir of all things; by whom also he made the worlds. This may seem
somewhat difficult because he speaks of worlds, whereas we acknowledge but
one; but this seeming difficulty, you may easily get over, if you please but to
consider the persons to whom he writes, which were Hebrews; whose custom it was
to style God, Rabboni, Dominus mundorum; the Lord of the worlds: They were wont
to speak of three worlds: The lower world, the higher world, and the middle
world: The lower world contains the Elements; Earth, and Water, and Air, and
Fire: The higher world that contains the Heaven of the blessed: And the
middle world that contains the starry Heaven. They now being acquainted with
this language, and the Apostle writing to them, he says that God by Christ
made the worlds, those worlds which they were wont to speak so frequently of.
And whereas one scruple might arise from that expression in the Ephesians, God
created all things [By] Jesus Christ; and this to the Hebrews, By whom he made
the worlds: As if Christ were only an instrument in the Creation, and not the
principal efficient: Therefore another place in this chapter will* clear it,
which speaks of Christ as the principal Efficient of all things, Heb. 1.
compare the 8th. and 10th. verses together; To the son he says, thy throne, O
God, is for ever and ever; then Christ is God: then, And thou Lord, verse. 10.
have laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy
hands: Namely thine, that is, the Son, which he spoke of before; Christ is the
principal Efficient of the Creation; and in this sense it is said by him were
all things made, not as by an instrument, but as by the chief Efficient. 6. The
preservation and sustentation of all things, Colos. 1. 17. by him all things
consist: They would soon fall asunder had not Christ undertaken to uphold the
shattered condition thereof, by the word of his power: All creatures that are
made are preserved by him in being, life, and motion; Heb. 1. 3. He upholdeth
all things by the word of his power. Both in respect of being, excellencies and
operations, sin had hurled confusion over the world; which would have fallen
about Adam's ears, had not Christ undertaken the shattered condition thereof,
to uphold it. He keeps the world together (says one) as the hoops do the
barrel: Christ bears up all things, continuing to the several creatures their
being, ordering and governing them, and this he does by the word of his power;
by this word he made the world; [He spoke, and it was done:] And by this word
he governs the world, by his own mighty word, the word of his power: both
these are divine actions; and being ascribed unto Christ, evidence him to be no
less than God. Now from what has been said, we may thus argue; He to whom those
actions are ascribed, which are proper to the most high God, he is the most
high God; but such actions or works are ascribed to Christ ergo, he is the most
high God. But,

Sixthly, Christ's eternal Deity may be demonstrated Gal. 4. 8. That religious
worship ought to be performed to none but to him that is God by nature; and
that they are ignorant of the true God, who religiously worship them that are
no Gods by nature; and therefore, This is a clear and full evidence that Jesus
Christ is, and must be more than (...), mere m^n, or yet a divine man; as
Doctor Lus^ing ^n styles him in Heb. 7. 22. verse.
if Christ were not God by nature, and consubstantial with the father, we ought
not to perform religious worship to him. Divine worship is due to the second
person of this coessential Trinity, to Jesus Christ our Lord and God. There is
but one immediate, formal, proper, adequate and fundamental reason of divine
worship or adorability (as the schools speak) and that is the sovereign,
supreme, singular, majesty, independent and infinite excellency of the eternal
Godhead; for by divine worship we do acknowledge and declare the infinite
majesty, truth, wisdom, goodness and glory of our blessed God: we do not esteem
any thing worthy of divine honor and worship, which has but a finite and
created glory; because divine honor is proper and peculiar to the only true
God, who will not give his glory to any other who is not God. God alone is the
adequate object of divine faith, hope, love, and worship, because these graces
are all exercised, and this worship performed in acknowledgment of his infinite
perfection. and independent excellency; and therefore no such worship can be
due to any creature, or thing below God. There is not one kind of divine honor
due to the father, and another to the son, nor one degree of honor due to the
father, and another to the son; for there can be no degrees imaginable in one
and the same excellency, which is single because infinite, and what is infinite
does excel and transcend all degrees and bounds. And if there be no degrees in
the ground and adequate reason of divine worship, there can be no reason or
ground of a difference of degrees in the worship it self: The father and the
son are one; one in power, excellency, nature; J^hn 10. 30.
one God, and therefore to be honored with the same worship: That all men
should honor the son even as John 5. 23.
they honor the father; every tongue must confess that Jesus Christ who is
man, is God also, and therefore equal P^il. 2. 6, 11, 12.
to his father; and it can be no robbery, no derogation to the father's honor
for us to give equal honor to him and his coequal son, who subsists in the
form of God, in the nature of God. Thus you see the divine nature, the infinite
excellency of Jesus Christ, is an undeniable ground of this coequal honor, and
therefore the worship due to Christ as God, the same God with his father, is
the very same worship, both for kind and degree, which is due to the father.
But for the further and clearer opening of this, consider,

First, that all inward worship is due to Christ; as, 1. Believing Jer. 17. 5.
v.
commands us to believe in him; John 14, 1. Ye believe in John 1. 12.
God, believe also in me, John 3. 16. For God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life; verse. 36. He that believes in the son, has everlasting
life, and he that believes not the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abides on him: John 6. 47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that
believes on me has everlasting life. The same respect that Christians give
unto God the father, they must also give unto the son, believing on him, which
is an honor due only to God; other creatures, men and Angels, may be believed,
but not believed on, rested on; this were to make them Gods, this were no less
than Idolatry.

Secondly, loving of Jesus Christ with all the heart, commanded above the love,
nay even to the hatred of father, mother, wife, children, yea and our own
lives; Luk 14. 26. He who is not disposed (where these loves are incompatible)
to hate father, and all other relations for the love of Christ, can be none of
his: I ought dearly and tenderly to love father and mother (the Law of God and
nature requiring it of me;) but to prefer dear Jesus, Phil. 3. 7, 8. Master
Brad. Acts and Mon. Fol. 1492.
who is God blessed for ever, before all, and above all; as Paul, and the
primitive Christians, and Martyrs have done before me; your house, home and
goods, your life, and all that ever you have (says that Martyr) God has given
you as love tokens, to admonish you of his love, to win your love to him again:
Now will he try your love, whether you set more by him, or by his tokens, etc.
when Relations or life stand in competition with Christ, and his Gospel, they
are to be abandoned, hated, etc. But,

Secondly, all outward worship is due to Christ; as,

First, Dedication in Baptism is in his name, Mat. 28. Baptizing them in the
name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost; (...), into the
name, by that right initiating them, and receiving of them into the profession
of the service of one God in three persons, and of depending on Christ alone
for salvation. Baptizing them into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, is the consecrating of them unto the sincere service of the
sacred Trinity.

Secondly, Divine invocation is given to Jesus Christ; 2. Ponder^ upon these
Scriptures, 2 Cor. 12. 8. 9. 1 These. 1. 1. 2 Th^s. 1. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 1. 2.
Acts 7. 59. Stephen calls upon the Lord Jesus to receive his spirit; 1 Cor. 1.
2. All that in every place, call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord; 1
These. 3. 11. God himself and our father and our Lord Jesus Christ direct our
way unto you; Ephe. 1. 2. Grace be to you, and peace from God our father, and
from our Lord Jesus Christ. It is the Saints Character, that they are such as
call on the Lord Jesus; Acts 2. 21. Acts 9. 14. But,

Thirdly, Praises are offered to our Lord Jesus Christ; Rev. 5. 9. And they
sung a new song, saying, Thou ar^ worthy to take the book, and to open the
seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood,
out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. verse. 11. And I
beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels This is taken out of Daniel, cap.
7. 10. whereby the glory and power of God and Christ is held forth, they being
attended with innumerable millions of Angels, which stood before the fiery
throne of God, etc.
round about the throne, and the beasts, and the elders; and the number of them
was, ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; verse. 12.
saying with a loud voice, worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power,
and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.
Verse. 13. And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under
the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I,
saying, blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sits
upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever, and ever. here you have a
Catholic confession of Christ's divine nature and power: All the creatures,
both reasonable and unreasonable, do in some sort set forth the praises of
Christ, because in some sort, they serve to illustrate, and set forth his
glory. Here you see that Christ is adored with religious worship by all
creatures, which does evidently prove that he is God; since all the creatures
worship him with religious worship, we may safely and boldly conclude upon his
Deity. Here are three parties that bear a part in this new song: 1. The
redeemed of the Lord, and they sing in the last part of the 8. verse, and in
the 9. and 10. verses. Then, 2. The Angels follow, verse 11. and 12. in the
third place all creatures are brought in joining in this new song, verse 13.
That noble company of the Church Triumphant and Church Militant, sounding out
the Praises of the Lamb, may sufficiently satisfy us concerning the divinity
of the Lamb. But,

Fourthly, Divine adoration is also given to him, Mat. 4. Mark 1. 40. Luke 5.
12. So that he touched Christ his feet as the word (...), signifies, not
kneeled, as the word is translated, Mark 1. 40. This Leper came to know Christ
was God, 1. by inspiration, 2. by the miracles which Christ did.
8. 2. A Leper worshipped him, Mark says he kneeled down, and Luke says he
fell upon his face: He showed reverence in his gesture; [Lord, if thou will
thou can make me clean.] He acknowledged a divine power in Christ, in that he
says, he could make him clean if he would. This poor Leper lay at Christ's
feet, imploring and beseeching him, as a dog at his master's feet, as Zanch de
Red. renders the word, which shows that this Leper looked upon Christ as more
than a Prophet, or a holy man; and that believing he was God, and so able to
heal him if he would, he gave him religious worship, he does not say to Christ,
Lord, if thou will pray to God, or to thy father for me, I shall be whole; but
Lord, if thou will, I shall be whole: He acknowledges the Leprosy curable by
Christ, which he and all men knew was incurable by others, which was a plain
argument of his faith; for though the Psora or scabbedness may be cured, yet
that which is called Lepra Physicians acknowledge incurable; for if a particular
Cancer cannot be cured, much less can an universal Cancer; as Avicen observes,
Mat. 2. 11. Though the wise men of the East, who saw Herod in all his Royalty
and Glory, worshipped not him, yet they fell down before Christ: No doubt, but
that by divine instinct they knew the divinity of Christ, hence they worshipped
him, not only with civil worship, as one born King of the Jews, but with divine
worship; which was, it is like, the outward gesture of reverence, and kneeling,
and falling down, for so the Greek words signify. Is it probable that they
would worship a young babe, that by reason of his infancy understands nothing,
except they did believe some divine thing to be in him? and therefore not the
Chrysostom.
childhood, but the divinity in the child was worshipped by them: certainly if
Christ had been no more than a natural child, they would never have undertaken
so long, so tedious, and so perilous a journey to have found him out:
principally considering (as some conceive) they themselves were little
inferior to the Kings of the Jews. It is uncertain what these wise men (who
were Gentiles) knew particularly concerning the mystery of the Messiah: but
certainly they knew that he was something more than a man, by the internal
Revelation of the spirit of God; who by faith, taught them to believe, that he
was a King though in a cottage; and a God, though in a cradle: and therefore as
unto a God, they fell down and worshipped him, etc. But,

Fifthly, when Jesus Christ was declared to the world, And let all the Angels
of God worship him; Heb. 6. The glorious Angels who refuse divine honor to be
given to themselves; see thou do it not, says the Angel to John, wen John fell
Rev. 19. 10. cap. 22. 9.
at his feet to worship him; I am thy fellow servant, etc. yet they give, and
must give divine honor unto Christ. Phil. 2. 9.
The Manhood of it self could not be thus adored (because it is a creature) but
as it is received into unity of person with the Deity, and has a partner
agency therewith, according to its measure in the work of Redemption and
Mediation. All the honor due to Christ according to his divine nature, was due
from all eternity; and there is no divine honor due to him from and by reason
of his humane nature; or any perfection which does truly and properly belong to
Christ as man. He who was born of Mary is to be adored with divine worship; but
not for that reason, because he was born of Mary, but because he is God; the
coessential and eternal Son of God. From what has been said, we may thus argue;
He to whom Religious worship is truly exhibited, is the most high God. But
religious worship is truly exhibited unto Christ Ergo, Christ is the most high
God. But,

Seventhly, Christ's Eternal Deity may be demonstrated 7. Never did any mere
creature challenge to himself the honor due to God, but miscarried and were
confounded; witness the Angels that God cast out of heaven; 2 Pet. 2. 4. And
Adam that he cast out of Paradise; ^^n. 3. 22, 23, 24. And Her^d, whom the
Angel smote with a fatal blow; Act. 12. 23. And those several Popes that we
rea^ of in Ecclesiastical stories: and therefore had Jesus Christ been but a
mere creature, divine justice wo^^d have confounded (...) for making himself a
God.
from Christ's oneness with the Father, and from that claim that Jesus Christ
does lay to all that belongs to the father as God. Now certainly if Jesus
Christ were not very God, he would never have laid claim to all that is the
father's, as God. The Ancients insist much upon that, Joh. 16. 15. All things
that the father has (as God) are mine: the father has an eternal Godhead,
and that is mine; the Father has infinite power and wisdom, and that is mine;
the father has infinite majesty and glory, and that is mine, the father has
infinite happiness and blessedness in himself, and that is mine, says Christ.
The words are very emphatical, having in them a double Universality. 1. All
things, there is one note of Universality. 2. Whatsoever, there is another note
of Universality: we, says Christ, there is nothing in the father (as God) but
is mine, All that the father has is mine; the father is God, and I am God; the
father is life, and I am life; for whatsoever the father has is mine; John 10.
30. I and my father are one; we are one eternal God, we are one in consent,
will, essence, nature, power, dominion, glory, etc. I and my father are one;
two persons, but one God; he speaks this as he is God, one in substance,
being and Deity, etc. As God, he says, I and my father are one; but secundum
formam servi, in respect of the form of a servant (his assumed humanity) he
says, John 14. 28. My father is greater than I, John 10. 37. If I do not the
works of my father, believe me not: verse. 38. But if I do, though ye believe
not me, believe the works, etc. The Argument of it self is plain; No man can of
himself, and by his own power, do divine works, unless he be truly God: I do
divine works by my own power, yea, I do the works of my father; not only the
like and equal, but the same with the father: Therefore I am truly God: neither
deserve I to be called a Blasphemer, because I said I was one with the father,
1 John 5. 7. And these three are one, one in nature and essence, one in power
and will, and one in the act of producing all such actions, as without
themselves any of them is said to perform. Look as three Lamps are lighted in
one chamber, albeit the Lamps be diverse, yet the lights cannot be severed: so
in the Godhead, as there is a distinction of persons, so a simplicity of
nature. From the Scriptures last cited we may safely and confidently conclude
that Christ has the same divine nature and Godhead with the father; they both
have the same divine and essential Titles and Attributes, and perform the same
inward operations in reference to all creatures whatsoever. To make it yet more
plain, compare John 17. 10. with John 16. 15. All things that the father has
are mine, John 16. 15. Father all mine are thine, and thine are mine, John 17.
10. That is, whatsoever does belong to the father as God, does belong to
Christ; for we speak not of personal but Essential Properties: Christ does lay
claim to all that is natural, to all that belongs to the father as God; not to
any thing which belongs to him as the father, as the first person of the
blessed Trinity. All things that the father has are mine:] This he speaks
John 1. 16. v.
in the person of the Mediator: because of his fullness we all receive grace for
grace; and herein shows the unity of Essence in the holy Trinity, and
community of Power, Wisdom, Sanctity, Truth, Eternity, Glory, Majesty: such is
the strict union of the persons of the blessed Trinity, that there is among
them a perfect communion in all things, for all things that the father has are
mine, And let thus much suffice for the proof of the Godhead of Christ.

Concerning the Manhood of Christ, let me say, that as he is very God, so he is
very man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. The man Christ Jesus; Christ is true man, but not mere
man; verus, sed non merus. The word is not to be taken exclusively as denying
the Divine Nature, Christ is (...), both God and man, sometimes denominated
from the one nature, and sometimes from the other, sometimes called God, and
sometimes man; yet so as he is truly both, and in that respect fitly said to be
a Mediator betwixt God and men, having an interest in, and participating of
both natures. This Title, THE SON OF MAN, is given to Christ in the New
Testament four score and eight times: The design being not only to express a
man according to the Syrian Dialect then used, (...), Bar Nosho: nor only to
express Christ's Humanity, who was truly man, in all things like unto us, sin
only excepted, nor only to intimate his humility, by calling himself so often
by this humble name; but also to tell us to what a high honor God has raised
our nature in him and to confute their Imaginations who denied him to be very
Man, Flesh, Blood, and Bones, as we truly are: and who held, that whatever he
was, and whatever he did, and whatever he suffered, was only seeming, and in
appearance; and not real and to lead us to that original promise (the first
that was made to Mankind) The seed of the woman shall bruise Genesis 3. 15.
the serpent's head, that so he might intimate (says Epiphanius) that himself
was the party meant, intended, and foretold of by all the Prophets, who was to
come into the world, to all nations in the world. Jews and Gentiles originally
a like descended of the woman, who both had a like interest in the woman and
her seed, though the Romans 3. 1, 2.
Jews did and might challenge greater propriety in the seed of Abraham than the
Gentiles could: but they having been a long time as it were God's Favorites, a
selected People, a chosen Nation, did wholly appropriate Exodus 19 6. 1 Pet. 2.
9.
the Messiah to themselves, and would endure no copartners; nor that any
should have any right, title or interest in him but themselves; and therefore
they would never talk otherwise than of the Messiah, the King of Israel, the
son of David, never naming him once the light of the Isa. 42. 6. Isai. 3. 6.
Isai 63. 5. Genesis 3. 15. Luke 3. 23. to the end.
Gentiles, the expectation of the Gentiles, the hope and desire of the eternal
hills, the hope of all the ends of the earth, the seed of the woman, the son of
man, as descending from Eve, extracted from Adam, and allied unto all Mankind.
And it is observable that the Evangelist Luke, at the story of Christ's Baptism
when he was to be installed into his Ministry, and had that glorious testimony
from Heaven, deriveth his Pedigree up to the first Adam, the better to draw all
men's eyes to that first promise concerning the seed of the woman: and to cause
them to own him for that seed there promised, and for that effect that is there
mentioned of dissolving the works of Satan. And as that Evangelist gives that
hint, when he is now entering this quarrel with Satan, even in the entrance of
his Ministry: so does he very frequently and commonly by this very Phrase, give
the same intimation for the same purpose: no sooner had Nathaniel proclaimed
him the son of God, John 1. 49. Nathaniel answered and said unto him, Rabbi,
thou art the son of God, thou art the king of Israel; but he instantly titles
himself THE SON OF MAN, verse. 51. not only to show his humanity (for that
Nathaniel was assured of by the words of Philip who calls him Jesus of Nazareth
the son of Joseph, verse. 45.) but also to draw the thoughts of the hearers to
the first promise, and to work them to look for a full recovery of all that by
the second Adam, which was lost in the first: Though the gates of Heaven were
shut against the first Adam by reason of his fall, yet were they open to the
second Adam, verse. 51. And he says unto him, verily, verily, I say unto you,
(This double Asseveration, verily, verily, puts the matter beyond all doubt and
controversy) hereafter you shall see heaven open, and the angels of God
ascending and descending upon the son of man: the Jacob's He alludes to Jacob's
Ladder. Gen 28. 12. v.
Ladder, the Bridge that joyneth Heaven and Earth together, as Gregory has it.
This 51. verse. does greatly illustrate Christ's glory, and farther confirm
believers says, that Christ is Lord of Angels even in his state of
humiliation, and has them ready at his call, as he or his people shall need
their service, to move from earth to heaven, and from heaven to earth. This
Title THE SON OF MAN shows that the Son of God, was also the son of man, and
that he delighted to be so, and therefore does so often take this Title to
himself, THE SON OF MAN.

Now concerning the Manhood of Christ. the Prophet plainly speaks, Isa. 9. 6.
Unto us a child is born, and unto us a son was given; Parvulus a child, that
notes his humanity; Filius a son, that notes his Deity: parvulus a child even
man of the substance of his mother, born in the Mat. 1. 25.
world; filius a son, even God of the substance of his father, begotten before
the world: Parvulus a child, behold Prove. 8. 22. to the end. Luke 2. 7.
his humility, she brought forth her first born Son, and wrapped him in
swadling-cloaths, and laid him in a manger: Filius a son, behold his dignity,
when he brings in his first begotten son into the world, he says, and let
all the Angels of God worship him; to prove that he was Heb. 1. 6. v.
man, it is enough to say, that he was born, he lived, he died. God became man
by a wonderful, unspeakable and unconceivable union. Behold God is offended by
man's affecting and coveting his wisdom and his glory (for that was the Devil's
temptation to our first parents, ye shall Genesis 3. 5.
be as Gods) and man is redeemed by God's assuming and taking his frailty, and
his infirmity: man would be as God, and so offended him; and therefore God
becomes man, and so redeemeth him. Christ, as man, came of Acts 17. 31. Isa. 7.
14.
the race of Kings: As man, he shall judge the world, As man, he was wonderfully
born of a Virgin; called therefore Mat. 1. 23.
by a peculiar name, Shiloh, which signifies a secundine, or afterbirth, Genesis
49. 19. The word comes of (...), which signifies tranquillum esse, intimating
that Christ is he who has brought us peace and tranquillity, and that he might
be our peacemaker, it was necessary that he should be Shiloh, born of the
sanctified seed of a woman without the seed of man. The Apostle expounds the
name where Gal. 4. 4.
he says of Christ that he was made of a woman, not of a man and woman both,
but of a woman alone without a man. Christ as man was foretold of by the
Prophets, and by sundry Types, Christ as man was attended upon at his birth by
holy Angels, and a peculiar star was created Luke 2. 13, 14. Mat. 2. 1, 2.
for him: Christ as man was our sacrifice and expiation he was our (...), a
counterprice, such as we could never have paid, but must have remained, and
even rotted in the prison of hell for ever. Christ as man, was Man. 1. 18. Act.
1. 9, 10. C^l. 11. 3. 1.
conceived of the holy Ghost: Christ as man is ascended into heaven: Christ as
man sits at the right hand of God. Now what do all these things import, but
that Jesus Christ is a very precious, and most excellent person, and that even
according to his manhood. Christ had the true properties, affections, and
actions of man: He was conceived, born, circumcised, he did hunger, thirst, he
was clothed, he did eat, drink, sleep, hear, see, touch, speak, sigh, groan,
weep, and grow in wisdom and stature, etc. as all the four Evangelists do
abundantly testify. But because this is a point of grand importance
(especially in these days, wherein there are risen up so many deceivers in the
midst of us) it may not be amiss to consider of these following particulars.

First, of those special Scriptures that speak out the John 1. 14. And the word
was made flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16. without controversy great is the Mystery of
godliness, God manifested in the flesh, Christ is one and the same, begotten of
the father without time, the son of God without mother: and born of the Virgin
in time, the son of man without father: the natural and consubstantial son of
both; and Oh what a great mystery is this, Heb. 2, 14. 16. For as much then as
the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took
part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is, the devil: For verily he took not on him the nature of angels:
but he took on him the seed of Abraham: according to the Greek (...), He
assumed, caught, laid hold on, as the Angels did on Lot, Genesis 19. 16. Man. 14.
31.
or as Christ did on Peter, or as men use to do upon a thing they are glad they
have got, and are loath to let go again: Oh Sirs! this is a main pillar of our
comfort that Christ took our flesh, for if he had not taken our flesh, we could
never have been saved by him, Romans 1. 3. Concerning his son Jesus Christ our
Lord, who was made of the seed of David according to the flesh: Romans 9. 5.
Whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is
over ^ll God blessed for ever, Amen. This is a greater honor to all mankind,
than if the greatest King in the world should marry into some poor family of
his Subjects: Christ says my flesh is meat indeed, and I say his flesh was
flesh indeed; as true, real, proper, very flesh as that which any of us carry
about with us, Col. 1. 22. In the body of his flesh through death; Heb. 10. 5.
wherefore when he comes into the world he says, sacrifice and offering thou
would (...), but a body have thou prepared we. (...), It Is a Metaphor taken
from Mechanics, who do artificially fit one part of their work to another, and
so finish the whole; God fitted his Son's body to be joined with the Deity, and
to be an expiatory sacrifice for sin, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our
sins in his own body on the tree, etc. The word (...) himself has a great
Emphasis, and therefore that Evangelical Prophet Isaiah mentions it no less
than five times in that, Isa. 53. v. 4, 5, 7, 11, 12. Christ had none to help
or uphold him under the heavy burden Isa. 63. 3. v.
of our sins and his father's wrath. It is most certain, that in the work of
man's Redemption Christ had no coadjutor: He who did bear our sins (that is,
the punishments that were due to our sins) in his own body on the Tree; he did
assume flesh cast into the very mould and form of our bodies, having the same
several parts, members, lineaments, the same proportion which they have.
Christ's body was no spectrum or phantasm, no putative body (as if it had no
being but what was in appearance and from imagination, as the Marcionites,
Maniche^s, and other heretics of old affirmed, and as some men of corrupt
minds do assert in our days) but as real, as solid a body, as ever any was: And
therefore the Apostle calls it a body of flesh, a body to show the Organization
of it, and a C^los. 1. 22.
body of flesh to show the reality of it, in opposition to all aerial and
imaginary bodies; Christ's body had all the essential properties of a true
body; such as are organicalness, extension, local presence, confinement,
circumscription, penetrability, visibility, palpability, etc. as all the
Evangelists do abundantly witness: take a few instances for all, Luke 24, 39.
Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self, handle me and see, for a
spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have: Christ here admits of the
testimony of their own senses to assure them, that it was no vision, or spirit,
but a true and real body risen from the dead which they now saw: certainly
whatever is essential to a true glorified body, that is yet in Christ's body.
Those stamps of dishonor that the Jews had set upon Christ by wicked hands,
those he retained after his resurrection, partly for the confirmation of his
Apostles, and partly to work us to a willingness and resoluteness to suffer for
him when we are called to it, 1 John 1. 1. That which was from the beginning,
which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked
upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life. He alludes to the Sermons
which he and the other Apostles heard from Christ's own mouth, and also to the
glorious testimony which the father gave once and again from heaven to Christ;
he alludes also to the miracles that were wrought by Christ, and to that sight
that they had of his glory in the Mount, M^t. 17. A^^s 1.
and to his Resurrection and visible ascension into the highest heaven: he
alludes to the familiar conversation which the Apostles had with Christ for
about three years, and also to that touching, when after the Resurrection,
Christ offered himself to the Apostles that believed not in him to touch him.
The truth of these things were confirmed Luke 24.
to them by three senses; hearing, seeing, handling, the latter still surer
than the former; and this proves Christ to be true man, as his being from the
beginning, sets out his Deity. Christ had also those natural affections,
passions, infirmities which are proper to a body, as hunger, Mat. 4. 2. When he
had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an hungerd. All
Christ's Actions are for our instruction, not all for our imitation, Matthew
expressly makes mention of nights, lest it should be thought to be such a fast
as that of the Jews, who fasted in the day, and did eat at the evening, and in
the Chemnit.
night. He would not extend his fast above the term of Moses and Elias, lest he
should have seemed to have appeared only, and not to have been a true man; he
was hungry, not because his fasting wrought upon him, but Hilar.
because God le^t man to his own nature, It seems Christ felt no hunger till
the forty days and forty nights were expired, but was kept by the power of the
Deity, as the three children (or rather Champions) from feeling the heat of
Dan. 3. 27.
the fire: Christ fasted forty days and forty nights, and not longer, lest he
might be thought not to have a true humane body, for Moses and Elias had fasted
thus long before, but never did any man fast longer. When Christ began to be
hungry the tempter came to him, not when he was fasting; the Devil is cunning,
and will take all the advantage he can upon us: during the forty days and forty
nights, the Devil stood doubtful, and durst not assault the Lord Jesus, partly
because of that voice he heard from heaven, This is my beloved son, in whom I
am well Mat. 3. 17.
pleased, and partly because his forty days and forty nights fast did portend
some great thing; but now, seeing Christ to be hungry, he impudently assaults
him. Christ was not hungry all the forty days, but after he was hungry to show
he was man. Some think that Christ by his hunger did objectively allure Satan
to tempt him, that so he might overcome him, as soldiers sometimes feign a
running away, that they may the better allure their enemies closely to pursue
them, that so they may cut them off, either by an Ambush, or by an orderly
facing about: so the Devil tempted Christ as man, not knowing him to be God; or
if he did know him to be God, Christ did as it were encourage his cowardly
enemy that durst not set upon him as God, showing himself to be man. And as
Christ was hungry, so Christ was thirsty, John 4. 7. There came a woman of
Samaria to draw water: Jesus says unto her, give me to drink; here you see
that he that is rich 2 Cor. S. 9. Psalm 104. 27. v.
and Lord of all became poor for us, that he might make us rich; and he that
gives to all the creatures their meat in due season, he begs water of a poor
Tankerd-bearer to refresh himself in his weariness and thirst: John 19. 28.
Jesus says I thirst, bleeding breeds thirsting: sleeping, Mat. 8. 24. he was
asleep, to show the truth of the humane nature, and the weakness of his
Disciples faith, Christ was in a fast and dead sleep (for so much the Greek
word (...), signifies) his senses were well and fast bound, as if he had no
operation of life, and therefore the Disciples are said to raise him, as it
were from the dead. The same Greek word is used in many places where mention is
made of the Resurrection, as you may see by comparing John 2. 19. Mat 27. 52. 1
Cor. 15. 12.
the Scriptures in the margent together. He was asleep, 1. By reason of his
labor in preaching and journey he slept; 2. To show forth the truth of his
humane nature: some think the Devil stirred up the storm, hoping thereby to
drown Christ and his Disciples, as he had destroyed Job 1. 18, 19.
Job's children in a Tempest before: but though Satan had malice and will
enough to do it, yet he had not power; yea, though Christ slept in his humane
nature, yet was he awake in his Deity; that the Disciples being in danger might
cry unto him more fervently, and be saved more remarkably. And as Jesus slept,
so he was also weary; John 4. 6. Now Jacob's well was there; Jesus therefore
being wearied with his journey, sat thus on the well: and it was about the
sixth hour, about noon: in the heat of the day Christ was weary, Christ took on
him not only our nature, but the common infirmities thereof, and he is to be as
seriously eyed in his humanity, as in the glory of his Godhead; therefore it is
recorded, that he was weary with his journey ere half the day was spent; and
that through weariness he sat thus on the well; that is, even as the seat
offered, or as weary men use to sit, etc. But in a word, he was conceived,
retained so long in the Virgins womb, born, circumcised, lived about thirty
years on earth, conversed all that time with men, suffered, died, and was
crucified, buried, rose again, ascended, and sat down with his body at the
right hand of God, and with it will come again to judge the world. Now what do
all these things speak out, but that Christ has a true body, and who in their
wits will assert, that all this could be done in, and upon, and by an imaginary
body. But,

Secondly, The several denominations that are given son of the virgin, Isa. 7.
14. 2. Her first born son, Luke 2. 7. 3. The branch, Zach. 3. 8. and 6. 12. 4.
The branch of righteousness, Jer, 33. 15. and 23. 5. 5. A rod out of the stem
of Jesse, and a branch out of his roots, Isa. 11. 1. 6. The seed of the woman,
Genesis 3. 15. 7. The seed of Abraham, Genesis 22. 18. 8. The fruit of David's loins,
Psalm. 80. 36. and 132. 11. Act. 2. 30. 9. Of the seed of David according to the
flesh, Romans 1. 3. 2 Samuel 7. 2. 10. The Lion of the tribe of Judah, Rev. 5. 5.
11. The seed of Jacob, Genesis 28. 14. 12. The seed of Isaac, Genesis 26. 4. 13. A
son born to us, a child given to us, Isa. 9. 6. 14. The son of man, Mat. 8. 20.
Mat. 16. 13. Rev. 1. 13. Dan. 7. 13. Joh. 3. 13. 15. He Is called the man Christ
Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. 1 Cor. 15. 21. Since by man came death, by man came also
the resurrection of the dead: God's justice would be satisfied, in the same
nature that had sinned. 16. God's son made of a woman, Gal. 4. 4. 17, Man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. The man Christ Jesus. 18. The son of David, Mat. 1. 1. Mar. 12. 35.
How say the Scribes, that Christ is the son of David? In that the Scribes and
Pharisees knew and acknowledged, according to the Scripture that Christ should
be the son of David; that is, should be born, and descend of the stock and
posterity of David according to the flesh. Hence we may easily gather the truth
of Christ's humane nature, that he was ordained of God to be true man as well
as God, in one and the same person; for else he could not be the son of David.
Now, that he must be the son of David, even the Scribes and the Pharisees knew
and acknowledged, as we see here; and this was a truth which they had learned
out of the Scriptures; and not only they, but even the common sort of Jews in
our Savior's time, John 7. 42. some of the common people spoke thus, Has not
the scripture said that Christ comes of the seed of David? and the Messiah was
then commonly called the son Romans 1. 3.
of David: so then Christ being of the seed of David after the flesh, he must
needs be true man, as well as God; for which cause he was incarnate in the due
time appointed of God; that is to say, he being the son of God from
everlasting, did in time become man; taking our nature upon him, together with
the infirmities of our nature, sin only excepted, John 1. 14. Now thus you see
that the 18 denominations that are given to Christ in the blessed Scriptures do
abundantly demonstrate the certainty of Christ's humane nature. But,

Thirdly, Christ took the whole humane nature, he

First, Christ had a true humane and reasonable soul, the greatest influence
into his being and essence, if therefore Jesus Christ had only a humane body
without a humane soul, he had wanted that part which is most essential to man,
and so he could not have been looked upon as true and perfect man. O Sirs,
Christ redeemed and saved nothing but what he assumed; the redemption and
salvation reach no farther than the assumption, our soul then would have been
never the better for Christ, had he not taken that as well as our body: Hence
said Augustine, Aug de civ. Dei. lib. 10. c. 27. p. 586
Therefore he took the whole man without sin, that he might heal the whole; of
which man consists, of the plague of sin. And Fulgentius to the same purpose,
As Fulgent ad Thrasymund. lib. 1. p. 251.
the Devil smote by deceiving the whole man, so God saves by assuming the whole
man: If he will save the whole man from sin, he will assume the whole man
without sin, says Nazianzen. The Scriptures do clearly evidence that Christ
had a real humane soul, Mat. 26. 38. My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto
death; every word is emphatical; my soul, his sorrows pierced his soul, Psalm.
22. 16.
and sorrowful round about, even to death, (...), that is, heavy round about:
Look as the soul was the first Agent in transgression, so it is here the first
Patient in affliction; to death, that is, this sorrow will never be finished or
intermitted but by death: My soul is exceeding sorrowful, then Christ had a
true humane soul, neither was his Deity to him for a soul, as of old, men of
corrupt minds have fancied; for then our bodies only had been redeemed by him,
and not our souls, if he had not suffered in soul as well as in body. The
sufferings of his body were but the body of his sufferings, the soul of his
sufferings were the sufferings of his soul, which was now beset with sorrows,
and heavy as heart could hold, John 12. 27. Now is my soul troubled, and what
shall I say, The Greek word signifies a vehement commotion and perturbation, as
Herod's mind was troubled when he Mat. 2. 3.
heard that a new King was born, or as the Disciples were Mat. 14. 26.
troubled when they thought they saw a spirit walking on the sea, and cried out
for fear; or as Zachary was troubled Luke 1. 12.
at the sudden sight of the Angel. The rise and cause of Christ's soul-trouble
was this, the Godhead hiding it self from the humanitie's sense; and the father
letting out, not only an apprehension of his sufferings to come, but a present
taste of the horror of his wrath, due to man for sin; he is amazed,
overwhelmed, and perplexed with it in his humanity; and no wonder since he had
the sins of all the Elect laid upon him by imputation, to suffer for. And so
this wrath is not let out against his person, but against their sins which were
laid on him. Now though Christ was here troubled or jumbled and puzzled, as the
word imports; yet we are not to conceive that there was any sin in this
exercise of his, for he was like clean water in a clean vessel, which being
never so often stirred and shaken, yet still keeps clean and clear: neither are
we to think it strange, that the son of God should be put to such perplexities
in this trouble, as not to know what to say; for considering him as man,
encompassed with our sinless infirmities; and that this heavy weight of wrath
did light upon him on a sudden, it is no wonder that it did confound all his
thoughts as man, O Sirs, look that as sin has infected both the souls and
bodies of the Elect, and chiefly their souls, where it has its chief seat; so
Christ to expiate this sin, did suffer unspeakable sorrows and trouble in his
soul as well as torture in his body; for my soul is troubled, says he. Though
some sufferings of the body be very exquisite and painful, and Christ's in
particular were such; yet sad trouble of mind is far more grievous than any
bodily distress, as Christ also found, who silently bare all his outward
troubles, but yet could not but cry out of his inward trouble, Now is my soul
troubled, Isa. 53. 10. Thou shall make his soul an offering for sin; when
Christ suffered for us our sins were laid upon Isa. 53. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
him, verse. 5. 6. as by the Law of sacrificing of old, the sinner was to lay
his hands upon the head of the beast Levit. 8. 14. 18. 22. v.
confessing his sins, and then the beast was slain, and offered for expiation;
thus having the man's sins as it were taken and put upon it, and hereby the
sinner is made righteous: The sinner could never be pardoned, nor the guilt of
sin removed, but by Christ's making his soul an offering for sin; what did
Christ in special recommend to God, when he was breathing out his last gasp but
his soul? Luke 23. 46. When Jesus had cried out with a loud voice he said,
father, into thy hands I commend my spirit; and having said thus he gave up the
Ghost; that is, to thy safe custody, and blessed tuition I commend my soul, as
a special treasure or Jewel most charily and tenderly to be preserved and kept,
Luke 2. 52. He increased in wisdom and stature, here is stature for his body,
and wisdom for his soul; his growth in that speaks the truth of the former, and
his growth in this the truth of the latter: his body properly could not grow in
wisdom, nor his soul in stature, therefore he must have both. There are two
essential parts which make up one of his natures, his Manhood, viz. soul and
body, but both of these two of old have been denied. Marcion divests Christ of
a body, and Apollinaris of a soul; and the Arrians held that Christ had no
soul, but that the Deity was to him instead of a soul, and supplied the office
thereof, that what the soul is to us, and does in our bodies, all that the
divine nature was to Christ, and did in his body: and are there not some among
us, that make a great noise about a light in them that dash upon the same rock?
but the choice Scriptures last cited, may serve sufficiently to confute all
such brainsick men. But,

Secondly, as Christ had a true humane and reasonable Heb. 2. 14. He also took
part of the same, that is, of flesh and blood, Christ had in him the blood of a
man, shedding of blood there must be, for without it Heb. 9. 22.
there is no remission of sin; the blood of bruit creatures Heb. 10. 4, 5, 10.
v.
could not wash away the blots of reasonable creatures; wherefore Christ took
our nature, that he might have our blood to shed for our sins. There is an
Emphasis put upon Christ as man, in the great business of man's salvation, The
Man Christ Jesus; the remedy carrying in it a suitable 1 Timothy 2. 5.
ness to the Malady, the sufferings of a man to expiate the sin of man. 2. He
had bones as well as flesh, Luke 24. 39. A spirit has not flesh and bones, as
ye see me have. 3. Christ had in him the bowels of a man, Phil. 2. 8. which
bowels he fully expressed when he was on earth, Mat. 12. 18, 19, 20. nay he
retains those bowels now he is in heaven, in glory he has a fellow feeling
of his people's miseries, Acts 9. 4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, see
Mat. 25. 35. to the end of that chapter; though Christ in his glorified state
be freed from that state of frailty, passibility, Mortality, yet he still
retains his wonted pity. 4. He had in him the familiarity of a man, how
familiarly did Christ converse with all sorts of persons in this world, all the
Evangelists do sufficiently testify. Man is a sociable and familiar creature;
Christ became man Heb. 2. 17.
that he might be a merciful High Priest: Not that his becoming man made him
more merciful, as though the mercies of a man were more than the mercies of
God, but because by this means mercy is conveyed more suitably and familiarly
to man. But,

Fourthly, and lastly, our Lord Jesus Christ took our Jam. 5. 7. Psalm. 77. 10.
the best of men are but men at the best; witness Abraham's unbelief, David's
security, Job's cursing, Genesis 20. 2. Psalm. 30. 6. 7. Job 3. Jen. 4.
Jonas his passion, Thomas his unbelief, Peter's lying, etc. Now these
infirmities Jesus Christ took not upon him; for though he was made like unto us
in all things, yet without sin, Heb. 4. 15. 2. There are personal infirmities,
which from some particular causes befall this or that person; as Leprosy,
blindness, dumbness, Palsy, Dropsy, Epilepsie, Stone, Gout, Sickness; Christ
was never sick, sickness arises from the unfit or unequal temperature of the
humors, or from intemperance of labor, study, etc. but none of these were in
Christ, he had no sin, and therefore no sickness; Christ took not the passions
or infirmities which were proper to this or that man. 3. There are natural
infirmities which belong to all Mankind since the fall; as hunger, thirst,
wearisomness; sorrowfulness, sweating, bleeding, wounds, death, burial; now
these natural infirmities that are common to the whole nature; these Jesus
Christ took upon him, as all the Evangelists do abundantly testify: our dear
Lord Jesus he lay so many weeks and months in the Virgin's womb, he received
nourishment and growth in the ordinary way, he was brought forth and bred up
just as common infants are, he had his life sustained by common food as ours
is; he was poor, afflicted, reproached, persecuted, tempted, deserted, falsely
accused, etc. he lived an afflicted life, and died an accursed death; his whole
life from the cradle to the cross was made up of nothing but sorrows and
sufferings; and thus you see that Jesus Christ did put himself under those
infirmities which properly belong to the common nature of man, though he did
not take upon him the particular infirmities of individuums. Now what do all
these things speak out, but the certainty and reality of Christ's Manhood.

Que. But why must Christ partake of both natures, was it absolutely necessary
that he should so do; An. Yea, it was absolutely necessary that Christ should
partake of both natures; and that both in respect of God, and in respect of us:
First in respect of us; and that,

First, because man had sinned, and therefore man must 1. 1 Cor. 15. 21.
be punished; by man came death, therefore by man must come the resurrection of
the dead; man was the offender, therefore man must be the satisfier; man had
been the sinner, and therefore man must be the sufferer: it is but justice to
punish sin in that nature, in which it had been committed: by man we fell from
God, and by man we must be brought back to God; by the first Adam we were
ruined, by the second Adam we must be repaired. The Romans 5. 12.
humane nature was to be redeemed, therefore it was necessary that the humane
nature should be assumed: The Law was given to man, and the Law was broken by
man, and therefore it was necessary that the Law should be fulfilled by man.
But,

Secondly, that by this means the justice of God might

Secondly, there are reasons both in respect of God, and

First, that he might be a meet Mediator between God (If a man sin against the
Lord who shall entreat for him, says Eli to his sons, 1 Samuel 2. 25.) And that
he might deal for God with man, he must be man: He must be God that he may be
fit to transact, treat, and negotiate with God; and he must be man, that he may
be fit, to transact, treat, and negotiate with man: when God spoke unto Israel
at Mount Sinai at the giving of the Law, the people were not able to abide that
voice or presence, and therefore they desired an Internuncius, a man like
themselves, who might be as a Mediator to go betwixt God and them, Exodus 20.
18, 19. Now upon his very ground Exodus 20. 18.
besides many others that might be mentioned, it was very requisite that Jesus
Christ should be both God and man, Heb. 12. 18.
that he might be a meet Mediator to deal betwixt God and man. Jesus Christ was
the fittest person either in that upper or in this lower world to mediate
between God and us. There was none fit to umpeire the business between God and
man but he that was God-man: Job hit the nail when he said, Neither is there
any days-man betwixt Job. 9. 33.
us that might lay his hand upon us both: There was a double use of the
days-man, and his laying his hand upon them; 1. To keep the dissening parties
asunder, lest they should fall out, and strike one another: 2. To keep them
together, and compose all differences, that they might not depart from each
other; the Application is easy, man is not fit to mediate, because man is the
person offending; Angels are not fit to mediate, for they cannot satisfy
divine Justice, nor pacify divine wrath, nor procure our pardon, nor make our
peace, nor bring in an everlasting righteousness upon us; God the father was
not fit for this work, for he was the person offended; and he was as much too
high to deal with man, as man was too low to deal with God: The holy Ghost was
not fit for this work, for it is his work to apply this Mediation, and to clear
up the believers interest in this Mediation. So then there is no other person
fit for this office, but Jesus Christ, who was a middle person, 'twixt both,
that he might deal with both: Christ could never have been fit to be the
Mediator in respect of his office, if he had not first been a middle person in
respect of his natures; for (says the Apostle) Gal. 3. 20. Now a mediator is
not a mediator of one, but God is one; A mediator is not a mediator of one,
that is of one party, but is always of two differing parties to unite them; not
of one, that is, 1. Not of one person, because mediation implies more persons
than one it necessarily supposes different parties betwixt whom he does
mediate; Christ (to speak after the manner of men) lays his hand upon God the
father, and says, O blessed father, will thou be at peace with these poor
sinners? will thou pardon them? and will thou lift up the light of thy
countenance upon them? if thou will, then I will undertake to satisfy thy
justice, and to pacify thy wrath, and to fulfill thy royal Law, and to make
good all the wrong they have done against thee. And then he lays his hand
upon the poor sinner; and says, sinner, art thou willing to be changed and
renewed? art thou willing to come under the bond of the covenant? art thou
willing to give up thy heart and life to the guidance and government of the
spirit? then be not discouraged, for thou shall certainly be justified and
saved. 2. Not of one nature, the Mediator must necessarily have more natures
than one, he must have the divine and humane nature united in his single
person, or else he could never suffer what he was to suffer, nor never satisfy
what he was to satisfy, nor never bring poor sinners into a state of
reconciliation 2 Cor 5. 19, 20.
with God: and it is farther observable, that the Text last cited says, God is
one, (viz.) as he is essentially considered, and therefore as so he cannot be
the Mediator; but Christ, as personally considered, he is not of one (that is)
not of one nature, for he is God and man too, and therefore he is the only
person that is fitted and qualified to be the Mediator: and it is observable
that when Christ is spoken of as Mediator, his Manhood is brought in (that
nature being so necessary to that office,) 1 Timothy 2. 5. For there is one God,
and one mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus: Jesus Christ was
God and man; as man he ought to satisfy, but could not; as God he could
satisfy, but ought not: but consider him as God and man, and so he both could
satisfy, and ought to satisfy, and accordingly he did satisfy, according to
what was prophesied of him, Dan. 9. 24. He did make reconciliation for
iniquity, and brought in everlasting righteousness: He did not begin to do
something, and then faint, and leave his work imperfect, but he finished it,
and that to the glory of his father, John 17. 4. I have glorified thee on the
earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. And it is good to
observe the singularity and oneness of the person mediating; not many, not a
few, not two, but one Mediator between God and man, there was none with him in
his difficult work of Mediatorship, but he carried it on alone; though there
are many Mediators among men, yet there is but (...), one only Mediator betwixt
Isa. 63. 3. I confess the word (...) is given to Moses, in that, Gal. 3. 19.
but Moses was but a typical Mediator, and you never find that Moses is called a
Mediator in a way of redemption, or satisfaction, or paying a Ransom; for so
dear Jesus is the only Mediator: so the word (...), us used in that 1 Timothy 2.
5. Heb. 8. 6, 7. 8. Heb. 9. 14, 15. Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.
God and men: and it is as high folly and madness to make more Mediators than
one, as it is to make more Gods than one (There is one God and one mediator
betwixt God and men,) for look as one husband satisfies the wife, as one father
satisfies the child, as one Lord satisfies the servant, and on sun satisfies
the world, so one Mediator is enough to satisfy all the world, that desire a
Mediator, or that have an interest in a Mediator. The true sense and import of
this word (...), a Mediator, is a middle person, or one that interposes betwixt
two parties at variance, to make peace betwixt them. Though (...), a Mediator,
be rendered variously, sometimes an Umpiere or Arbitrator, sometimes a messenger
betwixt two persons, sometimes an interpretor imparting the mind of one to
another, sometimes a reconciler or peacemaker; yet this word (...), does most
properly signify a Mediator or a midler, because Jesus Christ is both a middle
person, and a middle officer betwixt God and man, to reconcile and reunite God
and man. This of all others is the most proper and genuine signification of
this name (...), Jesus Christ is the middle, that is, the second person in the
Trinity, betwixt the Father and the Holy Ghost: He is the only middle person
betwixt God and man, being in one person God-man; and his being a middle person
fits and capacitates him to stand in the midst between God and us. And as he is
the middle person, so he is the middle officer, intervening, or interposing, or
coming between God and man by office, satisfying God's justice to the full for
man's sins by his sufferings and death, and maintaining our constant peace in
heaven by his meritorious intercession. Hence, as one observes, Jesus Christ is
Gerhard.
a true Mediator, is still found, in medio, in the middle. He was born, as some
think, from Wisd. 18. 14. about the middle of the night, he suffered in the
middle of the world, that is, at Jerusalem, seated in the middle of the Heb.
11. 12.
earth: he was crucified in the midst, between the two John 19. 18.
thieves: he died in the air on the cross, in the midst between heaven and
earth: he stood after his Resurrection John 20. 19.
in the midst of his Disciples: and he has promised, that where two or three
are gathered together in his name, he Mat. 18. 20.
will be in the midst of them: and he walks in the midst Rev. 2. 1.
of the seven golden candle-sticks, that is, the Churches: And he as the heart
in the midst of the body; distributes Ephe. 4. 15, 16.
spirits and virtue to all the parts of his mystical body. Thus Jesus Christ is
the Mediator betwixt God and man; middle in person, and middle in office. And
thus you have seen at large what a meet Mediator Jesus Christ is, considered in
both his natures, considered as God-man. But,

Secondly, If Jesus Christ be not God, then there is no spiritual Mark 2. 7.
John 3. 16. John 10. 28. 2 Timothy 4. 8. James 1. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 4. v. Rev. 3. 21.
Rev. 2. 11.
Christ has promised that believers shall never perish, he has promised them
eternal life, and that he will raise them up at the last day, he has promised a
Crown of Righteousness, he has promised a Crown of Life, he has promised a
Crown of glory, he has promised that conquering Christians shall sit down with
him in his throne, as he is set down with his father in his throne: He has
promised that they shall not be hurt of the second death. And a thousand other
good things Jesus Christ has promised; but if Jesus Christ be not God, how
shall these promises be made good? If a man that has never a foot of Land in
England, nor yet worth one groat in all the world, shall make his will, and
bequeath to thee such and such houses, and Lands, and Lordships in such a
County, or such a County; and shall by Will, give thee so much in Plate, and so
much in Jewels, and so much in ready money; whereas he is not, upon any
account, worth one penny in all the world; certainly such Legacies will never
make a man the richer nor the happier. None of those great and precious
promises, which are hinted at above will signify any thing, if Christ be not
God; for they can neither refresh us, nor cheer us in this world, nor make us
happy in that other world. If Christ be not God how can he purchase our pardon,
procure our peace, pacify divine wrath, and satisfy infinite justice: A man
may satisfy the justice of man, but who but a God can satisfy the justice of
God? will God accept of thousands of Micah 6. 7.
Rams. or ten thousands of Rivers of Oil, or the firstborn of thy body for the
sin of thy soul? Oh? No, he will not, he cannot; that Scripture is worthy to be
written in letters of Gold, Acts 20. 28. Take heed, therefore, unto your
selves, and to all the flock, over the which the holy Ghost has made you
overseers; to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood: This must needs relate to Christ, and Christ is here called God, and
Christ's blood is called the blood of God, and without a peradventure Christ
could never have gone through with the purchase of the Church, if the blood he
shed had not been the blood of God. This blood is called God's own blood,
because the son of God, being and remaining true God, assumed humane flesh and
blood in unity of person: by this phrase that which appertains to the
humanity of Christ, is attributed to his Divinity, because of the union of the
two natures in one person, and communion of properties. The Church is to Christ
a bloody Spouse, an Acheldama or field of blood: for the could not be redeemed
with silver and gold, but with 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
the blood of God: so it is called by a communication of properties, to set
forth the incomparable value and virtue thereof. But,

Thirdly, if Christ be not God, yea God-man, then the Divine did satisfy:
Christ's Godhead did give both Majesty and Essicacy to his sufferings; Christ
was sacrifice, Priest, and Altar: He was Sacrifice as he was man, Priest as he
was God and man, and Altar as he was God. it is the property of the Altar to
sanctify the thing offered Mat. 23. 19.
on it; so the Altar of Christ's divine nature, sanctified the sacrifice of his
death, and made it meritorious, Man sinned, and therefore man must satisfy:
Therefore the humane nature must be assumed by a surety, for man cannot do it:
If an Angel should have assumed humane nature, it would have polluted him:
Humane nature was so defiled by sin, that it could not be assumed by any but
God: Now Christ being God, the Divine nature purified the Humane nature which
he took, and so it was a sufficient sacrifice, The person offered in sacrifice
being God as well as man. This is a most noble ground upon which a believer may
challenge Satan to say his worst, and to do his worst; let him present God as
terrible, yea, as a consuming Heb. 12. 29.
fire: let him present me as odious and abominable Zecha. 3. 2, 3.
in the sight of God as once he did Joshuah, let him present me before the Lord
as vile and mercenary as once he did Job, let him aggravate the height of
God's displeasure, Job 1. 9, 10, 11.
and the height, and depth, and length, and breadth of my sins; I shall
readily grant all, and against all this I will set the infinite satisfaction of
dear Jesus: this I know, that though the justice of God cannot be avoided nor
bribed, yet it may be satisfied. Here is a proportionable satisfaction, here is
God answering God. It Is a very noble plea of the Apostle, who is he that
condemns? Romans 8. 34.
it is Christ that died; let Satan urge the justice of God as much as he can, I
am sure that the justice of God 1 John 1. 7, 8, 9.
makes me sure of Salvation, and the reason is evident, because his justice
obliges him to accept of an adequate satisfaction of his own appointing: The
justice of God makes me sure of mine own happiness, because if God be just,
that satisfaction should be had; when that satisfaction is made, Justice
requires that the person for whom it is made, shall be received into favor. I
confess, that unless God had obliged himself by promise, there were no pressing
his justice thus far, because Noxa sequitur caput. There was mercy in the
promise of sending Christ, Genesis 3. 15. Had not Christ stepped in between man's
sin and Gods wrath, the world had fallen about Adam's ears.
out of mercy to undertake for us, otherwise we cannot say that God was bound
in justice to accept of satisfaction, unless he had first in mercy been pleased
to appoint the way of a surety. Justice indeed required satisfaction, but it
required it of the person that sins, Genesis 2. 17. But of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the day thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely die; or dying thou shall die; or as others read the
words, thou shall surely and shortly, or suddenly die; and without
controversy, every man should die the same day he is born, The wages of sin is
death; and this wages Romans 6. 23.
should be presently paid, did not Christ, as a boon, beg poor sinners lives
for a season, for which cause he is called the Savior of all men; not of
eternal preservation, 1 Timothy 4. 10.
but of temporal reservation: it was free and noble mercy to all mankind, that
dear Jesus was promised and provided, sealed and sent into the world, that some
might be eternally saved, and the rest preserved from wrath for J^hn 6. 27.
a time. Here comes in mercy, that a surety shall be accepted, and what he
does is as if the person that offended should have done it himself. Here is
mercy and salvation surely bottomed upon both: ah what sweet and transcendent
comfort flows from this very consideration, That Christ is God. But,

Fourthly, the great and glorious majesty of God required John 10. 30. cap. 14.
9, 10, 11. etc.
between God and fallen man. The Angels, though they are glorious creatures,
yet they are but creatures; and could these satisfy divine justice, and bear
infinite wrath, and purchase divine favor, and reconcile us to God, and
procure our pardon, and change our hearts, and renew our natures, and adorn our
souls with Grace? and yet all these things must be done or we undone, and that
for ever. Now if this were a work too high for Angels, then we may safely
conclude, that it was a work too hard for fallen man. Man was once the mirror
of all understanding, the Hicroglyphick of Wisdom; but now quantum mutatus ab
illo? there is a great alteration, for poor sorry man is now sent to school, to
learn wisdom and instruction of the beasts, birds, and creeping things; he is
sent to the Pismire to learn providence, Prove. 6. 6, To the Stork and to the
Swallow to learn to make a right use of time, Jer. 8. 7. To the Ox and the Ass
to learn knowledge, Isa. 1. 3. And to the fowls of the Air to learn confidence,
Mat. 6. Man that was once a master of knowledge, a wonder of understanding,
perfect in the science of all things, is now grown blockish, sottish, and
senseless; and therefore altogether unfit and unable to make his peace with
God, to reconcile himself to God, etc. But,

Fifthly, and lastly, that Christ's sufferings and merits obey and suffer, he
was man; and that he might merit by his obedience and suffering, he was
God-man; just such a person did the work of Redemption call for. That Christ's
merits might be sufficient he must be God, for sufficient merit for Mankind
could not be in the person of any mere man, no not in Christ himself considered
only as man; for so all the grace he had he did receive it, and all the good he
did he was bound to do it; for, he was made of a woman, and made under the Law
(not only Gal. 4. 4.
under the Ceremonial Law as he was a Jew, but under the Moral as a man, for it
is under that Law under which we were, and from which we are redeemed)
therefore Gal. 3. 13.
in fulfilling it, he did no more than that which was his duty to do; he could
not merit by it, no not for himself, much less for others (considered only as
man) therefore he must also be God, that the dignity of his person might add
dignity, and virtue, and value to his works: in a word, Deus potuit, sed non
debuit; homo debuit, sed non potuit: God could, but he should not; man should,
but he could not make satisfaction: therefore he that would do it must be both
God and man: Torris erutus ab igne (as the Prophet speaks) Is not this a
firebrand taken out of the fire? you know that in a firebrand taken out of
the fire, there is fire and wood inseparably mixed, and in Christ there is God
and man wonderfully united. He was God, else neither his sufferings nor his
merits could have been sufficient; and if his could not, much less any man's
else: for all other men are both conceived and born in Original sin, and also
much and often defiled with actual sin, and therefore we ought for ever to
abhor all such popish Doctrines, Prayers, and Masses for the dead, which exalt
man's merits, man's satisfaction. For, no man can by Psalm. 49. 7. 8. v.
any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him; for the
redemption of their soul is precious and it cease for ever. And therefore all
the money that has been given for Masses, Dirges, Trentals, etc. has been
cast away for Jesus Christ, who is God-man, is the only Redeemer, and in the
other world money bears no mastery. Let me make a few inferences from what
has been said; and therefore,

First, is it so that Christ is God-man, that he is God 1. 1 Pet. 1. 21.
and man, then let this raise our faith, and strengthen our faith, in our Lord
Jesus Christ, faith is built on God* Now Jesus Christ is very God, and
therefore the fittest foundation in the world for us to build our faith upon;
God manifest in the flesh is a firm basis for faith and comfort. Heb. 7. 25. ad
plenum, says Erasmus ad perfectum say others.
He is able to save to the uttermost, Christ is a through Savior, he saves
perfectly, and he saves perpetually; he never carries on Redemption-work by
halves: Christ being God as well as man, is able by the power of his Godhead to
vanquish Death, Devils, Hell, and all the enemies of our Salvation; and by the
power of his Godhead is able to merit pardon of sin, the favor of God, the
heavenly inheritance, and all the glory of the other world: for this dignity of
his person adds virtue and Acts 20. 28.
efficacy to his death and sufferings, in that he that suffered and died was
very God, therefore God is said to have purchased the Church with his own
blood; Christ having suffered in our nature which he took upon him, (that is in
his humane soul and body) the wrath of God, the curse, and all the punishments
which were due to our sins; has paid the price of our Redemption, pacified
divine wrath, and satisfied divine Justice, in the very same nature in which we
have sinned and provoked the holy one of Israel, so that now all believers may
triumphingly say, There is no condemnation to us that are in R^m. 8. 1. v.
Christ Jesus: Christ having in our nature suffered the whole curse and
punishment due to our sins, God cannot in justice but accept of his sufferings,
as a full and complete satisfaction 1 John 1. 7, 9.
for all our sins; so that now there remains no more curse or punishment
properly so called, for us to suffer either in our souls or bodies, either in
this life or in the life to come, but we are certainly and fully delivered from
all; not only from the eternal curse, and all the punishments and torments of
Hell, but also from the curse and sting of bodily death, and from all
afflictions as they are 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56.
curses and punishments of sin, that Jesus who is Godman, has changed the
nature of them to us, so that of bitter curses and heavy punishments, they are
become fatherly chastisements, the fruits of divine love, and the Heb. 12. 5,
6, 7. Rev. 3. 19.
promoters of the internal and eternal good of our souls. Oh! how should these
things strengthen our faith in dear Jesus, and work us to lean and stay our
weary souls wholly and only upon him who is God-man, and who of God 1 Cor. 1.
30.
is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. Among
the Evangelists we find, that Christ had a threefold entertainment among the
sons of men: some received him into house, not into heart, as Simon Luke 7. 44.
the Pharisee, who gave him no kiss, nor water to his feet; some neither into
heart nor house, as the graceless Mat. 8. 34.
swinish Gergesites, who had neither civility nor honesty; some both into house
and heart, as Lazarus, Mary, Martha, John 11. 16.
etc. certainly that Jesus who is God-man deserves the best room in all our
souls, and the uppermost seat in all our hearts. But,

Secondly, If Jesus Christ be God-man, very God and Heb. 2. 16. For verily he
took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham;
(...), he assumed, apprehended, caught, laid hold on the seed of Abraham, as
the Angel did on Lot, as Christ Genesis 19. 16.
did on Peter, or as men do upon a thing they are glad Mat. 14. 31.
they have got, and are loath to let go again. Oh sirs, it is a main ground and
pillar of our comfort and confidence, that Jesus Christ took our flesh, for if
he had not took our flesh upon him, we could never have been saved by him;
Christ took not a part, but the whole nature of man; that is, a true humane
soul and body, together with all the essential properties and faculties of
both: that in man's nature he might die, and suffer the wrath of God, and whole
curse due to our sins, which otherwise Heb. 2. 14.
being God only, he could never have done; and that he might satisfy divine
justice for sin, in the same nature that had sinned, and indeed it was most
meet and fit, that the Mediator, who was to reconcile God and man, should
partake in the natures of both parties to be reconciled. Oh, what matchless
love was this, that made our dear Lord Jesus, to lay by for a time all that
glory, that he John 17. 5.
had with the father before the world was, and to assume our nature, and to be
found in fashion as a man, to see Phil. 2. 8.
the great God in the form of a servant, or hanging upon the Cross, how
wonderful and astonishing was it to all that believed him to be God-man; God
manifested in 1 Timothy 3. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 11.
our flesh is an amazing mystery, a mystery fit for the speculation of Angels,
that the eternal God should become 1 Timothy 2. 5.
the man Christ Jesus, that a most glorious Creator should Dan. 7. 9, 13, 22.
Mat. 2. 11.
become a poor creature, that the Ancient of days should become an Infant of
days, that the most high should stoop so low as to dwell in a body of flesh, is
a glorious mystery, that transcends all humane understanding. It would have
seemed a high blasphemy for us to have thought of such a thing, or to have
desired such a thing, or to have spoken of such a thing, if God in his
everlasting Gospel had not reveiled such a thing to us: Among the Romish
Priests, Friars, Jesuits, they count it a great demonstration of love, an high
honor that is done to any of their orders, when any Noble man or great Prince
(who is weary of the world, and the world weary of him) comes among them, and
takes any of their habits upon him, and lives and dies in their habits: Oh,
what a demonstration of Christ's love is it! and what a mighty honor has
Jesus Christ put upon mankind, in that he took our nature upon him, in that he
lived in our nature, and died in our nature, and rose in our nature, and
ascended in our nature, and now sits at his fathers right hand in Acts 1. 10,
11.
our nature! Though Jacob's love to Rachel, and Jonathan's love to David, and
David's love to Absalom, and the primitive Christians love to one another was
strong, very strong; yet Christ's love in taking our humane nature upon him
does infinitely transcend all their loves. I think Bern. sup. cant. ser. 20.
(says one speaking of Christ) he cannot despise me, who is bone of my bone,
and flesh of my flesh ^! for if he neglect me as a Brother, yet he will love me
as a husband, that is my comfort. Oh my Savior (says one) did thou Hierom.
die for love of me? a love more dolorous than death, but to me a death more
lovely than love it self; I cannot live, love, and be longer from thee: I read
in Josephus, that when J. s. Bell. Jud. l. 1. c. 8.
Herod Antipater was accused to Julius Caesar as no good friend of his, he made
no other Apology, but stripping himself stark naked, showed Caesar his wounds,
and said, let me hold my tongue, these wounds will speak for me how I have
loved Caesar: ah, my friends, Christ's wounds in our nature speak out the
admirable love of Jesus Christ to us: and Oh, how should this love of his draw
out our love to Christ, and inflame our love to that Jesus who is Godman
blessed for ever. Mr. Welsh a Suffolk-minister, weeping at table; being asked
the reason, said, it was because he could love Christ no more: ah, what reason
have we to weep, and weep again, and again, that we can love that Jesus no
more, who has showed such unparalelled love to us in assuming of the humane
nature! Et ipsam animam odio haberem, si non diligeret meum Jesum, I must hate
my very soul, if it should not love my Jesus, says Bernard: ah, what cause
have we given to hate our selves, because we love that dear Jesus no more who
is very God and very man. But,

Thirdly, Is Jesus Christ God-man, is he very God and 3. consult hese
Scriptures, Isa. 61. 1. Dan. 9. 24. 1 John 3. 8. Luke 1. 74. 75. Tit. 2. 14. 1
Pet. 1. 4.
very man? then we may very safely and roundly assert, that the work of
Redemption was a very great work, the Redemption of souls is a mighty work, a
costly work: to redeem poor souls from sin, from wrath, from the power of
Satan, from the curse, from hell, from the condemnation, was a mighty work;
wherefore was Christ born, wherefore did he live, sweat, groan, bleed, die,
rise, ascend; was it not to bring deliverance to the captives, and the opening
of the prison to them that are bound? was it not to make an end of sin, to
finish transgression, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to destroy
the works of the Devil, and to abolish death, and to bring life and immortality
to light, and to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify us to himself, and
to make us a peculiar people zealous of good works? Certainly the work of
Redemption was no ordinary or common thing; God-man must engage in it, or poor
fallen man is undone for ever. The greater the person is that is engaged in any
work, the greater is that work: the great Monarchs of the world do not use to
engage their sons in poor, low, mean, and petty services, but in such services
as are high and honorable, noble and weighty: and will you imagine that ever
the great and glorious God John 1. 18. 8. Pro. 22. -- 33
would have sent his son, his own son, his only begotten son, his bosom son,
his son in whom his soul delighted before the foundations of the earth was
laid; to redeem poor sinners souls, if this had not been a great work, a high
work, and a most glorious work in his eye. The Creation of the world did but
cost God a word of his mouth; Let there be light, and there was light; but the
Redemption Genesis 1. 3.
of souls cost him his dearest son, there is a divine greatness stamped upon
the works of providence, but what are the works of Providence to the work of
Redemption? what are all providential works to Christ's coming from heaven, to
his being incarnate, to his doings, sufferings, and dying, and all this to
ransom poor souls from the curse, hell, wrath, and eternal death? souls are
dear and costly things, and of great price in the sight of God. Amongst the
Romans, those their proper goods and estates, which men had gotten in the wars
with hazard of their lives, were called Peculium Castrense, of a Field-purchase
Oh, how much more may the precious and immortal souls of men be called Christ's
Peculium Castrense! his purchase, gotten not only by the jeopardy of his life,
but with the loss of his life and blood, Ye know (says the Apostle) 1 Pet. 1.
18. 19.
that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as with silver and gold,
from your vain conversation, received by tradition; but with the precious blood
of the son of God, as of a lamb without a spot. Christ that only went to the
price of souls, has told us that one soul is more worth than Mat. 16. 26.
all the world: Christ left his father's bosom, and all the glory of heaven for
the good of souls, he assumed the nature of man for the happiness of the soul
of man, he trod the Wine Press of his father's wrath for souls, he wept for
souls, he swet for souls, he prayed for souls, he paid for souls, and he bled
out his heart-blood for the redemption of souls. The soul is the breath of God,
the beauty of man, the wonder of Angels, and the envy of Devils: it is of an
Angelical nature, it is a heavenly spark, a celestial plant, and of a divine
offspring; it is capable of the knowledge of God, of union with God, of
communion with John 14. 8. Psalm. 17. 15.
God, and of an eternal fruition of God; there is nothing that can suit the
soul below God, there is nothing that can satisfy the soul without God; the
soul is so high and so noble a piece that it scorns all the world; what are all
the riches of the East or West- Indies? what are Rocks of Diamonds, or
Mountains of Gold? or the price of Cleopatra's draught, to the price that
Christ laid down for souls? it is only the blood of him that is God-man that is
an equivolent price for the Redemption of souls. Silver and Gold has redeemed
many thousands out of Turkish bondage, but all the Silver and Gold in the world
could never redeem one poor soul from Hellish bondage, from hellish torments.
Souls are a dear commodity, he that bought them found them so; and yet at how
cheap a rate do some sinners sell their immortal souls. Callenuceus tells us of
a noble man of Naples that was wont profanely to say that he had two-souls in
his body, one for God, and another for whosoever would buy it; but if he has
one soul in Hell, I believe he will never find another for Heaven. A person of
quality, who is still alive, told me a few years since, that in discourse with
one of his servants, This pious Gentleman was with me in May, 1673. at my house.
he asked him what he thought would become of his soul if he lived and died in
his ignorance and enmity against God, etc. he most profanely and atheistically
answered, that when he died, he would hang his soul on a hedge, and say, run God
run Devil, and he that can run fastest let him Discipul at de t^mp. Ser^. 132.
take my soul. I have read of a most blasphemous wretch, that on a time being
with his companions in a common Inn, carrowsing and making merry, asked them if
they thought a man had a soul or no; whereunto, when they replied that the
souls of men are immortal, and that some of them after death lived in hell and
others in heaven; (For so the writings of the Prophets and Apostles instructed
them) he answered, and swore, that he thought it nothing so, but rather that
there was no soul in man to survive the body, but that Heaven and Hell were
mere fables and inventions of Priests to get gain; and for himself, he was
ready to sell his soul to any that would buy it: then one of his companions
took up a cup of wine, and said, sell me thy soul for this cup of wine; which
he receiving, We laugh at little children to see them part with rich Jewels for
silly trifles, and yet daily experience tells us, that multitudes are so
childish as to part with such rich and precious Jewels as their immortal souls,
for a lust, or for base and unworthy trifles; of whom it may be truly said as
Augustus Caesar said in another case, they are like a man that fishes with a
golden hook, the gain can never recompense the loss that may be sustained.
bad him take his soul, and drank up the wine: Now Satan himself being there in
man's shape, bought it again of the other at the same price, and by and by bad
him give him his soul, the whole company affirming, it was meet he should have
it, since he had bought it, not perceiving the Devil; but presently, he laying
hold of this soul-seller, carried him into the Air before them all, to the
great astonishment and amazement of the beholders; and from that day to this he
was never heard of, but has now found by experience that men have souls, and
that Hell is no Fable. Ah, for what a thing of naught do many thousands sell
their souls to Satan every day! how many thousands are there who swear, curse,
lie, cheat, deceive, etc. for a little gain every day! I have read that there
was a time when the Romans did wear Jewels on their shoes: Oh, that in these
days men did not worse! Oh, that they did not trample under feet that matchless
Jewel their precious and immortal souls! Oh sirs, there is nothing below heaven
so precious and noble as your souls, and therefore do not play the Courtiers
with your poor souls: now the Courtier does all things late, he rises late, and
dines late, and sups late, and goes to bed late, and repents late. Christ made
himself an offering for sin, that souls might not be undone by sin, the Lord
died that slaves might live, the son dies that servants might live, the natural
son dies that adopted sons may live, the only begotten son dies that bastards
might live, yea, the judge dies that Malefactors may live. Ah friends! as there
was never sorrow like Christ's, so there was never love like Christ's love; and
of all his love, none to that of soul-love. Christ who is God-man did take upon
him thy nature, and bare thy sins, and suffered death, and encountered the
Cross, and was made a sacrifice and a curse, and all to bring about thy
Redemption; and therefore thou may safely conclude, that the work of
Redemption is a great work. But,

Fourthly, is Jesus Christ God-man? is he very God Eliezer, Abraham's servant,
Genesis 24.
to seek a match for our master's son: now our way to win you to him, is not
only to tell you what he has, but what he is; now he is God-man in one person,
he is man that you may not be afraid of him, and he is God Heb. 7. 25. Rev. 1.
5. cap. 17. 14. Heb. 1. 3. Psalm. 45. 1. Cant. 5. 10. 16.
that he may be able to save you to the uttermost, he is the Prince of the
Kings of the Earth, he is Lord of Lords and King of Kings, he is the heir of
all things, he is fairer than the Children of men, he is the chiefest of ten
thousand, he is altogether lovely, there is every thing in Jesus who is God-man
to encourage you to come to him: If you look upon his names, if you look upon
his natures, if you look upon his offices, if you look upon his dignities, if
you look upon his personal excellencies, if you look upon his mighty conquests,
if you look upon his Royal attendance; all these things call aloud upon you, to
come to Christ, to close with Christ: if you look upon the great things that he
has done for sinners, and the hard things that he has suffered for sinners, and
the glorious things that he has prepared and laid up for sinners; how can you
but readily accept of him, and sweetly embrace him: Though thou have no
loveliness nor comeliness, Ezekiel. 16. 4. 5. Isa. 55. 1, 2.
no beauty nor glory, though thou have not one penny in thy purse, nor a rag to
hang on thy back, yet if thou art but really and heartily willing to be
divorced from all thy sinful lovers, and accept of Christ for thy Sovereign
Lord; he is willing that the match should be made up Hoses. 3. 3. Rev. 22. 17.
between thee and him: Now, shall Christ woo you himself? shall he declare his
willingness to take you with nothing? shall he engage himself to protect you,
to maintain you, and at last, as a dowry, to bestow heaven upon you? and will
you refuse him, will you turn your backs upon him? Oh sirs, what could Christ
have done that he has not done to do you good, and to make you happy for ever?
Lo, he has laid aside his glorious Robes, and he has put on your Rags, he has
clothed himself with your flesh, he came off from his Royal Throne, he humbled
himself to the death of the Cross, and has brought Life, Immortality, and Glory
to your very doors, and will you yet stand out against him? Oh how shall such
escape who neglect so great salvation, who say, this man Hell. 2. 3. Luke 19. 14.
shall not rule over us, who tread under foot the son of God! Oh what wrath,
what great wrath, what pure Heb. 10. 28. John. 3. ult.
wrath, what infinite wrath, what everlasting wrath is reserved for such
persons! doubtless Turks, Jews, and Pagans will have a cooler and a lighter
Hell, than the despisers John 5. 40. Mat. 23. 13, 14.
and rejecters of Christ; the great damnation is for those that might have
Christ, but would not; and no wonder, for the sin of rejecting Christ is not
chargeable upon the Devils. Ah sinners, sinners, that you would labor to
understand more, and dwell more upon the preheminent excellencies of Christ;
for till the soul can discern a better, a greater excellency in Christ than in
any other thing, it will never yield to match with Christ: Oh labor every day
more and more to take the height, and depth, and breadth of the excellency of
Christ. He is the chiefest and the choicest of all, both in that upper, and in
this lower world. The Godhead dwells bodily in him, he is full of grace, he is
the heir of glory, the holy one of God, the brightness of his father's Image,
the fountain of life, the well of salvation, and the wonder of heaven. Oh, when
will you so understand the superlative excellency of Christ, as to fall in love
with him, as to cry out with the Martyr, O none but Christ, O none to Christ?
It is your wisdom, it is your duty, it is your safety, it is your glory, it is
your salvation, it is your all to accept of Christ, to close with Christ, and
to bestow your selves, your souls, your all on Christ; if you embrace him you
are made for ever, but if you reject him you perish for ever, Bernard calls
Christ Sponsus sanguinum, the Bridegroom of Bloods, because he espoused his
Church to himself upon the bed of his Cross, his head begirt with a pillow of
Thorns, his body drenched in a bath of his own blood: to turn your backs upon
this Bridegroom of Bloods, will certainly cost you the blood of your souls, and
therefore look to it. But,

Fifthly, Is Jesus Christ God-man? is he very God and 5. Colos. 1. 18. Phil. 2.
6, 7, 8, 9. 10. John 5. 23. This Text looks sowerly on Jews, Turks, Papists,
Socinians, and others.
very man? O then honor him above all, Oh let him have the preeminence, exalt
him as high as God the father has exalted him; it is the absolute will of the
father that all should honor his son, even as they honor himself: for he
having the same nature and essence with the father, the father will have him
have the same honor which he himself has; which whosoever denies to him
reflects dishonor upon the father, who will not bear any thing derogatory to
the glory of his son: certainly there is due to Christ, as he is God-man, the
highest respect, reverence, and veneration which Angels and men can possibly
give unto him. Oh, look upon the Lord Jesus as God; and according to that
honor that is due to him as God, so must you honor him. The Apostle speaks of
some who, when they knew God they did not glorify R^m. 1. 21.
him as God; so several pretend to give some glory to Christ, but they do not
glorify him as God, Oh sirs, this is that which you must come up to, viz. to
honor Christ in such a manner as may be suitable to his natures, and as he is
the infinite, blessed, and eternal God; and ah what honor can be high enough
for such a person. Christ's honor was very dear to him, who said, Lord, use
Bernard.
me for thy shield to keep off those wounds of dishonor, which else would fall
on thee. Luther in an Epistle to Spalatinus, says, they call me a Devil, but
be it so, so long as Christ is magnified, I am well apayed. The inanimate
creatures are so compliant with his pleasure, that they will thwart their own
nature to serve his honor: fire will descend (as on Sodom and Gomorrah) and
water, Genesis 19. Exodus 14. 22.
though a fluid body, stand up like a solid wall (as in the Red Sea) if he do
but speak the word. Oh, let not the inanimate creatures one day rise in
judgment against us for not giving Christ his due honor; if we honor Christ,
we shall have honor, that is, a bargain of Christ's own making; but if we
dishonor him, he will put dishonor 1 Samuel 2. 30.
upon us, as Scripture and History in all Ages do sufficiently evidence: in
History we read of an Impostor that gave it out that he was that star which
Balaam prophesied N^m. 24. 17.
of, which was a Prophecy of Christ; this fellow called himself Ben-chomar, the
son of a Star: this man professed himself to be Christ, but he was slain with
thunder and lightning from heaven, and then the Jews called him Ben-cosmar,
which signifies the son of a lie. Learned Synag. Julaics, cap. 5. and 36.
Buxtorf tells us, that the Jews call Christ Bar-chozabb, the son of a lie, a
Bastard; and his Gospel Aven-gelaion, the Volume of lies, or the Volume of
iniquity: and has not God been a revenging this upon them for above this
sixteen hundred years. Rabbi Samuel, who long since writ a Tract in form of an
Epistle to Rabbi Isaac, Master of the Synagogue of the Jews; wherein he does
excellently discuss the cause of their long Captivity and extreme misery, and
after that he had proved it was inflicted for some grievous sin, he shows
that sin to be the same which Amos speaks of. For three transgressions of
Israel, and for Amos. 2. 6.
four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they sold the
righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes: The selling of Joseph
he makes the first sin, the worshipping the Calf in Horeb the second sin, the
abusing and killing God's Prophets the third sin, and the selling of Jesus
Christ the fourth sin: For the first they served four hundred years in Egypt,
for the second they wandered forty years in the Wilderness, for the third they
were Captives seventy years in Babylon, and for the fourth they are held in
pitiful Captivity, even to this very-day. Oh, how severely has God revenged the
wrongs and indignities done to Christ the Lord, by this miserable people to
this very hour! and yet, Oh, the several ways, wherein this poor people do
every day express their malice and hatred against the Lord Jesus! Oh, pray,
pray hard, that the veil may be taken away that has been so long before their
eyes. Herod imprisons Peter, and kills Act. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4,
James with the sword, this God puts up, but when he comes to usurp the honor
due to Christ, he must die verse. 23.
for it: Herod might more safely take away the liberty of one, and the life of
another, than the glory due to Christ: long before his death, being in chains,
he met with a strange Omen; For as he stood bound before the Palace, Josephus
of the Antiquities of the Jews, lib. 18. page 475. 476.
leaning dejectedly upon a tree, among many others that were prisoners with
him, an Owl came, and sat down in that Tree to which he leaned; which a German
seeing, being one of those that stood there bound, he asked who he was that was
in the Purple, and leaned there; and understanding who he was, he told him of
his enlargment, promotion to honor, and prosperity; and that when he should
see that bird again, he should die within five days after. Now when Herod had
imprisoned Peter, and slain James with the sword, he went down to Caesarea, and
there he made sports and shows in honor of Caesar; and Page 510. 511.
on the second day being most gorgeously apparelled, and the Sun shining very
bright upon his Robe of Silver, his flatterers saluted him for a God, and cried
out to him; Be merciful unto us, hitherto have we feared thee as a man, but
hence forward we will acknowledge thee to be of a nature more excellent than
mortal frailty can attain to: the wretched King reproved not this abominable
flattery, but was well pleased with it; and not long after he espied the Owl
which the German had foretold to be the Omen of his death: And suddenly he was
seized with miserable gripings in his belly, which came upon him with vehement
extremity; whereupon, turning himself toward his friends; says, Lo, he whom
ye esteem for a God is doomed to die, and destiny shall evidently confute you,
in those flattering and false speeches which you lately used concerning me; for
I, who have been adored by you as one immortal, am now under the hands of
death: and his griefs and torments increasing, his death drew on apace:
whereupon he was removed into the Palace, and all the people put on Sackcloth,
and lay on the ground, praying for him; which he beholding, could not refrain
from tears: and so after five days he gave up the Ghost. Thus you see how
dearly they have paid for it, that have not given Christ his due glory; and let
these instances of his wrath alarm all your hearts so, that we may make more
conscience than ever, of setting the Crown of honor only upon Christ's head,
for he only is worthy of all honor, glory and praise, Rev. 14. 10, 11. But,

Sixthly, Is Jesus Christ God-man? is he very God and viz. because of the
dignity of his person that died and suffered for us; the son of God, yea, God
himself: there was an infinite virtue and value in all his sufferings, hence
his Heb. 9. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 19. Acts 20. 28. Gal. 4. 4, 5, 6.
blood is called precious blood, yea the blood of God: did man transgress the
Royal Law of God? behold God himself is become a man, to make up that breach,
and to Romans 8. 2, 3, 4.
satisfy divine Justice to the uttermost farthing: for the man Christ Jesus to
stand before the bar of the Law, and to make full and complete reparation to
it, was the highest honor that ever was done to the Law of God: this is
infinitely more pleasing and delightful to divine Justice, than if all the
curses of the Law had been poured out upon fallen man; and than if the Law had
built up its honor upon the destruction of the whole Creation. To see one Sun
clouded is much more than to see the Moon and all the Stars in Heaven overcast:
Christ considered as God-man was great, very great; and the greater his person
was, the greater were his sorrows, his sufferings, his Isa. 53.
humiliation, his compassion, his satisfaction to divine Justice; had not
Christ been God-man, he could never have been an able surety, he could never
have paid our Heb. 7. 25.
debts, he could never have satisfied divine Justice, he could never have
brought in an everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9. 24.
he could never have spoiled Principalities and Powers; C^l^s. 2. 15.
and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them on the Cross (a plain
allusion to the Roman Triumphs; where the Victor ascending up to the Capitol in
a Chariot of state, all the prisoners following him on foot with their hands
bound behind them, and the Victor commonly threw certain pieces of Coin abroad
to be picked up by the common people. So Christ, in the day of his solemn
inauguration into his heavenly Kingdom, triumphed over Sin, Death, Devils, and
Hell, and gave gifts to men:) and had he not been God-man, he could never have
merited for us a glorious Reward. If we consider Christ himself as a mere man
(setting aside his Godhead) Ephesians. 4. 8^
he could not merit by his sufferings: for, 1. Christ as he was man only, was a
creature; now a mere creature can merit nothing from the Creator. 2. Christ's
sufferings, as he was man only, were finite, and therefore could not merit
infinite glory: indeed as he was God, his sufferings were meritorious; but
consider him purely as man, they were not. This is wisely to be observed
against the Papists, who make so great a noise of men's merits; for if Christ's
sufferings, as he was mere man, could not merit the least favor from God, then
what mortal man is able to merit, at the hand of God, the least of mercies by
his greatest sufferings? But,

Seventhly, Is Jesus Christ God-man? is he very God Phil. 2. 6. John 1. 18.
leave the bosom of his father, which was a bosom of the sweetest loves, and
the most ineffable delights, that he should put off all that glory that he had
with the father, John 17. 5.
before the foundation of the world was laid, that he should so far abase
himself as to become man, by taking on him our base, vile nature, that so in
this our nature he Heb. 2. 10.
might dye, suffer, satisfy, and bring many sons to glory: Oh, here, is the
greatest humility and abasement that ever was; and oh, that all sincere
Christians would endeavor to imitate this matchless example of humility and
self denial. Oh, the admirable condescentions of dear Jesus, that he should
take our nature, and make us partakers 2 Pet. 1. 4.
of his divine nature; that he should put on our rags, and put upon us his
Royal Robes; that he should Rev. 19. 7, 8. 2 Cor. 8. 9.
make himself poor, that we might be rich; low, that we might be high;
accursed, that we might be blessed! Gal. 3. 10, 13.
Oh wonderful Love, oh Grace unsearchable! ah Christians, did Christ stoop low?
and will your be stout, proud, and high? was he content to be accounted a worm,
a wine-bibber, an enemy to Caesar, a friend of Publicans and sinners, a Devil?
and must you be all in a flame, when vain men make little account of you? was
he willing to be a curse, a reproach for you? and will you shrug, and shrink,
and faint, and fret, when you are reproached for his name? did Jesus Christ
stoop so low, as John 13. 14.
to wash his Disciples feet? and are you so stout and sturdy, that you cannot
hear together, nor pray together, nor sit at the table of the Lord together,
though you all hope, at last, to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in
Mat. 8. 11. v.
the Kingdom of Heaven? shall one Heaven hold you at last; and shall not one
House, one Bed, one Table, one Church hold you here? Oh, that ever worms should
swell with such intolerable pride and stoutness: he who was God-man, was lowly,
meek, self-denying, and of a most condescending spirit; and oh, that all you,
who hope for salvation by him, would labor to write after so fair a copy.
Bernard calls humility a self-annihilation: The same Author says that humility
is conservatrix virtutum. Thou will save the humble, says Job; in the Hebrew
Job 22. 20. (...)
it is, him that is of low eyes: an humble Christian has lower thoughts of
himself than others can have of him; Abraham is dust and ashes in his own eyes,
Jacob is Genesis 18. Genesis 32. 10.
less than the least of all mercies, David, though a great King, yet looks upon
himself as a worm; I am a worm, Psalm. 22. 6.
and no man. The word in the Original, Tolugnath, signifies a very little
worm, which breeds in Scarlet; a worm that is so little, that a man can
hardly see it or perceive it: Oh, how little, how very little was David in his
own eyes! and Paul, who was the greatest among the Apostles; yet, in his own
eyes, he was less than the Ephesians. 3. 8. See my unsearchabletiches of Christ upon
that Text.
least of all Saints. Non sum dignus dici minimus, says Ignatius, I am not
worthy to be called the least: Lord, I am Hell, but thou art Heaven, said
blessed Cooper: I am a most hypocritical wretch, not worthy that the earth
should bear me, said holy Bradford: Luther, in humility, speaks thus of
himself; I have no other name than sinner, sinner is my name, sinner is my
surname, this is the name by which I shall be always known; I have sinned, I do
sin, I shall sin, in infinitum. Ah, how can proud, stout spirits read these
instances, and not blush: certainly the sincere humble Christian is like the
Violet, which grows low, hangs the head down, and hides it self with its own
leaves; and were it not that the frequent smell of his many virtues discovers
him to the world, he would choose to live and die in his self-contenting
secrecy. But,

Eighthly, Is Jesus Christ Godman? is he very God Romans 5. 1, 2. Ephesians. 3. 12.
us to God, and give us access to him, Ephesians. 2. 18. By him we have access to the
father. The word is (...), a leading by the hand, an introduction, an
adduction: it is an allusion (says Estius) to the customs of Princes, Ephesians. 1.
to whom there is no passage, unless we are brought in by one of their
Favorites. Though the Persian Kings held it a piece of their silly glory to
hold off their best friends, who might not come near them, but upon special
license: yet the great King of Heaven and Earth counts it his glory, to give us
free access at all times, in all places, and upon all occasions, by the man
Christ Jesus; 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one mediator between God and us, even the
man Christ Jesus. Christ was made true man, that in our nature he might
reconcile us to God, and give us access to God, which he could never have done,
had he not been very God and very man; without the humane nature of Christ, we
could never have had access to God, or fellowship with God; being by nature
enemies to God, Romans 5. 10. Ephesians. 2. 1. 12, 13, 14.
and estranged from God, and dead in trespasses and sins. It Is only by the
mediation of Christ incarnate, that we come to be reconciled to God, to have
access to him, and 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3.
acceptance with him; in Christ's humane nature God and we meet together, and
have fellowship together. It could never stand with the unspotted holiness and
justice of God, who is a consuming fire; to honor us with one Heb. 12. 29.
cast of his countenance, or one hours communion with himself, were it not upon
the account of the man Christ Jesus; the least serious thought of God out of
Christ, will breed nothing in the soul, but horror and amazement; which made
Luther say, Nolo Deum absolutum, let me have nothing to do with an absolute
God. Believers have free and blessed access to God, but still it is upon the
credit of the man Christ Jesus; Let us come boldly to the throne Heb. 4. 15. 16.
of Grace (says the Apostle, speaking of Christ) that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need the Apostles phrase is (...), a word which
signifies liberty of speech, and boldness of face; as when a man with a bold
and undaunted spirit, utters his mind before the great ones of the world
without blushing, without weakness of heart, without shaking of his voice,
without imperfection and faltring in speech, when neither Majesty nor Authority
can take off his courage, so as to stop his mouth, and make him afraid to
speak; with such heroic and undaunted spirits would the Apostle have us to
come to the Throne of Grace, and all upon the credit of Christ our High Priest,
who is God-man. But,

Ninthly, Is Jesus Christ God-man, is he very God and 9. Ezekiel. 35. 10, 11, 12,
13. Isa. 37. 23, 24.
very man? then you may be very confident of his sympathizing with you in all
your afflictions, then this may serve as a foundation to support you under all
your troubles, and as a Cordial to comfort you under all your afflictions, in
that Christ partaking of the same nature, and having had experience of the
infirmities of it, he is the more able and willing to help and succor us; Heb.
2. 17. wherefore As the Brazen Serpent was like the fiery serpent, but had no
sting.
in all things it behooves him to be like his brethren, that he might be a
merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people: so, Heb. 4. 15. If one come to visit
a man that is sick of a grievous disease, who has himself been formerly
troubled with the same disease, he will sympathize more, and show more
compassion than twenty others, who have not felt the like: so here, from
Christ's sufferings in his humane nature, we may safely gather, that he will
show himself a merciful high Priest to us in our sufferings, and one that will
be ready to help and succor us in all our afflictions and miseries, which we
suffer in this life, in as much as himself had experience of suffering the like
in our nature; for in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able
to succor them that are tempted: and this should be a staff to support us, and
a cordial to comfort us in all our sorrows and miseries. It is between Christ
and his Church, as it is between two lute strings that are tuned one to
another; no sooner is one struck, If weperish Christ persheth with us, Lu^her.
but the other trembles; Isa. 63. 9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted:
These words may be read interrogatively, thus, was he in all their afflictions
afflicted? Christ took to heart the afflictions of his Church, he was himself
grieved for them, and with them. The Lord, the better to allure and draw his
people to himself, speaks after the manner of men; attributing to himself all
the affection, love, and fatherly compassion, that can possibly be in them, to
men in misery: Christ did so sympathize with his people in all their
afflictions and sufferings, as if he himself had felt the weight, the smart,
the pain of them all; he was in all things made like unto his brethren; not
only in nature, but also in infirmities, and sufferings, and by all manner of
temptations, that thereby he might be able (experimentally) to succor them
that are tempted: he Zech. 2. 8. Ishon of Ish, It is here called Bath, the
daughter of the eye, because it is as dear to a man as his only daughter. Act.
9. 4. Mat. 25. 35, 36.
that touches them, touches not only his eye, but the apple of his eye, which
is the tenderest piece of the tenderest part; to express the inexpressible
tenderness of Christ's compassion toward them: let persecutors take heed how
they meddle with God's eyes, for he will retaliate eye for eye, Exodus 21. 24.
he is wise in heart, and mighty in strength, and sinners shall one day pay dear
for touching the apple of his eye. Christ counts himself persecuted when his
Church is persecuted; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me: And he looks upon
himself as hungry, thirsty, naked, and in prison, when his members are so; so
greatly does he sympathize with them: hence the afflictions of Christians are
called (...), the remainders of the afflictions of Christ: such as Christ, by
his fellow-feeling, suffers in his members, and as they by correspondency are
to fill up, as exercises and trials of their faith and patience, Christ gave
many evidences of his sympathy, or fellow-feeling of our infirmities when he
was on earth; as he groaned in his spirit, John, 11. 33.
and was troubled; when he saw those that wept for Lazarus, verse. 35. Luke 19.
41.
he wept also; as he did over Jerusalem also: It is often observed in the
Gospel, that Christ was moved with compassion; and that he frequently put forth
acts of pity, mercy, and succor to those that were in any distress, either in
body or soul. Christ retains this sympathy and fellow-feeling with us, now he
is in Heaven; and does so far commiserate our distresses, as may stand with a
glorified condition: Jesus Christ grieves for the afflictions of his people;
the angel of the Lord answered and Zach. 1. 12.
said, O Lord of hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem; the
Angel here is that Jesus, who is our Advocate 1 John 2. 1, 2.
with the father, he speaks as one intimately affected with the state and
condition of poor Jerusalem: Christ plays the Advocate for his suffering
people; and feelingly pleads for them, he being afflicted in all their
afflictions, it moved him to observe, that God's enemies were in a better case
than his people; and this put him upon that passionate expostulation, O Lord of
hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem. Alexander the great
applied his Crown to the soldiers forehead that had received a wound for him:
and Constantine the great kissed the hollow of Paphnutius eye, that he had lost
for Christ: what an honor was it to the soldier and to Paphnutius, that these
great men should have fellow-feeling of their sufferings, and sympathize with
them in their sorrows? but, oh then, what an honor is it to such poor worms as
we are, that Jesus Christ, who is Godman, who is the Prince of the Kings of the
earth, that he should have a fellow-feeling Rev. 1. 5.
of all our miseries, and sympathize with us in all our troubles! But,

Tenthly, Is Jesus Christ God-man, is he very God and Adam in innocence.
Christ, as man, was perfect in all graces, Isa. 11. 1, 2. And there shall come
forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots;
and the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge, and of
the fear of the Lord. God gave the spirit of wisdom to him not by measure; and
Joh. 3. 34. Luke 2. 46, 47.
therefore, at twelve years of age you find him in the Sanedrim, disputing with
the Doctors, and asking them questions, 1 John, 16. and of his fullness have all
we received grace for grace; Col. 1. 19. for it pleased the father, that in him
should all fullness dwell; cap. 2. 3. In whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. The state of innocence was an excellent estate, it was an
estate of Genesis 1. 27. Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24.
perfect holiness and righteousness, by his holiness he was carried out to know
the Lord, to love the Lord, to delight in the Lord, to fear the Lord, and to
take him as his chiefest good. A legal holiness consists in an exact, perfect,
and complete conformity in heart and life, to the whole reveiled will of God;
and this was the holiness that Adam had in his innocence, and this holiness was
immediately derived from God, and was perfect: Adam's holiness was as
co-natural to him, as unholiness is now to us; Adam's holiness was as natural,
and as pleasing, and as delightful to him, as any way of unholiness can be
natural, pleasing, and delightful to us, The estate of innocence was an estate
of perfect wisdom, knowledge and understanding; witness the names that Adam gave
to Genesis 2. 20.
all the creatures, suitable and apposite to their natures; The estate of
innocence was an estate of great honor and dignity: David brings in Adam in
his innocent estate with a Crown upon his head, and that Crown was a Crown of
glory and honor; thou have crowned him with glory and Psalm. 8. 5.
honor, his place was little lower than the Angels, but far above all other
creatures, The estate of innocence, it was an estate of great Dominion and
Authority, man being made the Sovereign Lord of the whole Creation: Psalm. 8. 6,
7, 8.
we need not stand to enlarge upon one parcel of his demesns; namely, that
which they call Paradise, since the Genesis 1. 26.
whole both of Sea and Land, and all the creatures in both, were his
Possession, his Paradise: certainly man's first estate was a state of perfect
and complete happiness; there being nothing within him, but what was desirable;
nothing without him, but what was amiable; and nothing about him, but what was
serviceable and comfortable: and yet Jesus Christ, who is God-man, is
infinitely more glorious and excellent than ever Adam was; for Adam was set in
a mutable condition, but Christ is the Rock of Ages, he is steadfast, and
abiding for ever; he is yesterday, Heb. 13. 8.
and to day, and the same for ever; he is the same before time, in time, and
after time; he is the same, that is, unchangeable in his Essence, Promises, and
Doctrine; Christ is the same in respect of virtue, and the faith of believers;
even his Manhood, before it was in being, was clothed with perfection of
grace, and so continues for ever. And again, Adam was a mere man, and alone by
himself; but in Christ the humane nature was hypostatically united unto the
divine; and hence it comes to pass, that Christ, even as man, had a greater
measure of knowledge and revelation of Grace, and heavenly gifts, than ever Adam
had. The Apostle tells us, that in Christ dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead, (...), bodily, that is essentially; that is, not by a naked and bare
communicating of virtue, as God is said to dwell in his Saints; but by a
substantial union of the two natures, divine and humane, the eternal word and
the man, consisting of soul and body, whereby they become one, (...), one
person, one subsistence. Now from this admirable and wonderful union of the two
natures in Christ, there flows to the Manhood of Christ a plenitude and fullness
of all spiritual Wisdom and Grace, such as was never found in any mere man, no,
not in Adam whilst he stood in his integrity and uprightness. But,

Eleventhly, Is Jesus Christ God man? is he very God Doctrine of Christ's
Godhead, and Eternal Generation from the father, was greatly opposed by sundry
wicked and blasphemous Heretics, as Ebion, Cerinthus, Arrius, etc, who stirred
up great troubles, and bloody Persecutions against the Church: for maintaining
this great truth of Christ's Godhead, they asserted that Christ had no true
slesh; 'twas only the likeness of flesh which he appeared in, and that his body
was only a fantastic imaginary body; but had the body of Christ been only
such a body; then his conception, nativity, death, resurrection, are all too,
but imaginary things; and then, his sufferings and crucifiction are but mere
fancies too; and if so, then what would become of us, what would become of our
salvation; then our faith would be in vain, and our hope would be in vain, and
our hearing, preaching, praying, and receiving, would all be in vain; yea, then
all our Religion would vanish into a m^re fancy also: when a man's conscience
is awakened to see his sin and misery. and he shall find guilt to lay like a
load upon his soul, and when he shall see that divine justice is to be
satisfied, and divine wrath to be pacified, and the curse to be born, and the
Law to be fulfilled, and his nature to be renewed, his heart to be changed, and
his sins to be pardoned, or ^ls^ his soul can never be saved: how can such a
person venture his soul, his all, upon one that is but a m^re crcature?
certainly, a mere man is no Rock, no City of refuge, and no sure foundation for
a man to build his faith and hope upon, woe to that man, that ever he was born,
that has no Jesus, but a Socinian's Jesus to rest upon: oh, it is sad trusting
to one, who is man, but not God; flesh, but not spirit: as you love the eternal
safety of your precious souls, and would be happy for ever; as you would escape
Hell, and get to Heaven, lean on none, rest on none, but that Jesus who is
God-man, who is very God and very man. Apollinaris held, that Christ took not
the whole nature of man, but a humane body only, without a soul, and that the
Godhead was instead of a soul to the Manhood. Also Eutyches, who confounded the
two natures of Christ, and their properties, etc. Also Apelles and the
Manichees, who denied the true humane body; and held him to have an aerial or
imaginary body. Though the popular sort deified Alexander the great; yet,
having Plutarch, in vita.
got a clap with an Arrow, he said, ye style me Jupiter's son, as if immortal;
sed hoc vulnus clamat esse hominem; this blood that issues from the wound
proves me in the issue, a man: this is, (...), the blood of man, not of God,
and smelling the stench of his own flesh, he asked his flatterers if the God's
yielded such a scent: so may it be said of Jesus Christ our Savior, though
Myriads of Angels and Saints acclaim he is a God, ergo, immortal; and a crew of
Heretics disclaim him to be man, as the Marcionites averred that he had a
fantastical body, and Apelles, who conceived that he had a sydereal substance,
yet the streams of blood following the arrow of death, that struck him, makes
it good, that he was perfect man; of a reasonable soul and humane flesh
subsisting. And as this truth looks sowerly upon the above mentioned persons,
so it looks sowerly upon the Papists; who, by their Doctrine of the real
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, do overthrow one of the properties
of his humane nature, which is to be but in one place present at once. This
truth also looks sowerly upon the Lutherans or Ubiquitaries, who teach, that
Christ's humane nature is in all places by virtue of the personal union, etc. I
wonder that of all the old Errors, swept down into this latter Age, as into a
sink of time, this of the Socinians and Arrians should be held forth among the
rest: O sirs, beware of their Doctrines, shun their meetings, and persons that
come to you with the denial of the Divinity of Christ in their mouths: this was
John's Doctrine and Practice. Irenaeus says, that after he was returned from
his banishment, and came to Ephesus, he came to bathe himself, and in the bath
he found Cerinthus, that said, Christ had no being, till he received it from
the Virgin Mary; upon the sight of whom, John skipped out of the Bath, and
called his companions from thence; saying, let us go from this place, lest the
Bath should fall down upon us, because Cerinthus is in it, that is so great an
enemy to God. ye see his Doctrine, see his words too, 2 John, 10, 11. If any
come to you, having not this doctrine receive him not into your house, neither
bid him God speed: For he that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil
deeds. What that Doctrine was, if you cast your eye upon the Scripture, you
shall find it to be the Doctrine of the Divinity of Christ: show no love where
you owe nothing but hatred; I hate every Psalm. 119. 113.
false way, says David: And, I shall look upon Auxentius as upon a Devil, so
long as he is an Arrian, said Hilarious. We must show no countenance, nor give
no encouragement to such as deny, either ^ne divinity or humanity of Christ.

I have been the longer upon the Divinity and humanity of Christ. 1. Because
the times we live in require it. 2. That poor weak staggering Christians may be
strengthened, established, and settled in the truth, as it is in Jesus. 3. That I
may give in my testimony and witness against all those who are poisoned and
corrupted with Socinian and Arrian Principles, which destroy the souls of men.
4. That those, in whose hands this book may fall, may be the better furnished
to make head against men of corrupt minds; who, by slight of hand, and cunning
craftiness, lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4. 14.

Sixthly, As he that did feel and suffer the very torments of Hell, though not
after a hellish manner, was God-man; so the punishments that Christ did sustain
for us, must be referred only to the substance, and not unto the circumstances
of punishment. The punishment which Christ endured, if it be considered in its
substance, kind, or nature; so 'twas the same with what the sinner himself
should have undergone. Now the punishment due to the sinner was death, the
curse of the Law, etc. now this Christ underwent, for he was made a curse for
us: Gal. 3. 13.
but if you consider the punishment which Christ endured, with respect to
certain circumstances, adjuncts, and accidents, as the eternity of it,
desperation going along with it, etc. then, I say, it was not the same, but
equivalent: Whether the work of man's redemption could have been wrought
without the sufferings and humiliation of Christ, is not determinable by men;
but that it was the most admirable way, which wisdom, justice, and mercy, could
require, cannot be denied.
And the reason is, because, though the enduring of the punishments, as to the
substance of them, could, and did agree with him as a surety, yet the
circumstances of those punishments could not have befallen him, unless he had
been a sinner; and therefore, every inordination in suffering was far from
Christ, and a perpetual duration of suffering could not befall him; for the
first of these had been contrary to the holiness and dignity of his person, and
the other had made void the end of his suretiship and Mediatorship; which was
so to suffer, as yet to conquer, and to deliver, and therefore, though he did
suffer death for us (in the substance of it) yet he neither did nor could
suffer death in the circumstances of it, so as for ever to be held by death;
for then, in suffering death, he should not have conquered death, nor delivered
us from death; neither was it necessary to Christ's substitution, that he
should undergo, in every respect, the same punishment which the offender
himself was liable unto: but if he underwent so much punishment as did satisfy
the Law, and vindicate the Lawgiver, in his holiness, truth, justice, and
righteousness, that was enough. Now, that was unquestionably done by Christ, as
the Scriptures do abundantly testify. It must be readily granted, that Christ
was to suffer the whole punishment due unto sin, so far as it became the
dignity of his person, and the necessity of the work; but if he had suffered
eternally, the work of Redemption could never have been accomplished; and
besides, he should have suffered that which could no ways beseem him. And
therefore the Apostle says, Heb. 2. 10. It became him to be consecrated
through sufferings: Christ was only to pass through such sufferings as became
him, who was ordained to be the Prince and Captain of our salvation. It became
him to be man, and it became him in our humane nature to suffer death, and it
became him to sustain for us the substance of those punishments that we should
have undergone; and accordingly, he did: what our sins did deserve, and what
justice might lay upon us for those sins, all that did Christ certainly suffer
or bear: Jesus Christ did so suffer for our sins, as that his sufferings were
fully answerable to the demerit of our sins. And I think I may safely say, that
God, in justice, could not require any more, or lay on any one more punishment
than Jesus Christ did suffer for our sins: and my reason is this, because
Christ bare all our sins and all our sorrows, and was obedient unto the death,
and made a Isa. 53. Gal. 3. 13.
curse for us; and more than this, the Law of God could not require: and if
Christ did suffer all that the Law of God required, then certainly he suffeed
so much as did satisfy the justice of God: viz. as much punishment as was
commensurated with sin. But,

Seventhly and lastly, the meritorious cause, the main 7. Isa. 53. 4, 5. There
were other subordinate ends of his sufferings; as, 1. To sanctify sufferings
to us. 2. To sweeten sufferings to us. 3. To succor us experimentally under
all our sufferings, Heb. 2. 17, 18. 4. That he might be prepared to enter into
his glory, Luke 24. 26 5. That he might be a Conqueror over sufferings, which
was one piece of his greatest glory, etc.
end, and the special occasion of all the sufferings of Christ, were the sins
of his people: Christ was our surety, and he could not satisfy for our sins,
nor reconcile us to God without suffering, Isa. 53. 5. But he was wounded for
our transgressions; the Hebrew word for wounded, (...), has a double Emphasis;
either it may signify that he was pierced through as with a dart, or that he
was tormented or pained, as women or other creatures are wont to be that bring
forth with pain and torment, at the time of their travail: for the word in the
Text last cited, comes regularly from a root that signifies properly to be in
pain, as women are when they bring forth. It was our transgressions that gave
Christ his deadly wounds, it was our sins that smote him, and bruised him. Look
as Zippora said to Moses, Exodus 4. 25. Surely, a bloody husband art thou to me;
so may Christ say to his Church, surely a bloody spouse have thou been to me;
Christ's spouse may look upon him, and say, It was I that have been that Judas,
that have betrayed thee, it was I that was the soldiers that murdered thee, It
was my sins that brought all sorrows and sufferings, all mischiefs and evils
upon thee: I have sinned, and thou have suffered: I have eaten the sower
Grapes, and thy teeth were set on edge: I have sinned, and thou have died: I
have wounded thee, and thou have healed me. It is the wisdom, and oh, that it
might be more and more, the work of every believer, to look upon an humble
Christ with an humble heart, a broken Christ with a broken heart, a bleeding
Christ with a bleeding heart, a wounded Christ with a wounded heart; according
to that, Zech. 12. 10. Christ was wounded, bruised, and cut off for sinners
sins. When Christ was taken by the soldiers, he said, If ye seek me, let these
go their way: Christ was willing, that the hurt which sinners had done to God,
and the debt which they owed to him, should be set upon his score, and put upon
his account: and the Apostle mentions it as a remarkable thing, That Christ
died for the ungodly, Romans 5. 8. The just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3. 18. our
sins were the meritorious cause of Christ's sufferings; Christ did not suffer
for himself, for Heb. 4. 15. cap. 7. 26.
he was without sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. The grand design,
errand and business about which Christ came into the world, was to save
sinners: He had his 1 Timothy 1. 15. Mat. 1. 21.
name Jesus, because he was to save is people from their sins: he died for our
sins; not only for our good, as the final cause; but for our sins, as the
procuring cause of his death. He was delivered for our offenses, Christ died
Romans 4. 25. 1 Cor. 15. 3.
for our sins according to the scriptures: that is, according to what was
typified, prophesied, and promised in the blessed Scriptures, Gal. 1. 4. He
gave himself for our sins; 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his
own body upon the tree: by whose stripes ye were healed, (...). The whole
Testament has not the like two relatives at once in the original, as if I
should say, by whose stripes of his, we are healed. Peter (says Estius)
alludes to the stripes that servants receive from their cruel masters:
therefore he return to the second person, ye are healed: here you see that the
Physician's blood became the sick man's salve, we can hardly believe the power
of sword-salve. But here is a mystery, that only the Gospel can assure us of,
that the wounding of one should be the cure of another: Oh, what an odious
thing is sin to God, that he will pardon none without blood, yea, without the
blood of his dearest son! Oh, what a Hell of wickedness Heb. 9. 22. 1 Pet. 1.
18, 19.
must there be in sin, that nothing can expiate it, but the best, the purest,
the noblest blood that ever run in veins! Oh, what a transcendent evil must sin
be, that nothing can purge it away but death, but the death of the Cross, no
death but an accursed death! Oh, what a Leprosy is sin, that it must have
blood, yea, the blood of God to take it away!

Now, thus you have seen, 1. That the sufferings of Christ have been free and
voluntary, and not constrained or forced. 2. That they have been very great and
heinous. 3. That the punishments which Christ did suffer for our sins, were in
their parts, and kinds, and degrees, and proportion, all those punishments
which were due unto us by reason of our sins; and which we our selves should
otherwise have suffered. 4. That Jesus Christ did feel and suffer the very
torments of Hell, though not after a hellish manner. 5. That he that did feel
and suffer the torments of hell, though not after a hollish manner, was
God-man. 6. That the punishments that Christ did sustain for us, must be
referred only to the substance, and not to the circumstances of punishment. 7.
That the meritorious cause of all the sufferings of Christ, were the sins of
his people. Now, to that great question of giving up your account at last,
according to the import of Eccles. 11. 9. cap. 12. 14. Mat. 12. 14. cap. 18.
23. Luke 16. 3. Ram. 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb. 9. 27. cap. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 7.
those ten Scripures in the margent; you may in the fourth place, make this
safe, noble, and happy plea; Oh blessed God, Jesus Christ has suffered all
those things that were due unto me for my sin; he has suffered even to the
worst and uttermost; for all that the Law threatened was a curse, and Christ was
made a curse for me, Gal. 3. 13. he knew no sin, but was made sin for me; 2
Cor. 5. 21. and what Christ suffered, he suffered as my surety, and in my
stead; and therefore, what he suffered for me, is as if I had suffered all that
my self; and his sufferings has appeased thy wrath, and satisfied thy justice,
and reconciled thee to my self. For God was in Christ, reconciling the 2 Cor.
5. 19.
world to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. And he has
reconciled both (Jews and Gentiles) unto God, in one body, on the Cross; having
slain enmity thereby: Jesus Christ took upon him all my sins; they were all of
them laid upon him, and he bare or suffered all the wrath and punishment due
for them, and he suffered all as my surety, in my stead, and for my good; and
thou did design him for all this, and accepted of its sufficient and
effectual on my behalf. Oh, with what comfort, courage, and confidence, may a
believer, upon these considerations, hold up his head in the great day of his
account.

Let me now make a few inferences from the consideration of all the great and
grievous sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ: and therefore!

First, Let us stand still, and admire and wonder at the love of Jesus Christ
to poor sinners; that Christ should rather dye for us, than the Angels; they
were creatures of a This is the envy of Devils, and the admiration of Angels
and Saints.
The Angels were more honorable and excellent creatures than we; they were
celestial spirits, we earthly bodies, dust and ashes; they were immediate
attendants upon God, they were, as I may say, of his privy chamber; we servants
of his in the lower house of this world, farther remote from his glorious
presence; their office was to sing Hallelujahs, Songs of praise to God in the
heavenly Paradise, ours to dress the Garden of Eden, which was but an earthly
Paradise; they sinned but once, and but in thought (as is commonly thought,)
but Adam sinned in thought, by lusting, in deed, by tasting, and in word, by
excusing: why did not Christ suffer for their sins, as well as for ours? or if
for any, why not for theirs rather than ours? Even so, O Father, for so it
pleased thee. We move this question, not as being curious to search thy secret
counsels, O Lord, but that we may be the more swallowed Mat. 11. 26.
up in the admiration of the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, of the
love of Christ, which passes knowledge. The Apostle, being in a holy admiration
of Ephesians. 3. 18. 19.
Christ's love, affirms it to pass knowledge; that God, who is the eternal
Being, should love man when he had scarce Prove. 8. 30, 31.
a Being, that he should be enamoured with deformity, that he should love us
when in our blood, that he should pity us when no eye pitied us, no, not our
own: Oh, such was Christ's transcendent love, that man's extreme Ezekiel. 16.
misery could not abate it; the deploredness of man's condition did but
heighten the holy flame of Christ's love; it is as high as Heaven, who can reach
it? it is as low as Hell, who can understand it? Heaven (through its glory)
could not contain him (man being miserable) nor Hell's torments make him
refrain, such was his perfect matchless love to fallen man: that Christ's love
should extend to the ungodly, to sinners, to enemies that were in arms of
rebellion against him; yea, not only so, but Romans 5. 6, 8, 10.
that he should hug them in his arms lodge them in his bosom, dandle them upon
his knees, and lie them to his breasts, that they may suck and be satisfied, is
the highest improvement of love. That Christ should come from the Isa. 66. 11,
12, 13.
eternal bosom of his father, to a Region of sorrow and John 1. 18. Isa. 53. 4.
1 Timothy 3. 16. John 17. 5. Mat. 25.
death; that God should be manifested in the flesh, the Creator made a
creature; that he that was clothed with glory, should be wrapped with rags of
flesh; that he that filled Heaven, should be cradled in a manger; that the God
of Israel should fly into Egypt, that the God of strength, should be weary;
that the judge of all flesh should be condemned; that the God of life should be
put to death; that he that is one with his father, should cry out John 19. 41.
of misery, O my father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me; that he
that had the keys of hell and death, Mat. 26. 39. Rev. 1. 18. John 19. 41, 42.
should lie imprisoned in the Sepulcher of another, having, in his life time,
no where to lay his head; nor after death, to lay his body; and all this for
man, for fallen man, for miserable man, for worthless man, is beyond the
thoughts of created natures. The sharp, the universal and continual sufferings
of our Lord Jesus Christ, from the cradle to the cross, does above all other
things speak out the transcendent love of Jesus Christ to poor sinners: That
wrath, that great wrath, that fierce wrath, that pure wrath, that infinite
wrath, that matchless wrath of an angry God, that was so terribly impressed upon
the Soul of Christ, quickly spent his natural strength, and turned his moisture
into the Psalm. 32. 4.
drought of summer; and yet all this wrath he patiently underwent, that Sinners
might be saved, and that he Heb. 2. 10.
might bring many sons unto glory. O wonder of love! Love is passive, it
enables to suffer: The Curtii laid down their lives for the Romans, because
they loved them; so 'twas love that made our dear Lord Jesus lay down his life,
to save us from hell and to bring us to heaven. As the Pelican, out of their
love to her young ones, when they are bitten with Serpents, feeds them with her
own blood, Genesis 3. 15.
to recover them again; so when we were bitten by the old Serpent, and our
wound incurable, and we in danger of eternal death, then did our dear Lord
Jesus, that he might recover us and heal us, feed us with his own Jeh. 6. 53.
54, 55, 56. Dilexisti me Demine magis. quam teipsum, Bern.
blood: O love unspeakable! This made one cry out, Lord thou have loved me more
than thy self; for thou have laid down thy life for me. It was only the golden
link of love that fastened Christ to the Cross, and Joh. 10. 17.
that made him die freely for us, and that made him willing to be numbered among
transgressors, that we might Isa. 53. 12.
be numbered among general assemby and church of the Heb. 12. 23.
first born, which are written in heaven. If Jonathan's 2 Samuel 1. 26.
love to David was wonderful, how wonderful must the Heb. 10. 10.
love of Christ be to us, which led him by the hand to make himself an offering
for us, which Jonathan never did for David: for though Jonathan loved David's
life and safety well, yet he loved his own better; for when his father cast a
javelin at him to smite him, he flies 1 Samuel 10. 33, 34, 35.
for it, and would not abide his fathers fury, being very willing to sleep in a
whole skin, notwithstanding his wonderful love to David; making good the
Philosophers notion, that Man is a life-lover. Christ's love is like his name,
and that is wonderful, yea it is so wonderful, that Isa. 9. 6.
it is supra omnem creaturam, ultra omnem mensuram, contra omnem naturam, above
all creatures, beyond allmeasure, contrary to all nature. It Is above all
Creatures, for it is above the Angels, and therefore above all others: It Is
beyond all Measure, for time did not begin it, and time shall never end it;
place does not bound it, sin does not exceed it, no estate, no age, no sex is
denied it, tongues cannot express it, understandings cannot conceive it: and
it is contrary to all Nature; for what nature can love where it is hated? what
nature can forgive, where it is provoked? what nature can offer reconcilement
where it receives wrong? what nature can heap up kindness upon contempt,
favor upon ingratitude, mercy upon sin? and yet Christ's love has led him to
all this; so that well may we spend all our days in admiring and adoring of this
wonderful love, and be always ravished with the thoughts of it. But

Secondly, Then look that ye love the Lord Jesus Act. 20. 24. cap. 21. 12, 13.
2 Cor. 1. 8, 9, 10. cap. 4. 11. cap. 11. 23. Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38, 39.
our Lord Jesus Christ with an over-topping love, Rev 12. 11. They loved not
their lives unto the death, that is, they slighted, contemned, yea despised
their lives, exposing them to hazard and loss, out of love to the Lamb, who had
washed them in his blood. I have read of one Kilian a Dutch Scholmaster, who
being asked whether he did not love his wife and Children, answered, Were all
the world a lump of gold, and in my hands to dispose of, I would leave it at my
enemies feet to live with them in a prison; but my Soul and my Savior are
dearer to me than all. If my father (says Jerome) should stand Hieron. ad
Heliodor. epist. 1.
before me, and my mother hang upon, and my brethren should press about me, I
would break through my brethren, throw down my father, and tread underfoot my
mother, to cleave to Jesus Christ. Had I ten heads, Cere non amaut illi
Christum, qui ali quid plusqe, am ^^ristum amant, Aug. de resurr. Hey do not
l^ve Christ, who love any thing more than Christ.
said Henry Voes, they should all off for Christ. If every hair of my head
(said John Ardley Martyr) were a man, they should all suffer for the Faith of
Christ. Let fire, racks, pullies (said Ignatius) and all the torments of Hell
come upon me, so I may win Christ. Love made Hierom to say, O my Savior, did
thou die for love of me? a love more dolorous than death; but to The more
Christ has suffered for us, the dearer Christ should be unto us: the greater
and the bitterer Christ's sufferings have been for us, the greater and the
sweeter should our love be to him.
me a death more lovely than love it self; I cannot live, love thee, and be
longer from thee. George Carpenter being asked whether he did not love his wife
and children, which stood weeping before him, answered, My wife and children;
my wife and children are dearer to me than all Bavaria, yet for the love of
Christ I know them not. That blessed Virgin in Basil, being condemned for
Christianity to the fire, and having her estate and life offered her if she
would worship Idols, cried out, Let money perish, and life vanish, Christ is
better than all. Sufferings for Christ, are the Saints greatest glory; they are
those things wherein they have most gloried: Crudelitas vestra, gloria nostra,
your cruelty is our glory, says Tertullian. It is reported of Babylas, that
when he was to die for Christ, he desired this favor, that his Chains might be
buried with him, as the ensigns of his honor. Thus you see with what a
superlative love, with what an over-topping love, former Saints have loved our
Lord Jesus; and can you Christians, who are cold and low in your love to
Christ, read over these instances, and not blush? Certainly the more Christ
has suffered for us, the more dear Christ should be unto us; the more bitter
his sufferings have been for us, the more sweet his love should be to us, and
the more eminent should be our love to him: O let a suffering Christ lie
nearest your hearts; let him be your Manna, your Tree of Life, your
Morning Star: it is better to part with all than with this Pearl of price.
Christ is that golden pipe through which the golden oil of salvation runs; and
oh how should this inflame our love to Christ! Oh that our hearts were more
affected with the sufferings of Christ! Who can tread upon these hot coals, and
his Can. 8. 7, 8.
heart not burn in love to Christ, and cry out with Ignatius, Christ my love is
crucified? If a friend should die Joh. 10. 17, 18.
for us, how would our hearts be affected with his kindness! and shall the God
of Glory lay down his life for us, and shall we not be affected with his
goodness? Shall Saul be affected with David's kindness in sparing his life, 1 Samuel 24. 16.
and shall not we be affected with Christ's kindness, who Joh. 1. 18.
to save our life, lost his own? O the infinite love of Christ, that he should
leave his Fathers bosom, and come down Joh. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4.
from heaven, that he might carry you up to heaven; that he that was a Son
should take upon him the form of a Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8.
servant, that you of slaves should be made Sons, of enemies should be made
friends, of heirs of wrath should Romans 8. 17.
be made heirs of God and joynt-heirs with Christ; that to save us from
everlasting ruin, Christ should stick at nothing, but be willing to be made
flesh, to lie in a manger, to be tempted, deserted, persecuted, and to die upon
a Cross! O what flames of love should these things kindle in all our hearts to
Christ! Love is compared to fire; in heaping love upon our enemy, we heap coals
of R^m. 12. 19, 20. Prove. 26. 21.
fire upon his head: now the property of fire is to turn all it meets with into
its own nature, fire makes all things fire, the coal makes burning coals; and
is it not a wonder then, that Christ having heaped abundance of the fiery coals
of his love upon our heads, we should yet be but key-cold in our love to him.
Ah what sad metal are we made of, that Christ's fiery love cannot inflame our
love to Christ! Moses wondered why the Bush Exodus 3. 3.
consumed not, when he see it all on fire; but if you please but to look into
your own hearts, you shall see a greater wonder; for you shall see that though
you walk (like those three Children in the fiery furnace) even in the Dan. 3.
midst of Christ's fiery love, flaming round about you; yet there is but
little, very little true smell of that sweet fire of love to be felt or found
upon you, or in you: Oh when shall the sufferings of a dear and tenderhearted
Savior kindle such a flame of love in all our hearts, as shall still be a
breaking forth in our lips and lives, in our words and ways, to the praise and
glory of free Grace? Cant. 2. 5.
O that the sufferings of a loving Jesus might at last make us all sick of
love! O let him for ever lie betwixt our Cant. 1. 13.
breasts, who has left his Fathers bosom for a time, that he might be
enbosom'd by us for ever. But

Thirdly, Then in the sufferings of Christ, as in a Psalm. 119. 104, 113, 128.
Romans 7. 15. cap. 12. 9.
behold it in the ^ed Glass of Christ's sufferings. Can we look upon sin, as
the occasion of all Christ's sufferings; can we look upon sin, as that which
made Christ a curse, and that made him forsaken of his Father, and that made
him live such a miserable life, and that brought him to die such a shameful,
painful and cruel death, and our hearts not rise against it? Shall our sins be
grievous unto Christ, and shall they not be odious unto us? shall he die for
our sins, and shall not we die to our sins? did not he therefore suffer for
sin, that we might cease from sin? did not he bear our sins in his own body on
the tree, 1 Pet. 4. 1.
that we being dead to sin, should live to righteousness? If 1 Pet. 2. 24.
one should kill our father, would we hug and embrace him as our father? no, we
would be revenged on him: Sin has killed our Savior, and shall we not be
revenged on it. Can a man look upon that Snake that has stung his dearly
beloved spouse to death, and preserve it alive, warm it at the fire, and hug it
in his bosom, and not rather stab it with a thousand wounds? It Is sin that has
stung our dear Jesus to death, that has crucified our Lord, clouded his glory,
and shed his precious blood, and oh how should this stir up our indignation
against it: ah how can a Christian make much of those sins that killed his
deared Lord! how can he cherish those sins that betrayed Christ, and
apprehended Christ, and bound Christ, and condemned Christ, and scourged
Christ, and that violently drew him to the Cross and there murdered him! It was
neither Judas, nor Pilate, nor the Jews, nor the Soldiers, that could have
done our Lord Jesus the least hurt, had not our sins, like so many Butchers and
Hangmen, come in to their assistance. After Julius Caesar was treacherously
murdered in the Senate House, Antonius brought forth his Coat, all bloody, cut
and mangled, and laying it open to the view of the people, said, Look, here is
your Emperors coat, and as the bloody conspirators have dealt by it, so have
they dealt with Caesar's body; whereupon the people were all in an uproar, and
nothing would satisfy them but the death of the murderers, and they run to
the houses of the conspirators, and burnt them down to the ground: But what was
Caesar's coat, and Caesar's body, to the body of our dear Lord Jesus, which was
all bloody, rent and torn for our sins? Ah, how should this provoke us to be
revenged on our sins! how should we for ever loath and abhor them! how should
our fury be whetted against them! how should we labor with all our might to be
the death of those sins, that have been the death of so great a Lord, and will,
if not prevented, be the death of our Souls to all eternity. To see God thrust
the sword of his pure, infinite and incensed wrath, through the very heart of
his dearest Son, notwithstanding all his supplications, prayers, Heb. 5. 7.
tears and strong cries, is the highest discovery of the Lords hatred and
indignation of sin that ever was or will be: It Is true God discovered his great
hatred against sin, by turning Adam out of Paradise, and by casting the Angels
down to hell, by drowning the old world, and by raining hell out of heaven upon
Sodom and Gomorrah, and by the various and dreadful judgments that he has been
a pouring forth upon the world in all ages: but all this hatred is but the
picture of hatred, to that hatred which God manifested against sin in causing
the whole curse to meet upon our crucified Lord, as all streams meet in the
sea. It Is true, God discovers his hatred of sin, by those endless, easless and
remediless torments that he inflicts upon Devils and damned spirits; but this
is no hatred, to that hatred against sin, which God discovered when he opened
all the floodgates of his envenomed wrath upon his Son, his own Son, his only
Son, his Son Isa. 53. 5, 6. Prove. 8. 30, 31. Matthew. 3. ult.
that always pleased him, his Son that never offended him. Should you see a
father that had but one son, and he such a son in whom he always delighted, and
by whom he had never been provoked; a son that always made it his business, his
work, his heaven to promote Joh. 8. 49, 50.
the honor and glory of his father, a son who was always Joh. 9. 4.
most at ease, when most engaged in his fathers service; Joh. 4. 34.
a son who counted it his meat and drink to do his father's will: now should
you see the father of such a son, inflicting the most exquisite pains and
punishments, tortures and torments, calamities and miseries upon this his
dearest son, you would readily conclude, that certainly the sins, the offenses
that have put the father upon exercising such amazing, such matchless severity,
fury and cruelty, upon his only Son, are infinitely hateful, odious Jer. 44. 4.
Zech. 8. 17. The Rabbis, to scare their Scholars from sin used to tell them,
that sin made God's head ache; but I may say, sin has made Christ's head ache
and his heart ach too.
and and abominable to him. Now if you please but to cast your eye upon the
actings of God the Father toward. Jesus Christ, you will find that he has
inflicted more torments and greater torments upon the Son of his dearest love,
than all mortals ever have or could inflict upon their only sons, Isai. 53. 6.
The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all, Heb. Has made the
iniquities of us all to meet on him, or to light or fall on him rather; God
made all the penalties and sufferings, that were due to us, to fall upon Jesus
Christ, as a man is wont to fall with all his might in a hostile manner upon
his enemy; God himself inflicted upon dear Jesus, whatsoever was requisite to
the satisfying of his Justice, to the obtaining of pardon, and to the saving of
all his elect, verse. 10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to
grief: all the devils in hell, nor all the men upon earth, could never have
bruised or put to grief our Lord Jesus; if it had not pleased the Lord to
bruise him and put him to grief, he had never been bruised or put to grief: O
how should this work us to look upon sin with indignation!

Suppose a man should come to a Table, and there should be a knife laid at his
Trencher, and it should be told him, this is the very knife that cut the throat
of your child or father; if this person should use this knife as any other
knife, would not every one say, Surely this man had but very little love to his
father or his child, who can use this bloody knife as any other knife: So when
you meet with any temptation to sin, O then say, This is the very knife that
cut the throat of Jesus Christ, that pierced his sides, that was the cause of
his sufferings, and that made Christ to be a curse, and accordingly let your
hearts rise against it: Ah, how well does it become Christians to look upon
sin, as that accursed thing that made Christ a curse, and accordingly to abhor
it! Oh with what detestation should a man fling away such a knife! and with the
like detestation should every Christian fling away his sins, as Ephraim did his
Idols, Get you Hosea 14. 8. Isa. 2. 20. cap. 30. 22.
hence, what have I any more to do with you? Sin, thou have slain my Lord, thou
have been the only cause of the death of my Savior: Let us say as David, Is
not this the 2 Samuel 23. 17.
blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives? so, is not this the sin
that poured out Christ's blood? oh how should this enrage our hearts against
sin, because it cost Heb. 2. 10.
the Captain of our salvation, not the hazard, but the very loss of his life!
God showed Moses a tree wherewith he Exodus 15. 25.
might make the bitter waters sweet; but lo, here is a tree wherewith ye may
make the sweet waters of sin to become bitter: Look upon the tree on which
Christ was crucified, remember his Cross, and the pains he suffered thereon,
and the seeming sweetness that is in sin will quickly vanish; when you are
solicited to sin, cast your eye upon Christ's Cross, remember his astonishing
sufferings for sin, and it will soon grow distasteful to your souls: for how
can that choose but be hateful to us, if we seriously consider how hurtful it
was to Jesus Christ? who can look upon the Cross of Christ, and excuse his sin,
as Adam did, saying, The woman which thou gave me, she Genesis 3. 12.
gave me of the tree, and I did eat? who can look upon the Cross of Christ, and
color his sin, as Judas did, saying, Hail Matthew. 26. 49.
Master? who can look upon the Cross of Christ, and deny his sin, as Gehazi
did, saying, Thy servant went no whither? 2 Kings 5. 25.
who can look upon the Cross of Christ, and defend his sin, as Jonah did,
saying, I do well to be angry? O sirs! where is Jonah 4. 9.
that hatred of sin that use to be in the Saints of old? David could say, I
hate vain thoughts, and I hate every false Psalm. 119, 104, 113, 128. Romans 7, 15.
way; and Paul could say, what I hate that do I. It Is better (says one) to be
in hell with Christ, than to be in heaven with sin: O how odious was sin in the
Saints eye! The primitive Christians chose rather to be cast to Lions without,
Ad leonem magis qnam lemonem, says Tertullian.
than to be left to lusts within, so great was their hatred of sin. I had
rather (says Anselm) go to hell pure from sin, than to heaven poluted with
that guilt: I will rather (says another) leap into a Bonfire, than wilfully to
sin against God. Under the Law, if an Ox gored a man that he died, the Exodus
21. 28.
Ox was to be killed: Sin has gored and pierced our dear Lord Jesus, O let it
die for it; O avenge your selves upon it, as Sampson did avenge himself upon
the Philistines, for Judge. 16. 28.
his two eyes. P^lutarch reports of Marcus Cato, that he never declared his
opinion in any matter in the Senate, but he would close it with this passage,
Methinks still Carthage should be destroyed; so a Christian should never cast
his eye upon the Cross of Christ, the sufferings of Christ, nor upon his sins,
but his heart should say, Methinks pride should be destroyed, and unbelief
should be destroyed, and hypocrisy should be destroyed, and earthly-mindedness
should be destroyed, and self-love should be destroyed, and vain glory should
be destroyed, etc. The Jews would not have the pieces of silver, which Judas
cast down in the Temple, put in the Treasury, because Man. 27. 5, 6.
they were the price of blood: Oh, lodge not any one sin in the Treasury of your
hearts, for they are all the price of blood. But,

Fourthly, let the sufferings of our Lord Jesus raise in Mat. 10. 37. Luke 14.
26.
graces, and above all our privileges, and above all our outward contentments,
and above all our spiritual enjoyments! a suffering Christ is a commodity of
greater value than all the riches of the Indies, yea, than all the wealth of
the whole world; he is better than Rubies (says Prove. 8. 11.
Solomon, and all the things thou can desire are not to be compared to him:
he is that Pearl of price, which the wise Merchant purchased with all that ever
he had; no Mat. 13. 46,
man can buy such Gold too dear. Joseph (a type of the Lord Jesus) then a
precious Jewel of the world, was far more precious, had the Ishmaelitish
Merchants known so Genesis 27. 37.
much, than all the Balms and Myrrhs that they transported: and so is a
suffering Christ, as all will grant, that really know him, and that have
experienced the sweet of union and communion with him. Christ went through
heaven and hell, life and death, sorrow and suffering, misery and cruelty, and
all to bring us to glory, and shall we not prize him? When, in a storm, the
Nobles of Xerxes were to lighten the ship, to preserve their King's life, they
did their obeisance, and leaped into the Sea: but our Lord Jesus Christ, to
preserve our lives, Col. 1. 18.
our souls, he leaps into a Sea of wrath. Oh, how should this work us to set up
Christ above all! what a deal ado has there been in the world, about Alexander
the great, and Constantine the great, and Pompey the great, because of their
civil power and authority: but what was all their greatness and grandeur, to
that greatness and grandeur, that God the father put upon our Lord Jesus
Christ, when Mat 28. 1^. Heb. 1. 13. Ephesians. 1. 20.
he gave all power in heaven and in earth unto him, and set him down at his own
right hand? Oh sirs! will you value men according to their titles, and will you
not highly value our Lord Jesus Christ, who has the most magnificent titles
given him? he is called King of Kings, Rev. 17. 14. cap. 19. 16.
and Lord of Lords. It is observed by learned Drusins, that those Titles were
usually gi^^n to the great Kings of Persia, than which, there was none assumed
more to themselves, than they did: yet the holy Ghost attributes these great
Titles to Christ, to let us know, that as God has exalted Christ above all
earthly powers, so we should magnify him, and exalt him accordingly. Paul,
casting his eye upon a suffering Christ, tells us, that he esteems of (...),
Phil. 3. 8.
all things, as nothing in comparison of Christ; All things, is the greatest
account that can be cas^ up; for it includes all prizes, all sums, it takes
in heaven, it takes in the vast and huge Globe and Circle of the capacious
world, and all excellencies within its bosom: all things, includes all Nations,
All Angels, all Gold, all Jewels, all Honors, all delights, and every thing
else besides: and yet the Apostle looks upon all these things (...), quasi
(...), micae quae canibus: vide a Lapide, vide Bezam; the original word notes
the filth that comes out of the entrails of beasts or off all, cast to dogs.
but as (...), dung, dog's dung (as some interpret the word) or dogs meat,
course and contemptible, in comparison of dear Jesus. Galeacius, that noble
Italian Marquess, was of the same mind and metal with Paul; for when he was
strongly tempted, and solicited with great sums of money, and preferments, to
return to the Romish Church; he gave this heroic answer, Cursed be he that
prefers all the wealth of the world, to one days communion with Christ. What if
a man had large demains, stately buildings, and ten thousand rivers of Oil;
what if all the mountains of the world were Pearl, the mighty Rocks Rubies, and
the whole Globe a shining Chrysolite; yet all this were not to be named in the
same day, wherein there is mention made of a suffering Christ. Look, as one
Ocean has more waters than all the rivers in the world, and as one Sun has
more light than all the Luminaries in heaven; so one suffering Christ is more
all to a poor soul, than if it had the all of the whole world a thousand times
over and over. Oh sirs! if you cast but your eye upon a suffering Christ, a
crucified Jesus; there you shall find righteousness in him to cover all your
sins, and plenty enough in him to supply all your wants, and grace enough in
him to subdue all your lusts, and wisdom enou^h in him to resolve all your
doubts, and power enough in him to vanquish all your enemies, and virtue enough
in him to heal all your diseases, Heb. 7. 25. I have read of a Roman servant,
who knowing his master was sought for by officers, to be put to death; he put
himself into his master's clothes that he might be taken for him; and so he
was, and was put^ to death for him: whereupon his master, in memory of his
thankfulness to him, and honor of him, erected a brazen Statue: but what a
statue of Gold should we set up in our hearts to the eternal honor and
exaltation of that Jesus, who not in our clothes, but in our very nature, has
laid down his life for us!
and fullness enough in him, both to satisfy you and save you, and that to the
utmost. All the good things that can be reckoned up here below, have only a
finite and limited benignity: some can cloth, but cannot feed; others can
nourish, but they cannot heal; others can enrich, bu^ they cannot secure;
others can adorn, but cannot advance; all do serve, but none do satisfy; they
are like a beggars coat, made up of many pieces; not all enough, either to
beautify, defend, or satisfy: but there is enough in a suffering Christ, to
fill us and satisfy us to the full; Christ has the greatest worth and wealth
in him. Look, as the worth and value of many pieces of Silver, is to be found
in one piece of Gold; so all the petty excellencies that are scattered abroad
in the creatures, we to be found in a bleeding dying Christ; yea, all the whole
volume of perfections, which is spread through heaven and earth, is epitomized
in him that suffered on the Cross, nec Christus, nec coelum patitur hyperbolen,
a man cannot hyperbolize in speaking of Christ and heaven; but must entreat his
hearers, as Tully does his readers, concerning the worth of L. Crassus; (ut
majus quiddam de iis quam quae scripta sunt suspicarentur, 3. De oratore) that
they would conceive much more than he was able to express: certainly, it is as
easy to compass the heavens with a span, and contein the sea in a nut-shell,
as to relate fully, a suffering, Christ's excellencies, or heaven's happiness.
O sirs! there is in a crucified Jesus, something proportionable to all the
straits, wants, necessities, and desires of his poor people. He is bread to
nourish them, and a garment to John. 6. 5, 6, 37. Rev. 13. 14. Mat. 9. 12. Isa
9. 6. Heb. 2. 10. Act. 5. 31.
cover and adorn them, a Physician to h^al them, a Counselor to advise them, a
Captain to defend them, a Prince to rule, a Prophet to teach, and a Priest to
make atonement Act. 7. 37, 38. Heb. 2. 17, 18. cap. 4. 15, 16. 2 Cor. 11. 2.
Isa. 9. 6, 7. John. 20. 17. Isa. 28. 16. Rev. 22. 16. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.
for them; an Husband to protect, a Father to provide, a Brother to relieve, a
Foundation to support, a Root to quicken, a Head to guide, a Treasure to
enrich, a Sun to enlighten, and a Fountain to cleanse. Now what can any
Christian desire more, to satisfy him and save him, to make him holy and happy
in both Worlds? Shall the Romans and other Nations highly value those that have
but ventured to lay down their lives for their Country, and shall not we
highly value the Lord Jesus Christ, who has actually laid down his life for
his sheep? I have John 10. 11, 15, 17.
read of one, who walking in the fields by himself, of a sudden, fell into loud
cries and weeping; and being asked (by one that passed by, and overheard him)
the cause of his lamentation; I weep (says he) to think that the Lord Jesus
Christ should do so much for us men; and yet, not one man of a thousand so much
as mind him, or think of him. Oh what a bitter Lamentation have we cause to
take up, that the Lord Jesus Christ has suffered so many great and grievous
things for poor sinners; and that there are so few that sincerely love him, or
that highly value him; most men preferring their lusts, or else the Toys and
Trifles of this world above him. But,

Fifthly, let the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ work Mat. 16. 24.
and follow him: did Christ suffer, who knew no sin? and shall we think it
strange to suffer, who know nothing but sin? shall he lie swelthering under his
father's wrath, and shall we cry out of men's anger? was he crowned Godfrey of
Bullen first King of Jerusalem, refused to be crowned with a Crown of Gold;
saying, that it became not a Christian to wear a Crown of Gold, where Christ,
for our salvation, had worn a Crown of thorns.
with thorns, and must we be crowned with rose-buds? was his whole life, from
the cradle to the cross, made up of nothing but sorrows and sufferings? and
must our lives, from the cradle to the grave, be filled up with nothing but
pleasures and delights? was he despised, and must we be admired? was he
debased, and must we be exalted? was he poor, and must we be rich? was he low,
and must we be high? did he drink of a bitter cup, a bloody cup; and will no
cups serve our turns, but cups of consolation? Let us not think any thing too
much to do for Christ, nor any thing too great to suffer for Christ, nor any
thing too dear to part with for such a Christ, such a Savior, that thought
nothing too much to do, or too grievous to suffer, that so he might accomplish
the work of our Redemption. He left heaven for us, and shall not John 1. 18.
we let go this world for him? he left his father's bosom for us, and shall not
we leave the bosoms of our dearest Relations Psalm. 45. 10, 11. Mat. 10. 37.
for him? he underwent all sorts of sufferings for us, let us as readily
encounter with all sorts of sufferings for him: Paul was so inured to
sufferings for Christ, that ^ Cor. 12. 10. 2 Cor. 11. 23, to verse 28.
he could rejoice in his sufferings, he gloried most in his chains, and he
looked upon his scars, buffetings, scourgings, stoneings for Christ, as his
greatest triumphs. And how ambitious were the primitive Christians of Martyrdom
in the cause of Christ: and of late, in the times of the Marian Persecution,
how many hundreds cheerfully and willingly laid down their lives; mounting,
Eliah-like to heaven in fiery charriots. And, oh, how will Christ own and
honor such Christians at last, as have Rev. 3. 21.
not set on others, but exposed themselves to hazards, losses and sufferings
for his sake! as those brave souls, who Rev. 12. 11.
loved not their lives unto the death; that is, the despised their lives in
comparison of Christ; they exposed their Heb. 11, 33, to 39. cap. 10. 34.
bodies to horrible and painful deaths, their temporal estates to the spoil,
and their persons to all manner of shame and contempt for the cause of Christ:
in the days of that bloody persecutor Dioclesian, the Christians showed
certatim Plo^iosa in certamina ruebatur, etc. Sulpitius.
as glorious power in the faith of Martyrdom, as in the faith of Miracles, the
valor of the patients, and the savageness of the persecutors, striving
together; till, both exceeding nature and belief, bred wonder and astonishment
in beholders and readers. In all Ages and Generations, they that have been born
after the flesh, have persecuted Gal. 4. 29.
them that have been born after the spirit; and the seed of the serpent, have
been still a multiplying of troubles upon the seed of the woman. Would any man
take the Churches picture (says Luther) then let him paint a poor silly maid,
sitting in a wilderness; compassed about with hungry Lions, Wolves, Bores and
Bears, and with all manner of other cruel hurtful beasts; and in the midst of a
great many furious men, assaulting her every moment and minute: and why should
we wonder at this, when we consider, that the whole life of Christ was filled
up with all sorts and kinds of sufferings? Oh, where is that brave spirit, that
has been upon the saints of old? Blessed Bradford looked upon his sufferings
for Christ, as an* evidence to him, that he was in the right way: It is better
If one man did suffer all the sorrows of all the Saints in the world, yet they
are not worth one hours glory in heaven; Chrysostom.
for me to be a Martyr than a Monarch, said Ignatius, when he was to suffer.
Happy is that soul, and to be equalled with Angels, who is willing to suffer,
if it were possible, as great things for Christ, as Christ has suffered for
it, says Jerome: sufferings are the ensigns of heavenly nobility, says Calvin:
Modestus, Lieutenant to Julian the Emperor, said to Julian, while they suffer
they deride us (says he) and the torments are more fearful to them that stand
by, than to the tormented: Luther reports of Vincentius, that he laughed at
those that slew him; saying, that to Christians, tortures and death were but
sports, and he gloried when he went upon hot burning coals, as if he trod upon
roses: 'twas a notable saying of a French Martyr, when the rope was about his
fellow, give me that golden chain, and dub me a Knight of that noble Order:
Paul rattled his chain, which he bore for the Gospel; and was as proud of it,
as a woman of her ornaments, says Chrysostom: do your worst, do your worst,
said Justin Martyr (to his persecutors) but this I will tell you, that you may
put all that you are like to gain by the* bargain into your eye, and weep it
out again: Basil will tell you, that the most cruel Martyrdom is but a trick to
escape death, to pass from life to life (as he speaks) for it can be but a days
journey between the Cross and Paradise: Their names that are written in red
letters of blood in the Churches Calender, are written in golden letters in
Christ's Register, in the book of life, says Prudentius: Though the Cross be
bitter, yet it is but short; a little storm, as one said of Julian's
Persecution, and an eternal calm follows: Methinks, said one, I tread upon
Pearls, when he trod upon hot burning coals; and I feel no more pain, than if I
lay in a bed of Down, and yet he lay in flames of fire: I am heartily angry
(says Luther) with those that speak of my sufferings; which, if compared to
that which Christ suffered for me, are not once to be mentioned in the same
day: Paul greatly rejoiced in his sufferings for Christ; and therefore,
oftentimes sings it out, I Paul a prisoner (as you may see by See Act. 23. 17.
Ephesians. 3. 1. cap. 4. 1. 2 Timothy 1. 8. Philem. 1. 9. ^ Cor. 11. 23. Romans 16. 7.
Col. 4. 10. ^^il^m. 23.
the Scriptures in the margent) not I Paul an Apostle, nor I Paul wrapped up in
the third heaven; Christ showed his love to him, in wraping him up in the third
heaven; and he shows his love to Christ, in suffering for him: During the cruel
Persecutions of the heathen Emperors, the Christian Faith was spread through
all places of the Empire, because the oftener they were mowed down (says
Tertullian) the more they grew: I am in prison till I am in prison, said one of
the Martyrs: I am the unmeetest man for this high office of suffering for
Christ, that ever was appointed to it, said blessed Sanders: Austin observed,
that though there were many thousand Christians put to death for professing
Christ, yet they were never the fewer for being slain: Cyprian, speaking of the
Christians and Martyrs in his time, said, occidi poterant, sed vinci Lo^d^ Id
corda computeth 44 several kinds of to^ment, wherewith the primitive Christians
were tried Adv. Sacr. cap. 128.
non poterant, they may kill them, but they cannot overcome them: The more we
are cut down by the sword of persecution, the more we increase, says
Tertullian: Eusebius tells us of one that writ to his friend from a stinking
Dungeon, and dates his letter from my delicate Orchard: Burn my foot if you
will (said that noble Martyr in Basil) that it may dance everlastingly with the
blessed Angels in Heaven: The young child in Josephus; who, when his flesh was
pulled in pieces with pincers, by the command of Antiochus, said with a smiling
countenance; Tyrant, thou losest time, where are those smarting pains, with
which thou threatnest me? make me to shrink and cry out if thou can: And
Bainam, an English Martyr, when the fire was flaming about him, said, you
Papists talk of miracles, behold here a miracle, I feel no more pain than if I
were in a bed of Down; it is as sweet to me as a bed of roses: Lawrence, when
his body was roasted upon a burning Gridiron, cried out, this side is roasted
enough, turn the other side: Marcus of Arethusa, when his body was cut and
mangled, and anointed with honey, and hung up aloft in a basket, to be stung to
death by wasps and bees; looked down, saying, I am advanced, despising you that
are below: Henry Voes kissed the stake: Hawks clapped his hands in the flames
when they were half consumed: John Noys blessed God that ever he was born to
see that day: and Bishop Ridley called his execution day his wedding day. Thus
you see a cloud of witnesses to raise and inflame your hearts into a free,
ready, willing, cheerful, and resolute suffering for that Jesus, who has
suffered so much for you. Oh sirs, when we see all sorts and sexes of
Christians, divinely to defy and scorn their torments and tormentors, when we
see them conquering in the midst of hideous sufferings, when we hear them
expressing their greatest joy in the midst of their greatest sufferings; we
cannot but conclude that there was something more than ordinary, that did thus
raise, cheer and encourage their spirits in their sufferings; Heb. 11. 24, 25,
26. cap. 12. 2.
and doubtless this was it, the recompense of reward on the one hand, and the
matchless sufferings of Jesus Christ for them on the other hand. The cordial
wherewith Peter is said (by Clemens) to comfort his wife when he saw her led to
Martyrdom, was this, Remember the Lord; whose disciples if we be, we must not
think to speed better than our master.

It is said of Antiochus, that being to fight with Judas, Captain of the host
of the Jews; he showed unto his Elephants, 1 Machah. cap. 6. v. 3, 4.
the blood of the Grapes and Mulberries, to provoke them the better to fight:
so the holy Ghost has set before us the wounds, the blood, the sufferings, the
dying, of our dear Lord Jesus, to encourage us to suffer with all readiness and
resoluteness, whatsoever calamities or miseries may attend us for Christ's
sake, or the Gospel's sake. Ah, what a shame would it be, if we should ^ot be
always ready to suffer any thing for his sake, who has suffered so much for
our sins, as is beyond all conception, all expression. Never was Jacob more
gracious and acceptable to his father Isaac, than when he stood before him,
clothed in the garments of his rough brother Esau: then, the father smelling
the savor of the elder Genesis 27. 27.
brothers garments; said, Behold, the smell of my son, is as the smell of a
field which the Lord has blessed. And never are we more gracious and
acceptable to our heavenly father, than when we stand before him, clothed in
the rough garments of Christ's afflictions and sufferings. Oh Christians, all
your sufferings for Christ, they are but in lets to your glorious reigning with
Christ. Justin Martyr says, that when the Romans did immortalize their
Emperors, as they called it, they brought one to swear, that he see him go to
Heaven out of the fire: but we may see by an eye of faith the blessed souls of
Martyrs, fly to heaven like Elias in his fiery chariot, or like the Angel that
appeared to Manoah in the flames. By the consent of the Schoolmen, all Martyrs
shall appear in the Church triumphant, bearing the signs of their Christian
wounds about them, as so many speaking testimonies of their holy courage; that
what here they endured in the behalf of their Savior, may be there an addition
to their glory. But,

Sixthly, has Jesus Christ suffered such great and grievous Psalm. 90. 1. Psalm.
91. 1, 4, 9.
thy self under the wings of a suffering Christ. I have read of Nero, that he
had a shirt made of a Salamander's skin, so that if he went through the fire in
it, it would keep him from burning: Oh sirs, a suffering Christ is this
Salamander's skin, that will keep the Saints from burning in the midst of
burning, from suffering in the Dan. 3. 24. 29. Isa. 43. 2.
midst of sufferings, from drowning in the midst of drowning. In all the
storms, that beat upon your inward or your outward man, eye the sufferings of
Christ, l^an upon Zach. 13. 10. Cant. 8. 5. 2 Cor. 2. 14. Ephesians. 6. 14.
the sufferings of Christ, plead the sufferings of Christ, and triumph in the
sufferings of Christ. It is storied of a Martyr; that writing to his wife,
where she might find him when he was fled from home; oh my dear (said he)
Surius in vita sancti Elzearii.
if thou desire to see me, seek me in the side of Christ, in the cleft of the
rock, in the hollow of his wounds; for there I have made my nest, there will I
dwell, there shall thou find me, and no where else but there. In every
temptation let us look up to a crucified Christ, who is fitted Heb. 2. 17, 18.
cap. 4. 15, 16.
and qualified to succor tempted souls: oh my soul, when ever thou art
assaulted, let the wounds of Christ be thy City of refuge, whither thou may
fly and live. Let us learn in every tentation which presses us (whether it be
sin, or death, or curse, or any other evil) to translate it from our selves to
Christ; and all the good in Christ, let us learn to translate it from Christ,
to our selves. Look, as the Burgess of a Town or Corporation, sitting in the
Parliament house, bears the persons of that whole Town or place; and what he
says, the whole Town says; and what is done to him, is done to the whole
Town: even so, Christ upon the cross, stood in our Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6.
place, and bare our sins; and whatsoever he suffered, we suffered; and when he
died, all the faithful died with him, and in him. I have read of a gracious
woman; who, being by Satan strongly tempted, replied; Satan, if thou have any
thing to say to me, say it to my surety, who has undertaken all for me, who
has paid all my debts, and satisfied Divine Justice, and set all reckonings
even between God and my soul. Do your sins terrify you? oh then, look up to a
crucified Savior, who bare your sins in his own body on the Tree. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
When sin stares you in the face, oh then, turn your face The strongest
Antidote against sin, is to look upon sin in the red glass of Christ's blood;
Au^tin.
to a dying Jesus, and behold him with a spear in his side, with thorns in his
head, with nails in his feet, and a pardon in his hands. Have thou wounded thy
conscience by any great fall or falls? O then, remember that there is nothing
in heaven or earth more efficacious to cure the Bern. Ser. 61. in cant.
wounds of conscience. than a frequent and serious meditation on the wounds of
Christ. Does death, that rides upon the pale horse, look gashly and deadly upon
thee? Rev. 6. 8. Romans 5. 6, 8.
oh, then remember that Christ died for you; and that, by his death, he has
swallowed up death in victory: Oh, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57.
remember that a crucified Christ has stripped death of his sting, and
disarmed it of all its destroying power: death may buzz about our ears, but it
can never sting our souls. Look, as a crucified Christ has taken away the
guilt of sin, though he has not taken away sin it self; so he has taken away
the sting of death, though he has not taken away death it self: He spoke
excellently that said, that is not death, but life, wbich joins the dying man
to Christ; Ambrosius in 1 Timothy 5. 6. Death will blow the bud of Grace into the
flower of Glory.
and that is not life, but death, that separates the living man from Christ:
Austin longed to die, that he might see that head, that was crowned with
thorns: Did Christ die for me (says one) that I might live with him, I will
not therefore, desire to live long from him; all men go willingly to see him
whom they love; and shall I be unwilling to die, that I may see him whom my
soul loves? Bernard would have us, never to let go out of our minds the
thoughts of a crucified Christ; let these, says he, be meat and drink unto you,
let them be your sweetness and consolation, your honey, and your desire, your
reading, and your meditation, your contemplation, your life, death, and
resurrection: certainly, he that shall live up to this counsel, will look upon
the King of terrors, as the King of desires. Are you apt to tremble when you
eye the curse threatened in the Law? Oh then, look up to a crucified Christ, and
remember that he has redeemed you from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for Gal. 3. 13.
you: does the wrath of God amaze you? Oh, then look up to a crucified Christ,
and remember that Christ has trod the winepress of his father's wrath alone,
that he Isa. 63. 3. 1 These. 1. ult.
might deliver you from wrath to come: Is the face of God clouded, does he that
should comfort you stand afar off? oh, then look up to a crucified Christ, and
remember that he was forsaken for a time, that you might not be forsaken for
ever: are you sometimes afraid of condemnation? oh, then look upon a crucified
Christ, Lamen. 1. 16.
who was condemned, that you might be justified: who shall lay any thing to the
charge of God's Elect? it is Romans 8. 33, 34.
God that justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died: ah
Christians, that you would, at last, under all your temptations, afflictions,
fears, doubts, conflicts, and disputes, be persuaded to keep a fixed eye upon
crucified Jesus; and remember that all he did, for you, and that all he
suffered he suffered, for you; and this will be a strong cordial to keep you
from fainting under all Turbahor sed non perturbabor quia vuln^rum Christi
recordabor, Aug.
your inward and outward distresses, according to that saying of one of the
Ancients, I may be troubled, but I shall not be overwhelmed, because I remember
the print of the nails, and of the spear, in the hands and side of Jesus
Christ. Oh, that Christians would labor under all their soul-troubles to keep
a fixed eye upon a bleeding Christ; for there is nothing that will ease them,
quiet them, settle them, and satisfy them, like this: Many, may I not say,
most Christians are more apt to eye their sins, their sorrows, their prayers,
their tears, their resolves, their complaints, than they are to eye a suffering
Christ? and from hence springs their greatest woes, wounds, miseries, and
dejection of spirit: oh, that a crucified Christ might be for ever in your eye,
and always upon your hearts. But,

Seventhly and Lastly, Has Jesus Christ suffered such anger, and for
satisfying his justice, and for the obtaining Surely that Religion that lo^es
to lap blood, and that is propagated and maintained by blood, and that prefers
their own inventions and abominations. before the blood and sufferings of
Christ; that Religion is not of God: but such is the Romish Religion; Ergo,
their Religion is not of God.
of pardon, etc. have appointed Penances and Pilgrimages, and Self-scourgings,
and Soul-masses, and Purgatory, and several other such like abominations (which
the Scripture no where commands, but every where forbids:) which inventions and
abominations of theirs tend only to derogate from the dignity and sufficiency
of Christ's sufferings, and to reflect dishonor and disgrace upon that full
and perfect price that Christ has paid for our Ransom, and to set up other
Saviors, in the room of our blessed Redeemer: certainly all Popish pardons,
penances, pilgrimages, masses, whippings, scourgings, etc. they unavoidably
fall before the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, as Dagon fell before the
Ark, Goliath before David, Haman before Mordecai, and as the darkness falls
before the morning-light: and as for their Purgatory, they do not know
certainly where it is, nor how long it will last, nor what sort of fire is
there; neither can they show us how corporeal fire should work upon the Souls
in Purgatory, they being spiritual and incorporeal: they cannot tell us whether
the pains of Purgatory be at all times alike, neither can they tell us whether
the good or evil Angels are the tormenters of the Souls in Purgatory: and as
for the whipping, scalding, freezing of Souls in Purgatory, they are but old
wives fables, and the brainsick fancies of some deceitful persons to cheat poor
ignorant people of their money, under a blind pretense of praying their souls
out of Purgatory. Christ offered himself once for all, but the Romish Priests
offer Heb. 10. 10.
him up daily in the Mass, an unbloody sacrifice; and so they do what lies in
tehm to tread underfoot the blood Act. 20. 28. H^b. 10. 29.
of God, the blood of the Covenant: to be short; Popery in effect is nothing
else but an underhand close witness-bearing against Christ in all his offices,
and against all that he has done and suffered for the Redemption and Salvation
of sinners, as might be made abundantly evident, but that I may not now lanch
out into that Ocean; I only give this brief touch by the way, that I might
raise up in all your hearts a greater detestation of Popery, in this day
wherein many are so warm for it, as if it were there only Diana. And let thus
much suffice, concerning the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ and the
improvement that we should make of them.

Thus you may clearly see, by what I have said concerning A Christians plea
from the passive obedience of Christ. God did insist on it, that our surety
should pay down the whole debt at once, and accordingly he did. Heb. 10. 10, 12.
the Active and Passive Obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, that whatsoever we
are bound to do or suffer by the Law of God, all that did Christ do and suffer
for us, as being our Surety and Mediator. Now the Law of God has a double
challenge or demand upon us; one is of active obedience, in fulfilling what it
requires; the other is of passive Obedience, in suffering that punishment which
is due to us for the transgression of it, in doing what it forbids: for as we
were created by God, we did owe unto him all obedience which he required; and
as we sinned against God, we did owe unto him a suffering of all that
punishment which he threatened; and we being fallen by transgression, can
neither pay the one debt, nor yet the other: of our selves we can do nothing
that the Law requires; neither can we so suffer, as to satisfy God in his
Justice wronged by us, or to recover our selves into life and favor again: And
therefore Jesus Christ (who was God-man) did become our Surety, and stood in
our stead or room, and he did perform what we should but could not perform, and
he did bear our sins and our sorrows, he did suffer and bear for us. what we
our selves should have born and suffered, whereby he did fully satisfy the
Justice of God, and made our peace, and purchased pardon and life for us:
Christ did fully answer to all the demands of the Law, he did come up to
perfect and universal cons^rmity to it; he did whatever the Law enjoins, and he
suffered whatever the Law threatens; Christ by his active and passive
obedience, has fulfilled the Law most exactly and completely; Gal. 3. 13.
As he was perfectly holy, he did what the Law commanded; and as he was made a
curse, he underwent what the Law threatened, and all this he did and suffered in
our steads, and as our Surety; what ever Christ did as our Surety, he made it
good to the full: so that neither the righteous God, nor yet the righteous Law,
could ever tax him with the least defect. And this must be our great Plea, our
choice, our sweet, our safe, our comfortable, our acceptable Plea, both in the
day of our particular accounts when we die, and in the great day of our
account, when a crucified Savior shall judge the World. Although sin, as an
act, be transient, yet in the guilt of it, it lies in the Lord's high Court of
Justice, filed upon record against the sinner, and calling aloud for deserved
punishment, saying, Man has sinned and man must suffer for sin: but now Christ
has suffered, that plea is taken off. Lo here, says the Lord the same Nature
that sinned, suffers; mine own Son,, being made flesh, has suffered death
for sin in the flesh; the thing is done, the Law is satisfied, and so non-suits
the action, and casts it out of the Court, as unjust. Thus whereas sin would
have condemned us, Christ has condemned sin; he has weakened, yea nullified
and taken away sin, in the guilt and condemning power of it, by that abundant
satisfaction that he has given to the Justice of God by his active and passive
Obedience: so that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus;
for Romans 8. 1, 3.
the blood of the Mediator outcries the clamor of sin: and this must be a
Christians joy, and triumph, and plea in the great day of our Lord Jesus. As
Christ was made 2 Cor. 5. 21.
sin for us, so the Lord does impute the sufferings of Christ to us, that is,
he accepts of them on our behalf, and puts them upon our account: As if the
Lord should say unto every particular believer, My Son was thy Surety, and
stood in thy stead, and suffered, and satisfied, and took away thy sins by his
blood, and that for thee: in his blood I find a ransom for thy soul; I do
acknowledge my self satisfied for thee, and satisfied toward thee, and thou
art delivered and discharged: I forgive thee thy sins, and am reconciled unto
thee, and will save thee and glorify thee for my Sons sake; in his blood thou
have Redemption, the forgiveness of thy sins. As when Simile.
a Surety satisfies the Creditor for a debt, this is accounted to the Debtor,
and reckoned as a discharge to him in particular; I am paid and you are
discharged, says the Creditour: so it is in this case; I am paid, says God,
and you are discharged, and I have no more to say to you but this, Enter into
the joy of your Lord, Matthew. 25. 21.

The Fifth Plea that you are to make in order to the 5. Eccles. 11. 9. cap. 12.
14. Mat. 12. 14. cap. 18 23. Luke 16. 3. Romans 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb. 9. 27,
cap. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 4 5.
Ten Scriptures in the Margin, that respects the account that you are to give
up in the great day of the Lord, is drawn from the imputed Righteousness of
Christ to us; the Justification of a Sinner in the sight of God upon the
account of Christ's Righteousness imputed to him, whereby the guilt of sin is
removed, and the person of the Sinner is accepted as righteous with the God of
Heaven, is that which I shall open to you distinctly in these following
Branches.

First, That the Grace of Justification in the sight of

First, there is an Act of absolution and acquittal from Romans 8. 1. (...), it is
a forensick word relating to what is in use amongst men in their Courts of
Judicature to condemn. It Is the sentence of a Judge decreeing a mulct or
penalty to be inflicted upon the guilty Person.
or concomitant of it, that can never be removed: it may be truly said of the
sins of a justified person, that they deserve everlasting destruction; but
Justification is the freeing of a sinner from the guilt of his iniquity,
whereby he was actually bound over to condemnation: as soon as any man does sin
there is a guilt upon him, by which he is bound over to the wrath and curse of
God, and this guilt or obligation is inseparable from sin, the sin does deserve
no less than everlasting damnation. Now forgiveness of sin, has a peculiar
respect to the guilt of sin, and removal of that: when the Lord forgives a man,
he does discharge him of that obligation, by which he was bound over to wrath
and condemnation; Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus. verse. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect?
it is God that justifies: verse. 34. who is he that condemns? it is Christ
that died. Beloved, the Lord is a holy and just God; and he reveils his wrath
from heaven, against Romans 1. 18. Gel. 3. 10. R^m. 1. 32. Romans 6. 23.
all unrighteousness; and there is a curse threatened to every transgression of
the Law; and when any man sins, he is obnoxious unto the curse, and God may
inflict the same upon him: but when God forgives sins, he therein does
interpose (as it were) between the sin and the curse; and between the
obligation and the condemnation. When the sinner sins, God might say unto him;
sinner, by your sinning, you are now fallen into my hands of Justice; and for
your sins, I may, according to my righteous Law, condemn and curse you for
ever: but such is my free, my rich, my sovereign grace; that for Christ's sake,
I will spare you, and pardon you; and that curse Jer. 31. 20.
and condemnation which you have deserved, shall never fall upon you. Oh! my
bowels, my bowels, are yearning toward you; and therefore I will have mercy,
mercy J^b 33. 13, 24, 28, 30.
upon you, and will deliver your souls from going down into the pit: when the
poor sinner is indicted and arraigned at God's bar, and process is made against
him, and he found guilty of the violation of God's holy Law, and accordingly
judged guilty by God, and adjudged to Job. 33. 24.
everlasting death: then mercy steps in and pleads, I have found a Ransom; the
sinner shall not die, but live. When the Law says, ah sinner, sinner, thus and
thus have thou transgressed, all sorts of duties thou have omitted, and all
sorts of sins have committed, and all sorts of mercies thou have abused, and
all sorts of means thou have neglected, and all sorts of offers thou have
slighted: then God steps in, and says, ah sinner, sinner, what do thou say?
what can thou say to this heavy charge, is it true or false? with thou grant
it or deny it? what defense or plea can thou make for thy self? Alas, the
poor sinner is speechless (Mat. 22. 12. (...), he was muzzled or haltered up,
that is, he held his peace as though he had a bridle or a halter in his mouth;
this is the import of the Greek word here used) he has not one word to say for
himself; he can neither deny, nor excuse, or extenuate what is charged upon
him: why now, says God, I must and do pronounce thee to be guilty; and as I am
a just and righteous God, I cannot but adjudg thee to die eternally: but such
is the riches of my mercy, that I will freely justify thee, through the
righteousness of my son; I will forgive thy sins, and discharge thee of that
obligation, by which thou wast bound over to wrath, and curse, and
condemnation; so that the justified person may triumphingly say, who is he that
condemns; He may read over the most dreadful passages of the Law, without
being terrified, or amazed; as knowing that the curse is removed; and that all
his sins that brought him under the curse, are pardoned, and are in point of
condemnation, as if they had never been. This is to be justified, to have the
sin pardoned, and the penalty remitted; Romans 4. 5, 6, 7, 8. But to him that
works not, but believes on him that justisieth the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the
man, to whom God imputes righteousness without works; saying, Blessed are they
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: Blessed is the man,
to whom the Lord will not impute sin, It is observable, that what David calls
forgiveness of sin, and not imputing of iniquity, St. Paul styles a being
justified. But,

Secondly, as the first part of Justification consists in the Cant. 4. 7. Thou
art all fair, my love and there is no spot in thee; that is, none in my
account, Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
nor no such spots as the wicked are full of: Look as David saw nothing in lame
Mephibosheth, but what was lovely, 2 Samuel 9. 3, 4, 13, 14.
because he saw in him the features of his friend Jonathan; so God beholding
his people in the face of his son, sees nothing amiss in them: They are all
glorious within and without, Psalm. 45. 13. Look, as Absalom had no blemish from
head to foot; so they are irreprehensible, and Jer. 2. 32.
without blemish before the throne of God, Rev. 14. 5. The pardoned sinner, in
repect of divine acceptance, is without Ephesians. 5. 26, 27.
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing: God accepts the pardoned sinner as
complete in him, who is the head Colos. 2. 10.
of all principality and power: Christ makes us comely, through his beauty; he
gives us white raiment, to stand before the Lord: Christ is all in all, in
regard of divine acceptance; Ephesians. 1. 6. He has made us accepted in the
beloved, All persons out of Christ, are cursed enemies, objects of God's wrath,
and Justice, displeasing, offending, and provoking creatures, and therefore,
God cannot, but loath them and abhor them.
(...), he has made us favorites; so Chrysostom and Theophilact render it,
God has ingratiated us, he has made us gracious in the son of his love:
through the blood of Christ, we look of a sanguine complexion, ruddy and
beautiful in God's eyes; Isa. 62. 4. Thou shall no more be termed forsaken, but
thou shall be called Hephzibah; for the Lord delights in thee. The
acceptance of our persons with God, takes in six things: 1. God's honoring of
us: 2. His delight in us: 3. His being well pleased with us: 4. His extending
love and favor to us: 5. His high estimation of us: 6. His giving us free
access to himself. It is the observation of Ambrose; that, though Jacob was
not, by birth, the firstborn; yet, hiding himself under his brother's clothes,
and having put on his coat, which smelled most fragrantly; he came into Genesis
27. 36.
his father's presence, and got away the blessing from his elder brother: so it
is very necessary, in order to our acceptance with God, that we lie hid under
the precious Robe of Christ our elder brother; that, having the sweet 2 Cor. 2.
15.
savor of his garments upon us, our sins may be covered with his perfections,
and our unrighteousness with the Robes of his righteousness; that so we may
offer up our selves unto God, a living and acceptable sacrifice; not Romans 12.
1. Isa. 64. 6. Phil. 3. 9.
having our own righteousness, which are but as filthy rags, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.

Thus you see that Justification, for the nature of it, lies in the gracious
pardon of the sinners transgressions, and in the acceptance of his person as
righteous in Gods sight. But,

Secondly, In order to the partaking of this grace of the of purer eyes than to
behold iniquity, Habak. 1. 13, that is, Habak. 1. 13. Heb. And to look on
iniquity thou can not do it.
with patience or pleasure, or without punishing it. There are four things that
God cannot do: 1. He cannot lie: 2. He cannot die: 3. He cannot deny himself:
4. He cannot behold iniquity with approbation and delight: Josh. 24. 19. And
Joshua said unto the people, ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy God,
he is a jealous God, he will not forgive your transgressions, nor your sins:
such is the holiness of God's nature, that he cannot behold sin, Psalm. 5. 4, 5,
6.
that he cannot but punish sin where ever he finds it: God is infinitely,
immutably, and inexorably just, as well as he is incomprehensibly gracious.
Now, in the justification of a sinner, God does act as a God of justice, as
well as a God of compassion: God is infinite in all his attributes, in his
justice as well as in his mercy: these two cannot interfere; as justice cannot
entrench upon mercy, so neither may mercy encroach upon justice; the glory of
both must be maintained. Now, by the breach of the Law, the justice of God is
wronged; so that, although mercy be apt to pardon, yet justice requires
satisfaction, and calls for vengeance on sinners. Every transgression Heb. 2. 2.
must receive just recompense, and God will not, in any case, absolve the
guilty: till this be done, the hands of Exodus 34. 7.
mercy are tied, that she cannot act. And seeing satisfaction could not be made
to an infinite majesty, but by an equal person, and price; therefore the son of
God must become a curse for us, by taking our nature, and pouring out his soul
to the death; and by this means justice and mercy are reconciled, and kiss each
other, and mercy now being set at liberty, has her free course, to save poor
sinners. God will have his justice satisfied to the full, and therefore Christ
must bear all the punishment due to our sins, or else God cannot set us free,
for he cannot go against his own just will: observe the force of that phrase,
Christ ought to suffer, And thus it behoved Christ to suffer, Luke 24. 26.
and Mat. 26. 54. Thus it must be, why must? but because it was, 1. So decreed
by God: 2. Foretold by the Prophets, every particular of Christ's sufferings
were foretold by the prophets, even to their very spitting in his face. 3.
Prefigured in the daily morning and evening sacrifice; this Lamb of God was
sacrificed from the beginning of the world. A necessity then there was of our
Savior's sufferings; not a necessity of coaction, for he died freely John. 10.
11, 14, 17, 18.
and voluntarily) but of immutability and infallibility for the former reasons
mentioned. An earthly Prince that is just, holds himself bound, to inflict
punishment impartially, upon the malefactor, or his surety; it stands upon his
honor, he says it must be so, I cannot do otherwise: this is true much more
of God, who is Justice it self, God, who is great in counsel, and excellent in
working; had store of means at hand, whereby to set free, and recover lost
mankind; yet he was pleased, in his infinite wisdom, to pitch upon this way of
satisfaction, as being most agreeable to his holy nature, and most suitable to
his high and sovereign ends; viz. Man's salvation and his own glory: and that
God does stand upon full satisfaction; and will not forgive one sin without it,
may be thus made evident.

First, from the nature of sin, which is that abominable 1. ^e^. 44. 4. God
could not ^salv^ jure) pass over the sin of man, so as absolutely to let it go
unpunished.
thing which God hates. The sinner deserves to die for his sins; Romans 6. 23.
Tho wages of sin is death; every sinner is worthy of death; (They which commit
such things are worthy of death, Romans 1. 32.) Now God is just and righteous (It
is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble
you; 2 These. 1. 6.) yea, and God did, therefore, set forth Christ, to be a
propitiation through faith in bis blood, Romans 3. 25. To declare his
righteousness, that he might be just, verse. 26. Now, if God be a just and
righteous God, then sin cannot absolutely escape unpunished; for it is just
with God, to punish the sinner, who is worthy of punishment; and certainly, God
must deny himself, if he will not be just; 2 Timothy 2. 13.
but this he can never do: sin is of an infinite guilt, and has an infinite
evil in the nature of it: and therefore, no person in heaven or earth, but that
person, our Lord Jesus, who is God-man, and who had an infinite dignity, that
could either procure the pardon of it, or make satisfaction for it; no prayers,
no cries, no tears, no humblings, no repentings, no resolutions, no
reformations, etc. can stop the course of Justice, or procure the guilty
sinners pardon; it is Christ alone, that can dissolve all obligations to
punishment, and break all bonds and chains of guilt, and hand a pardon to us
through his own blood, Ephesians. 1. 7.
we are set free by the blood of Christ; By the blood of thy Zach. 9. 11.
covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit: it is by his blood,
that we are justified and saved from wrath; Romans 5. 9. Much more being
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath by him. Pray tell me what
is it to be justified, but to be pardoned; and what is it to be saved from
wrath, but to be delivered from all punishment? Ephesians. 2. 13. Colos. 1. 20.
and both these depend upon the blood of Christ. But,

The veracity of God requires it: Look, as God cannot Genesis 2. 17. In the day
that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die: Heb. in dying, thou Under the
name of death are comprehended all other calamities, miseries and sorrows.
shall die: death is a fall, that came in by a fall, and without all
p^radventure, every man should die the same day he was born, for the wages of
sin is death; and this wages should be presently paid, did not Christ reprieve
poor sinner's lives for a season: upon which account, he is said to be the
Savior of all men; not of eternal preservation, but of a temporal reservation:
He will by no means clear 1 Timothy 4. 10.
the guilty: The soul that sins, it shall die: Ezekiel. 18. Exodus 34. 7.
20. The wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him: Romans 2. 6. He will render
to every man according to his deeds. Oh sirs, God can never so far yield, as to
abrogate his own Law, and quietly to sit down with injury and loss to his own
Justice, himself having established a Law, etc. The Law pronounces him cursed,
that continues not in all things Gal. 3. 10.
that are written therein, to do them. Now, though the threatenings of men are
frequently vain and frivolous, yet the threatenings of the great God, shall
certainly take place, and have their accomplishment; though many ten thousand
millions of sinners perish, not one tittle of the Mat. 5. 18.
dreadful threatenings of God shall fail, till all be fulfilled. Josephus says,
that from that very time, that old Eli heard those terrible threatenings, that
made their ears tingle 1 Samuel 3. 11, 12, 13, 14.
and hearts tremble that heard them; Eli never ceased weeping: ah, who can look
upon the dreadful threatenings that are pointed against sinners all over the
book of God, and not tremble and weep. God cannot but in justice, punish
sinners; neither is it in his choice or freedom, whether he will damn the
obstinate impenitent sinner, or no: Look, as God cannot but love holiness
wherever he sees it; so he cannot, But loath and punish wickedness wherever
he beholds it; neither will it stand with the infinite wisdom of God, to admit
of a dispensation, or relaxation of the threatenings, without satisfaction: God
had passed a peremptory doom, and made a solemn declaration of it in his word,
that he that sins, shall die the death; and he will not, he cannot break his
word: you know he had foreordained Jesus Christ; and set him forth to take
upon himself this burden, to become a propitiation Romans 3 35. 1 Pet. 1. 20.
for sin through his blood, and made known his mind, concerning it in his
written word, plainly, Isa. Exigitur, as Junius, and some others read it.
53. 7. If we read the words (it is exacted, or strictly required) meaning the
iniquity or punishment of us all, verse. 6. It is required at his hands, he must
answer it in our stead, and so he is afflicted, and this affliction reaches
even to the cutting him off, verse. 8. Therefore when Christ puts this work upon
an (ought, and must be) he lays the weight of all on the Scriptures (thus it is
written) as you may see in the texts lately cited, as if he should say, God
has spoken it, and his truth engages him to see it done; so God has
threatened to punish sin, and his truth engages him to see it done. Oh sirs!
there is no standing before that God that is a consuming fire, a just judge, a
holy God, except I have Heb. 12: 9.
one to undertake for me, that is mighty to save, and mighty to satisfy divine
justice, and mighty to pacify divine Isa. 63. 1.
wrath, and mighty to bear the threatenings, and mighty to forgive sin: when God
forgives sin, he does it in a way of Isa. 19. 20.
righteousness, 1 John 1. 9. He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; he does not say he is merciful, but
just to forgive us our sins, because they are satisfied for, and God's justice
will not let him demand the same debt twice, of the surety and of the debtor
too: it will never stand with the unspotted justice and righteousness of God,
to require such debts of us; which Christ, Romans 3. 25.
by shedding his most precious blood, has discharged for us. Mark, the
maledictory sentence of death, denounced by the Law against sinners, was
inflicted by God upon Christ: this is that which the Prophet Esaias positively
asserts; where he says, the chastisement (that is, the punishment called a
chastisement, because inflicted by a father, and only for a Isa. 53. 5, 7.
time) of ourpeace was upon him; and again, he was oppressed, and he was
afflicted: which, according to the genuine sense of the Original, is better
rendered, it was exacted; to wit, the punishment of our sin, and he was
afflicted, or he answered, to wit, to the demand of the penalty. The curse, to
Theod. disp. l. 15. c. 5.
which we are subject (says Theodorus) he assumed upon himself of his own
accord; the death that was not due Gr. mer. l. 3. c. 13.
to him he underwent, that we might not undergo that death which was due to us:
says Gregory, he made himself Arnol. de sep. verb Tr. 1.
a debtor for us, who were debtors; and therefore the Creditor exacts it from
him, says Arnoldus. Now, God's justice being satisfied for our offenses, it
cannot but remit those offenses to us: As the Creditor cannot demand that of
the debtor, which the surety has already paid; so neither can God exact the
punishment of us, which Christ has suffered; and therefore, it is just with
God, to forgive us our sins. It will be altogether needless to enquire, whether
it had been injustice in God, to forgive without satisfaction: St. Austin's
determination is very solid, there Aug. de Trinit. l. 13. c. 10.
wanted not to God another possible way (and if it were unjust, it were
impossible) but this of satisfaction was most agreeable to divine wisdom;
before God did decree this way, it might be free to have used it or not; but in
decreeing, this seemed most convenient, and after it became When you are
forgiven, you are then released, and for ever acquitted from any after
reckonings with the justice of God; divine Justice has no more to say or do
against you, for remissa culpa, remi^ttur paena; if the fault be forgiven, then
also is the punishment forgiven; nay, let me speak with an holy and humble
reverence, God cannot in his justice punish, when he has pardoned.
necessary, so that there can be no remission without it; and however, it might
not have been unjust with God, to have forgiven without it: yet we are sure it
is most just with him to forgive upon satisfaction. Indeed the debt being paid
by Christ, God's very justice (as I may say with reverence) would trouble him,
if he should not give in the bond, and give out an acquittance. The believing
penitent sinner may, in an humble confidence, sue out his pardon, not only at
the throne of grace, but at the bar of justice, in these or the like
expressions; Lord, thou have punished my sins in thy son, will thou punish them
in me? thou have accepted that suffering of thy son, as the punishment of my
sin, therefore thou can not, in justice, exact it of me, for this were to
punish twice for one offense, which thy justice cannot but abhor. Oh sirs, God
does not pronounce men righteous when they are not; but first he makes them so,
and then he pronounces them to be such: so that if a man will be justified, he
must be able to produce such a complete righteousness, wherewith he may stand
before the justice of God: ah sinners! the Lord is infinitely just, as well as
merciful; and if ever your sins be pardoned, it must be by an admirable
contemperament, or mixture of mercy and justice together: it was one of the
great ends of the Gospel Dispensation, that God might exalt his justice in the
justification of a sinner, Romans 3. 26. To declare, Isay, at this time, his
righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes
in Jesus. But

Thirdly, The only matter of man's righteousness since the fall of Adam, wherein
he can appear with comfort before the Justice of God, and consequently whereby
alone he can be justified in his sight, is the obedience and suffering of Jesus
Christ, the righteousness of the Mediator; there is not any other way
imaginable, how the Justice of God may be satisfied, and we may have our sins
pardoned in a way of justice, but by the righteousness of the Son of God; and
therefore this is his name Jehovah-Tsidkenu, the Lord our Righteousness: this
Jer. 23. 6.
is his name, that is, this is the Prerogative of the Lord Jesus, a matter that
appertains to him alone, to be able to bring in everlasting righteousness,
and to make reconciliation Dan. 9. 24.
for iniquity. The costly Cloak (of Alcisthenes) It Is a sign of great favor
from the Great Turk, when a rich garment is cast upon any that come into his
presence, Knolls Hist. The application is easy.
which Dionysius sold to the Carthaginians, for an hundred talents, was indeed
a mean and beggarly rag, to that embroidered Mantle of Christ's Righteousness
that he puts upon us, Isai. 61. 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul
shall be joyful in my God; for he has clothed me with the garments of
salvation, he has covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom
decketh himself with ornaments, and a bride adorneth her self with her jewels:
Christ's Righteousness is that garment of wrought gold, that we all need to
cover all our imperfections, Psalm. 45. 13. Romans 5. 19. Col. 2. 10. Ephesians. 5, 27.
Rev. 14. 5. Romans 3. 21, 22, 25, 26.
and to render us perfectly beautiful and glorious in the sight of God: in this
Robe of Righteousness we are complete, we are without spot or wrinkle, we are
without fault before the throne of God; through the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, we are made righteous in the sight of God; God looking upon us,
as invested with the righteousness of his Son, accounts us righteous. All
believers have a righteousness in Christ as full and complete, as if they had
fulfilled the Law, Christ being the end of the Law for righteousness to
believers, Romans 8. 3, 4.
invests believers with a righteousness every way as complete, as the personal
obedience of the Law would have invested them withal. When men had violated
God's holy Law, God in justice resolved that his Law should be satisfied before
man should be saved: now this was done by Christ, who was the end of the Law;
he fulfilled it actively and passively, and so the injury offered to the Law is
recompensed. God had rather that all men should be destroyed, than that his Law
should not be satisfied. No man can perfectly be justified in the sight of God
without a perfect righteousness, every way commensurable to God's holy Law,
which is the Rule of righteousness; Do this and live: neither can any person
have any choice, spiritual, lively communion with a righteous God, till he be
clothed with the righteousness of Jesus Christ. All Christ's active and passive
obedience was either for himself or in our stead and behalf; but it was not for
himself, but for us that he suffered and obeyed: whatsoever Christ did or
suffered in the whole course of his life, he did it; and suffered it as our
Surety, and in our steads: for as God would not dispense with the penalty of
the Law without satisfaction, so he would not dispense with the commands of the
Law without perfect obedience. Remember once for all, that the Actions and
sufferings of Christ make but up one entire and perfect obedience to the whole
Law; nor had Christ been a perfect and complete Savior, if he had not
performed what the Law required, as well as suffered the penalty which the Law
inflicted. The imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us is a gracious Act of
God the Father, according to his good will and pleasure, whereby as a Judge he
accounts believers sins unto the Surety, as if he had committed the same; and
the righteousness of Christ unto the believer, as if he had performed the same,
the same obedience that Christ did in his own person: so that Christ's imputed
Righteousness is as effectual to the full, for the acceptance of the believing
sinner, as if he had yielded such obedience to the Lord himself: hence his
righteousness is called our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. now without this
righteousness there is no standing before the Justice of God. But

Thirdly, As this great design of Christ's redeeming Solon, that wise Law --
maker, could never find out a law to put all other good laws in execution; but
such as are living laws, will make the laws to live: and will not the wise and
living God make his laws and threatenings to live? surely he will.
maintains the authority of his righteous Law. When a Law is solemnly enacted,
with a penalty in case of transgression, all those whom it concerns may
conclude for certain, that the Lawgiver will proceed accordingly; and it is a
Rule in Policy, That Laws once established and published, should be vigorously
preserved: If the Lord should have wholly waved the execution of the Law upon
sinners, or their surety, it might have tended greatly to the weakening of its
authority, and the diminishing of the reverence of his sovereignty in the
hearts of the sons of men: How often does. God use that Oath, As I live, for
the fulfilling of his threatenings as well as of his Jer. 22. 24. Ezekiel. 5. 9,
10, 11.
promises: the Lord Jehovah is as true, faithful and constant in his
threatenings as in his promises; what he has threatened shall undoubtedly come
to pass; he will be made known by his Name Jehovah in the full execution of all
his threatenings: The old World found it so, and Jerusalem found it so; yea the
whole Nation of the Jews have found it so to this very day. Look as all the
saints See Ezekiel. 5. 13, 15.
in heaven will readily put to their Seals, that God is true and faithful in
all his Promises; so all the damned in hell will readily put to their Seals,
that God is faithful in all his threatenings. Men frequently deride the Laws,
and threatenings of great men, when they are not put into execution; it is the
execution of Laws, that is the very life and soul of good Laws. Should God
pardon sin, without exacting the penalty of the Law, how Eccles. 8. 11. Mal. 2.
17. Such an emphasis there is in the Hebrew, as Corn. a Lapide observes.
would sinners be hardened and emboldned to say, with those men or rather
monsters in Malachi, Where is the God of judgment? i. e. no where; either there
is no God, or at least, not a God of that exact, precise and impartial
judgment, as some men say, and as others teach: But now when God lets sinners
see, that he will not pardon sin, without exacting the penalty of the Law,
either of the sinner, or of his Surety; then the sinner cries out, O the depth
of the riches both of the wisdom Romans 11. 33.
and knowledge of God! God stood so much upon the complete satisfaction and
accomplishment of his Law, that he was willing that Christ should be a
sacrifice, that the Law might be satisfied in its penalty, and that Christ Romans
8. 3, 4, 5.
in his own person should fulfill the righteousness of the Law, that it might be
satisfied in its commands: now in this plenary satisfaction made to the Law,
the Wisdom of God does gloriously shine. The heart of God was so set upon a
full satisfaction to his Law, that, rather than it should not be done, his own
Son must come from heaven and put on flesh, and be himself made under the Gal.
4. 4, 5.
Law; he must live a holy life, and die a cursed death, and all to satisfy the
Law, and to keep up the Authority of it. But

Fourthly; God does stand upon full satisfaction, and 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude. v. 6.
hope of recovery. Satan might say, Lord, thou might have spared me as well
as Man: but the Lord can now answer, Man has made satisfaction, he has born
the Curse, and thereby fully discharged all the demands of the Law; if he had
not, I would no more have spared him than thee. Ambrose brings in the Devil
boasting against Christ, and challenging Judas as his own; He is not thine,
Lord Jesus, he is mine, his thoughts beat for me; he eats with thee, but is fed
by me; he takes bread from thee, but money from me; he drinks with thee, but
sells thy blood to me: Had God pardoned sin without satisfaction, ah how would
Satan have boasted and triumphed over God himself! But

Fifthly and lastly, God's standing upon full satisfaction, Exodus 15. 1, 11.
might have rigorously exacted the penalty of the Law on the persons of sinners
themselves; but he has so far dispensed with his own Law, as to admit of a
Surety, by whom the end of the Law, that is, the manifestation of his Justice
and hatred of sin might be fulfilled, and yet a considerable part of Mankind
might be preserved from the jaws of the second death, Rev. 20. 6.
which otherwise must unavoidably have perished to all eternity. God seems to
speak at such a rate as this; I may not, I will not suffer this high affront of
Adam Romans 7. 12, 14.
and his posterity against my holy and righteous Law, whereby the honor both
of my Justice and Truth is in danger to be trampled underfoot; and yet if I
should let out all my wrath upon them, they were never able Psalm. 78. 38.
to stand under it, but their spirits would fail before me, and the souls that
I have made: I will therefore let out Isa. 57. 16.
all my wrath upon their Surety, and he shall bear it for them, that they may
be delivered: and thus the Lord in wrath remembers mercy, Hab. 3. 2. But

Fourthly, we can receive no benefit by the Righteousness of Christ for
Justification in the sight of God, nor can we be pardoned and accepted
thereupon, until that righteousness become ours, and be made over unto us: how
can we plead this righteousness before God, except Isa. 45. 2^, 25.
we have an interest in this righteousness? how can we rejoice and triumph in
this righteousness, if this righteousness 2 Cor. 2. 14. ^al. 6. 14. Romans 5. 1.
^^b. 4. 15, 16. ^sal. 22. 1 2. Romans 4. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Romans 4. 3. If Christ's
obedience be imputed to us, it must be so imputed as to be our righteousness
before God; no imoutation be^ow this will serve our turns, ^h^ar our heart* and
save our souls. Rev. 14. 8. Isa. 63. 1. R^v. 3. 18.
be not made ours? how can we have peace with God and boldness at the throne of
grace through this righteousness, except we can lay claim to this
righteousness? how can we conclude that we are happy and blessed upon the
account of this righteousness, except it be made over to us? There is none of
us that have such an inherent righteousness in our selves that we dare plead
before the Bar of God: and though God has provided such a glorious Robe of
righteousness for poor sinners, as is the wonder and amazement of Angels, yet
what would all this avail the poor sinner, if this righteousness be not made
over to him? O sirs! remember this, Christ's Righteousness must be yours, it
must be made over to you, or else it will never stand you in stead, Romans 5. 17.
For if by one man's offense, death reigned by one; much more they which receive
abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in glory by
one Jesus Christ: except they receive the Righteousness of Christ, it is
nothing to them: Christ's Righteousness is in it self white raiment and
beautiful and glorious apparel, but it will never cover our nakedness, except
it be put on, and we are clothed with it; it must be made over to us, or we
can never be justified by it, 1 Cor. 1. 30. He of God is made to us
righteousness; if he be not made to us righteousness, we shall never be
righteous: Though man has lost a righteousness to be justified by, yet there
is an absolute necessity of having one; God cannot love nor delight in any
thing but righteousness: God is a holy God, a righteous God, and therefore can
only love and take pleasure in those that are righteous, both by a
righteousness imputed and a righteousness imparted, Isa. 45. 24. Surely shall
one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, ver. 25. In the Lord
shall all the seed of Israel be justified and shall glory: Isa. 54. 17. Their
righteousness is of me, says the Lord: Psalm. 71. 16. I will make mention of
thy righteousness, even of thine only. Look as no man can be made rich by
another man's riches, except they are made his; so no man can be made righteous
by the righteousness of Christ, except his righteousness be made over to him:
hence he is called, the Lord our righteousness. Jer. 23. 6. and hence we are
said to be the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. hence we are said by
his obedience to be made righteous, 2 Cor. 5. 21.

Fifthly and lastly, The way whereby this Righteousness Romans 3. 21. Isa. 53.
Imputed righteousness seems to be prefigured by the skins wherewith the Lord
after the fall clothed our first parents; the bodies of the beasts were for
sacrifice, and the skins to put them in mind, that their own righteousness was
like the sig-leaves imperfect, and that therefore they must be justified
another way.
the glory of God, and became obnoxious to the vindictive Justice of God; and
the Lord Jesus Christ by his obedience and death has given full content and
satisfaction to divine Justice on our behalf: now when God does pardon and
accept us hereupon, he does put it upon our account, he does reckon or impute
it unto us as fully, in respect of the benefit thereof, as if we our selves had
performed it in our own persons: and this is the way wherein the holy Ghost
frequently expresses it, Romans 4. 6. Even as David also describes the
blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works; and
ver. 11. That righteousness might be imputed to them also: and therefore it
highly concerns us to mind this Scripture-rule, That in order to the
satisfaction of the Justice of God, the sins of Gods people were imputed and
reckoned unto Christ, and in order to our partaking of the benefit of that
satisfaction, or deliverance thereby, Christ's righteousness must be imputed
and reckoned unto us. The first branch of this Rule you have, Isa. 53. 5, 6. He
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, etc. and
the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all: And for the other branch of
the Rule, see Romans 5. 19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners,
so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous: ver. 17. As by one
man's offense death reigned by one, much more they which receive abundance of
grace and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus
Christ. From the comparison between the first and second Adam, it is evident,
that as Adam's transgression of the Law of God, is imputed to all his
posterity, and that in respect thereof they are reputed sinners, and accursed,
and liable to eternal death; so also Christ's obedience, whereby he fulfilled
the Law, is so imputed to the members of his mystical body, that in regard of
God, they stand as innocent, justified and accepted to eternal life. Look as
Adam was the common root of all Mankind, and so his sin is imputed to all his
posterity; so Jesus Christ is the common root of all the faithful, and his
obedience is imputed to them all: for it were ridiculous to say, that Adam's
sin had more power to condemn, than Christ's righteousness has to save: and
who but fools in folio will say that God does not impute Christ's righteousness
as well as Adam's sin? The Apostle's parallel between the two Adams does
clearly evidence, That as the guilt of Adam's disobedience is really imputed to
us, insomuch that in his sinning we all sinned; so the obedience of Christ is
as really imputed unto us, insomuch that in his obeying, reputatively and
legally we obey also. How did Adam's sin become ours? Why, by way of
imputation, he transgressed the Covenant, Genesis 3 6, 11, 12. As imitation of
Adam only made us not sinners, so imitation of Christ only makes us not
righteous, but the imputation. Dew^. of Justification.
and did eat the forbidden fruit, and it was justly reckoned unto us: it was
personally the sinful act of our first Parent, but it is imputed to all of us
who come out of his loins; for we were in him not only naturally, as he was the
Root of Mankind, but also legally, as he was the great Representative of
Mankind. In the Covenant of works and the transactions thereof, Adam stood in
the stead, and acted in the behalf not only of himself but of all his
posterity, and therefore his sin is reckoned unto them; even so, says the
Apostle, after the same manner, the obedience and righteousness of Christ is
made over to many for Justification. I cannot understand the analogy betwixt
the two Adams (wherein the Apostle is so clear and full) unless this
imputation, as here stated, be granted. Look as Christ was made sin for us only
by imputation, so we are made righteous only by the imputation of his
righteousness to us, as the Scripture every where evidences, 2 Cor. 5. 21. 1
P^t. 2. 21.
He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. How was Christ made sin for us? not sin inherent,
for he had no sin in him (he was holy, harmless and undesiled, separate Heb. 7.
26.
from sinners, and made higher than the heavens) but by imputation: Christ's
righteousness is imputed to us in that way wherein our sin was imputed to him.
Now our sin was imputed to Christ, not only in the bitter effects of it, but he
took the guilt of them upon himself (as I have in this Treatise already
evidenced:) so then his righteousness or active obedience it self must be
proportionably imputed to us, and not only in the effects thereof. The
Mediatory righteousness of Christ can no way become the believers, but as the
first Adam's disobedience became his posterities (who never had the least
actual share in his transgression) that is by an act of imputation from God as
a Judge, the Lord Jesus having fulfilled the Law as a second Adam, God the
Father imputes it to the believing soul, as if he had done it in his own
person. I do not say that God the Father does account the sinner to have done
it; but I say that God the Father does impute it to the believing sinner, as if
he had done it, unto all saving intents and purposes. Hence Christ is called
the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. (An awakened soul, that is truly
sensible of his own baseness and unrighteousness, would not have this golden
sentence, The Lord our righteousness, blotted out by a hand of heaven out of
the Bible for as many worlds as there are men in the world:) so is that Text to
a believer living and dying, a strong cordial, In this 1 Cor. 1. 30. the
Apostle 1. distinguishes Righteousness from Sanctisication, imputed
Righteousness, from inherent Righteousness: 2. he says that Christ's
Righteousness is made ours of God See Romans 4. 6. Psalm. 71. 16.
viz. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Christ Jesus is made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness,
etc. And pray how is Christ made righteousness to the believer? not by
infusion, but imputation; not by putting righteousness into him, but by putting
a righteousness upon him, even his own righteousness, by the imputing his
merits, his satisfaction, his obedience unto them, through which they are
accepted as righteous unto eternal life, Romans 5. 19. Christ's righteousness is
his in respect of inhesion, but it is ours in respect of imputation; his
righteousness is his personally, but ours meritoriously: we are justified by
another righteousness, and that only, and therefore by imputed righteousness,
for another righteousness can no other way be made ours but only by
imputation, Romans 5. 18. By the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all
men to justification: were it any other than imputed righteousness, it would be
as manifold a righteousness as there are persons justified; but it is said to
be the righteousness of one that comes upon all men for justification of life.
That is a choice word that you have in Rev. 19. 8. And to her (that is Christ's
Spouse) was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and
white; for the fine linen is the righteousness of the saints: the Greek word
here is (...), righteousnesses or justisications; this, say some, signifies a
double righteousness given to us; 1. The righteousness of Justification,
whereby we are justified before God: 2. The righteousness of Sanctification, by
which we evidence our Justification to men: but others say, it is an So the
Hebrew word is used, Isa. 45. 24.
Hebraism rather, by the plural righteousnesses, nothing the most absolute,
complete and perfect righteousness which we have in Christ. Now though I would
not exclude inherent righteousness, yet I judge that imputed righteousness is
the righteousness here meant; and that first, because this clothing is that
which is the righteousness of all Saints, by which they stand recti in curia
before Psalm. 76. 7, Psalm. 143. 2. J^b 9. 15. cap. 22. 2, 3, 4. Jeb 35. 7. The
Saints are said, Rev. 7. 15. to he clothed in white Robes, not because they had
merited or adorned themselves with goodworks, but because they had washed and
made white their Robes in the blood of the Lamb.
God: now there is no standing before God in our inherent righteousness; for
though next to Christ, our graces are our best jewels, yet they are but weak
and imperfect, they have their specks and spots; they are like the Moon which
when it shines brightest, yet has her black spots. 2. Christ's righteousness is
the only pure clean, white, spotless righteousness, there is is no speck or
spot to be found upon Christ's righteousness: but we are all as an unclean
thing, and al our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, as that evangelical
Prophet speaks, Isa. 64. 6. 3. The word here is plural, (...), righteousnesses;
Christ has many righteousnesses: first, he has his essential and personal
righteousness, as God; now this essential personal righteousness of Christ
cannot be imputed to us. Osiander was of opinion, that men were justified by
the essential righteousness of Christ as God, which was a most dangerous
opinion, and learnedly and largely confuted by Calvin in his Institutions, and
by others since. Secondly, there is the mediatory righteousness of Christ; now
this is that righteousness which he wrought for us as Mediator, whereby he did
subject himself to the precepts, to the penalties, commands and curses,
answering both Gods vindictive and rewarding Justice: there is Christ's Active
righteousness, and there is Christ's Passive righteousness, etc. of these I
have spoken already in this Treatise, and therefore a hint here is enough. But
fourthly, How can it stand with reason that the Papists by the Popes
indulgences should be made partakers of the ^ner^^^ and good works one of
another, and yet be against reason that we by the ordinance of God should be
made partakers of ^^e merits and righteousness of Jesus Christ.
there are some expressions in the Text (that is under consideration) that do
best agree with the righteousness of Christ; as first that, that she is arrayed
in fine linen, clean and white; this clearly points at imputed righteousness,
which Christ puts upon his Bride as a royal Robe. That which makes Christ's
Bride beautiful, yea whiter than the snow, and more glorious than the Sun in
his eyes, is not any beauty of her own, nor any inherent righteousness in her
self, but the white Robe of Christ's own righteousness that he puts upon her:
2. That expression in the Text, To her it was granted, that she should be
arrayed in fine linen, etc. It was granted to her to show that this fine
linen was none of her own spinning, it was a free gift of Christ unto her;
Saints have no other righteousness to make them comely and lovely in the eyes
of God, but the Robe of Christ's righteousness, which is that fine white linen
that Christ gives them, and that he puts upon them. Lastly, observe the
confirmation and ratification that is given to these words in the 9. verse.
write, these are the true sayings of God; these are not my sayings, nor the
sayings of Angels, but they are the sayings of that God that is truth it self,
that cannot die, nor lie, nor deny himself, nor deceive the sons of God; and
therefore you may safely rest upon these sayings of God both in the 8. and 9.
verses, as most sure and certain: Surely, the righteousness the believer has
is imputed, it is an accounted or reckoned righteousness to him, it is not that
which he has inherently in himself, but God through Christ does esteem of him
as if he had it, and so deals with him as wholly righteous: 1. It stands with
reason that that satisfaction should be imputed to me, which my Surety has
made for my debt: now Christ was our Surety, as the Apostle calls him, Heb. 7.
22. 2. Adam's sin was justly imputed by God to all his posterity, though it was
not their own inherently and actually, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 5. 14. and
the sins of all the elect were 2 Cer. 5. 21. Isa. 53. 6. This must be Lu^her's
meaning, when he says, Christ was the greatest sinner; he was Manasseh. thit
Idolater, David that Adulter^r, Peter that denier of his master, etc. to wit,
by imputation only, he being made sin f^rthem, as the Apostle speaks.
imputed unto Christ, though they were not his own inherently and actually: He
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, says the Apostle; and upon him was
laid the iniquity of us all: All the sins of all the believers in the world,
from the first Creation to the last Judgment, were laid on him; how laid on
him, but by imputation? Surely there was in Christ no fundamental guilt, no,
no, but he was made sin by imputation and law-account; he was our Surety, and
so our sins were laid on him in order to punishment: And to prefigure this, all
the iniquities of Gods people were imputed to their sacrifice, though they were
not inherently his own, as we read Levit. 16. 21, 22 Aaron shall put all the
iniquities of all the children of Israel, and all their transgressions and all
their sins, upon the head of the Goat; and the Goat shall bear upon him, all
their iniquities: and why then should it seem strange, that the perfect
righteousness of our sacrifice and surety, though it be not our own inherently,
should be imputed to us by the Lord, and made ours.

Frequently and seriously consider, that the word answering this imputing, is
in the Hebrew, Chashab, and in To impute in the General, is to acknowledge that
to be another's, which is not indeed his: and it is used either in a good or
bad sense; so that it is no more, than to account or reckon. It is the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and accepted for us, by which we are
judged righteous.
the Greek, (...); of which, the sum (as the learned say, comes to this:) That
though the words in the general signify to think, to reason, to imagine, etc.
yet very frequently they are used to signify, to account, or reckon by way of
computation, as Arithmeticians use to do: so that it is, as it were, a judgment
passed upon a thing, when all reasons and arguments are cast together. And from
this it is applied to signify any kind of accounting or reckoning: and in this
sense, imputation is taken here, for God's esteeming and accounting of us
righteous: (...), signifies to reckon or account; it is taken by a borrowed
speech from Merchants reckonings, and accounts; who have their debt-books,
wherein they set down how their reckonings stand in the particulars they deal
in. Now in such debt-books, Merchants use to set down, whatever payments are
only made, either by the debtors themselves, or by others in the behalf of
them; an example whereof we have in the Epistle to Philemon, verse. 18. where
Paul undertakes to Philemon, for Onesimus; if he has wronged thee, or owes
thee any thing, put that on my account: that is, account Onesimus his debt, to
Paul, and Paul's satisfaction or payment to Onesimus which answers the double
imputation, in point of justification, Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
that is, of our sins to Christ, and of Christ's satisfaction to us; both which
are employed, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He made him to be sin for us (that is, our sins were
imputed to him) that we might be the righteousness of God in him (that is, that
his rightcousness might be imputed to us.) The language of Jesus Christ to his
father, seems to be this; Oh holy Father, I have freely and willingly taken all
the debts, and all the sins of all the believers in the world upon me; I have
undertaken to be their paymaster, to satisfy thy justice, to pacify thy
wrath, to fulfill thy Law, etc. and therefore, Lo, here I am ready Psalm. 40. 6,
7, 8. Heb. 10. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
to do what ever thou command, and ready to suffer whatsoever thou please,
I am willing to be reckoned a sinner, that they may be reckoned righteous; I am
willing to be accounted cursed, that they may be for ever blessed; I am willing
to pay all their debts that they may be set at liberty; I am willing to lay
down my life, that John 10. 11, 15, 17, 18. Rev. 20. 6.
they may escape the second death; I am willing that my soul should be
exercised with the most hideous Agonies, that their souls may be possessed of
heaven's happinesses. Oh, what wonderful wisdom, grace and love is here
manifested! that when we were neither able to satisfy the penalty of the Law,
or to bring a conformity to it; that then Christ should interpose, and become
both redemption and righteousness for us.

Now, from the imputed righteousness of Christ, a believer may form up this
fifth plea, as to all the ten Scriptures E^cles. 11. 9. cap. 12. 14. Mat. 12.
14. cap. 18. 23. Luke 16. 3. Romans 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb. 9. 27. cap. 13.
17. 1 Pet. 4. 5.
in the margent, that refer to the great day of account. Oh, blessed God, thou
have given me to understand, that the mediatory righteousness of Christ
includes, first, the habitual holiness of his person, in the absense of all
sin, and in the rich and plentiful presence of all holy and requisite
qualities: Secondly, the actual holiness of his life and death by obedience. By
his active obedience he perfectly fulfilled the commands of the Law; and by his
passive obedience, his voluntary sufferings, he satisfied the penalty and
commination of the Law for transgressions: That perfect satisfaction to divine
justice, in whatsoever it requires; either in way of punishing for sin, or
obedience to the law, made by the Lord Jesus Christ, God and man, the Mediator
of the new Covenant, as a common head, representing all those, whom the father
has given to him, and made over unto them that believe in him. This is that
righteousness that is imputed to all believers in their Justification, and this
imputed righteousness of thy dear son, and my dear savior, is now my plea,
before thy bar of Justice. Imputed righteousness is the same materially with
that which the Law requires; The Righteousness which the Law requires, upon
pain of damnation, is a perfect obedience and conformity to the whole Law of
God, performed by every son and daughter of Adam in his own person. Now imputed
righteousness is the same materially with that which the Law requires.
it is obedience to the Law of God exactly, and punctually performed to the
very utmost Iota and tittle thereof, without the least abatement, Christ has
paid the uttermost farthing. He is the fulfilling of the Law for righteousness,
and he has fulfilled the Law in the humane nature, to the intent, that it
might be fulfilled in the same nature, to which it was at first given; and all
this he has expressly done in all their names, and on all their behalfs, that
believe in him; That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in them,
Romans 8. 3, 4. It is as if our dear Lord Jesus had said, oh blessed father, this
I suffer, and this I do to the use, and in the stead, and room of all those
that have ventured their souls upon me, that they may have a righteousness,
which they may truly call their own, and on which they may safely rest, and in
which they may for ever glory; Isa. 45. 24, 25. Now, it will never stand with
the unspotted holiness, justice and righteousness of God, to reject this
righteousness of his son, or that plea that is bottomed upon it. Oh, the
matchless happiness of believers, who have so fair, so full, and so noble a
plea to make in the great day of our Lord Jesus.

But some may say, what blessed fruit grows upon this viz. the righteousness of
Jesus Christ, that is imputed to all believers? what strong consolations flows
from this fountain, the Imputed Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ? I
answer there are these nine choice consolations, that flow in upon all
believers, through the righteousness of Christ imputed to them.

First, let all believers know for their comfort, that in so complete, and so
fully satisfactory to the Justice of God, as that Divine Justice cries out, I
have enough, and I require no more; I have found a ransom, and I am fully
pacified toward you. It Is certain that Christ was truly Ezekiel. 16. 61, 62, 63.
Heb. 10. 10, 11, 12, 14. Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6.
and properly, a sacrifice for sin; and it is as certain, that our sins were the
meritorious cause of his sufferings, he did put himself into poor sinners
stead, he took their guilt upon him, and did undergo that punishment, which
they should have undergone; he did die, and shed his blood, Romans 5. 6, -- 12.
that he might thereby atone God, and expiate sin: and therefore we may safely
and boldly conclude, that Jesus Christ has satisfied the justice of God to the
uttermost; Heb. 7. 25.
so that now the believing sinner may rejoice and triumph in the justice, as
well as in the mercy of God; for doubtless, the Mediatory righteousness of
Christ, was infinitely more satisfactory, and pleasing to God, than all the
sins of believers could be displeasing to him; God took more pleasure and
delight in the bruising of his son, in Isa. 53. 10.
the humiliation of his son, and he smelt a sweeter savor in his sacrifice,
than all our sins could possibly offend him or provoke him: when a believer
casts his eyes upon his many thousand sinful commissions and omissions, no
wonder if he fears and trembles; but then, when he looks upon Christ's
satisfaction, he may see himself acquitted, and rejoice; for if there be no
charge, no accusation aagainst Romans 8. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
the Lord Jesus, there can be none against the believer: Christ's expiatory
sacrifice has fully satisfied divine justice; and upon that very ground, every
believer has cause to triumph in Christ Jesus, and in that righteousness 2
Cor. 2. 14. Rev. 14. 4, 5.
of his, by which he stands justified before the Throne of God. Christ is a
person of infinite transcendent worth and excellency, and it makes highly for
his honor to justify believers, in the most ample, and glorious way
imaginable, etc. and what way is that, but by working out for, and then
investing them with a righteousness adequate to the Law of God; a
righteousness, that should be every way commensurate to the miserable estate of
fallen man, and to the holy design of the glorious God. It Is the high honor of
the second Adam, that he has restored to fallen man a more glorious
righteousness, than that he lost in the first Adam: and it would be high
blasphemy in the eyes of Angels and men, for any mortal to assert, that the
second Adam, our Lord Jesus Christ, was less powerful to save, than the first
Adam was to destroy. The second Adam is able to save to the uttermost, all such
as come to God through him. The second Adam is able to save to all ends and
purposes perfectly, Heb. 7. 25. (...), To the uttermost of time, at all times,
and for ever, etc.
says Beza: perpetually, or for ever, says Tremel: in aeternum, says Syrus:
in perpetuum, says the vulg. ad plenum, says Erasmus: ad perfectum, says
Stapulensis: he is able to save to the uttermost obligation of the Law,
preceptive as well as penal; and to bring in perfect righteousness, as well as
perfect innocence: he is able to save to the uttermost demand of divine
justice, by that perfect satisfaction, that he has given to divine justice;
Christ is Isa. 63. 1.
mighty to save; and as he is mighty to save, so he loves to save poor sinners,
in such a way, wherein he may most magnify his own might; and therefore, he
will purchase their pardon with his blood, and make reparation to divine 1 Pet.
1. 18, 19.
justice, for all the wrongs and injuries, which fallen man had done to his
Creator, and his Royal Law; and bestow upon him a better righteousness, than
that which Adam lost; and bring him into a more safe, high, honorable, and
durable estate, than that which Adam fell from, when he was in his created
perfection. All the attributes of God, do acquiess in the Imputed Righteousness
of Christ, so that a believer may look upon the holiness, Psalm. 4. 8.
justice, and righteousness of God; and rejoice, and lay himself down in peace.
I have read in story, that Pilat being called to Rome, to give an account unto
the Emperor, for some mis-government, and maladministration, he put on the
seamless coat of Christ; and all the time that he had that coat upon his back,
Caesar's fury was abated: Christ has put his coat, his Robe of righteousness
Isa. 61. 10.
upon every believer, upon which account, all the Judicial anger, wrath, and
fury of God, toward believers cease; Isa. 54. 9. For this is as the waters
of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah, should no more go
over the earth, so I have sworn, that I would not be wroth with thee, nor
rebuke thee: verse. 10. For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be
removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant
of my peace be removed says the Lord that has merey on thee. But,

Secondly, Know for your comfort, that, this imputed, Isa. 53. 5, 6, 7. Colos.
2. 12, 13, 14, 15.
away all iniquity, and answers for all your sins. Lord, here are my sins of
omission, and here are my sins of commission; but the Righteousness of Christ,
has answered for them all: here are my sins against the Law, and here are my
sins against the Gospel, and here are my sins against the offers of grace, the
tenders of grace, the strivings of grace, the bowels of grace; but the
Rightcousness of Christ has answered for them all. I have read, that, when a
Cordial was offered to a godly man that was sick; Oh (said he) the cordial of
cordials which I daily take, is, that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us
from all our sins. Oh sirs. it would be high blasphemy, for any to 1 John 1. 7.
imagine, that there should be more demerit in any sin, yea, in all sin, to
condemn a believer, than there is merit in Romans 8. 1, 33, 34, 35.
Christ's righteousness, to absolve him, to justify him. The righteousness of
Christ, was shadowed out by the glorious Robes, and apparel of the High
Priest: That Exodus 30.
attire, in which the High Priest appeared before God, what was it else, but a
type of Christ's righteousness? The filthy garments of Joshua (who represented
the Church) were not only taken off from him, thereby signifying the removal of
our sins; but also a new fair garment Zach. 3. 4, 5.
was put upon him, to signify our being clothed with the wedding garment of
Christ's righteousness. If any shall say, how is it possible, that a soul that
is defiled with the worst of sins, should be whiter than the snow yea, Psalm.
51. 7.
beautiful and glorious in the cyes of God; the answer is at hand, because, to
whomsoever the Lord does give the pardon of his sins, which is the first part
of our justification, to them he does also impute the righteousness of Christ,
which is the second part of our justification before God: thus David describes
(says the Apostle) the blessedness of Romans 4. 6, 7.
the man to whom the Lord imputes reghteousness without works; saying, blessed
are they, whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: Now to
that man, whose sins the Lord forgives, to him he does impute righteousness
also: Take away the filthy garments from him (says Zach. 3. 4.
the Lord of Joshua) and he said unto him, behold, I have cansed thine iniquity
to pass from thee, and I will cloth thee with change of raiment: and what was
that change of raiment? surely, the perfect obedience and righteousness of the
Lord Jesus, which God does impute unto us; in which respect, also, we are said,
by justifying faith, to Romans 12. 14. Gal. 3. 27.
put on the Lord Jesus; and to be clothed with him, as with a garment. And no
marvel if, being so apparelled, we appear beautiful and glorious in the sight
of God. To her (that is, to Christ's Bride) was granted, that she should Rev.
19. 8.
be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, for the fine linen is the
righteousness of saints: This perfect righteousness of Christ, which the Lord
imputes to us, and wherewith (as with a garment) he clothed us, is the only
righteousness which the Saints have to stand before God with; and having that
Robe of righteousness on, they may stand with great boldness and comfort,
before the judgmentseat of God. But,

Thirdly, Know for your comfort, that this righteousness of Christ, presents us
perfectly righteous in the sight He is made to us righteousness. The Robe of
innocence, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
like the veil of the Temple is rent asunder: our righteousness is a ragged
righteousness, our righteousnesses Isa. 6^. 4.
are as filthy rags. Look, as under rags the naked body is seen, so under the
rags of our righteousness, the body of death is seen: Christ is all in all, in
regard of righteousness; Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness to
Romans 10. 4.
them that believe.

That is, through Christ, we are as righteous, as if we Finis persiciens nen
intersic^ens: Aug.
had satisfied the Law in our own persons. The end of the Law, is to justify
and save those which fulfill it; Christ subjected himself thereto, he perfectly
fulfilled it for us, and his perfect righteousness is imputed to us; Christ
fulfilled the moral Law, not for himself, but for us, therefore Christ doing it
for believers, they fulfill the Law in Christ; and so Christ by doing, and they
believing in him that does it, do fulfill the Law: or Christ may be faid to be
the end of the Law, because the end of the Law is perfect righteousness, that a
man may be justified thereby, which end we cannot attain of our selves, through
the frailty of our flesh, but by Christ we attain it, who has fulfilled the
Law for us. Christ has perfectly fulfilled the Decalogue for us, and that 3
ways: 1. In his pure conception: 2. In his godly life: 3. in his holy and
obedient sufferings and all for us: for whatsoever the Law required that we
should be, do or suffer, he has performed in our behalf. Therefore one wittily
says, that Christ Arctius.
is Telos, the end or tribute; and we by his payment, Ateleis, Tribute free; we
are discharged by him, before God. Christ, in respect of the integrity and
purity of his nature, being conceived without sin; and in respect of his life
and Mat. 1. 18. Luke 1. 35. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Cel. 1. 20.
actions, being wholly conformed to the absolute righteousness of the Law; and
in respect of the punishment which he suffered, to make satisfaction unto God's
justice, for the breach of the Law: in these respects, Christ is the perfection
of the Law, and the end of the Law, for righteousness to them that believe.
Jacob got the blessing in the garment of his elder brother; so, in the garment
of Christ's righteousness, who is our elder brother, we obtain Ephesians. ^. 4.
the blessing, yea, all spiritual blessings in heavenly places; we are made the
righteousness of God in him. The 2 Cor. 5. ult.
Church, says Marlorat, which puts on Christ, and his righteousness, is more
illustrious than the air is by the sun. The infinite wisdom and power of dear
Jesus in reconciling the Law and the Gospel, in this great mystery of
justification, is greatly to be magnified. In the blessed Scriptures, we find
the righteousness of Justification, to take its various denominations: In
respect of the material cause, it is called the righteousness of the Law: In
respect of the efficient cause, it is called the righteousness of Romans 5. 17. 1
Cor. 1. 30. Romans 3. 22. Phil. 3. 9. Phil. 3. 9. Romans 3. 24. Titus. 3. 7.
Christ: in respect of the formal, It is called the righteousness of God, he
imputing of it: In respect of the instrumental cause, it is called the
righteousness of faith: And in respect of the moving and final cause, we are
said to be justified freely by Grace. The Law, as it was a Covenant of works,
required exact and perfect obedience, in men's proper persons; this was legal
Justification. But in the new Covenant, God is contented to accept this
righteousness in the hand of a surety, and this is Evangelical Justification;
this righteousness presents us in the sight of God, as all fair; Cant. 4. 7. as
complete; Colos. 2. 10. as without spot or wrinkle; Ephesians. 5. 27. as without
fault before the throne of God; Rev. 14. 5. as holy, and unblameable, and
unreproveable in his sight; Colos. 1. 22. Oh the happiness and blessedness, the
safety and glory of those precious souls; who, in the righteousness of Jesus
Christ, stand perfectly rightcous in the sight of God. but,

Fourthly, know for your comfort, that this imputed ^ Co^. 5. 21. ^al. 3. 13.
made a curse for me: or rather, I am thy sin, and thou art my rightcousness; I
am thy curse, and thou art my blessing; I am thy death, and thou art my life; I
am the wrath of God to thee, and thou art the love of God to me; I am thy hell,
and thou art my heaven. Oh sirs, if you think of your sins, and of God's wrath;
if you think of your guiltiness, and of God's justice; your hearts will faint
and fail, they will fear and tremble, and sink into despair; if you do not
think of Christ, if you do not stay and rest your souls upon the mediatory
righteousness of Christ, The Imputed Righteousness of Christ. The Imputed
Righteousness of Christ, answers all cavils and objections (though there were
millions of them) that can be made against the good estate of a believer. This
is a precious truth more worth than a world, that all our sins are pardoned,
not only in a way of truth and mercy, but in a way of justice. Satan and our
own consciences will object many things against our souls, if we plead only the
mercy and the truth of God; and will be ready to say, oh but where is then the
justice of God? can mercy pardon without the consent of his justice? but now,
whilst we rest upon the satisfaction of Christ, justice and mercy kiss Psalm.
85. 10.
each other; yea, justice says, I am pleased: in a day of temptation, many
things will be cast in our dish, about the multitude of our sins, and the
greatness of our sins, and the grievousness of our sins, and about the
circumstances and aggravations of our sins; but that good word Christ, has
redeemed us from all iniquities, he has paid Titus 2. 14.
the full price that justice could exact or require; and that good word, mercy
rejoices against judgment, may James 2. 13.
support, comfort and bear us up under all. The infinite worth of Christ's
obedience, did arise from the dignity of his person, who was God-man; so that
all the obedience of Angels and men, if put together, could not amount to the
excellency of Christ's satisfaction. The righteousness of Christ, is often
called the righteousness of God, because it is a righteousness of God's
providing, and a righteousness that God is fully satisfied with; and therefore,
no fears, no doubts, no cavils, no objections, no disputes can stand before
this blessed and glorious righteousness of Jesus Christ, that is imputed to us.
But,

Fifthly, know for your comfort, that the imputed righteousness a Kingdom that
shakes not, for riches that corrupt not, Heb. 12. 28. 1 Pet. 1 3, 4, 5. 2 Cor.
5. 1, 2, 3, 4,
for an inheritance that fades not away, and for an house not made with bands,
but one eternal in the heavens. It Is the fairest certificate that you have to
show for all that happiness and blessedness that you look for in that other
world: The righteousness of Christ is your life, your joy, your comfort, your
crown, your confidence, your heaven, your all; oh that you were still so wise,
as to keep a fixed eye, and an awakened heart upon the mediatory righteousness
of Christ; for that is the righteousness, by which you may safely and
comfortably live, and by which you may happily and quietly die. It was a very
sweet and golden confession, which Bernard made, when he thought Guliel. A^bas,
in v^ta Bern. lib. 1. cap. 12.
himself to be at the point of death: I confess, said he, I am not worthy, I
have no merits of mine own to obtain heaven by: but my Lord had a double right
thereunto; an hereditary right as a son, and a meritorious right as a
sacrifice; he was contented with the one right himself, the other right he has
given unto me; by the virtue of which gift, I do rightly lay claim unto it, and
am not confounded: ah, that believers would dwell much upon this, that they
have a righteousness in Christ; that is, as full, perfect and complete, as if
they had fulfilled the Law; Christ being the end of the Law for righteousness
to believers, invests believers with a righteousness, every way as complete, as
the personal obedience of the Law, would Romans 8. 3, 4.
have invested them withal; yea, the righteousness that believers have by
Christ is, in some respect, better than that they should have had by Adam: 1.
Because of the dignity of Christ's person, he being the son of God, his
righteousness is more glorious than Adam's was, his righteousness is called the
righteousness of God; and we are made the 2 Cor. 5. 21.
righteousness of God in him. The first Adam was a mere man, the second Adam is
God and man. 2. Because the righteousness is perpetual; Adam was a mutable
person, he lost his righteousness (in one day say some) and all that glory
which his posterity should have possessed, had he stood fast in innocence: But
the righteousness of Christ cannot be lost; his righteousness is like himself,
from everlasting to everlasting, it is an everlasting righteousness; when once
this white raiment is put upon a believer, it D^n. 9. 24.
can never fall off, it can never be taken off. This splendid glorious
righteousness of Jesus Christ's, is as really a Rev. 19. 8.
believers, as if he had wrought it himself. A believer is no loser, but a
gainer by Adam's fall; by the loss of Adam's righteousness, is brought to
light, a more glorious and durable righteousness, than ever Adam's was; and
upon the account of an interest in this righteousness, a believer may challenge
all the glory of that upper world. But,

Sixthly, know for your comfort, that this imputed righteousness of Christ, is
the only true basis, bottom and Paul makes, Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of God's elect, it is God that justifies? some read R^m. 8. 33.
(...), signifies in ^^s vecare, o call in o the I am. It is a Law custom to
clear men by Proclaration, if one has been indicted at the Assizes, and no
Bill ^roughtin against him, there is an Oh yes made, if any have any thing to
say against the prisoner at the bar, let him come forth, since he stands upon
his freedom The application is easy.
it question-wise, thus, shall God that justifies? no such matter: and if the
judge acquit the prisoner at the bar, he cares not, though the Jailer, or his
fellow prisoners condemn him; so here, there are no accusers that a believer
needs to fear, seeing that it is God himself, who is the supreme Judge, that
absolves him as just; God absolves, and therefore it is to no purpose for Satan
to accuse us, Rev. 12. 10. nor for the Law of Moses to accuse us, John 5. 45.
nor for our own Consciences to accuse us, Romans 2. 25. nor for the world to
accuse us: God is the highest Judge, and his Tribunal-seat is the supreme
Judgment Seat; therefore, from thence there is no appealing: As amongst men,
persons accused or condemned, may appeal, till they come to the highest Court;
but if, in the highest, they are absolved and discharged, then they are free,
and safe, and well, so the believer being absolved before God's Tribunal seat,
there is no further accusations to be feared, all appeals from thence being
void, and of no force: The consideration of which should arm us, and comfort
us, and strengthen us against all terrors of conscience, guilt of sin,
accusation of the Law, and cruelty of Satan; in as much as these either dare
not appear before God, to accuse us, or charge us; or if they do, it is but
lost labor. Ambrose gives the sense thus; None can or dare retract the
judgment of God; for he confidently provokes all adversaries, if they dare
come forth to accuse; not that there is no cause, but because God has
justified: It is God that justifies, therefore it is in vain to accuse them;
and It is God that justifies them, if God does it, none can reverse it, for
there are none that are equal with God: Let all the accusations, which shall
come in against thee, from one hand or another, be true or false, they shall
never hurt thee; for he, from whom there is no appeal, has fully acquitted
thee, and therefore no accusation can endanger thy peace. Ah, what a strong
Cordial would this be to all the people of God, if they would but live in the
power of this glorious truth, that It is God that judifies them, and that there
lies no accusations in the Court of Heaven against them! the great reason why
many poor Christians are under so many dejections, despondencies and
perplexities is because they drink no more of this water of life. It is God
that justifies: did Christians live more upon this breast, It is God that
justifies, they would be no more Genesis 41. 1, 2, 3.
like Pharaoh's lean Kine, but would be fat and flourishing, did they but draw
more out of this Well of salvation, It is God that justifies; how would their
spirits revive, and a new life rise up in them, as did in the dead child, by 2
King. 4. 34, 35, 36, 37.
the Prophet Elisha's applying himself to it. The Imputed Righteousness of
Christ, is a real, sure and solid foundation, upon which, a believer may safely
build his peace, joy, and everlasting rest; yea, it will help him to glory in
Romans 5. 1, 2, 3.
tribulations, and to triumph over all adversities; Isa. 45. 24. Surely, shall
one say, in the Lord I have righteousness and strength. That which is the
greatest terror in the world to unbelievers, is the strongest ground of
comfort to believers; that is, the justice and wrath of God against sin. Look
how it was when the Angel appeared at the resurrection of our Savior Jesus
Christ; The keepers were affrighted, Mat. 28. 4, 5.
and became as dead men: but it was said to the women, Fear not ye, for ye seek
Jesus of Nazareth, that was crucified: so it is much more in this case; when
God's Justice is powerfully manifested, the sinners of Sion and Isa. 33. 14.
the world, are afraid and terrified: but yet poor believers seek for Christ
who was crucified, ye need not fear any thing; yea, you may be wonderfully
cheared at this and it is your greatest comfort, that you have to deal with
this just God, who has already received satisfaction for your sins. It is
observable that the Saints triumph in the justice and judgments of God, that
are most terrible to the enemies of God, in that which is the substance of the
song of Moses and the Lamb, Rev. 15. 3, 4, 5. so in that Luke 26. 28. where the
day of judgment is described (say some) and that in it, there shall be distress
of nations, and men's hearts failing them for fear (viz. of the justice and
wrath of God:) Why so? it is for looking after those things that are to come
upon the earth; for the powers of the earth shall be shaken, etc. But when
these things begin to come to pass; Then look up, and lift up your heads, for
your redemption draws near. This day is the most dreadful day that ever was
in the world to all the ungodly, but the just and faithful, then shall be able
to lift up their heads; to see all the world on a light fire about them, and
all the Elements in terrible confusion. But how dare a poor creature lift up
his head in such a case as this? They shall see the son of man, coming in a
cloud, with power and great glory: here is enough to comfort the poor members
of Christ, to see Christ, on whom they have believed, and who has satisfied
God's justice for them, and imputed his own righteousness to them: to see him
set upon his judgment seat, cannot but be matter of joy and rejoicing to them.
Now they shall find the power of that word upon their souls; Isa. 40. 1.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says the Lord; speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, and say unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her
iniquity is pardoned; for she has received at the Lord's hand, double for her
sins: i. e. Their conflict with the wrath of God, is at an end, the punishment
of their iniquity is accepted, they have received in their head and surety,
Christ Jesus, double for their sins: i. e. Justice has passed upon them, in
their head, Christ Jesus; and they are sure that the judge of all the earth will
do right, and will not punish their sins twice: The exactness of Gods justice
cannot do this, Job 34. 10. Far be it from God, that he should do wickedness*
and from the Almighty, that be should commit iniquity: verse. 12. Yea; surely
God will not do wickedly; neither will the Almighty pervert judgment. It would
be high injustice in a magistrate, to punish the same offense twice: and it
would be high blasphemy for any to assert, that ever God should be guilty of
such injustice. Whilst Christians set up a righteousness of their own, and
build not upon the Romans 10. 3.
righteousness of Christ, how unsettled are they? how miserably are they tossed
up and down, sometimes fearing and sometimes hoping, sometimes supposing
themselves in a good condition, and anon seeing themselves upon the very brink
of hell? but now, all is quiet and serene with that soul that builds upon the
righteousness of Christ; for he being justified by faith, has peace with God:
observe Romans 5. 1.
that noble description of Christ, in that, Isa. 32. 2. And a man (that is, the
man Christ Jesus) shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and a covert from
the tempest, as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock
in a weary land, When a man is clothed with the righteousness of Christ, who is
God man, it is neither wind nor tempest, it is neither drought nor weariness,
that can disturb the peace of his soul; for Christ and his righteousness will
be a hiding place, a cover, and rivers of water, and the shadow of a great rock
unto him: for, being at perfect peace with God, he may well say with the
Psalmist, Isa. 26. 3. Psalm. 4. 6, 7, 8.
I will lay me down in peace: The peace and comfort of an awakened sinner, can
never stand firm and stable, but upon the Basis of a positive righteousness:
When a sensible sinner casts his eye upon his own righteousness, holiness,
fastings, prayers, tears, humblings, meltings; he can find no place for the
sole of his foot to rest firmly upon, by reason of the spots, and blots, and
blemishes, that cleaves both to his graces and duties; He knows that his
prayers need pardon, and that his tears need washing in the blood of the Lamb,
and that his very righteousness needs another's righteousness, to secure him
from condemnation. If thou Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord, who shall
stand? Psalm. 130. 3. Psalm. 1. 5.
that is, rectus in curia, stand, that is, in judgment: Extremity of justice he
deprecateth; he would not be dealt with in rigor and rage: The best man's
life, is fuller of sins, than the firmament is of stars, or the furnace of
sparks; and therefore who can stand in judgment, and not fall under the weight
of thy just wrath, which burns as low as hell it self, i. e. none can stand:
were the faults of the best man alive but written in his forehead, he was never
able to stand in judgment: when a man comes to the Law for Justification, it
convinces him of sin; when he pleads his innocence, that he is not so great a
sinner as others are, when he pleds his righteousness, his duties, his good
meanings, and his good desires; the Law tells him that they are all weighed in
the balance of the sanctuary, and found Dau. 5. 27.
too light; the Law tells him, that the best of his duties will not save him,
and that the least of his sins will damn him; the Law tells him, that his own
righteousnesses, are as filthy rags, do but defile him; and that his best
services do but witness against him; The Law looks for perfect and personal
obedience, and because the sinner cannot come up to it, it pronounces him
accursed; and though the Gal. 3. 10.
sinner sues hard for mercy, yet the Law will show him none, no though he seeks
it carefully with tears: but, Heb. 12. 17.
now, when the believing sinner casts his eye upon the righteousness of Christ,
he sees that righteousness to be a perfect and exact righteousness, as perfect
and exact as that of the Law, yea, it is the very righteousness of the Law,
though not performed by him, yet by his surety, the Lord his righteousness; and
upon this foundation he stands firm, and rejoices with joy unspeakable, and
full of glory. The Saints of old have always placed their happiness, peace, and
comfort in their perfect and complete Justification, rather than in their
imperfect and incomplete sanctification; as you may see by the Scriptures in
the margent, with Jer. 23. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Luke 7. 48, 50. Romans 4. 6, 8. cap.
5. 1, 3. Isa. 38. 16, 17. cap. 45. 24, 25. Phil. 4. 7.
many others that are scattered up and down in the blessed book of God. That
text is worthy to be written in letters of Gold, Isa. 61. 10. I will greatly
rejoice in the Lord (says the sound believer) my soul shall be joyful in my
God; for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, (He has imputed
and given unto me the perfect holiness and obedience of my blessed Savior, and
made it mine) he has covered me (all over, from top to toe) with the robe of
righteousness as a bride groom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride
adorneth her self with her jewels. Though a Christian's inherent righteousness
be weak and imperfect, ^maimed and stained, blotted and blurred, as it is; yet
it affords much comfort, peace, joy, and rejoicing, 1 Chronicles. 29. 9. J^b. 27. 4,
5, 6. Neh. 13. 14, 22, 31. Isa. 38. 3. Prove. 21. 14. 2 Cor. 1. 12. 1 Pet. 3. 3.
4. cap. 5. 4.
as you may see, by comparing the Scriptures in the Margent together: Job was
much taken with his inherent righteousness, Job 29. 14. I put on righteousness,
and it clothed me; my judgment was as a robe, and a diadem unto me. Look as
sober, modest, comely apparel, does much set forth, and adorn the body in the
eyes of men; so does inherent grace, inherent holiness, inherent righteousness,
when it sparkles in the faces, lips, lives, and good works of the Saints, much
more beautify and adorn them in the eyes, both of God and man. Now, if this
garment of inherent righteousness, that has so many spots and rents in it,
will adorn us, and joy us so much, what a beauty and glory is that, which the
Lord our God has put upon us, in clothing us with the robe of his son's
righteousness; for by this means we shall recover more by Christ, than we lost
by Adam: the robe of righteousness, which we have gotten by Christ, the second
Adam, is far more glorious, than that which we were deprived of, by the first
Adam. But,

Seventhly, Then know for your comfort, that you 7. Gal. 6. 14.
have the highest reason in the world to rejoice and triumph in Christ Jesus;
Phil. 3. 3. For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus: we rejoice in the person of Christ, and we rejoice in
the righteousness of Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 14. Now, thanks be to God, which always
causes us to triumph in Christ; Deo gratias was ever in Paul^s mouth, and ever
in Austin's mouth, and should be ever in a Christians mouth, when his eye is
fixed upon the righteousness of Christ: Every believer is in a more blessed and
happy estate, by means of the righteousness of Christ, than Adam was in
innocence, and that upon a threefold account; all which are just and noble
grounds for every Christian to rejoice and triumph in Christ Jesus: 1. That
righteousness which Genesis 3. chap. Psalm. 8. 5. E^cles. 7. 29.
Adam had, was uncertain, and such, as it was possible for him to lose; yea, he
did lose it, and that in a very short time: God gave him power and freedom of
will, either to hold it, or lose it; and we know, soon after, upon choice, he
proved a Bankrupt: but the righteousness that we have by Jesus Christ, is made
more firm and sure to us: it is that good part, that noble portion, that shall
never be taken from us, as Christ said to Mary. Adam Luke 10. 42.
sinned away his r^ghteousness, but a believer cannot sin away the
righteousness of Jesus Christ: It is not possible ^ John 3. 9. R^m. 8. 35, 39.
for the Elect of God, so to sin, as to lost Christ, or to strip themselves of
that robe of righteousness, which Christ has put upon them. The gates of ^ell
shall never be able Mat. 16. 18.
to prevail against that soul, that is interested in Christ, that is clothed
with the righteousness of Christ: Now, what higher ground of joy and triumph in
Christ Jesus, can there be than this. But Secondly, the righteousness that Adam
had was in his own keeping, the spring and root of it was sounded in himself,
and that was the cause why he lost it so soon: Adam (like the Prodigal son) had
Luke 15. 12. 13.
all his portion, his happiness, his ^oliness, his blessedness his
righteousness, in his own hands, in his own keeping; and so quickly lost stock
and block, as some speak it: O but now, that blessed righteousness that we have
by Jesus Christ, is not in our own keeping, but in our father's keeping. Look,
as our persons, graces and inherent righteousness are kept (as in a Garrison)
by the power of God 1 Pet. 1. 5. (...), the original is a military word, and
signifies safe keeping^ kept as with a Guard, or in a Garrison, that is well
fenced with walls and works, and so is made impregnable.
unto salvation; so that righteousness that we have by Jesus Christ, is kept
for us by the mighty power of God, unto salvation; God the father is the Lord
Keeper, not only of our inherent righteousness, but also of the imputed
righteousness of Jesus Christ unto us: My sheep shall never perish (says our
Savior, John 10. 28, 29.) neither shall any pluck them out of my hand; my
father that gave them me, is greater than all, and none is able to pluck them
out of my father's hands. Though the Saints may meet with many shak^^gs and
tossings in their various conditions in this world; yet their final
perseverance, till they come to full poss^^sion of eternal life, is certain:
God is so unchangeable in his purposes of love, and so invincible in his power;
that neither Satan, nor the world, nor their own flesh, shall ever be able to
separate them from a Crown of righteousness, 2. Tim. 4. 7, 8. A Crown of life,
Rev. 2. 10. A Crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5, 4.. The power of God is so far above
all created opposition, that it will certainly maintain the Saints in a state
of Grace. Now, what a bottom and ground for rejoicing and triumphing in Christ
Jesus, is here. But Thirdly, Admit, that the righteousness that Adam had in his
Creation, had been unchangeable, and that he could never have lost it; yet, it
had been but the righteousness of a man, of a mere creature, and what a poor,
low righteousness would that have been, to that high and glorious righteousness
that we have by Jesus Christ, which is the righteousness of such a person as
was God as well as man; yea, that righteousness that we have by Jesus Christ,
is a higher righteousness, and a more excellent, transcendent righteousness,
than that of the Angels; though the righteousness of the Angels be perfect and
complete in its kind, yet it is but the righteousness of mer^ creatures; But
the righteousness of the Saints, in which they stand clothed before the throne
of God, is the right ousness of that person, which is both God and man. Look
as the second Adam was a far more excellent person, than the first Adam was:
The first man was of the earth, earthy; 1 Cor. 15. 47. Look, as Adam conveighs
his guilt to all his children, so Christ conveighs his righteousness to all
his: he was caput cum foedere, as well as the first Adam.
(as the Apostle speaks) The second was the Lord from heaven (not for the
matter of his body, for he was made of a woman, but for the original and
dignity of his person; whereof you may see a lively and lofty description in
Heb. 1. 2, 3.) so his righteousness also, must needs be far more excellent,
absolute, glorious, and every way all-sufficient to satisfy the infinite
justice of God, and the exact perfection of his holy Law, than ever Adam's
righteousness, could possibly have done. Remember sirs, that that righteousness
that we have by Jesus Christ, is called the righteousness of God: He made him
to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him, says the Apostle, in 2 Cor. 5. 21. Now, that righteousness that we
have by Jesus Christ, is called the righteousness of God: 1. because it is such
a righteousness as God requires: 2. As he approves of, and accepts: 3. As he
takes infinite pleasure, and delight, and satisfaction in. The Righteousness
the Apostle speaks of in that Scripture last mentioned, is not to be understood
of the essential righteousness of Christ, which is infinite, and no ways
communicable to the creature, unless we will make a creature a God; but we are
to understand it, of that righteousness of Christ, that is imputed to
believers, as their sin is imputed to him. Now, what a Well of salvation is
here? what three noble grounds, and what matchless bottoms are here, for a
Christian's joy and triumph in Christ Jesus? who has put so glorious a Robe,
as his own righteousness upon them. Ah Christians, let not the consolations of
Job 15. 11.
God, be small in your eyes; why take you no more comfort and delight in Christ
Jesus? why rejoice you no more in him? not to rejoice in Christ Jesus is a
plain breach of that Gospel command; Rejoice in the Lord always (that is, Phil.
4. 4.
rejoice in Christ) and again I say rejoice, says the Apostle; he doubleth the
mandate, to show the necessity and excellency of the duty: so Phil. 3. 1.
Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. Now, in some respects, the breach of
the commands of the Gospel, are greater than the breach See Heb. 2. 2, 3. 8. 6.
10. 28, 29.
of the commands of the Moral Law; for the breach of the commands of the Gospel
carries in it a contempt and light esteem of Jesus Christ. Men's not rejoicing
in Christ Jesus, must flow from some dangerous humor, and base corruption or
other, that highly distempers their precious souls. If all created
excellencies, if all the privileges of God's people, if all the kingdoms of the
earth, and the glory of them, were to be presented at one view, they would all
appear as nothing, and emptiness, in comparison of the excellency and fullness
that is to be found in Christ Jesus: and therefore, the greater is their sin,
who rejoice not in Christ Jesus. Do you ask me where be Plutarch in Phocione.
my Jewels? my Jewels are my Husband, and his Triumphs, said Phocion's wife: do
you ask me, where be my ornaments? my ornaments are my two sons, brought up in
virtue and learning, said the mother of the Gracchi. Do you ask me where be my
Treasures? my Treasures are my friends, said Constantius, the father of
Constantine: but now, if you ask a child of God (when he is not clouded,
tempted, deserted, dejected) where be his Jewels, his Treasures, his Ornaments,
his comfort, his joy, his delight; he will answer with that Martyr, none but
Christ, none but Christ: Oh! none to Christ, none to Christ; Christ is all in
all unto me, Colos. 3. 11. Aeterna erit exultatio, quae bono laetatur aeterno:
That joy lasts for ever, whose object remains for ever: such an object is our
Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore the joy of the saints should still be
exercised upon our Lord Jesus Christ; shall the worldling rejoice in his barns,
the rich man in his bags, the ambitious man in his honors, the voluptuous man
in his pleasures, and the wanton in his Dalilahs; and shall not a Christian
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and in that robe of righteousness, and in those
garments of salvation, with Isa. 61. 10.
which Christ has covered him. The joy of that Christian that keeps a fixed
eye upon Christ and his righteousness, cannot be expressed, it cannot be
painted, no man can paint the sweetness of the honeycomb, nor the sweetness of
a cluster of Canaan, nor the fragrancy of the Rose of Sharon: As the being of
things cannot be painted, so the sweetness of things cannot be painted: The joy
of the Holy Ghost cannot be painted, nor that joy that arises in a Christian's
heart, who keeps up a daily converse with Christ and his righteousness, cannot
be painted, it cannot be expressed: who can look upon the glorious body of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and seriously consider, that even every vein of that blessed
body did bleed to bring him to heaven, and not rejoice in Christ Jesus? who can
look upon the glorious righteousness of Christ, imputed to him, and not be
filled with an ex^berancy of spiritual joy in God his Savior? There is not the
pardon of the least sin, nor the least degree of grace, nor the least drop of
mercy, but cost Christ dear, for he must die, and he must be made a sacrifice,
and he must be accursed, that pardon may be thine, and grace thine, and mercy
thine: and oh how should this draw out thy heart to rejoice and triumph in
Christ Jesus. The work of redemption sets both Angels and Saints Rev. 5. 11,
12, 13, 14. Rev. 1. 5, 6. cap. 5. 8, 9, 10.
a rejoicing and triumphing in Christ Jesus; and why not we, why not we also,
who have received infinite more benefit by the work of Redemption, than ever
the Angels have? A beautiful face is at all times pleasing to the eye; but then
especially, when there is joy manifested in the countenance. Joy in the face
puts a new beauty upon a person, and makes that which before was beautiful, to
be exceeding beautiful, it puts a luster upon beauty; so does holy joy and
rejoicing in Christ Jesus, put (as it were) a new beauty and luster upon
Christ. Though the Romans punished one that feasted, and looked out at a Plin.
1. c. 7.
window, with a Garland on his head, in the second Punick war: yet, you may be
sure, that God will never punish you for rejoicing and triumphing in Christ
Jesus, let the times be never so sad or bad, in respect of war, blood or
misery. But,

Eighthly, The Imputed Righteousness of Christ may people of God, from fainting
and sinking under the sense of the weakness and imperfection of their inherent
righteousness. The Church of old have lamentingly said, we are all as an
unclean thing, and all our righteousness Isa 64. 6.
is as filthy rags: when a Christian keeps a serious eye upon the spots, blots,
blemishes, infirmities, and follies, that cleaves to his inherent
righteousness, fears and tremblings arise, to the sadding and sinking of his
soul; but when he casts a fixed eye upon the righteousness of Christ imputed to
him, then his comforts revive, and his heart bears up; for though he has (...)
righteousness of his own, by which his soul may (...) ^ccepted before God, yet
he has Gods righteousness, which infinitely transcends his own, and such as,
in God's account, goes for his, as if he had exactly fulfilled the
righteousness which the Law requires; according to that of the Apostle, Romans 9.
30. What shall we say then? the Gentiles which followed not after
righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which is
of faith. Faith wraps it self in the righteousness of Christ, and so justifies
us. The Gentiles sought righteousness, not in themselves, but in Christ; which
they apprehending by faith, were by it justified in the sight of God, and the
Jews seeking it in themselves, and thinking, by the goodness of their own
works, to attain to the righteousness of the Law, missed of it; it being in no
man's power, perfectly to fulfill the same, only Christ has exactly fulfilled
it, for all that, by faith, close savingly with him. Oh sirs, none can be
justified in the sight of God, by a righteousness of their own making: but
whosoever will be justified, must be justified by the righteousness R^m. 3. 20,
28. cap. 10. 2. Gal. 2. 16. T^. 3. 5.
of Christ through faith. The Gentiles, by faith attain the righteousness of
the Law, therefore the righteousness of the Law, and of faith, are all one;
viz. in respect of matter and form, the difference is only in the worker; The
Law requires it to be done by our selves; the Gospel mitigates the rigor of
the Law, and offers the righteousness of Christ, who performed the Law, even to
a hairs breadth. The right way to righteousness for justification is by Christ,
who is the way, the door, the truth, and the life; because we want a
righteousness of our own, God has assigned us the righteousness of Christ,
which is infinitely better than our own, yea, better than our very lives, may I
not say, yea better than our very souls. The branch Christ Jesus is called
Jehovah Tsidkenu, the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. And this is his name,
whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS: Where note, first, to
be called by this name, is to be so really, for Christ is never called what he
is not: and so he is, to the same purpose, elsewhere Mat. 1. 23.
called Immanuel, God with us; that is, he shall be so indeed, God with us; so
here he shall be called, the Lord our righteousness; that is, he shall be so
indeed. Secondly, observe this is one of his glorious names, that is, one of
his Attributes, which he accounts his excellency, and his glory. Now all the
attributes of Christ are unchangeable, so that he can as easily change his
nature as his name. Now remember, that this imputed righteousness of Christ,
procures acceptance for our inherent righteousness: when a sincere Christian
casts his eye upon the weaknesses, infirmities and imperfections, that daily
attend his best services, he sighs and mourns; but if he looks upward, to the
Imputed Righteousness of Jesus Christ, that shall bring forth his infirm, weak
and sinful performances, perfect, spotless and sinless, and approved according
to the tenor of the Gospel, so that they become spiritual sacrifices, he
cannot 1 Pet. 2. 5.
but rejoice. For as there is an imputation of righteousness to the persons of
believers, so there is also, an imputation to their services and actions: As
the fact of Psalm. 106. 31.
Phineas, was imputed to him for righteousness; so the imperfect good works
that are done by believers, are accounted righteousness, or (as Calvin speaks)
are accounted for righteousness, they being dipped in the blood of Christ:
(tincta sanguine Christi) i. e. they are accounted righteous actions; and so
sincere Christians shall be judged Rev. 11. 18. cap. 20. 12. Mat. 25. 34, 35,
36, 37.
according to their good works, though not saved for them. And it is observable
in that famous process of the last judgment, that the supreme judge makes
mention of the bounty and liberality of the Saints; and so bestows the Crown of
life, and the eternal inheritance upon them; so that, though the Lord's
faithful ones have eminent cause to be humbled and afflicted, for the many
weaknesses that cleaves to their best duties; yet, on the other hand, they have
wonderful cause to rejoice and triumph, Heb. 13. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 6 11. Mal. 4. 2.
that they are made perfect through Jesus Christ, and that the Lord looks at
them (through the righteousness of Christ) as fruits of his own spirit. The Sun
of Righteousness has healing enough in his wings, for all our spiritual
Maladies: The Saints prayers, being perfumed with Rev. 8. 3, 4.
Christ's odours, are highly accepted in heaven: Upon this bottom of Imputed
Righteousness, believers may have exceeding strong consolation, and good hope
through grace; that both their persons and services do find singular
acceptance with God, as having no spot or blemish at all in them: Surely
Righteousness imputed, must be the top of our happiness and blessedness, Romans
4, 5, 6. But,

Ninthly and lastly, know for your comfort, that Imputed Righteousness will
give you the greatest boldness Psalm. 1. 5.
there is no standing in judgment. That Righteousness only, is able to justify
us before God, which is perfect, and that has no defect nor blemish in it,
such as may abide the trial before his Judgment Seat; such as may fitly
satisfy his justice, and make our peace with him; and consequently such, as
whereby the Law of God is fulfilled. Therefore it is called the Righteousness
of God; such a Romans 10. 3.
Righteousness as he requires, as will stand before him, and satisfy his
justice: so the Apostle says, The righteousness Romans 8. 4.
of the Law must be fulfilled in us. Now there is no other Righteousness under
heaven, whereby the Law of God was ever perfectly fulfilled, but by the
righteousness of Christ alone; no righteousness below the Righteousness of
Christ, was ever able to abide the trial at God's judgment seat; and fully to
satisfy his justice, and pacify his wrath. A gracious soul triumphs more in
the Righteousness of Christ Imputed, than he would have done, if he could have
stood, in the Righteousness, in which he was created. This is the crowning
comfort to a sensible and understanding soul, that he stands righteous before a
Judgment Seat, in that full, exact, perfect, complete, matchless, spotless,
pearless, and most acceptable Righteousness of Christ imputed to him: The
Righteousness R^m. 3. 21, 22. cap. 10 3. ^hil. 3. 9.
of Christ, is therefore called the Righteousness of God; because it is it,
which God has assigned, and which God does accept for us in our justification;
and for, and in which, he does acquit, and pronounce us righteous before his
seat of Justice. There is an indispensible necessity that lies upon the sinner,
to have such a Righteousness to his justification, as may render his appearance
safe and comfortable in the day of Judgment. Now, there is no righteousness
that can abide that day of fiery trial, but the Righteousness of Christ imputed
to us: Paul, that great Apostle, had as fair and as full a Certificate to show
Phil. 3. 4, 5, 6. Act. 23 6. 2 Cor. 11. 22.
for a legal Justification, as any person under heaven had; but yet he durst
not stand by that righteousness, he durst not plead that righteousness, he
durst not appear in that righteousness, before the dreadful Judgment Seat: But
oh, how earnest, how importunate is he, that he may be found (in that great day
of the Lord) in the Mediatory Righteousness Phil. 3. 9, 10.
of Christ, and not in his own personal righteousness, which he looked upon as
filthy rags, as dross, dung, dogs meat: the great thing that he most strongly
insists up on is, that he might be clothed with the Robe of Christ's
Righteousness; for then, he knew that the Law could not say, black was his eye,
and that the Judge upon the Bench, would pronounce him righteous, and bid him
enter into the joy of his Lord, a joy too great to enter into Mat. 25. 21, 23,
24
him, and therefore he must enter into that: when the match is made up between
Christ and the soul, that soul bears her sovereigns name. The spouse of the
first Adam, and her husband, had both one name; God called their Genesis 5. 2.
name Adam, in the day that he made them: so the Spouse of the second Adam, in
the change of her condition, from Christ and Christians are namesakes. caput
and corpus, unus est Christus. Aug. The head is called Christ, and the members
are called Christ, ^ Cor. 12. 12. Christ is called Solomon, Cant. ^ ^. cap. 3.
1^. in Hebrew Sh^lom^h of peace, and the Church is called Shulamite, by he^
Bride-grooms name; Cant. 6. 13.
a single, to a married estate, with Christ the Lamb; had a change of her name:
The head is called, The Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. and so is the
Church, Jer. 33. 16. In those days shall Judah he saved, and Jerusalem shall
dwell safely: and this is the name, wherewith she shall be called, The Lord our
righteousness: here is a sameness of name. As Christ is called The Lord our
righteousness, so his spouse is called, The Lord our righteousness: Oh happy
transnomination, Christ's Bride being one with himself; and having his
Righteousness imputed to her, is called, The Lord our righteousness: and
therefore they may, with the greatest cheerfulness and boldness bear up, in the
great day of account, who have the perfect Righteousness of Christ imputed to
them; especially if you consider, 1. That this Righteousness is of infinite
value and worth: 2. That Dan. 9. 24.
it is an everlasting righteousness, a righteousness that can never be lost: 3.
That it is an unchangeable Righteousness; Though times change, and men change,
and friends change, and providence change, and the Moon Mal. 4. 2.
change, yet the Sun of Righteousness never changes, J^mes 1. 17.
in him is no variableness, neither shad^w of turning: 4. That it is a complete
and unspotted Righteousness, an unblameable Righteousness, and unblemished
Righteousness; and therefore God can neither in Justice, except or object
against it: In this Righteousness the believer lives, in this Righteousness the
believer dies, and in this Righteousness believers shall arise, and appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, to the deep admiration of all the elect
Angels, and to the transcendent terror and horror of all Reprobates, and to
the matchless joy and triumph of all on Christ's right hand, who shall then
shout and sing, Isa. 61. 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall
be joyful in my God: for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he
has covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh
himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth her self with jewels. Oh, how 2
These. 1. 10.
will Christ, in this great day, be admired and glorified in all his Saints,
when every Saint wrapped up in this fine Linen, in this white Robe of Christ's
Righteousness, shall shine more gloriously than ten thousand Suns. In the great
day of the Lord: when the Saints shall stand before the Tribunal of God,
clothed in the perfect Righteousness of Jesus Christ; they shall then stand,
recti in curia; they shall then be pronounced righteous, even in the Court of
Divine Justice; which sentence will fill their souls with comfort, and the
souls of sinners with astonishment: Suppose Rev. 20. 12. cap. 12. 10.
we saw the believing sinner, holding up his hand at God's Bar: the books
opened, the accuser of the brethren present, the witnesses ready, and the Judge
on the Bench, thus bespeaking the sinner at the Bar; Oh sinner, R^m 7. 12, 14,
16. G^l. 3. 10.
sinner, thou stand here indicted before me, for many millions of sins of
commission, and for many millions of sins of omission, thou have broken my
holy, just and righteous Laws, beyond all humane conception, or expression, and
hereof thou art proved guilty: What have thou now to say for thy self, why thou
should not be eternally cast? Upon this, the sinner pleads guilty; but
withal, he earnestly desires, that he may have time and liberty to Mat. 25. 41.
plead for himself, and to offer his reasons, why that dreadful sentence, Go
you cursed, etc. should not be passed upon him: The liberty desired, being
granted by the Judge: The sinner pleads, that his surety, Jesus Christ, has, by
his blood and sufferings, given full and complete satisfaction to Divine
Justice, and that he has paid down upon Heb. 10. 10, 14.
the nail the whole debt at once, and that it can never stand with the
holiness, and unspotted justice of God, to demand satisfaction twice. If the
Judge shall farther object, Gal. 3. 10.
I but sinner, sinner, The Law requires an exact and perfect Righteousness in
the personal fulfilling of it; now sinner, where is thy exact and perfect
righteousness? Upon which the believing sinner, very readily, cheerfully, Isa.
45. 24.
humbly and boldly replies, my righteousness is upon the Bench, In the Lord
have I Righteousness, Christ my Surety, has fulfilled the Law on my behalf.
The Laws Righteousness consists in two things: 1. In its requiring perfect
conformity to its commands: 2. In its demanding satisfaction, or the undergoing
of its penalty, upon the violation of it, Now Christ, by his active and passive
obedience, has fulfilled the Law for Righteousness, and this active and
passive obedience of Jesus Christ is imputed to me; his obeying the Law to the
full, his perfect comforming to its commands, his doing as well as his dying
obedience, is by grace made over and reckoned to me in order to my
justification and salvation; and this is my plea, by which I will stand before
the Judge of all the world: Upon this the sinners plea is accepted as good in
Law, and accordingly he is pronounced righteous; and goes away, glorying and
rejoicing, triumphing and shouting it out, sla. 45. 25.
Righteous, Righteous, Righteous, Righteous; In the Lord shall all the seed of
Israel be justified, and shall glory. And thus you see that here are nine
springs of strong consolation, that flow into your souls, through the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto you. But,

The sixth Plea that a believer may form up, as to the ten Eccl f, 11. 9. cap.
12. 14. Mat 12. 14. cap. 18. 23. Luke 16. 3. Romans 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb. 9.
27. c^p. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 5.
Scriptures in the Margent, that refer^ to the great day of account, or to a
man's particular account, may be drawn from the consideration of Christ, as a
common person, a representative head, one that represents another man's person,
and acts the part of another, according to the appointment of the Law, the
acceptance of the Judge: so that what is done by him, the person is said to do;
whose person he does represent. And so was Adam a common person, and that by an
act of God's Sovereignty; appointing him, in making a covenant with him so to
be, Romans 5. 15, 16 17, 18, 19. We were all i^ Adam, as the whole Country is in
a Parliament Man. An although w^ chose not, ye^ God chose for ^s
and he did represent all Mankind: And hence it comes to pass, that his sin is
imputed unto us, and made ours; so in our Law, an Attorney appears in the
behalf of his Client; and so Christ is said to be gone to heaven, as our
Attorney, to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9. 24. (...), To appear
as a Lawyer appears for his Client; opens the cause, pleads the cause, and
carries it. The word appear, is verbum forense, an expression borrowed from the
custom of humane Courts: for in them, when the Plaintiff or Defendant is
called, their Attorney appears in their behalf: so, 1 John, 2. 1. you know
that the Levitical Priest was wont to appear before God, in the peoples name:
Now, he was but a figure, in Christ is the solid truth, and full effect of the
figure: Or as taking Possession, Livery and Seizing by an Attorney, is all one,
as if done by the person himself, who is represented, and is valid: so the Lord
Jesus, he is a common person, by an act of God's Sovereignty, representing the
persons of all the Elect of God, being designed and appointed by God, to be a
second Adam: And as the first Adam did represent all in him, so the second Adam
does represent all in him also; and therefore, as Judgment came upon all in the
first Adam, so Righteousness comes upon all in the second Adam: we all
transgressed the Royal Law in Adam, we were all in Adam's Loins; what he was,
we were; what he did, we did. Although we did not, in our own persons, either
talk with the Serpent, or put forth Genesis 3.
our hands to take the fruit; yet we did eat the forbidden fruit as well as he,
and so broke the holy Law, and turned aside in him: for he was not a single
person, standing for himself alone; but a public person, standing in the room
of all mankind: therefore, his sin being not merely the sin of his person, but
of the whole nature of man, is justly imputed to us all. If Adam had stood fast
in his uprightness, in his primitive purity, glory and excellency, Eccles. 7.
29.
we should all have shared in his happiness and blessedness; but he falling,
and forfeiting all, we must all share with him in his loss and misery: ponder
upon Romans 5. 12. In whom all have sinned. As the Murrain infects the whole
flock, so sin and the curse seizes upon all the whole world, as well as upon
Adam and Eve: and verse. 19. By one man's disobedience, many are made sinners:
Many, is here put for All, as All elsewhere is put for Many, 1 Timothy 2. 3. All
sinners are tainted with Adam's guilt and filth. Adam was the head, all his
posterity the members; if the head plot and practice treason against the state,
is not this judged the act of the whole body? He was the tree, we the branches;
when the tree falls, all the branches fall with it: when Christ died on the
Cross, he did stand in our room, and place, and stead; for he did lay down his
life for us as a Ransom: now when one dies for another, in way of Ransom, he
does not only die for the benefit and profit of the ransomed; but in the place,
and room, and stead of the ransomed: and thus Christ died for us, as himself
testifies, The son of man came, to give himself a Mark, 10. 45. (...).
ransom for many: Christ rose as a common person, representing all his Elect;
and Christ was sanctified as a common person representing all his Elect; and
Christ was justified as a common person, representing all his Elect. Look, as
we we were condemned in Adam, as he was a common person; so we are justified by
Christ, as in a common person also: so that every believer may well look upon
him self as acquitted, in his justification, from the guilt of his Heb. 9. 28.
sins, they being laid upon the head of his surety. It is a very great part of
a Christian's wisdom, to be often looking upon Christ, as a representative
head, as one in whom Ephesians. 2. 6.
he died, in whom he rose, in whom he is sanctified, and in whom he is
justified: how would such a daily eyeing of Christ, seatter a Christian's
fears, arm him against temptations, support him under afflictions, weaken his
sins, strengthen his graces, cheer his soul, and mend his life.

It Is very observable, that in the Levitical expiatory Sacrifices; there was
the substitution of them, in the place and stead of the offenders themselves;
the peoples sin, and the punishment due to them thereupon, was laid upon the
poor Beasts that died for them. I might multiply Scriptures to evidence this;
but I shall only hint at one or two plain pregnant T^xts to clear it. Take
that, Levit. 17. 11. For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have
given it to you upon the altar, to make an atonement for your souls; for it is
the blood that makes ustin Martyr observes the great mercy of God to mankind,
in that, ^^co hominis in ^ie^d of man he caused beasts to be sacrificed.
atonement for the soul: Mark here, the blood is to make atonement for the
souls of the people of Israel, that is, in the room and stead of their souls,
and accordingly it did make atonement for their souls: so that in the blood
sacrificed (which was a Type of the Blood of Christ) there was soul for soul,
life for life; the soul and life of the sacrifice, for the precious soul and
life of the sinner. Now here you see substitution of the one in the room of the
other. The transferring of the guilt and punishment of the peoples sins, over
to their sacrifices in those days, was the reason, Levit. 16. 22. cap. 10. 17,
etc.
why the sacrifices were said to bear the iniquities of the people: And it is
observable, that at the great Expiation, Aaron was to lay both his hands upon
the head of the live Goat, and to confess over him all the sins of the children
of Israel, etc. By this Ceremony Levit. 16. 21.
of imposition of hands, is signified the transferring of their sins upon the
Goat; herein to type out si. 53. 6.
Christ, upon whom God did lay the iniquity of us all. Certainly the main thing
that is held forth by this Rite (viz. Aaron's laying both his hands upon the
head of the live Goat) is the translation of the sinners guilt to the
sacrifice, and the substitution of it in his stead: Typically, the very sins of
the people were imposed upon the Goat, who herein was a type of Christ
Maimomdes.
which did himself bear our sins. Yea, the Hebrews themselves hold, that the
Escape goat made atonement for all their sins, lighter and greater,
presumptuously and ignorantly committed. Certainly the Escape goat was a most
lively Type of our blessed Savior; 1. In that the Lord laid upon him the
iniquity of us all, as the sins of Israel were laid upon the head of the Goat:
2. As Isa. 4. 2. a^. 53. 8.
the Goat was carried away, so Christ was cut off from the land of the living;
his life was taken from off the earth: 3. As Acts 9. 33. Heb. 9. 14. 2 Pet. 3.
13
this Goat was not killed, so Christ through the eternal Spirit offered up
himself, whereby he was made alive after death: Though Christ Jesus died for
our sins, acording to his his Humanity, yet death could not detain him nor
overcome him, nor keep him prisoner, but by virtue of his impassible Deity, he
rises again, and triumphs over Hos. 13. 14.
death and the grave, and over principalities and powers. Col. 2. 13.
4. As this Goat went into an inhabitable place, so Christ went into heaven;
whither I go ye cannot come. Christ Joh. 13. 33.
speaks this, not to exclude his Disciples out of heaven, Verse. 36.
but only to show, that their entrance was put off for a time. Saints must not
expect to go to heaven and rest with Christ, till they have fought the good
fight of faith, 2 Timothy ^. 7, 8. Heb. 12. 1. 1 Cor. 9 24. Act. 13. 30.
finished their course, run their race, and served their generation: Christ's
own children, by all their studies, prayers, tears and endeavors, cannot get
to heaven, unless, Joh. 14. 1, 2, 3.
Christ come and fetches them thither: Christ's own servants cannot get to
heaven presently nor of themselves, no more than the Jews could do. Now if you
please to cast your eye upon the Lord Jesus, you will find and exact
correspondency between the Type and the Antitype, the one fully answering to
the other. Did they carry substitution in them? that eminently was in Christ,
he indeed substituted himself in the sinners room, he took our guilt upon him,
and put himself in our place, and died in our stead, he died that we might not
die; Whatever we should have undergone, that he underwent in his body and soul;
he did bear (as our (...)) all the punishments and torments that were due to
us: Christ's suffering, dying, satisfying in our stead, is the great Article of
a Christian's Faith, and the main prop and foundation of the believers hope: It
is bottomed as an eternal and unmovable truth, upon the sure Basis of the
blessed Word. Substitution, in the case of the old sacrifices, is not so
evidently held forth in the Law, but substitution with respect to Christ and
his sacrifice, is more evidently set forth in the Gospel. Ponder seriously upon
these Texts: Romans 5. 6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time
Christ died for the ungodly: verse. 8. But God commends his love toward us,
in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us. Herein God lays naked to
us the tenderest bowels of his fatherly This shows us the greatness of man's sin
and of Christ's love, of Satan's malice and of Gods Justice; and it shows us the
madness and blindness of the Popish Religion, which tell^ us that some ^^^ are
so light and ^enial, as that the sprinkling of holy water and ashes will p^rge
them away.
compassions, as in an Anatomy. There was an absolute necessity of Christ's
dying for sinners: for 1. God's Justice had decreed it; 2. His Word had
foretold it; 3. The Sacrifices in the Law had prefigured it; 4. The foulness of
man's sin had d^served it; 5. The Redemption of man called for it; 6. The glory
of God was greatly exalted by it: So 1 Pet. 3. 18. For Christ also has once
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust. To see Christ the just, suffer in
the stead of the unjust, is the wonderment of Angels, and the torment of
Devils: 1 Pet. 4. 1. Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the
flesh, etc. that is, in the humane nature, for the exp^ation and taking away of
our sins: 1 Pet. 2. 21. Because Christ also suffered for us; Joh. 10. 11. I lay
down my life for the sheep; this good Shepherd lays down life for life, his own
dear life for the life of his sheep: Joh. 11. 50. Nor consider that it is
expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole
nation perish not, that is, rather than the whole nation should perish.
Caiaphas took it for granted, that either Christ or their Nation must perish,
and, as he foolishly thought, that of two evils he designed the least to be
chosen, that is, that Christ should rather perish, than their Nation: but God
so guided his tongue, that he unwittingly by the powerful instinct of the
Spirit, prophesied of the fruit of Christ's death, for the reconciliation and
salvation of the elect of God. Heb. 2. 9. That he by the grace of God should
taste death for every man, (...), or for every creature: who all these be the
Context shows; 1. Sons that must be led unto glory; ver. 10. 2. Christ's
Brethren, ver. 11. 3. Such children as are given by God unto Christ, ver. 13.
In all which Scriptures, the preposition (...) is used, which most commonly
notes substitution, the doing or suffering of something by one in the stead and
place of others, and so it is all along here to be taken. But there is another
preposition, (...), that proves the thing I am upon undeniably, Matthew. 20. 28.
Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, Matthew. 20. 28.
but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many ((...).) (...)
signifies a Redemptory price, a valuable rate; for it was the Blood of God
wherewith the Church was purchased, 1 Timothy 2. 6. Who gave Acts 20. 28.
himself a ransom ((...)) for all: the Greek word signifies a counterprice,
such as we could never have paid, but must have remained everlasting prisoners
to the wrath and justice of God. O sirs! Christ did not barely deliver poor
captive souls, but he delivered them in the way of a ransom; which ransom he
paid down upon the nail; when their ransom was ten thousand talents, Matthew. 18.
24.
and they had not one farthing to lay down, Christ stand up in their room and
pays the whole ransom. Every one knows, that (...), in composition, signifies
but two things, ^ither opposition and contrariety, or substitution and
^^^autation: So that the matter will thus issue; 1 John 2. 18. Romans 1^. 17.
Matthew. 5. 38.
That either we must carry it thus, That Christ gave himself a ransom against
sinners (than which nothing can be more absurd and false;) or else thus, That
he gave himself a ransom in the room and stead of sinners, which is as true as
truth it self. Certainly no head can invent, no heart can conceive, nor no
tongue can express, more clear, plain, pregnant and apposit words and phrases,
for the setting forth of Christ's substitution, than is to be found in that
golden Chapter of Isai. 53. In this Chapter, as in a holy Armory, we may find,
had I time to go through it many pointed daggers, and two-edged swords and
shields of brass, to arm us against the corrupt notions and opinions of the
blinded and deluded Socinians, who fight with all their might against the
Doctrine of Christ's substitution. (Ver. 4.) Surely he has born our griefs,
and carried our sorrows, etc. (ver. 5.) The chastisement of our peace was upon
him, and with his stripes we are healed: (ver. 6.) The Lord has laid on him
the iniquities of us all; (or) the Lord has made the iniquity of us all to
meet on him: (ver. 7.) He was oppressed and he was aflicted, etc. or (as the
words are rendered by some) It was exacted and he answered: (ver. 8.) For the
transgression of my people he was stricken: (ver. 11.) For he shall bear their
iniquities: (ver. 12.) And he bare the sin of many. All men of worth and weight
conclude, that all this is spoken of the Lord Jesus Christ. Now what more clear
and evident proofs can there be of Christ's susception of the sinners guilt,
and of his bearing the punishment due for it. The Priests of old you know are
said to bear the iniquity of the people, Levit. 10. 17. God has given it you
to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement for them before the
Lord. The sinner bears his iniquity subjectively, the Priest typically, and the
Lord Christ really: Exodus 28. 38. That Aarib may bear the iniquity of the holy
things. Herein the high Priest was a Type of Christ; answerable to which, the
Prophet Isaiah tells us, that Christ (our high Priest) had Heb. 4. 14, 15.
the iniquities of all believers laid upon him, and that he bare them in his
own person; so the Apostle, Heb. 9. 28. So Christ was once offered to bear the
sins of many, etc. (...). It Is an allusion to the Priests, who carried up the
sacrifice (and with it the sins of the people) to the Altar: Christ our Priest
did carry up the sins of his people upon the Cross, and there made satisfaction
for them (in their room or stead) by the sacrifice of himself; and that
Scripture is more worth than the Indies, viz. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self
bare our sins in his own body on the tree -- (...), he bare them Col. 2 13, 14,
15.
aloft, viz. when he climbed up his Cross, and nailed them thereunto: Christ in
the Humane nature when he was upon the Cross, did suffer all the punishments
and torments that were due to our sins; he cancelled all bonds, annihilated the
curse; in which respects he is said to bea^ our sins in his own body on the
tree. But to prevent prolixity, I shall produce no more Scriptures (though many
more might have been produced) to prove Christ a common Person, a
representative Head of all his Elect; and that he did really substitute himself
in their room, and took upon himself their guilt, and put himself in their
place, and did undergo whatever they should have undergone.

Now from all these Considerations, a Child of God Eccles. 11. 9. c 12, 14.
Ma^^h. 12. 14. cap. 18. 2^. Luk 16. 3. Ro^. 4. 10. 2 C^r. 5 10. H^b 9 27 cap.
13 17. ^^. 4. 5.
may form up this Sixth Plea, as to the Ten Scriptures in the Margin, that
refer to the great day of account, or to a man's particular account. O blessed
God, Jesus Christ was a common Person, a representative Head: I am to be
considered in him, who is my Surety, and therefore he is bound to pay all my
debts: and as he is a common person and stood in my stead; so the satisfaction
that is made unto thy Justice by him, is in Law to be accounted mine, as really
as if my Attorney should pay a debt for me: And therefore I must rest satisfied
that the debt is paid, and in Law shall never be exacted of me; though it was
not paid by my self in person, but by another, who did personate me in that
act, and did it for me, and in my behalf. Christ was a common Person,
personating as a second Adam, the first Adam and all his posterity; offering
the same Nature for sin, which fell by sin from the pattern of perfection, God
himself. By man came death, and by man came the resurrection from the dead: 1
^o. 15 21.
man for man, person for person, nature for nature, and name for name. There
are two roots out of which life and death springs. 1. As all that die receive
their deaths wounds by the disobedience of the first Adam; so all that live
receive life from the obedience of the second Adam. 2. As all die who are the
sons of the first Adam by natural Generation; so all live, who are the sons of
the second Adam through spiritual Regeneration. O holy and blessed God, thou
have set up Jesus Christ as a common person, as the representative Head of all
thy Elect, and I am to be considered in that common Head; and all that he has
done as my Head, and in my stead and room, is to be reckoned to me, as if I had
done it in my own person; and by this Plea I will stand, rejoice and triumph:
upon this God accepts of the Plea, as sound and good, and says to him that
pleads it, Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Matthew. 25. 21.

The seventh Plea that a believer may form up, as to the ten Scriptures
formerly cited, that refer to the great day of account, or to a man's particular
account, may be drawn from the consideration of Christ's Surety ship: Our
English Translation has it, Of a be^ter Testam^nt, but not so fitly, because
properly, a Testament neither uses nor needs to have a Suret^, as a Covenant
does. Beza there^ ^re justly blames both Erajmus and the Vulgar Translation,
for rendering it Testament; for that a Surety is not added in Testaments, And
should it be added, how can the same be both a Testator and a Surety? So that
this word, Surety, has reference properly to a Covenant, and not to a
Testament.
Christ is called a Surety, Heb. 7. 22. By so much was Jesus made a surety of a
better testament. The Greek word (...), Sponsor, Fidejussor, Praes, a Surety, a
Pledger, is very significative, being derived, as some think, from (...), an
hand, as it were (...), in hands, because the security or pledge is given in
hand. A Surety is properly one that willingly promises, and undertakes to pay
and discharge the debt if the debtor fail, and be not able to make satisfaction
himself. Thus Paul willingly and spontaneously, from the love he had to his new
Convert Onesimus, promised and undertook to make satisfaction to Philemon, for
any wrong that Onesimus had done him, Phil. 18, 19. If he has wronged thee, or
owes thee ought, put it upon mine account; I Paul have written it with mine
own hand, I will repay it, i. e. account Onesimus his debt to Paul, and Paul's
satisfaction or payment to Onesimus; which answers the double imputation in
point of Justification, that is, of our sins or debts to Christ,, and of
Christ's satisfaction to us. Consider Christ as a Surety, and so he has fully
paid all our debts, and set us perfectly free for ever. A Surety is one that
enters into bond, and engages himself for the debt of another; and so Christ is
become our Surety; therefore he was bound by our bond, and engages himself for
the debt of another: for our debt he was made under the Law, and so as a
sacrifice, he stood in the stead of a sinner, and the sacrifice was to be
offered for the man; and so some expound that place, He was made sin for us, 2
Cor. 5. 21. that is, a sin-offering; therefore he does take our sins upon him
as his own, Isa. 53. and so the Lord does impute them and lay them upon him as
his own: ver. 6. He did make to meet upon him the iniquities of us all: the
original word here used comes from (...) pagang, which word in its native
propriety intends a kind of force or violence, impetum fecit, they met with all
their violence upon him, and therefore he was made sin for us, that is, as a
Surety in our stead; he did bear our sins in his body upon the tree; he was
delivered for our transgressions: our Surety has paid all our debts. The
chastisement of our peace Isa. 53. ^, 10.
was upon him, and it pleased the Father to bruise him; the original word
signifies to break him to pieces as in a mortar: By the great things that our
Surety has done for us, and the great things that he has suffered for us: he
has given most perfect and complete satisfaction both to his Fathers Law, and
to his Fathers Justice; and this pleased the Father. W^igh well that, Col. 2.
14. He Some by the hand writing do understand the Covenant of God with Adam.
Beza and Calvin do understand it of the Ceremonial Law: But says Ch^s^tom; It
is meant not only of the Ceremonial Law, but also of the Moral Law, as a
Covenant of w^rks Occumen^us, Jer^me and others are of the s^re opinion: B^t,
s^ith Zan^hy, the is s^^len^ (...) the (...) wr^ were (...) un ^^rtie
^^^^inonial ^^n.
blotted out the handwriting of ordninances that was against us, that was
contrary unto us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross: Christ
has crossed out the black lines of our sin with the red lines of his own
blood. The Greek word (...), i. e. the handwriting, some do take here for a
writing written with God's own hand in Tables of stone, as the Law of the Ten
Commandments were, Exodus 34. 1. and this is by them understood of the moral
Law, or of the Ten Commandments, which are said to be against us, in respect of
their strict requiring of perfect obedience, or in default thereof, by reason
of its curse, which Christ as our Surety has born for us on the Cross, and
delivered us from it, Gal. 3. 10, 13. But others by this handwriting do
understand the Law of the Ceremonies of the Old Testament. In the general, it
was something that God had against us; to show or convince, or prove, that we
had sinned against him, and were his debtors. I suppose that this handwriting
was principally the Moral Law, obliging us unto perfect obedience, and
condemning us for the defect of the same, and likewise those Ceremonial Rites,
which (as Beza observes) were a kind of public confession of our debts: Now
these were against, and contrary unto us, in as much as they did argue us
guilty of sin and condemnation which the Moral Law threatened, and sentenced,
etc. but says the Apostle, Christ has blotted out the handwriting, and has
taken it out of the way and nailed it to his cross (that is) Jesus Christ has
not only abrogated the Ceremonial Law, but also the damnatory power of the
Moral Law (as our Surety) by performing an act of obedience which the Law did
require, and by undergoing the punishment which the Law did exact from the
trangressors of it: And so Christ doing and suffering, what we were bound to do
and to suffer, he did thereby blot out the Handwriting, and cancelled it; and
therefore we may safely conclude, that the Creditor is fully satisfied, when he
gives in h^s Bond to be cancelled. There are two ways of cancelling a Bond,
laceratione and litura; here it is blotted out, and can be read no more than if
it had never been; the obligatory power of the Law as a Covenant is taken away.
God delivered his people from Pharaoh by force, and from Babylon by savor; but
that deliverance that Christ (as our Surety) hands out to us, from sin, from
wrath, from hell, from the curse, and from the moral Law as it is a Covenant of
works, is obtained justo pretio soluto, by paying a full price; by which one
becomes satisfied, and another thereupon delivered: Heb. 9. 26. He has
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself: to put away sin, is to
abolish or make void the guilt or obligation ^a^. 9. 24. si. 38. 17. (...). 7.
19.
of sin, whereby it binds over unbelievers to condemnation; to put away sin is
to abrogate it, it is to bind it up in a bundle, to seal it up in a bag, to
cast it behind him, as cancelled obligations; it is to blot out the black
handwriting with the red lines of his blood drawn over it: so that sin has no
force, no power to accuse or condemn, or shut such poor souls out of heaven,
who have that Jesus for their Surety, that made himself a sacrifice to put away
sin. Christ as our Surety laid down a satisfactory price, not only for our
good, but also in our stead or room: 1 Pet. 3. 18. Christ also has suffered
for sin, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God: What the
unjust sinner should have suffered, that the just Christ suffered for him: 1
Cor. 5. 21. He was made sin for us: (that is) an offering, a sacrifice, in our
stead, for the expiation of our sins. Christ was made a curse for us, Gal. 3.
13. Now Christ's becoming a curse for us stands in this, That whereas we are
all accursed by the sentence of the Law, because of sin; he now comes into our
room, and stands under the stroke of that curse, which of right belongs to us:
so that it lies not now any longer on the backs of poor sinners, but on him for
them, and in their stead; therefore he is called a Surety, Heb. 7. 22. The
Surety stands in the room of a debtor, malefactor, or him that is any way
obnoxious to the Law: Such is Adam and all his posterity. We are by the doom of
the Law evil doers, transgressors, and upon that score we stand indebted to the
justice of God, and lie under the stroke of his wrath: Now the Lord Jesus
Christ seeing us in this condition, he steps in and stands between us and the
blow; yea he takes this wrath and curse off from us unto himself, he stands not
only or merely after the manner of a Surety among men in the case of debt; for
here the Surety enters bond with the Principal, for the payment of the debt,
but yet expects that the debtor should not put him to it, but that he should
discharge the debt himself, he only stands as a good security for the debtor;
no, Christ Jesus does not expect that we should pay the debt our selves, but he
takes it wholly upon himself. As a surety for a murderer or traitor. or some
other notorious malefactor, that has broken prison and is run away; he lies by
it body for body, state for state, and undergoes whatsoever the malefactor is
chargeable withal for satisfying the Law. Even so the Lord Jesus stands Surety
for us runagate malefactors, making himself liable to all that curse that
belongs to us, that he might both answer the Law fully, and bring us back again
to God: As the first Adam stood in the room of all mankind fallen; so Christ,
the second Adam, stands in the room of all mankind that are to be restored, he
sustains the person of all those which do spiritually descend from him, and
unto whom he bears the relation of a Head. When God appointed his dearest Son
to be a Surety for us, and charged all our debts upon him, and required an
exact satisfaction to his Law and Justice; insomuch that he would not abate the
Son of his love one farthing token of the debt; he did demonstrate a greater
love to Justice, than if he had damned as many worlds as there are men in the
world, O let us never cast an eye upon Christ's Suretyship, but let us stand
and wonder, yea let us be swallowed up in a deep admiration of Christ's love and
of his Fathers impartial justice! Ah what transcendent wisdom also does here:
appear in reconciling the riches of Mercy and infinite Justice both in one, by
the means of a Surety. If all the Angels in heaven and all the men on earth had
been put to answer these Questions: How shall sin be pardoned? how shall the
sinner be reconciled and saved? how shall the wrath of God be pacified? how
shall the Justice of God be satisfied? how shall the Redemption of Man be
brought about, in such a way whereby God may be most eminently glorified? they
could never have answered the questions: But God in his infinite Wisdom, has
found out a way to save sinners, not only in a way of Mercy and Grace, but in a
way of Justice and Righteousness; and all this by the means of Christ's
Suretyship, as has been already declared.

Now from the consideration of Christ's Suretyship, a believer may form up this
Seventh, safe, comfortable and blessed Plea, as to the ten Scriptures formerly
cited, that refer to the great day of account, or to a man's particular
account. O blessed Father, remember that thine own Son was my Ransom, his blood
was the price; he was my Surety, and undertook to answer for my sins. I know, O
blessed God, that thou must be satisfied, but remember When a man matries a
woman, with her person he takes her debts and satisfaction too; so does Christ,
when he takes us to be his he takes our sins also to be hi^.
my Surety has satisfied thee; not for himself, for he was holy and harmless, a
Lamb without a spot; but for me: They were my debts he satisfied for; and look
over thy Books, and thou shall sind that he has cleared all accounts and
reckonings between thee and me; the guilt of all my sins have been imputed to
my Surety, who did present himself in my stead to make full payment and
satisfaction to thy Justice, as Paul said to Philemon, Philem. ver. 18.
concerning his servant Onesimus, If he has wronged thee or owes thee any
thing, put it upon my account. So says Christ to the penitent and believing
soul, If thou have any guilt, any debt to be answered for unto God, put them
all upon my account; if thou have wronged my Father, I will make satisfaction
to the uttermost; for I was made sin for thee, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Isa. 53. 12.
I poured out my soul for thy transgressions; it cost me my hearts blood to
reconcile thee to my Father, and to Acts 20. 28. Genesis 27. 13.
slay all enmity. And as Robeckah said to Jacob in another case, Upon me, my
son, be the curse, so faith Christ to the believing soul, why, thy sins did
expose thee unto the curse of the Law, but I was made a curse for thee. I did
Gal. 3. 13.
bear that burden my self upon the Cross, and upon my shoulders were all thy
griefs and sorrows born: I was Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 10. Ephesians. 1. 7.
wounded for thy transgressions, and I was bruised for thy iniquities; and
therefore we are said to have redemption and remission of sins in his blood. O
blessed God! thou know that a surety-doth not pay the debt only for the
debtors good, but as standing in the debtors stead, and so his payment is
reckoned to the d^btor. And thus the case stands between Christ and my soul;
for as my Surety, he has paid all my debts, and that very payment that he has
made, in honor and justice thou art obliged to accept of, as made in my stead.
Oh dearest Father! that Jesus who is God-man as my Surety, he has done all
that the Law requires of me, and thereby he has freed me from wrath to come,
and from the curse that 1 These. 1. ult.
was due to me for my sins: This is my plea, O holy God, and by this plea I
shall stand. Hereupon God declares, this plea I accept as just and good, and
therefore enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

Christian Reader, I have gone as far in the opening and clearing up of those
Grand Points of the Gospel that have fallen under our consideration as I judge
meet at this time. By the Title Page thou may safely conclude, that I have
promised much more than in this Treatise I have performed; but be but a little
patient, and by divine assistance, I shall make sure and full payment. The
Covenant of Grace, and the Covenant of Redemption, with some other Points of
high importance, I shall present to thee in the Second Part, which will be the
Last Part. In this First Part I don't offer thee that which cost me nothing. I
desire that all the interest thou have in heaven may be so fully and duly
improved, that this First Part may be so blessed from on high, as that Saints and
Sinners may have cause to bless God to all Aeternity, for what is brought to
hand; and beg hard, that the other Part, which is drawn up and fitted for the
Press, may also be crowned with many blessings: Hereby thout wilt put a high
obligation upon the Author, to do all he can, to be yet a little further
serviceable to thy soul and others, to thy salvation and others, before he goes
hence and shall be seen no more.

FINIS.
The Table.
A Of Acceptance. THe second part of Justification consists in the acceptance
of the sinners person, as perfectly righteous, in Gods sight. -- page 317, 318,
319
Of Access. Our Access is by Christ. -- page 276. 277
Of Adam. We recover more by Christ, than we lost by Adam. page 353 The
Righteousness of the second Adam, transcends the Righteousness of the first
Adam, in three respects. page 354, 355, 356
Of Afflictions. Christ sympathises with his people in all their afflictions.
page 277, 278, 279
Of Assurance. Assurance is hindered eight ways. page 29, to 42
Of the glorious Attributes of God. Four glorious Attributes of God, that are
ascribed to the Lord Jesus Christ, in the blessed Scriptures. page 221, to 225

B Bellarmine. BEllarmin' s Limbus patrum, is a mere Fable. page 203, 204
Of bearing up the hearts of God's people. The Imputed Righteousness of Christ,
will best bear up the hearts of the Saints, under the sense of their weakness
and imperfections. page 358, 359, 360, 361
Of the Body of Christ. Of those special Scriptures that speak out the
certainty and verity of Christ's body. page 238, to 243 That Christ had a
perfect, entire, complete body, and every thing which is proper to a body. page
247, 248.

C Of Christ's Claim. CHrist lays claim to all that belongs to the Father as
God. page 233, 234, 235
Of Christ's Eternal Deity. Christ's Eternal Deity, proved at large by variety
of special Arguments. page 208, to 235 Eleven Inferences from the Divinity and
Humanity of Christ. page 260, to 284
Of Strong Consolations. Nine strong Consolations, that flow from the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. page 339, to 365
Of Christ's Soul. That Christ had a true, humane and reasonable soul. page
244, 245, 246, 247
Of the Curse. That Jesus Christ was made a curse for us. page 204, 205, 206,
207, 208

D Of Debt. CHrist takes our debt wholly upon himself. page 377, 378, 379 Of
Christ's Deity. page 208, to 235.
Of the Devil. The Devils acknowledge four Articles of our faith. page 185, 186*
Of Christ's dying. Upon six grounds there was a necessity of Christ's dying.
page 370 Who those are, for whom Christ died. page 370, 371

E Encouragement to poor sinners. Poor sinners encouraged to come to Christ.
page 267, 268, 269
Of the Excellency of Christ. Of the Excellency of Christ above man, above all
men, yea, above Adam in Innocence. page 279, 280, 281

F Of the faithfulness of God. OF God's faithfulness. page 327, 328
Of Faith. What that faith is, that gives a man an interest in Christ, and in
all those blessed benefits, and noble favors that come by Christ, opened at
large. page 54, to 59 Chrri^, being God man, should raise and strengthen our
faith in our Lord Jesus. page 260, 261
Of Fears. The Imputed Righteousness of Christ, will answer all a Christians
fears. page 345, 346, 347, 348
Of Fulfilling the Moral Law. How believers fulfill the moral Law. page 343,
344, 345

G The Scapegoat. The Scapegoat was a most lively Type of Christ. page 368,
369.
Of God. There are four things that God cannot do. page 319.
Of the Godhead of Christ. Of Christ's Godhead. page 208, to 235 A smart
reproof to those that deny the Godhead of Christ. page 281, 282, 283, 284

H Of the Hatred of Sin. The sufferings of Christ should raise up in us, the
greatest Hatred of Sin. page 296, to 300
Of the Headship of Christ. Christ considered as a common Head. page 365, to 373
Of Hell, and Hellish Torments. That Christ's soul, after his passion upon the
Cross, did not really and locally descend into the place of the damned, is made
evident by several Arguments. page 147, 148, 149, 203, 204
Objections against Christ's suffering of Hellish Torments, answered. 1
Objection answered. page 144, 145 2 Objection answered. page 145, 146 3
Objection answered. page 146, 147 4 Objection answered. page 147, 148, 149,
150, 151 5 Objection answered. page 151, 152, 153, That there is a Hell, is
proved at large, by Scriptures and Arguments. page 155, to 185, etc. Hellish
Torments are matchless, easless and endless. page 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180,
etc. There are ten things in Hell. page 176, 177, etc. A fivefold Improvement
of Hellish Torments. page 186 Of the place where Hell is. page 197, to 203
Of Honoring of Christ Christ, as he is God-man, is to be honored and exalted
above all. page 269, 270, 271
Of Humility. Christ is the greatest pattern of Humility, that ever was, or
will be in this world. page 274, 275

I Of the Imputed Righteousness of Christ. Of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness at large. page 315, to 339 Nine choice Consolations, that flow
from the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. page 339, to 365
Of Infirmities. That Christ took our Infirmities upon him. page 248, 249
Inferences. Eleven Inferences drawn from the Divinity and Humanity of Christ.
page 260, to 288 Seven Inferences from the consideration of the great
sufferings of Christ. page 289, to 315
Of the General Judgment, and of men's particular Judgment-day. See the
Questions. Imputed Righteousness gives the greatest boldness before God's
Judgment Seat. page 361, 362, 363, 364, 365
Of the Justice of God. The Righteousness of Christ satisfies the Justice of
God, to the uttermost farthing. page 339, 340, 341, 342 In the Justification of
a sinner, God does act as a God of Justice. page 319, 320
Of Justification. Justification in the sight of God, is made up of two parts.
page 315, 316, 317, 318, 319

L Of the Love of Christ. Of the firstness, freeness and greatness of Christ's
love, etc page 261, 262, 263. Admire and wonder at Christ's love. page 289, to
292
Of our Love to Christ. We must love Christ with a superlative love. page 292,
to 295

M Of the Manhood of Christ. The Manhood of Christ proved at large. page 235,
to 249

N Of Christ's two Natures. Of his Eternal Deity. page 208, to 235 Of Christ's
Manhood. page 235, to 249 Several reasons, why Christ did partake of both
natures. page 249, to 260 Eleven Inferences drawn from the Divinity and
Humanity of Christ. page 260, to 284
Of the several Names of Christ. The several Names, which denote the Essence of
God, are attributed to Christ also, in the blessed Scriptures. page 208, to 221

O Of the active obedience of Christ. Christ did perform that active Obedience
unto the Law of God. which we should, but (by reason of sin) could not perform.
page 89, to 94 A Plea drawn up from the active Obedience of Christ. page 94.
95, 96, 97 Of the passive obedience of Christ. page 97, to 105, etc. Of
universal obedience; see Universal.
Of Oneness. Of Christ's Oneness with the Father. page 233, 234. 235

P Of the Papists. The ridiculous, and superstitious devices of the Papists,
detected, etc. page 311, 312, 313
Of Pardon of sin. That all the sins of believers are pardoned at once, and
actually unto them, is proved by ten Arguments. page 73 to 76 All a believer's
sins are fully and finally pardoned at the hour of his death. page 76, 77 God
looks not upon those as sinners, whose sins are pardoned. page 77, 78, 79
Pardon takes off our obligation to suffer eternal punishment. page 79, 80
Of Peace of Conscience. The imputed righteousness of Christ, is the only true
basis, bottom and ground, for true peace, and quiet of conscience. page 348,
349, 350, 351, 352, 353 Of the several Pleas that every sincere Christian may
form up, as to the ten Scriptures in the Old and New Testament; that refer,
either to the General Judgment, or to the particular Judgment, that will pass
upon every Christian, immediately after death. The first Plea. page 72, 73 The
second Plea. page 88. 89 The third Plea. page 94, 95, 96, 97 The fourth Plea.
page 288, 289, 313, 314, 315 The fifth Plea. page 338, 339 The sixth Plea. page
373 The seventh Plea, page 378, 379
Of prizing Christ. The Sufferings of Christ should raise up our hearts to a
very high prizing of Christ. page 300, 301, 302, 303

Q Q. What that faith is, that gives a man an interest in Christ, etc? page 54.
to 59 Q. Whether, in the General Judgment, or in that Particular Judgment, that
will pass upon all the Saints after death; whether their infirmities or
enormities, their weaknesses or wickednesses, shall be brought into the
Judgment of discussion and discovery, or no? that they shall not, is proved at
large. page 59, to 73
R Reasons. Several weighty Reasons, why Christ did partake of both Natures.
page 249, to 260
Of the Work of Redemption. That the work of Redemption was a very great work.
page 263, 264, 265, 266, 267 Revelations the 19. 8. opened and applied. page
334, 335, 336
Of the Righteousness of Christ. Of the excellency and glory of Christ's
Righteousness. page 315, to 339 Nine strong Consolations, that flow from the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. page 339, to 365
Of Running to Christ. Under all our fears, doubts, conflicts, we should still
run to Christ. page 308, 309, 310, 311

S Of Satisfaction. That God does stand upon satisfaction, and will not forgive
one sin without it; is made evident by five Arguments. page 320, to 324
Of Sincerity. When a man's heart is sincere with God. page 1, 2, 3
Of Sin, many weighty things about it. Four ways to know when sin is indulged.
page 3, 4 Thirteen Arguments to prove that no Godly man does or can indulge
himself in any course, or way, or trade of Sin. page 4, to 14 Ten Arguments to
show the folly, vanity and falsehood of that opinion that is received, and
commonly avowed by Ministers and Christians, viz. That every Godly person has
his beloved sin, his bosom sin. page 14, to 24 First, All wicked men have their
beloved sins, their darling sins, etc. page 24, 25 Secondly, The Elect, before
their conversion, have had their beloved sins, etc. page 25 Thirdly, after
conversion, the hearts of the Elect are most set against those sins, which were
once their beloved sins, etc. page 25 Fourthly, After conversion, a sincere
Christian endeavors to be most eminent in that particular grace, which is most
contrary to that sin, which was once his beloved sin, etc. page 25, 26 Fifthly,
Though no Godly man has any beloved sin, yet every Godly man has one sin or
other, to which they are more prone, than to others. page 26, 27, 28, 29 Eight
remedies against keeping up of any special sin, either in heart or life,
against the Lord, or against the light and convictian of a man's own
conscience. page 29, to 42 Five and twenty Arguments against keeping up of any
special sin in heart or life, against the Lord, or against the light of a man's
own conscience. page 42, to 50
Of the sufferings of Christ. See, page 97, to 105 The true reasons, why the
Sufferings of Christ, though short, yet, have a sufficient power and virtue in
them, to satisfy God's justice. page 272, 273, 274
Of the Sufferings of Christ in his body. The Sufferings of Christ in his body,
largely opened. page 105, to 121
Of the Sufferings of Christ in his Soul. The Sufferings of Christ in his soul,
largely opened. page 121, to 131 The Sufferings of Christ in his soul were very
high, and great, and wonderful. page 131, to 137 That Jesus Christ did feel and
suffer the very Torments of Hell, though not after an Hellish manner. page 137,
to 153, Christ's Sufferings for us, should mightily endear Jesus Christ to us.
page 153, 154, 155 The punishments that Christ did suffer for us, must be
referred only to the substance, and not to the circumstances of punishment.
page 284, 285, 286 The meritorious cause of Christ's Sufferings, were the sins
of his people. page 286, 287, 288 Seven Inferences from the consideration of
the great sufferings of Christ page 289, to 315
Of the Suretyship of Christ. All the sins of believers, were laid upon Christ,
their Surety. page 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85 Q. Whether God were not unjust, to
give Jesus Christ to be our Surety? answered. page 85, 86, 87, 88 The
Suretyship of Christ considered at large. page 374, to 379

T Of Triumphing in Christ Jesus. The Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
affords us the highest reason to rejoice and triumph in Christ Jesus. page 354,
355, 356, 357, 358
Of a True penitential turning from all sin. A True penitential turning from
all sin, lies in six particulars. page 17, 18, 19 Five and twenty Arguments to
work us to turn from all sin. page 42, to 50
Of Types. The Scapegoat was a most lively Type of Christ. page 368, 369

V Of Universal Obedience. Five and twenty Arguments for Universal Obedience.
page 42, to 50 An objection against universal obedience answered. page 50, 51
Universal obedience consists in nine things. page 51, to 55
Of our Unrighteousness. Christ's mediatory righteousness takes away all our
Unrighteousness. page 342, 343

W Of Willingness. Christ's sufferings should work in us the greatest
willingness to suffer for Christ. page 303, to 308
Of the works of God. The same Works which are peculiar to God, are ascribed to
Christ, in the blessed Scriptures. page 225, 226, 227
Of Worship. Divine honor and Worship is due to Christ, and by Angels and
Saints, is given unto him. page 227, 228, 229 First, All inward Worship is due
to Christ. page 229, 230 Secondly, All outward Worship is due to Christ. page
230, to 232 When Jesus Christ was declared to the world, God did command, even
the most glorious Angels to worship him, as his natural and coessential Son
page 232, 233


ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 1. read all. p. 6. l. 22. r. I. p. 22. l. 13. r. our. p. 34. l.
14. heat r. heart. p. 8. l. 4. him r. them. p. 80. l. 31. lai r. laid. p. 89.
l. 16. r. so. p. 111. l. 26. r. A (...). p. 112. l. 7. opinion r. opening. p.
112. l. 20. nature r. water. p. 112. l. 28. r. (...). p. 125. l. 19. r. animam.
p. 174. m. r. Bernard. p. 181. l. 23. r. to. p. 188. m. r. summam paenae. p.
197. l. 22. love r. lose. p. 202. l. 1. reviled r. revealed. p. 193. l. 36. the
r. their. p. 212. l. 18. r. not. p. 133. m. r. Relinquit. m. r. confut. p. 137.
l. 7. and r. the. p. 138. m. Romans r. Act. p. 141. l. 8. Torments r. Tormentors.
p. 147. l. 11. Isa. 5. r. Isa. 50. p. 157. m. r. magnum. p. 232. l. 30. any r.
and. p. 234. l. 19. r. that. l. 34. not r. nor. p. 238. l. 3. r. (...). p. 263.
l. 30. given r. even p. 267. l. 21. into r. with, with r. into. p. 283. l. 14.
their r. her. blot out my wife and children. p. 296. l. 4. deared r. dearest.
p. 311. l. 15. r. he did. p. 321. l. 29. r. Secondly. p. 336. m. hat r. that.
p. 354. l. 38. blot cut it. in the fourth leaf of the Epistle Dedicatory, l. 2.
the r. this.

There are sundry other mistakes in pointings, changes and transpositions of
letters, misfiguring of pages, etc. besides: Some are omitted, because they do
not much disturb the sense, others, because they will not easily escape thy
notice: Share the faults between the Author's absence, and the Printers
negligence; and then correct before thou read.


