THE TRAGEDY OF THAT FAMOUS ROMAN ORATOVR Marcus Tullius CICERO

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for John Sweeting at the Angel in
Pope's Head Alley, 1651.

The Scene ROME.
The persons of the PLAY.
The Ghost of Julius Caesar. Marcus Tullius Cicero. Quintus Cicero his Brother.
Marcus Antonius formerly Consul, now at enmity with the Senate. Octavius
Caesar, Lepidus Generals for the Senate. Publ. Servilius, Piso, Calenus
Senators. Salvius, Carnutius, Publius Apuleius Tribunes of the people. Minutius
Praetor. Popilius Lanas Collonell. Cornelius a Centurion. Quintus Junior
Quintus Cicero's son. Philologus a Scholar, Quintus Cicero's man. Clodius,
Laenas Commanders in Lepidus's Army, friends to M. Antonius. Laureas a Poet,
Tyro -- a great pretender to history, Marcus Cicero's men. The Senate. Chorus.
(...) wife to Quintus Cicero. Fulvia Marcus Antonius wife. Centurions. Lictors.
Soldiers. Messengers.
I Purae Cicero pater loquelae,
I Jurista Quiritium supreme,
Post passas Latii furentis iras
I pernix, fuge, and Alitis Sabaei
Surgentis tepido ex rogo renatis
Vestitus calamis, petas Asylum
Magni pectoris, aurei, sereni,
In quo Mercurius, Themista, uterque
Divini soboles Jovis triumphat,
Hermes eloquii fluentis author,
AEqui diva parens Themista Juris.
THE TRAGEDY OF M. TVLLIVS CICERO
Actus Primus.
Julius Caesar's Ghost.
WHat not one prodigy to (...) thee, Rome,
And give loud warning that great (...) come?
What not one peale of thunder to (...),
And echo from thy seven proud hills the fame
Of my arrival? is my weight so light
It cannot force one dismal (...) affright
And wake thy Genius? is the ground thus (...)
And Julius like an exhalation sent
From the black womb of hell, yet cannot (...)
An Earthquake in thy breast? I like, I like
Such dire forerunners. What? before my fall,
In (...) great Forum, upon every (...),
A bird of Night was percht in midst of day,
And when black Night her mantle did display
(As if the Stygian people had forsook
Their pitchy harbors, and possession took
Of the upper world) the Air was sill'd with (...)
Of rolling fires, and the presaging dreams
Of Citizens were broke by dismal frights
Caused by the confused noise of walking sprights:
And is my rise so full of silence?
Thunder.
So,
Now stubborn Rome I Will thunder forth thy (...).
Caesar must be revenged, and to thy cost.
Alas thou can not bribe my wronged Ghost,
With the vain fiction of thy (...) star;
Were I but stellified indeed I Would (...)
Thy pride with such an influence should convay
Submission through thy blond, and cast a ray
Should (...) a Sun to (...) the Roman world
Without a Colleague: yet this sat is hurled
Through thy own blindness on thy cursed head,
(...) with such plagues to (...), as thy (...)
Thy butchered Julius from his soul abhorred;
My glory was, that Fortune did afford
That royal power to do thee good I would,
And Nature heart to will the good I could.
But I was too too mild; a heavier hand
Shall make thee stoop to Sovereign command,
And (...) the yoke, though sullied first and died
In thine own gore; a sourge shall check thy pride;
The days of Sylla shall return, and blood
Swim down thy streets in as profuse a (...),
As ere his black (...) made, the sword
Shall be as free as then, the Slave his Lord,
The Wife her Husband shall betray, the (...)
Thinking the vital thread of's Father spun
To a too tedious length, and that his feet
Travel too slowly to the grave, shall greet
His age with death; The Senators shall drink
Of the same cup of slaughter too, and think
The hurden easy, for, A sudden death
Is sweet to them that scorn a slavish (...).
Each Proscripts head shall (...) a weighty rate,
And Piety be treason to the State.
Thus, Rome, shall thou be plagued, and among
Thy other evils lose thy sacred Tongue,
The great Patritian of the speaking Art,
Then shall thy griefs lie fettered in thy heart,
And speak no other language but of tears;
Words shall be strangled by thy stupid fears.
Exit. Enter Marcus Cicero. Now ought we to give thanks unto the Gods
That now at length the Fathers of the Public
With free unforced judgments dare lay open
The sick distempers, which (...) and (...)
The body (...)? me thinks in this
I see some gleame of liberty break forth
And promise to the State a milder (...),
Then, since our late unbridled (...)
Usurpt the (...) heaven, we have been blessed with.
As sor my self, though now grown old and feeble
(...) my loved Countries service, I have yet
As good a heart as ever to defend her.
What though my voice did seem (...) while suppressed?
My heart did nourish (...) untainted love
Of the Republic, which in zealous flames
Has now discharged it self in the face of Antony
That Traitor to the freedom of his Country;
I did defen I while but a Youth, the State,
I will not now I am grown old for sake it;
I have (...) the swords of (...);
I will not now fear his.
Some twenty years ago I well remember
I said (...) could not to a Consular
Be (...); how much more truly now
May I pronounce unto an aged man?
Now may I wish for Death, yet from my heart
Two things I do dosire, and pray for; one,
That I may leave the Roman people free,
(...) immortal Gods cannot bestow upon me
A greater blessedness: the other's this;
That all may meet with a (...) fate,
As their deserts have been unto the State.
Enter Laureas. Laur. Your Brother Quintus Sir.

Marc. Entreat him hither.

Enter Qu. (...), and Philologus. Brother you are welcome: How does thy Pomponia,
And my young Cozen?
Quint. Both my Wife and Son
Are (heaven be (...)) as well as my best wishes
Can fancy they would have them; and my Wife
Presents her love, my Son his duty to you.

Marc. They cannot by a better messenger,
For you are Monarch of Pomponia's love,
And (...) of his duty; these are titles
Good in Occonomy, but once thrust out
Make heavy hearts in State when they return;
You have not heard of Antony's proceedings
Since he departed to Brundusium?

Quint. Not one word.

Marc. I collect the Consuls drift;
But why do I the State that injury
To style him Consul that so governs it,
That (...) his life so, and was so (...)?
His aim I know's at those four Legions
Transported from the (...) Province
At his appointment thither by his brother;
Twere dangerous he should win them; but I have
A surer confidence in the Martial Legion,
For it has ever been extolled as much
For its (...) toth' State as (...);
The fourth is under conduct of the (...)
Egnatuleius, a brave Citizen
And valiant man, so that I cannot doubt
But he will be partly frustrate.
Then Caesar's posting to Campania
Puts (...) in hope, it is to procure the Colonies
There resident, to side with him, against
Antonius; for you know the Noble youth
Will not be cheekt by him. But Brother Quintus
I have some private matters: which require
A more retired conference; take a seat.

Laureas. How does my fellow Academick? can
Digest my Lords discourse of Summum bonum?

Philol. It Is somewhat tough, methinks; but Laureas
Which hadft thou rather be? An Epicure?
A Stoic? or Peripatetick? tell me.

Laur. Why faith before I was infranchiz'd boy,
The Stoic would have furnished me completely,
I should have laughed a cudgel in the face,
And swore a bed of straw had been as soft
As wool, or down of Ermins. I should then
Have stood as stout as Atlas with a burden
Weighty as his upon my brawny shoulders;
But since I did with thee shake off the Name
And Nature of a slave, and serve my Lord
More for affection then (...), I could
Sometimes methinks shake hands with (...).

Marc. It must be so. But brother since your have
Hinders your longer stay, let me entreat you
Philologus a while may bear me company.

Quint. With all my heart.

Marc. My love unto (...).

Quint. I will; Farewell.

Marc. Farewell good brother Quintus.

Exit. Qu. Philologue and Laureas come let us hear
How you have relisht your Philosophy.
Phil. My Lord, your Laureas relishes (...),
For he is almost turned an Epicure.

Cicero. An Epicure!

Laur. Not I my Lord, I told him
Virtue which in a proud conceit neglected
The due preservatives of the weaker nature,
And was estranged from that firstborn (...)
Of making natures union, if'twere possible,
Immortal, by a competent cherishing
Of either part, and in an (...)
Like an Intelligence, all Soul and Reason,
Was wholly taken up with mental beauties;
Was like a table furnished with rare viands,
But not a dish prepared with Condimentall
Provocatives to make the relish kind;
For Virtue is, we know, a fruitless, (...),
Impolisht treasure, without use and action,
Which give it taste and life, now to the use
Health, wealth and liberty are requisite,
Though not essential unto Virtues self,
That root of goodness. Thus you may see my Lord,
Laureas is neither Epicure nor Stoic;
'Twas only the comparison which made
Your shallow-brain'd Scholastic think I was
One of the Kitchen; but were I a hog
Of Epicures fraternity, yet his brain
Should not be the Atalanta to unhead me.

Cicer. Why here is no sign of Epicure in this,
It Is current and Authentic.

Phil. True, but Sir,
He harpt upon another string even now.
Yet, since he is so cunning, pray my Lord
Let me be Stoicall a while, and try
Whether he be sound as he pretends.

Laur. Pish, there is a face to act a Stoic with!
Make me believe the Goddess Vinus thought
She was embraced by Mars, when 'twas young Adon
With whom she dallyed. Give me one shall look
With as severe a countenance as Cato
When he unshackled his Heroic soul.

Cicer. No more of him, I pray, unless you would
Make fountains of my eyes; but Laureas
You have the fittest visage for a Stoic,
It shall be your part.

Laur. Then my Noble Lord,
Suppose I had ingrost the Stoic wisdom
Within my bosom, and were now brought forth
To some unheard of torture: thus I Would stand,
And thus I Would dare the utmost of their furies.
Vain Mortals, do you think my fearlesse soul
Is capable of pains? why, tear this flesh
From off my bones; you touch not me: for know
This is not Laureas but his robe. Extract
The very quintessence of the strongest poison,
I Will quaffe it as I would divinest Nectar,
And think it but a draught of Immortality:
Cast me alive into a den of Lions,
I will embrace my destiny, and deem
The loudest accent of their spacious throats
But as a trumpet to proclaim my triumphs.
I would not bellow in Perillus engine,
But like the Swan in Tybers silver streams
Sing my own dirge with an unwrinckled note.
Nay, more then this, the disunited Heavens
Tumbling upon my head should not affright me,
Yea the confused rattling of their ruins
Should be as ravishing harmony to my ears,
As now they make in their celestial spears.
Now, Sir, suppose the anger of some tyrant
Had thrust me from the bosom of my Country,
From the embraces of a faithful spouse,
And the sweet pledges of our mutual loves,
And I were wandering in some wilderness,
Within whose gloomy shades was never heard
The Daulian minstrell, but the boding tones
Of Owls, and Night-ravens, and in every bush
Lay coucht a Lion, Tiger, or a Wolf:
Would I sit musing in a dumpish passion?
And cry, O Times! O Manners! no my Lord,
A wise man does not tie his house, or home
To the tuition of one private (...),
Nor does he bound what men their Country call
To the straight limits of one State or Kingdom;
Though Thule were the place of my Nativity,
Yet should the Gades be my country too.
I have a little world within my self,
And shall one narrow Landscape claim me hers?
Now for those petty dangers I defy them,
A wise man (...) in his sacred front
The character of Majesty, which brutes
Though never so wild and savage must adore.
As for my Wife and Children they were given me
Not for aeternity, and as good be severed
By exile as by death: had I still lived
Dividing my indulgent soul among them,
I might perhaps have seen my loving Wife
Ravished before my face, I might have seen
My Childrens brains knocked out against the stones,
And dashed in my own wounded eyes, but now
I shall not view those clouds. Thus had I been
Unhappy, had I not unhappy been.
And now my honored Lord, with wonder hear,
How in a yet unparalled Affliction
Your Stoic Laureas would demean himself.
Suppose my Lo. -- O how my heart strings ache
To utter't! yea it makes me clean forget
The Stoic whom I personate: I say
Suppose -- O hold me good Philologus.
The very thought will strike me dead -- suppose
My bosom Friend, my faithful Pylades,
My second self, even my Philologus,
Were whipped clean through the streets of Rome and cudgel'd
Till his bones cracked again, d' ye think I Would weep?
Lift up my eyes, and cry, O cursed Heavens
Which suffer innocence thus to be afflicted!
Now, my Lord, I Would do an Act of wonder
Which after Ages should admire; I Would down
And in the Cellar all my sorrows drown.

Cicer. Is It come to this? you are a wanton Laureas.

Laur. It Is Stoicall my Lord.

Cicer. Well let it be so.
But since you think you could so sweetly sing
In the engine of Perillus; let me hear you
Out often. for I Am persuaded you might frame
Your voice a great deal better to a song
In a far colder place.

Laur. It Is true my Lord;
But I spoke like a Stoic.

Cicer. Be not modest.
Begin: but let your song be sage, and grave,
Such as a Vestall need not blush to hear.
Rip up the Vices of the State, that while
You sing, my wounded heart may bleed for sorrow.

Song.
How happy was the Roman State?
When her chiefest Magistrate was raised to the fasces from the plow?
when such as Cincinnatus swayed
The helm of the Commonwealth, and made
Her proudest Adversaries humbly how
To the self (...) yoke wherewith they used to check
The (...) of the toiling (...) neck?
How sacred was the Roman Name?
How (...) was our virgin same?
When in their (...) our bravest men
Had nothing glorious but themselves?
When he who now in quarries (...),
(...) golden (...) as low as Pluto's den,
Was deemed a Paricide, and had the doom
Of one who rent his Mothers sacred (...)?
How happy were we then, how (...),
When the (...) was possessed
Of (...) ancient Palinures?
When Curious and Fabricius led
How Armies, which for (...) sed
On (...)? then the easy (...)
Of her more temperate body soon were wrought,
(...) health with little loss of blood was bought.
But since the Asian luxury
Has (...) into our (...), and we
No (...) for same in dishes (...)
Then if we had the conquest (...)
Of the (...) Hamilears son,
Or brought (...) Syphax home alive
To (...) Triumphs: now a thousand pains
(...) brooding in the States corrupted veins.
The Commonwealth is full of (...),
And each day (...)
Threaten the downsall of this srame;
(...) constitution is too week
To (...) such (...), and not break,
(...) quench the (...).
(...) thou (...) AEsculapius mighty (...),
And send some (...) influence from above.
Philologus and Laureas together. (...) our AEsculapius mighty, Jove,
And send some (...) influence from above.
(...). So here is a Song has (...), Poetry;
O it is the language of the Gods when Virtue
(...) made (...) theme; they prostitute the Muses,
And turn (...) to (...) a stews, that cloth
(...) fancies in these (...) weeds.

Enter Quintus Cicero. Marc. Brother so soon? your countenance me thinks
Tells me your bosom travails with some news,
And fain would be delivered.

Quint. Sir, Octavius
Is with an Army at the gates.

Mar. Octavius?
Why, that is not Hannibal.

Quint. But the Citizens
Suspect a more then Panick treachery;
For those that saw the Consul and Octavius
So lately reconciled in the Capitol,
Will not believe these forces are contracted
To oppose (...); but that covertly
Both have complotted one to aid the other
In the promotion of their aims; that Antony
May gain the Sovereignty, and Octavius
Revenge on those which slew his uncle Julius.

Enter Tyro. Tyr. Carnutius, Sir, the Tribune of the people
Desires some conference with your Lordship.

Mar. Quintus,
He Is a professed (...) to Antonius,
And friend to Caesar. Bring the Tribune in.

Enter Carnutius. Car. Octavius is returned.

Mar. I, so I hear,

Car. And brought along with him ten thousand soldiers.
I have explored his aims, and they are whole
For opposition of the Consul Antony
Whom he has much endamag'd.

Mar. How Carnutius?

Car. By spies, which he has closely had about him
Still crossing and opposing his proceedings,
And with such good success, as now the Legions
Are even upon desertion of his party
Especially the Fourth and Martial.

Mar. Tribune,
Inform the people how the youth's affected,
And (...) procure he shall be straight brought in;
For I Am persuaded, since he is returned
Antonius enemy, the provident Senate
Will not be so injurious to the State
And their own (...), as deny him entrance,
Yea, I presume they will with glad (...)
Meet the first motion of his entertainment.

Car. They will no (...); Come let us dispatch my Lo.

Exeunt. Enter Piso and Salvius. Salv. Me thinks the admittance of Octavius,
Will much endamage Antony.

Piso. I fear it,
And doubt not but he will be shortly here:
But what do think of this young (...), (...)?
It cannot enter Piso's head, that (...).
To the Republic does incite him to it.

Salv. 'Faith Piso my opinion's this; I doubt
The boy will prove at length another (...).

Piso. And so think I.

Salv. Was It ever known a youth
Of his (...) spirit, was so much devoted
Unto his Country cause without some plot
To strengthen his ambitious aims? well Piso.
I am persuaded Caesar's heart and countenance
Are not Correlatives.

Pis. And I fear our Orator,
Although he think himself a profound Statist,
Is but as 'twere a visor, which Octavius
Covers the face of his close projects with:
Well, mark the end, these now are but surmises,
But they may prove oraculous. Let this pass.
I think if Antony come he will not stay,
You know he has determined to be Master
Of the (...) Province.

Salv. True, he has.

Pis. Now when he is gone to Gaul, if Cicero
Advice the Senate any thing against him,
It must be our parts to oppose their counsels.

Salv. It must. I Will second you, you know (...)
Do much by virtue of the Tribuneship.

Pis. It Is true, you may do much indeed.

Enter Messenger. Mess. The Consul
Antonius is arrived; and, (...) Piso,
Desires your presence; to you, (...),
He sends his love, and prays you to repair
Unto the Senate, which is newly convocated.

Salv. Piso return my love, I Will (...) straight.

Ex. Enter Quintus Cicero. Pomponia. Pomp. How does my Brother Marcus Cicero?

Quint. Well my Pomponia, but would be far better
Could he once see the Commonwealth in health.

Pomp. Why, husband; what have States (...) too?

Quint. They have my Sweet, and as old fathers die
To make room for pesterity, so Chance
Quits ancient States, that from their (...)
New ones arise. States have their several (...)
Which carry some analogy with (...):
Their small beginnings are their infancies.
Their bold exploits to propagate their glories,
Are like the slashes of ambitious Youth;
When they are mounted to the highest pitch
Decreed them in the (...),
They are arrived to a state much like
That which in us does bear the name of Manhood.
They stand not long on this high (...) of Glory,
But stealingly, as we, do (...)
Their sprightly vigor like a full-blown Rose
Droops and decays, they suddenly contract
(...); grow diseased, and finally
Sink down into the grave of their own ruins
The (...) and the (...) Monarchies
Di'd of a (...); then the (...)
Of a seditious quarrel in the Humors
Striving to be predominant;
Greece of a (...); (...) first was caught
With an (...) Fever, which at last
Degenerated to an Ague, and
Was quickly seconded by Death. But Rome
(Only she never felt an Ague yet,
Unless when Hannibal was at her gates)
Is whole infected with a various mixture
Of all together; she is even grown a Spittle,
An Hospital of diseases which will sink
Her glories to the first and ancient Nothing:
But may that day be leaden heel'd, nor fall
Within the (...) of this Age.

Pomp. (...) Husband,
This passion is not Roman. We may raise
Our spirits with hopes of better times;
Caesar affords us comfort.

Quint. True Pomponia,
But Rome has had a long succession
Of State-(...), when this (...) (...)
Is cut away, another may bud forth;
Pray heaven we have no cause with that old (...)
Of Syracusa, in our fruitless wishes
To dig our Ancient tyrants up again.
Enter Marcus (...). Welcome from the Senate Brother, pray what news?
How were things carried?

Mar. Nothing done at all.
The Consul Antony came without all doubt
To censure Caesar's doings, but his mind
It seems was changed; for having said a little
Touching the Provinces and (...),
But not a word of Caesar, he departed.

Quint. And what will follow think you?

Mar. Sure he will not
Stay long in Rome, for, as I hear, 'has sent
His Army to Ariminum, no doubt
With an intent to follow, then besides
I think he dares not stay for fear of Caesar;
For he returned though proudly, yet but weakly
With only one (...) cohort with him.
But it is grown something late, I must entreat you
To let my Cosen Quintus guide me homeward.

Quint. He will be proud to do you such a service.

Exeunt. Enter Antonius. Ant. What evil Genius (...) me? the Fourth
And (...) Legions sided with (...)?
For so I have received (...);
Well (...) Alba, (...), as I (...),
The (...) all Legion have (...) themselves.
Enter (...). I will not thus be (...) by a boy,
A mungrell; (...) shall a (...) or (...)
Stop the (...) Eagle in his (...),
And heaven be scaled by a band of Pygmies.
Let Cicero call him Romes (...) boy,
And truly golden offspring of his Mother,
Let the whole Senate hug him, as they do;
Yet will I (...) and ruin all their hopes,
I Will send him naked home to his first Nothing,
And make him answer to (...); what?
Is not the Family of (...)' (...)
Derived from Anton son to Hercules?
And shall (...) sons of Earth confront me thus?
The stellisi'd Alcides shall not lose
The cheerful luster of his rays, to (...)
His blood run muddy in his issues veins.

Fulv. I like this spirit, (...), me thinks I see
The world already prostrate at thy feet,
Cherish this fire: o were thou all (...)
Of these Heroic slames, (...) would be
To such a Jove another Semele.

Anton. Spoke like thy glorious self: yet, Fulvia,
Passion or indiscretion may (...) him,
But when I weigh his Actions in the balance
Of (...) and more accurate Construction,
I (...) he has no base or common soul,
And does as well inherit Caesar's he (...),
And (...), as his name: beside (...) has
The counsels of experienced heads to steer
His Actio is by; so that he is now above
The pitch of my disdain: with strong-nerv'd eyes,
Like a young Eagle, he confronts our Sun.

(...). What (...) so soon? (...) an Eagle?
A Scarab rather. He an Eagle Antony?
He Is but (...) Ganymed (...) an Eagles (...):
The Octavian' family (...) yet was nest
To such a kingly bird. But who I pray
Are those experienced heads you talk of? what?
Is that Tongue-valiant Cicero worth the fear
Of (...) Antony?
No doubt but he who has of late divorc't
His Wife Terentia, and in her place
Made a young (...) his (...), may as soon
Supplant Antonius, and set up that boy:
O'twas great policy to exercise
Himself (...) the weaker sex at first;
Your turn is next: the Hawk thus tries his talons
Upon some meaner pray, before he ventures
To (...) with the Eagle or the (...).

Anton. I think Minerva's self (...) in thee Fulvia,
Such words as these might fire the coldest bosom,
And by strong (...) a heart
Of (...) temper, to a golden Purity.
Were young Octavius (...) an Eagle,
And nested in the bosom of Great Jove,
I Would pluck him thence: As for that Cicero,
My fear, if I had any, should not be
Pitched on so base an object: I will make
That Inmate know what it is to write my life,
H'ad been as good have (...) to the world
The mystic name of Rome. But let that (...)
Proceed to belch his poisonous vomit forth
At view of light; yet shall his unwasht mouth
One day repent that biting impudence.

Fulv. And there may come a time when Fulvia
Shall be revenged on his wormwood jeers.
O how my entralls boil! my heart's on (...):
Had I his damned tongue within my clutches,
This bodkin should in bloody characters
Write my revenge.

Ant. Come Fulvia, be content,
Let him triumph, and in his proud conceit
Frame to himself a conquest great as Joves
Over those sons of (...), and parallel
His verbal thunder with the voice of Heaven,
Yet may I one day be that stronger Typhon
Shall cut the sinews of his insolence,
And place thee (...) in this Romes Olympus.
Come kiss me Sweeting, though the drousie (...)
Have not (...) left the bosom of his Thetis,
Yet here is no nightly shade, for from (...) eyes'
Breaks a more glorious day. I could, my beauty,
For ever dwell in thy divine embraces,
But I must leave thee, yea and that before
Aurora's first blush gilds the East; thou know
My Army is sent before unto Ariminum,
And I must follow; I will have the Province
Of Decimus (...); I, I will, that is certain,
By fair or foul means; Julius my Colleague
Returned from Gaul so happily established,
Great Pompey's (...) was (...) by his Eagles.
I know an Army will be soon sent after,
And war proclaimed against me as an enemy
To the State, if once I offer violence
To Decimus, but I Am resolved, and should
The whole world rise against me, what I Have said
I Will prosecute to ruin or fruition.
Only my Fulvia do but thou (...)
My foes at home by opposite authority.
There Is Lucius Piso, Lucius (...),
(...) Calenus, Salvius, Lucius Caesar,
(...) Sulpitius too, and many others
My special friends: thou may solicit them,
They Will not be backward in my glorious cause.
Come I Will go kiss the pledges of our bed,
And then for Mutine; there my hopes are fed.

Exeunt. Chorus.
IS there such sweetness in (...)?
Or is it only fond opinion?
Is there such pleasure in the height
Of greatness? or is it mere (...)?
Sure if the glories of a throne
Were in their proper colors shown,
It would appear the highest place
Is pleasant only in the face;
A King is but a Royal slave,
And Rule a Vassallage more (...);
A Scepter's but a glorious name,
A Crown the burden of the (...)
Proud front which it (...); but Peace
And (...) joy with full increase
Salute the cottage of (...) Swain;
There Quiet (...), where (...)
Does six a scornful brow, but where
The eye of Envy's (...), there
A thousand discontents do dwell,
O it is a second second (...).
Why then, O why, (...) Rome,
Do thy Vipers (...) thy (...),
To be possessors of a light
So prejudicial to the sight?
Unhappy Rome, did Julius (...)
For (...) Tyranny?
And must (...) (...)
The aims of his Ambitious spirit?
Yet in this (...) happy State,
That thou have an Advocate
Dares plead thy Griefs, and to his face
Tell thy proud (...) is base.
Base in his life, and (...) to (...),
An hater of thy liberty.
O (...) a Statists worth,
Let thy Matrons Caroll forth
His praise, and crown his aged (...):
Not with Laurel wreaths, but prayers.
Long may thou live brave man, and have
When dead a (...) and peaceful (...)
Actus secundus.
Cicero.

SO now me thinks I see our (...)
Already (...) with ruin; he shall know
Ambition is a precipice, and the sky.
At which he aims his (...) to be too high.
Were it the cause though 'twere ground enough
To build a settled confidence upon.
An honest cause in mouth of ruin sings,
It Is the good genius of a State, and brings
Down Jove himself to side with her: but more
It Is Brutus whom Antonius copes with, Brutus
The Omen of whose very name, and blood
Fatal to State-usurpers were sufficient
To (...) our drooping souls, and raise (...)
From thought of (...). But then besides;
Three Armies have we sent to succor him;
Two under Aulus Hirtius, and Pansa,
Our late elected Consulls. Young Octavius
Have we made General of the third; A youth
Ordained by Heaven to do his Country (...).
And yet before this war was brought about,
What oppositions did I meet withal.
Piso withstands it, Salvius seconds him,
The Consular Calenus makes a third.
The matter is adjourned. Till at the last
(...) must be sent to Antony
To treat of Peace; A thing, in my conceit,
Of little credit to the Senators;
For what could be more base, more full of (...)
Then to send messengers of Peace to him
Whom, but a little before they had condemned
As enemy to's Country, and Republic,
By several decrees, as (...) Honors,
The great Rewards of the Legions that forsook him,
The Assignment of the Consuls to the wars?
As also their most ample commendations
Of Brutus and his Army, which the Province
Of Gaul did plainly intimate: moreover
There was great danger in it; for could the City
Be safe, when it should Antony immure,
Or rather Antonies within her bosom,
Which like a nest of Serpents would torment her,
And never cease to (...) with (...) stings
Till they had wrought a passage to the heart?
Lastly, it was not possible (...) should
Be peace confirmed with him, for not the Senate
Nor Citizens could affect him, nor he them,
Both had condemned him, he injured both.
Well, Legates are dispatched; yet nothing done;
Antony is still as insolent as ever:
Then must a second Embassy be entered;
And I am one elected for that service.
O Heavens! with what distempered wounded eyes
Should I have looked that Monster in the face?
Who in a public Concion had decreed
My goods unto Petissius of Vrhin,
One who but newly from the utter shipwreck
Of a no mean but rich inheritance
Was crept (...) those Antonian rocks for (...)
My tender eye balls never could have bom
The hated sight of Saxo, (...), (...),
Hostilius and Vesenius. O (...) should
Have seen the very visage and aspect
Of Civil war it self. But this Legation
Was found at length a (...) device and (...)
To hinder with delays the (...)
In preparation for the war. Yet see
A new (...) obtruded M. (...)
Our General beyond the Alps, (...)
The (...) by (...) to (...) peace;
Hereat the former Advocates take heart,
And plead (...) authority of Lepidur,
As if that plea could quench the zealous flames
Which were then kindled in the Senates breasts.
But all in (...). Our armies are launcht forth
Against (...) Arch-pirate of the State Antonius.
And now we daily with our prayers solicit
The ears of heaven to (...) the Commonwealth
Of such a dangerous and (...) plague,
Which like a gangrene would run (...) and spread
To the (...) of the body Politic:
But to (...) down such monsters Jove has thunder,
And we have arms to press this viper under.
Exit Enter (...). Pomp. Phillis come (...).

Phil. (...).

Pomp. Are the Rooms
Perfumed as I commanded?

Phil. Yes.

Pomp. And all things
Done as I gave directions?

Phil. All things Madam.

Pomp. Well.

Exit Phil. But I need not be so punctual,
My Brother Marcus, as he is no stranger,
So not so curious, as our other Romans.
As for my self, I Am none of those which waste
Whole Mornings in the fruitless contemplation
Of their supposed beauties in a glass;
I have not learned to paint and (...) my face
With borrowed colors, mine is a native grace,
And, if it please my Quintus, it is enough.
Nor am I in the list of those which spend
Their husbands faculties on loose (...),
On rings, and bracelets, or a (...)
To dangle in my (...), my Ornaments
And Jewels are the Virtues of my Quintus.
Enter Philologus. Phil. Madam, my Lord your Brother's newly entered.

Exit Pomponia, (...) Phil. Enter Laureas and Tyro. Laur. Here Is a triplicity
of (...)
How does my little (...)

Phil. O Sir the better
To see your Stoickship in health: but, (...),
What is (...) (...) doing?

Laur. (...) let us see.
Why, poring on a fragment of (...)
The Grandfire (as he calls him) of Historiaus
A kind of vermin he is enamored with:
And he himself has got an (...) humor
To be of that fraternity.

Phil. IN faith!
Nay then (...) furnish him, Most learned Tyro
Have you not heard the news?

Tyro. Ha. News? What news?

Phil. Why it is reported, and that credibly.
How Atlas being weary of his burden,
As sure he well may be, and if you ever
Beheld his picture with that mighty globe
Upon his back, he looks but sowrely (...):
Well, Atlas being weary as I told you,
To ease his shoulders, lifted up his arm,
Some say it was his right arm, some his left,
But that is not so material; you observe!
Lifting his arm above his head to keep
The Sphere a while from's back, he (...) to thrust
His thumb into a star, and (...) it off.

Laur. Tyro. he is misinformed; 'twas thus old boy.
About the time when the all-seeing Sun
Mounted the raging (...) back, this Atlas,
This living Column of the arched (...),
Distilling from his hot and sweating brows
As much Salt waters as might turn a Sea
Fresh as our Tiber, to a brinish sowrnesse.
And truly, were that scorching season constant,
Well might the Nation of Philosophers
Cease their intestine broiles about the saltness
Of the vast Ocean, and determine safely
The sweat of Atlas were the genuine cause.
Well Atlas sweltring, as I said, and sending
Whole clouds of vapors from his hoiling entrails,
Erects his brawny arm, and so sustaines
That azure fabric, while he stoopes to reach
A draught or two of Nilus in his palm;
But as he stoops, he thus behind him throws
His leg, and by ill fortune popt his foot
Into the hot Trinacrian hill; and so
(O sad dystaster!) burnt his little toe.

Ty. I thought your Mount at length would be (...)
Of a ridiculous Mouse. But what is this all?

Phil. I, there is enough at once, too much will glut you

(...). Glut me! by Castor I Am as lank and thin
As if Chamaeleon-like I had been fed
Of naught but Air. This have I only chewed on
Since (to usurp Laureas inspired Notion)
The Sun (...) up his (...) Teem from the
Blushing Ocean.

Laur. How the Rogue hobbles! 'slight he makes the Muses
Halt, and their God Apollo (...) on crutches.

Phil. No matter Laureas, you must attribute it
To the faintness of his stomach, which I Will quicken
With some supply. Stay here, while I go in,
And if I meet with an extravagant Capon,
Or some such Pilgrim, I Will direct him hither.

Laur. Well said; but Sirrah, you know what I love,
A cup of rich Falern, you Rogue, or some
Extracted Nectar of the Formian grape.

Phil. I Will furnish you immediately.

Exit. Laur. I wonder
What foolish humor Pindarus was in,
When he begun his Poems with the praise
Of that weak Element Water: 'slight blind Homer
Was an old Soker at it, and the Father
Of our brave Roman Laureats (...),
Before he dipped his sacred quill in blood,
Would steep his brains in this Castalian liquor;
Drencht in this juice he could more proudly look
Bellona in the face, then ere (...)
Dipped by his Mother in the Stygian lake.

Enter Philologus. Laur. So soon Philologus?

Tyro. What Is here?

Phil. Why, Tyro,
The (...) of a martyred quartered Goose.

Tyro. I thought in troth this would be one of your
(...) pilgrims; for it is reported,
That (...) have travailed on their (...) to Rome
Even from the Marshes of the (...).
What bird is this? it is a young Goose I (...).

Laur. How, a young Goose?

Phil. He Is one that said so rather.

Tyro. No Rogue, I Will leave that title to Philosophers,
With whom the (...) are so enamoured.
For I have read in story of one (...),
Of your bald tribe affected by a Goose,
With such (...) ardent zeal; that day and night
Abroad, at home, at board, and in his bed,
She would be with him: and I am persuaded
There are but few of that profession
Can leap a Span from Goose.

Laur. The Rogue's Satyricall.

Tyro. Nay there are Poets too of this (...).
Know you not Anser, he who sings the praise
Of Antony in verse?

Laur. And witty too.

Phil. But it is a Partridge Tyro.

Tyro. Hal a Partridge.

Laur. Come leave this prattle, he will tell you now
How Mulciber the Ferrian Prince was Hawking,
And a poor Partridge, such a one (...) this,
Mewted in's mouth, only for sincere dread
Of the pursuing Hawk: but you young Rascal
Here Is that has life in it.

Phil. Come.

Drinks to Philolog. Phil. Historical Tyro.

Drinks to Tyro, Tyro takes it, Tyro. What Is this?

Laur. It Is wine, pure wine.

Tyro. But Romulus
The Father of this City knew not wine,
Milk was his drink.

Laur. That was in Romes infancy,
Come drink you Coxcombe.

Tyro. Ha, methinks it smiles
Like an ungirdled Maiden.

Laur. Are you there?

Phil. I see these scribbling. Fablers are sly (...)

Laur. There Is my Lords biting Mastix Salust, (...)
Was found at the sport.

Phil. I, and I think belabour'd
To the purpose for his pains.

Tyr. It Is something pleasant.
'Twere good this Vacuum were again replenisht.

Laur. Come, come let us fall aboard.

They eat. Tyro. I see you Rascals, you are no Pythagoreans.

Phil. Why Tyro? we are as still as they.

Tyro. It Is true.
But they to enure themselves to abstinence
Would cause a Table to be richly furuisht
With costly viands, and then sit them down
To feast their eyes upon the several dishes,
But not to (...) a bit, for when their mouths
Had watered long (...) the enticing dainties,
A waiter was commanded to remove,
And so with empty stomachs all departed.

Laur. A fine device to make a living Ghost on.
But Tyro, Here boy.
Drinks. (...), why it is the Soul
Of History; me thinks in this small glass
I see a Volume of brave Heroes Acts
In Letters capital: here I read the Trophies
Of Bacchus fetched from the remotest India;
Here I peruse the battle of such same,
Between the Centdures and the Lapathites,
The sack of Troy, and many other things
As well recorded in this fluid Monument,
As in the strongest Adamantine tables.

Tyro. I may in time make use of this sweet doctrine

Enter Marcus Cicero, Quintus Cicero, Quintus jun. Laur. My Lord by Phoebus.

(...). So, so, I perceive
You have been at it, it is well done, but Tyro
What news from Mutine? you (...) ever wont
To be (...).

Tyr. None but this my Lord:
It Is for a truth given out, that (...)
From the (...) Town conveyed a Letter
To the Army of the Consulls by a Kestrell.

Mar. How weak alas, to what sinall purpose tend
The plots of State-usurpers in the end?
How are (...) projects crossed? he thought
With (...) and trenches to cut off intelligence
Between the Consulls and the Town, and spread
(...) o'r the surface of the neighboring river,
Lest the swift waves should carry Brutus counsels.
But all in vain, if through the yielding Air
A winged post his embassy may (...).

Enter Pomponia. Pomp. Alas, my Lord, the Town is full of uprores,
Some cry out Antony, some, We are undone;
Some, (...) Brutus must be called home.

Mar. Tyro, Go see whence springs this sad confusion.

Exit. Tyro. Pomp. Some answer it is now too late, and others
Affirm it were best to (...) to him for succor.
There Is not a throat but hoarse with cries; An eye
But drowned in (...) of tears. The cause I know not.
But yet I (...).

Mar. If Antony have won the day (which heaven
And heavens all-seeing Monarch Jove forbid)
We are undone, there is no hope of succor
Except in Brutus, which must be (...)
Not by his coming, but our slight to him,
Unless the common voice mistakes, and danger
Be (...) so nigh our (...), as it (...).
But yet (...) soul is quiet, which was ever
Wont to: (...) the common ills
In her (...).

Ent. Tyr. Tyro. My Lord,
There is a rumor (...) throughout the City
That (...) has overthrown tho Consulls,
And is now coming with his Troops to Rome.

Quint. Great Jove defend us.

Marc. Heaven (...) this evil.

Tyr. And the Antonians within the City
Are (...) together into (...) court.

Mar. No doubt to broach some mischief against the State.

Tyro. My Lord it is broacht already; for there is raised
Another (...) without all doubt by those
(...) Citizens, only to divert
The concourse of the people from your Lordship,
That on the Ides of April you have determined
TO (...) the Fasces.

Cic. (...) thou art deceived,
(...) meant some Ambitious thief, or sword-player,
Or some new minted Catiline.

Tyr. No my Lord;
You are the man.

Mar. O Heavens, that I who ruined
The Counsels of base Catiline, should now
Turn Catiline my self! is any man
So lost, so wicked to raise this of me?
So rash, so furious to believe it? Heavens!

Enter Publius Apuleius. Alas good Tribune, how is Cicers wronged?
Apul. I know you are, and therefore in a Concion
Before the poople have I urged your innocence,
And partly choakt the rumor. I proposed
All your endeavors for the Public State
Before their censures, and the whole Assembly
Pronounced they never yet could find you guilty
So much as of a thought against the welfare
Of the Republic: but what noise is this?

Qu. Hark, the late cries are turned to (...) me thinks.

Quin. jun. I hear a cry of Victory in the streets.

Marc. Tyro, Go see again, my heart presages
Some sudden good.

Ex. Tyr. Pomp. Hark, hark, the noise increases.

Quint. I, and approaches (...) too me thinks.

Apul. It Is at the doors.

Enter Tyro and a Messenger. A shout. Tyro. Here Is one my Lord can tell you.

(...). The Consuls (worthy Sir) have won the day.
These will inform you better.

Letters. Cicero reads. Marc. Brother Quintus
A word or two in private. Antony
Is put to flight, but Hirtius (...), and Pansa
Dangerously wounded; for some private reasons
Best known unto my self, I will conceal
The Consulls death, which I may do completely,
For here is a Letter sent from Hirtius
Unto the Senate of a former victory:
This will remove suspect.

Shout. Tyro. The Roman people
Wait at the door to bring you to the Capitol.

Mar. Thanks to the Gods, this day we will dedicate
To Jove and Mars the savers of our State.

Exeunt. Laur. Nay Madam stay, I feel an ecstasy
Steal through my breast, and sire my plyant soul,
You shall not go without a Hymn of Victory.

Pomp. (...), Clarinda, Gallu, quickly come,
Laureas begin, and these shall sing the (...).

The Song.
Have you not beard the Cities cry,
How the people vent their joys
In the welcome welcome noise
Of victory?
The Capitol returns their shout again,
As if it self would (...) their joyful strain.
Chorus.
Let Echo sing with long-spun (...),
And Philmels (...) from their lubrick throats;
Let Hills rebound,
And valleys sound
Io triumph.
The streets are filled with cheerful glee,
And the common mirth is shown
In the pleasant pleasant (...)
Of Liberty;
For now our Consuls have delivered Rome,
And the disturber of her peace o'rcome.
Chorus.
Let Echo sing with, etc,
Great Jove we bless thy Palronage;
By whose high auspice Rome is saved
The Roman State, and kept unslav'd
From inbred rage.
And Mars we praise thee, by whose aid have stood
The Roman walls so long, though built in blood.
Chorus.
Let Echo sing with long-spun notes,
And Philmells caroll from their lubrick throats;
(...) Hills rebound,
And valleys sound
Io triumph.
Exeunt. Enter Senate. A shout. Cicer. Honored and Conscript Fathers, if those
days
Appear to us with far more welcome rays
Wherein we (...) preserved, then those wherein
To breath this common Air we first begin,
Because our safeties have a sure fruition
Of gladness, but our births a frail condition,
And that we do our safeties entertain
With pleasure, but Nativities with pain:
How ought we then to embrace this happy light
Which has redeemed us from that sad (...)
Raised by domestic furies? yet we will not
Return unto our civil robes, till tidings
Be brought of Brutus safety, for this war
Was undertaken for his (...) and succor,
Against those enemies of the State, and is not
Complete but with his freedom first recovered.

Servilius. Although I am not Cicero of your mind
Concerning the retaining of this robe
Of war, yet I determine public prayer
Be made to all the Gods for twenty days
In the three Generals names.

Cic. Which twenty days
Publius Servilius I inhance to fifty,
Since they are granted not to one but Three,

Pise. But, M. Tullius, my opinion is
This day to put our civil garments on,
And to resume the Sage again to morrow.

Calenus. And it is my judgment too.

Cic. Yes, 'twould be grateful
To the immortal Deities to depart
To put the Sage on from their hallowed (...)
To which we came (...) in (...)
'Twere most enormous, and against Religion.

Calen. Then (...) your terms are too too (...)
You brand them with the name of (...)
It Is too severe a style. We will allow them
To be called wicked and audacious Citizens,
But not their Countries foes; and for this cause
The Consulls Hirtius, Pansa, with (...)
Are not to be entitled Generals.

Cic. If the Antonians are not enemies,
Then 'twas a great (...) to (...) them;
And if it were impiety to slay them,
How can we hope our solemn supplication,
Decreed for their destruction, should be pleasing
To the immortal Delties? But Calenus
Know I am not contented with a word
Of such a slight conceit; if any man
Will furnish me with one of deeper (...),
I Will burned into their names; for even by those
Which spilt their sacred blonds for us at Mutine
I know they doc deserv't. As for the Consulls
And young Octavius whom we made our Chiefs,
Their brave deserts have made them Generals,
For now that Prince of outlaws is or thrown;
The very Sun was happy, which before
He hid his beams, beheld the breathless trunks
Of those dead Parricides, and Antony
For very fear with few Associates fly.
Therefore I thus (...), That in the names
Of the Three Generals, fifty days together
Be supplications made, which I will frame
In the most ample words I can contrive.
Then for the Legions, we renew the promise
Of their rewards, which we decreed before,
Should be performed when the war was (...):
But as for those which perished in the battle,
We will the Pensions were decreed for them
Be (as it is just and requisite they should (...))
Paid to (...), Brothers, Wives and children.
Some of the (...) to our grief
But their own glory fell with Victory.
O happy death which being Natures due,
Was for their countries welfare (...) you
(...) your glorious names from Mars, that he
Who for the Nations good did Rome decree,
Might (...) to have ordained you for Romes.
Fame (...) erect you Mausolaean tombs:
Death caught in flight is backed with (...),
It Is glorious to die with Victory;
For in the fight Mars to oblige the rest,
Is wont for pledges to select the best.
Therefore those impious foes whom you have slain,
In hell now suffer their deserved pain;
But you who poured forth your latest spirit
In (...) Victory, shall now (...)
Those blessed fields where pious souls are sainted.
What though your lives were short? they were untainted.
And the (...) of your deaths shall climb
Beyond the (...) of all (...)
Therefore most (...) while you lived, but now
Most holy Soldiers it goes well with you,
Your (...) Virtues shall not clauded lie
In the (...) dungeon of (...)
Not your surviving (...), but all Rome,
Senate and People shall erect your tomb;
There shall be built? (...)
With words engraven, whose (...) shall present
Your deeds unto AEternity; that they
Which see that (...) and read your acts, may say
These (...) the men that loved their countries good,
And bought her (...) with their dearest blood;
And (...) for (...) of their (...)
Have (...) a crown of Immortality.

Exeunt omnes. A (...). Chorus.
How wildly Fortune sports with (...)? now
She shows a face as black as Night,
(...) her (...) my brow,
And (...) Apollo's light.
We float upon the surface of this Main,
Now sinking into Scylla's jaws,
Anon we check our fears again
With hope and comforts (...) laws.
The worlds great (...), the blind Queen of Chance,
A fairer pattern never drew
Of her own unconstant glance,
Then our Native Rome (...).
Alas! how did we whilome fear the (...)
Done in the poor Brundusium?
When Caesar with maturer have
Strikes all those bleeding sorrows dumb.
Then what a sad confused distraction late
With horror did surprise our ears?
How each heart did antedare
A tempest in their troubled fears?
When on a sudden ((...) Jove be praised)
The welcome news of Victory
Seren'd those storms, and shouts are raised
Which echoed from the harmonious sky.
O may this fleeting fickle Goddess here
Securely softly sit her down,
And sleep as long as Phoebe's Dear
On towering Latmus sacred crown.
O that the wakefull Genius of this place
Would but present her with a (...)
From Lethe fetched, might make her (...)
Forget its frown, and feet their motion.
Now Rome is Mars his darling Aphrodite;
O that some Deity would set
To take them in this happy plight
A lasting (...) net!
Listen Great (...) with what devotion sings
The Voice of newborn liberty;
O that some God would clip the wings
Of unconstant Victory!
Actus tertius.
Enter Antony in a morning gown; the hair of his head and beard very long and
unkembed. (...). An. COme fellow Sold. cheer your drooping spirits,
Behold the camp of Lepidus. This weed
Black as my Fortunes, these unkembed locks,
This rusty long-grown (...), this meager visage,
Emblems of my distress, might make the bowels
Of ravenous Wolves and Tigers yern with pity,
But they are Romans, and have Roman hearts;
Come, come, the day may shine, when with (...)
We shall recount the sorrows of this (...);
When by our fires, in bosom of our wives,
Our children too, and faithful friends about (...)
We shall discourse unto their greedy ears
Our travails through the Alps, and glory (...) them,
How every weary step presented us
With some new precipice; how we eased our limbs
Not on the soft repose of downy beds,
But on a frigid and congealed heap
Of snowy fleeces, with some (...)
To be our pillow. You shall (...) deride
The Roman pomp, and when you see an ear
Hung with a jewel, tell them 'twas not so
With you, when whilome on the Alpine (...)
Your hairs were linkt with chains of dangling (...);
What a brave glory will it be at a feast,
Amongst the abundance of the Roman (...),
To tell them how your welcome drink was me
Not the sweet Nectar of the (...) grape,
Or Formian wines presented in a cup
Of Gold ingrav'n with Anticks, or in crystal
Prized more for its fragility (...) worth?
But, that which once Darius so esteemed,
The muddy water of a tainted puddle
(...) with a hollow (...) into your mouths;
And that your Viands were not (...) oysters,
The dainties of Cercei, or wild fowl
Procured as far as from the River Phasis,
But beasts whose stinking flesh would make (...) stomach
Of your luxurious citizen disgorge,
Roots, wild fruit, and the very barks of trees.
Thus faithful Partners of my travails shall we
Solace our selves, when these unwelcome clouds
Are blown away. I Am now to throw the Dice,
Pray heaven the chance (...) good; Retire you something.

(...) Soldiers. Enter Soldiers as in Lepidus camp. 1 Sold. What discontented
(...) is this approaches
Our trenches in this mournful garb and habit?

2 Sold. By Mars he looks like a Memento mori.

3 Sold. Sure I have seen thy face.

Ant. You have no doubt.
And if my eyes deceive me not, I see
Clodius and Laelius there among you, Two
That would have known me once.

Clod. It may be so.

(...). But if we cannot call you now to mind,
I hope you will impute it to your habit
And our forgetfulness, but not to pride,
Or scorn of misery.

Ant. No I do not Laelius.
For I may well seem strange to (...), who am
Grown almost out of knowledge with my self;
Yet have I not forgot my Name, which while
I was more happy was Antonius.

Clod. Alas, I know you (...) to my grief.

Ant. But now I will not (...) that name,
For being fallen from what I was, I must not
Make my self what I (...) Alas I thought not,
Then when Antonius was Antonius,
Fortune would ere malign me so as make me
An eyesore to my self. Brave Romans, here
You see a wretch thrown from the height of greatness
To feed on carrion, and, in fellowship
Of Beasts, drink water out of tainted quagmires.
Some remnants of my Army are surviving
Which have with many a weary step past ore
The rugged Alps, and here attend the sentence
Of life or ruin from your (...).

Omnes. Alas!

Enter Lepidus. Lep. How Is this? Antonius in a mourning habit
Close at my Trenches, and with fawning words
At parley with my (...)? Sound the (...),
And drown this Sirens language, or we are lost.

Ex. Trumpets sound. Anton. I had but two poor Engines by whose help
I thought the fortress of these Soldiers hearts
Might be subdued, my habit and my speech;
And one's already frustrate, it is no matter.
Though with this more then Corybantian noise
My words are swallowed, yet my miseries
Shall speak as loud as thunder in the ears
Of these relenting Romans, for I see
Tokens of pity in their looks, well here
Like a decayed statue will I stand
And speak a mute Oration, that may chance
Advance my hopes to the height of (...) fruition.

(...) Soldiers as in Lep. (...). 1 Sold. See where he stands.

2 Sold. Is that Antonius?

1 Sold. The same, or rather not the same Antonius.

3 Sold. Before Jove it is pity, he is a proper man.

4 Sold. Me thinks he looks vile thin about the gills.

2 Sold. He stands by Heaven like a Mercuriall Index.

4 Sold. Even such a meager face for all the world
Has Saturnes statue in the Capitol.

Enter Clodius and Laelius in women's attire. 4 Sold. But stay, what is here, a
brace of Cockatrices?
Whither so fast, my pretty mincing Damsels?
We must not part thus, Come, come.

Clod. Say you so?

With a box on the ear strikes him down Soldiers. Ha, ha, ha!

4 Sold. What female devil tro was it? by Jove
My ear's as hot as limping Vulcans anvill.

Soldiers. Ha, ha!

Exeunt. Clod. Now, Noble Antony, I see we are
As much unknown to you in this disguise,
As you to us, when first you did appear
So far unlike our late renowned Consul;
But Sir to put you out of doubt I Am Clodius.

Lael. And I am Laelius.

Clod. Both come to recomfort
Your wretched fortunes.

Ant. Friends I can but thank you.

Lael. It Is more then we deserve yet.

Ant. It Is as much
As my forlorn estate can now afford.

Lael. Your state's forlorn no longer then you please,
Take heart, the camp is ready to receive you.

Clod. I, and to kill the General Lepidus
If you will but say the word.

Ant. Again I thank you,
And will not die a debtor; nay I must
Die both a debtor, and ungrateful too.
The courtesie's so great, my best endeavors
Will be too feeble ever to requite it.
Yet shall the General Lepidus live for me,
I will not raise my fortunes by his fall.

Clod. Then Sir to morrow morning shall our camp
Expect you with your Soldiers, and the Trench
Be levelled against your coming.

Ant. Clodius,
And Laelius the restorers of my life,
I were a foe my own happiness,
And which is more, respectlesse of your kindness,
If I should fa^l.

Clod. Then Antony till then
Farewell.

Ant. Farewell, farewell good Laelius.
Ex. Clod. and Lael. Why now me thinks I Am Antony again;
I gratulate my Alpine travails now.
Who in a state so hopeless as was mine
Would not for such an issue feed on dogs,
Or cats, or worse then both an age together?
Well I Will unto my fellow travailers,
This news will make them frolic. Thus the day
Ushered with darkness sends the sweeter ray.
Exit. Enter Caesar. Now Caesar summon thy whole self, thou art
But yet a stripling, and must arm thy self
With providence unknown in these few years.
The Senators, those Nestors of the State,
Disturb the fair praeludium of my Glories:
They have created Decimus their General
Against Antonius, robbed me of my Triumph,
And jealous of my fortunes, closely practice
To win the Soldiers from me, but I am not
So weak a Politician, on such (...)
To part with these fair hopes: if this contempt
Be cast upon me, Antony yet living,
What would they do if he were once extinguished?
Well I Will no longer be deluded thus.
I Will do what Pansae on his Deathbed wished nie,
Even this, acquaint my self with Antony,
And Lepidus, to whom no doubt he is joined.
Then will I send Centurions to the Senate,
To ask for me in name of the whole Army
The Consulship. If It be denied, I am determined
To march my self to Rome, and gain by force
What fair means cannot win. They who intend
Betimes to compass their wished journeys end
Must take the day before'em; so must I,
Set forth at morning of my age, and ply
My youthful sinews in this task of glory,
Crowning my spring with harvest, that the story
Of Caesar's forward years, may be as bright
As others lives, and send as fair a light.

Exit. Enter M. Cicero, and his brother Quint. Mar. Brother, I Am much perplexed
about this Caesar,
He has so fixed his hopes upon the Consulship
There Is no removing him.

Quint. I always feared,
What the Immoderate Honors which the Senate
Conferred upon him would at length produce.
For if Antonius from deceased Caesar,
Took his occasion to usurp the State;
What hope, may we suppose, will he put on
The Author of whose confidence is not
A murdered Tyrant, but the Senates self?
And truly brother you are to be blamed
For the same flux of Honors with the rest.

Mar. Why Quintus, he deserved them and more
While he stood constant to his countries cause;
As for my self, the dignity which I
Decreed him, was but just and necessary;
For you well know the name of General,
Though it was somewhat too much for his age,
Is not convenient only, but essential
To the well governing of so great an Army.
Now since Octavius has abused both that
And other favors, it is his own ambition
And not my fault, unless I must be (...)
As guilty of another misdemeanors.

Quint. You must, if you might have prevented it,
Which moderation would have done. But now
That Caesar who (as you were wont to say)
Flowed from the fountain of your Counsels, sullies
All your intendments; for alas what good,
What profit gain we by the overthrow
Of Antony, since for reward Octavius
Requires succestion in his Tyranny?
Since he who vindicated one, begins
Himself another ill, as black as that,
And like to take a deeper root (...) footing?

Mar. Nay, prethy Quintus, do not aggravate.
The youth I hope is not so lost to goodness,
So desperately given, but I may win him
To have some pity on the State, to tender
The safeties of well-minded Citizens,
Especially of my beloved Brutus.

Quint. What if he will not? shall we not (...) safe
But under his protection? Heaven defend us,
What would the noble Brutus say of this,
Should he but hear it, do you think he would (...)
His Safety should be so demissely begged
Of him that is heir to Julius, whom he slew?
Why now you put the reins of Tyranny
Into his hand, and indiscreetly kindle
The fire already glowing in his breast.
He Will raise his thoughts to fancy certainties,
And hasten to maturity what yet
Is scarce (...) in the womb of his (...);
When he perceives the authors of our liberty
Commended to his care, and that by you
Who have been hitherto the (...) prop
And pillar of it. Why consider Mark
The very name of Caesar (...) encite him
Against those which (...) his Uncle.

Mar. Cease Good Quintus,
You (...) me too severely.

Enter Tyro. Tyro. My Good Lord,
The Centiner Cornelius, from the General
Octavius Caesar waits to speak with you.

Mar. He must be mildly handled.

Quint. As you please.

(...). Well, bring him in.

Exit Tyro. Enter again Tyro with (...). Corn. The General Octavius
Salutes your Lordship not by me alone
But by these Letters.
Delivers and Cic. reads. Sir I must entreat you
In name of the whole Army to repair
To the Senate.

Cic. Yes Cornelius I will,
And glad I am to hear the noble Caesar
Is in good health.

Corn. Farewell my Lord.

Cic. Farewell.

Exit Cornelius. Marc. Brother here is that I feared so much, there are
Four hundred Soldiers in the Armies name
Come to entreat for him the Consulship.
It Is Caesar's own device I fear, although
He makes it not his, but the Armies suit.
What Is your advice?

Quint. Why are you doubtful brother?
Never give your voice, lest what you have archiev'd
Against Antonius now degenerate
From the fair glory of a valiant mind,
To an opinion of slavish fear;
Nay worse, 'twill occasion to the world
To brand you with (...), and say
Your deeds have tended not to root out Tyranny,
But rather to obtain a milder Master.
You know the times; a Magistrate is made,
Do what he can, the common mark of slander;
The best State-pilots often are overwhelmed
With the foul sea of an opprobrious mouth;
Their Virtues branded with the name of Vice,
Their diligence of deceit; but to consent
To this Ambitious suit for Caesar, were
(...) expose your self to a deserved censure
And such a one would taint your worthiest actions.

Exeunt. (...) Tyro. Takes out a Table Book, and writes, Call. Sex. An. ab urb.
cond. D. CC. XX. Cornelius with other Centurions and Soldiers, to the number
of 400 came in the behalf of the whole army to Rome, to ask of the Senate the
Office of Consul for their General Octavius Caesar.


Now, as it is the custom of Histoxians,
Let me a little descant on this business.
There is a whispring rumor, that Octavius.
Slew Hirtius in the tumult of the battle,
And poisoned Pansa at Bononia,
By his (...) (...); now me thinks,
This sudden suit for the Consulship confirms,
At least makes more suspicious that report.
Nay more, I hear he is reconciled to Antony
Upon a sudden; this is something too.
I know not what will follow; but it is doubtful.
So, now I (...) not, if I go and read
Two or (...) pages of that liquid (...)
(...) to me by my Cosen (...).
Enter Senate, Cornelius and (...). Cornel. My Lords the Senators, we here are
come,
(...) ask for (...) our victorious General,
In the behalf and (...) of the (...) Army,
The Office of the Consul, and expect
Your present answers to our just request.
We hope (...) Age will be no greater bar
To him, (...) it has been before to others,
(...) (...) but yet a youth, and (...)
No more, when they were both created Consulls,
And yet the State (...) them of (...).
We might (...) the examples of great (...)
And Dolabella, but we hope it is needless.

Cent. (...) speaks the language of us all.

Cor. And the whole Army, Fathers, speaks in us.

(...). (...) is your counsel (...)?

1 Sen. Marcus Tullius
Our (...) at stake (...) my opinion.
And would be ruined should we grant the suit.

2 Sen. (...) palpable.

3 Sen. We must not give such (...)
To this (...) Youth.

4 Sen. I know not one
(...) all our Order will (...) unto it.

5 Sen. The Tribunes are against it.

Cic. (...) too?

5 Sen. I, he especially.

6 Sen. And I.

All. And All.

Cic. (...) him good Minutius.

Min. The Senators (...) all (...) the Army
To be a while contented with the honors
Already he (...) on your General,
The worth / Caesar, and the States (...).
When they shall judge it timely and convenient
He shall, I know it (...), have both (...),
And other dignities with a full hand.
While others rule, yet those that (...) obey
Are no (...) part of the Commonwealth then they.

Cor. (...) you may keep your sentences,
(...) they nor your fair language shall persuade us
To leave the prosecution of our suit.
(...) seems the Conscript Fathers are against it;
(...) this shall do it, if the Senate Will not.

(...) them the pommell of his sword. Minut. (...) traitrous (...) do (...)
threaten us?

Exeunt Cornel. and Cent. 1 Sen. (...) this?

(...) Sen. So boistrous? then I (...) a storm.

(...). A (...).

Min. (...) heavy (...)
Must we expect from Caesar's Consulship
Whose (...) thus check this sacred Order?

Exeunt. Enter Pomponia, Philologus. Pomp. What is the Senate yet broke up
Philologus?

Phil. Yes, newly Madam.

Pomp. Where Is my Husband Quintus?

Phil. Gone but to accompany my Lord your Brother
Home to his house, he will be with you straight,
For so he bad me tell you.

Pomp. It Is enough.
Exit (...) Why what a piece of idle Vanity,
Is Woman to be so inquisitive?
My ear now itches, till I hear the affairs
Debated in the Senate. -- I have read
A very pretty fiction now I think on it;
How the first mover, being, cause, or Nature,
Or Fate or Fortune, call him what you will,
When he first framed (...) fondling sex of Women
In his Promethean shop, did form the Heart,
The Mind, the Soul, or whatsoere you call
That inner Pilot of this (...) Clay,
Of strange and various matters, whence they did
Derive their as strange qualities and conditions:
A slut was formed of as foul a sow;
A subtle Huswife of a crafty fox;
A gluttonous and lazy Crone of earth;
A woman turning like a weathercock,
With the fond wind of cross and foolish (...),
Smiling and frowning oft-times in an hour,
As false as winter sunshine or a shower
In summer, was composed of the Ocean.
And so of all the rest, but she whose (...)
Tingle as mine with this inquisitive itch,
Had, as the Fable fancies, for her (...)
A dog; but yet me thinks I cannot find
My self in all this brood; for though I have
A fond desire to hear, yet say I little,
I bark not, mine is (...) harmless folly which
Is never like to change me to a bitch
As't did the Trojan (...).

Exit. Enter (...) and Fulvia. Pi. Come, Fulvia, cease these sorrows, for thy
husband
Has now shook off the chains that kept him down,
The frozen Alps have brought him to a Fortune
Which may weigh down the thought of past afflictions;
He Is fellow General with Lepidus,
Nay, he alone rules all, and Lepidus
Has but the naked name and title only;
And now they have repast the Alps together,
With seventeen (...), as I am informed,
Besides ten thousand Hors-men; nay Octavius
And he are now for ever reconciled;
Here Is that will add Authority to my (...).

Delivers a Letter. She reads. Fulv. Octavius is our own; confirmed, (...).
By a more natural tie then Friendship.

Piso. How!

Fulv. He must now call me (...) for the daughter
Of Fulvia is decreed his Spouse.

Piso. indeed!

Fulv. I, and Octavius too has past the Rubicon,
And is now (...) hither with (...).
So Cicero I think has lost his (...).
Now shall my Husband Antony, and I
Be for his stabbing jeers at length revenged.
Piso I thank you, all my cares are vanished.

Exit. Piso. This woman's now secure, but I (...) eyes
Which stay (...) at the Superficies,
But pierce to the center and the (...) of things.
I am afraid this friendship is (...),
And but to compass his own ends. He creeps
Into acquaintance with Autonius,
That by his aid I doubt himself may (...)
A good success to his Ambitious (...);
As first to seat himself (...) the Consulship,
Next to root out the (...) Chiefs
(...) (...) Cassius; but will this be all?
Will he sit still and on this height (...)
To six the pillar of his hopes? No, no,
Ambition cannot brook Plurality.
Only one Neptune in the Sea does (...),
One Jove in Heaven, and but one Dis in Hell:
Heaven, Hell, and raging Sea have each but one,
And He or Antony must rule alone.

Ex. Enter Salvius, Cicero. Salv. (...) good Cicero, (...) not (...) to you
Nor love unto Antonius that I did it,
But pure devotion to my Countries cause.

Cic. But my (...) hate of Antony
(I now confess it) blinded my discretion,
And carried me too (...)
Unto this dangerous planting of Octavius.

Salv. 'Twas that I feared, and therefore did withstand you.
You favored Caesar, and maintained his youth
In opposition of Antonius,
Lest Antony should get the upper hand;
I favored Antony, and opposed your counsels,
Lest Caesar should ascend too high a pitch;
Your aim was to beat down a reigning (...),
Mine to keep down springing Ambition;
Yours to oppress Antonius culminant,
Mine to suppress rising (...); both
Good in the intent, though in (...).

Cicer. Sure some superior power has ordered this,
And made us instruments of our own subversion;
But this afflicts me most, that these (...)
Should happen at a season so unfortunate,
When Brute and Cassius are so far remote,
Nor furnished neither to oppose such (...).

Enter Apuleius. You look, good Tribune, as if horror dwelt
Upon your brows; what tidings Apuleius?
Apul. My Lord Octavius is directly coming
To the City with an Army of (...) Legions;
Antonius too and Lepidus are come
With mighty forces into Italy
Only with this intent, to second Caesar;
The streets are filled with tumult and (...)
(...) run about not knowing what to do,
Others remove their (...) and (...)
Into out-villages, or stronger places
Within this City.

Salv. Heaven defend us, Cicero,
Alas we are undone.

Apul. The Senate, Sir,
Is now in consultation of some course
Whereon to pitch. Your presence is expected.

Cic. No doubt it is; but (...) absent my self,
The Conscript Fathers may themselves (...)
What Is best in this necessitating (...)
For their own safeties, I should say the States,
But there the choice is crossed; as for my self
Nothing can come amiss. I'v lived too long
To see this day. The Fathers foro't to (...)
(As now they must) to the ruin of their liberty:
O it is a corrosive to my soul to think on it.
Twere good you two would (...) and take your (...)

Both. We will, and that with speed; Farewell.

Cic. Farewell.

Ex Enter Senate. 1 Sen. We must be speedy Fathers. What Is counsels?

2 Sen. Twere best in my opinion to dispatch
A message to him to present him with
The Consulship.

3 Sen. I, that is the (...) way.

4 Sen. But the Armies fired for the late (...)
How shall we stay their (...)?

2 Sen. We Will decree
To the whole 8 (...) so much in
As we have promised to the two.

1 Sen. How say you?
Are you content?

Omnes. Content! we must of force.

1 Sen. See what the Tribunes say (...).

Sen. They consent,
Forced by the same (...) as we.

1 Sen. Come then, let us (...) the Legates.

Exeunt. Enter Cicero. (...). How will this royal City now become
A (...) of (...)! and (...) Senators
(...) a (...) prey to ravenous talous!
Will Caesar think himself secure, while men
So (...) addicted to the State survive?
No; Tyranny's suspicious, (...) unhead them,
Lest happily they should be get young (...). Enter (...).
(...) what news?

Salv. What news! why Caesar's Consul.
(...) are sent unto him with the offer.

(...). Heavenst what a tide of (...) must Rome expect,
(...) she must list the (...) to her own head?
(...) (...) were at home now! we would loose
(...) blood, before our liberty.
(...) happy you, which in the Mutine sield
(...) up your lives! you breath not with the rest,
To taint your (...) glories with black (...)
To your own (...) freedom; in soft peace
Rest your (...) souls. But (...) we,
(...) for one (...), now are plagued with three.

Enter Qu. Cicero. Quint. (...), the Africa Legions (...) arrived.

(...). (...) Quintus?

(...). (...) it is most certain.

(...). Nay, then we will not on such feeble terms.
(...) with our Countries freedom, Salvius come.

Exeunt. Enter (...). Senator. What have we done my Lords? given up our (...),
(...) the shedding of one drop of blood?
Twill grow (...) custom for Ambitious men
TO (...) the offices of State, if thus
The Consulship be made a prey to force;
Nay rather (...) oppose and bear the assault,
(...) Decimus or Plancus come and (...) us.
(...) fight till our life's (...) breath be spent,
(...) then (...) a gap for (...)
(...) before attempted with success.
(...) was, (...) was that (...) once in Rome,
When her brave Worthies would not stand aghast
At such a threatened storm as this, but (...)
The (...) hand of that (...) Jove
Durst (...) once to raise it. (...), what
Have we let (...) and rust (...) glorious edge
(...) that (...) or is it only
(...) imprisoned (...) the sheath? let us draw (...) out:
Nor fail (...) Country, but uphold (...) cause,
While we have hearts, and hands, like true-born Romans.

Enter (...). Cicer. Fathers you were too forward (...) dispatch
Of your Legation to Octavius.
You will repent it.

1 Sen. (...). Tullius, why?

Cic. The Africa Legions are arrived.

Sen. Arrived!
Then (...) the Messengers be called back.

Ex. Cic. Fathers, I need not urge how bright and glorious
Is zeal unto the common cause. I know
You prize it as the jewel of your lives,
And you do well; for it is a Music which
Will, like the note of the Caystrian bird,
Stick by you till (...) latest gasp; and then
Be your good Genius mounting to the skies
Your winged souls, where being stellifi'd
You shall with shining Optics see how weak
A nothing is, this molchill earth (...)
Poor Mortals toil so; there you shall behold
How feeble, how ridiculous a madness
Is fond Ambition. But I lose my self
In this divine and pleasing contemplation,
Come let us dispose our selves for opposition.

Senators. With all our Hearts. Heaven prosper the attempt.

Exeunt. Enter Caesar, Captains, Soldiers. Caes. How Is this? the Senate so
(...)? well.
Cornelius take some certain Horsemen with you,
Post to the City, and assure the people,
I come not with intent to raise a tumult,
But on fair (...) of peace; make have before,
And I will follow with all speed I can.

Exit. Enter Pomponia and Young Quintus. Pomp. So studious Quintus in such
times as these?

Quint. Yes, Madam, therefore cause the times are such
Though Caesar be a youth as well as I,
Yet he is one of deeper undertakings
Then can be sounded by such heads as mine;
Pray heaven they puzzle not the piercing judgments
Of our grave Senators.

Pomp. And it is my prayer,
But what is it you are reading?

Quint. It Is a book
My Uncle Marcus (...) me to peruse.

Pom. You cannot better spend your mornings (...)
Then after his praescriptions. Time's a (...).
`A day is like a costly ring of Gold,
`And morning is the Diamond of that ring
But tell me something which your book contains
Worthy our hearing.

Quint. Madam, the whole volume
Is like a gallery hung about with pictures
Of filial piety. Here on trembling shoulders
More famed then those of Hercules, which upheld
The heavenly orbs, one bears his aged father
Through midst of flames, and so conserves that being
Which was the Spring of his. Another bears
Her on his pious back who in her womb
Bare him. Here one sustains her mothers (...)
With the same food wherewith her own first breath
Was by that mother cherisht; these were (...)
In Natures heaven, and have now an (...)
Not to inhabit only but to rule.
Yet that which makes me most admire, is this,
That the mute son of (...) should unlose
The fetters tied by Nature to his tongue,
And cry, Kill not the King.

Pomp. To save our Parents
Is the first law and dictate Nature writes
In our hearts (...) Tables, therefore did she
Articulate the (...)
Of his chained tongue, lest by her fault that (...)
Should want its force and vigor in the (...).

Quint. Methinks I envy the example.

Pomp. What?
Would you your father should be so (...)
That you might save him?

Quint. No, not for a world.
But who knows what this age does travail with?

Pomp. True. But the (...) coheres (...) You,
The heavens be thanked for it, were not (...) dumb.

Quint. It Is a great benefit; but yet me thinks
I could incarcerate, as he freed his voice,
To save a father. I could (...) by bridling
As great a name, as he by giving reins
To stupid nature; such an act would come
Within the verge of praise, whereas his does not
Without the internalls.

Pomp. Go, you make me sad.
Exit Quintus. What Genius has informed my Quintus fancy,
That he still (...) on such examples?
Pray heaven my husband never prove an object
For him whereon to exercise this piety.

Exit. Enter M. Cicero. Still do I strive against the stream, and like
A silly (...) mount the enraged (...),
Which i I do not poise my actions well
Will carry me away. We thought the Gods
By their auspicious providence (...) sent
The Africa Legions to our (...); but
They are revolted from us, and their Captains
Taken to favor. Only one (...)
Scorning to beg life from this second Caesar
Haslike a second Cato slain himself.
And I would follow him, but that the good
And safety of my Country is my Remora.
I will for the present (...) Octavius favor,
It cannot be a stain to (...)
Since all have don't already but my self.
Enter Senators. Sen. Have you made peace with Caesar?

Cic. I have sued it
By mediation of his friends, and now
Wait to accost him, sure he is at hand.

Sen. He is indeed; Hark how the people shout.

Shout. Enter Caesar and others. Sen. Health to the worthy and victorious (...).

Caesar. Fathers I thank you.

Cicer. Hail to Noble Caesar.

Caes. My Honer'd Father (...)

Cic. It Is too high a Title
For M. Tullius Cicero.

Caes. Now you wrong me,
The Parent of my country must be mine.
But yet I must be bold to tell you Sir,
You have been something sparing of your (...);
You are the last of all my Noble friends
That come to welcome my return from Gaul.

Exeunt. A (...). Chorus.
O what awounding shout was this!
It Is even as banefull as the Mandrakes note,
The shricks of damned souls, the hiss
Of Scorpions, Adders, or the Sirens throat.
Let it be strangled, it is a sound
Will wake pale death from his Cimmerian Cell,
Twill rend a passage through the ground,
And bring the Furies from their Court of Hell:
The barbarous Thracians though they sing
Their dead unto their graves, would howl to see
So black, so venomous a sting
Enter the body of their State, as we.
For these are but Sardonian soniles
Which dance upon (...) brows; this fading mirth
Will prove an Embryon, and beguile's
When we shall find it still-borne at the birth.
O what a golden age w' enjoyed
Under the Reverend Saturnes of the State!
But now an upstart (...) unboyd,
Unto an age of iron gives new date.
What power this ruin on us slings?
Julius is turned his Genius, we fear,
And lent him Tityus Vultures wings
TO enhaunce the swistnesse of his proud careere
If such a little time as (...)
Full (...) Summers have a Consul bore
Of such a growth, so (...);
(...) we think alas of twenty more?
Others when (...) this sacred way
Of (...), they had travailed but so far,
Would (...) them down, and sagely say,
Death was (...) unto a Consular.
But this young Minion of (...) chance,
Like a skie-climbing Eagle still will tower
Until he shall himself advance
Unto a Sovereign Independent power.
Heavens! if it be your sacred pleasure
To put a period to our liberty,
O let the Scepter know some measure,
That being servile we may yet seem free.
Actus Quartus.
M. T. Cicero.

NOW we are past (...), lost sor ever.
Our new-made Consul, made indeed, but not
Elected, for Election is an Act
Of Will net Voice, of an internal (...),
Not outward sound; this Consul, whom our fears,
Not our Consents or Votes have (...),
(...) over us like a full and pregnant (...)
Ready to pour a tempest on our heads.
Our forced hands delivered him the Are
To punish State-maligners, but alas
He whets it for the necks of our preservers.
I, only I am blamed: (...) City;
They are not (...) honors which afflict us,
But his new-(...) friendship with Antonius,
Which was the only rock my best endeavors
Were ever pressed to avoid, lest the Republike
Should suffer (...) upon it. I thought the way
To keep him distant with Antonius,
Was to advance him to a requisite power
Of opposition: alas we but conjecture
And guess at the events of things; our knowledge
Cannot arrive to an infallible certainty
Of the success of matters; it is a (...)
Peculiar only to the Gods, and is
Derived to us, (...) mortals, not by nature,
But extraordinary participation.
Since therefore it is the unknown event alone,
(...) the (...) of my soul, which (...)
The seeming good appearing in my counsels,
Why am I made the mark of accusation?
But (...) the custom of the times, I will not
Deject my self for this; the innocence
Which I am armed with is enough to raise me
From such (...), but yet I Am (...)
For the (...) of my countries freedom,
For my Dear (...), and the Noble (...).
The other Consul Quintus Pedius
Has published a decree wherein they are (...)
With interdiction of Fire and Water.
Of Fire and Water! can they then constrain
The fountains of our eyes to cease their course?
Brutus shall have these waters, till we have wept
Their currents dry; and then our hearts shall send
Whole clouds of vapouring sighs to feed new showrs.
But as for fire, they want it not; their (...)
Cherish the flame of an unmoved real
Unto their countries liberty, which cannot
Be quenched but with their blood; this Caesar knows,
And therefore that he may with doubled power
Oppress the heroic bravery of their spirits,
Has reconciled Antonius and Lepidus,
Those two pernicious monsters with the Senate,
And now he is returned again toward Mutine,
No doubt to (...) with those two plagues, and there
Contrive the ruin of the Commonwealth.
For State- (...) think of naught but blood,
when they consult it is to devour the good.
Enter Q. Cicero. Quint. Brother, How do?

Mar. Think my beloved Quintus
I can be healthful when the State's (...)
Whereof I am a Member?

Quint. Alas it is true,
Too true; the Commonwealth's diseased indeed,
Sick (...) the heart, faints, can no longer stand,
Lies bedrid, and like sierce Procrustes guests
Must be distended or abbreviated
To the pleasure of her Lord the worst of thieves;
For Caesar, Antony, and (...),
Are met together not far off from Mutine,
And in an (...) round environed
With a small river, without any company,
Are as I hear consulting,

Marc. What a Hell
Will this poor City he, when such a (...),
Like Minos, AEacus, and (...),
Sit on the life and death of her best Statesmen?

Quint. It Is to be feared indeed they will play Sylla's.
But who can help it? if the Gods will (...)
Destruction on us, we must not complain,
For they are above us, and it were but vain,
For who can alter the decrees of fate?
Alas we are but mortal, and the State
Of this life's pilgrimage is full of woe,
Better die once delivered with one blow,
And in ones countries cause, then living (...)
Wounded with sight of bloody Tyranny.

Marc. Now Quintus speaks like his own virtueus self,
This language melts me into fire and air;
I am sublimed, and ready to take flight
In ecstasy from this unwieldy lump;
Come, let us retire into my garden; there
Proceed in this divine discourse, 'twill make
My soul disdain with Earthly mould (...)
And raise her thoughts to immortality.

Exeunt. Enter Casar Solus. How full of fare and horror is this morning?
She comes not tripping on the mountains (...),
But moves with drooping pace, and leaden heels,
Her eyelids are not rosy, nor her brow
Gilded with that sweet beauty it was wont;
What has she changed colors with her (...)?
Or is she sick, and so has bound her head,
In this black vail of clouds? Alas, alas,
It Is lest her eyes behold our blacker deeds.
My self, Antonius, and Lepidus
Have, like the three Saturnian brothers once,
Amongst us shared the Roman would, as if
It were our own inheritance, and now
We must complot a Tragedy; the (...)
Must be culled out; shall (...) then die?
Alas, how piety struggles in my breast.
This mouth, this tongue which now must speak his death;
Was wont to call him Father; shall I (...)
Become a Paricide? Suppose I do;
He that aspires to govern without check,
Must set his foot upon his fathers neck.
It is a maxim long since practiced
By Jove himself upon his father (...).
But words oblige not to a natural (...).
I did but call him Father; and if now
I yield consent unto his death, I do it
As he is Marcus Cicero, a stranger
To Casars blood. But Cato thought him (...)
The honored title of his Countries (...).
And shall (...) ruin so great worth?
Be still my melting (...): He must die,
And therefore 'cause he is his Countries parent,
He that is Caesar's friend must be a (...)
Unto his countries freedom, which he prizes
Above his life, and for this cause must lose it.
Shall he then die? Ambition says he must.
But piety forbids; but Piety
Must not be sided with Ambition.
It must be so. Antonius shall have Cicero,
Antonius then shall give me Lucius Caesar,
And Lepidus shall yield his brother Paulus.
Ambition thus must thought of pity smother
Even toward a Father, Uncle, or a Brother. Exit.
Enter Laureas. Heavens! What a dismal time is this? the dogs
As if they were transformed into wolves,
Gather together, and do naught but howl;
And wolves as if they were changed into dogs,
Have left the woods and traverse through the streets.
A Bull was heard send forth a humane voice,
An infant newly born to speak; A shower
Of stones descended from the troubled skies;
And in the air was heard the cries of men,
Clashing of armor, and a noise of Horses,
Shrill trumpets sounds; the statues of the Gods
Swet drops of blood, and some were touched from heaven,
Many of the Temples too are Thunder struck.
Enter Tyro. Tyro were ever known such Tragedies?
Tyro. Never was imminent calamity
Threatened to Rome, but 'twas thus ushered, Laureas.
I might allege the wretched fall of Crassus,
When such a purple flood of Roman gore
Discolored Lucans field.
But the not yet cured dire Pharsalian blow
Shall speak for all. Rome scarce ere knew a prodigy
Which was not praevious to that bloody day,
The Sun and Moon eclipst, (...) flames
Obliquely darted on the Italian shore,
The Vestall fire extinct, the Native gods
Weeping; State-changing comets, monstrous births,
The groans of Ghosts from out their troubled Vrnes,
With many more.

Laur. But the Hetruscian Soothsayers
Will descant better on these things then we.

Tyro. 'Slight thou say true, and now I think on it (...).
We Will try if we can search what they determine,
Sure they have done by this their immolations.

(...) Enter Senate and (...). Cicero. You the most Reverend of Hetruscian
Vates,
To whom is known the births and deaths of States,
You who by art unlock the Pole, to whom
Is made apparent fates (...) doom
By (...) deep (...), or by thunder,
A hairy star or some such boding wonder,
Inform us what the angry (...),
Threaten in these (...) prodigies,
But be not (...), nor shroud
Your Speeches in (...) dark mysterious cloud,
(...) did the Sibylls and the (...), hick Nun,
(...) your inspired Numbers evenly run
With obvious and unfolded sense, that so
We (...) conceive the essence of our (...).

The Ancientest of the (...).
Then fathers, (...) your dismal fate,
Your freedom shall be lost, your state
Converted to a Monarchy,
And all be slaves but only I
Sen. What means the Aged Prophet?

Stops his breath, and (...) down (...) d. Cicer. Fallen down?
(...) it some (...) ecstasy or death?
Second Soothsayer.
(...) brother from his clay is slowne,
And (...) your destiny with his own.
(...) happy he, (...) now is blessed
With a true (...) rest,
And shall not see the tide of (...)
Which on Survivers heads will (...).
The third.
Like our brothers Vital (...)
Who now lies before us dead,
Your twine of (...) is broke,
And (...) (...) expect the yoke.
The fourth.
What the (...) have made
A firm decree, and he has said,
No humane power can disanull,
It Is signed in your speaking bull.
The fifth.
When Romulus first founded Rome,
He (...) his Crown by Remus doom,
And built his Monarchy in blood;
Now shall return that antique power
Not (...) with a shower
Of that salt (...), but a sloud.

(...). Well, what the fates have (...), humane power
(...) of (...) to cancel; if I dye,
(As sure my (...) must help to make the (...))
I will dye willingly; (...) a noble death
Not to survive ones countries liberty:
If Gods might (...) of death, then would they die.

The Soothsayers over the dead corpse sing this Song.

1 Brother, 2 Brother, 3 Brother, 4 Brother.

1. Art thou dead?

2. Art thou fled?

3. Art thou gone,

4. All alone?

1. To the shades below,

2. To the desert cells,

3. Where glooing darkness (...),

4. And cloudy woe;

1. Where never was known;

2. A cheerful tone,

3. Where wretched Souls

4. Like Stygian owls,

Together.
Have no joy of one another?
1 Brother, 2 Brother, 3 Brother, 4 Brother.

1. Thou art dead;

2. Thou art fled,

3. Thou art gone

4. All alone,

1. To the groves below,

2. Where sacred Quires

3. Inspired with holy fires

4. In triumph go,

1. Where songs of mirth

2. Are caroll'd forth,

3. Where blessed Souls,

4. In Nectar bowls,
Together.
Drink and solace one another.
Exeunt with the (...). Enter Cicero reading. O Vitam vere vitalem! sed beatam
etiam mortem (...) be atissimam vitam aditum (...)

Most true, for did we like savage beasts
Returning to a former (...) being,
No one part of us free from dissolution,
Death were a plague, and did not harbor in it
The sweetness which they talk of; for I think
To be, is better, though in restless troubles,
Then not to be at all; twere senseless, impious
To say the power that is (...) of Nature,
Infused into us such a love of Union
In this compounded frame; without some blessing
In the continuance; but a (...) cessation,
A sinking into nothing, though it pains (...),
Yet it is no blessing, nor can properly
Be said to take our cares and sorrows from us,
Or us from them, but rather and more truly
Us from our selves. I cannot think the Gods
Were so unkind, so sparing of their blessings,
Or feebly stored, as to bestow a Nothing
On the two pious sons of Argia,
On Agamedes and Trophonius;
For, pray, what goodness can be coucht in that
Which cancells being, that is one with goodness?
But do we live then? can I think the soul
Survives, when in an urnes forgetful chest
The mournful treasure of our Ashes (...)?
See how my panting struggling soul contends
To harbor the belief! Alas, me thinks
It Is no small argument to ground our hopes on,
To see how sweetly good men entertain
The weakest motion for a future life;
To see them, how even shaking hands with death,
They are more sprightly and repleat with vigor,
Yea oftentimes oraculous, as if
Something lay cag'd within that was not mortal,
But were new rapt with joy of better state,
And even then seizing on Divinity,
When wicked men are full of (...)
Tortured with furies, which their consciences
Present them in the ugliest shapes: is it fancy?
Or is it a fear their sullyed names will stink
In the nostrills of posterity? it is neither.
For if the first; why then are not the good
Subject to the same commotions, whose diseases
And bodily distempers are the same?
But if the second; then might they be free
To whose enormous actions darkness (...)
And secret Angels have been conscious;
Therefore by this it seems that (...) (...),
Ixions wheel, and the Tantalian fruits
Are not mere bug-bears; but some mystic Emblemes
Of the succeeding pains of guilty souls.
Thus have I argued, yea and (...) satisfied
My own weak reason. Yet our great Philosophers
In the discussing of this weighty matter,
Fare much like naked men in stony fields,
They can with ease beat down another reasons,
But cannot save their own, alas, from falling;
They can offend a wise (...)
Weaken his grounds, but not defend themselves.
Whither, alas, shall our endeavors (...),
When we are (...) in knowledge of our end?

Enter Laureas. Laur. My Lord, there is one without would speak with you
From the Triumvirs.

Cic. The Triumvirs (...)?

Laur. Yes, so he says.

Cic. O from Antonius,
Caesar and (...). Send for Quint. to me,
For Salvius, Otho, Publius (...),
And other of my friends, you know.

Lau. I fly.

Cic. But charge none enter till they heat from me.
From the Triumvirs? have they then (...)
Ex. (...). A new-coyn'd office? what will now become
Of those that have the old ones? what I why have
Their Reverend heads struck off like Tarquins poppie.

Enter Quintur Cicero. (...) Brother, how is it you are here so soon,
Since it is but now I sent to entreat your company?

Quint. A Brother should not stay till he be sent for,
When he suspects his presence will be useful;
I had some doubtful notice of this messenger
Which now within waits for admittance.

Mar. Quintus,
How I am blessed in such a careful brother!
Thus when the Argive King was vexed with doubts,
And called a council of the Grecian Peers,
Only his brother (...) came
Of his own free accord.

Quint. It should be so,
Why had we else one father, why one mother,
If not to live like brothers?

Mar. True, good Quintus,
I could even weep to see this piety
Flow so divinely from thee, now if ever
Our states require our mutual aids and counsels.
But what do think this messenger may bring?

Quint. No good I warrant you, perhaps our deaths
Can we expect from those three Roman (...)
A milder sentence?

Mar. Why, I will embrace it.
Father and Ruler of the lofty sky,
What way thou please lead, and grant that I
May follow with no sad or grieved blood,
Nor like an ill man bear what fits a good.

Enter Salvius, Apuleius, and other friends of Cicero. Mar. Friends, you are
welcome. You shall hear anon
Why you were sent for. Now call in the Messenger.

Enter Messenger. Mess. I (...):, Sir, say Health unto your Lordship,
Until your self confirm it, which you may
As will appear by this,
(Delivers a Letter.) Nay good my Lord,
Give these the hearing of it, for the affair
May crave their judgments.

Mar. Then you know it.

Mess. Partly.

Mar. Read you it (...).

(...). No, my mouth shall never
Speak my own Brothers sentence,

Marc. This is fond,

Quint. Pray heaven it prove so.

Marc. Will you read it Salvius?

Salv. You must excuse me Cicero.

Cic. Say you so?
Then Apuleius you must be the Man.

Apul. Sir, by no means, if your own brother dare not;
Pray pardon me.

Cic. Indeed! then read it you.

1 Friend. No: I my Lord, 2 Nor I, 3 Nor I, 4 Nor I.

Marc. Then Marcus Tullius sit thee down and read,
No doubt, thine own proscription.

Omnes. Heavens defend!

( Cic. Reads.) M. Antonius Imperater, Augur, Triumvir, to M. Tullius Cicero,
Consular, Greeting.

(...) the Triumviri M. Antonius, M. Lepidus, and Octavius (...) (Ventidius
being chosen Consul in his room


Mar. Ventidius Consul in Octavius room,
And he Triumvir? this afflicts my soul.

(Reads.) are for the space of five whole years appointed with full and
absolute authoriy for the re-establishment of the Commonwealth; and you Cicero
are now in my hands; yet have I so mitigated my just conceived indignation
toward you, that if you will but (...) your Orations which you call your
Philippicks, compiled only out of malice and rancour against me, you shall
live; otherwise --

Yours, if perverseness make you not your own foe.


Mar. You shall be soon informed which way I am resolved to take.

Mess. I Will wait your Lordships pleasure.

Exit. Mar. Friends, here you see the slender twine whereon
My aged life depends.

Salv. Too true my Lord.

Marc. Your counsel brother.

Quint. Mine is resolute.

Marc. The better, let me hear it.

Quin. This it is; --
Defy him.

Salv. Hold, I hope you will not, Quint.
Be your own brothers heads-man, that but now
Could not be won so much as read the Letter,
Lest you should speak his sentence.

Apul. Good my Lord,
Preserve your self for better times; the State
Will lose its soul, when it is deprived of you.

Salv. Twill be a breathless trunk, a livelesse carcass,
When you are gone; which were the only blood
And Sinews of her liberty.

1 Friend. Alas!
We shall be preyed upon by ravenous Vultures,
And those insulting Eagles of Ambition.

2 Friend. Think but of this when (...) arise,
Where shall we find new Cicero's to oppose them?

3 Friend. Where shall oppressed and wronged Citizens
Find upright Patrons, that will stick to justice,
Not fearing to incur a great ones frown?
They may as soon climb up to heaven, and bring
Astraea down again; unhappy Rome!

Quint. I do confess good friends the commonwealth
Will miss a Cicero; and that my brother,
If we respect the wishes of the people,
And wan^t of the Republic, has not yet
Lived half of half his time; but if we cast
A backward eye upon his glorious actions,
Has lived a goodly age, and cannot now
Die immaturely. Look upon the state
Of present things, the downfall of our liberty,
(And heaven knows what calamities will follow)
I think you cannot be so much his foe,
As not to say, he has now lived too long.

Apul. Ah! but the public good's to be preferred
Before respects of private consequence.

Quint. But Publius, the State is now so wounded
That there is no hope of cure, and therefore may
Our old Physicians safely give it over;
Were he an AEsculapius that could put
New life into a State, as once that son
Of Paean did to Virbius; I should then
Blaspheme Great Jove himself, should he but aim
His triforke flames against him; but for one
Now sinking of himself into his grave,
And such a one as Cicero, in these times,
When such men's ages are but vain, what sepulcher
Can be more fit, more glorious then the same
Wherein his countries freedom lies enclosed?
If he now die, he shall be buried
With the renowned Pompeys, son and father;
With Catulus, Petreius, and Afranius,
Yea with Antonius that brave man, unworthy
His noble stock should bear so foul a branch.
But if he live, with whom I pray wilt be
But Capho's, Saxa's, and Ventidii?
Therefore good brother, (I confess my eyes
Do swim with tears, yet shall my words proceed
From a courageous mind) be still thy self;
To the huge volume of Antonius faults
Add one crime more, even Cicero's death; 'twill stick
Upon his name with a more lasting blot
Then the most heinous of his other (...).
For should his future deeds pronounce him (...)
To the great Alexander or (...) son,
From whom he (...) his vain pedigree;
Should after ages wonder at his Acts,
And say, why this, and this, and this he did,
Built such a City, conquered such a Country,
Thus and thus many times (...), with Kings
And Queens to follow his victorious chariot;
Yet, for a period to each glorious sentence,
Some honest stander by will sighing say
But he killed Cicero; (...) shall still
Much like (...) Vulture rend and (...)
The very heart and liver of his name,
Let Antony proscribe thee, let him Marcus,
Why, he can do it but once, and that is some comfort;
But thou shall proscribe him unto eternity;
It is not thy proscription he (...)
But closely (...) a pardon for his own.
Believe me (...), it is the (...) part
Which can be given, or taken from thee; that,
That Is the true Cicero which Antonius knows
Cannot be proscribed (...) by Cicero.
If Antony deceive, and break his faith,
(As faith is (...) me found in such as he)
Then thou must die. Suppose he (...) perform (...)
Then must you live a vassal to his (...);
Now which is to be (...), death or fervitude,
I leave it to your self, and your own judgment.
Yet my beloved Brother, by our Loves,
By thy now well-spent three and sixty years,
By thy renowned (...), the sacred
And (if thou (...)) the everlasting memory
Of thy admired Eloquence, by these
And all that is dear unto thee, I adjure thee
Die not confessing that thou would not die.

Mar. Friends, I am bound unto your (...), and thank you
That not affection only, which were fond,
But the Republics good, has been the (...)
Of your persuasions. Well; I promise you
I will do nothing unbeseeming Cicero.
Frame your hopes complement by this. I shall
Dispatch the messenger my self.

Salv. Good Cicero
Remember us and Rome.

Apul. We were not born
(It Is your own saying) for our selves alone,
Our Country claims a (...).

Cic. Farewell, farewell,
Farewell my Friends; but (...), let me have
Your company.

Quint. You shall.

Apul. Nay then I fear.

Exeunt Mar. Come Brother Quintus, (...) have bravely argued;
Why weep'st (...)

Quint. Do you then approve my (...)
I will unsay it.

Mar. Nay, thou shall not, can not.
Come, come, let us in, thy self shall only hear
How I will send defiance to (...).

Exeunt. Enter Laurcas and (...). Laur. What (...) thou Tyro that my Lord admits
None but his brother Quintus to the delivery
Of his reply?

Tyr. I cannot guess the reason.

Laur. Me thinks he should not bar their longing ears
The hearing, if he does intend acceptance
Of the Triumvirs proffer. But I fear
He does not prize his life at such a (...).

(...). (...), life is precious.

Laur. But honor more;
`And what is life?

Tyro. It Is Natures gift. (...). A poor
`And worthless jewel fastened by a hair
`To the ear of vanity.

Tyro. It is the fair
`And sprightly shine of this compendious world.

`Laur. And from what (...) is that luster hurld.

`Tyro. The soul. La. A short lived day, a twilight sun,
`Whose fading beauties cease when scarce begun.
`But honor is a day, that knows no night,
`And ever triumphs in immortal light.
I think Antonius might have done more wisely,
And might have sooner compast his (...),
If he had only sent him life, without
The intimation of those harsh conditions;
For so he could not in my slender judgment,
(...) such applausive terms have contradicted
The proffered benefit of his life, and then
I am persuaded fully that my Lord
Would never have let posterity have known
His hate to Antony, from whom he should
Have daign'd the acceptance of a slavish breath.

Tyro. Come, prethy leave, I shall despair (...),

Exeunt. Enter M. Cicero solus. Now I have sealed my fate, I must expect
The second message for my head. I must?
What, may not man unlock this Cabinet,
And free the heavenly jewel of his soul?
A wise man stays not Natures period, but
If things occur, which trouble his (...),
Emits himself, departing out of life
As from a stage or Theater, nor passes
Whether he take or make his dissolution;
Whether he do it in sickness or in health.
It Is base to live, but brave to die by stealth,
This is the daring Stoics glorious language
I was (...) self too of the opinion once;
But now I find it impious and unmanly.
For as some pictures drawn with slender lines,
Deceiving almost our (...) eyes,
Affect us much, and with their subtilties
Woo us to gaze upon them, but are found
By skillful and judicious eyes to (...)
In symmetry of parts, and due proportion;
Even so the Stoics (...) are carved
With seeming curiousness, almost forcing judgment,
And carry with them an applausive show
Of undenial (...) verity, (...) well scanned
They are more like the dreams of idle brains,
Then the grave dictates of Philosophers:
The wise (...) was opinion'd (...),
For most divinely he forbids us leave
The corpse due guard without our Captains license.
And to speak true, we are but Vsufructuaries,
The God that governs in us is (...).
A Prisoner breaking from his (...) or hold;
If he be (...), (...) his (...);
If innocent, (...) even that innocence
Which might perhaps have brought him clearly (...).
It Is so with us; our Magistrate, I mean
The power that is sovereign of this natural frame,
Has sent us ( Plato says from heavenly mansions)
Into this (...) prison; here we live,
And must not free our (...), but patiently
Expect our summons from that sacred power
By his (...) Death. For otherwise
We become guilty of a greater sin
Then Parricide it self, no bond of Nature
Being so (...), as of one to himself.
The Graecians knew this, when they judged the body
Of Ajax who had slain himself, unworthy
The common rites of burial. Careful Nature
(...) fenced our hearts about with certain bones;
(...) like swords; and shall we break the guard?
(...), rather (...) us wait the will of the heavens,
And, when we hence are warned by their Ordinance,
(...) us (...) with glad and joyful hearts,
And think (...) selves delivered from a gaol,
Eased of gives and fetters, that we may
Remove unto our own (...) dwelling;
For, without doubt, that power that gave us being,
Did not (...) and foster us for this,
That having suffered on this stage of life
Thousand (...), (...) calamities,
Quotidian (...), and all in Virtues cause,
We should for guerdon fall into the gulf
Of an (...) death, and non-subsistence.
(...), rather let us cherish this belief
That there is another haven provided for us,
(...) blessed (...) for our longing souls.
Armed with a (...) of this,
Like (...) I will (...) my death,
And with the (...) spirit resign my breath.
Enter Quintus. Marc. (...) now? (...). O (...), there is no remedy
(...) die we must, or save our selves by slight.

(...). Why, if the (...) have so determined,
Welcome the easer of (...) woes, (...) Death.
(...) what is the matter Quintus?

(...) The (...)
(...) posting with a threatening speed to Rome;
They come like thunder, and are bringing with them
A bloody tempest.

Marc. Who can help it brother?
Yet we will incline the times malignity;
The heavens must not be tempted; we are to keep
This (...) of our lives safe from invasion;
Why did they else entrust us with it? now
That cannot be without the use of means;
We must not look to escape the jaws of Scylla,
When by our own improvident carelessness,
We are (...) already. He that thinks
Surrounded with his enemies to escape
(As Homer fables in the Trojan war)
Inveloped with a cloud, may be deceived.
No Quintus, we will fly, or, if that word
Be, as the Stoics prattle, not beseeming
A prudent man, we will give way to the times,
We will depart.

Qu. But whither?

Marc. Whither, Quintus,
But into Macedon to my dearest Brutus?
Prethy see all things suddenly prepared;
We Will first unto my house at Tusculum;
Thence to Astyra, so to Macedon.

Exit. Qu. Marc. I have a heart dares meet a thousand deaths,
But yet my soul is grieved to see these days.
Are all my labors come to this? my watchings?
My cares and services for the public good?
The dangers which I daily have incurred
By opposition of new-springing Tyranny?
Are (...), all my endeavors come to this,
That they now seem to have precipitated
This ruin on us, rather then withstood (...)
Unhappy Rome! the Deities decreed
This downfall of thy liberty; for never
Could all our labors have been so pernicious,
Unless there had a greater power disposed them
To this sad end; which was the sole (...),
Whence we directed thy now shipwrackt (...).
This sinks me in a (...) of grief, thy Senators
Shall die like Victimes, Russians be the Priests;
And thou the Altar, in their wretched entrails
A dismal horrid augury shall be written,
Even thy eternal bondage to oppression.

Enter Quint. Pomponia. Quint. jun. muta persona. Marc. Are all things ready?

Quint. Yes, or will be straight,
But the Triumvirs are not with such have
Posting to the City, as I was informed,
Yet there are certain (...) they say
Coming as Harbingers.

Marc. Believe me Quintus,
We have the greater reason to be packing;
These are the lightning previous to that thunder,
Whereof you spoke before. And lightning strikes not
The humble cottage, but the (...) edifice.
I see the loved objects which imprint
Those characters of sadness in thy visage.
Grieve not Pomponia, Thou (...) happy, Sister,
Thou may remain in thine own native (...)
No Antony thirsts for thy blood, thou may
In peace adore the deities of thy country,
Yea and the Lares of thy private house;
When such as we, must leave our ancient (...),
Yea and our Country to a heavier woe.

Pomp. And that it is grieves me brother; what (...),
What pleasure can I take in any thing,
When my beloved Quintus is departed?
My life will not be vital. O my Quintus.
Soul of my soul.

Quin. Pomponia, do not weep,
Tears are an ill presage to such a journey.

Enter Laureas, Tyro, Philologus. Marc. What (...) the Litters ready?

Laur. (...) my Lord.

Quint. My life Pomponia, now farewell.

Pomp. Nay husband,
I Will see your setting forth, I will enjoy
As long as possibly I may thy sight,
Heaven knows if ever I shall see you more.

Marc. Nay Sister, now your grief is too (...).

Pomp. It cannot brother.

Marc. Yes, for though you (...),
Thy loving spouse shall leave behind his (...)

Exeunt omnes. Chorus.
WHere is that ancient beauty, Rome,
Was (...) to shine
About thy head? (...) are become
Those rays divine?
Survey thy Fortunes, stupid City,
Look, look and know
Thyselfe turned monument of (...),
A map of woe.
(...) thou art deaf; well vaunting (...)
And tell't about,
It was thy once renowned hand
Thrust Tarquin out;
Proclaim it, Citizens, that you
Did Melius quell
That Cassius and Manlius too,
Your Victimes fell.
Boast this, and more, do, but withal
With horror say,
You did it only to install
Worse plagues then they,
That you one viper of the State
Have changed for (...);
And for a worse Triumvirate
A Monarchy.
Alas, Alas, where shall we shroud
Our wretched heads?
For this threatening pendulous cloud
Wide ruin spreads.
Our ship upon a rock is cast,
Our sail yards (...),
The Northwind has (...) down our Mast,
Our sheets are torn;
Our (...) too (alas!) are lost,
Oars have we none,
And that which grieves and cuts (...) most,
Our Pilot's gone.
What helps, weak Vessel, on this shelfe
Thy birth divine?
In vain, in vain, thou (...) thyselfe,
A Pontick Pine;
In vain thou invocat'st thy two
Tyndarian Gods,
They aret' anticipate such (...)
Too weak by ods.
Then since poor (...), (...) we must
Our selves compose
To bear each rigid storm, each gust,
Each wave that flows;
O let us pray, this dangerous (...)
Do not become
A dead sea, or a sea of blood,
And its own Tomb.
Actus Quintus.
Enter Salvius and others. Salv. Friends, you are welcome, why so sad, I pray?
Those looks be fit not feasts; invest your (...)
In the glad livery of smiles; be merry;
(...) is the only essence of a feast.
But ah, how ill does this dissembled (...)
Suit with my (...), or the times? I have
Invited you this night unto a supper,
The last, for ought I know, that I shall (...)
In your (...) companies. It Is true;
The Tribuneship was ever till this day
(...) holy and of (...) power;
But from those men which (...) new (...),
What must the old expect but foul misprision?
(...) Jove (...) come down from his Olympus,
(...) shadowing his (...) with a veil,
But in's most God-like majesty, I think
For one Lycaon, he might now find three,
And such that would with more unheard of savagenesse
(...) his (...); not with some poor infant,
But even their Mothers flesh, I mean (...) countries,
And stead of (...) give him blood to drink;
You know how fraught (...) zeal unto the cause
Of the Republic, I have now (...)
And quit that (...) of villainous Rebellion
Ant (...) party, and have (...) to Cicero,
The (...) (...) (...) was ever blessed with;
And can I hope to meet with (...)
Then those who is only (...) apparition
Has made him timely seek another (...)?
Which from my soul I wish he may obtain;
Nay rather if that good (...) a shower,
I must expect a tempest; for our nature
(...) more in placably a declined friend
Then (...) foe. Since therefore Antony
And his two (...) plagues are now approaching,
(...) there are Centiners arrived already,
Their fatal (...), perhaps, to extinguish
Those careful eyes, whose restless vigilance
Has been employed in service of the State,
(As sure they come to some such bloody end)
Let me enjoy you with the same solemnity
As parting friends take leave of one another.
Yet (...) so nething of the (...) mirth
(...) your (...); let us laugh away our sorrow,
We may (...) with (...) sup to morrow.

Exeunt. Enter Centurion, Soldiers. Centurion. Come Soldiers, Salvius Otho, as
I hear,
Is frolic with his neighbors at a feast,
We Will spoil their second course. You know the price
Whereat the heads are rated by the Triumvirs.
Come follow me.

Exeunt. A Table discovered. Salvius and his friends. To them the Centurion.
Centur. Nay stir not, (...), be still, and keep your places,
Lest your own folly make your selves copartners
In this man's fall, which must be sudden. -- Tribune.

Pulls. Salvius (...) the Table by the hairs of the (...). A Curtain drawn.
Enter Centurion with Salvius head. Cent. Now for Minutius.

Exeunt. Enter Minutius disguised. Minut. Nay leave me (...), I am still
Minutius
Although disguised, and if you longer stay
Those very ensigns of my Praetorship
Will soon betray me, and perhaps the Axe
Which you there carry may strike off my head.

Exit. Lictores. Alas, alas, but lest our too much (...)
Prove our own Lords destruction, let us be gone.

Exeunt. Enten Centurion, Soldiers. Cent. He cannot be escaped far, that is
certain.
What should the Lictors else do here? go search.
Yet M. Tullius, with whose execution
Exeunt milites. We were most strictly charged, is (...),
With Quintus (...). But the Colonel
Popilius (...), and Herennius
I hope will overtake them.

Sold. Here Is the head
Of that tall Poppy.

Enter Soldiers with Minutius head. Centu. Why, it is bravely done.
Come, there are more such Cedars to be (...).

Exeunt. Enter Quintus Cicero. Quint. They say the golden and the silver age
Was then, when frugall mankind was content
With those displayed riches, which the earth
Invests her self with, and her concealed entrails
Were not rent up in quarries deep as hell,
For those pernicious world-disturbing metals;
But sure this is the age of gold and silver,
When those two precious perils, are the poles
And hinges of the world, whereon it moves;
I might perhaps with my beloved (...)
Have been secure and safe, whereas being forced
For lack of (...) to return, each step
I take, is ready to surrender me
Into the hands of death.

Enter Quintus (...). Quint. jun. O Father, Father,
Your treacherous Servants have betrayed you, come
For heavens sake, come, death, death is at your heels.

Exeunt. Enter Centurion, Soldiere. Cent. Bring his son hither, though you sind
not him.
(...) Sold. (...) returned! I wonder where is his brother.

Enter Soldiers with Quintus jun. Sold. Himself we cannot find, but here is
young Quin.

Cent. Come yongster, where is your father quickly tell me.

Quint. jun. O that I knew, my ever honored Sire,
The place of thy abode, alas; or whether
Thou art yet living, or have now breathed forth
Thy sacred spirit! for a thousand pains,
My breast all gored with (...), hands cut with chains,
Famine, or sword, or all should never move
Me make a rupture in my (...) love.

Cent. Cease this dissembling language, and reveal him.
Or by the Heavens thou die.

Quint. jun. No, villainous centurion (...) life,
If I knew where my reverend father were,
That would (...) it soonest. It Is my wish
I may soon quit this life.

Cent. With stipes, with wounds,
With torments worse then death; impetuous pains
Shall rend thy secrets from thy stubborn breast.

Qu. jun. (...) these are nothing, threat more and (...),
Expose me to the ravenous Lions paw;
(...) me into some common (...), or Dungeon,
Wind off my flesh with (...), do and (...)
Young Vultures with the hits before my (...);
Yet had I hid my father, as you deem,
I never would (...) so dear, so sacred,
So glorious a treasure.

Cent. Take him thenee,
And torture this fond elfe till he confess.

Quint. sen. Above.

Exeunt Soldiers with Quintus jun. Quint. sen. O what a virtuous son have I,
was ever
Such piety in so few years? he dares
The extremest of their tortures, with a spirit
Constant as Virtue's self. See how they wrack him!
My melting bowels yern within me; oh!
Each stripe they give him cuts my very soul.
See, see, they are even weary of tormenting,
And yet the youth still firm. O Piety!

Enter Soldiers with young Qu. as from (...). Cent. What? where is his father?
has he yet confessed?

Quint. jun. Confessed Centurion! no I will not, cannot,
I am not Juno's Iris, that my eyes
Should reach from hence to Macedon.

Cent. To Macedon?
Why his own servants say he is returned.

Q. (...). Such slaves as they that would betray their master,
If he were in their clutches; may not they
Cheat thee as well?

Cent. It Is folly to (...),
What force shall soon unbosome: speak,
Where is he?

Qu. ju. What Is that to thee? I dare the worst, Centurion,
Thy malice can inflict.

Cen. Nay then I see
I must my self chastise you; come ye weesell.

Enter Quint. sen. Qu. sen. Nay hold Centurion, here I am before you,
(...) the father whom you seek for.

Qui. ju. Ah,
What mean you father, that you thrust your self
Into the jaws of certain fate? I could
Have spit desiance in the face of cruelty.
Though she had harbored in her friendlike looks
A thousand deaths.

Quint. sen. Indeed I do believe it,
And let me kiss thee for thy piety;
But old unfruitful stocks must be cut down,
When their decaying, and now saplesse heads
Keep off the quickening sun-beans from the young
And hopeful tenderlings which they overtop.
Suppose, my son, I had still lived, and thou
Been made a prey to their relentlesse rage,
I should have died too: for my (...) loins
Are dry and barren; but in thee my son
I shall survive my self.

Cent. Ha, ha, ha!

Qu. sen. I hope you do not mock at my calamity.

Cent. Survive in him? I, so you shall, and both
Be ferryed over the Stygian lake together.

Qu. sen. What! must my son then die? what has he done, Alas?

Cent. (...) crime enough to have a life.

Qu. sen. Then kill me first, for sure I shall anticipate
Your bloody hands, if I but see him slain.

Q. jun. Nay on my knees with suppliant (...) I beg
I may die first, it is a boon I shall
Prize even above my life.

Cent. We Will soon decide you controversy, you shall die together.

(Both slain.) (...). Take (...) the bodies and unhead them quickly.

Exeunt. Enter Popilius Lenas with Marcus Tullius Cicero's head and hands. A
princely gift, by Jove; Popilius Laenas,
Thou have now played the royal butcher, on;
And let Antonius bless his longing eyes
With sight of such a welcome present. Ha!
Is this that Cicero's head that thundered so
In our Tribunalls? Ha! is this that mouth
Was wont to spit such lightning? or are those,
Those hands which whilome thumpt our Rostra so?
I, even the self same head, and mouth, and hands.
Then Antony triumph, thy foe is dead,
The trophies of his fall, these hands, this head.
Exit. Enter Pomponia, Laureas, Tyro. Laur. Dire, horrid, bitter fates! did
Rome ere see
A cruelty of such a high degree?
Whose griefs shall I first publish? thine,
Unhappy Widow? or the states? or mine?
Thine that have lost so excellent a brother?
The States, that cannot now produce another,
So reverend a Patriot? or mine own,
That have now lost so good a Lord? I groan
Under the burden of my loss, nor can
Summon the (...) character of Man
Into my wounded breast.

Pomp. Come, Laureas, come,
Expoand the series of his death; my heart
Is turned adamant, I cannot weep,
Stupidity has seized me, and me thinks
I feel a kind of pleasure in the story
Of woes complete and perfect, I am even
Transformed to a statue: Small griefs mourn,
But great ones, such as mine, much like the head
Of the deformed Gorgon, turn to stone,
And make us our own sepulchers.

(...). Good Tyro,
Tell thou the Tragic story, for my voice
Is strangled by a throng of struggling sighs,
Crouding from out my wounded breast.

Tyro. Then thus.
Departing hence we went to Tusculum,
Where hearing of these Outlawries and proscriptions,
They suddenly determined for Astyra.
So we conveyed them both into two Litters
Weak as they were alas; but on the way
Your husband calling to his sad remembrance
That at his fatal setting forth he took
But little money with him, and his brother
My Lord had scarce sufficient for himself;
He thought it best in such an urgent straight,
His brother should hold on, while he himself
Returned home to furnish him with necessaries,
And so to have and overtake him; this
They both agreed upon, and so embracing
Tears trickling down their cheeks, they took their leaves
Of one another.

Laur. Thus departing souls
Do bid adue unto their fading mansions,
For never nature strove so much, as when
This honored pair sigh't forth their last farewells.
It Was a sad Omen that they never should meet.

Tyro. My Lord being come at length unto Astyra,
Found a ship ready and imbarqu'd immediately,
And with a fair and prosperous gale of wind
Sailed along the coast unto Mount Circe,
And there he landed; but on other thoughts
He went aboard again, for 'twas his mind
To be conveyed by sea unto his farm
Which is by Capua; but before we landed,
Bowing securely by the pleasant shore,
Our linnens swelling with the Etesian gales,
Which in the Summer season fan that tract,
A shole of Crows came waving through the air,
As we conjectured from a little Temple
Standing upon the shore, and dedicated
To God Apollo; these most strangely crying
Lighted upon our Saleyards, with their bills
Pulling the cords, which made our heavy hearts
Presage some sinister and dismal luck
Then imminent, yet being come a land,
We brought him to his house, where he reposed
Himself a while, to see if he could sleep.

Laur. Unhappy sleep! for straight this drouzy brother,
Was seconded by his pale sister Death.

Tyro. But lo, the former shole with louder cries
Came hither also, beating against the windows,
Till some of them got in, and never ceased.
Till with their bills they had plucked off at length
The clothes wherewith his face was covered.
We, seeing this, were angry with our selves
As too too negligent of our Masters safety,
Saying we were more vile then savage creatures,
Should we still tarry in that fatal place,
And see perhaps our Lord, before our eyes
Cruelly butchered, wherefore with all speed
Partly by force, and partly by entreaty,
We carry him again unto his Litter
And so in have departed toward the sea;
But being come into a shady wood
Which the Sun never pierces with his beams
To glad the widowed earth.

Laur. A place decreed
By fate, I think, for such a villainy;
For should the Sun have seen so foul an act,
(...) would have turned retrograde, and hid
His visage from such cruelty.

Tyro. Well here,
In this same gloomy canopy of horror,
Popilius Lanas overtook the Litter.

Pomp. Who, he whose cause my brother Marcus one e
Pleaded before the Judges, when he was
Accused for his fathers death?

Tyro. The same.
We stood prepared to spend our dearest blood,
Before we would have seen our Master (...);
But ah! my Lord commands us not to stir,
And to speak truth, it was in vain, fot (...)
Had armed Soldiers with him, and was followed
By other Centiners. Then, O then my Lord
Thrust out his aged head from forth the Litter,
And taking, as his manner was, his beard
In his left hand, and looking manfully
His Headsman in the face, he stoutly faid,
Come Soldier, come, strike off this head of mine.

Laur. We stood like statues with our trembling hands
Before our wretched eyes, for 'twould have struck
A Tiger with remorse to have beheld him.

Tyro. Then (...) with a thrice repeated stroke
Hackt off his head; there was scarce blood enough
Fell from those aged veins to stain the sword,
And prove it conscious of so foul a murder.

Laur. Thus was divided from his breathless trunk
That sacrary of Learning, where the Graces,
Graces that never had a Cytherea
To be their Mistress, moved in their right spears.
Where Hermes was enthroned, that winged Patron
Of heaven-born elocution, but without
His silching Art; for that State-piracy
The bribing Science was as far from him
As Themis self; where Pallas too was lodged,
Not she that strove with Venus for an apple
On the (...) hill, but such a one
That deemed externalls but as chafe and dust,
In (...) of inward beauties, which in form
The Intelligences of our souls, and make them
Comply with Heaven and Immortality.
Lastly, where all the Deities invested
In their divinest purities, did dwell.
As 'twere in a compendious Capitol.

Tyro. But Cicero's reverend head was not enough;
The hands that wrote those glorious Philippicks
Must be cut off too.

Laur. Those illustrious hands
Which once held up this tottering Commonwealth,
And see her on her feet, when she was falling
From her proud orb into a gulf of Fire.

Tyro. That head, those hands, are both divorc't, and severed
From his now moldred (...), and no doubt
Are by this time Antonius game and sport;
For Laenas posted with them to the City.

Pomp. Why, here is a story at whose sad (...),
Democritus might change his laughing humor
And side with (...). As for me
I cannot weep; but Laureas, prethy tell me
How came Popilius to find you out?
Me thinks he could not, without information,
So shrewdly light upon the self same way
Which you had took before him; was it fate?

Laur. It Was fate, that is certain Madam, 'twas, but (...)
There was an engine which the Destinies
Did make their agent.

Pomp. Whom?

Tyro. Philologus.

Pomp. Philologus?

Laur. I, he betrayed your brother.
The Oracle from which he learned the mysteries
Of pure Philosophy. He, he it was
Who, being left behind us at the house,
Revealed the way we took unto the Colonel.

Pomp. And where is the villain?

Laur. Brought by Laenas hither
To be rewarded of Antonius
As for a service of egregious merit.

Pomp. I, so he shall, I Will see his wages paid.

Exit Pomp. Laur. Come Tyro, since our day is set for ever,
We Will live like owls, those Citizens of Night.
Like Owls indeed, but like Athenian owls;
Thou shall sublime thy pen, and write the life
Of our deceased Lord, that spotless life,
Which Virtue's self might mahe her meditation.
Tyro thou shall, and I poor Laureas, I
Will sit and sigh forth mourning (...)
Upon his death, he while he lived good man,
Delighted in my Muse, and now my quill
Shall consecrate his name toth' Muses hill.

Exeunt. Enter Antonius, Fulvia. Popilius Laenas crowned, Cicero's head in one
hand, and his hands in the other. Ant. (...), 'twas nobly done, and thou have
well
Deserved that crown which circles in thy Temples.
The head of Marcus Tullius Cicero (...)
Takes it of Popilius. Why it is a Kingly present, Ha, ha, (...)

Derides and misuses it. Fulv. To me.

Ant. Rub and a good cast. Ha, ha, (...)

Fulv. Bravely bowl'd, (...) faith.
Come up here.
Takes it up, and sitting down places it upon her knees. Now I Will be revenged
For your tart nipping jeers -- yes Reverend Sir,
Fulvia's indebted to the State: -- too long.

Ex. 2. (...). The no whit covetous wife of Antony,
Whom you describe without all contumely,
Owes the third pension to the Roman people.
Indeed! but does she? yes, nor will I wrong
The people of their due, the debt's thy tongue.
Cuts out his tongue. (...). I war (...) him for barking now.
I will make better football then a bowl.

(...) away. Ant. Have at (...), ( Coytes the hands to the head.)
Take them good Popilius,
And place them on the Rostra, where he vomited
His Philippisks against me. Let his head
Be set betwixt his hands, 'twill be a brave
And goodly spectacle.

(...). I will my Lord.

Exit. Ant. Do (...) stab it; give't as many wounds
As Julius Caesar had, whose (...) murder,
(...) worm extolled as an heroic deed.
Well I must leave you for a while to meet
My Colleagues, (...) and Octavius Caesur.

Exit. (...). That such a paultry thing as this should make
So great a bustling in a Commonwealth?
I heard my husband once compare his lungs
To Vulcans bellows, and his head to AEtna,
His words to (...), and this his tongue to fire.
But now I think it is quenched, (...) burns not now;
Nay, it is as cold as stone, no thunder in it,
No lightning flies from't. Sure this is not that
Herculean tongue that lately was so weighty.
That (...) could (...) such Giants of the State
As it has done to Nothing. Yes the same.
Then Fulvia march along, and (...) fear,
Thou (...) that (...) upon thy silver spear.

Exit. Enter Pomponia. Pomp. Anger will give me strength, Bloody Antonius
Thou shall not thus evade; as once the stout
And stern (...) foiled the (...) (...),
Or as the enraged Maenas armed with (...),
With (...) directed by inspired force,
(...) the woods, and quite distract makes gush,
The blood which she perceives not; will I rush
Upon these (...) Canniballs; if I die
I shall enjoy my Quintus company.
Alas, alas! what foolish rage is this?
We must appeal (...) heaven when we are wronged,
And not be our own carvers, Such State-(...)
Must have a (...) to curb them. Yet (...),
That traitrous (...), that ungrateful (...),
(...) not my husbands (...),
(...) the divinest precepts of my brother,
Could keep within the bounds of faith and piety,
He, he shall (...) if I live, (...)!

Flourish. Enter Antonius, Lepidus, Octavius, Piso, and others. Pomponia. Cruel
(...), though thou have unliv'd
My honored husband, my beloved son,
Though thou have slain my brother, and with him
Rent up the very groundwork of our Capitol.
And shown more cruelty to those sacred (...)
Of his dissolved corpse, then Victory
Did perpetrate on the AEmathian Perseus
On the triumphed Jugurth, and King Syphax,
Or Hannibal himself, not one of whom
Was sent defective to the lower shades
With members violated, yet I come not,
Like the poor widowed Hecuba, to (...)
And tell thee to what depth thou have (...)
The laws of goodness, and religious Nature,
Making thy self the hate of men and Gods,
Nor do I come to beg thy infamous sword
To rip that womb whose fruit thou have destroyed,
Though I would (...) my destiny. No Antony,
But only to put up a fair Petition,
Whose grant will somewhat wipe away the rust
Which sullies thy bad name, and make (...)
Say thou (...) something worthy of a Roman,
And thy renowned stock; and this it is,
By all that is (...) unto thee, I beseech (...)
Shelter not treason, but deliver me
The villain that betrayed my brother (...).

Ant. Philologus?

Pomp. I, (...) Sir.

Ant. Bring him forth.
Though such a treason was expedient,
Yet such a Traitor must not live.

Caes. My Lord,
You are most just (...).

Lep. So says Lepidus.

Piso. It Is god-like equity.

Enter with Phil. Ant. Pomponia take him, he is at your disposing.

Pomp. You heard that, Varlet, now you're mine again;
I Will make you (...) to a more hellish vulture
Then that of Tityus, thou thy self shall slice
Thy own foul flesh by morsells off, and make
Thy own gaunt entrails thy own sepulcher;
Nay it is in (...).

Phil. For heavens sake, good my Lord.

She drags him out. Enter Popilius (...). Popil. My Lord, the Tribune Publius
Apuleius
Is with his wife escaped away by flight.

Ant. No matter, my long wished for aim is won,
And Cicero slain, the whole prescription's done.

FINIS.

