Exceeding happy News FROM IRELAND. Being a true Relation of many passages of
great Consequence very joyful and delectable to all true hearted Protestants.
Wherein is declared five several matters of great Consequence. 1. That the
Earl of Cork is gone into the North of Ireland, putting all to Fire and
Sword. 2. That Information is given by certain Frenchmen, who declared that
the Rebels had received certain Arms from France by stealth, but at this
present there was no Fleet at Sea, of any Nation that way bound. 3. A true
Declaration of what Victories have lately been obtained by the Lord Don luce,
Earl of Antrim. 4. An Information that Philomy Oneale is secretly fled. 5.
That the Earl of Astry is desirous to lay down his Arms and yield to the
Kings mercy, and curses those that advised him first to rise in Rebellion.


Being the Copies of two Letters sent from Ireland, the one from Mr. William
Brooks a Justice of Peace, to his Wife an Inhabitant in Ratcliffe. The other
Letter sent to Mr. Hunt now resident in London. Read in the Honorable House of
Commons, And Ordered to be Printed.

Hen. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed by T. F. for I. R. June 16. 1642.

Exceeding Joyful News From Ireland.
Loving Wife,
I Have not at this present to write at large of news we have it now more
calmer weather, since the Ships and Soldiers Arrived then formerly, God be
thanked, and the Rebels are quelld, Muskrey the great Rebel is gone for
Limbricke, thinking there to have a place of refuge, that City stands out, and
the Castle, the only strength of it is in danger, in that the Boneadventure,
and other Ships have bin there to relieve the Castle, my Lord President being
at Cork as J hear intends to march into the Country, being now by the coming
of the two last Regiments reasonable well provided, but the tardencie of their
coming, will cost thrice as much as if they had come 2. Months past, the
reason is as I conceive, that the protraction of time. I confess the Rebels
are all one, but increase of Arms coming over from France in Barques, and by
that means every Month comes Arms to furnish their naked and formerly
unprovided Rebels.

We have hope that Galway will be gained, for we fear no foreign Aid, for
by all the Examinations, taken of French, Dunkirkes, and others, I could not
find the least breath of any thing by them, neither of Fleet from France or
Spain, that are intended this way, but of one Fleet that was in the beginning
of April at Breast, and so in other Examinations, that they met them Southwest
off the Seames ten Leagues, and the other Fleet in Normandy; likewise that
the Lord Muskrey curses the Popish Priest that advised him to take up Arms.

Many thousands of the Rebels are slain, and hanged, here is no quarter, but
Fire and Sword Our Town of Brandon has done many brave exploits against the
Rebels, and have taken many Castles.

Our Townsmen are now besieging Kilbrittane Mr. Chartis Castle, (God bless
and prosper their design) I doubt that will not be taken without great loss
of men, the Castle being strong and full of men.

Your Son Robert has been a Trooper in Wars, and none so forward as he but
I took him off, by reason that I wanted him aboard, and two days past he was
at the taking of Sheriff Longs Castle in Oyster Haven, the Bearer hereof
informed me that Brandon men had killed 16. hundred of the Rebels, and lost not
above 8. men, only some few men maimed.

Likewise I am informed that upon the landing of the last Forces sent from
England the Rebels fell upon them and slew 200 of them, but afterward they in
requital slew almost a thousand of them, putting the rest to flight.

The Lord Donluce Earl of Antrim, behaves himself very valiantly, but at the
^^st he not putting himself forward, nor ^^sing the power he had in his own
Tenants against the Rebels, was termed a newtrall by the English Soldiers,
which he hearing, desiring to quit himself from such an ignominious slander,
and to give a testimony to the contrary, desired the Earl of Ormond, Lord
Lieutenant General of his Majesty's Forces, that he would grant him the
command of a Regiment, to which he would add such horse and foot as he could
raise among his Tenants, promising upon his honor, to employ them with the
best advantage both to prejudice them, and preserve his own men, which
honorable request was granted, which command he has employed so nobly, that
he has taken many prisoners of Note, and done the Rebels more mischief then
any man of that Kingdom of late.

Likewise J am informed, that the General of the Rebels Philomy Oneale, is
privately fled from his Army, but of the truth I cannot speak, only so it is
rumoured here.

The Earl of Astry does determine to lay down his arms and to submit
himself to the Kings mercy, which makes us hope that we by Gods assistance
shall quickly quell the Rebels.

This is all the News that J have at this time to send to you, only J would
entreat you to be solicitous in my business to the Parliament. So J rest.

Your loving Husband. William Brook.
Kingsale this 10. of June, 1642.
A Letter sent from Ireland, and read in the House of Commons.
SIR,
THe Earl of Cork and Colonel Monro has given the Rebels another great
Overthrow, hard by Kingsaile, and has taken two Castles from them, but the
Rebels increasse abundance, and receive Aid and Ammunition from foreign Parts
daily, and commit most vild and cruel Outrages upon the poor Protestants,
wheresoever they come.

The last Monday the Lord Moore and Sir Henry Titchburne sallyed out of the
Town, and fell upon the enemies, and drove them out of their Trenches, and
raised their Siege, slew above 100 of their men, and took many of their chief
Officers, and have relieved themselves bravely, and took 150. of their
Muskets, and great store of Pikes, we having lost, as some affirm, few men.
Here are some of our Captains come by Land, so that this News is true, etc.

With my true love, I rest, Your loving friend. R. H.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

H. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS

