TRAVELS OVER England, Scotland and Wales. GIVING A True and Exact Description
of the Chiefest Cities, Towns, and Corporations; Together With the Antiquities
of diverse other Places, with the most Famous Cathedrals, and other Eminent
Structures; of several Remarkable Caves and Wells, with many other Divertive
Passages never before Published.

By James Brom, M. A. Recter of Cheriton in Kent, and Chaplain to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Romney.

The Design of the said Travels being for the Information of the two Eldest
Sons, of that Eminent Merchant Mr. Van-Ackar.

LONDON: Printed for Abel Roper, at the Black-Boy, Rich. Basset, at the Miter,
in Fleetstreet; and Will. Turner, at the Angel at Lincoln's Inn Back-Gate, 1700.

To the Honorable Sir Basil Dixwell, Bar. A MEMBER of the Honorable House of
Commons, AND Governor of Dover-Castle, etc.
Honored Sir,
WHEN I first resolved to publish these Papers, I could not be long in suspense
to whom to Dedicate them: They contain a short Account of our Own British
Island, and I know not better at whose Feet chiefly to prostrate them, than
where I found the brave, old, heroic, English Spirit most eminently
Predominant.

It Is the unhappy Genius of some Grandees in this Age to affect nothing, but
what either appears in a Foreign Dress, or comes fraught with new and
unheard of Rarities from abroad, as if our English Soil was so barren in its
Productions, that it could not afford any thing to divert the Curious; or it
was altogether not worth the while to Contemplate herein the wonderful Works of
Nature, because they are nearer to our own Doors.

And yet, as it is not very easy to discover many other Countries, where
Nature has been more diffusive of her choicest Blessings than in our Own; so
likewise to point out any one Place, where she has beeen more liberal in
dispersing various and delightful Objects, than within the Confines of this
flourishing Monarchy, a Scheme of which I take here the boldness to present to
your Honor.

Upon which account I could have wished that I had Portrayed the Features in a
more exact conformity to the first Lineaments of Nature; but however it may
miscarry in the Draught, perhaps there may be something which may not prove
altogether Indivertive, when your vacant Hours from greater and more important
Affairs in the Government, in one of the highest Orbs of which Your experienced
Wisdom and Integrity have most deservedly placed You, will give You leave to
cast some few glances on it.

SIR,
I confess I ought justly to Apologize for prefixing Your Great Name before so
mean a Trifle, whose late signal Service to the Ancient and Worthy Corporation
and Port of Dover, will alone perpetuate it to succeeding Generations.

But when again I consider Your great Candor and Goodness, Your generous
Temper and obliging Deportment, with which You are wont to Proselyte all who
have the Honor of Your Acquaintance, I am apt to Flatter my self, that You
will please to Pardon this bold Address, and look upon it only, as indeed it
is, a sincere Testimony for me, how ready and officious I am to express my
Gratitude for the manifold Favors conferred upon,

SIR, Your most Faithful and Obliged Servant, James Brom.


A PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT will not, I presume, be thought amiss to acquaint the Reader, that these
Papers had in all probability lain long buried in Dust and Obscurity, had not
some false Copies, which by chance came lately to the true Author's notice,
stole Clandestinely into the World under the specious Title of Mr. Roger's
Three Years Travels over England and Wales, etc. which are indeed so
unadvisedly patched together, so wretchedly Curtailed, so horribly Imperfect,
and abominably Erroneous, that the right Author was obliged in his own
Vindication to publish from his own true Manuscript, which has been formerly,
and of late, perused by the Hands of some Learned Men, a more Authentic Copy.
And though he cannot as yet discover this mysterious Cheat, which has for some
time walked in Darkness, yet to discourage for the future all such unbecoming
mercenary Attempts, he resolved at last with himself, by a more correct
Edition, to expose the Plagiarism and Dishonesty of such vile Pultroons, and
scandalous Undertakers, which have appeared with such open and brazenfaced
Effrontery.

And though indeed they have put on what false Disguise they can to Cheat the
World, and set off the Book with the most plausible Varnishes, that thereby
they might the better recommend it to the Reader, yet there does appear
throughout the whole Series of it such horrible Blunders, and impardonable
Mistakes, such silly Shiftings and Turnings both of Things and Places, such
crude Apologies for its Brevity, and in short, such a shameful Contexture of
Ignorance and Impudence closely linked together by that unlearned Fry. To give
but one notorious Instance here for all, their placing, Page 99. the Seven
Wonders of the Peak in Lancashire instead of Darbyshire; though there are
diverse other as gross Errors, if it be worth while to rake into them, as their
false Transcribing or leaving out quite diverse proper Names of great
Significancy; as also what chiefly related to the Latin Tongue, that as such
uncomely Features will easily discover the Spuriousness of the Brood, so no Pen
can be sharp enough to expose the Disingenuity and Baseness of such a viperous
Generation.

Now such a seasonable Advertisement as this is, being sufficient to caution
the unwary Reader against all other previous Editions, will become as just an
Apology for the present Publication of these ensuing Papers, which if so useful
and diverting (as the World is told) under a false Vizor, will now prove, it is
to be hoped, more pleasing and acceptable in their own true, native Colors.

For they will here meet with a more full and accurate Description, though not
of every individual Town and Place of Note within the Dominions of Great
Britain, yet with a true and impartial Account of most Cities and Towns
Corporate, with their famous Cathedrals and other eminent Structures; of the
most remarkable Havens and Rivers, of diverse curious Caves, Wells and Mines,
with many other divertive Passages, and historical Relations, with several
ancient Inscriptions, Epitaphs and Observations, which were yet never taken
notice of by any English Topographer, which being some Years ago Penned for the
use of Two Young Gentlemen, Sons to Mr. Van-Acker, formerly an eminent Merchant
in London, whom the Author had the happiness to accompany in these Travels, is
now again Revised to make it the more consummate and inviting.

So that whosoever is disposed to Travel Abroad, or to see, which indeed is
most necessary first, and acquaint himself with the Rarities of Nature at Home,
may know hereby in what Parts of our Island to find them; and for those who
having already visited remoter Regions, are so strangely enravished with the
prospect of Foreign Varieties, that they are hardly brought to believe any
thing in their own Native Soil equal to such Discoveries as they have made in
other Countries; this may be sufficient to inform them, That there is not any
thing worth our Wonder Abroad, whereof Nature has not written a Copy in our
own Island: And it cannot be too frequently observed, that as Italy has
Virgil's Grotto, and the Sybil's Cave by Puteoli, so England has Ochy-Hole by
Wells, and Pool's by Buxton: We have Baiae at the Bath, the Alps in Wales, the
Spaw in Yorkshire, Asphaltites at Pitchford in Shropshire, the Pyramids at
Stonehenge, Pearls of Persia in Cornwall, and Diamonds of India at St.
Vincent's Rock. Besides, we have the (...) of ancient and famous Castles and
Garrisons, Fortresses and Bulwarks, Rampires and Trenches; where as great
Sieges have been made, as remarkable Battles fought, and as noble Achievements
performed as in any other Places in Europe, which have been eminent for the
Seats of War; to which if we add diverse Roman Highways and Causeys, with
various Coins and Medals of great Antiquity, variously dispersed about the
Kingdom, it will not stoop to any neighboring Nation for such admirable
Curiosities.

So that since England is not destitute of those many taking Things, which all
Travelers so passionately admire Abroad, it is very incongruous to pretend to
be acquainted with other Countries, and to be Strangers to their own, which is
an Epitome of all other; and which upon all these, as well as other Accounts,
may very justly claim and challenge, as a due Debt, all those glorious Elogies
which both Ancient and Modern Writers have conferred upon it.

And having thus briefly declared the main Design and Scope of this Narrative,
I shall neither Complement my Reader into its acceptance, nor trouble my self
to make any Harangue in Apologizing for its Contrivance; for as for all Candid
Persons, I question not but their Censures will be as favorable as their
Humors ingenuous: And as for such snarling Critics, and carping Momus's of
the Age, who can sooner find a Fault than mend it, I am sure most complemental
Apologies will never work in them Candor or good Nature; I shall therefore
endeavor to Arm my self against all their Cavils, with the excellent Advice of
the wise Moralist Mimnermus, (...)
(...).


In English thus, Attempt brave things, then set your Heart at rest,
Let not the senseless Mob disturb your Breast:
If some speak ill on purpose for to teaze you,
Others will speak the best, and let that please you.


J. B.

AN ACCOUNT OF Mr. BROME'S Three Years TRAVELS OVER England, Scotland, and
Wales.
A Narrative of his first Journey.
WHen the Spring had rendered the Roads passable, and the Country was a fitting
Entertainment for Travelers, the Gentlemen, whose Names I have given my self
the Honor of Inserting in the Title, were pleased to take me for their
Companion, in order to have a View of those Places, which were under the same
Government with the City from whence they set out, and which it was not
Improper to be acquainted with before they made a Visit to Nations more ^ote.
And since it is but natural for the Inhabitants of other Countries to be as
inquisitive after our Situation and Establishment, as we are after Theirs; we
could not but endeavor to provide our selves with an Answer, by the Knowledge
of our own Country's Constitution, before we had occasion to ask Questons in
Relation to those of others.

As these were the Reasons which occasioned our Journey, so we took a time in
which it was agreeable to make one. The Season of the year pushed us forward,
and the delights which it afforded were motives enough to persuade us to take
leave of the Glorious City of London, which is Caput Gentis, and an Epitome of
England.

Middlesex.
We took our Journey through Middlesex, a Country famous for its goodly
Edifices, as well wisely compacted together upon the pleasant Banks of Thames;
as likewise for diverse stately and magnificent Palaces dispersed in several
other parts thereof, Uxbridge
to Vxbridge, anciently Woxbridge, seated on the Colne, which parts it from
Buckinghamshire, a Town Built of late times, well stored with Inns, and of a
considerable length. This was the place famous in the Year 1644. for a Treaty
held betwixt King Charles the First, and the Parliament, where after several
Debates by Commissioners on both sides, the Treaty of Peace was unhappily
broken off, and ended in a Deluge of Blood, which speedily overran this whole
Nation.

Bucks.
From Vxbridge, we came into the County of Bucks, which might possibly receive
its Denomination from its Fertility in Beech-Trees, there being a Province in
Germany called Buchonia for that very reason: It Is a Country rich in Pasture,
and so convenient for Grazing, that the Inhabitants thereof do very much addict
themselves to that Employment, receiving great Advantages by the Vicinity of
London, where the Markets are very Encouraging, the Prices being high, and the
Returns considerable.

Passing through Beconsfield, Beconsfield and Wickam.
a Town better known, in that it was formerly part of the Inheritance belonging
to the Noble Family of the Schudamore's, than for any thing at present of
greater Consequence, we arrived at Wickam or Wicomb, situated above a pleasant
Valley, by which runs along a little Rivolet, and perhaps from this situation
it took its Name; for Comb, says the Great Antiquary Mr. Somner, in his Saxon
Dictionary, is a Valley enclosed on either side with Hills; and Wick, says the
same Author, is the turning, winding, or hollowness of Water-banks, or the
curving reach of a River: It Is a Town for largeness and buildings, not much
inferior to any throughout the Shire; and has a Mayor and Aldermen to govern
and support it; and is a place very much celebrated for the abundance of
Bone-Lace usually made here, which brings no small Advantage and Profit to its
Inhabitants.

Having refreshed our selves a while here, we set forward for Oxfordshire,
Oxfordshire.
which being once entered into, we could not sufficiently enough admire the
pleasantness of the Soil; for there it is that Ceres bestows her Gifts most
liberally upon the laborious Husbandman; there it is the Meadows are garnished
with Flora's curious Embellishments; and the great variety of Plants allure and
invite the industrious Herbalist into a more strict Enquiry of their Names,
Natures, and Properties: There it is where the Hills adorned with shady Woods,
afford most delightsome Bowers to wearied Students, whilst the Silver-stream'd
Rivers with their gentle Murmurs nimbly coursing along by the humble Valleys,
do whet their Fancies, and scrue up their Inventions to the highest pitch. To
confer upon them suitable Encomiums; What more pleasant than Isis, afterward
called Thamisis, which runs along the South Side, and then branching it self
out in several Veins gives heart to the Eastern part of the County, till by a
continued Circulation like that of the Blood, after several Windings, and
Maeandrous Flexures, it lodges at last again within it self? What can be more
diverting than the River Cherwell, which being well replenished with numerous
Shoals of Fish, after it has for a time parted this County from
Northamptonshire, passes through the midst of it, and divides it as it were
into two equal Portions? In fine, Nature has here so generously scattered all
her Largesses, either for Pleasure or Profit, that she certainly at first
designed it as a Glorious Seat for the Muses, and a fruitful Colony for
Apollo's Children; and therefore we now find here one of the Eyes of this
Nation, which is the Renowned Oxford.

Oxford.
Oxford, q. Bovis Vadum, a Ford for Oxen to pass over, as the Thracian
Bosphorus is called by the Germans Ochenfurt. It was anciently called
Bellositum for its healthy Air, and commodious Situation betwixt two Rivers,
and is so ancient a City as to fetch its Original from the time of the
Britain, so large, to contain 13 Parish Churches, besides the Cathedral so
well adorned with private goodly Structures, as well as with diverse magnificent
Colleges and Halls, that it must needs be allowed to be one of the most
beautiful and stately Cities in England: it is supposed by Antiquaries, to have
been a place for public Studies before the Reign of that learned Saxon King
Alfred, who very much augmented it out of his Princely Favor, and Love to
Learning and Religion, and it justly glories in the Ancient and Royal
Foundation of Vniversity-College, founded by the aforesaid King Alfred, about
the year 872.; afterward re-edified by William Archdeacon of Durham, or as
others write, by William, Bishop of Durham, in the Reign of William the
Conqueror; In the curious Fabric of New-College, built by William of Wickham,
Bishop of Winchester, in Richard II's time; In the Magnificence of
Christ-Church, erected by Cardinal Woolsey, in the Reign of Henry VIII. and in
Twenty two stately Colleges and Halls besides. To wave the curious Fabric of
the Schools, the admirable Structure of the Theater, built at the sole Cost and
Charges of the most Reverend Father in God, Gilbert, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury; the famous Bodleian Library, which for a Collection of choice
Books, and rare Manuscripts is not much inferior to that of the Vatican at
Rome. The Musaeum erected at the Charge of the University, for the Improvement
of Experimental Knowledge: The public Physic Garden, replenished with the
choicest Plants, and surrounded with a strong Stone-Wall, at the Expense of his
Grace the present Duke of Leeds, together with all the Customs, Privileges,
Offices, and Dignities, which are already Elegantly set forth by the Ingenious
Author of the Present State of England: I shall only observe, that the most
Puissant King Henry VIII. erected here first a Bishop's See, and Endowed it, as
we are informed, out of the Lands belonging to the dissolved Monasteries of
Abington and Osney; and for further Ornaments to the University, and
Encouragement of Learning, through the Munificence of that Prince, and diverse
other Benefactors, there have been since added diverse professors of several
Arts and Sciences, to instruct the younger Pupils in their Minority, and to
make them fit Instruments for the Service of Church and State.

From hence we moved forward to Burford, Burford.
a Town in this County of good Note for its Antiquity, situated very pleasantly
on the side of a rising Hill: It was formerly called Berghford, or Bregforde,
says my Learned Friend, Mr. White Kennet, in his Parochial Antiquities of
Oxfordshire; and as he further informs us, A Synod was here Convened, at which
were present the two Kings Etheldred and Berthwald, Theodore, Archbishop of
Canterbury, Sexwolph, Bishop of Litchfield, Bosel, Bishop of Worcester, and
Aldhelm, afterward Bishop of Sherborn, then only Priest and Abbot of Malmsbury;
which said Aldhelm, at the Command of this Synod, wrote a Book against the
Error of the British Christians, in the Observation of Easter, and other
different Rites wherein they disturbed the Peace of the Church; the reading of
which Book reclaimed many of those Britains who were under the West- Saxons.

After this, it is storied further, That about the year 752. Cuthred King of the
West- Saxons, when he was no longer able to bear the Severe Tributes, and
Exactions of Aethelbald, King of the Mercians, who did most cruelly oppress
him, and began (...) suck the very Blood and Marrow of his Subjects, came into
the Field against him, and in a pit^^'d Battle at Beorgford, says the Saxon
Chronicle, published by the Learned Mr. Gibson, routed him ^^tally, taking from
him his Banners, on which was painted a golden Dragon, and so eased and freed
himself and his Subjects from that Tributary Vassalage: The Memory whereof has
continued for several Ages in the Custom used here of making a Dragon, and
carrying it about the Town solemnly on Midsummer-Eve, with the addition of a
Giant to it; the reason of which latter Practice is not so easily discovered,
says the Ingenious Dr. Plot, in his Natural History of Oxfordshire.

Having once passed from this place, we soon arrived within the Limits of
Glocestershire, Glocestershire.
in the Eastern parts swelled up into Hills, called Cotswold, which Feed
innumerable Flocks of Sheep, the Wool whereof is much praised for its fineness;
the middle parts consist of a fertile Plain, watered by the Severn: and the
Western part, where lies the Forest of Dean, is much covered with Woods: It Is a
Country happy in the Enjoyment of all things that are necessary for the Use and
Service of Man; the very Lanes and Hedges being well-lined with Apple, and
Pear Trees; and the Vales, which in William of Malmsbury's time, were filled
with Vineyards, are now turned into Orchards, which yield plenty of Sider. The
Towns and Villages stand mostly thick together, and so it is populous; the
Houses numerous, and so it is sociable; the Churches fair and magnificent, and
so it is honorable: But that which is one of the greatest Blessings of all, is
the Noble River Severn, than which there is not any River in all this Island
for its Channel broader, for Stream swifter, for variety of Fish better stored,
though sometimes it overflows its Banks; and when it has roved a great way
upon the Land, retires back again in Triumph as a victorious Conqueror.

This River Severn, The River Severn.
or Sabrina, was so called from Sabrine, a fair Lady, concerning whom there
goes this Story. Locrine, the Eldest Son of Brutus, who came first into
Britain, and from whom, some Writers are of Opinion, our Country received its
Denomination, took to Wife Guendoline, Daughter to Corineus Duke of Cornwall,
the Companion of that Noble Trojan; but notwithstanding this, he kept a very
beautiful Mistress, whose Name was Estrilde, and by her had a Daughter, which
he named Sabrine, whereupon he grew so enamoured of her, that after the Death
of his Father-in-law Corineus, he put away his Wife, and Married this Lady; at
which Act his Wife was so extremely netled, that she immediately repairs into
Cornwall, makes her Complaint among her Friends, and Relations, and having
gathered a great Power to revenge her Injury, she fought with her husband
Locrine at New- Troy, or London, and there slew him: After this, to execute her
Revenge still in the highest degree, she took the Lady Estrilde, with her fair
Daughter Sabrina, and drowned them both in this River.

Traveling over this delightsome Region, the first place of any Remark we
arrived at, was Cirencester, alias Circiter Cirencester. It was called by the
Britains Kaerceri Rudborn's Hist. of Winchester.
; which the River Corinus, or Churne rising among the Wolds passes by and
gives it its Name: It appears to have been a place of great Antiquity and
Renown, from the old Roman Coins and Medals, and diverse Marble Engraven Stones,
which have been dug up hereabouts: Nay, a Judicious Antiquary Mr. Kennet has
observed, That this place seems to have been as well the first, as the greatest
of the Roman Stations, which the Britains had before made a place of Strength,
and Confluence: That this Corinium is by Ptolemy Recorded, as the Metropolis,
or Chief City of the Dobuni; and was after called Corinium Dohunorum.

The British Chronicles tell us further, That this Town was burnt down, being
set on Fire by a company of Sparrows, through an Invention devised by one
Gurmund. Certain it is, the Inhabitants show a Mount below the Town; which they
Report this Gurmund cast up, which they corruptly call Grismund's Tower:
Grismund 's Tower.
It was a long time subject to the West- Saxons; afterward the Mercians got it
into their Possession, where it continued till the Establishment of the English
Monarchy, under which it sustained very great Calamities, by the Incursion of
the Danes: and it is probable, that Gurmon the Dane, whom some Historiographers
call Guthrus and Gurmundus, was a great Instrument to augment its Troubles and
Oppressions: However, there are still some Remains to be seen of old Ruinated
Walls, and of an Abbey built, as some conjecture, by the Saxons; afterward much
repaired, or rather rebuilt by King Henry I: It Is now beautified with a very
handsome Church, having a high Spired Steeple, and has once a Week a Market,
and has formerly been Enriched with the Trade of Clothing, though that with
many other Privileges and Immunities they enjoyed, are now impaired and gone to
decay.

From hence coursing over the Wolds, we came to the top of Burlipp-Hill,
Burlipp- Hill.
where we had a Prospect of a very pleasant Vale; the Hill is craggy, steep,
and high, from which descending by degrees, and passing through a Way which was
formerly paved with Stone, and was undoubtedly one of the Roman high Ways,
which here crossed one another, we came to Gloucester, Gloucester.
called by Antiquaries, Caer Gloyn, which took its Name either of Claudius the
Emperor, or of the Beauty and Brightness thereof, which the Britains call
Gloyn, though others call it Kaerclan.

It Is a City well Seated, and as well Inhabited, and of a considerable Trade,
by reason of the River Severn, over which it has a fair Bridge, and being
Navigable, Boats of great Burden come up to the Key side, loaded with several
Commodities. It Is governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, and is adorned with 12
Parish Churches besides the Cathedral: And for the Strength of the Place, it
was formerly on the Landside encompassed with a strong Wall, the standing
Remains whereof show what Force they have been of: On the Southside it had a
strong Castle of square Stone now fallen to Ruin. Craulin King of the West-
Saxons Conquered this City from the Britains about the year 570; and 300 years
after it fell into the Hands of the Danes, who miserably defaced it.

Soon after this Aldred, Archbishop of York, built the Cathedral, to which
belongs now a Dean and Six Prebendaries and it has been much enlarged by the
Charity of good Benefactors, John Hanly and Thomas Early adding to it the
Chapel of the Virgin Mary; N. Morwent the Forefront, being an excellent
Fabric; G. Horton adjoined to it the North-Cross part; Abbot Trowcester, a
very fine Cloister, and Abbot Sebrok, a high Four square Steeple: As for the
Southside, it was repaired by the Free Offerings of the Inhabitants at the
Sepulcher of Edward II. who lies here Interred under a Monument of Alabaster;
and in the Quire, under a wooden-painted Tomb, lies Robert, the Eldest Son of
William the Conqueror, who was deprived both of his Life and Kingdom, by his
Younger Brother Henry I. having his Eyes first put out at Cardiff-Castle; and
died thereafter 26 years Imprisonment.

Here likewise is the Monument of Lucius, who is said to have been the first
Christian King in England: Now, though by Bishop Burnet in his Travels we are
told, That there is a famous Chapel Erected to him, as their Great Apostle,
near Coir, a Town of the Grisons, for the great Service he did to them, in
working their Conversion; yet it is most probable that he lies Interred here:
But how he came at first to be instructed in the Christian Faith, we have the
most probable Account given us by the most Learned Bishop Stillingfleet, in his
Antiquities of the British Churches, which is this: That King Lucius hearing of
the Christian Doctrine, either by the old British Christians, such as Eluanus
and Meduinus are supposed to have been; or by some of M. Aurelius his Soldiers
coming hither, after the great Deliverance of the Roman Army by the Prayers of
the Christians, which had then lately happened, and occasioned great Discourse
every where. The Emperor himself, as Tertullian says, giving the Account of
it in his own Letters, might upon this be very desirous to inform himself
thoroughly about this Religion; and there being then frequent Intercourse
betwixt Rome and Britain, by reason of the Colonies that were settled, and the
Governors and Soldiers passing to and fro, he might send Eluanus and Meduinus
to be fully instructed in this Religion, and either the same Persons alone, or
two others with them (called Fag^^us and D^^^ianus commonly) coming into
Britain, might have so great Success, as to Baptize King Lucius, and many
others, and thereby enlarge the Christian Church here.

But to return from what we have made a little Digression, the Pillars of this
Church are of an extraordinary Thickness, not to be Paralleled in any Church of
England: But that which makes it most Remarkable, is a curious piece of
Architecture at the East End of the Quire, called, The Whispering Place; The
Whispering Place.
it is an Arch in the form of a Semicircle, 30 yards in Circuit, and so rare a
Contrivance, that if any Person stand at one end of it, and Whisper never so
softly, he that lays his Ear to the other end, will discover distinctly the
Words he speaks.



A C D E F B is the Passage of the Voice, or Whispering Place; at A and B do
the two Persons stand that Whisper to each other. At D, the middle of the
Passage, is a Door and Entrance into a Chapel, with Window-Cases on each side
of the Door; and to my best Remembrance, there are one or two Places open
upward in the Roof of the passage; from whence it is the Opinion of Mr.
Childrey, in his Britannia Baconica, when he has occasion to speak of this
Place, that the Chapel standing so in the middle, much conduces to the
conveying of the Sound so entirely, which is helped by the open places of the
Roof beforementioned, for they help to draw in the Voice, which else would not
so well enter into that narrow Passage, but reverberate back into that broad
open place before the Whispering Entry; and the Reason upon which he grounds
his Opinion, that the Chapel does a great part of the Work is this, Because,
says he, we see in Viols, Lutes, and other Musical Instruments, there are
Holes cut into the Belly of the Instrument just under the playing or striking
place, which we find by Experience, do much augment the Noise of the Notes, and
make them more Audible.

But this being only a Conjecture, I shall leave it to be further discussed by
those who delight in such kind of Speculation, and proceed to Lassington,
Astroites at Lassington.
a little Village near Gloucester, where are found many Astroites, or
Star-stones, being about the breadth of a silver Penny, but the thickness of
half a Crown, flat, and pointed like a Star, or Mullet in Heraldry, only the
Points of them are not sharp, but a little roundish, and of a greyish Color,
and on both sides curiously graved, (as it were by Art) as if there were a
little Mullet within the great one: Being put into Vinegar, they have a Motion
like the Astroites in Germany, which the Learned Cambden speaks of; and are
more fully described by Mr. Childrey in his Natural Rarities of Gloucestershire.

Having diverted our selves at Gloucester, we steered our Course for Tewksbury,
Tewksbury.
a Market Town of a great Trade for Cloth, Mustard Seed, but more especially
for Stockings, of which the Townsmen every Saturday buy great Quantities from
the Neighboring Inhabitants: It Is situated among three pleasant Rivers; Severn
on the one side enricheth it, and on the other Avon, and another small Rivolet
which comes from the East; over each whereof stand Bridges which give Entrance
into it. By the Saxons it was called Thro^^ ^uria, from a Religious Man named
Throcus, who led here an Hermite's Life, and has been reputed famous for a
Monastery, founded by Odo, and Dodo, two Saxon Noble Men, which was afterward
much enlarged by the Earls of Gloucester, who lived at Homes-Castle near to
this place, Homes- Castle.
and were generally here Interred. Nor is it of less Fame for the Memorable
Battle fought here in 1471 between the House of York and Lancaster, which
bloody day decided for that time, that great Controversy, and left the Crown
to the former.

In the Reign of King Henry III. there is a Story Recorded, of a Jew that lived
in this Town, how that falling into a Jakes, or Privy, on the Jewish Sabbath,
or Saturday, would by no means, out of Reverence to that Day, suffer any one to
come and rescue him out of that Noisome place; whereupon Richard, then Earl of
Gloucester, having some Intelligence of his refractary Sullenness, gave a
strict charge, that no one should dare to take him out on the Sunday, for the
Reverence of that Day; and so the poor Circumcised Wretch perished in that
loathsome Dungeon through his own Folly.

Our abode at this place was but short, for we hasted into the Confines of
Worcestershire, Worcestershire.
which we found a very healthful and plentiful Country: In one part it is of
Note for its Cheese, in most for its Perry, which is a very pleasant Liquor,
made of the Juice of Pears, growing here in abundance in the Hedges; it is
likewise full of Salt Pits, and has formerly been admired for abundance of
Salt-Springs, which have been very often discovered in this County: But that
which makes it most Renowned, is the River Severn, which Streams along the
Country, which as also the River Avon, is well replenished with diverse sorts of
Fish; but more particularly seemed to be designed on purpose by Nature, as
Stews and Ponds, for the Preservation of Lampreys, a Fish of great esteem in
that County, and sent far and near as a very great Present throughout diverse
parts of England; they are called Lampreys from the Latin word Lampetra, as if
they had their Denomination from licking of Rocks, they are like Eels, slippery
and blackish; however, on their Bellies they are of a bluish color; in the
Spring they are most wholesome and sweet, for in the Summer the inner Nerve,
which is to them instead of a Backbone, waxes too hard for Concoction:
Naturalists observe, that these Fish receive, and let in Water at seven Holes,
for that they have no Gills which are any way visible; the Romans always
thought this a very noble Dish, and when any Person of Quality desired a
sumptuous Feast, he would be sure to be provided with these; and the Italians
at this day are very much delighted with them, and consequently by their
Cookery, make them exceeding delicate to the Taste, for they take a Lamprey,
and killing it in Malmsey, close the Mouth with a Nutmeg, and fill all the
Holes with as many Cloves, then they roll it up, and put Filberd, Nut-Kernels
stamped, crumbs of Bread, Oil, Malmsey, and Spices to it, and so they boil it
with great care, and then turn it over a soft gentle Fire of Coals in a
Drying Pan.

The first place we came to which was Remarkable in this County was Worcester
it self, Worcester.
where the River Severn, which in other parts of the County runs along in a
swift Current, glides on here more softly with a gentle Stream, admiring as it
were, this City, This City was called by the Britains Kaerkorangon. Rudborn.
as it passes by, which is famous both for its Antiquity and Beauty: It Is
supposed that the Romans built it at that time when they first planted Cities
on the Easternside of the Severn, to hinder the Incursion of the Britain, who
were on the other side, as they did on the Southside of the Rhine to repress
the Germans: It Is situated partly upon the Brow of a Hill, rising with a gentle
Ascent, and has a very fair Bridge over the River, and is of great Repute for
its Manufacture of Cloth, by which the Inhabitants become Wealthy and
Creditable: The Houses are neat and well built, the Streets clean and well
paved, the Churches in number many, in Order and Beauty excellent, especially
the Cathedral, in which are diverse small Pillars all of pure Marble, which
stand in Rows, and do uphold that vast Bulk and Fabric, somewhat strange to
see the Body larger than the Supporters, and that so small Props should be able
to bear up so great a Weight: This Church, say some Historians, was first built
by Ethelred, King of the Mercians, though others by Bishop Sexwolph Bosel was the
first Bishop here, say the Annals of Worcecester. Angl. Sacr. pars prima.
, about the year 680, under the high Altar, whereof lies the Body of King John
wrapped in a Monk's Cowl, which the Superstition of that time accounted Sacred,
and a very necessary Defensative against all evil Spirits: Here is likewise to
be seen the Tomb of Arthur Prince of Wales, the eldest Son of Henry VII. with
diverse Monuments belonging to the ancient Family of the Beauchamps: It was
formerly a Cloister for Monks, but King Henry VIII. did substitute in their
Room a Dean and Prebendaries, and erected a free School for the Education of
the Citizen's Children: It has suffered great Calamities by Fire, being burnt
down by the Danes about the year 104.1, after this by an unknown Casualty under
the Reign of Henry I. and once again in King Stephen's days; and sure I am, it
has of later years fallen into the Hands of some merciless Men, who were as
raging as the Flames, and whose Fury was as unquenchable as the Fire it self;
Witness the grievous Pressures it groaned under for its Loyalty to the King, in
the year 1651: For here it was, that after his long Exile, King Charles the
Second arrived with an Army of Scots and some English the 22. of August, and by
the Assistance of the Citizens, beat but the Soldiers, who kept it for the
Commonwealth, and being proclaimed by the Mayor that then was, and Sheriffs,
King of England, etc. Nevertheless, was attended with the same ill Fortune and
Success, which was at that time his chief Attendants; and having but a small
Army in comparison of the numberless number of Rebels that were poured in upon
him, was totally defeated at this City, several of his Nobles Slain and took
Prisoners, the rest forced to fly for their Lives, and himself constrained to
make his Escape as privately as he could, and to betake himself into a Wood in
Staffordshire, where hiding himself in the shady Boughs of a well-spread Oak,
he found more Pity and Security from Trees and Woods, than from some of his own
unnatural and bloody Subjects: However, this City is now again restored to its
Luster, and like the Phoenix, being revived out of its own Ashes, is raised up
to its Prestine Splendor and Magnificence.

Having sufficiently satisfied our selves with the Varieties of that City, we
came into the Confines of the Eastern part of Herefordshire, Herefordshire.
which appeared very Rocky and Mountainous at the first; but having passed
those Rocky parts, we began to find the Country more pleasant to the Eye; for
we discovered it to be a Fertile Soil, the Valleys thick with Corn, and the
Meadows abounding with Grass, and well watered with Rivers, the Hills covered
with Sheep, and the Hedges full of Apple Trees, which bear a sort of Fruit
called Redstreaks, of which they make the best Syder in England: In a word, we
found it according to the usual Report, which is made of it, to yield to no
Country in this Nation, for three W. W. W, Wheat, Wool, and Water, to which
formerly might have been added Wood, but that the Iron Works have since
destroyed it very much, and made it become less plentiful.

Passing through Bramyard, a small Market Town of no great Consequence,
Mereford.
we came to Hereford, the chief City of this County, which is situated almost
in the middle of it, and watered by two pleasant Rivers, Wye and Lugg, which by
their happy Union not far from this place advance her Felicity, and enrich her
Soil: Antiquaries are of Opinion, That this City had its Rise from Ariconium,
which has at this day no manner of Form of a Town, as having been thrown down
by an Earthquake, only some do imagine it to have stood in a place which they
now call Kenchester, three Miles distant from this City, Kenchester.
and they do build their Conjectures from the Ruins of old Walls, which are
there Conspicuous; as likewise from some apiece paving Tiles, and thick
Bricks, as well as several Roman Coins dug up thereabouts, though now the
place which they mention is all overgrown with Shrubs, Bushes, and Brambles:
We observed, when we went to visit this place, three or four Receptacles in an
old piece of Ruined Wall, in which the Owners had found some Urns, which argues
the place to have been of great Antiquity; however, her Sister Hereford, which
is now become Beautiful by the others Decay, justly claims the Pre-eminence
above all other Places within this County: She is thought first to have shown
her Head under the Saxon Heptarchy, and is supposed to have received great
Helps and Increase by Religion; and the Martyrdom of Ethelbert, King of the
East Angles, who, when he Courted the Daughter of Offa, King of the Mercians,
was treacherously put to Death by Quendred, Offa's Wife: Hereupon, being
Registered as a Martyr, he had a Church built, and Dedicated to him by Milfrid
King of the Mercians, A. D. 825. which after the Establishment of a Bishop's
See in it, grew to great Wealth and Honor through the Devout and Pious
Liberality of the Mercians, and then of the West- Saxons, and is thought never
to have suffered any Misfortune, until Edward the Confessor's time, when
Griffith, Prince of South- Wales, and Algarus, having raised a Rebellion
against King Edward, and led away Captive Leofgarus, the Bishop, sacked the
City, and burnt the Cathedral Afterward the Normans at the East End of the
Church, by the River Wye, built a strong Castle, Fortified the City with a
Wall; and by the Trench near the Castle is a very fine Spring, called St.
Ethelbert's Well, St. Ethelbert's Well.
famous formerly for Miracles, to which, no question, but in that Superstitious
Age, there was a great Resort of the Lame and the Blind, with their Vows, and
their Offerings; the Sanctity of Waters being such a Devout Fancy among our
Ancestors, as has been truly observed by that Indefatigable Searcher into
Antiquity, the Ingenious Mr. White Kennet, that after Ages were forced to
restrain the horrid Superstition of Well-Worship, by a Canon in a Council under
Edgar, and after this too by some other Episcopal Injunctions.

Within this City are four Parish Churches, and Bishop Reinelme, in the Reign
of King Henry I. founded the Cathedral that now is, being a beautiful and
magnificent Structure, adorned with diverse Monuments of ancient Prelates, and
Abbots: To this adjoyns diverse Houses, for the Dignitaries of the Church, and a
College for 12 Vicars, who live after an Academical way under a Praefectus, who
presides over them, and supplies them with all Necessaries, to encourage their
Attendance upon all Divine Offices: So ready were our Ancestors to promote
Learning, and advance such Persons whose quick and acute Parts were eclipsed
under mean and slender Fortunes.

The City is governed by a Mayor, (who is Annually sworn upon Michaelmas-Day)
12 Aldermen, a Recorder, and diverse Common Council Men; and by their Charter
have Privileges for particular Companies and Societies amongst themselves, who
have several distinct Halls and Petty-Laws Enacted, for regulating and ordering
their Affairs in Trade: It has three Markets a Week, in which there is plenty
of Corn, and all other sorts of Provisions: And finally, it is observable, That
in the late Civil Wars it was never taken by the Rebels; and though the Scotch
Army came against it, yet they found such hot Service without, by the playing
of the Ordinance from within, that they were forced at last to Retreat
Ingloriously.

Not far distant from this City stands an ancient House, Rotheras.
belonging formerly to the Family of the Bodenhams, since in the Possession of
the Heirs of Mr. Van-Acker, which is one of the most delightful and sweetest
Seats in all this part of the County, having a spacious Park before it, the
River Wye behind it, pleasant Meadows on the one side, and fruitful Tillage on
the other, and having had such great plenty of Apple Trees belonging to it, as
we were credibly informed by those that knew it, that take but one Apple from
each Tree, and it would make a Hogshead of Sider; and the Country People there
have a Proverb, which goes current amongst them, Every one cannot live at
Rotheras, it having formerly been a place of too profuse Hospitality.

Having spent some time at Hereford, and being now upon the Borders of Wales,
we resolved to make a visit to some parts of that Country: To this purpose we
Traveled into Monmouthshire, Monmouthshire.
in some places very Fruitful, and in others as Barren, though Nature supplies
those Defects, by giving the Inhabitants great plenty of Iron, which proves to
them a very advantageous Commodity.

We found the ways near Monmouth very hard and rugged, Monmouth.
and that Town to be environed with Hills on all sides, the Ruins of its Wall
and Castle argue its great Antiquity; it has a fair Church and Marketplace,
with a Hall for the Assizes and Sessions; it is governed by a Mayor, Recorder,
and Aldermen, and the Inhabitants do generally speak both the Welsh and English
Tongue: They told us there of great Immunities and Privileges granted to them
by the House of Lancaster; but for nothing is it so much Renowned, as in that
it was the Native place of Henry V. that dreadful Scourge of the French, and
glorious Pillar of the English Nation, who Conquered Charles VI. King of
France, and maugre all the Scoffs and Affronts put upon him by the Dauphin, as
particularly when he sent him a Tun of Tennis-Balls in dirision of his Youth,
thinking him more fit to play with them, than to manage Arms, did at length
toss such Iron Balls amongst them, that the best Arms in France were not able
to hold a Racket to return them. Here likewise was born that famous British
Historian, Geoffrey, Archdeacon of Monmouth, who lived under King Stephen,
about the year 1150, of whom is made this Observation, by the Learned
Archdeacon of Carlisle, in his English Historical Library, that having a
peculiar Fancy for Stories surmounting all ordinary Faith, his History being
Epitomized by Ponticus Vitruvius, an Italian, is of a Complexion fitter for the
Air of Italy than of England: Hither, they say, do the Welsh Men come down in
great crowds out of South- Wales, as they do likewise to Ludlow out of North-
Wales, and make their Appeals upon diverse Occasions, and Commence their Suits,
which upon Court-days are very Numerous and Trivial, for the Yeomanry are
generally warm and litigious, and make often good Work and Sport too for the
Lawyers.

After we were passed this Town, we found the Ways still more troublesome and
uneasy, and were entertained with no other Objects, but what the stony Rocks,
and dangerous Cliffs, the towering Mountains, Vast high Mountains in Wales.
and craggy Precipices did afford us, being covered with Flocks of Sheep, or
Herds of Goats, or Multitudes of Oxen, which they call Runts. The Rusticks will
tell you, that upon the Black Mountain, or near it, are some Hills which are so
high, and whose Tops are so sharp, that two Persons may stand upon two
different Points thereof, and discourse with one another, and understand one
another with great Facility, although they must be forced to traverse a long
Circuit of Ground before they can meet to embrace each other: But though I will
not answer for the Truth of this Story, sure I am, that there are many of those
Mountains of so unconceivable a Height, and so steep an Ascent, that they seem
to be, as it were, Nature's Stair-Cases, by which we may climb up to some
higher Regions, and have an Intercourse and Correspondence with the Inhabitants
of the Moon, or converse more frequently and familiarly with the Aereal Demons.

Having with much Difficulty scrambled over some of these Mountains, we arrived
at a Town in the furthermost part of this County, which is called Chepstow,
Chepstow
which signifies in the Saxon Language, a Market, or place of Trade; this Town
has formerly been Fortified with Walls, though more naturally with Rocks, with
which it is environed on all sides. It is still remarkable for its Castle
built, as some affirm, by Julius Caesar, after he had conquered Britain, which
is strong, and generally well guarded with a convenient Garrison: It Is seated
upon the Wye, with a strong wooden Bridge over it near its fall into the
Severn. The Water flows here 11 or 12 Else high at every Tide, as likewise at
Bristol, an extraordinary proportion in comparison of most places besides on
the English Shore. The Lords hereof have anciently been Earls of Pembrook, or
Strighull, so called from a Castle of that Name, not far distant from this
place; the last of whom was Richard, Sir-named Strong-bow from his Nervous
Arms, wherewith he could most dexterously use his Bow, and was the first
Champion that made an Inroad for the Normans into the Kingdom of Ireland.

Whilst we were in these parts, we made the best Enquiries after South- Wales,
South Wales.
which we had not then an opportunity to travel over, and from some of the
Natives, who were very Communicative, and ready to make what discoveries they
could of the Rarities of their own Country, we made a shift to Collect this
short Account.

Brecknockshire.
Brecknockshire is one of the most Mountainous Counties of all Wales, but
between its Mountains there are many fruitful Valleys; it has four Market
Towns, amongst which Brecknock is the chief; Brecknock. Mounth-Denny- Hill.
three Miles from which is a Hill, called Mounth-Denny, that has its Top above
the Clouds, and if a Cloak, Hat, or the like, be thrown from the Top of it, it
will, as they Report, never fall, but be blown up again; nor will any thing
descend but Stones, or the like.

Lynsavathan Mere.
Two Miles East from the same place is a Mere called Lynsavathan, which (as the
People dwelling there say) was once a City, but was swallowed up by an
Earthquake, and this Water or Lake succeeded in the place: They Report
likewise, that after a long Frost, when the Ice of this Lake breaks, it makes a
fearful Noise like Thunder, possibly, because the Lake is encompassed with high
steep Hills, which pen in the Sound, and multiply it, or else the Ground may be
hollow underneath, or near the Lake.

Levenny River.
Through this Lake runs a River called Levenny, without mixtures of its Waters,
as may be perceived both by the Color of the Water, and also by the quantity
of it, because it is no greater afterward than when it entered the Lake.

Cadier Arthur.
Cadier Arthur, or Arthur's Chair, is a Hill so called on the Southside of this
County, from the Tops resembling the form of a Chair, proportionate to the
Dimensions of that great and mighty Person, upon the Top whereof rises a
Spring as deep as a Well, apiece, having no Streams issuing from it, and
yet there are plenty of Trouts to be found therein.

Radnorshire, in the East and South parts thereof, is more fruitful than the
rest, Radnorshire.
but is uneven and rough, with Mountains, yet it is well stored with Woods,
watered with running Rivers, and in some places with standing Pools; the Air is
cold and sharp, because the Snow continues long unmelted under the shady Hills,
and hanging Rocks, whereof there are many; and upon the Borders of it, which
lies next to Herefordshire, runs a long famous Ditch, which Offa, King of the
Mercians, with great Toil and Labor, caused to be cast up from Deermouth to
Wymouth, for the space of 90 Miles, to separate the Britains from the English:
There are in it four Market Towns, amongst which Radnor is the Principal,
Radnor.
being seated in a pleasant Valley near the River Somergil, which runs at the
foot of a Hill, on the Top whereof stands the Ruins of an ancient Castle,
demolished by that notorious Rebel, Owen Glendore.

Glamorganshire has a temperate Air, Glamorganshire.
and is generally the most pleasant part of all South- Wales; it is replenished
with diverse convenient Towns, amongst which Cardiff, Cardiff.
which stands near the Sea, where Robert the Eldest Son of William the
Conqueror died after a long Imprisonment, is reputed the most Eminent, a Mile
above which stands also on the River Taff Landaff, Landaff.
one of the four Episcopal Sees of Wales: It Is one of the most ancient Sees
either in England or Wales, claiming a direct Succession from the Archbishops
of Caer-leon upon Vske; it is adorned with a Cathedral consecrated to St.
Telran who was Bishop here, which Church Germanus and Lupus, French Bishops,
then Erected, when they had suppressed the Pelagian Heresy, preferring
Dubritius, a very devout Person, to this Bishopric, unto whom Meurick, a
British Lord, gave all the Lands which lie betwixt the two Rivers, Taff and
Elri Mr. Wharton's Angl. Sacr. Pars Secunda p. 667.
.

Minyd-Morgan Hill.
On the top of a certain Hill, called Minyd-Morgan, in this County, is a
Monument with a strange Character, which the Dwellers thereabouts say, if any
Man read the same, he will die shortly after.

The Springs by Newton.
Upon the River Ogmore, and near unto Newton, in a Sandy Plain, about a hundred
Paces from the Severn, Springs a Well, in which at full Sea in Summertime, can
hardly any Water be took up, but at the Ebb it bubleth up amain: it is most
observable in Summer, for in Winter the Ebbing and Flowing is nothing so
evident, because of the Veins of Water coming in by Showers, or otherwise;
besides, it is observed, that this Spring never rises up to the Spring, or
overfloweth; and Polybius relates the same of a certain Well at Cadiz.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, That in Britain is a Cave under the bottom of a
Hill, and on the top of it a gaping Chink, where when the Wind is gathered into
that Hole, and tossed to fro in the Womb of it, there is heard, as it were, a
Musical sound like that of Cymbals: It is not unlikely that he might point at
the Cave at Aberbarry in this Shire, Aberbarry Cave.
the Story agreeing very near with the Quality of this Cave: It is mentioned by
my Lord Bacon, in his History of Winds to this effect, That in a certain Rocky
Cliff, in which there are Holes, if a Man lay his Ears to them, he shall hear
diverse Noises, and rumbling of Winds; now these Noises Cambden says, are as
well to be heard at the lowest Ebb, as the highest Flood.

Carmarthenshire
Carmarthenshire, though a most Hilly Country, yet it has a wholesome Air, and
though the Soil be not very fruitful in Corn, it is well stored with Cattle, and
in some places yields good Pit-Coal for Fuel: On the South side the Ocean has
with so great Violence encroached upon the Land, that the Country seems to have
shrunk back in a fright, and withdrawn it self more inwardly for Security.

Carmarthen, Carmarthen.
the chief place of it being a pretty distance from the Sea, is situated
between pleasant Meadows and Woods: The Residence kept here by the Princes of
South- Wales, made it anciently very Eminent, and it became a Prey to the
Normans in the Reign of William the Conqueror.

Near Carreg-Castle are many Caves of great wideness within the Ground now
covered all over with green Swerd and Turf, The Caves and Well near
Carreg-Castle.
wherein it is probable, the Multitude, when unable to bear Arms, when the
Normans made their first Incursions into these parts, hid themselves during the
heat of the War; where also is a Well that like the Sea, Ebbs and Flows twice
in 24 hours.

That Cardiganshire being a Hilly Maritime Country, was not formerly planted,
Cardiganshire.
or garnished with Cities, may be gathered from that Speech of their Prince
Caratacus, who being taken Prisoner by the Romans, and carried to Rome; when he
had thoroughly viewed the Magnificence of that City, What mean you, says he,
when you have such stately Buildings of your own, to covet such poor and mean
Cottages as ours are?

Its chief Town is Cardigan, Cardigan.
pleasantly seated upon the Tivy near its fall into the Sea, which River parts
this County from Pembrokeshire; and over it here is a Stone Bridge, supported
by several Arches.

Pembrokeshire has a good temperate Air, Pembrokeshire.
considering it lies so near to Ireland; the Inhabitants are now many of them
Dutch Men, and formerly, as it appears from Giraldus Cambrensis, they were like
the Romans of old, very skilful in Soothsaying, by looking narrowly into the
Entrails of Beasts, and by their Manners and Language, are so near akin to the
English, that upon this Account this Country is called Little England beyond
Wales.

About Three hundred years ago it was reported, That for five Generations, the
Father of the Family, in the Earldom of Pembroke, whose Names then were
Hastings, never saw his Son, the Father dying always before the Son was Born.

At the time when Henry II. made his Abode in Ireland, there were extraordinary
violent and lasting Storms of Wind and Weather, so that the Sandy Shore on the
Coasts of this Shire were laid bare to the very hard Ground, which had lain hid
for many Ages; and by further Search, the People found great Trunks of Trees,
which when they were dug up, were apparently lopped, so that they might see
where the strokes of the Axe had been upon them, as if they had been given but
a little before; the Earth also looked very black, and the Wood of these Trunks
like Ebony, as the Report then went. At the first discovery made by these
Storms, the Trees we speak of, lay so thick, that the whole Shore seemed
nothing but a lopped Grove, from whence may be gathered, that the Sea has
overflowed much Land on this Coast, as it has done upon the Shoars of many
other Countries bordering upon the Sea, which is to be imputed to the Ignorance
of former Ages, who had not those excellent Arts and Ways to repress the Fury
of the Sea, which have been since discovered.

The Salmons-Leap at Lilgarran
About Kilgarran are abundance of Salmons taken, and there is a place called the
Salmons-Leap, as there is also in other Rivers, probably for this Reason, the
Salmon coveteth to get into fresh Water Rivers to Spawn, and when he comes to
places where the Water falls downright, almost Perpendicular, as some such
like places there be, he uses this Policy; he bends himself backwards, and
takes his Tail in his Mouth, and with all his force unloosing his Circle, on a
sudden with a smart Let-go, he mounts up before the fall of the Stream; and
therefore these downright falls, or little Cataracts are called the
Salmons-Leap.

S. David's
In this County is St. David's, now only a Bishop's, though formerly an
Archbishop's See, Translated from hence by Sampson the last Archbishop, to Dole
in Bretagne: Here is a fair Church, Dedicated to St. Andrew and St. David,
which being often spoiled and ruined by diverse foreign Pirates as standing near
the Sea, it was after this reedified by Bishop Peter the 49th Bishop of this
Diocese, who lived in the Reign of King Henry II. hard by which stands the
Bishops Palace, and fair Houses of the Chanter, (who is next to the Bishop,
here being no Dean) and of the other Dignitaries, all enclosed round with a
Wall, whereupon they call it a Close.

It Is reported by some Historians, That while David, Bishop of this See, who
was a very sharp Stickler against the Pelagian Heresy, was one day very
zealously disputing against those erroneous Tenants, the Earth, whereon he then
stood arguing, rose up by a Miracle to a certain height under his Feet.

From South- Wales our Curiosity led us over the Severn to Bristol, Bristol.
undoubtedly one of the principal Cities in this Kingdom; if we consider the
stateliness of the Buildings, or its Natural and Artificial Fortifications, the
Commodiousness of its Harbor, and its most pleasant Situation at the Influx of
the From into the Avon, which five Miles from hence empties it self into the
Severn, its lofty Churches, and its stately Palaces, the great Concourse of
Foreigners, as well as the great Number of Native Citizens upon which account
no wonder if both the Counties both of Somerset and Gloucester, do contend which
of them may be most glorious and happy in its Superiority over them, and yet
neither of them can attain to that Honor, it being both City and County of it
self, and having particular Privileges, immunities, and Laws of its own: It Is
governed by a Mayor, and two Sheriffs, twelve Aldermen, with other Ministers
and Officers befitting its Dignity; it is environed with a double Wall, and
adorned with two Navigable Rivers: Avon, which at Spring Tides, is 11 or 12
Fathom deep, and From, over which stands a Stone Bridge, with Houses built on
both sides, consisting of four large Arches: It is very convenient for the
Ships, and larger Vessels to Anchor in, and has a Key sufficiently commodious
for the Exporting and Importing of Goods out, or into the Merchants Houses;
this returns back into the River Avon, and so both by their mutual Union enrich
this City, and augment its Happiness. At what time it was first built, it is
very hard to determine, only it is supposed to take its Rise in the Declination
of the Saxon Empire, at the time when Harold is said to have sailed from
Brickstowa with a great Navy into Wales: Robert, Son of William the Conqueror
made choice first of this place, to begin his War against his Brother William
Rufus, and did encompass it with the Inner-Wall, as some conjecture, part of
which in some places is still to be seen; and what Spoils he then took, he
lodged here for safety in the Castle, about the year 1088, as the Saxon
Chronicle informs us, where himself afterward was kept Prisoner, as was also
King Stephen, by the Order of Mawd the Empress; from which time it has been
still receiving great Enlargements, and by degrees is risen to that Eminency we
now behold it; and as its Houses are fair, and its Streets clean, so are its
Gates strong, and its Churches glorious, consisting of Nineteen
Parish-Churches, whereof, though that which is the Cathedral, and
Mother Church, Dedicated to St. Austen, and endowed for a Bishop by King Henry
VIII. ought to have the Precedence, as well for that Honor, as for its
Antiquity too, which is remarkable by the Inscription over the Door of the
Porch, Rex Henricus II. and Dominus
Robertus filius Hardingi, filii
Regis Daciae, hujus Monasterii
Primi Fundatoris.


Ratcliff-Church.
Yet notwithstanding this, the Church of Ratcliff in the Suburbs of this City,
is a more noble Structure, being curiously Arched, and made a stately Fabric
all of pure Stone, without any Additions of wooden Beams, or Rafters; not one
Stick being made use of throughout its whole Compages: The Steeple is
foursquare, and of a very great height, but most artificially Carved with
diverse Sculptures, all at the Cost and Charge of one Mr. Cannins, a Merchant of
this City, about 110 years since, who in the Erecting this famous piece of
Architecture, employed at his own Expense, 800 Laborers and Artificers,
besides Masons and Carpenters, to the number of 300, in all, 1100 for three
years together, until the Work was totally completed, and in it his Monument
does now stand in Marble; but may his Memory be more lasting than the Marble,
and his Name more durable to succeding Generations than the noblest Mausoleum,
or Monument can make it.

St. Vincent's Rock.
On the Northern side of this City are several high and craggy Rocks, by which
the River Avon gently glides along, till it returns back again into the Severn,
one of the chief whereof is called St. Vincent's Rock, which has great plenty
of Pellucid Stones, commonly called Bristol Stones: The Learned Mr. Cambden
has observed, That their Pellucidness equals that of the Diamonds, only the
hardiness of the latter gives them the Pre-eminence; and yet certainly Nature
never made greater Demonstrations of her Art than in such wonderful Phenomenon,
as we here observed in this place, having made some of the Stones as smooth as
the most expert Jeweller could have done, as round and sharp, as broad above,
and small beneath, as the greatest Artist could have effected, shaping some of
them with four, some of them with six Angles apiece, like the Stones which we
usually set in Rings; and to make us still the more to admire her Perfections,
she has not given them all one Color, but some of them are like Crystal,
clear, and some are of a more ruddy and sanguine Complexion, according to the
nature of the Soil, by which means she causes the Production not to be unlike
the Parent.

There is one thing here still very remarkable; and that is the Hot-Well, The
Hot-Well.
which is just at the bottom of this Rock, and at the very brink of the River
Avon, by which, though it is still overflowed every Tide, yet it still retains
its natural heat, and by its constant Ebullitions, purges away all the Scum,
or saltish Froth it might have contracted from the salt Water; the Water is
exceeding wholesome, very good to purge away ill Humors, and purify the Blood,
it gives some ease in the Stone, and is useful, as is reported, for sore Eyes
too, which makes it much frequented and resorted to by all sorts of People.

From this Renowned City we traveled into Somersetshire, Somersetshire.
a County of a very rich Soil, Commodious for its Havens, pleasant for its
Fruit, profitable for its Pasture and Tillage, and sociable for its
Inhabitants. Some will have it, it takes its Name from its comfortable Air, and
the wholesome refreshing Gales it affords in Summer, which indeed then is truly
affirmed of it, though in Wintertime that part of it which lies low, moist and
fenny, must needs be troublesome and unhealthy; that part of it which lies
betwixt Bristol and Wells, is more Hilly and Mountainous; and the Hills called
Mendipp-Hills, Mendipp-Hills.
under which Wells is situated, are very remarkable, being in old Records
called Munedupp, or rather Moinedupp, from the many Knolls there visible, and
steepness of their Ascents; as also Mineragia from their richness of leaden
Mines, the Ore of which being dug thereabouts in great abundance, and
afterward melted down into Pigs and Sows, as they are there called, the Lead is
conveyed to Bristol, and from thence it is transported into diverse other parts.

Wells, Wells.
which is the chief City of the Province, receives its Denomination from the
variety of fresh and wholesome Springs, which bubble up about it, the Houses
therein are well contrived, and built of Stone, the Government by the Mayor and
his Brethren safe and regular; but the chief Ornament hereof is the Cathedral,
built by King Ina, in honor to St. Andrew, enlarged by Kenewulph, one of his
Successors, and since much enriched by the Liberality and Piety of diverse
Religious Benefactors; it was made a Bishop's See in the Reign of Edward the
Senior, and Athelmus was constituted the first Bishop here, Angl. Sacr, pars
prima, p. 556.
but afterward Johannes Turonensis united Bath and Wells together, and ever
since the Bishop has received both these Titles. In the late unhappy times of
Charles I. this Church underwent the same Calamities, which was then in this
Nation the Lot of all such Religious places, and became a grateful Prey to
Rapine and Sacrilege; but at the happy Restoration of our Religion and
Government, it returned again by degrees to its Primitive Magnificence and
Luster, and the Quire of it yields now to few for Workmanship, whether we
consider the Artificial Bosses very delicately gilded, which adorn it above, or
the curious Columns which uphold it below, or the Bishops Seat of Marble, set
out with most glorious Embellishments, supported with rich Pillars, and with
its Towering Pyramids being the Head and Ornament in a more especial manner of
the Quire, as he is of the Church: To this I may add the variety of carved
Images, which almost environ the Body of the Church without, containing the
History both of the Old and New Testament, and the curious Architecture of the
Chapter House, supported only by one large Column, which stands in the middle
of it; to all which may be added the Bishop's Palace built Castle-wise of great
Grandeur, which appositely becomes a Father of the Church to be seated in.

But the most remarkable, and which cannot but have the Suffrage of all
Travelers to be the most admirable piece of Nature's Workmanship in our
English Nation is a place called Ochy-Hole, some two Miles distant from this
City, it is a Cave under a high Rock, situated among the Mendipp-Hills I before
mentioned, of which I shall endeavor to give a Description as briefly as I can

Ochy-Hole.
After that we had with some difficulty climbed up to the top of a Rock, we went
along the Brow of the Hill till we came to the Mouth of the Cave, where a Door
being opened that gave us an Entrance, we lighted up Candles to direct us in
the way, and took Staffs in our Hands to support us in our Passage, and in we
ventured: Having gone forward some few paces, we found the Cave very craggy as
well as hollow, and so dark, that nothing sure but Tartarus it self could
resemble it; the Candles, though six in number, and of a large size, scarce
burning so bright, as one great one does usually in an open Room, we then
thought certainly we were arrived upon the Confines of the Infernal Regions, or
else were got into some such dismal place as the Italians tell us the Sibylline
Grotto is, and we began to be afraid we might probably meet with the same
unwelcome Entertainment the Boeotick Cave of Trophonius used to give those who
were so curious to visit it; namely, that though they entered in frolicksom and
merry, yet they should certainly return out of it sad and pensive, and never
laugh more whilst they lived upon Earth: Such dreadful Apprehensions did at
first seize upon some of us, and, indeed, we had cause to fear such dismal
Operations might proceed from this, as well as from the other, since both were
equally uncomfortable, by reason of their deprivation from the least
glimmerings of light, and consequently had the same Circumstances to beget both
horror and astonishment: however we plucked up our Spirits, and crept in one
after another, as fast as we could conveniently.

The Cave, as we went along, was parted into several kind of Rooms; the names
whereof our Guides informed us to be thus: The first was the Kitchen, in which
by the Door sticks out a large mass of the Rock, which they tell us was the
Porter's Head formerly the Keeper of this Cave; it seems to bear that kind of
resemblance, and though by that is a Stone which they call the Tombstone, under
which they report that he lies interred, and his Dog hard by him too,
metamorphos'd into the same lapideous Substance, yet their Transformations are
not so strange and wonderful, though perhaps something too fabulous to be given
credit to, as the variety the Rock affords into which they are incorporated,
part of it glistering like Silver, and part like Diamonds, and both appearing
very pleasant to the Eye. A little farther on the Right Hand is another piece
of the Rock, that bears the resemblance of a Bell; and on the Left, of a
Vessel, which they term a Ceave, in which the Beer of an old Sorceress (Cousin
to the famous Circe, Lady Governess of this dismal Cave) used to be worked in.
It Is a hollow Cistern of a considerable depth, always filled with Water, and
now and then flowing over, to which the drops of Water which continually
trickle down from the top of the Rock, add every moment fresh supplies. Hard by
this stands another Vessel of hers too, in which, they say, she used to wet her
Malt; they call it the East-Hurdle: It Is likewise hollow, and of a pretty
depth. And how appears to your view the old Witch her self, heating, as it
were, her Furnace, which looks at first view black and sooty, but inwardly
seems to be a Statue of Alabaster, by reason of its whiteness, though it is
most probably the product of Nature, not of Art, because the place is very
unfit and unsuitable for any Artist to exercise his Skill in, it being very often
so low, that it is impossible here and there for any one to stand upright in
it, and therefore it was that we were enforced frequently to stoop, and buckle
almost double, for fear of dashing our Heads against the Rock, until we came to
some Steps we were to descend, where the descent likewise was tedious and
frightful; for on the Right Hand the Rock hung over us very low and sloping,
and on the Left a Rivolet which, with a pretty loud noise, glides along the
Cave, made us cautious in our Steps, till at last we came Sweating into another
Room, which is called the Hall; and here at first sight we were entertained
with as great a Rarity as Nature has in all her Storehouses: It Is a Cistern
almost square, about six Foot each way, and of a considerable depth, always
brimful of Water, supplied by the drops which continually fall from above, and
yet never runs over: and the reason is this, because as the Water increases,
so does the Cistern too, and both of them had then been observed, within the
space of Twenty Years, to have received a considerable augmentation; which is
the more probable, because the Water is of a petrefying nature; and if any
thing be cast into it, in a short time it discovers this secret quality by an
outward incrustation of that which is thrown in. The drops which hang above are
like congealed Icecles, as clear as Crystal, some of which falling down into
the Water grow harder in substance, though they appear pretty pellucid. Round
about this Hall hang four Stones resembling four Flitches of Bacon, for the
outside is blackish, and the inside white. In this place the Daughter of the
old Sorceress has took up her residence, and appears to your Eye like a Statue
of a Woman big with Child; she is of a different color from her Mother, being
much more dusky. But nothing is more pretty to behold than those which they
call the Organ-Pipes, placed upon one side of the Rock, and are very like to
those we have in our Churches, some being of bigger, and some of lesser
dimensions; in the middle of a good reasonable thickness, though at the ends
sharp and slender. After some more difficulties in our Passage, and no less
dangerous than before, we came into another part of the Cave, more strange than
any we had yet seen: It Is a place which they call the Dancing-Room, so well
contrived and arched above, that Nature has here wrought what Art can never be
able to attain: If you look up, the variety of Colors which are there to be
seen by the light of the Candles, and the checquered Configurations of the
Rock, which is now very high above your Head, will both feast your Eyes and
refresh your Body, which by that time is sufficiently wearied by the
tediousness as well as the trouble of the Passage; for there is so great a
glistering, such a luster as it were of Silver and Precious Stones about you,
that you would be ready to mistake your self, and think that you were in the
Palace of some great Monarch of the World, and not in the subterraneous Caverns
of the Earth. If you look down, there you will find no stony, hard, rugged
tract to perplex you, but a fine, even, sandy Floor to divert you; and indeed
it was beyond expectation, that we who had beheld before nothing but such
craggy Stones and dangerous Passages, should at last arrive in so spacious and
delightful a Place: They told us it was not unusual for the Gentlemen and
Ladies in those Parts to bring Music and Dance here, the Music, by reason of
the Echo, making a Melody more sweet than ordinary. We paused and breathed a
little here, delighting our selves as well with it, as also with the
resemblance of a Chimney, which we took really to be one, it being of that
Fashion, and having in it a kind of black moist matter, which, if you touch, it
will stick to your Fingers and black them like Soot, and yet no Fire was ever
known to be there. But we were not as yet satisfied, though we were near half a
Mileunder Ground in a dismal Grotto, but went on farther to a place termed the
Cellar, that is curiously Vaulted; and it is very usual to carry Bottles of
Wine, and drink there upon a Stone Table, which is formed out of the Rock. In
this place lies a huge Massy Stone, which they call the Great Gun; the nature
of which is this, take it but up in your Hands, and let it fall down to the
Ground, and a great Gun cannot give a louder report: We tried this experiment
thrice, but we thought the Rock we were under would have rent in Pieces about
our Ears, yet they who were half way in the Cave, or at the Mouth of it, or
above it, heard no noise at all; this we found experimentally true, for one of
the Gentlemen who entered in with us, being beat out with the difficulty of the
Tracts, staid about the middle-way, and when we returned back to him, he
assured us, that where he stood he had heard nothing of a noise. But at length,
at the end of the Cellar, after we had gone down lower some few Steps, a
Rivolet there was that gave a period to our Progress; it was pretty deep, and
as clear as Crystal, the Water extreme cold, but very pleasant to the Palate,
and runs along the Cave sometimes in a small, and sometimes in a larger
Current, where taking up some of the congealed Matter that lies at the bottom
of it, we found it very hard, of a dusky color, and of a round consistency,
just as if a little company of Hailstones were cemented and joined together,
and the River running along under Ground, though its Head from whence it first
springs, like that of the Nile in Egypt, is not as yet plainly discovered, and
conveying it self at last out of the Cave sets, as they say, Thirty Mills on
work, after it comes into the adjacent Country.

When we were got thus far, almost a Mile under Ground, as our Guides told us,
we began to consider how we should return, and get out safe again from this
place of Horror and Darkness to the Regions of Light, being afraid to find the
same Difficulties we had encountered with in our entrance. But though the place
was something resembling an infernal Abyss, and our Passage into it proved so
troublesome and irksom, yet we came back without any toil, or rather with great
facility and pleasure, notwithstanding it is impossible to find out the way
without a Guide, there being so many windings and turnings; nor could the
Guides themselves ever extricate themselves out of this darksom Labyrinth, but
by the light of Candles, whereby they are enabled to steer their Course.
However at last we made a shift to creep up again to the top of the Rock, just
as merry Lucian tells us old Menippus did out from a hole in Lebadia, after he
returned from Hell, and had ended his Discourses with the Ghosts below, and
went back to the place where we first dismounted, and left our Horses to graze
with the neighboring Shepherds.

After we had got breath, Bath.
and were a little recruited, we mounted again, and rode away for Bath, which
by several old Writers is called Acamannum, Akemancester, from the old Roman
way called Akemanstreet-way; which, say Antiquaries, took its name from them
that being full of Aches and Achings, made it their way to this place for ease
of their Pains. We could not discover it, until we came just upon it, lying
low, and on all sides surrounded with Hills, out of which issue forth many
Springs of a wonderful virtue, though some of them are very Sulphurous and
unpleasant to the Taste. It is watered with the Avon, over which it has a
Stone Bridge, and is environed with a Wall, commodious for its Marketplace,
and handsomely adorned with three Churches, one whereof is very large and
spacious, built in the form of a Cathedral, the Steeple is apiece, and
has a Ring of tunable Bells, and the Quire is graced with a small but sweet
Organ: And in it are erected several ancient and stately Monuments of Persons
of great Quality, and of some Bishops of this See, who have been most noble
Benefactors to it. It Is governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, and the Assizes are
generally kept there in the Summer time: But that which is most remarkable, and
causes a concourse not only of the Nobility and Gentry, but of the Commonalty
too from all parts of the Nation hither, are the Baths, which are not inferior
to any whatever in Europe: The Waters herein are hot, of a blueish Color,
strong scent, and send forth thin Vapors; and as, without question, they have
strengthened many weak and feeble Limbs, so do they cure diverse Diseases, which
are incident and destructive to humane Nature, by causing Men to Sweat either
more or less proportionably to their Distempers. There are four or five which
are principally in request, one Triangular, and called the Cross-Bath, from the
Cross that stood formerly in the midst of it; it is about twenty-five Foot long,
and as broad at one end, the heat of it gentler than the rest, because it has
fewer Springs. Whilst we continued in the Town, we were presented by the
Sergeant of this Bath with a piece of Earth, which was dug up here at the
loss of a Spring; it smelt like Sulphur, and burnt like Soot. We saw likewise a
piece of an Elm-Tree, which was dug up at the same time, together with the
Skull of a Woman taken up then too, which are supposed to have lain there many
Years before the Bath was so enclosed. The Orders are strict and regular, and
Persons of the greatest Quality prefer to bathe here, and to drink the Water
hereof with Limona Sugar, rather than of the other. Hard by this stands the Hot
Bath, not much frequented save by those who have quite lost the use of their
Limbs, the Water hereof being much hotter than the rest. Not far from this is
that which they call the Leper's Bath, which is believed to be very efficacious
against that loathsome Disease, and an Hospital or Spittle, built by Reginald,
Bp. of Bath, for the use of poor, aged, decrepit People. About the middle of
the Town, nearer to the great Church, are the King and Queen's Baths, divided
only by a Wall; the last having no Spring in it, but receiving the Water from
the King's Bath, which is about 60 Foot square, and has in the middle of it
many hot Springs that make its heat the greater: Each of these two Baths have a
Pump to pump Water upon the Diseased; and I have observed some Persons who have
been troubled with great Pains in their Heads, or other parts of their Body,
have suffered very great quantities of this scalding Water to be poured on them
by their Guides. Hereabouts, formerly, was found an ancient Statue of Hercules
amongst other great Monuments of Antiquity, holding a Serpent in his Hand,
which was discovered in the Ruins of an ancient Temple, perhaps that which was
here Consecrated to Minerva, and it might be thought very convenient, that he
being the Tutelary Patriot of such places, and having so frequently exposed
himself to hard Labors, and manifold Dangers, might now and then ease, and
refresh his wearied Limbs by such Purgations, as the Bath could afford him. In
this, and other Baths, hang diverse Crutches of lame and decrepit Persons, which
they left behind them as Trophies of their Recovery, being perfectly cured of
their Lameness and Infirmity, and restored again to their former Health and
Strength. There is still one behind, which is called the Horse- Bath, which is
said to be as effectual for the cure of lame and foundred Horses, and the
removal of some other Distempers, which are incident to those kind of Animals.

Wiltshire.
Having passed away some few days very pleasantly in this Town, we set forward
for Wiltshire, a County healthy, pleasant, and fruitful; the Northern part of
it is Hilly, and has formerly been shaded with thick Woods, and well watered
with wholesome Springs; the Southern part is plain and open, very convenient for
feeding great Flocks of Sheep, and through the middle of it, from East to West,
a great large Ditch runs across, called Wanedike, the Banks whereof, as the
Vulgar will have it, were thrown up by the Devil on a Wednesday: But the
Learned Mr. Cambden is of Opinion, That it was made by the West- Saxons, for a
Boundary to their Kingdom against the Mercians: We traveled over some of these
wide and large Plains for near twenty Miles, until we arrived at a place
called Stonehenge, some four or five Miles distant from Salisbury.

Stonehenge.
It is called by ancient Historiographers, Chorea Gigantum, from its Magnitude,
and contains within the Circumference of three hundred Foot, a rude and
indigested Mass of vast large Stones, rough, and of a gray Color, 25 Foot in
length, 10 in breadth, and 8 in thickness: they look as if they were hewn
square, and are joined two and two together, and every couple has a third
Stone lying across, which is fastened by Tenons that enter into Morraises, not
closed with any Mortar; it appears as if they had been set in three Ranks going
round as Circles one within another, whereof the uttermost and largest contain
in compass about three hundred Foot, but the other Ranks are decayed, and some
of them being fallen down to the Ground, as it is something difficult to
compute their Number, so if they be rubbed, or scraped, and Water thrown upon
the Scrapings, they will (say some) heal any green Wound, or old Sore. It is
very strange to think how such vast Bulks should happen in this place, whenas
there are no other kind of Stones even of smaller Dimensions near, or about it,
therefore some not irrationally conjecture that they are not Natural, or had
their first growth here, but were Artificially cemented into that hard and
durable Substance from some large Congeries of Sand, and other unctuous Matter
mixed together; Just as there has been visible at Rome, Cisterns made of Sand
and Chalk so artificially and closely conjoined, that they have passed for the
Product of Nature, and not of Art, and therefore it is not an improbable
Conjecture, which is made by the Author of the History of Alchester, Published
amongst other Parochial Antiquities of Oxfordshire, by the Industrious Mr.
Kennet, that they are not, as some Fable, Giants Stones fetched from
Mount-Karel in Ireland, by Merlyn's Art, that Renowned Magician, but might be
made out of that Cliff over against old Sarum, the color of which Clay they
still represent; and being scraped with a Knife, a Man may discern this Clay
cemented with some other glewy Substance, as Plaster of Paris and such like,
Erected not in Memory of those Nobles, whose Tombs in heaps of Earth appear
still thereabouts, slain treacherously by Hengist, when he called, his
Son-in-law Gourtigern, and the Britains to feast there; but for a Trophy of
some Memorable Victory thereabouts obtained, as Necham the Poet says, by Vter
Pendragon; or as others, by Arthur the Valiant, and to that seems the ancient
Bard Theliesinus to allude: But Necham's Verse is this: Uter Pendragon molem
transvexit ad Ambri
Fines de victo Victor ad host means.
Uter Pendragon brought these Stones to Ambrosbury Coast,
For Trophies of his Victory, had on the Pagan Host.


Salisbury.
From hence we rode to Salisbury, or Sarisbury, which some derive from Caesar's
Burg, and in our way beheld the place where formerly old Wilton, the Metropolis
of this County, stood which had then upon its Gates, in honor to the Romans, a
black Spread-Eagle: It was also called Willey, or Ellandun, that is, Elen's
Town: for here, or at Chloren, or at old Sarum, says the Alchester Historian,
being, before Guns were invented, an invincible hold, St. Helen, at her return
out of Wales, did remain as well for her better Safety; as also to be near the
South-Seas, to expect daily News and Tidings from Constantine the Emperor in
the East Parts; as also from his Sons, her Nephews, who were in the Western.
It Is situated (says Cambden) where the two Rivers, Willeybrook, and Adderbourn
meet: and here it was that Egbert King of the West- Saxons in the year 823,
fought the second Battle against Beorwulphus the Mercian, so bloody on both
sides, that the River Avon was dyed red with the Blood of the Slain: And in the
year 871, Alfred having maintained a long Fight against the Danes, upon the
first onset had Success, but was at last quite Routed, his Forces defeated, and
himself forced to fly to save his own Life. In the Saxon Reign it mightily
flourished, and Edgar building there a Nunnery, made his Daughter Editha, Lady
Governess thereof, afterward being long exposed to the Fury of Suenus the
Dane, who was its mortal Enemy, and deserted by the Bishops, who were its main
support, it went to decay, and almost returned again into its first Principles
of Nothing; and so Sorbiodunum, or old Salisbury then, and since new Salisbury,
which has sprang from that, have quite extinguished its Primitive Luster and
Glory. Old Salisbury was seated upon a Hill, exposed much to Winds and Storms,
very dry, barren and uncomfortable, by reason of the great defect of Water
throughout the whole City, though it was well fortified, as appears still by some
remaining pieces of old Walls. Kinricus the Saxon; in the year 553 first
sacked, and took it, being very fortunate in all his Enterprises he undertook
against the Britains; and in the Reign of Edward the Senior, Osmund, Bishop of
Sherborne, Translated the Sea hither, and built a Cathedral Church, though
Suenus the Dane, not long after having taken and burnt the City, that likewise
underwent the same fatal Calamity, and were both levelled with the Ground, till
both of them were raised again in William the Conquerour's time; for after that
he had made his Progress throughout England, he at last summoned all the three
Orders of the Nation to meet here, and take the Oaths of Allegiance to him: But
after this, in the Reign of King Richard I. the Citizens being oppressed by the
insolency of the Soldiers, and very much incommoded by a continual want of
Water, resolved to free themselves from these Inconveniences, by transplanting
themselves into another Soil, which they unanimously agreed upon, and seated
themselves about a Mile from this place, in a more pleasant Valley, where the
Flowery Meads, and Crystal streamed Rivers gave them a more cheerful Welcome,
and endearing Entertainment. After the Plantation of this new Colony, Richard
Pore first Bishop of Chichester, and then of this place, did likewise
transplant the Cathedral from that barren dry place, in which it was first
Erected near to the old Castle of the Earls of Salisbury, and built it at last
in a more pleasant Soil, and by the Advice and Contrivance of the most
excellent and ingenious Artificers, not only Natives, but Foreigners, whom he
drew hither by his large Rewards, he raised it to that Splendor and
Magnificence, that it now vies both for Stateliness and Workmanship, with the
most noted Cathedrals throughout the whole Kingdom. The Steeple is built in
form of a Pyramid, very high, and as the Pole Star directs the Pilot at Sea, so
does this Spire direct the wandering Traveller over the Plain, discovering its
lofty Head near the distance of twenty Miles; but the Admirableness of the
Structure consists in this, That it has as many Pillars as there are Hours in
the Year, and these not so closed, but you may see the Interstices betwixt
them, and shake some that are of a lesser size; as many Windows as there are
Days in the Year, and these very Artificially adorned, and curiously painted to
Admiration; and as many Gates as there are Months, all which are thus comprised
in an ingenious Copy of Verses: Mira canam, Soles quot continet Annus, in una
Tam numerosa, ferunt, aede fenestra micat.
Marmoreasque tenet fusas tot ab art Columnas,
Comprensas horas quot vagus Annus habet.
Totque patent portae, quot mensibus Annus abundat,
Res mira, at vera res celebrata fide.


In English thus: How many Days in one whole Year there be,
So many Windows in one Church we see.
So many Marble Pillars there appear,
As there are Hours throughout the Fleeting Year.
So many Gates as Moons one Year does view,
Strange Tale to tell, yet not so strange as true.
And as the Church was then Re-edify'd, so was the City much enlarged, by which
means since its Houses are grown stately; its Guild Hall for the use of the
Mayor and Aldermen is beautiful; its Churches are many and glorious; its
Streets, by reason of diverse Rivolets, conveyed in Channels through the midst
of them sweet and cleanly; its Gardens delightful, and fragrant, and nothing
wanting to please and gratify either the Eye or Palate.

From hence we coursed over the Plains directly to Winchester, Winchester.
which by Antiquaries has been called Venta Belgarum, as Bristol was Venta
Simenorum; and amongst the Britains it had the Name likewise of Caer-Guent: It
was of great Repute amongst the Romans, and no less famous in the time of the
Saxons, and flourished as greatly under the Power of the Normans, till once or
twice both Fire and Sword in an envious Emulation strove together to deface it;
but it is grown again since very fair and populous, large and stately, is
computed within the Walls to be about a Mile in length, is pleasantly seated in
a Vale betwixt two Hills, and has six Gates which give Entrance into the City,
though it was much defaced in the late Civil Wars; as likewise the Castle which
formerly has been accounted altogether impregnable. This is the Castle that
Mawd the Empress having held out, after she had taken it, a considerable time
against King Stephen, and after by a close Siege being in great danger to be
Re-taken, fearing by that means to fall into her Enemies Hand, she secured her
self by this cunning Stratagem; she commanded it should be given out for a
Truth, that she was certainly dead; and upon this ordered her self to be
carried out upon a Bier, as if she had been so indeed, and by this means
provided for her own safety. Upon the Wall hereof hangs the Round Table so much
talked of by the Vulgar, and called King Arthur's Round Table; whether this can
justly claim so great Antiquity, as is attributed to it, I shall not undertake
to determine; yet certain it is, that these very Tables are of a long standing,
for formerly, after Justs and Tournaments, when there happened to be any great
Entertainments amongst the valiant Champions of the Nation, it was usual for
all such to sit round them, Mr. Whartons Angl. Sacr, pars prima, p. 191.
least any difference should arise amongst the Noblemen about Superiority of
place. About the middle of the City stands the Cathedral, built by Kenelwalch
King of the West- Saxons, who, after the expulsion of Agilbert, constituted
Wine a Saxon born and ordained in France the first Bishop there, and it has
been Dedicated to diverse Patrons accordingly, as it has been re-edified by
different Benefactors, viz. to Amphibalus, St. Peter, St. Swithin, and now to
the holy and undivided Trinity. Here it was that Queen Emma, upon the suspicion
of Adultery, by the trial of Fire Ordeal, walking barefoot over nine hot
Plough-shares without hurt, ascribed this miraculous Proof of her Innocence to
St. Swithin, Patron of this Church, and afterward in a grateful acknowledgment
bestowed great Donatives upon it. It was always held in great Veneration by the
Saxons, because diverse of their Kings were Interred in it, and was called by
them the old Monastery, to distinguish it from the new one founded by Alured,
in which he placed a Fraternity of Presbyters, who it seems, by a great Miracle
of the Cross speaking, and disapproving their Order, were all expelled from
thence by Dunstan, Archbishop of Canterbury, who substituted Monks in their
Room: These Monasteries were joined so near to one another, that it did often
create a Disturbance at their Devotions, and hence arose great Feuds and
Contentions amongst the Brethren: besides a great Current of Water running from
the Western Gate of the City in diverse Channels to this new Monastery, did
stagnate, and so caused the Air to be foggy and unwholsom. Hereupon, the
Church, about two hundred years after it was built, was Translated to the
Northern part of the City, which they call the Hide, where, by the Permission
of King Henry I. the Monks built another fair and stately Monastery, which in
the space of a few years, by the Treachery, as some suppose, of Henry, Bishop
of Winchester, was reduced to Ashes: In the Conflagration whereof it is Storied,
That the rich Crucifix given by King Canutus, who was buried here in the old
Monastery, says the Saxon Chronicle, in the year 1036, in the making of which
was expended the Revenues of one whole year throughout this Kingdom, was burnt
likewise; after which another Monastery was erected, which continued till the
Expulsion of Monks out of England, in the Room of whom there have since been
placed here a Dean and twelve Prebendaries. The Church is now curiously adorned
with Monuments of ancient Hero's and Bishops of this See. William Wainfleet
Founder of Magdalen-College in Oxford, lies here Entombed with his Heart in his
Hand, and Cardinal Beaufort, and Bishop Gardener that bloody Scourge to the
poor Protestants in Q. Mary's days, who did so insatiably thirst for the Blood
of Queen Elizabeth, but was always crossed in his most wicked Inclinations;
there lies also the Lord Weston, Earl of Portland, whose Monument is of Brass,
and by him his Father, who lies in Marble; here is likewise preserved the Chair
of State, in which Queen Mary was Married to King Philip, and near to it lies
Entombed, the Countess of Exeter, who was Godmother to King Charles II. and
very remarkable is the Chapel of Bp. Fox, where he now lies, Founder of Corpus
Christi-College in Oxford, which he built for his own use, together with his
Study and Press for his Books all in one place; in the Quire under a plain flat
Marble Stone, lies the Body of Will. Rufus. This King received his mortal Wound
as he was Hunting in the new Forest, by Sir Walter Tyrrel, who shooting at a
Deer, hit this Prince unawares in the Breast, of which he died immediately, and
was brought hither and buried in this place; though afterward, they say, his
Bones were translated and put into the same Coffin with those of King Canutus.
At the West End of the Quire stand two Statues in Brass very curiously wrought,
the one of King James I. and the other of his Son King Charles I. of Blessed
Memory; but that which is most remarkable in this Cathedral, is the rich and
famous Monument of William of Wickham, who from a mean Beginning, by the Favor
of Edward III. was created Bishop of Winchester, and having after this run
likewise through all the Grand Stages of Temporal Honor in this Kingdom,
though now and then the Wheel of Fortune turned very cross against him, he by
that means became no less a Benefactour to the Church, than he still approved
himself an Ornament to the State; and to perpetuate his Name with the greater
Glory to succeeding Generations, he built in this City a College, and liberally
endowed it for the Education of Youth, and for a Seminary to New College in
Oxford, also founded by him; and notwithstanding the great Expenses he must
needs have been at, in Erecting two such large and noble Structures as these
were, he Rebuilt likewise the present Body of the Cathedral, where his own
Body lies Interred: Nor did all this lessen his Charity, or diminish his
Hospitality, for he fed both Rich and Poor, as his Tomb Stone informs us, and
for all this died exceeding Rich; and deceasing in the Reign of King Henry IV.
when he was Fourscore years old, he bequeathed great Legacies to Persons of all
Degrees, and gave something at his Death to every Church throughout his Diocese
See the Life of this Great and Worthy Prelate. VVrote by Tho. Chandler
Chancellor of Oxford. Angl. Sacr. Pars a. p. 355.
. Here is one thing yet further not to be passed by in Silence, That when King
Alfred divided his Kingdom into Counties, Hundreds, and Tythings, he had an
Inquisition taken and digested into a Register, called Dome-boc, which was
reposited in the Church of Winchester, thence called Codex Wintoniensis, a
Model afterward followed by William the Conqueror, in his Domes-Day Book,
which Mr. Kennet observes was for some time kept in the same Church.

But to return again into our Discourse relating to the City, we find it not
only to have attained a great Eminency for its Religious Houses, for its
pleasant Gardens, for its Brooks and Meadows, for its public and private
Edifices, for its great Hall, wherein the Assizes are usually held for the
County of Southampton, not to be paralleled for length and breadth by any
throughout this Nation, except Westminster, but likewise for the true and exact
Rules of Equity and Justice, which are followed and prescribed by its chief
Magistrates and Governors, and before we take our leaves of it, we shall add
for a Conclusion, that as in the time of Athelstane King of the West- Saxons,
that Invincible Hero, Guy Earl of Warwick, is reported, in a single Combat, to
have slain Colobraild, the Danish Giant in Hide-Mead near this City; so
Waltheof, Earl of Northumberland, being beheaded here without the Walls, in the
Reign of William the Conqueror, is observed as the very first Example of
Beheading in this Island.

Having took a sufficient Prospect of the great Curiosities of this place,
Surrey,
we advanced forward into Surrey, q. d. South- Rey, from its Situation on the
Southside of the Thames, the Saxons calling that Rey which we term a River. The
Skirts of this County are noted for their Fruitfulness; and the middle parts
for their Barrenness, which has occasioned the saying, That Surrey is like a
course piece of Cloth with a fine List: However, in point of Health, the middle
parts have the advantage, besides the Pleasure they yield by their Downs in
Hunting and Horse-Races. It Is adorned is most places with very stately Palaces
of Gentlemen and Merchants, who by reason of the Parks well stored with Deer,
and the Rivers replenished with Fish, have no Divertisement wanting to recreate
their Bodies, and gratify their Senses.

The first Town of Note we ariv'd at here was Farnham, Farnham,
receiving its Denomination very probably from the great quantity of Fern which
grows thereabouts. It Is a Town of no very large Extent, but situated in a
wholesome Soil, and a pleasant Air; and for its further Accommodation, has the
conveniences of a Market for those Commodities which the Inhabitants mostly
want: Here it was, that in the year 894, says the Saxon Chronicle, King Alfred
routed a great Army of the Danes, with a small Party, taking from them a
considerable Booty, and putting them to flight to the River Colne in Essex:
After this, when King Stephen gave a general Toleration for building Castles
and Fortresses, Henry his Brother, then Bishop of Winchester, built for himself
in this place a magnificent Castle, but proving in length a Nursery and
Receptacle for Sedition and Rebellion, King Henry III. quite demolished and
pulled it down, though afterward it was again Re-edified by the Bishops of
Winchester, to whom it peculiarly belongs, and is at present a glorious Seat
for the Prelates of that See.

Guilford.
Passing from hence through Guilford, a Town of good Note, seated on the River
Wey, consisting of three Parishes well frequented, and full of fair Inns, we
observed here still the Ruins of a large old Castle near the River, and have
since learnt, That the Saxon Kings had formerly a Royal Mansion here, in whose
times it was a place of a greater Extent.

Kingston.
Coming after this to Kingston, a Market Town of good Resort, we were informed,
that it went anciently by the Name of Moreford, but after that, changed its
Name to Kingston, when it had the Honor to become a place for the Coronation
of the Saxon Monarchs; Athelstan, Edwin, and Ethelred, being here Crowned Kings
upon an open Stage in the Marketplace.

Richmond.
And now we began to draw near to our Journies end; but calling in at Richmond,
heretofore called Sheen, we found it still a Town of a considerable Account,
though perhaps no less in the Reign of King Edward III. who, when he had lived
sufficiently both to Glory and Nature, died at this very place. King Henry VII.
gave it the Name of Richmond, from the Title he bore before he obtained the
Crown of England, and ended his Life here, as did after him (here likewise) the
most Glorious and Puissant Queen Elizabeth.

From hence pacing along by the Noble River Thames, which is on both sides of
it wonderfully graced with many pleasant Towns and Villages, we arrived again
in safety at the Renowned Metropolis of England.

The End of the First Journey.
To the Right Worshipful George Elcock of Barham, Esquire One of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the County of Kent.
SIR,
THE great Civilities you are naturally inclined to show all Travelers, who
have seen and learnt so much abroad your self, is a sufficient Encouragement to
me to lay these Papers before you, not doubting but that they will find a
favorable Acceptance from so worthy a Friend, whose experienced Candor and
Ingenuity makes him so signally Eminent amongst all such, who have themselves
any true sparks of it.

What it was that moved me to publish this Itinerary, as it will fully appear
by the Preface I have prefixed, so if I add further, that the natural and
congenite Propensity that is in Mankind to pay their Regards, and show what
Service they can in their Stations and Capacities to their own Native Country,
in which, as Lipsius elegantly expresses it, Infantia vagiit, pueritia lusit,
juventus exercita and educata est, was the next motive, I hope they will
jointly be a sufficient Apology for this Topographical performance. If I may
flatter my self that it will any way gratify your nice and curious Palate, I
shall not doubt, but it will then find a powerful Advocate to plead for such
Slips and Imperfections, to which things of this nature may be unwillingly
obnoxious; however, it will fully answer my design, if it may be accepted of as
a grateful Acknowledgment for the repeated Acts of Kindness conferred upon

Your most Humble Servant, James Brom.

AN ACCOUNT OF Mr. BROME'S Three Years TRAVELS, OVER England, Scotland, and
Wales.
A Narrative of his second Journey.
AFTER some few days respite and abode in London, we began a new Progress, and
passing through Newington, Totnam-High-Cross, and Edmington, Towns of good
Note, by reason of diverse Gentlemen, Merchants, and rich Citizens that inhabit
there, we came to Waltham in Essex, of which County I shall have occasion to
speak more fully hereafter.

Waltham was of old a small Village, Waltham in Essex.
or rather a desolate place beset with Woods and Briars, which one Tovius in
the declination of the Saxon Empire, a great Courtier, and a very wealthy and
potent Man, first Founded, and planted there a Colony of some sixtysix Men;
afterward he deceasing, Athelstan his Son was deprived of his Patrimony, and
Edward the Confessor bestowed it upon Harold, a great Favorite of his, who,
having taken possession of it, constituted in it a Church of Secular Canons,
and Dedicating it to the Honor of the Holy Cross, made his Vows here in hopes
of a Victory, when he went to fight against William the Conqueror; but Harold
being slain, and his Army quite routed by the Normans, his Body was begged by
his Mother, of the Norman Duke, and buried in this place. After this, the same
Abbey, in the Reign of K. Henry II. was by the King's Command much enlarged, and
Regular Canons placed there to the number of Twenty-four, and Dedicated to the
Holy Cross and St. Lawrence, says the most Ingenious Mr. Tanner, in his
Notitia Monastica. Richard I. still more augmented it, and so did King Henry
III. with Fairs and Markets, appointing one Fair in the year to last for seven
days together.

Hartfordshire.
We staid not long here, and therefore were presently in Hartfordshire, a County
every where abounding with fertile Fields, sat Pastures, shady Groves, and
pleasant Rivolets; and the first Town here of any Remark, which presented it
self to our View, was Ware, Ware.
which was built, say Antiquaries, by Edward the Senior, King of the West-
Saxons, about the year 914. It Is watered by the River Ley, and has a great
Market for all sorts of Grain; it is populous, and well inhabited by persons of
very good Quality and lying in the great Road to London, frequented constantly
by persons of all degrees; and although Hartford be the Eye of the County, it is
now inferior to this place, since all Passages for Carriages being there
obstructed during the Barons Wars, were here freely opened to the great
Advantage of this Town: But the most remarkable thing in Ware is the New River,
or Aquaeduct, conveyed above 20 Miles together in a continued Channel from this
place to Islington, from whence the Water thereof is dispersed in Pipes laid
along in the Ground for that purpose into abundance of Streets, Lanes, Courts,
and Alleys of the City and Suburbs of London; the happy Contrivance whereof all
the Citizens have daily Experience, and ought to Immortalize the Name of their
Inventor, Sir Hugh Middleton, who bestowed this most excellent Gift upon them,
and consummated this good Work so useful and beneficial to the City at his own
proper Cost and Charges.

We lay here one Night in the company of some Friends, Puckeridge and Barkway.
who came along hither with us for their Diversion; but the next Morning taking
a solemn farewell of them, we set forward on our Journey, and passing through
Puckeridge, and Barkway, Towns of good Hospitality and Entertainment for
Strangers, we were quickly arrived within the Precincts of Cambridgeshire.

This is an extreme pleasant open Country, Cambridgeshire.
and a place of such Variety and Plenty, that fruitful Geres with a smiling
Countenance, invites the Industrious Peasant to behold with Joy the Fruits of
his Labor, whilst she crowns his Industry with a plentiful Harvest; and as if
the Earth strove not to be behind hand with him in conferring other Largesses,
she in diverse places makes some Annual Additions of another Crop, by adorning
the Fields with large Productions of Saffron, by which great Profits do
continually arise: Besides, here it is that the green Banks of murmuring
Rivers, and sunny Hills bedecked with diversity of Plants and Simples, call
forth the Students from their musing Cells, and teach them Theory as well as
Practice, by diving into their Natures, contemplating their Signatures, and
considering their Qualities and various Effects. In a word, here is nothing
wanting for Profit or Delight; and though the Northern parts of the County
toward the Isle of Ely, lying somewhat low, are moist and Fenny, yet that
Defect is abundantly supplied by the Plenty of Cattle, Fish, and Fowl bred in
those Fenns, and which makes the Air more healthy, the gentle Gales which are
frequently stirring, drive away all thick Mists and Fogs which in some parts
most annoy it; and by this means it is become a fit Seat for the Muses to
inhabit, and we have no reason to complain of the Soil, since our Wise
Ancestors thought it good and convenient to plant a Colony of Learned Men here,
and place one of the Eyes of our Nation in this spot of Ground, the famous and
most glorious University of Cambridge, which we could not in Honor pass by
without a Visit.

Cambridge.
Cambridge was formerly called by the Britains, Kaergrant, and Grantbridge,
from a fair large Bridge made over the River Grant, which is now called Came,
from whence the Town it self receives its Name: It is increased much by the
Ruins of Grantchester, sometimes a famous City situated a little above a Mile
from this place, and the Castle that is beyond the River, the Ruins of which
are still to be seen, was built, as ancient Records testify, in the first year
of William the Conqueror; and in the fifth year of William Rufus, in the year
of our Lord, 1092, a Nobleman of the Norman Blood, named Picot, a Vice-comes,
or Sheriff, at the request of Hugolin his Wife, founded a Church, and Dedicated
it unto St. Giles near to this Castle, placing in it a Convent of six black
Canons, which was twenty years after removed to Barnwell, a Village near a Mile
distant from this place, by Pain Reverell, where he built a Priory to the
Honor of St. Giles, and St. Andrew, and endowed it with Revenues for the
maintenance of thirty Canons of St. Austin's Order: As Mr. Tanner informs us.

As to the Antiquity of the University of Cambridge, if any Credit may be given
to King Arthur's Diploma, which says, That King Lucius was converted by the
preaching of the Doctors of Cambridge, for which reason he gave Privileges to
that University, which were after confirmed by King Arthur; or if the Bull of
Pope Honorius the First, may be allowed Authentic, which bearing date, Feb.
20: An. Dom. 624. makes mention of the Privileges granted to the University of
Cambridge, by Pope Eleutherius, and takes notice of Doctors and Scholars
Resident there at that time, Why then as it is truly observed by our most
Learned Bishop of Worcester, in his Antiquities of the British Churches: This
is a sufficient Proof to all that rely on the Pope's Authority, that in the
time of King Lucius, and Eleutherius, there might be a sufficient number of
Learned Men in Cambridge, to have instructed King Lucius in the Christian
Faith; and that it is not improbable that Eluanus and Medwinus might be of that
number, especially considering that Camboritum, or as many Copies have it,
Camboricum, was a Roman Colony, and mentioned amongst the best Copies among the
28 Cities of Britain, and that the Roman Colonies had their Schools of
Learning, wherein the several Professors of Arts and Sciences did instruct both
the Roman and British Youth. But what ever Favors the Romans were pleased to
confer upon this place, it is certain, it met afterward with very great
Encouragement from diverse other Benefactors; and by the Countenance of
Segebert, King of the East Angles, and other Saxon Princes, it held up its Head
in a flourishing Condition, till about the year 1100, as the Saxon Chronicle
informs us. The cruel and merciless Danes laid all waste before them, and Swene
their King with Fire and Sword, burnt this place to the Ground, contrary to
what we read of the Roman Captain Sylla, who, though otherwise as furious as a
Tiger, or a Lion; yet when he raged in Greece, spared the much celebrated
Athens for Minerva's sake: Yet, nevertheless, when these Storms were once blown
over, in the time of the Normans Learning, began to peep out again, and seeing
all was clear and quiet, sprouted up a fresh, recruiting it self by degrees,
till at last, in progress of time, it returned to its Primitive State, and
flourished more vigorously than ever it did before: For in the Reign of K.
Henry I. for his Learning, sirnam'd Beauclere, it began again to be new
modeled into an University; and hereupon Religious Houses and Halls were
immediately erected, and they have ever since been increasing to the number of
Sixteen, namely, Twelve Magnificent Colleges, and four famous Halls, where the
Buildings are so Uniform, the Chapels so Stately, the Privileges so Great, the
Government so Regular, the Orders so Strict, the Ceremonies so Decorous, and
the Preferments so Honorable, that in all the European Countries, no, nor
perhaps in all the Nations of the World can we find out one University,
excepting that of Oxford, so richly endowed, so famous and renowned for its
Structures, so admirable for its Discipline, and so courted and addressed to
for its most Polite Learning: So that when Erasmus was pleased to give us a
Strain of his Eloquence, in Decyphering both their Characters, he does it but
in such a Style as is very suitable to the Subject, and the Elogy is no less
than what they justly deserve. I have before this, says he, been extremely
well satisfied, and have exceedingly rejoiced, that England has constantly
been furnished with Men, who have been as Eminent for their Parts, as Learning:
But now I begin to envy her Felicity, (had he lived now in our days, he would
still have had greater reason for this Harangue) by reason that she is now so
enriched with all kind of Literature, that by taking the Commendation thereof
from other Regions, she does marvellously obscure and eclipse their Glory, and
yet this Commendation is not only due to England at this present time, for it
is well known for diverse years past, to have flourished with persons of deep
and profound Learning: The Universities prove this to be true, which have for
their Antiquity and Worthiness contended with, and outstripped the most ancient
and celebrated Academies, that ever were planted in the Christian World.

It might now be expected that I should further exspatiate into a more
particular Description of these Famous and Ample Colleges, and give an exact
Portraiture of the large and spacious Quadrangle of Trinity-College, so
excellently contrived, and admirably surrounded with a curious Pile of
Buildings, which was at first founded by King Henry VIII.: Of the noble Fabric
of St. John's, founded by Margaret, Countess of Richmond and Darby, both which
Colleges have of late years been so extremely beautified and enlarged: Of
Corpus-Christi, or Bennet-College, founded by Henry Duke of Lancaster, whose
Library is so famous for its diverse ancient Manuscripts, as well as from the
great Honor it daily receives from His Grace, the present Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, who was formerly a Learned Fellow, and still continues the greatest
Glory of it: Of that unimitable Piece of Architecture in King's- College
Chapel, founded by that Heroic Prince, King Henry VI. Of the Public Schools
of the University, which have been of so ancient a continuance, that there is
no mention, when, or how they began: Of the Public Library, which though it be
not so spacious and glorious as the Vatican, or Bodleian, yet it is so well
stocked with all kind of Divine and Humane Writers, that there is not
sufficient Room for all the Manuscripts, and choice Books which are daily given
to it, especially if that Order be strictly observed, of which I have been
credibly informed, That a Copy of every Book which is printed in England, be by
the Printer presented to it.

I might insist further on the laudable Modes and Customs which are duly
observed in this Renowned University, of the large Privileges and Immunities,
which have been ever granted to it, of the honorable Degrees in Divinity, Law,
and Physic, which are here annually conferred, of the great Encouragements
which are daily given to all such Persons who have been most Exemplary for
their Piety and Learning; for which Reason, undoubtedly, three great and
eminent Persons, the Pious and Humble, Dr. Sancroft, the Florid and Rational
Preacher, Dr. Tillotson, and our present Incomparable Archbishop, whose
Stations were all of them first fixed in this place, have been successively
advanced in this our present Age, to the Archiepiscopal See of Canterbury.

But since this would take up a Volume, and require a much more Polite Pen to
accomplish, I shall only crave leave out of a due Honor and Gratitude to
Christ's-College, of which I had once the happiness to be a Member, to give a
more particular Account of that Society.

Christ's-College.
Christ's-College was first began by K. Henry VI. and after his Decease, by the
Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmond and Darby, Daughter and Heir of John, Duke
of Somerset, and Mother to King Henry VII. in the place where the College of
God's House had stood in the Preacher's Street (founded by Mr. Will. Bringham,
Parson of St. John Zachary in London) which College, because it never came to
perfection, she obtained of the said King, her Son, his Charter, to increase
the number of Students, Translating it according to her Pleasure and
Discretion. After she had completed this stately Fabric, making it
Quadrangular, and very Uniform; the next thing she accomplished was the
planting in it a Colony of Religious Men, whom she desired should be all
devoted to the Service of God, and Study of Divinity, and their number to be
Twelve Fellows under the Government of a Master. After this, for the better
encouraging of Learning, and the enstating of this her College in a flourishing
Condition, she gave several Scholarships for the maintenance of poor Students,
the number of which to be about Sixty, as preparatives to the better Promotions
that might attend their Industry: And that Religion and Learning might be
inseparable Associates she built likewise a Chapel, in which all the Members
should meet twice a day, and join unanimously in their Devotions, in which
there is placed a tunable Organ, for the better promoting of fervent Piety. And
because Discipline is necessary in Bodies Spiritual as well as Civil, for those
whose Natures might be so base and disingenuous, as that Rewards could not move
or incite them to Virtue, she found out the more rough and harsh ways to
enforce them, by inflicting such Penalties, as the very Shame thereof might be
Spurs and Goads to their future Reformation; These were all comprised in a Book
of Statutes, according to the Rule whereof all Persons, here to be admitted
Members, are sworn to square and regulate their Actions. After all things were
settled in this admirable Decorum, this matchless Lady lived for some time in
the Buildings her self, which she had designed for the use of the Master, and
at her Hours of leisure wrought such curious Work in Hangings with her Needle,
some of which are still preserved in the College to this day, that she seems to
have been equal to Minerva her self, and to have monopoliz'd all Arts as well
as Sciences in her Brains, making her Hands as well as Head to give
Demonstration of her admirable Perfections, King Edward the Sixth, whether by
hearing some superstitious Abuses that were put upon the College, the Master
and the Fellows having by some vain Persons been called Christ and his Twelve
Apostles, or whether rather being willing to follow the good Example of this
most virtuous Lady, added another Fellowship, and so made the number to be
Thirteen. And since that by the Munificence of diverse other well-disposed
Benefactors, there have been several Donaries conferred upon it both in
Exhibitions and Scholar-ship: In process of time the House being replenished
with Students, and so thronged that the College not being large enough to
receive them all, they were forced to take up Lodgings in the Town. Upon this
Consideration to remove all such Inconveniences, and preserve it in a
flourishing Condition, diverse Persons of Quality of the Black as well as
Scarlet Robe, gave large Contributions for the enlarging of it; and by their
Liberality there was some Years ago erected a new and far more noble Fabric
than the other, called the New-Building, four Stories high, built of
Freestone, and adorned with curious Embellishments in the Front, in the midst
whereof is a small arched Cloister, and through that a Passage into the
Orchard; in which are pleasant Walks, shady Arbours, and secret Recesses for
the Fellows to retire to in Summer time: So ready and careful were our Noble
Ancestors to gratify the Muses in every respect, and to suffer them to lack
nothing either for Improvement or Delight. And indeed it has been the main
care and aim of such Persons, who have been admitted Masters or Fellows, by
their great Improvements in all sort of Learning, to answer those ends and
designs for which they were admitted. And, not to mention several Persons
deceased, who having received their first Rudiments here, became afterward
great Luminaries in the Church, and Columns in the State: His Grace the present
Archbishop of York is a sufficient Testimony of this, whose great Learning and
exemplary Piety add now at this time no less a Luster to the Church, than it
does likewise still to this College, where he was formerly a most accomplished
Member. And as for the present Master, the Worthy Dr. Covil, my most Honored
Friend, whom all ingenious Travelers highly court, and all the Learned justly
admire; with the rest of the Reverend Fellows, who are now of that Society,
there cannot possibly in any respect be greater Ornaments to a College, which
ever has had the Honor to enjoy such worthy Persons. For, not to look farther
back than a very few Years ago, when this Itinerary was first drawn up, here
was a Learned Knot of Professors all concentred in this place, which was not
then observable in any other College besides; the Learned Dr. Cudworth, then
Master, was public Hebrew Professor; the Reverend Dr. Widdrington, my Honored
Tutour, from being Public Orator was made Margaret Professor; Dr. Luke was
Arabic Professor: To whom may be added the Learned Dr. Henry More, whom his
Philosophical Writings did sufficiently render worthy of that Title. As for
what concerns the particular Government of the College, we have annually two of
the Fellows elected Deans of the Chapel, whose Office is to see that constant
Attendance and good Orders be there observed, and due Penalties inflicted upon
all who presume to absent themselves from Divine Service; and likewise four
Readers, one to read Hebrew, two to read Greek Lectures, and one to hear,
moderate, and determine all Logical and Philosphical Disputations in Term-time:
And for other Offices subservient to these; there is a Manciple, Cook, Butler,
Porter, Gardener, with other subordinate Servants for the use of the College.

And thus I have set down a Breviate of the Modes and Orders of this House,
from whence it will be easy and natural to guess at the Customs and
Constitutions which are in use in all other Colleges, by this short Epitome
which has been given here of this.

But before I take leave of this most flourishing College, I must not forget
the Munificence of some late great Benefactors, who by their generous
Liberality to it have erected to themselves a more lasting and durable Monument
than the Pyramids of Egypt, or the Coloss at Rhodes; The one was the Right
Reverend and Learned Dr. Ward, the late Bishop of Salisbury, who has founded
here four new Scholarships of Ten Pounds a piece per Annum; The other Noble
Benefactors were the Honorable Sir John Finch, Brother to the Earl of
Nottingham, sometime Ambassador in Turkey; and Sir Thomas Bayns, a Physician,
his Companion and Fellow-Traveller, sometime here a Student, who at their Death
added to the College two more considerable Fellowships and Scholarships, for
the due encouragement of Learning, and lie interred in the Chapel, as a signal
Testimony of that indissoluble Love and Affection they had always even to the
very last, for this Learned Society.

As far the Town of Cambridge it self, it is governed by a Mayor, who at the
entrance into his Office takes a solemn Oath before the Vice Chancellor to
observe and conserve the Privileges, Liberties and Customs of the University;
and as the Assizes for the County are for the most part kept here, so it is
observable that one High Sheriff serves for both the Counties of Cambridge and
Huntingdon, which borders upon it. The chief Market every Saturday supplies it
well with Corn, and plenty of other Provision: But nothing is more remarkable
nor advantageous to it, than the great Fair annually kept within a Mile of it
in September, called by the name of Sturbridge Fair; Sturbridge-Fair.
from whence it received its denomination is uncertain, but this is most
certain, that of all Fairs or public Marts in England it is supposed the
largest, and best stored with all kind of Wares and Commodities, which the
Londoners take special care to import hither. When you are within the Limits,
you would rather be ready to imagine your self in some great Town, by the
variety of Shops and multiplicity of Booths, than in a wide open Field. Now
those Booths are always built for the time in which it lasts, which is about a
Fortnight: Neither are you presented with Booths only upon the Land, but with
Booths upon the Water too, there being particular contrivances in their Boats
upon the River, which runs hard by this place, for Rooms and secret
Retirements, all covered above for the convenience of Strangers which resort
thither; and indeed here is always a great concourse of People from all parts
of the Nation.

Not far from this place appears aloft a certain ridge of Hills called
Hog-magog-Hills, Hog-magog Hills.
fortified of old by the Danes, when they infested these Parts, with a
threefold Trench, some part whereof is still to be seen.

Having paid our Devoirs, and taken a review of that which affords so great
Variety, we at last took our farewell, and bidding it adieu we betook our
selves into its Neighboring County of Huntingdon; Huntingdonshire.
it is a fruitful Country both for Corn and Grass; toward the East it is
waterish and fenny, and has formerly been well beset with Woods. In the Reign
of King Henry the Second it had a large Forest, which he destroyed, converting
it to other uses: It Is watered by the pleasant Rivers Avon and Ouse, which
render it very fertile.

The first Village we arrived at in this County was Fenny-Stanton, but found
nothing observable till we came to Godmanchester, Godmanchester.
a great Country Town, and of as great a Name for Tillage, situate in an open
Ground, of a light Mould, and bending for the Sun. Here have been observed more
stout and lusty Husbandmen, and more Ploughs agoing, than in any Town besides
in England, for they make their boast, that they have in former times received
the Kings of England, as they passed it their Progress this way, with Ninescore
Ploughs, brought forth in a rustical kind of Pomp for a gallant Show. Soon
after King James the First came into England, the Bailiffs of this Town
presented him with Seventy Teem of Horses all traced to fair new Ploughs, of
which when His Majesty demanded the reason, he was answered, That it was their
ancient Custom, whenever any King of England passed through their Town so to
present him; besides they added, That they held their Lands by that Tenure,
being the King's Tenants. His Majesty took it well, and bad them make good use
of their Ploughs, being glad he was Landlord of so many good Husbandmen in one
Town.

Antiquaries do affirm it to have been formerly a flourishing City, and not
only the old Roman Coins, which have been dug up here, do attest its
Antiquity, but its ancient denomination too: It was formerly called
Duroliponte, corruptly for Durosiponte, which in the British Language signifies
a Bridge over the River Ouse; but this Name being antiquated in the Saxons
time, it began to be called Gormoncester by Gormon the Dane, for King Alfred
having conquered the Danes, who had made an Invasion into these Parts, reduced
them at last to these Conditions, either forthwith to give him Pledges that
they would immediately depart this Land, or else that they would embrace the
Christian Religion, which latter Proposal being made choice of, Guthrus or
Gormundus the Danish King with Thirty more of his Nobility was Baptized into
the Christian Faith, and their Prince adopted by Alfred for his Son, who
changing his Name to Athelstan appointed him his Station here, and committed
the Provinces of the East Angles and Northumbers to his peculiar Charge: And if
it be likewise allowed that one Machutus was here Bishop, when it was called
Gumicastrum, hou! quantum mutatur! It Is certainly now reduced to a poor and
despicable Condition, to what it could then glory of in former Generations.

Huntingdon.
Huntingdon is about a Mile distant from this place, and is the chief Town of
the County, situate upon the River Ouse, over which stands a Bridge made of
Stone, which gives entrance into it; the Houses are fair, and the Streets
large; it is adorned with Four Churches, and had formerly a Benedictine Nunnery
dedicated to St. James, says the Notitia Monastica, and a Priory of Black
Canons founded about the Year 1140, to the honor of St. Mary, by Eustace de
Luvetot; some of the Ruins whereof are still to be seen. Near the River, upon a
high Hill, stands the remains of a Castle, which was built about the Year of
Christ 917, by Edward the Senior: Afterward David King of Scots waging War
against King Stephen, upon the account of Mawd the Empress, who was his Neice,
this was surrendered upon some certain Conditions to the Scots King, who did
exceedingly beautify and strengthen it, by making strong Rampires and
Fortifications about it, but Henry the Second finding it in process of time a
Cage only for Rebels and Ringleaders of Sedition, at last quite demolished it;
and from the top of this Hill is a very pleasant Prospect for the space of some
Miles. The Town, which is supposed to have been the Daughter of Godmanchester,
is governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, and the Assizes are held here twice a Year
for the Shire, and wants no kind of Provision to entertain Travelers, who much
resort hither out of the Northern Parts, the great Road to the City of London
lying through it.

In this Town in the Year 1599 was that Usurper and Religious Cheat Oliver
Cromwell born and educated, whom though we have some just Reasons to curse in his
very Name, and detest his Memory as odious and execrable, yet since prosperous
Successes of the most cruel Tyrants makes others inquisitive after those
Persons, which they did so fortunately attend; it will not be amiss to tell the
World, that this place gave him his first being, who, exceeding Nero in
Cruelty, destroyed his Father and Mother too, the Father of his Country, and
his Country likewise, being a Murderer of the one, and a Plague to the other;
who was of so unparalleled and base a temper of Mind from his Cradle to his
Grave, that nothing could stay with him, or be pleasing to him long, but what
even carried the World before it, Confusion and Ruin.

From hence we passed directly into the pleasant County of Northampton,
Northamptonshire.
where the Air is temperate, the Soil rich, fruitful and Champaign, and having
less waste Ground than any other County, withal so populous and well
replenished with Towns, that in many places 20 or 30 Steeples present
themselves at one view; nor is there perhaps a County, which within that
compass of Ground, can show more Noblemens and Gentlemen's Seats: For in all the
dispersed Villages of this Country it is observed, that there are fixed several
bright and coruscant Luminaries shining in this Orb, of whose influence the
Peasantry are continually sensible, feeling diverse good Effects and enlivening
Operations from their Vicinity. For whilst the Noblemen and Persons of
Superior Ranks transplant themselves hither, and fix in this Soil, the
Commonalty are quickly invigorated with the warmth which they communicate,
whilst all Trades flourish more by those Encouragements they afford them, and
the poor Tenant is enabled through their Assistance to discharge all Rents with
greater Improvement, both to their Landlords and themselves, they being like
the Primum Mobile which put all the other Orbs into a continued motion, or the
Wheels in a Machine, which make the whole Engine move very regularly, which
otherwise would be altogether useless and unseruisable.

Thrapston is Twelve Miles distant from Huntingdon, Thrapston-
which being the first Market Town we arrived at here, well stored with Inns,
and replenished with all sorts of Grain, we went from thence to another Town
called Kettering, Kettering
which has been of much more Note than its Neighbors, by reason of a handsome
Cross formerly beautified with diverse Images of Christ and his Apostles, very
curiously and artificially carved. And the next place of consequence is
Higham-Ferries, the excellent Ornament of which place was formerly Henry
Chicheley, Archbishop of Canterbury, who built All Souls College in Oxford,
and another here ( Temp. Hen. V.) for eight Secular Canons, four Clerks, and
six Choristers, and commended it to the Patronage of the Blessed Virgin, St.
Thomas of Canterbury, and St. Edmund the Confessor.

But that which is the Ornament of the County is Northampton it self,
Northampton.
a Town pleasantly seated on the River Nen, where it meets with two Rivulets,
one North and the other South. This Town, as many others, fell under the Fury
of the Danes, who burnt it to Ashes. In the Reign of King Stephen the Abbey of
St. Mary de Pratis for Cluniac Nuns was Founded here by Simon de Senilitz II.
Earl of Northampton: And an Abbey of Black Canons was built to the Honor of St.
James. King Henry the First was a good Benefactor, keeping his Court here in
Lent, as the Saxon Annals tell us, in the Year 1106, and again at Easter in the
Year 1122; but in the Reign of King John it suffered exceedingly by the Barons
Wars. In his Successor Henry the Third's time, the Students of Cambridge are
reported to have removed hither by the King's Warrant, in order to settle the
University here, where Henry the Sixth had the fate to be overthrown, and taken
Prisoner by his Rival for the Crown, Edward the Fourth. In the Year 1675, Sept.
3. this Town was reduced to Ashes by a general Conflagration, but by the
Assistance and Contributions of Charitable People, it is once more restored to
greater Magnificenco and Beauty, than it ever yet before enjoyed; it is governed
by a Mayor, and is the place where the County Gaol and Assizes are generally
held.

Warwickshire.
Our next Remove was into Warwickshire, which, as it is situated almost in the
very Heart of the Kingdom, is very free from the frequent Vapors, that annoy
many other places, and therefore is justly celebrated for its Health as well as
Fruitfulness.

Warwick.
Warwick is the principal Town of the whole Shire, it stands on the West side
of the River Avon, over which it has a strong Stone Bridge, and consists of
two Parishes; it is seated in a dry and a fertile Soil, having the benefit of
rich and pleasant Meadows on the South part, with lofty Groves, and spacious
Thickets of Woodland on the North; the Town has not long since suffered
extremely by Fire; but it is to be hoped it will in a little time, return again
to its ancient Splendor and Renown; the chief Beauty of it is its Castle, the
Seat, in times past, of the Earls of Warwick, mounted aloft upon a steep and a
craggy Rock. The Collegiate Church of St. Mary was endowed by Roger, Earl of
Warwick, A. D. 1133. and a Priory of Canons Regular of the Holy Sepulcher, was
likewise founded by Henry Earl of Warwick, Temp. Hen. 1.

Guy-Cliff.
Here is also Guy Cliff near Warwick, among Groves and fresh Streams, called
Guy-Cliff, from Guy of Warwick, the Hercules of England, who having left off
his noble and valiant Exploits, betook himself, as Tradition has it, to this
place, where he led a kind of Hermetical Life, and built a Chapel, in which he
was Interred.

The next place which claims here a Precedence, above all the rest, Coventry.
is Coventry, so called from a Covent founded here by the Danish King Canutus,
stands upon the Sherborn, which joining with another Stream, runs not far from
thence into the Avon. It is a City very commodiously Seated, large, sweet, and
neat, was formerly fortified with a very strong Wall, and is set out and
adorned with right goodly Houses, amongst which there rise up on high, two
spacious Churches, noted for their Loftiness, and the Cross for its
Workmanship, standing one hard by the other, and matched (as it were) as
Concurrents, one Consecrated to the Holy Trinity, the other to St. Michael, a
Town that injoys a good Inland Trade by the Cloth here made, and vended, which
makes it Populous and Rich; the same is a Bishop's See joined with Litchfield,
to which it was united by Hugo Novant, about the latter end of the Twelfth
Century. Leofrick, Earl of Mercia, about the year 1050, built an Abbey here for
black Monks, to the Honor of the Blessed Virgin. Rob. de Limesie, Bishop of
Chester, removed his Seat hither, (Temp. Hen. 1.) one of whose Successors
expelled the Monks, and placed Secular Canons in their Room, A. D. 1191. but
seven years after the Monks were restored. The same Leofrick, the first Lord of
this City, being much offended, and angry with the Citizens, oppressed them
with most heavy Tributes, which he would remit upon no other Condition, at the
earnest Suit of his Wife Godina, unless she would her self ride on Horseback
Naked through the greatest and most inhabited Street of the City, which she did
indeed, being covered only with her fair long Hair: Also a Proclamation was
Published, Commanding all People to keep close within their Houses, to shut
their Doors and Windows, and no Person, on Pain of Death, to appear in that
Street where she Rode, nor so much as to look into it, whether out of a Window,
or otherwise: Upon which, as she was Riding along Naked, one Man more curious
than ordinary, ventures to peep out of a Garret Window, and being immediately
discovered, was apprehended and hanged; as by the Effigies of a Man does
appear, that is continually kept up for a Memorandum, in a full proportion
looking out of a Garret Window, and called by the Inhabitants, Peeping Jack.
And thus did she free her Citizens of Coventry from any such further rigorous
Payments.

Gatford-Gate.
One thing is still observable, That at Gatford-Gate, there hangs up to be
seen, a mighty great Shield-Bone of a wild Bore, (or rather of an Elephant,
being not so little as a yard in length) which some believe Guy of Warwick slew
in Hunting, when he had turned up with his Snout a great Pit, or Pond, which is
now called Swanse-well, but Swines-well in times past.

Coleshill and Litchfield, i. e. Cadaverum Campus, aut Campus irriguus, a
Saxon. leccian, irrigare. Mr. Gibson in his Explication of Saxon Places.
Passing through Coleshill, a little Market Town, after about Twelve Miles
riding the Road brought us to Litchfield, a City low seated, of good largeness,
and fair withal, divided into two parts, with a shallow Pool of clear Water,
which parts notwithstanding join in one, by the means of two Bridges, or
Causeys made over with Sluices in them, for the passage of the Water. That part
which lies on the Southside of the Water, is much the greater, and divided into
several Streets. It has been, doubtless, a place of very great Antiquity, for
we read, That Oswy, King of the Northumbers, A. D. 656, built a
Cathedral-Church, and placed here a Bishop, (called Duima) for the Kingdom of
Mercia; and the Saxon Chronicle tells us, Angl. Sacr Pars prima, p. 423.
That in the year 716, Ceolred King of the Mercians died, and was buried in
this place. King Ossa, about A. D. 786, made it an Archbishops See, which
Honor it enjoyed for ten years, and then was again subjected to Canterbury. It
was Translated, A. D. 1075. to Chester, and from thence to Coventry, A. D.
1102. but the Bishops not long after being settled here again, Bishop Clinton
built a new Cathedral Church, Dedicating it to the Virgin Mary, and St. Chadd,
and restored and augmented the Chapter; and now this City, and Coventry with
it, make up but one Diocese under a double Name, which came to pass after the
same manner, and much about the same time as Bath and Wells were joined
together into one Bishopric. When this Town in the late unhappy Civil Wars
fell into a state of Suffering, the Cathedral at that time was a Fellow-sharer
with it, and through the insatiable Malice of some ill Wishers to it, it became
a Sacrifice to their merciless Fury; but since the happy Restoration, through
the indefatigable Zeal, and boundless Charity of Bishop Hacket, and other noble
and generous Benefactors, it has began again to revive out of its own Ashes,
and to retrieve its Primitive Splendor and Beauty, mounting up aloft with
three Pyramids of Stone, which make a lovely show; and for elegant and
proportionable Buildings, will in due time, it is to be hoped, equal some other
Cathedrals.

The next County we visited, was Leicestershire, Leicestershire.
which, though in very many parts is deep and Miry, yet the richness of the
Soil does sufficiently compensate for the unpleasantness of the Roads, which is
generally fruitful with all sorts of Grain, especially Pease and Beans, of
which there are so great Stacks, that they cover the Fields with their infinite
Numbers, and what is wanting in Wood, is supplied by their Coal-Mines, which
they have in great abundance.

When we had passed through Bosworth, Bosworth and Redmore.
a Market Town, famous for the Battle fought upon Redmore, near it, betwixt
Richard III. and Henry VII. by the Issue whereof, the Crown returned from the
House of York, to the House of Lancaster, Liecester was formerly called by the
Britains Kaerlirion. Rudborn.
and so an end was put to the bloody Wars, that had so long continued between
those two Houses. We came to Leicester, the Metropolis of the County, which is
more venerable for its Antiquity than its present Comeliness, or Beauty: I find
this to have been a Bishop See, about the year 680, and that Sexwulphus was
first installed in the Episcopal Chair, at the Command of Ethelred, King of the
Mercians, which continued not long; in 914. Ethelfleda, a noble and discreet
Lady, Rebuilt it, and surrounded it with Walls; after which, in the time of the
Normans, it flourished exceedingly, and Temp. Henry I. Robert, Earl of
Leicester, founded a College of a Dean, and Twelve Prebendaries, the Church of
St. Marys the less, in the Castle. But Crouch-back Robert, Earl hereof, having
raised a Rebellion against King Henry II. the Town was Besieged, and taken, and
the Castle quite dismantled; hard by which there is a fair, though ancient
Hospital, in the Chapel whereof, Henry, Earl of Lancaster, and Henry his Son,
the first Duke of Lancaster lie Interred, which Duke being very Aged, and
willing to give some visible Testimony of his Charity, built this Hospital for
the use and Maintenance of diverse poor, aged decrepit Persons of both Sexes;
and on the other side amongst those flowery Meadows, which the River Soar
enricheth with its bubling Streams, Robert Bossu, Earl of Leicester, built an
Abbey of Canons Regular of St. Austin's Order to the Honor of the Assumption of
the Blessed Virgin, of which Order, by the consent of his Wife Amicia, he
became himself the chief Canon, and lived in this place Fifteen years a Monk,
as hoping to atone for some of his former Crimes, by taking upon him this
Religious Habit. Here Richard III. was obscurely Interred, after that fatal
Battle at Bosworth beforementioned, and so was the great Cardinal Woolsey, in
Henry VIII. Reign. In the late unhappy Confusions this Town had its share of
Misfortunes and Calamities, though it has very well since recovered its old
Strength and Spirits; being governed by a Mayor, Recorder, Twelve Aldermen, and
Two Chamberlains, is furnished with all necessary Provisions on their Market
Days, the chief of which is Saturday, strengthened with several Gates, in one of
which is kept their Magazine, and adorned with diverse Fabrics both Sacred and
Civil; the Cross in the High street is an exquisite piece of Workmanship, and
besides five other Churches, near that which is Dedicated to St. Martyn, stands
a stately Edifice, called, the New Hospital, built and endowed by several Pious
Benefactours, for the Use of poor impotent Lazars, with a Chapel and Chaplain
to read Divine Service, and Minister to these helpless and indigent Creatures;
and to this joins a small, but complete Library, which was appointed for the
use of the Ministers, and Scholars, which belong to this Town: Hard by St.
Mary's Church stands the Castle, in which the Assizes are held for the County;
and by St. Nicholas there is a Wall, which, by the Ruins of it, seems to be of
great Antiquity, having several hollow places in it of an Oval form, of which
the Inhabitants have odd and strange Conjectures, as if here the Pagans were
used to offer up their Children to their Blood-thirsty Idols, or that here they
made them pass through the Fire, as the Israelites did theirs to Moloch; but
there being little probability of this, I am rather inclined to believe, that
they might possibly have been some Receptacles for Roman Urns, which might have
been placed here, as have been found in diverse other parts of the Nation.

Not far from hence is Carleton, Carleton.
of which we were told, that most Persons that are born there, whether it be by
a peculiar property of the Soil, or of the Water, or else by some other secret
Operation of Nature, have an ill favored untunable, and harsh manner of
Speech, fetching their words with very much ado, deep from out of the Throat,
with a certain kind of wharling, the Letter R being very irksome and
troublesome to them to pronounce.

Having rested at Leicester one Night, and made a visit to some Friends and
Relations, who were seated in this place, the next day we took our leaves both
of them and that place, and began a further Progress into the County, and
having rode four or five Miles further, we came to another Market Town, called
Mount-Sorrel, Mount-Sorrel.
so called from a high Mount situated in the middle of the Town. This place
has suffered much by dismal, and raging Fires, and I find in our English
Chronicles, that it was fortified with a Castle, in the Reign of King Henry
III. for the Officers and Soldiers that were here in Garrison, made an
incursion into the adjacent Country, to pillage and pick up what Booty they
could, which the Castle of Nottingham having due notice of, resolved to set
upon them, and if possible, to put a period to such grievous Calamities the
poor Neighboring Peasants at that time groaned under, whereupon they met, and
fought them, took some of the chief Ringleaders, dispersed the rest, and
returned back Victorious to their own Castle, of which brave Exploit, when News
was once brought to King Henry, he commanded the High Sheriff, for the County
of Nottingham, to demolish the Castle of Mount-Sorrel, which was never since
Re-edified to this day.

Four Miles further, is another Market Town, called Loughborough, Loughborough.
some will have this to be the Village that Cuthwulphus took from the Britains,
about the year 571, for the Saxon Name Lygeanburh is of very near Affinity to
it; but the Opinion of my Learned Friend, Mr. Gibson, seems much more probable,
who, in his Explication of this place, at the end of the Saxon Chronicle, tells
us, that it rather seems to point at Leighton, in Bedfordshire, for after
Cuthwulphus had taken Lygeanburh, he is reported likewise to have taken
Egelesburgh, i. e. Alisbury, in Buckinghamshire, and Bennington, now
Bensington, in Oxfordshire, and that the Road leads directly from Leighton to
Alisbury, and so to Bensington; but it is very improbable that Cuthwulphus
should so order his Marches to pass from Loughborough to Alisbury, and yet take
no other place in all that long March of his betwixt those two places, which
are so far distant from one another: This has been formerly reputed the second
Town in this County, both for its fair Buildings, and the pleasantness of its
Situation, being near unto the Forest of Charnwood, and several shady Woods,
and delightful Groves that lie about it, but of late Years this has likewise
undergone great Calamities from the sudden irruptions of Fire, and has been
almost quite destroyed by this merciless Element.

And here again having been generously entertained by some particular Friends
in these Parts, after some returns of Thanks for their great civility and
kindness, we quickly arrived within the County of Nottingham.

And because according to the great Orator, Nottinghamshire.
Non nobis solum nati sed Patriae, every one is obliged to be serviceable to
his Country proportionable to his Abilities, and every one has a natural
Propension to love that Native Soil, which first gave him a Being, I cannot but
in Duty pay some acknowledgments of the Benefits I have received herein, both
for my Nativity, and first Rudiments of Education: And indeed, I may justly
say, without any partiality, that it is a Province not much inferior to any in
England, being divided into two Parts, the one whereof is called the Sand, the
other the Clay, but both sufficiently productive of all things necessary for
Mankind. If we will take the pains to course over the Valleys, we shall find
the Earth groaning under the heavy burdens of bountiful Ceres, and the Fields
and Meadows in a careful contest which should appear most trim and glorious. If
we will range the Woods and Forests, we shall hear such Melodies by the mutual
reciprocation of Birds and Trees, that one would think they had got the knack
of speaking, and Dodona's prattling Groves were become visible to us: If we be
so curious to dig into the Entrails of the Earth, and take a view of her hidden
Treasures, we shall find several Minerals to gratify our Curiosity, several
great Quarries of Stone, diverse Mines of Coal to provide us with Fuel against
the blustering Storms of Winter. If we be taken with the gentle Streams of
Brooks and Rivers, Trent will not be wanting to satisfy our Desires, and will
afford us, as is reported, thirty kinds of Fish to please our Palates. As for
the Towns and Villages they are well inhabited with industrious Tradesmen and
laborious Peasants, and so it is populous, the Edifices of Nobles and Gentlemen
are thick and spacious, and so it is Honorable; the Churches fair and Uniform,
and so it is glorious; and in fine, the Air clear and serene, and so it is
salubrious. And to begin with that Town, which being the principal of all,
gives a Denomination to the whole County, even that alone will be sufficient to
set forth, and demonstrate the great Luster and Symmetry of all the other Parts.

Nottingham, by the Britains called Caer-Snotynham.
Nottingham is built upon a Rock, and is environed with Rocks on one side,
which are washed by the crooked Windings of a commodious River, has a fair
Park of the Duke of Newcastle's adjoining to it, with Sherwood Forest bordering
upon it. The Streets are large and well paved, the Marketplace handsome and
convenient, the Churches spacious and usefully contrived, and the Houses high
and stately, they are for the most part built with Brick, but some of them are
rare pieces, as well for Structure as Design; and in short, the whole front of
their Fabric is beautified with Sculptures, and glistering Balconies, the
Inhabitants being very curious in the new Modes and Draughts of Architecture.
The Castle which is on the West Side of the Town being situated upon an
exceeding high Rock, did formerly for strength, prospect and stateliness,
challenge the precedence of most Castles in the Kingdom. And here the Danes
held out a very long Siege against three Kings united against them. For in the
Year 868, Buthred King of the Mercians sent Ambassadors to Aethelred King of
the West Saxons, and Alfred his Brother to crave their Aid and Assistance
against the Danish Army, which they accordingly obtained, for the two Brothers
mustering up a considerable Army arrived in the Kingdom of Mercia, and made no
stop till they came to Snotenghaham, now Nottingham, and when the Pagans
confiding in their Fortress refused to give Battle, and the Christians had then
no Engines to batter or raze the Walls, the Mercians were enforced to conclude
a Peace with the Pagans, and the two Brothers to return home ingloriously
without doing any feats. After this, says the Saxon Chronicle, in the Year
942, the most Valiant and Puissant King Edmund not only rescued this place out
of its Danish Bondage, but four other Cities, Lincoln and Leicester, Stamford
and Darby, were by the same victorious Hand delivered from the Shackles and
Oppressions of those most bloody Infidels. In process of time King Edward the
Senior strengthened it with Walls; and a new Castle was built by William the
Conqueror. Edward the Fourth enlarged it with various dwelling Houses for
Commanders and Soldiers, and in the Rock upon which the Castle stands are
several small Cottages hewn out of it, in which at present dwell diverse poor
People: And it is reported that it was never taken until by a subtle Stratagem
it was surprised by Robert Earl of Darby in the Barons Wars, who having once
got this soon entered the Town, and then used the Townsmen according to his
pleasure. Though I find too in the Life of King Stephen, that Robert Earl of
Gloucester invaded this Town with a great Power, and when most of the Townsmen
were slain or burnt in the Churches, whither they fled for Refuge. There is a
Story of one of them, which was richer than the rest, that being forced to
return to his own House by the Soldiers that had taken him, to show them where
his Treasure lay, he bringing them into a Cellar, whilst they were busy in
breaking open Locks and Coffers, conveyed himself away, and shutting the Doors
after him set fire on the House, and so the Soldiers, being 30 in number,
perished in the Flames, which catching hold of other Buildings joining to it,
almost burnt up the whole Town. But that which makes this Castle most signally
remarkable, was the discovery of the secret Amors of Roger Mortimer Earl of
March, and the Imprisonment of David Bruce King of Scots, the Relation of which
I shall set down as briefly as I can.

After King Edward the Second had been Deposed and Murdered by the
Contrivances and Plots of his own Wife Queen Isabella, and King Edward her Son
had Reigned about Four Years, a Parliament was called at Nottingham, where this
Roger Mortimer, who was the Queen's most especial Favorite, was in such Glory
and Renown, that it was beyond all Comparison; none so much Lord Paramount as
the Earl of March, none appears in so great an Equipage, and attended with so
honorable a Retinue as the Earl of March, so that the King's Train was
inferior to his, and his Majesty's Glory eclipsed by the Pomp and Grandeur of
one of his Nobles; for he very often would presume to go foremost with his own
Officers, and was so exceeding proud and haughty, as to make all Persons cringe
and do as great Homage to him as to Majesty it self: Nay he undertook to order
and dispose of all Persons and Affairs according to his own Will and Pleasure;
and hereupon he one day rebuked the Earl of Lancaster, the King's Cousin, for
presuming to appoint Lodgings for certain Noblemen near the Court without his
particular License and Assignation, and having dislodged the Earl with some
other Persons of very great Quality, and removed them a Mile out of Town: He
did by this means so incense the Nobility against him, that they began to pry
more narrowly into his Actions, and being enraged to see his Pride and his
Usurpation of such great Prerogatives, they unanimously Libelled against him,
and gave it out amongst the People; that this Mortimer was the Queen's Gallant,
and the King's Master, and sought by all means he possibly could to destroy the
Royal Blood, and Usurp the Crown, which report did so work upon some of the
King's most trusty Friends, that they got Robert Holland, who had a long time
been Governor of the Castle, and knew well all the secret Corners therein, to
swear Secrecy to them, and Fidelity to the King, and accordingly to assist them
in those Designs they had in hand: Whereupon one Night King Edward lying
without the Castle, both he and his Friends were brought by Torch-light through
a secret Place under the ground, beginning afar off from the said Castle ('it is
the Vault which is still called Mortimer's Hole) till they came even to the
Queen's Chamber, which by chance they found open, being Armed with naked Swords
in they rushed, leaving the King in the same posture at the Door; when they had
entered into the Privy-Chamber, they found the Earl of March undressed, ready to
go to Bed to the Queen; but they crossed his Design, and cooled his Courage,
halling him away immediately by force, upon which the Queen cried out in
French, Good Son, take Pity of Gentle Mortimer, suspecting her Son to have been
in the Company: The Keys of the Castle were presently called for, and every
Place with all the Furniture committed into the King's Hands, and Mortimer was
forthwith sent to the Tower, who being Tried by his Peers, Arraigned and found
Guilty, was hanged upon the common Gallows two Days and two Nights.

The Articles that were brought against him were diverse, though his too great
Familiarity with the Queen, his unpardonable Treachery to the King, and his
secret Services to David King of Scots were the chief, having burnt the very
Charters by which the Scotch King stood obliged to do Homage to the King of
England, and thereupon ensued a great War betwixt them; for King David being
spurred on by the French King invaded England, and having made a great Inroad
into the Northern Counties, spoiling and burning all Places as he came along;
at length at Durham his Army was routed, and himself taken Prisoner; being
first sent to the Tower, afterward committed to this Castle, where during his
Confinement he engraved upon the Walls of his Apartment the History of our
Blessed Savior's Death and Passion, some of the Relicts of which are still
there to be seen. After Eleven Years Imprisonment he was restored again to his
Kingdom, by paying a good Ransom for his Liberty; but before he returned, he
was one of the Four Kings that was nobly treated by Henry Picard, a Vintner,
then Lord Mayor of London, King Edward the Third, John King of France, and the
King of Cyprus, together with Edward the Black Prince, all bearing him Company
at the same Table. This was about the Year 1358.

But before I leave this Town, I cannot but take notice of one thing more
memorable in our Age, this being the first place where King Charles the First
set up his Royal Standard against the Rebels in the late unhappy Wars; and when
the King's Forces were forced to leave it, the Castle was then quite
demolished, but of late it has been curiously rebuilt, beautified and
furnished by his Grace the Duke of Newcastle.

Having pleasured our selves with the Antiquities of this Town, we took Horse
and went to visit the Well and ancient Chair of Robin Hood, Robin Hood's Well
and Chair in Sherwood Forest.
which is not far from hence, within the Forest of Sherwood: Being placed in
the Chair, we had a Cap, which they say was his, very formally put upon our
Heads, and having performed the usual Ceremonies befitting so great a
Solemnity, we received the freedom of the Chair, and were incorporated into the
Society of that Renowned Brotherhood. But that we may not receive such
Privileges without an honorable mentioning of the Persons that left them to
Posterity, know we must that the Patent was bequeathed to the inferior Rangers
of this Forest by Robin Hood and Little John, honorable Personages indeed,
being the chief Lords of some most Renowned Robbers in the Reign of King
Richard the First, who descended from good Families, as some averr, but having
wasted their Estates, betook themselves afterward to such profligate Courses.
This same Robin Hood entertained One hundred tall Men, all good Archers, with
the Spoil he daily made himself Master of, upon whom Four hundred, though very
well accoutred to give Battle, durst scarce make an Onset: He suffered no Woman
to be violated, oppressed, or any ways molested, poor Men's Goods he spared, and
did relieve the necessitous very liberally with what he got from rich Carls and
Misers, he killed none wilfully, and by this means he did for a long time keep
up the Order of his Knight Errants, till King Richard issuing out a
Proclamation to apprehend him, it happened that he fell sick at a certain
Benedictine Nunnery in Yorkshire, called Kirkeley, (built by Reynerus
Flandrensis to the Honor of the Blessed Virgin) where being desirous to be let
Blood, he was betrayed, and made bleed to Death.

Having for some short time pleased our selves with our new Fraternity, we
equipped again for a Journey, and proceeded to find out new Adventures.

We traveled over the wide and desolate Forest of Sherwood for several Miles
together, but met with no place of any Note till we arrived at Alfretton,
Alfretton.
a Town within the Precincts of Darbyshire; it is a Market Town, and of
considerable Antiquity, being supposed first to have shown its Head in the time
of the Saxons, and to have received its primary rise from the Noble and Heroic
King Alfred. The Inhabitants here, as in diverse other places of this County,
make a sort of Liquor which they call Ale, which is very strong and nappy,
which as it has been the old drink of England, coming from the Danish word
Oela, so questionless in it self it is a very wholesome and sound sort of Drink,
and therefore however it pleased a Poet in the time of Henry the Third, thus to
descant on it: Nescio quid monstrum Stygiae conform paludi
Cervisiam plerique vocant, nil spissius illa
Dum bibitur, nil clarius est dum mingitur, ergo
Constat quod multas feces in ventre relinquit.


In English thus; Of this strange Drink, so like the Stygian Lake
Men call it Ale, I know not what to make;
Folk drink it thick, and piss it very thin,
Therefore much Dregs must needs remain within.


I think it not amiss to invert a little his Stanza's in the Reign of King
William the Third, thus, Nescio quid Stygiae monstrum conform paludi
Cervisiam plerique vocant, nil spissius unquam
Quam caput illius qui sic depinxerat, unde
Constat quod saeces, quia non epota, reliquit.


In English again thus; They that will have our Ale so like the Lake
Of Styx, I know not what of them to make;
Their Skulls are thick, nor can be rinsed clear
If Ale ben't drank, but dregs will still appear.


After a little pause we rode on two or three Miles further, Darbyshire.
till we came into the edge of those wide and dangerous Moors, which extend
many Miles both in length and breadth throughout this County, where being
several Bogs and dangerous Rocks, which do much annoy the Roads that lie
through them, and the Roads themselves very cross and irksom to Strangers, we
resolved to take a Guide to conduct us safe over them; and the Guide we
happened to make choice of was a plain but sensible Peasant, going homeward
with his Cart loaded with Stones; the poor Man readily complied with our
Proposals, whereupon taking a Horse out of his own Team, and leaving the rest
to graze thereabouts till his return, our Pilot began to steer forward: As we
rode along we became very inquisitive after the nature of the Soil, and the
modes of the Country, of which our Guide gave us the best account which he
could. The Country, says he, Eastward is fruitful and pleasant, abounding with
all sorts of Grain, but more particularly with Barley, which makes many of the
Inhabitants considerable Maltsters; but the Western, into which we are now
entering, and is commonly called the Peak, is Mountainous, as you see, and
Rocky, though Nature makes a sufficient amends for the Barrenness of the Soil
by her hidden Treasures, which are here frequently discovered. Its length from
North to South is about 30 Miles, and its breadth about 20, and the Moors, upon
which we now are, are of an unknown Longitude running along, they say, to the
very Borders of Scotland, and having diverse Names answerable to the places
through which they are extended, out of which diverse Rivolets have likewise
their Source and Original, who pay all their little Tributes to the more noble
River of Trent, which receiving all their petty Homages, makes at last an
acknowledgment of its Royalty to the Ocean. The River Derwent divides the
County into two Portions, and in that part, which you are now going to view,
you will meet with very strange and wonderful Curiosities.

As for we poor Folk that live here about these Moors, and in these parts, we
make a shift to live, but it is hardly, and if any eat their Bread in the sweat
of their Brows it is we; and we seem to be in a continual quarrel with the
Earth, that first gave us a Being, for we are continually opening her Veins,
and for Anger, eating even into her very Bowels; some of us are employed in the
Quarrys for Mill, and Whet-stones, and in some places to dig Marble and
Alabaster out of the Earth: Others are set to look for Antimony, or to dig for
Leaden Oar, and after with great difficulty, sometimes, with the loss of their
Limbs, they have got it up from the Mines, they are forced to hazard the rest
by their indefatigable Labor, before they can melt, and shape it into Pigs and
Sows. Others you will meet with, who by the blackness and grimness of their
Visage, you would imagine to have come out lately from some of the Infernal
Regions, these are they who work in the Coal-Mines, who, indeed, one would
think, by reason of the darkness and dismalness of the Abyss in which they
work, should thereby be frequently put in mind of the more dreadful Abyss, even
of Hell it self; but they, as well as most other Miners, as they are excluded
often from the least Glimmerings of Lights so they are not terrified with any
approaching Shades of Darkness, which makes them generally such insensate
Wretches as they are.

The Character this Man gave us of these Inhabitants, was as strange and
uncommon, and he had just ended his Discourse, when we Rode by a piece of
Ground, which was all enclosed with Stone: We asked him the meaning of it,
standing so alone without any other Enclosures near it, who replied, that it
was customary to enclose some of their Grounds after this manner, Wood and
Bushes here to make Hedges with, being a very scarce Commodity, and yet that
all Hunters who there pursued their Game never baulked them in the least, but
made their way over them with great facility, which the next day we found true,
for meeting some Gentlemen in a warm Chase after a Hare, we observed them to
Course nimbly with their light Gennets in those places, where we durst scarce
Trot, and at last poor Puss to become the Prey of the unwearied Pursuers.
Having passed this Enclosure, we came to the top of a high Hill, where
lighting, and walking down by reason of the steepness of the Descent, at the
bottom we found a little Village; and being thus safely got off from the Moors,
we took leave of our Guide, and riding two Miles further, we arrived at last at
our designed Stage.

And took up our Inn at Bakewell, Bakewell.
which was made a Borough by Edward the Senior; it was called by the Saxons,
Badecanwylla, in whose Neighborhood, says the Saxon Chronicle, in the year
924, King Edward Commanded a City to be built, and a Citadel for the Defense
of it It Is a Market Town much resorted to by the Inhabitants of the Peak,
(which by the Saxons was formerly called Peaclond) and found it a place, Seven
Wonders of the Peak.
from whence we might very appositely accomplish those designs we had proposed
to our selves, of viewing the seven Wonders, which are here so famous,
whereupon fitting our selves again with a Guide, we set out for the prospect of
such celebrated Varieties.

When we were got about two Miles from that Town, we observed upon the top of a
Hill, a particular piece of Ground, which was of a strange Nature, as our Guide
informed us. It was a Field, on which, for the most part, there was very good
Grass, which, within the space of a Month, would either Fat, or kill any Horse
that was put into it. As we Rode on, we found our first Pilot's Description in
most points truly verified, for we met diverse Horses laden with Lead and
Coals, and were frequently surrounded as well with plenty of Leaden Mines, as
Quarrys of Stone, and Coals, till at last we arrived at the Castle in the Peak,
Castle in the Peak.
which is eight or nine Miles from Bakewell; it is of great Antiquity by its
Ruins, and seems to have been impregnable by its Situation upon a high and
dangerous Rock, which is so steep, and craggy, that there appears but one way,
by which there is any access to it.

At the bottom of the Hill, which is near two Miles in the Descent, by reason
of its steepness and frequent windings, stands a Village, called Castleton,
Castleton.
sufficiently noted for that wide subterraneous Cavern, known commonly by the
Name of the Devil's Arse; The Devils Arse.
it runs under this Hill upon which the Castle stands, and at its Entrance is
large and capacious, though the further you go in, the more narrow it is, and
contracted: Within the Mouth of it are several small Cottagers, who dwell in
little clay Tenements erected therein; the top whereof is of a very great
height, and appears to the Eye, as if it was Arched above, and Checkered with
diversity of colored Stones: At our Entrance, the poor People were ready to
attend us with Candles and Lanthorns, and by their Conduct we ventured in,
though it belonged to Satan's Territories. After we were got a little way
within it, we found it very dark and slippery, by reason of a great Current of
Water, which runs along the Cave, and were often forced to stoop, because the
further we proceeded, the Rock hung down more low and sloping; We passed still
on, till at length we were stopped by the Water, which at that time being deeper
than ordinary, and bubling up apace in the Cave, cried, a Ne Vltra to us,
though, as they say, it is usual, not only to wade over this with great
facility, but another Current likewise, which runs along the Cave some ten or
twelve yards distant from this to a third, which is impassible. The Story of
the Shepherd, which passed over all, and at last came out into a fair
delightful Field, savours too much of a Romance, to be credited; however, it is
supposed, could all these Waters be once passed over, there might be made some
new Discoveries, though I confess I should be extreme loath, were it to
purchase the Fame of a Drake, or a Frobisher, to seek out a New found Land in
so dismal a place, which both by its Name and Nature, has so near a Relation
to the Diabolical Regions.

Having made our Retreat from this Stygian Lake, Mam-Tor.
and being safely returned through the Devils Posteriors, our Exit was as
welcome as our Visit irksome, and we proceeded to take a view of the second
thing, which deservedly merits the Name of Wonderful. It Is a high and steep
Cliff, called Mam-Tor, from the top whereof, the Sand, though the Air be never
so calm and serene, does continually tricle down Night and Day: The Sight of
which put us in mind of that Hill, where poor Sisyphus was allotted to
Punishment, of rolling up a Stone which immediately tumbled down again, and so
wearied the Wretch out in an endless Labor; and this bearing some little
resemblance to that, by the frequent rumbling down of the Stones from above,
which falling down from the Precipice with a very great Noise, do often
astonish and afright the poor Neighboring Inhabitants, made us a little stand
off at a distance, believing our Curiosity would not countervail the Hazards we
might run, or the Damage we might receive by our too near Approaches: On the
Top hereof arises a Spring, which in some places streams along the Cliff, but
affords nothing of Variety, save that it has its source about that high
Mountain.

The Spring that Ebbs and Flows. The Marble Stones.
The third Wonder we found as strange, which was the Spring that Ebbs and Flows
like the Sea; and the fourth, which is called the Marble Stones, by their
orderly disposition into several Rows, seem rather to have been the contrivance
of Art, than of Nature, but that we ought not to derogate in any wise from that
unimitable Parent, whose Productions are for the most part so rare and
unaccountable.

Not far distant from these, the fifth Wonder presented it self to us, known by
the Name of Elden-Hole, Elden-Hole.
it is reputed a bottomless Abyss, and could never yet be fathomed by any Art of
Man; the Mouth of it is very wide and craggy, but the inward Recesses
contracted and intricate. The Story of the Rustic that was let down with Ropes
and Candles, to give an account of this Avernal Pit, and by his diving too far
into the Bowels of the Earth, was drawn up Senseless, did too truly verify
that Poetic Aphorism, Coelum and Tartarum ipsum petimus stultitia, and paid
dear, by the loss of his Life, for his boldness and presumption, and we are as
much in the Dark, concerning its Nature, as we were before: But though we
cannot give a positive Account of its immense Profundity, yet we may negatively
conclude too, that it is not that which some represent it to be, a place where
the blustering Winds Rendezvouze and Muster, for the Experiment will not hold
good, That if a Cloth be trown in, it will be ross'd up again by the inpetuous
Blasts from within; neither did we perceive, but all was very whist and still
during the time we staid by it, only, if we threw into it a Stone of any
bigness, when we laid our Ears down close to the side of the Pit, the Rattling
which it made by its fall, would be very distinct and audible for a long time
together, until it was got beyond our sphere of hearing.

Passing from this, we rode on two or three Miles further, to Buxton, Buxton-
Well.
a Village very Eminent, in the Peak, for the sixth Wonder it glories in, viz.
The Hot Well. It Is enclosed in a fair Stone-Building, erected by the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and the Water, by its Operation, being of a near Affinity with that
in the Cross-Bath, draws hither in the Summer, a great Concourse of People, of
all Ages and Degrees, here being Lodgings prepared on purpose, proportionable
to their Quality, or Condition. The Fountain daily purging it self, runs away
in a continued Current into the adjacent Meadows, and adds a reeking color to
the other Waters with which it unites its Tepid Streams. Not far distant from
this, was formerly two Springs of a contrary Nature, the one hot, and the other
cold, but the Partition betwixt them being small, and no care taken to preserve
them, when we were at the place, the hot one seemed then to be most predominant.

Here is often very good Company, amongst whom we gathered up a brief account
of some other remarkable Places, which at that time we had not an opportunity
to view. They assured us, That Darby, Darby, Quarndon, Kedlaston, Stanley, and
Wirksworth Springs.
the chief Town of the County was large, and fair, populous, and rich,
consisting of five Parishes, and driving a very considerable Trade; that
Quarndon Springs near that Town, are much of the Nature of Tunbridge-Wells, in
Kent, and the Spaws in Yorkshire, as strong of the Mineral, and as effectual in
Operation; that Kedlaston Well is said to be singular in curing old Ulcers, and
even Leprosy it self; that Stanley Springs are much like Quarndon, but not
altogether so strong of the Mineral; and that near Wirksworth, another Market
Town in this County, are two Springs, the one warm and the other cold, and so
near each other, that one may put one hand in the cold, and the other in the
warm.

Pool's-Hole.
Not far from Buxton is the 7th and last Wonder, which is called Pool's-Hole,
it is a hollow Cave under a high Rock, bearing some kind of resemblance to
Ochy-Hole, which I have before described, but no way so remarkable for so many
amazing Varieties: Who that Pool was from whom it received its denomination,
whether some Hermit, that in this close Cell resolved to live an Anchorite's
Life, which by his Bedchamber here may not seem improbable, or what Queen of
Scots that was, which they tell you betook her self privately to this Grotto,
as a safe Asylum or Sanctuary, I shall by no means undertake to determine; but
sure I am, that the nature of this Cave is not much different from that I now
mentioned, for there are some Shapes and Figures of Animals here, as of a Lion
and a Dog, and there are some colors of the Stones within not much unlike to
those in the other; besides the Water which runs along it in a small current
does petrefie, and the modes observed both at our entrance and return are the
same; for you go in with Guides and Lights, and when we came out we were met by
some poor Woman, who live near to it, with Water and Herbs to purify and
cleanse our selves from any filth or dirt we might have contracted by creeping
along that darksom Cavern.

But he that desires any further Satisfaction about these Seven Wonders let him
have recourse to an ingenious Poem called Mirabilia Pecci, which was wrote some
Years ago by the famous Mr. Hobbs, who had the honor to live sometimes in the
Noble Family of the then Earl, now Duke of Devonshire, Chattesworth.
who has now such a glorious Seat in the Peak, called Chattesworth, that it may
be justly reputed the Eighth Wonder.

When we had sufficiently-feasted our Eyes with these most admirable Rarities,
and refreshed our selves a while after some few troublesome Fatigues, we mounted
again, and made the best of our way through Ashbourn, Ashbourn
another Market Town of a considerable Trade to Vtcester, or Vtoxeter, Utcester.
which being within the Limits of Staffordshire, is situated upon the River
Dove amongst verdant Meadows, and consequently rich in Pasture and Castle.
Historians tell us, that Vlferus King of Mercia, residing at his Castle of
Vlfercester, contractly Vlcester, and understanding that his Son Vlfade had
carried his Brother Ruffus, under a pretended color of Hunting, to St. Chad, a
famous Father of the Church in those days, and that they were both instructed
and baptized into the Christian Faith by the persuasion of Werebode a great
Favorite of his, goes immediately to the Oratory of this Holy Man, where
finding both his Sons in a devout Contemplation, he kills them immediately with
his own Hand, whereupon Ermenhelde his Queen, and their Mother, entombed them
in a Sepulcher of Stone, and in process of time caused a Church of Stone to be
erected over them, which place was afterward called Stones, by reason of the
many Stones that were brought hither by devout People in order for this sacred
Structure. After this Vlfer, being extremely dissatisfied with this inhumane
Action, and repenting heartily for his barbarous Butchery, did himself turn
Christian, and to show his Zeal for the Christian Cause destroyed the Pagan
Temples, burnt their Idols, and erected diverse Churches and Religious Houses in
their stead.

As we traveled along we found this County of a healthy Air and pleasant Soil,
Staffordshire.
though Northward it appears more hilly and barren; in some parts it is full of
Woods, in others it abounds with Coal and Iron, and so great was formerly the
number of Parks and Warrens here, that most Gentlemen's Seats were accommodated
with both. Its principal Rivers are the Dove, which so enricheth the Ground,
that the adjacent Meadows are noted for yielding, as some will have it, the
sweetest Mutton in England; and the famous Trent, which runs along through the
middle of the County, being commonly reputed the third River in England,
receives its Denomination, either say some, because there are Thirty Rivolets
which run into it, or Thirty sorts of Fish that swim within its Streams; nay
others go so far as positively to assert what the Hungarians do of their River
Tibiscus, that two Parts are Water, and the third Fish.

Stafford.
Stafford is about ten Miles from Vtcester, of great Antiquity, and has gone
under diverse Names; it was at first built by Edward the Senior, under the name
of Betheny, where one Berteline, that was afterward Canonized for a Saint for
his great Piety, led an Hermites Life; afterward Statford, and now Stafford.
The noble Lady Elfleda, Wife to Ethelred Duke of Mercia, was very liberal in
her Contributions in order to its Repairs, as she was likewise to diverse other
eminent Cities, who had suffered by the Danes: It Is situated in a fair Soil and
a sweet Air, on the Banks of the River Sow, with a Bridge over it; it is
adorned with two Churches, one whereof is very large and spacious, and a
Free School, beautified with a large and uniform Marketplace, in which is a
House where the Assizes are held for the County; the Streets are clean and well
paved, the Buildings of Stone and Slate, and some of the Structures are very
modish and beautiful. King John made it a Corporation, and Edward the Sixth
confirmed and enlarged the Charter. Here was a Priory of Black Canons built by
Rich. Peche, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, A. D. 1162. to the Memory of
St. Thomas of Canterbury, and a College of a Dean and Canons dedicated to St.
Mary; and not far from hence are to be seen the Ruins of an ancient Castle
belonging heretofore to the Barons of Stafford, but in our late unhappy Broils
it underwent the same Fate which diverse other Castles did then undergo.

Whilst we were resident in this place, we had some notice that the great
Asylum, which preserved his Sacred Majesty King Charles Second, was not far
from this place; whereupon being then a little impatient to behold that
unparalleled Sanctuary, we went from hence to Long Birch, Long-Birch.
a pleasant Seat situate about eight or nine Miles from Stafford, and as then
finding no convenient Opportunity to finish some particular Business which we
had there to dispatch, we rode on till we came at last to that noted Wood,
where that famous Oak stood in which his Majesty was preserved; The Royal Oak.
we found it paled in with high Pales, which were beset with Spikes of Iron to
keep off all Sons of Violence from offering it any harm. It Is true, a little
before his Majesty's Restoration the whole Wood being felled, the top of this
with the upper Branches were all then lopt off, but the Body of it did then
remain very firm and entire, and was ordered to be preserved to future
Generations.

Not far from that Wood stands a House called the White Lady's, The White Lady
's
belonging to the Penderels, who though but at first of a mean Extraction and
Fortune, yet could never be bribed to betray their Sovereign, who for some time
lay thereabouts concealed amongst them: And indeed all things did so strangely
concur to his Majesty's Protection, that Providence seemed to have laid a
golden Link of Causes on purpose to be instrumental to his glorious
Preservation; thus tho the Oak stood by the common Highway which led through
the Wood, and the bloody Sons of Mars rode under the very Boughs of it, whilst
the King was there present, though the Persons, who at first had provided him
that Sanctuary, being poor and indigent, might have been wrought upon to betray
their Trust, and rather balanced that way by the great Rewards that were then
promised, and Majesty being then at a very low Ebb, a Royal Assurance of some
future remembrance might have then passed for a very unsuitable and
insignificant Obligation to Fidelity, and though those grand Secrets being
committed to some of the other Sex might have been in danger to have slipped
through such chinky crannies, yet all went well, not the least discovery was made
of any thing, and impartial Justice and Loyal Piety did never more visibly
appear in the Cottages of the Country, than when Rural Swains became Protectors
of their injured Sovereign, and Majesty was shrouded safely under a Peasant's
Weeds.

We retired from hence to a Village called Tongue, Tongue.
about 3 Miles farther within the Limits of Shropshire, which receives its Name
from an old ruinated Castle belonging to the Family of the Pierpoints Isabel
the Wife of Fulk Penbridge, Knight. Founded here a Collegiate Church, and dedicated
it to St. Bartholomew, A. D 1131.
; where finding but little to divert us, save what the Church afforded us with
its Ring of tunable Bells, one whereof is of very large size, and near akin to
the famous Bell called Great Tom of Lincoln, we went to view the Slitting
Mills, which slit Iron in sunder, being but a small distance from this place
but the noise was so terrible before we came at them, that one would have
thought the Clouds had been running Re-encounters, and Jove with his
Thunderclaps had utterly prohibited us any further access; and when we came
near there was such flashes of Lightning, such hot Vapors and Steams, that we
might justly conclude we were got within the Territories of Vulcan, and that
these were some of the Cyclopean Race, who were here employed to hammer out
their Livings with Fire and Smoke; the Wheels of the Mill are put in motion by
a current of Water; that streams along by it, the Hammers which are continually
redoubling their strokes are ponderous and massy, and the Men which are at work
seem to be in no happier a Condition than they who dig at the Mines, or tug at
the Galleys; for they work Night and Day after so indefatigable a manner, that
the very Heat preys upon their Bodies, and shortens their Days; the place was
soon too hot for us, and the noise too troublesome, and therefore we journeyed
on to visit more of the County.

The Country appeared to us no less pleasant than its Neighbors, Shropshire.
and is of a wholesome and temperate Air, affording Health to the Inhabitants at
all Seasons of the Year, this was sufficiently verified in old Thomas Parr of
Alderbury, who lived 152 Years, and saw no less than ten Reigns; he was born
here in 1483, in the Reign of Edward the Fourth, and died in 1635, and lies
buried at Westminster: The Soil is generally fertile, standing most upon a
reddish Clay, and yields plenty of Pit-Coals and Iron, and has ever been in
great repute for its populous Towns and Castles; for bordering upon Wales the
Noblemen here and Persons of Quality were very sollicitous to preserve
themselves secure against any Incursions of the Welsh, and hereupon they
fortified their Houses to prevent all Dangers; and this dividing England from
Wales was called the Marches, for the defense of which the Lords here and
Gentlemen have enjoyed formerly very great Privileges and Immunities, but since
the Union of these two Kingdoms, as all Hostilities have ceased, so their
ancient Rights and Privileges are not now so much insisted on.

Here are found in diverse parts of this County several large Elms and other
Trees under Ground, which have been supposed to lie there ever since the
General Deluge; they are so dry, that being slit into small shivers they burn
like Candles, and are made use of sometimes by the poorer sort instead of the
other.

Shrewsbury.
In the midst of the County upon the Banks of the Severne, is seated upon a Hill
the famous City of Shrewsbury, by the Britains named Caerpengren, by the Saxons
called Scrobbesbirig, and by the Normans Sloppesbury and Salop; it is almost
surrounded with the River, and strengthened with a large and broad Wall, where
in some places two or three may walk abreast; and upon that part of it which
looks toward Wales, stands the Water-House, in which is a Well many fathoms
deep, from which the Water, drawn up there by Horses in great Buckets, is
conveyed by Pipes into all parts of the City, there being convenient steps
contrived from the bottom of the Ground to the top of the Well, for the Beasts
to go forward and backward from their accustomed Labors. Roger Montgomery in
the Reign of William the Conqueror, built on the North-side of it a strong
Castle, and founded here A. D. 1083. a Benedictine Abbey to the Honor of St.
Peter and St. Paul: Besides which here were likewise two Colleges of St. Mary
and St. Chad. The School was Founded by the most Heroic Queen Elizabeth, which
being a fair and uniform Structure built of Freestone, is governed by a Master
and two Ushers, and well furnished with a useful Library. As to the neatness of
its Streets and Buildings it yields to few other Cities in England; and for
public Devotion it has five Parish Churches, two of which are beautified with
lofty Spires; the City is governed by a Mayor, Recorder and two Sheriffs, who
live generally in great Repute and Grandeur; and the three Market-Days, which
are here every Week, cause a very great Concourse both of the Welsh and other
Persons, and occasions a considerable Trade in this place. Near to which a
sharp Battle was fought A. D. 1673. between Henry IV. and Henry Piercy Earl of
Northumberland, which place was called Battle-Field, where the King erected a
College of Secular Canons to the Honor of St. Mary Magdalen, for the Honor of
that Victory.

But I must not omit to speak of one thing more, that in the Year 1551, the
Sweating-Sickness, which destroyed so many, breaking forth first here dispersed
it self at length over the whole Nation.

Passing from hence we rode through Stretton, Stretton.
ten Miles distant from this City, and there being three of them which join
close to one another, Little-Stretton, Church-Stretton, and All-Stretton, the
middlemost being a Market Town is of greatest Note.

But finding here nothing to detain us, we made no stop till we arrived at
Ludlow, Ludlow.
the chief Town in this County; it is of greater Antiquity than Beauty, situated
by the River Corve, defended by a Wall and Castle, both built by Roger Earl of
Montgomery. When Robert de Belasme, Earl of Shrewsbury, and Son to Montgomery,
was taken Prisoner in his Rebellion against Henry the First, the King then
seized it; after this it was given away from the Crown by Henry the Second, and
came into the Possession of the Lacys, from thence to the Mortimers, and at
last it became the Inheritance of the Princes of Wales, and by this means
beginning to come into great Repute, the Inhabitants erected here a very
stately Church, so that in a little time it excelled all its Neighborhood;
Kenry Henry the Eighth instituting here the Council of the Marches. Here was
Young Edward the Fifth at the Death of his Father, and here died Prince Arthur,
eldest Son of Henry the Seventh, both being sent hither by their Fathers for
the same end, viz. by their Presence to satisfy and keep in order the unruly
Welsh.

But before I leave this County, I must not forget Pitchford, Pitchford.
a Village very eminent for its Well of Pitch, which though it be scumm'd off
returns again, and swims aloft upon the Surface of the Water. Cambden is of
Opinion, that it is rather a Bituminous kind of Matter, such as is in the Lake
Asphaltites in Palestine, or in a Fountain by the Hill Agragas in Sicily;
however the Inhabitants are said to make the same use of it, which they do of
Pitch, but whether like that in Jewry it has the same Balsamic Virtues of
drawing out Corruption, or healing Wounds or is of any efficacy against the
Falling Sickness, I have yet met with none who have made any Experiment.

Coming again within the Confines of Herefordshire, near to Richard's-Castle,
Nature, which is never more curious than in her Waterworks, presented us with
an exceeding great Rarity, it is a Well called Bone-Well, Bone-Well.
upon the Surface of which are still bubbling up several little Bones of
Fishes, and when those which appear above are taken away, others do immediately
succeed in their room.

Lempster.
We passed from hence to Lempster, a Town of great Antiquity; for here, says
the Notitia Monastica, Merwald King of the Mercians first built a Nunnery about
A. D. 800. which was destroyed in the Danish Wars; after that here was a
College of Prebendaries, until King Henry the first annexed their Lands to the
Abbey of Reading, and so it became a Cell of Benedictine Monks to that Abbey,
being dedicated to St. James; some are of Opinion that it received its name
from Linum, Flax or Hemp, which were wont to grow here in great abundance;
others from Lana, Wool, because it is supposed to have the best Wool, known
by the name of Lempster Ore, which as it makes the finest Cloth in England, so
does its Wheat the purest Bread; hence it is grown Proverbial among the
Inhabitants, For Lempster Bread and Weobley Beer, none can come near. The Town
is situated in a pleasant Valley, and is governed by a Bailiff and Aldermen,
and adorned with a handsome Hall for the dispatching of all public Affairs.

Our next remove was again to Hereford, where amongst other Varieties we were
entertained withal in the City, there are near to it some Remains of Antiquity,
which then we had an opportunity more particularly to view, namely Sutton
Walls, Sutton Walls.
near to the Village of Marden, which are the Ruins of some ancient great
Building, in all probability supposed to be the Mansion House of Offa, when
Kenchester flourished, or at least when Hereford was but in its Infancy: This
Offa being King of the Mercians, and having inveigled Ethelbert King of the
East Angles into his Palace, under color and pretense of bestowing his
Daughter upon him in Marriage, by the advice of his ambitious Wife, in hopes to
succeed him in his Kingdom, basely and treacherously caused his Head to be
stricken off by one Grimbert his Servant, and his Body being Buried upon the
Banks of the River Lugg was afterward removed to Hereford, and over it was
Built the present stately Cathedral.

Hard by Lidbury, another Market Town of this County, near to the place where
the Rivers Wye and Lugg unite, is a Hill called Marckley-Hill, Marckley Hill
near Lidbury.
celebrated by our Historians for its wonderful Travel Feb. 7. 1571. for about
six a Clock in the Evening on a sudden as it were rouzed out of a dull
Lethargy, it moved with a roaring noise from the place where it stood, and by
seven the next Morning had gone about 200 Foot, and so continued its Travels
for 3 days together, to the great Horror and Astonishment of all the
Neighboring Inhabitants; whereupon Kynaston Chapel, Trees, Hedges and Sheep
Folds fell down, and, which adds much to the Wonder, two Highways were turned
about 300 Foot from their former Paths, the East parts to the West, and the
West to the East, Pasturage being left in the place of Tillage, and this in the
place of Pasturage.

Having taken our leave of our Friends at Hereford, we passed through Ross,
Ross and Huntley.
a Town noted as well for its Houses built of Stone and Slate, as for the great
Vulcanian Tribe of Blacksmiths which there inhabit, to Huntly, a Village about
fifteen or sixteen Miles distant from Hereford.

From hence, Traveling again through Gloucester, we arrived at Fairford,
Fairford.
a Market Town, formerly of good account for its curious Church Windows, in
which was pourtrayed the History of the Bible in painted Glass; until they were
defaced by the malicious Hands of those, who, being all Deformity themselves,
could not endure to see God worshipped in the Beauty of Holiness.

After we were gone from this place, we were quickly got within the Precincts
of Berkshire, Berkshire.
a County pleasant and fertile, watered with the River Isis, adorned with woody
Hills, and thick Groves, and fruitful Valleys, whereof that which is called the
Vale of White Horse is extremely delightful, and Nature compensates the
Barrenness of the Soil in one place by her manifold Gifts she bestows upon it
in another.

Faringdon.
Farringdon was the first Town of Note we arrived at, called in the Saxon
Chronicle Fearndune, where about the Year 925 King Edward the Senior died;
which though situated upon a stony Soil, yet is now as famous for its great
Market, as it was formerly for its impregnable Fortress, erected here by Robert
Earl of Gloucester against King Stephen, which the King, though with the loss of
a great number of his Soldiers, at last by his continued Assaults and Batteries
took and utterly demolished. Here was a Priory of Cistertian Monks founded by
King John, A. D. 1200, which was Subordinate to the Abbey of Beaulieu in
Hampshire.

Ten Miles from this is another fair Town called Abington, Abington.
to which the River Isis, after it has winded it self a long way about in a
crooked Channel, makes its near approaches; it is a large and populous place,
and receives its denomination from a famous Abbey founded here A. D. 625, by
Heane, Nephew to Cissa Viceroy of the West Saxons; and although this Monastery
did for some Years flourish exceedingly, yet it was afterward subverted by the
Fury of the Danes, but through the Bounty and Munificence of King Edred and
King Edgar, it was restored again to its primitive Splendour and Greatness; and
as it has been famous for the Sepulture of diverse eminent Persons,
particularly of Sidemannus and Egeluinus, both ancient Bishops; and of Robert
d' Oily and Aldith his Wife, who contributed much to the Building St. Mary's
Church in Abington; so by the Care and Industry of the Norman Abbots it grew to
that pitch of Grandeur, and so exceeding Rich and Wealthy, that it began indeed
to be beyond all Comparison; and truly the Ruins of it, which are still
visible, do speak it to have been a glorious Structure: As for the Town, though
it had its chief Dependence on the Abbey, yet from the Year 1416, after that
King Henry the Fifth had Built a strong Bridge of Stone, over the River Isis,
as two Verses which are written in St. Helen's Church Windows do attest.
Henricus quintus quarto fundaverat anno
Rex pontem Burford super undas atque Culhamford:
And turned the Highway hither to make a shorter Passage, it began to be
populous, and much frequented, and has ever since been reputed the principal
Town in the County: The Inhabitants are generally Maltsters (Barley being here
a valuable Commodity) and great Cock-Masters too, for which little fierce
Creatures they make frequent Matches: The Magistrates by their Vigilance and
Care do keep up the Corporation in great Honor and Request, and the Mayor and
Aldermen are diligent and circumspect in the discharge of their Offices, and
for the more great and weighty Matters, which are above their Sphere, the
Judges when they come their Circuit, and keep the Assizes here for the County,
do ease them of that trouble, by giving a final Determination of all.

When we had rode about five Miles further, we came within the limits of
Oxfordshire, to a Town called Dorchester, Dorchester.
built at first by Birinus Bishop of Caer-Dor, which Bid calls Dorcinia, and
Leland Hydropolis, taking its name of the Waters it stands upon, sometimes
Walled about and Castled, but all now ruined and gone, a round Hill there still
appearing. Here, as we are told in the History of Allchester, the Superstitious
ensuing Ages built Birinus a Shrine, teaching them that had any Cattle amiss to
creep to that Shrine for help, such Blindness possessed them then, that they
laid the Commandments of God aside to follow their own Traditions, and yet so
blind are their Posterity, that they praise their Doings. That this was a
Colony of the Romans is very evident from their various Coins and Medals
bearing their Stamp, which have been found hereabouts, and it is as certain
that formerly it was a Bishop's See, which Birinus the Grand Apostle of the
West Saxons placed here; for in the Year 635, by the Preaching of this Holy
Man, King Kinegilsus and all his People received the Christian Faith, to whom
Oswald King of the Northumbers was God Father at the Font, whereupon a Bishop's
See was here fixed. But besides Kinegilsus he Baptized after that Guicheline
his Son too, and after him Cuthred King of Kent, about the Year 639. He is said
to have instituted Secular Canons in his Cathedral Church, who continued till
in the Reign of King Stephen, Alexander Bishop of Lincoln converted them to
Canons Regular. Upon the Death of Edward, Aethelstan his eldest Son succeeded,
and during his whole Reign guarded these Parts from all disturbance of the
Danes, who in January 938 held here a Council, as the Learned Mr. Kennet
informs us, In Civitate celeberrima quae Dornacestre appellatur, and there gave
a Charter, subscribed by four Tributary Kings, two Archbishops, and fourteen
Bishops, to the Covent of Malmsbury. Upon the Death of Vlf, or Wulfin, Bishop
of Dorchester, Remigius was preferred to this See, and at a Council held at
London, A. D. 1072. the Episcopal Seat was transferred from Dorchester, as too
obscure a place, to the City of Lincoln; from which time it began visibly to
decline, and is now only famous for its remains of Antiquity, and for the happy
conjunction of the two noted Rivers Tame and Isis.

The next Town of Note, which was obvious in the Road, was Henley, Henley.
to which the River Thames, after it has fetched a great Compass, does at last
approach; it is taken for a most ancient British Town, from Hen old, and Lhey a
place; and, as Cambden and Dr. Plot suppose, was the head Town of the People
called Ancalites, who submitted to Caesar: The Inhabitants are generally
Barge-Men, and by carrying away much Corn and good store of Wood, of which
there is great plenty in the adjacent Villages, in their Barges to London, do
enrich the Neighborhood, and pick out to themselves a very comfortable
Subsistence.

After a little respite we proceeded on to Maidenhead, Maidenhead.
which, they say, was thus denominated from the superstitious Adoration given
to a British Maid, being one of the Eleven Thousand, which by the Conduct of
St. Vrsula returning home from Rome, were all Martyred at Cologne in Germany,
by the Tyrant Attila, that most cruel Scourge to the Christians: It Is of no
long Date or Standing, for within this Hundred Years the Passage over the River
was at a place called Babham's-End, but after that a strong Bridge of Wood was
once here erected, it began to draw Strangers to it apace, and to outshine and
excel its Neighbor Bray, which being now ancient gives its Name to the whole
Hundred, it is not unlikely that the Bibroci were the former Inhabitants of
these Parts, who did willingly of their own accord come and submit themselves
to Julius Caesar, and the Relicts of their Name seem to make it out, for
Bibracte in France is easily contracted into Bray; and it is not at all
improbable that Caesar making an Inrode into this County, did pass over the
River not far from this place, though Mr. Kennett, I find is of Opinion, that
he brought his Forces over at Wallingford.

Windsor.
In this Hundred is Windsor, where we arrived toward the declining of the Day:
This place was given away by Edward the Confessor from the Crown to the Church
of Westminster, but William the Conqueror taking a great Affection to it, by
reason of its pleasant Situation, made an exchange with the Abbot of
Westminster for some other Lands in the room of this, and so it returned to the
Crown again; the Palace here, to which the King and Court do resort in Summer
time, is inferior to none for Sight and Pleasantness, for Beauty and
Magnificence throughout his Majesty's Dominions, and perhaps for curious
Painting exceeds at this time all other Palaces in the Kingdom, being the
admired Workmanship of Unimitable Seignior Verrio; in the Front lies a pleasant
Vale, garnished with Cornfieldsd, flourishing with green Meadows, decked with
melodious Woods, and watered with the gentle Streams of the noble River Thames;
behind it is a pleasant Prospect of a delightful Forest, designed on purpose by
Nature for Sport and Recreation, while she so liberally stocks it with numerous
Herds of Deer lurking amongst the shady Thickets. In fine, it is such an Elysium
for Pleasure and Delight, that our Kings and Princes have always chose to
retire hither for their Diversion; and Charles the Second was so taken with it,
that he yearly kept his Court here in the Summer time. The Royal Castle and
Chapel adjoining was rebuilt by Edward the Third, who was Born in this Town,
for Henry the First had before erected it, fortifying the same with strong
Walls and Trenches; he founded also a Chantry for Eight Priests, neither
endowed nor incorporate, but maintained by an Annual Pension out of the
Exchequer; but Edward the Third founded this College for a Custos, Twelve
Secular Canons, Thirteen Priests or Vicars, Four Clerks, Six Choristers,
Twenty-six Alms-Knights, besides other Officers to the Honor of St. Edward the
Confessor and St. George. In the Chapel lie interred two of our Kings, Henry
the Eighth and Charles the First; and to this Castle was committed Prisoners,
John King of France, and David King of Scots, by King Edward the Third. This
Castle stands upon a Hill, with a stately and spacious Terrace before it, and
it has a very magnificent Church dedicated by Edward the Third to St. George,
but brought to that present Splendour and Beauty, with which it is now
illustrated, by King Edward the Fourth, and Sir Reginald Bray. Who this St.
George was we have now mentioned, Mr. Sands in his Travels gives us the best
account, That he was a Cappadocian, advanced in the Wars to the Dignity of a
Tribune, who afterward became a Soldier of Christ, and is said in Lydda to have
suffered Martyrdom under Dioclesian, where stands a Temple built to his Honor,
as they say, by a King of England, which Church the Greeks have the Custody of,
and do show a Skull therein, which they affirm to be St. George's. On this St.
George's Day, which is April 23. King Edward the Third, that he might give to
true Chivalry that Honor and ample Reward it deserves, constituted first the
most noble Order of the Garter, appointing a select number of Twenty-six
Persons of Honor to wear a blue Garter on their left Leg, with this Motto in
French, Evil be to him that evil thinks.
Honey soit qui maly pense, and these he called Knights of the Garter: Of this
Order are and have been the most Puissant and Renowned Princes in Christendom,
this Honor being derived to them from the King of England, who is the first
and chief thereof; but because the Occasion of the constitution of this most
Noble Order, as well as a List of the Persons that are Honored therewith, are
given us already by Elias Ashmole Esquire and others. I shall not actum agere, but
rather declare who were the Principuli, and had the Honor to stand Ranked in
the first Front of this Order, and they are these who follow, who being very
Renowned in their Generation, it is pity they should be Buried in the Grave of
Oblivion: 1. Edward the Third, King of England. 2. Edward the Prince of Wales.
3. Henry Duke of Lancaster. 4. Thomas Earl of Warwick. 5. Captain de Bouch. 6.
Ralph Earl of Stafford. 7. William Mountague Earl of Salisbury. 8. Roger
Mortimer Earl of March. 10. Sir John Lisle. 11. Sir Bartholomew Burwash. 12.
Sir John Beauchamp. 13. Sir Hugh Courtney. 14. Sir Thomas Holland. 15. Sir John
Gray. 16. Sir Richard Fitz-Simon. 17. Sir Miles Stapleton. 18. Sir Thomas
Wall. 19. Sir Hugh Wrothesley: 20. Sir Neel Loring. 21. Sir John Chandos. 22.
Sir James Audley. 23. Sir Otho Holland. 24. Sir Henry Eme. 25. Sir Zanchet
D'Brigecoure. 26. Sir Walter Paveley.


All these, as likewise all other Knights of the Garter, have their several
Stalls allotted them in St. George's Chapel, over which hang their Escutcheons,
and their Arms, and when they are present they are all arrayed with Robes and
Mantles peculiar to their Order; and upon their day of admission to this
Dignity, which is usually on St. George's Day, they are generally Installed,
either by themselves or their Proxies, by the Prelate of the Garter, which
Office is settled upon the Bishop of Winchester, and the Chancellor belonging
to it is the Bishop of Salisbury.

On one side of the Church stand the Houses of the Dean and Prebendaries, who
are Twelve in number; and on the other side, an House not unlike the Grecian
Prytaneum, for the comfortable Maintenance of Twenty-six poor Knights, who
being all clad in long purple Gowns, bearing the Badge of the Cross upon them,
are daily to be present, Morning and Night, at Divine Service.

Betwixt the two Courts arises up a high Mount, on which is set a round Tower,
and hard by it rises another lofty Pinnacle, called Winchester Tower, of
William Wickam Bishop of Winchester, whom King Edward the Third made Overseer
of this Work, when he Built the Castle. There is a Rumor of a certain
Inscription that was engraven by this Wickam upon the inner part of the Wall,
after the finishing of the Tower, in these Words, This made Wickam; which
bearing a dubious meaning, some of the Courtiers, that were his Enemies,
represented them in such a sense to the King, as if he had arrogated to himself
all the Glory and Magnificence of the Structure, and so had eclipsed the King's
Honor, at which the King being incensed, and rebuking him for the Fact, he
replied, That he did not mean that he had made the Castle, but that the Castle
had made him, having raised him from a mean and low Condition to the King's
Favor, and thereby to great Wealth and Dignity.

But before I leave this Bishop, I cannot omit one very remarkable Story which
I find Recorded of him by John de Pontoys, in his History of the Bishops of
Winchester; how this Renowned Prelate discovered a notorious Cheat to Edward
the Third, put upon him by his own Queen Philippa; for that John Duke of
Lancaster, who then went for his Son, was never Born of that Queen, but was
really Supposititious, which she still concealed for fear of the King's Anger;
but afterward, a little before her Death, she declared the whole Truth to this
Bishop, and commanded him to tell the King the whole Matter, when he should
find the most convenient Opportunity. Mr. Wharton's Anglia Sacra, pars prima p.
318.

New-Windsor.
That which the Inhabitants call now New-Windsor, standing South-West from the
Castle, began to flourish in the Reign of King Henry the Third; and the
Daughter has now quite eclipsed the Glory and Honor of the Mother, for it is
grown very Beautiful and Populous, adorned with handsome Buildings, and a
regular Corporation, and sends from thence constantly two Burgesses to the
Parliament.

Aeton College.
There is one thing still more here, which is remarkable, opposite to Windsor on
the other side of the River Thames, a fair Bridge of Wood leads you on to
Aeton, where stands a famous College erected by that most Charitable Prince
King Henry the Sixth, in which besides a very honorable Allowance for the
Provost, there is a handsome Pension for Eight Fellows, and a creditable
Subsistence for Sixty Scholars, who having received here the first Rudiments of
Grammar and Rhetoric, are afterward translated to King's-College in
Cambridge, where they are certainly preferred according to their civil and
studious Deportment.

Having satisfied our Curiosities with these pleasant Prospects, we took our
Farewell of the Muses Athenaeum, as well as Mars his Citadel, and crossing
again the River arrived at Colebrook, Colebrook.
three or four Miles distant from this place, so called from the River Cole,
which gently glides along through Bucks and Middlesex; it is parted into several
Channels, over which stand as many Bridges, and by the several partitions of
its Streams it encompasseth several little pretty Islands, into which the Danes
fled about the Year 894. whither King Alfred pursued them, and endeavored what
he could to annoy them, till at last for want of Provision he was enforced to
quit that most advantageous Post.

We passed on from hence to Brentford, Brentford.
which receives its name from the Rivolet Brent running by it. Here in the Year
1016 Edmund Ironside did so overpower the Danes, that they fled away very
ingloriously, being quite routed by him, and leaving a great many Men slain
behind them. This Town being a great thorough Fare for the Western Counties,
and lying near to London, is enriched with a great Trade, and the Market draws
a considerable concourse of Citizens, who flock hither on purpose to buy up
such Commodities as it affords; besides the River Thames running not far from
it, is very conducive to beautify and enrich it, whilst by that means all
sorts of Goods are with great convenience conveyed backward and forward thither.

Here met us some Friends, who from thence conducted us back to the City, where
we again safely arrived after this divertive Perambulation.

The End of the Second Journey.
AN ACCOUNT OF Mr. BROME'S Three Years TRAVELS, OVER England, Scotland, and
Wales.
A Narrative of his Third Journey.
WE diverted our selves for some little time in the City, but the Pleasures
therein growing nauseating and irksom, and the Rural Diversions more pleasing
and delightful, we resolved to undertake once more a Pilgrimage of a greater
extent, than any we had done before; and the Vernal Season, which then began to
attire the Country in all its bravery, did as mightily conduce to quicken our
Resolutions in steering our Course about the Maritime Coasts of our Native
Soil, as in taking a view of that further part of the Continent, to which
before we had made no access.

Hereupon equipping our selves, like provident Pilgrims, with all things
requisite for so great a Journey, we set forward, and having some Friends which
accompanied us in our way, our first Remove was into the County of Essex, Essex.
a Country of as great Variety as Delight, of a considerable compass and very
fruitful; it is full of Woods and shady Groves, enriched with all kind of Grain,
abounds with Saffron, and is stocked with great Herds of Kine and Hogs;
hereupon the Rusticks have great plenty of Dairies, and make Cheeses massy and
ponderous; the Gentry generally are courtly and affable, and the Commonalty for
the most part pretty well refined; but for them who live in the Hundreds (as
they call that part of the County which lying more low and flat, and near to
the Sea, is full of Marshes and Bogs) they are Persons of so abject and sordid
a Temper, that they seem almost to have undergone poor Nebuchadnezzar's Fate,
and by conversing continually with the Beasts to have learned their Manners.

Rumford was our first Stage, Rumford.
about ten Miles from London, renowned for its great Market for all manner of
Cattle, but more especially celebrated for its Hogs and Calves. After a little
stop in this place, we passed on through Burntwood and Ingerstone, Burntwood
and Ingerstone.
Towns of no great Note, save one for its Free School, and both for their
Markets and Hospitable Inns, to Chelmsford, a Town twenty-five Miles from the
City, where we took up our Quarters for one Night.

This Town stands in the Heart of the County, Chelmsford.
being formerly called Chelmerford; it is situate betwixt two Rivers which meet
here, viz. Chelmer from the East, and another from the South, the name whereof,
if it be Can, as some would have it, we have no reason to doubt it was Old
Canonium, which Cambden tells us stood anciently in this place; it was of old
very famous for a small Religious House erected by Malcolme King of Scots, and
for its Church-Windows (having the History of Christ and the Escutcheons of its
noble Benefactors painted in them) which were battered down by the Instigated
Rabble in the late Rebellion; but that which now renders it most Renowned, is
not only the Assizes, which are held here twice a Year for the County, but
likewise its great Market for Corn, which the Londoners coming down every Week
take away in great quantities; and the Vicinity of the Nobility and Gentry,
which lying round about it, do very much enhance its Glory, as well as promote
its Trade.

But the Allurements of this place were too weak to detain us any longer than
the Morning; for no sooner did we discern the modest Blushes upon Aurora's
Cheeks, but we prepared our selves for the Farewell of our Friends, where
mutually embracing each other, with some passionate Expressions of Kindness at
our departure, we left them to return to the City, and they with a gale of good
Wishes speeded us forward on our Journey.

No sooner were they departed from us, but a Cloud of Sorrow overspread our
Countenance, and, as if we had suffered an Eclipse of Friendship upon our Souls
by their Separation from our Bodies, we began to think that of all Evils which
are incident to Humanity, there is none that equals Privation, upon which
account we became for a while a little discomposed in our Thoughts, till
Witham, Witham.
another Market Town about five Miles distant from Chelmsford, Built, as is
supposed, by King Edward the Senior, presented us with some other Scenes of
Pleasure and Diversion.

Colchester.
However our main drift being for Colchester, we hastened to that place, which
was formerly called Kaer-Colden by the Britains; but whether it took its Name
from Colonia, a Colony of the Romans being here planted, or from the River
Colne, it is not much material to enquire; the several Coins, which have been
dug up here, bearing all the Roman stamp, do evince its Antiquity; and
whether Lucius, Helena, and Constantine, the first Christian King, Empress, and
Emperor in the World, were Born here or no, sure I am, that the Inhabitants
speak great things of her Father King Coel, who built the Castle, (though others
will have it Built by Edward, Son of King Alfred) and the Walls of the Town,
having erected a Statue for him in the midst of it, which they preserve with
great Reverence to perpetuate his Memory: And it is as certain, that in
remembrance of the Cross which his Daughter found here, they give for their
Arms a Cross engrailed betwixt two Crowns. It suffered much of old from the
Fury of the East Saxons about the Year 921, as the Saxon Chronicle informs us,
who having taken it by Storm put all to the Sword, except a few, who by stealth
crept away, and saved themselves by flight, and destroyed all its Fortresses,
and threw down its Walls; but King Edward the Confessor came and Fortified it
again, and having repaired all its Breaches, and strengthened it with a
Garrison, it began by degrees to recover its Losses, and retrieve its ancient
Splendour and Comeliness; for, being pleasantly seated upon the Brow of a Hill,
which extends its self from East to West, it quickly drew to it numerous Shoals
of Inhabitants, whereby its Buildings were enlarged, and its Churches increased
to the number of 15 within the Walls, and 1 without, besides 2 Religious
Houses, an Abbey built here A. D. 1096. by Eudo, Steward to King Henry I. to the
Honor of St. John Baptist, for the use of the Benedictine Monks, the first of
that Order which was erected in England; and another Priory, says the Notitia
Monastica, Founded A. D. 1110. by Eynulphus, for Canons of the Order of St.
Austin, and dedicated to St. Botolph and St. Julian.

In the late unhappy Civil Wars it had its share of Calamities, for being close
Besieged by their Enemies, the Royalists within behaved themselves so bravely,
that they could neither take it by Violence, nor enforce it to a surrender,
till having blocked up all Avenues whereby the least Provision might be
conveyed to them within, they were reduced to such Exigency and Want, Hunger
exercising its Tyranny within the Walls, with no less rigor than the Enemy did
without, that they were compelled by one Enemy to Surrender to another, and to
fall by the Sword, rather than die by Hunger: Nor were the Royalists more
famous for their Valor and Bravery, than the adverse Party was infamous for
their Baseness and Treachery; for having got possession of the Town, they did
not only exercise the utmost Rigor and Severity upon the weaker sort, who
could make no Resistance, but even in cold Blood, did they barbarously Murder
Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle, Persons of great Integrity and
undaunted Courage; who became Victorious to their Malice, being cruelly shot to
Death by the Sanguinary Hands of the Insolent Soldiers in the Castle-yard; on
which Spot of Ground, where they fell down dead, there has never since, as is
reported, sprouted up any Grass, as there was wont to do, the very Ground it
self, it seems ever since being clad with mourning Weeds, and the Grass, as it
were dreading such execrable Murders, retires and hides it self within the
Bowels of the Earth: But though just Nemesis designs perhaps that plat, as a
Monument of infamy to succeeding generations, yet does a Vault prepared for the
Family of Sir Charles Lucas secure both his own and Fellow Sufferers Body from
any farther Attempts of the Sons of Violence; and being wrapped in Lead they
lie in that Church, which was next to his own House, and was formerly a fair
and Sumptuous Structure, but was ruinated by his Enemies, who hated the House
for the Masters sake, and were so maliciously incensed against all that had
relation to that Noble Family, that they sacrilegiously violated the Tombs of
the Lady Lucas and Killigrew in the Church adjoining, and inhumanely used their
dead Bodies dismembring, and disjoynting their very Trunks, and wearing their
Hair in their Hats by way of Triumph.

The Castle is now quite demolished, and gone to decay, and though they showed
us a Brazen-Gate, which gives entrance, as they say, to a Vault fifteen Miles
underground, yet the Stories they multiply concerning both, are so Romantickly
idle and extravagant, that there is little credit to be given to any Relations
concerning them: As for the Town it is very Rich and Populous, and there are
Merchants of considerable Estates, and great Traders who inhabit it; The chief
Manufacture of the Place is Stuff and Bays, which are from thence transported
into diverse parts of the World, and there being a Colony of Dutchmen planted
here, they are industrious in keeping up the Trade; nor is it less Famous for
its Oysters, which by the general Vogue of most Persons are reputed the best in
England.

We betook our selves from hence into its Neighboring County of Suffolk, which
is divided into too Parts called High and Low Suffolk, Suffolk.
the former of which is Miry and Dirty, the other more Pleasant and Delightful,
but both are of a fat and fertile Soil, the Air is here Wholesome and counted
proper for Consumptive people; the Country abounds in Rye, Pease, and Hemp,
feeds abundance of Sheep, and produces great Store of Butter and Cheese; it is
every where adorned with stately Palaces and Magnificent Edifices, to which the
Parks, Replenished with Game adjoining, are very conducive to their Profit and
Delight.

The first place of note we arrived at here, was Ipswich, Ipswich.
called by the Saxons Gippeswick, situate on the North side of the Stour, at
the foot of a steep Hill, commodious for its haven, enriched by Foreign
commerce, replenished with Inhabitants, adorned with several Magnificent
Churches, and being united into a Corporation is governed by two Bailiffs, who
have all other Ministers befitting their Grandeur to attend them: It has been
formerly fortified with Rampires and Trenches, but to little purpose, it being
incapable of Defense by its Situation, because commanded by hills on all sides,
but the South, and South-east: So that the Danes did easily master it 991. who
nine Years after reduced it in a manner to a heap of Ruins; in the Norman
times it began to recover it self, insomuch that it consists at this time of
diverse Parishes, graced with many fair Buildings. The Normans built a Castle,
which held out Stoutly against King Stephen, but was forced at last to
Surrender, and is supposed by Cambden to have been demolished by Henry the
Second: Here Landed the 3000 Flemmings called in by the Nobility against the
said King Henry, when his Sons rebelled against him; and it is very observable,
that in the Civil Wars under the Reign of Charles the First, this Town stood
clear of most of those Calamities which overspread and involved the rest of the
Nation: The Streets are kept clean and well Paved, and in the midst of the
Marketplace, which is surrounded with rich Shops, Stands a curious Cross with
the Essigies of the great and Impartial Goddess Astraea, bearing a pair of
Scales in the one Hand, and a Sword in the other, a fit emblem to remind the
Magistrates of the exact measures they must use in the distribution of Justice,
and with what Severity they must proceed in discountemanding all the contrary
acts of Violence and Oppression. The Storehouses, which are kept for the Kings
Ships, do much promote the Trade of the Town; and there is no small Advantage
rebounds to it by the continual supply of Stores, which upon occasion are made
for the Royal Navy.

Before the Subversion of Monasteries it had its share of some such Religious
Houses, and of a Magnificent College begun by Cardinal Woolsey, who receiving
here his first Breath, though of a mean Extraction, being only a Butchers Son,
did at last attain to such Dignity and Renown, as to surmount most Prelatical
Grandees, that have been in this Nation before him; but as he was mounted up
with admiration to the Hill of Honor, he did at last as suddenly tumble down
headlong from that dangerous Precipice, and though it might have been as truly
said of him in one, as it was of Alexander the Great in another Sense, Aestuat
infaelix angusto limite Mundi, that this microcosm of our English Soil was too
little and narrow for his large and boundless Thoughts, and ambitious Desires;
yet behold, Sarcophago contentus, a little Urn contains all his Pomp and
Grandeur, which extended it self from our British Island to the Popish Conclave
at Rome, and his dust appears of no finer mold, than those poor Creatures from
whom at first he lineally descended.

After some respite in this Place, we passed on through Needham, Stow and
Wulpit, Needham, Stow and Wulpit.
Towns of little Fame or Repute, but what accrues to them by their Markets, or
the River Orwell, which enricheth the Soil, to St. Edmunds-Bury, the Eye, and
indeed the pleasant Elysium of the whole County. St. Edmunds-Bury.


This Town is called St. Edmunds-Bury from Edmund the Martyr, King of the
East Angles, who for refusing to renounce the Christian Faith, was shot to
Death by Arrows at Hoxon by the Danes, and was buried in this Place: It is
further styled by Antiquaries Villa Faustini, and though it be not the same
with the Poet Martial's, which he so elegantly describes, yet it no ways falls
short in any thing, which may render it amiable or delightful; for it is
Situated in a Pleasant Air, in a wholesome Soil, not in any part annoyed with
noisome Fogs, or offensive Vapors, but so liberally enriched by Nature with a
contribution of all Varieties, which may illustrate and beautify it, that it
draws hither great numbers of Persons of Quality; and there is hardly to be met
withal in any Town Corporate of our British Island a more noble Colony, or
glorious Asterism of the Gentry, than is visibly shining in this renowned
Sphere.

The Town it self has been very famous for a large and stately Monastery,
Founded by Canutus in Honor of St. Edmund, whom his Father Suenus had caused
to be put to Death, to expiate which Murder, being affrighted with a Vision of
St. Edmund; he erected a curious Structure, beautifying it with costly
Ornaments, enriching it with great Revenues, and offering his own Crown at the
Martyr's Tomb. As the Incomes which the Monks hereby enjoyed were very
considerable, so were the Privileges granted to them unspeakable, being under
the Government of a Seneschal or Steward, who did not only govern them, but
preside over the whole Town besides; by whose strict Order and Discipline the
Townsmen were so awed and kept under, that in King Edward the Third's Reign,
they rose up in Arms against the Monks, took away all their Gold and costly
Habiliments, their Books, Charters, with the Assay of their Coins, Stamp, and
all other things appertaining to their Mint, for which they were afterward
sharply punished and fined by the King, and enforced to cry Peccavi, and make a
full Restitution of what they had so unjustly defaulked from them. After this
Broil was over, it increased again in such Wealth and Honor, great Offerings
being daily made at St. Edmund's Shrine, that it appeared rather like a City
than a Monastery, so many Gates it had for entrance, and many of them Brass, so
many Towers, and above all a most glorious Church; and thus it continued till
the final Dissolution of it by King Henry the Eighth, since which there remains
nothing now, but the Carcass of that ancient Structure; and yet even still by
its Ruins it is easy to conjecture what a majestic Fabric it once was.

To this adjoins two large Churches of curious Architecture, dedicated the one
to St. James, and the other to St. Mary, and in that spacious Church Yard, in
which they both stand, being only parted by a decorous shady Walk of Trees, as
the Assizes for the County are held at the further end of it, in a Courthouse
erected for that purpose, so there are diverse Monuments dispersed all over it
with various ancient inscriptions; but three Epitaphs in a more especial manner
we did more particularly take notice of.

The first is an Epitaph upon Charles Granger, a Shooemaker, who died when he
was almost Fourscore.

Brave Hero, whose attempts in Martial Camp
Such radiant Luster on your name instamp,
That now it is dubious which displays more light
TO our spacious Hemisphere, the Sun or it.
You dead, your Trophies live, and live to be
Sacred Monuments to all Posterity.
But unkind Fate, that cut the Thread so soon
Of hastened Life, not to its period spun.
But sublime Soul, that could no longer stay
On Earth, this humile Prison, than to pay
Your triple Debt, in Christian Duty own,
To King, to Country, and Religion;
Which paid, you soon took flight, exchanged soon
This dungeon Earth for a Celestial Throne.
The second is upon Christopher Barret's Tombstone, a Youth, whose Elogy is
this: Puer boni ingenii: Or, Puer bono ingenio.

The third is upon one Joan Kitchen.

Here lies Joan Kitchen, when her Glass was spent,
She kicked up her Heels, and away she went.
Which puts me in mind of another I met with elsewhere, which I think not amiss
to insert here likewise for the Readers Diversion.

Here lies John Cabott under this Stone,
One thousand six hundred forty and one,
Whether alive or dead it is all one.
Neither lament, nor make any moan,
Yet under his Head lay a Turf, or a Stone,
Or any thing else or nothing, it is all one.
Yet pray for John Cabott, since he is gone,
Or if you please you may let it alone,
For whether you pray, or pray not, it is all one.
On the Front of that noble and spacious Gate, which leads into the Abbey, is a
place called the Angel-Hill, very signal for its row of curious Buildings, most
of which belong to Persons of Quality; and a little further in the
North-Gate-street, besides several Houses of great Note and Eminency, stands
the Free School, being a new Structure erected of Brick, by the liberal
Contribution of well-disposed Benefactors: The ancient Station for the School
was formerly in the East-Gate-street, and was Built and Endowed by King Edward
the Sixth with a generous Minerval for a Master and Usher, and four Exhibitions
for four Scholars at their Transplantation to the University of Cambridge; but
that being very inconvenient by reason of a little Rivolet, which running along
by it, by whose muddy streams it was frequently overflowed, and the School it
self much impaired and gone to decay, through the care and prudence of its
Governors, who are Twelve in number, and the assistance of some other worthy
Gentlemen within the Neighborhood thereof, it was translated at last into a
better Soil, and fixed in a more pleasant and convenient place.

On the Front of it stands the Statue of King Edward the Sixth, and at the
upper end of the School were placed his Royal Arms with this Inscription,
Edwardus Sextus posuit, Virtutis Alumnus,
Gratis disce puer, Regia namque Schola est.


The Master and Usher, who here preside, are Persons of no less Note than
Learning, and by the great Concourse of Scholars which flock hither, and have
come to this place from the remotest Parts of the Nation, it is easy to guess
at the strictness of their Discipline, and their admirable way of instructing
Youth, which seems here to be Hereditary, there having of late been
successively three Masters of great Worth and Honor, viz. Mr. Dickenson, Dr.
Stephens, and Mr. Leeds, the present Master, who has sufficiently signalized
his Name to Posterity by several useful and learned Books, he has published,
under the last of which I had the Happiness to receive the first Rudiments of
my Education; nor can I mention his Name without the most profound Respect, nor
when I think of his manifold Favors conferred upon me, refrain from breaking
forth into a Poetical Rapture with the sincerest Gratitude imaginable, -- Dii,
siqua pios respectant Numina, siquid
Vsquam justitiae est, aut men's sibi conscia recti,
Praemia digna ferant --


Out of this Street lies a way up into a fair Champaign Heath, where the Walks
are so pleasant, and the Air so sweet, that every gentle gale does fan and
clear the Blood from all gross and feculent Humors, and infusing a more than
ordinary Agility and Briskness into the Spirits, keeps the Body constantly in
an even and healthy Crasis; And indeed every where about the Town there are
dispersed such variety of Delights for Recreation, so much Wit and
Facetiousness for Diversion, so much gentile Complaisance for Imitation, that
it is no wonder to behold it so Populous and so Rich, so Gay and so Glorious,
and every day to receive still greater addittaments of Wealth and Honor.

As for what concerns the particular Government of the Town, it is under the
Charge of an Alderman with Twelve Brethren, who are his Assistants, out of
which the Chief Magistrate is annually elected, who have all things necessary
to support their Grandeur: And for its constant supplies of Provision, there is
weekly a great Market of Corn and all other Commodities, to be serviceable to
the Inhabitants; and for the farther promoting of our English Manufactures,
there are two great Fairs kept here every Year, wherein they may furnish
themselves with what their Markets are not able to supply them.

Not far from this Town was that great Battle fought against King Henry the
Second, in which he overthrew Robert Earl of Leicester with his Rabble of
Flemmings, the Earl himself and his Wife being taken Prisoners. And here was
Born Richardus de Bury, Bishop of Durham, the Governor of Edward the Third when
young, and famous especially for a Work which he entitled Philobiblos, in the
Preface of which he confesses, Ecstatico quodam librorum amore potenter se
abreptum; he was well acquainted with Petrarch the Italian, and other Learned
Men of that Age: Bradwardin, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Richard Fitz-Ralph
Armachanus, Walter Burleigh, Robert Halcot, and other famous Men of that Age,
were his Chaplains.

We diverted our selves a while with our Friends, whose Civility and Kindness
was as generous as their Entertainments free and cordial, but though the Charms
of this place were very strong and inviting, yet at last we were enforced
unwillingly to break through these alluring Enchantments; and resolving again
to seek out new Adventures, we passed from hence through Buddesdale, Buddesdale.
a Market Town of good Note, to a little Village called Scole, very famous for
an Inn and Sign-Post, built by a Gentleman of this Country at a considerable
Charge.

The House is of Brick, neat and uniform, Scole- Inn.
and has great variety of Objects for Diversion; in the Porch, at the four
Corners, stand the Statues of two Men playing on Wind-Musick, a Tapster filling
out Drink, and a Tumbler showing of Tricks; on the two side Posts, Hercules
with his Club, and Sampson with his Jaw Bone; on the Front is the Figure of the
Whale vomiting up Jonah out of his Mouth; and on the East side of the House the
Statue of Peace and Hope with an Anchor and an Olive Branch: But that which is
most admirable, is the contrivance of the Sign-Post, which seems to contain an
Epitome of Ovid's Metamorphosis in Effigy; on the top of it is an Astronomer
looking through a Quadrant, and riding upon an Anchor, with the four Cardinal
Virtues on each side of him; Fortitude with her Pillars, Temperance with a Cup
pouring out Wine, Prudence with a Snake in her Right Hand, and Horn of Plenty
in her Left; and Justice with a pair of Scales and a Sword. All along the
Sign-Post stand several Images curiously carved and painted; the first
represents a Huntsman equipped and accoutred with his Horn and green Jacket, as
if he was then very hot upon his Chase; and next to him Actaeon transformed
into a Stag, under which is this Inscription, Actaeon ego sum, Dominum
cognoscite vestrum: The next is Diana, with a Half Moon upon her Head, the
Planets under her Feet, her Quiver in her Hand, and her Horn by her side, and
before her is a Gray hound in a close pursuit after a Hair: After which stands
old Time with an Hourglass on his Head, a Sith in his Left Hand, a Prodigal
Youth in his Right, and Death under his Feet, with this Inscription, Tempus
edax rerum. In the middle hangs the Sign of the White Heart, ingeniously
contrived into an Oval Figure, with two Angels and two Lions at each corner,
under one of which are placed four naked Boys pressing of Grapes, and under the
other a Tumbler showing feats of Activity. On both sides are Coats of Arms of
some of the chief Families both in Suffolk and Norfolk, with Bacchus sitting
astride upon a Barrel, and holding two Bunches of Grapes in one hand, and a Cup
of Wine in the other; The Effigies of a Triton riding upon the back of a
Dolphin; and also of a Shepherd playing merrily upon his Rural Pipe; And last
of all, on each side of the Post, which supports the whole Fabric, stands
three-headed Cerberus, the great Janitor of the Infernal Court; and
grislebearded Charon, with his Boat and Oars wafting a Wench over the Stygian
Ferry.

And because I find a great Master of Wit and Poetry, Mr. Alexander Brom,
exercising his Fancy ingeniously upon this Subject, I shall borrow from his
Book that elegant Poem, which was Printed some years ago.

I.
DID none of you hear
Of a Wonder last Year
That through all Norfolk did ring?
Of an Inn and an Host,
Of a Sign and a Post,
That might hold (God bless us) the King?
II.
The Building is great
And very complete,
But cannot be compared to the Sign,
But within doors, I think,
Scarce a drop of good Drink,
For Bacchus drinks all the best Wine.
III.
But here is the design,
What Is amiss in the Wine,
By Wenches shall be supplied,
There Is three in a row
Stands out for a show,
To draw in Gallants that ride.
IV.
The first of the three
Diana should be,
But she Cuckolded poor Actaeon;
And his Head she adorns
With such visible Horns,
That he is fit for his Hounds to prey on.
V.
It Is unsafe we do find
To trust Womankind,
Since Horning's a part of their Trade;
Diana is placed,
As a Goddess that is chaste,
Yet Actaeon a Monster she made.
VI.
The next Wench does stand
With the Scales in her hand,
And is ready to come at your beck;
A new Trick they have found
To sell Sack by the pound,
But 'twere better they would sell it by the Peck.
VII.
The last of the three
They say Prudence must be,
With the Serpent and Horn of Plenty;
But Plenty and Wit
So seldom do hit,
That they fall not to One in Twenty.
VIII.
But above these things all
Stands a Fellow that is small,
With a Quadrant discerning the Wind,
And says he is a Fool
That travels from Scole,
And leaves his good Liquor behind.
IX.
Near the top of the Sign
Stand three on a Line,
One is Temperance still pouring out;
And Fortitude will
Drink what Temperance fill,
And fears not the Stone or the Gout.
X.
The next to these three
You Will an Usurer see,
With a Prodigal Child in his Mouth;
It Is Time (as some say)
And well so it may,
For they be Devourers both.
XI.
The last that you stare on
Is old Father Charon,
Who Is wafting a Wench over the Ferry;
Where Cerberus does stand
To watch where they Land,
And together they go to be merry.
XII.
Now to see such a Change
Is a thing that is strange,
That One, who as Stories do tell us,
His Money has lent
At Fifty per Cent,
A College should build for good Fellows.
XIII.
But under this Work
Does a Mystery lurk,
That shows us the Founder's design;
He has chalked out a way
For Gallants to stray,
That their Lands may be his in kind.
XIV.
That Is first an Ale-Bench,
Next Hounds, then a Wench,
With these three to Roar and to Revel,
Brings the Prodigal's Lands
To the Vsurer's Hands,
And his Body and Soul to the Devil.
XV.
Now if you would know,
After all this ado,
By what Name this Sign should be known;
Some call it this, and some that,
And some I know not what,
But it is many Signs in one.
XVI.
It Is a sign that who built it
Had more Money than Wit,
And more Wealth than he got, or can use;
It Is a sign that all we
Have less Wit than he,
That come hither to Drink, and may choose.
We reposed our selves here one Night, but the next day we traveled on to
Bungay, Bungay.
about eight Miles further, a place much Renowned for some remains of
Antiquity; it is watered by the River Waveney, near to which Hugh Bigod, in the
Barons Wars, built a Castle, which by reason of its Situation, and artificial
Contrivances, became so strong and impregnable, that he thought it beyond the
Conquest of the most valiant Monarch, and did esteem himself so safe, when
immured in this Asylum, that he would frequently Hector, and make his Brags in
some such Rhymes as these; Were I in my Castle of Bungay,
Upon the River of Waveney,
I would not care for the King of Cockney.
And yet, notwithstanding such his vaunting Harangues, he was afterward forced
to submit both that and himself to the Mercy of King Henry the Second; and
could not without great Sums of Money, and sufficient Pledges for his future
Loyalty, obtain the Favor from him, that this Castle might not be demolished,
when diverse others underwent the same Calamities.

Halesworth.
From hence passing away through Halesworth (formerly called Healsworda, which
was made a Market Town by King Henry the Third, at the request of Sir Rich.
Argenton, whose Families were here seated) we came to Sowld, Southwold.
alias Southwold, where is a Haven of great Note in this County; it is situate
some Miles North from Dunwich, Dunwich.
anciently a Bishop's See, and a potent City, though now almost quite
overwhelmed by the merciless Ocean; it stands upon a Cliff, the Sea on the
East, the Harbor on the South, the River Blithe with a Draw Bridge on the West,
and a small neck of land on the North, so that it is in a manner surrounded
with Water, especially at every Flood; its Bay, called Southwold-Bay, but
commonly pronounced Sowlds-Bay, is chiefly made by the shooting forth of the
Easton Ness, which lies North-East from it, and covers it from Northerly Winds.
The commodiousness of Anchorage makes many Vessels lie near; by reason of which
the Mariners become good Benefactors to it, and contribute exceedingly to its
Trade and Commerce: It Is very famous for the many Rendezvouz's of our Royal
Fleets, near to which the English and Dutch have so frequently disputed their
Maritime Privileges with Powder and Bullet, where their resolute Courage has
been so Renowned amongst the neighboring Nations, that they have even trembled
at their furious Onsets, as if every Broadside had been a Thunderclap from
Heaven, which presently threatened their immediate Destruction; that though they
became Victims to each other's Fury, yet memorable Trophies of their invincible
Valor will still remain to succeeding Generations.

Lestoff, Lestoff.
a little narrow Town, which stands upon the Sea, being the last Market Town we
visited in this County, made us quickly a Passage for its neighboring County
of Norfolk, which are parted by the Rivers Ouse and Wavency.

It Is a Region of a large extent, Norfolk.
and near the Sea is Champaign, and yields plenty of Corn, in other parts Woody
or full of Heaths, well covered with Sheep and Conies; it is adorned with diverse
curious Seats of the Nobility and Gentry; and as the Villages stand thick, so
the Market Towns are numerous; but that which is too Remarkable, though in some
few places the Churches appear very decorous and splendid, yet the generality
of them are poor and mean Fabrics, being for the most part thatched, or
covered with Straw or Reeds, and endowed with very small and inconsiderable
Revenues; a thing not much for the Honor of our English Reformation.

Yarmouth
Yarmouth was the first Town of any Note which entertained us with a pleasant
and divertive Prospect; the Haven is as commodious as the Town beautiful, being
fortified both by Art and Nature: For although it be environed almost round
with Water, on the West Side with the River Yare (from whence it receives its
Name) which has a draw Bridge over it, and from other Parts with the Ocean,
unless it be Northward, where there is firm Land, yet it is likewise enclosed
with a very strong Wall, upon which, besides Towers, is cast up a Mount toward
the East, and are planted several Pieces of Ordnance to defend the Town and
command the Sea. There is but one Church, but that fair and lofty, adorned with
a high spire Steeple, built at first by Herbert Bishop of Norwich; but there
are diverse clean and spacious Streets, on each side of which are several rows
of very uniform Buildings, inhabited by wealthy and gentile Persons.

That this Town is of no great standing, but received its beginning from the
Ruins of old Gariannonum, is the general vogue of all Antiquaries: And it is
certain that Cerdick, a valiant Saxon Captain coming here to the place, which
is still called Cerdick-shore, about the Year 895, as the Saxon Chronicle
informs us, together with his Son Cynrick and five Ships; and finding it much
decayed, by reason the River Yare had diverted its Current another way, planted
a Colony of Saxons in a moist and watery Ground upon the West Side of the
River, which place he called Yarmouth; but the Inhabitants finding both the Air
and Soil very prejudicial to them, transplanted themselves to the other side of
the River, called from the same Cerdick, Cerdick-Sand, and built this new Town,
which in a short time grew so potent and populous, that they strengthened it
with a Wall, and were able to make up so strong a Body of Seamen, as would
frequently make Incursions upon the Neighborhood of Lestoff, and the adjacent
Cinque Ports, against whom they had a particular Antipathy, because they were
excluded by them from many advantageous Privileges, which their Ancestors had
enjoyed: But these private Feuds did at last end by an express Order from the
King, and their Courage was quelled by a sudden and fearful Pestilence, which
in the space of one Year brought above Seven thousand Men and Women to their
Graves, all which was faithfully Recorded in an ancient Chronographical Table,
which formerly used to hang up in their Church; since which time, as their
Grudges have ceased, so their Wealth has increased, and it is now a place of
great Merchandise and Traffic, but especially renowned for its Fishery of
Herrings, of which, at the season, there is usually such plenty, that they do
not only supply our own, but Foreign Nations too, after they have been by their
great care and industry dried and salted in particular Houses set apart for
that purpose.

The Haven it self is capacious enough for Vessels of great Burdens, and
standing well for Holland, affords a ready passage to it, and is a frequent
Shelter for the Newcastle Coal Fleet, when distressed by Weather; but the
North-East Wind being subject frequently to annoy this Coast, and drive in the
Sand and Beach in great heaps, the Townsmen are forced to be at a great
Expense, by removing all such Obstacles to clear their Haven.

From this place we hastened to Norwich, Norwich.
which is the Metropolis of the County, situate at the influx of the Winsder
into the Yare, and sprung up out of the Ruins of Venta Icenorum, now called
Castor, about three Miles distance from it, in which not many years since was
found a great number of Roman Urns: And from Wic, which in the Saxon Tongue
signifies a Castle, the Learned Mr. Gibson in his Explication of Places not
improbably guesseth, that it might receive its denomination.

This is one of the most Renowned Cities in our British Island, for whether we
consider the Wealth of the Citizens, the number of Inhabitants, the great
confluence of Foreigners, the stately Structures, and beautiful Churches, the
obliging deportment of the Gentry, and the laudable Industry of the Commonalty,
they do all concur to illustrate and dignifie it; it is situated on the brow of
a Hill, and environed with a Wall, upon which were placed diverse Turrets, and
Twelve Gates to give entrance into the Town, unless it be on the East side,
where the River (after it has with many windings watered the North part of the
City, having four Bridges over it) is a defense by reason of its deep Channel
and high Banks; it is reputed a Mile and half in length, and half as much in
breadth, drawing in it self at the South side, till it almost appear in the
form of a Cone.

The great Damages it sustained, and Misfortunes it was exposed to, when Sucnus
the Dane with his Bloody Crew took his range in these Parts; and after that
William the Conqueror had settled the British Crown upon his Head, were too
doleful and tragical a Story to relate: Nor were the Calamities it underwent
less deplorable, when Hugh Bigod, Earl of Norfolk, sided with Young Prince
Henry against his Father, and, as it is supposed, re-edified the Castle which
stands upon a high Hill, and was once thought impregnable, till Lewis the
French Monsieur, by the assistance of the Seditious Barons, won it at last by
Siege. And as if the Plague and the Sword had made a Conspiracy together,
utterly to subvert and destroy it, the Pestilence in the Reign of King Edward
the Third, consumed no less than 57374, besides Ecclesiastic Mendicants, and
Dominicans: But after this, in succeeding Ages, it began again to flourish,
whilst to recruit their strength, which was much impaired, King Henry the First
permitted the Citizens to Wall the City, and King Richard the Second gave them
a Grant for the Transportation of Worsted, and to advance their Trade, which
was extremely eclipsed; King Henry the Fourth renewed their Charter, and
conferred on them the Honor to choose every Year a Mayor, whereas by a former
Order from King Stephen, they were only governed by Coroners and Bailiffs: And
as if the Fates with no less eagerness designed their Felicity, than before
they consulted their Misery, the Dutch, who flocked over hither during the
Bloody Inquisition of Duke Alva, have made it very opulent by the great Trade
of Says, Bays, and other curious Stuffs, which here occasion a considerable
Merchandise.

Here is an Hospital, where above an Hundred Men and Women are maintained; and
A. D. 1094. the Episcopal See was translated hither, being first placed at
Dunwich about the Year 636. by Felix the Burgundian, who established the
East Angles in the Christian Faith; and here it continued, till Bisus the
fourth Bishop from him removed it to North-Elmham in Norfolk in 673. leaving a
Suffragan Bishop at Domor or Dunwich; afterward both Sees becoming vacant for
the space of 100 Years after the Death of St Humbert alias Humbritt (who
suffered Martyrdom with King Edmund by the Bloody Danes) in 995. Adulphus,
alias Athulphus, seu Eadulphus (who lived in the time of King Edwin) became
Bishop of both Sees under the Title of North-Elmham; but in the Eleventh
Century, Herfastus, by Bartholomew Cotton, in his History of the Bishops of
Norwich, called Arfattus, who was Chaplain to William the Conqueror, and a
great Favorite of that Prince before the Conquest, as is observed by the
Learned Mr. Wharton in his Notes on that place, Angl. Sacr. par. prima, p. 403,
404, 406.
was the Person that removed the Sea to Thetford, according to the Canon made
in the Council of London by Archbishop Lanfrank, A. D. 1075. by which it was
provided that all Episcopal Sees should be translated from smaller Villages to
more eminent Cities: But his next Successor to him, save one, Herbert Losing,
settled it at last in Norwich, A. D. 1094, where it has continued ever since,
founding a Cathedral Church to the Honor of the Holy Trinity, in which he
placed Benedictine Monks, who continued till the Dissolution, at which time
King Henry the Eighth put in their Room a Dean and six Prebendaries. This
Church is a very stately and magnificent Structure, and famous not only for its
Cross and Cloister, but for the Roof likewise, which runs aloft over the Body
of it, on which is pourtrayed to the Life the History of the Bible in diverse
little Images, curiously carved and adorned, from the Creation of the World to
the Ascension of our Blessed Savior, and the Descent of the Holy Ghost, with
the perfect Figures and Resemblances of our Lord's Crucifixion and
Resurrection, and diverse other Circumstances that attended him, both at his
Nativity and Passion. And for the Encouragement of Piety and Learning, every
Sunday Morning throughout the Year there is a Sermon preached by such Ministers
as the Bishop shall appoint, to each of which is presented Twenty Shillings
left as a Legacy to the Church for this Religious purpose, by one who had
formerly been Mayor of this City.

But before I leave this place, as the Duke of Norfolk's Palace, adorned with
curious Granaries, and a large and spacious Bowling-Alley, so the Mount on the
East Side of the City, called Ket's-Castle, must not be passed by in silence,
for it was the Harbor and Nest of Ket, a Tanner of Windham, that notorious
Ringleader of Rebellion in King Edward the Sixth's Days, who with no less
Violence assaulting the City, than afflicting the Citizens, did at last receive
the just Reward of his Rebellion, when, all the Seditious Rabble being
persuaded to desert him, he was hanged up in Chains on the Top of Norwich
Castle.

After some few Days abode in this City, we traveled on to a little Village
called Tettles-Hall, Tettles-Hall.
in the Parish Church whereof is erected a stately Monument of Marble, in
Honor to Sir Edward Cook, that most famous Lawyer of his time; on the top are
placed his Coat of Arms, with the four Cardinal Virtues to support them at each
corner; his Effigies is of Marble laid out in full length, above which this
Motto is engraved, Prudens qui Patiens, and underneath in Golden Characters
this following Inscription.

The Monument of Sir Edward Cook, Knight, born at Mileham in Norfolk; Recorder
of Norwich and London, Solicitor to Queen Elizabeth, and Speaker to the
Parliament, afterward Attorney General to Her and King James, Chief Justice of
both Benches, a Privy-Counsellor, as also of Council to Queen Ann, and Chief
Justice in Air of all her Forests, Chases and Parks; Recorder of Coventry, and
High-Steward of Cambridge, of which he was a Member in Trinity-College. He died
in the Eighty-third year of his Age, his last Words being these, Thy Kingdom
come, thy will be done. His Epitaph this.

Deo Optimo Maximo
Hae exuviae humanae exspectant Resurrectionem
Piorum.
Hic situs est
Non perituri Nominis Edvardus Cook Eques Auratus,
Legum anima, interpres, Oraculum non dubium,
Arcanorum Promicondus Mysteriorum,
Cujus fere unius beneficio
Jurisperiti nostri sunt Jurisperiti,
Eloquentiae flumen, torrens, fulmen,
Suadae Sacerdos Vnicus,
Divinus Heroes
Pro rostris ita dixit
Vt literis insudasse crederes non nisi humanis,
Ita vixit ut non nisi divinis.
Sacerrimus integrae pietatis Indagator,
Integritas ipsa:
Verae semper caussae constantissimus assertor
Nec favore nec muncribus violandus.
Eximic misericors,
Charior erat huic Reus quam sibi,
(Miraculi instar est)
Sicculus saepe ille audiit sententiam in se prolatam,
Nunquam hic nisi madidoculus protulit:
Scientiae Oceanus
Quique dum vixit Bibliotheca viva
Mortuus dici meruit Bibliothecae Parens.
Duodecim Liberorum, Tredecim Librorum Pater.
Facescant hinc Monumenta,
Facessant Marmora,
(Nisi quod pios fuisse denotarunt posteros)
Ipse sibi suum est Monumentum
Marmore perennius,
Ipse sibi sua est Aeternitas.
Next to Sir Edward stands likewise a Marble Monument of his first Wife
Bridget, Daughter of John Paston Esquire with Eight of her Children, six Sons and
two Daughters; his second Wife was the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to Thomas Earl
of Exeter, by whom he had only two Daughters.

Having given a solemn Vale to this great Man's Tomb, Lyn.
we took up our next Quarters at Lyn, which though but of a late being, having
received its Original from Old Lyn, which is seated in the Marsh-Land, and is
opposite against it, yet it is grown of far greater request; for the
commodiousness of its Haven, and safe Harbor, cause a great resort of Mariners
to frequent it; and the Vessels which coming loaded with Coals from Newcastle,
do lighten here their Burdens, and are conveyed up the River by Lighters and
Barges drawn along by Horses into diverse parts of the adjacent Counties: It Is a
large Town, surrounded with a deep Trench, and for the most part Walled; the
Streets are well paved and kept clean, and it is divided by two small Rivers,
over which there are Fifteen Bridges. It is called Old Lyn, and Linnum Regis,
i. e. King's Lyn, though before the Reign of Henry the Eighth it was called
Bishop's Lyn, because the Ground it stands upon belonged to the Bishops of
Norwich: There are five Churches (with a Free School) to adorn it, the chief of
which is a curious Fabric dedicated to St. Margaret, upon the top of which
stands a large and stately Lanthorn, very admirable for its rare Workmanship;
and here is once a Year, about February, held a great Mart for all sorts of
Commodities, by which no small Benefit accrues to it. The Town is governed by a
Mayor and Aldermen, who have received great Favors and Privileges from their
Sovereigns, but their chief and most munificent Benefactor was King John, who
for the good Service they had done him in the defense of his Quarrel, not only
presented them with his own Sword from his side (which is continually carried
before the Mayor, whenever he pleases to appear in State) but likewise gave
them a great Silver Cup gilt, for the use of the Corporation; which because
they show as a main Badge and Cognizance of Royal Favor to all Strangers and
Foreigners of any Note or Repute, they seldom produce it, unless filled with
Wine to drink His Majesty's, and Mr. Mayor's Healths, for which there is a
generous Allowance proportioned by the Town.

We rested here one Night, but the next Day being summoned away by the Tide,
whose Motions we were enforced to wait on and observe, we Ferried over into
Mersh-Land, and posted away for the Washes, through which we were to pass into
the Frontiers of Lincolnshire.

The Washes.
The Washes are called by Ptolemy, Metaris Aestuarium, being a very large Arm,
which every Tide and high Sea covers over with Water, but when the Sea Ebbs,
and the Tide is gone, it is as easy to pass over them, as upon dry Ground,
though not without some danger for Strangers, who are unacquainted with their
Tracts and Channels, which King John found true by woeful Experience; for,
whilst for the more speed he journeyed this way, when he was engaged in the War
against the disaffected Barons, his Men not aware of such Irruptions, the
Waters unexspectedly broke in upon them, by which means he lost all his
Carriage and Furniture: Hereupon, to prevent all such unwelcom Dangers, we
hired a Guide to ride before us, by whose conduct we nimbly tripped over those
dangerous Plains, and arrived safe at last out of these troublesome Territories
of Neptune in Holland, which is one of the grand Divisions in Lincolnshire.

Lincolnshire.
This County is of a large extent, and in most places very fertile and rich in
Cattle; it stretches out it self no less than Threescore Miles in length, and
above Thirty in breadth, and is divided into three Portions, called by the
Names of Holland, Kesteven and Lindsey.

Holland.
Holland (so called, as some would have it, from Hay, which our Ancestors
broadly term Hoy, is divided likewise into two parts, the Higher and the Lower;
the Lower is a very moist and watery Soil, troublesome for its deep Fens,
annoyed frequently with Quagmires, which in Summertime are so soft and pliable,
that they will shake under a Man's Feet, who will be ready to sink into them,
as he stands upon them; in that Season it is all over covered with Sheep, as in
the Winter with Water, at which time there is such a vast plenty of Fish and
Fowl, that many poor People thereabouts make a good Livelihood by catching of
them.

But as the Incomes are great, and the Profits considerable of most Persons who
inhabit these Fens, so are there some Inconveniences which are no less
intolerable; for their Cattle being commonly a good distance from their Houses,
they are forced in the Winter, when they go either to Fodder or Milk them, to
betake themselves to their little Boats which they call Skirries, carrying
usually two a-piece, and may be compared to an Indian Canoo, and by these
convey themselves from place to place, as occasion requires; and because their
Ground lies very low and flat, and Eastward adjoins to the main Ocean, lest at
any time it should be overflown by any sudden Inundations, as in stormy Weather
it too frequently happens, they fence in their Lands with great Piles of Wood,
and mighty Banks well lined and ramm'd down against the Violence of the Waves,
and are forced to keep Watches with great care and diligence, as against the
Approaches of a most dangerous Enemy; and yet, notwithstanding all their
vigilance and forecast, they can scarce with the strongest Barricadoes, they
can prepare, defend themselves from the violent Incursions and Outrages of the
Sea.

Here is great plenty of Flax and Hemp, and in all these Parts many thousands
of Sheep are fatted for the slaughter, but of good Bread and Water, which are
the staff of Life, as great a scarcity, for the Water is generally brackish and
ill relished, and the Bread as little pleasing and toothsom, being made for the
most part of Pease and Oats, which yet goes down as favourily with the
Peasants, as if it had been molded of finer Flour. Nor are their Dormitories
any more pleasing or delightful, for all the Summer long there are continually
such swarms of stinging Gnats, and other troublesome Flies throughout all these
Quarters, that a Stranger can find but a very unhospitable Lodging and
Reception amongst those little buzzing Misanthropical Animals. Being loath
therefore to lie at the mercy of such Enemies, or to come within the reach of
their Bloody Inquisition, we made all the haste we conveniently could their
troublesome Territories to Boston, which lying within the Precincts of Higher
Holland, we hoped to find more safe and inoffensive.

Boston.
This is a famous Town, situated upon the River Witham, more properly named
Botolph's Town, from a great Saint Botolph, who had here formerly a Monastery;
it is a place of great Note and Repute for Merchandise, for the Sea flowing up
the River causes a very commodious Haven, so that many times here lie a Fleet
of Ships, which convey down Goods hither from all Parts; and the Mart which is
kept here yearly does much enrich the Town with all sorts of Commodities: There
are fair and beautiful Houses seated on both sides of the River, over which is
built a wooden Bridge of a great height, for the more easy converse and
intercourse of the Inhabitants: The Marketplace is fair and large, and on
Market Days well stored with all kind of Provisions; and the Church being a
most curious and stately Fabric, is chiefly remarkable for its towering
Steeple, which has as many steps in it, from the top to the bottom, as there
are Days in the Year, and does not only salute all Travelers at a great
distance, but is a good Sea-mark and Direction to all Sailors.

And it seems the Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmond and Darby (of whose great
Munificence I have formerly spoken) had a great kindness and esteem for this
place, for the Margaret Preacher from Cambridge does usually once in two Years
come hither to give the Inhabitants a Sermon, for which service there is a
particular Salary left in Legacy by that Lady.

And whatever Damages it sustained formerly by the sudden Incursion of some
bold and insolent Ruffians, who coming clad cunningly in the Habits and Garb of
Monks and Friars, broke into Merchants Houses, and plundered and pillaged them,
and set Fire to the Town in sundry places in the time of Edward the First; (so
that, as our Chronicles tell us, Gold and Silver which was melted in the Flames
ran down in as rapid a stream, as the like and other Metals did at the Sacking
of Corinth) yet it has since retrieved its Wealth, and recovered its strength,
for the Inhabitants addicting themselves either to Merchandise, or Grazing, or
both, have reduced it to a very opulent and flourishing Condition; and it is now
governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, by whose prudent Conduct and Government it
may, in all probability, long continue in that prosperous Estate. In the Coat
of Arms for the Corporation there are three Crowns, relating to the three
Kingdoms; the Crest a Ram lying upon a Wooll-Sack, the Ram signifying the great
Sheep-walks in the Fens round about, and the Wool-Sack that it was a Staple
Town; the Supporters of the Coat are two Maremaids, signifying that it was a
Port Town.

Reposing our selves here one Night, the next Day we traveled further into the
Country, and passing over some part of the Fens, we came within the limits of
the second part of the County, called Kesteven (where as the Air is far more
sweet and wholesome, so the Soil is no less rich and fruitful) to a small
Market Town named Sleeford, Sleeford.
of little account, except it be by reason of an ancient Castle built formerly
by Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, or a House which was erected by Sir John
Hussy, who in King Henry the Eighth's Days lost his Head: And from hence
coming to Lindsey, the other part, which is a Champaign Heath Country, we
arrived at Lincoln, the most eminent Place and City of this County.

Lincoln.
This is the City, which Ptolemy and the Emperor Antoninus called Lindum, the
Britains (says Rudborne) Caerludecote; and Bid, Linde-Collina Civitas;
whether from its Situation upon a very high Hill, or in that it was an ancient
Colony, is not material to enquire; certain it is, a great place of Antiquity,
and the Remains of old Walls, and Ruins of Churches and other Edifices,
declare it to have been of a very long standing; its Condition was always
mutable according to the mutability of Affairs betwixt the Britains and the
Saxons; and if it was the burying place of that great Man of Valor and prowess
the Noble Britain, Vortimer, as is credibly reported, then this happened contrary
to his own Command, for he was desirous to be interred near the Sea Shore,
where he thought his very Ghost would be sufficient to Protect the Britains
from all Saxon Invasions. But however, after his Death the Saxons got
possession of it, and fortified themselves on the South Side of the Hill, about
which time Paulinus, having preached the Gospel in Lindsey, was the first, that
converted Blecca, the Governor hereof, to the Christian Faith, and erected a
Church all of Stone-work, some of the Ruins whereof remain to this Day.
Afterward it was much impaired and depopulated by the Danes, but in the Norman
time it flourished so exceedingly, that it became one of the most populous
Cities of England. King William the Conqueror strengthened it with a Castle,
and Remigius having translated hither the Bishops See from Dorchester (a small
Town which stood in the remotest corner of this Diocese) erected upon the top
of the Hill, a large and sumptuous His successor Robert Bloet ^ounded with him
the Cathedral, and endowed the Dean and Chapter. ^anner's Not. Monast.
Cathedral mounting up aloft with high Turrets and stately pyramids, and
dedicated to the Virgin Mary, which afterward being defaced by Fire, Alexander
his Successor re-edified and beautified after a more glorious manner than
before: Nor indeed did the Bishops, that succeeded him, add less to its Beauty
and Luster, and raised it to so great Magnificence and unconceivable Height,
that its starely Towers discover themselves at many Miles distance; the
Workmanship of the whole Fabric is very curious and admirable, and the carved
Images on the Front of the West End were such unimitable pieces of Art, (till
some of them in our late unhappy broils were sacrificed to the fury of the
Insolent Soldiery, who committed a new Martyrdom upon the Saints in Effigy)
that they did even allure and ravish the Eyes of all Spectatour: Nor was it
less glorious without than beautified within, for besides the Bell called Great
Tom, for which this Church is so famous, being cast in the Year 1610, and of a
larger Size than any Bell in the Kingdom, it is adorned with diverse Monuments of
very ancient Families; for the Bowels of Queen Eleanor, Wife to King Edward the
First, lie here interred in Copper; and the Body of the Lady Catharine
Swinford, third Wife to John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, and Mother to the
House of Somerset; and of the Lady Joan her Daughter, Second Wife to Ralph
Nevil, Earl of Westmorland; besides many other Persons of great Note and
Quality.

In the former Ages of the Church, the Precincts of this Diocese were of so
large an extent, that the greatness hereof became even burdensome to it;
hereupon they were contracted into a narrower compass by some Princes of this
Nation; and though King Henry the Second took out of this the Diocese of Ely,
and King Henry the Eighth the Bishoprics of Peterborough and Oxford, yet still
it is reputed the greatest Diocese of England, both for Jurisdiction and number
of Shires, there being no less than six Counties, and One thousand two hundred
forty seven Parish Churches, as is generally computed, belonging to it.

As for the Town, though it flourished mightily for some Years together after
the Norman Conquest, by reason of a Staple for wool, and other Commodities
settled here by King Edward the Third; yet it met still with some Calamities or
other, which hindered its Growth, and eclipsed its Grandeur for it had its share
of Sufferings, both by Fire and War in King Stephen's days about which time, it
seems, though the King had at first been conquered, and taken Prisoner, yet he
afterward entered into the City in Triumph with his Crown upon his Head, to
break the Citizens of a superstitious Opinion they held, that no King could
possibly enter into that City after such a manner, but some great disaster or
other would befall him; but neither did it then, or by the Barons wars
afterward sustain half the damages, which of late Years it has received from
the devouring Hands of Time, who has wrought its downfall, and from a rich and
populous City has reduced it almost to the lowest ebb of Fortune, and of Fifty
Churches, which were all standing within one or two Centuries, has scarce left
Fifteen; so that the old Proverbial Rhymes (which go current amongst them) seem
so far to have something of verity in them: Lincoln was, and London is,
And York shall be
The fairest City of the three.


Sure I am, that this does abundantly verify the verses of the old Tragedian
Sophocles: -- (...)
(...),
(...).
Only the Gods cannot Times sickle feel,
Nothing can else withstand his Powerful Steel.


But though the City be gone to decay, the Magistrates preserve their
Authority, and their ancient Charters and Privileges are not as yet involved in
the same Fate with the Town, which is governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, and
has the Assizes held here, where the Judges twice a Year determine all Suits
and Controversies depending either in the City or the County; and for provision
it affords great Plenty, for it is replenished every Friday, which is their
chief Market Day, with such variety of Fish and Fowl, to be bought up at easy
and cheap Rates, that there is hardly the like to be met withal in any other
City of England.

From this City we set forward for Barton, Barton.
a small Town Situate upon the River Humber, famous for the abundance of Puits,
Godwits, Knots (which are a sort of Bird so called, say some, from Canute the
Dane, who perhaps brought them hither first from Denmark,) and likewise for
Dottrels a simple kind of Bird much given to imitation; these Dottrels, are
caught by candlelight after this manner: The Fowler stands before the Bird,
and if he puts out an Arm, the Bird stretches out a Wing; if he hold out his
Head, or set forward his Leg, the Bird does the like, and imitates the Fowlers
gesture so long, till coming nearer and nearer by degrees, at length throws his
Net over him, and so takes him.

Here we met with a convenient Passage to Ferry over into Yorkshire,
Yorkshire.
whereupon we took the first opportunity of Wind and Tide, and sailed away for
Hull, which is about a League from the place on the other side of the River.

This County is the greatest in extent, being parted into three Divisions,
which are called the West Riding, the East Riding, and North Riding, amongst
which Providence has so wisely distributed her Blessings, that what one wants
the other enjoys, and makes a compensation for the Barrenness of one part by
the Fruitfulness of the other; if in one place it is craggy, and mountainous, in
another it is as Rich in Corn, and Pasture; and where the Woods do not shade in
Summer, and make some provision for its Inhabitants against the Winter, she
provides other kind of Fuel for them within the Bowels of the Earth, and by
dispersing such varieties all over it renders it a very grateful and delectable
Country.

Ouse and Humber.
The Rivers which water it are many, but the chief are Ouse and Humber, the
first of which lodging many Rivolets within itself, discharges both them and
itself into the Humber, who carries them all away as Tributaries to the Ocean.
This River has a very broad current, and rapid Stream, it rises very high,
when the Tide flows in upon it, and when it ebbs, the Sea returns back with
such a forcible violences, that the passage thereby becomes no less rough than
dangerous.

Kingston upon Hull.
Upon the mouth of this stands Hull, so called from the River Hull, that runs
along by it into the Humber: This Town has been of no long date, for King King
Edward the First was the Founder of it, who viewing well and considering the
convenience of this Place, how safe a Harbor it might prove for Ships to ride
in, made it first an Haven and Borough, and granted to the Inhabitants great
Privileges and Immunities from whence it received the name of Kingston, or
King's-Town, so that in few Years it arose to that degree of Dignity, that for
stately buildings, for strong Block-houses, for well rigged Ships, for store of
Merchants, and abundance of all other necessaries, it became the most famous
and renowned Town in all these parts.

Sir Michael Dela-Pole, whose Father, a most Eminent Merchant, was the first
Mayor of this place, being a great favorite of King Richard the Second's,
after he was created This same Nobleman founded here a Carthusian Priory, A. D.
1378. as did Walter Shirlane, Bishop of Durham, a College of Prebendaries A. D.
1400. Mr. Tanner Not. Mon.
Earl of Suffolk, did prevail with that King to enlarge their Charter, and the
Inhabitants themselves being very industrious and much addicted to trade for
Fish into the Northen Islands, did at last heap together in a common Stock so
great a Treasure, that it enabled them not only to fence the Town with a strong
Brick Wall, but to strengthen it likewise with Towers and Bulwarks, where it
was not defended by the River; and further brought such quantities of
Cobblestones for Ballast to their Ships, that therewith they paved all the
Streets of the Town, which added much comeliness and beauty to its strength;
and ever since it has been reputed one of the strongest and most impregnable
places in this Nation, for it is not only fortified with a Castle and
Block-house to command the Sea, but is likewise environed with a double Wall,
betwixt each of which are large Trenches, and has several great Sluices so
conveniently contrived, that the Floodgates being once pulled up, they can
drown all the Country, which lies within the compass of three or four Miles.

In the late Civil Wars the Hothams, being deputed Governors of this place,
kept this Garrison for the Pretended Parliament's Service, nor could all the
importunity of the King or his Friends prevail with them to surrender it to his
Majesty, till at last too late recanting their Actions and giving their own
Party some cause to suspect their fidelity toward them, and their inclinations
to be more favorable to the Royal Party, Vengeance laid hold upon both Sir
John and his Son, and being summoned up above, when they least thought of
Death, were sentenced to die by their own Friends, who having set them on work
paid them very justly the Wages which they deserved to have received from
their injured Sovereign.

This place of great consequence is now under the Government of his Grace the
Duke of Leeds, and the Inhabitants are still great Traders to Newfoundland for
Fish and Oil; and in their Trinity-House, which is an Hospital for poor and
impotent Persons, they show a little Boat with the Effigies of a Wild Man, who,
they say, was found therein many Leagues off at Sea, with a huge Jaw bone of a
mighty Whale, both which they brought with them from the Northern Seas.

After we had pleased our selves with the various Diversions of this place,
Beverly.
we withdrew from hence to a neighboring Town called Beverly, supposed by
Cambden to be the Petuaria Parisiorum, and is about seven or eight Miles
further into tho Country, where John de Beverly, first of Hexham, afterward
Archbishop of York, a Man of great Learning and Piety, having resigned up his
Bishopric, came and ended his Life in Solitariness and Contemplation. The
Memorial of this Holy Man was so reverend and sacred to many Kings of this
Island, especially to King Athelstan, who honored him as his Tutelary Saint,
after the greatest Conquest he had obtained over the Danes, that for his sake
they endowed it with great and singular Privileges and Immunities, which it
seems Athelstan did afterward enlarge, who came hither and offered his Knife at
his Tomb: For in the Church, which is an ancient and goodly Structure built
Cathedral-wise, is still to be read this Inscription, engraven upon the West
end of the Quire in old Characters: Alls free make I thee,
As heart may think,
Or eyh may see,


On each side of which are placed the Pictures both of King Athelstan and St.
John,

Nor were there only Privileges granted to the Town, but even Foreigners did
reap great Benefit hereby, by reason of an Asylum or Sanctuary, which was
appointed for Persons who had committed any capital Crime; for here formerly
stood an old Chair of Stone, which by its description did declare as much: Haeo
seeds lapidea Freed-Stool dicitur, i. e. Pacis Cathedra, ad quam Reus fugiendo
perveniens omnimodam habet Securitatem.

That is, This Chair of Stone is called Freed-Stool, that is, the Chair of
Peace, unto which whatsoever Offender flees or comes, has all manner of
Security.

In this Church there are some Monuments of great Note, particularly those
which are erected in Honor of the Earl of Northumberland, who was slain at
Chivy Chase in the Conflict with Lord Douglas, and of his Lady the Countess,
over whom is placed on one side the Image of our Savior Baptizing an Infant,
and on the other two Angels with our Lord in the middle, one of which holds the
Cross, the Nails and the Hammer, which were the cruel Instruments of his Bloody
Crucifixion. On the East side of the Town was a House of the Trinity, belonging
to the Knights Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem, says the Notitia
Monastica.

The conflux of Foreigners was not formerly more remarkable here to promote the
Merchandise of Rome, than it is now, by reason of great Fairs and Markets,
which have been granted to the Town, and especially for the great Mart, which
in the Month of May holds constantly a Forthight, which causing all kinds of
Commodities to be brought hither, is no less advantageous to the Town than
commodious to the Neighborhood, who by this means may provide themselves of
all Necessaries at a very reasonable Rate: And for the better Government of the
Town, a Mayor was placed here by Queen Elizabeth, which keeps the Town in a
good Decorum and Order.

We removed our Quarters from this place to York, which being the Metropolis of
the County, as well as the Ornament and Safeguard of the Northern Regions, is
but one days Journey remote from it.

York.
York, formerly styled by the Britains, Caer-Ebrank, from King Ebrank, the
first Founder of it; and Euerwick by the Saxons, from the River Ure or Ouse, is
for its Magnificence very deservedly reputed the second City of England; the
situation of it is mighty pleasing and delightful, and the Buildings, both
private and public, stately and beautiful; it is rich and populous, glorious
and honorable, both in respect of its being governed by a Lord Mayor, who
moderates in all cases of temporal Affairs, as also by an Archbishop, who is
Chief Judge in all Spiritual Matters.

The River Ouse flowing with a gentle Stream from the North, divides the City
into two Parts, which yet are conjoined by a strong Stone Bridge, consisting of
five Arches, one of which is of so large a size, that it contains twice the
breadth of any of the other: And round the City stands a thick and spacious
Wall; and as on the West side it is fortified with a Wall and River together,
and a great Gate, which is called Mikel Bar, near to which is the Mount called
the Old Bale, raised and designed for a Fort by William Melton, Archbishop of
this See; so on the East side, opposite to the Mount, stands an ancient Castle
built by William the Conqueror, which is environed with a strong Wall and a
deep Mote, over which is a Drawbridge, which gives entrance into it; here is
usually a small Garrison supplied by a Regiment of Soldiers, which Quarters
about the City, and has some great Guns and Ammunition suitable for the
Defense of it.

Here are now but Seventeen Parish Churches, though formerly there were Thirty;
and toward the North-East stands the Cathedral dedicated to St. Peter, being
one of the most magnificent and stately Fabrics in our native Soil, near to
which is the Prince's House, called commonly the Mannor-House. This Church was
first Founded by Paulinus, who converted Edwyn, King of the Northumbers, and
his People to the Christian Faith, about the Year 626. It was then a mean
Oratory built only of Wood, but, as we are informed by the Saxon Chronicle, the
King constituting Paulinus the first Bishop of this See, ordered him to build a
more ample Structure of Stone, but he dying before the whole was finished, it
was at last completed by Oswald; afterward, according to the various Successes
and Conquests of the Nation, it flourished or decayed till the Reign of King
Stephen, when a sudden Fire breaking out in the City, amongst other great
Buildings consumed this too; together with a noble Library founded at first
here by Egbert Archbishop of York, from whence Alcuinus, the Preceptor of
Charles the Great, and Founder of the University of Paris, borrowed those
Lights which have since glittered there, a Library which was styled by the Men
of those Days the Cabinet of Arts, and Closet of all the Liberal Sciences. In
this forlorn Condition it continued, and lay buried in its Ashes till the Reign
of Edward the First, when John Roman, Treasurer of the Church, laid the
Foundation The Notitia Monastica informs us, That Thomas the first Norman
Archbishop, A. D. 1067. laid the Foundation of the stately Cathedral that now
is.
for a new Superstructure, which afterward by the Munificence of William
Melton, and John Thursby, both Archbishops hereof, together with the liberal
Contributions of diverse Persons amongst the Nobility and Gentry, especially of
the Piercies and Vavasors (which their Arms and Images at the West end of the
Church portrayed, the one with Timber in their Hands as finding it Timber, the
other with Stones as supplying it with Stone, does declare) recovered its
Luster and Dignity, that it has now justly the Pre-eminence above all others;
and outvies all its Neighbors in Art and Stateliness.

As for the Windows, which convey Light to the whole Fabric, they are very
admirable for their Workmanship, all the Panes of Glass being exquisitely
painted and adorned with most curious Colors; and in the East Window is
portrayed to the Life the History of the Bible in very lively Representations.

The Isles of the Church are large and spacious, the Pillars strong and
uniform, and the whole Body adorned with the Monuments of several Persons of
Quality and Renown, who have lived and died in these Parts; amongst which is
interred Mr. Swinborn, the great Civilian, who wrote concerning Wills and
Testaments, on whose Tomb this Epitaph is engraved.

Non viduae caruere viris, non patre pupillus,
Dum stetit hic Patriae Virque Paterque suae:
At quod Swinburnus viduarum scripsit in usum
Longius aeterno marmore vivet opus.
Scribere supremas hinc discat quisque tabellas,
Et cupiat, qui sic vixit ut Ille, mori.
The Superstructure above is made with great Raftures of Timber which are
covered with Lead, raised Spire-wise, and upon one of the Turrets is placed a
Lanthorn Seventy Foot square, which discovers it self at a great distance to be
a beautiful Ornament, and there are 286 Steps which lead up to it.

The Quire is well Roof'd, and curiously furnished with all decent Habiliments,
and the Chapter House, is as famous and remarkable, being circular, and one and
twenty Yards Diameter, raised by many Pillars, and finished by an Arch or
Concave on the top, having no Column at all to support it in the middle, and
indeed it is so glorious a place, that it justly deserves the Character which is
written upon the Roof of it in golden Characters.

Vt Rosa flos florum sie est domus ista domorum. In the Vestry upon the left
hand is a little Well of pure Water, called St. Peter's-Well; in the times of
Popery supposed to have been of great Virtue and Efficacy in charming Evil
Spirits, and curing of Diseases, but it may be his Holiness, since the
Extirpation of his Papal Authority in these Parts, has laid an interdict upon
its healing Faculty, since which time it has ceased, no doubt in Reverence to
St. Peter's Successor, from any such miraculous Operations.

The first Original of this Church's Metropolitanism was from Pope Honorius, at
which time it had not only a Superiority over Twelve Bishoprics in England,
but its Primacy was dilated over all the Bishops of Scotland too; but in
process of time Scotland having exempted it self from its Jurisdiction, other
places likewise did the same, so that there are only now left four Bishoprics
which are subject to this See, namely, Durham, Carlisle, Chester, and Man, or
Sodor in the Isle of Man: Indeed there was afterward several private Grudges,
Heart-burnings, and Contests betwixt Canterbury and York touching Precedence,
Appeals, and some Ecclesiastical Privileges, but by a Decree of Pope Alexander
they were quelled, who ordained that the Church of York should be subject to
Canterbury, and obey the Constitutions of that Archbishop as Primate of all
Britain, in such things as appertain to the Christian Religion.

But to return again from the Church into the City, we find it to have been a
place of great Antiquity; for it was not only famous for the Sepulture of
Eadbryth, King of the Northumbers, about the Year 738, together with his
Brother Egbert, Archbishop of this See; and long before that time, of two
greater and more renowned Emperors, Severns and Constantius; but likewise in
that Constantine the Great, after the Death of his Father, was first here in
this place saluted and proclaimed Emperor by the Soldiers, at which time it
appears to have been in great Repute and Estimation, till the Romans deserting
it, left it a Prey to the barbarous Nations, so that not only the Scots and
Picts did depopulate and spoil it, but afterward the Saxons and Danes, as they
got Possession, still Ransacked and laid it Waste; so that about the Year 867,
it grew so extremely weak, through the grievous Oppression of the Danes, that
Osbright and Ella broke easily through the Walls thereof, and encountering there
the Danes, were both slain in the Battle, the Danes remaining Masters of the
City, says the Saxon Chronicle, tho they lost it at last to Athelstan, in the
year 928. Nor found it kinder Usage from the merciless Normans, who treated it
no better than its former Enemies had done; so that even till after King
Stephen's Days there was little left in it, by reason of so many Calamities
that befell it, but a small poor shadow of a great Name; but at last after
sundry bitter Blasts, and troublesome Storms, which had grievously shaken and
afflicted it, a sweet gale of peaceful Days began to refresh and enliven it,
and in the space of a few Years it hereby became a Wonder to it self, and a
Miracle to others, by reason of its prosperous Condition, and ever since it
has increased in Honor and Wealth, in Grandeur and Power, till at last it
attained to that height of Greatness in which it is now established.

We diverted our selves for some Days in this City, where during our abode we
had the Honor to be invited to the Lord Mayors House, who treated us with all
the Civility imaginable; where I cannot omit to observe by the way, that there
are no Gentlemen more affable, and Courteous, more Hospitable and Generous,
more Obliging in their deportment and hearty in their entertainments, to all
Strangers and foreigners, than the generality of the Gentry, who are every
where dispersed through these Northen Climates.

The great satisfaction we met withal here made us hope for no less in the rest
of our Northern travels, and giving us encouragement for a further Progress,
Malton.
we set forward from York to Malton a Market Town notable for the great resort
of Jockeys, who flock thither in abundance to the Fair, that is held there
every Year for Horses, it is watered by the River Rhie, and well frequented for
Corn, Fish, and Instruments of Husbandry; and here are still to be seen the
ruins of an old Castle belonging formerly to the Vrscies, who were ancient
Barons in these Parts: and in the Reign of King Stephen here was built by
Eustace a Gilbertine Priory, dedicated to the Honor of the Blessed Virgin.

From hence we steered toward the Sea Coast, and came to Scarborough,
Scarborough.
a Town very eminent for its Spaw-water and Castle, where Pierce Gavaston, the
great favorite of King Edward, the Second, was placed by the King to secure
him from the Barons, whom he had so extremely incensed, from which
notwithstanding he was by force drawn away, and immediately beheaded by their
Command and Order.

The Castle is Situated upon a Rock, of a wonderful height and bigness, which
by reason of its steep and craggy Cliffs is almost inaccessible, extending it
self into the Sea, wherewith it is encompassed, excepting on that Side which
opens to the West, on the top it has a very fair, green, and large Plain,
containing diverse Acres of Ground, with three fresh Springs, one of which
comes out of a Rock, and a Mill to grind Corn in case of a Siege; in the strait
passage which leads up to it stands a high Tower, and beneath the said Passage
stands the Town, spreading two sides North and South, but the forepart
Westward which is fenced on the front with a Wall of its own; on the East
fortified by the Castle, wherein a Garrison is kept, and on both sides watered
by the Sea: The Town is not very large, but conveniently built of Stone and
Slate, and well inhabited, and stands bending upon the Brow of the Hill, and
served for a Landmark to Ships off at Sea, till it was so much defaced in the
late Civil Wars: It has a commodious Key, and enjoys a pretty good Trade.

About half a Mile from the Town near to the Sea is the Spring which they call
the Spaw, The Spaw.
of a very Medicinal and purgative Nature; what are the particular qualities
and Mineral principles of this Well I leave to Physicians See Dr. Simpson on
this Subject.
and Naturalists to discuss; but sure I am but the effects of this Water have
been strange and wonderful, and many Persons who in the Summer time resort
hither to Drink it, do find great benefit and advantage by it.

From hence the Shore indented and interlaced with Rocks, bends in as far as
the River Teese, and by a large compass which it fetches, there is made a Bay
about a Mile broad, which from the Famous Outlaw Robin-Hood is called
Robin-Hoods Bay: Robin-Hoods Bay.
Here is a small Village, but the most celebrated for the Fishing Trade: In all
these parts, for here are caught great quantities of all sorts of Fish in their
Seasons, which not only supply York, but all the adjacent Country, and hard by
the Shore is a little Hully (as they call it) which is much like a great Chest,
bored full of Holes to let in the Sea, which at high Water always overflows it,
where are kept vast quantities of Crabbs and Lobsters, which they put in and
take out again all the Season, according to the quickness or slowness of their
Markets.

Here and all along this Coast are great plenty of Herrings; which, coming
hither in Shoals out of the Northen Seas the beginning of August, are caught
until November, not only by our own Fishermen, but by Dutchmen too: Afterward
they disperse themselves into the British Sea, where they continue till
Christmas, and then betake themselves to the Irish Coast, and after they have
coasted round about Britain, away they hie into the Northern Ocean, as to their
own proper home, where having settled and rested themselves a while till June,
they cast their Spawn and bring forth a young Fry, and then return hither in
innumerable companies, and so march constantly about these Islands.

The great quantity of Fish, which is here taken, causes as great a cheapness
throughout all the neighborhood, and indeed we found every thing so plentiful
and cheap in these parts, that a five Shillings Ordinary in many other places
of England, would hardly produce what Sixpence or to be sure Twelvepence would
here.

Four Miles further lies Whitbay, Whitbay.
called by the Saxons of old Streaneshalh and Streonesheal, which probably
might be taken, as the Learned Mr. Gibson observes in his Glossary, from the
Saxon word Heal, which Signifies a Palace or Hall: It was formerly remarkable
for a Monastery founded by St. Hilda, about A. D. 650, who died here in the
Year 680. It was destroyed by the Danes, but reedified for Benedictine Monks,
by William de Percy, to the Honor of St. Peter and St. Hilda, A. D. 1067. The
Town has a convenient Harbor, that can receive Ships of considerable Burdens,
and is famous for some Stones scattered here and there (so atificially) and yet
naturally round, that one would think they had been turned into Shot for small
Ordnance; which take and break by heating them red hot in the Fire, and then
quenching them with cold Water, and when the crust is fallen off, you will
find, Stones wrapped, and folded up together in a Wreath, looking just like
Snakes, or Serpents; Nature, as one speaks, disporting her self with the
production of such Phenomena, and being wearied with more serious Works, shapes
and forms such things by way of Sport and Recreation: We were presented with
several of diverse dimensions, and one might be apt to think they were little
petrified Snakes, only they are headless, and are covered over some of them
with a bright shining Coat, though others again appear of a more dark and dusky
Color. But it would argue great credulity and Surperstitious to attribute
their Transformations to the Prayers of St. Hilda, as it would be Folly or
Levity to ascribe to her Holiness the sudden and immature Death of certain Wild
geese, which in the Winter, when they change their Air, and seek out for fresh
Rivers, that are not frozen in the Southern Parts, by flying over some certain
Fields adjoining to this place (as is reported) suddenly fall down dead to the
Ground, whereas this may be caused by some malignant Vapors arising from this
Soil, which become very noxious and destructive to them.

Not far from Whitbay stands a little Village by the Sea side called Leith,
Leith.
very Famous for some Alum Mines, Alum Mines.
which belong to the Earl of Mulgrave now Marquess of Normanby: Here are
abundance of Laborers employed in this Service to dig and hew this out of a
high Rock, which hangs over into the Sea; this Mineral is of the color of
Slate, of which when they have got a good quantity together, they burn it as we
do Lime, till it changes to a more ruddy Color, afterward they steep it in
pits of Water, which are dug for that purpose, and when it has lain there
as many Hours as is convenient, they convey it away in certain Pipes laid along
the Ground to a House below the Rock, where it is afterward boiled and
clarified, as we find it; the Charge is great, and the Trouble unspeakable
before it can be purified or refined, as it ought; but the great Revenues and
Profits that do amount from it, sufficiently countervail all Expenses, and
other inconveniences that attend it.

From hence, all along the Shore, Other Rarities on this Shore, by
Mulgrave-Castle.
are dispersed other strange and wonderful Varieties, for by Mulgrave-Castle is
often found Jet, and upon the same Shore are discovered Stones, some yellow,
some reddish, some with a rough cast crust over them of a Salt Nature, which by
their smell and taste make a show of Copperas, Nitre, and Brimstone; and not
far from Huntcliff appear certain Rocks, Huntcliff.
about which the Seal-fishes meet together to sleep and sun themselves, and
upon that Rock which is next the Shore, one of the Seals lies to keep Sentry,
and as any man approaches, he either throws down a large Stone, or tumbles
himself into the Water with a great noise, as a signal for all the rest to wake
and get into the Water; they are not afraid of Women, but only Men, and
therefore they that do catch them, commonly put, on Woman's apparel, and they
say, that when they are chased by Men, if they be destitute of Water, they will
with their hind Feet fling back a cloud of Sand and Gravel in the Faces and
Eyes of the pursuers; yea, and many times drive them away, making them by this
means weary of their designs.

But we hastened from hence to Gisborough, Gisborough.
which stands very high, about four Miles from the Mouth of the River Tees;
this is now a small Market Town, but when it appeared in its flourishing
Condition, it was very renowned for a Priory of Black Canons, built here to the
Honor of the Blessed Virgin, about the Year 1119, by Robert de Bruce, Lord of
the place; and that it was the common burying Spot of all the Nobility and
Gentry of this tract: It Is much commended for a sweet, pleasant, and healthful
place; the Land about it is very fertile, and, as is reported, bears Flowers
the greatest part of the Year. It abounds with Veins of Metal and Alum, Earth
of sundry colors, and with some Iron; some of these Veins of Earth Sir Thomas
Chaloner, Tutor to Prince Henry, first discovered, by observing that the Oaks
thereabouts had their Roots spreading Broad, but very shallow within the Earth,
which had much strength, but small store of Sap, and that the Earth standing
upon Clay, and being of diverse colors, whitish, yellowish and blue, was never
frozen, and in a clear Night glistered in the Paths like Glass.

Roseberry-Topping, or Ounsberry-Hill.
Not far from this Town is Ounsberry-Hill, or Roseberry-Topping, which mounts
aloft and makes a great show at a distance, serving unto Sailors for a mark of
Direction, and to the Neighbor Inhabitants for a Prognostication; for as often
as the Head of it has its cloudy Cap on, there commonly follows Rain,
whereupon they have a Proverbial Rhyme. When Roseberry-Topping wears a Cap.
Let Cleveland then beware a Clap.
Near to the top of it, out of a huge Rock, there flows a Spring of Water,
Medicinable for diseased Eyes, and from thence there is a most delightful
Prospect upon the Valleys below to the Hills above, green Meadows, delightful
Pastures, fruitful Cornfieldsd, Rivolets stored with Fish, the River Tees Mouth
full of Roads and Harbors, the Ground plain and open, without danger of
Inundations, and into the Sea, where Ships are under Sail, dancing along the
proud Billows of the Ocean.

After we had traveled some few Miles from hence, we came in little time
within the Liberties of the Bishopric of Durham, Bishopric of Durham.
a County very rich in its Mountains, which are inlayed with Iron, Lead and
Coals, and very fruitful in its Valleys with Grass and Corn. It was formerly
the Patrimony of St. Cuthbert, who being Bishop of Lindisferne, and afterward
Patron of the Church of Durham, led a Life of such wonderful Piety and
Holiness, that he was Canonized for a Saint, and Invocated by some of the Kings
and Princes of this Nation, as their Tutelary Saint and Protector against the
Picts and Scots, who formerly did grievously infest these Parts, upon which
account upon him and his Successors was not only conferred and settled all the
County between the Tees and the Tine, while he lived, but after his Death came
diverse Princes and other Potentates with the greatest Devotion imaginable in
Pilgrimage to visit his Body, and offered at his Shrine an inestimable Mass of
Treasure: To which many other great Privileges and Immunities being daily added
at the coming in of the Norman Conqueror, the Bishop was reputed for a Count
Palatine, and did ingrave upon his Seal an Armed Knight holding a naked Sword
in one hand, and the Bishops Arms in the other: Nay, it was once adjudged in
Law, that this Bishop was to have Forfeitures and Escheats within the
Liberties, as the King had without; in short, the Bishops hereof have had the
Royalties of Princes, having their own Courts of Judicature both for Civil and
Criminal Causes, and Coining their own Coins: But these Royalties have been
since taken off in a great measure, and reannexed to the Crown. However the
Bishop is still Earl of Sadberg, a place in this Bishopric, and takes place in
the Episcopal College next to the Bishop of London, but he is subordinate to
the Archbishop of York.

Darlington.
We took up our first Station at Darlington on the Skerne, over which it has a
Stone Bridge: It Is a Market Town of good resort, which Seir, an English-Saxon,
the Son of Vlph, having obtained leave of King Ethelred, gave unto the Church
of Durham, and Hugh Pudsey adorned it with a fair Church and other Edifices.
Here was also formerly a College for a Dean and six Prebendaries: In the
Precincts of this place are to be seen three Pits full of Water, of a wonderful
depth, called by the common People Hell-Kettles, Hell-Kettles.
concerning which Sir Richard Baker in his Chronicle gives us this following
Account, That in the 24th Year of King Henry the Second the Earth in this place
lifted up it self in the manner of a high Tower, and so remained immovable from
Morning until Evening, and then fell with so horrible a noise, that it
afrighted all the Inhabitants thereabouts, and the Earth swallowing it up, made
there a deep Pit, which is still to be seen to this day. That these Pits have
Passages under Ground was first experimented, they say, by Bishop Tunstall,
who, to satisfy his Curiosity herein, marked a Goose, and let her down into
them, which very Goose he found afterward in the River Tees, which runs along
not far from this place.

Bishop-Aukland.
From hence we bent our course to Bishop-Aukland upon the Ware, over which it
has a Bridge; it is a Town pleasantly seated in a good Air, upon the side of a
Hill, and as it was formerly adorned with a Collegiate Church dedicated to St.
Andrew, Founded by Anthony Beck, Bishop of Durham, for twelve Prebendaries, so
is it likewise graced with the Bishop's Palace, built at first by the same
Bishop Beck, with diverse Pillars of Black and White Marble, and re-edified
since by that Munificent Prelate Dr. Cosins, one of the Miracles of our Age for
his great and unbounded Works of Charity: He likewise rebuilt the Chapel, and
very gloriously adorned it with the most costly Habiliments, that are any way
befitting so Sacred a place; and the Plate which was bestowed upon it, by him,
for religious Uses was of a great value: Nor was his Charity confined at home,
but dispersed and diffused it self as liberally abroad, having erected here an
Almshouse, as he did likewise another at Durham for diverse poor People, for
whom he has allotted a comfortable subsistence. He erected at Durham a Library
very spacious and uniform, to which he bequeathed several Volumes of choice
Books; he raised there a new Structure for the use of the Country, in which are
held the Assizes and Sessions; he made the Castle, (formerly built by William
the Conqueror) which was quite gone to Ruin, very useful again, and
magnificent; besides all this, he gave some new Fellowships and Exhibitions to
St. Peter's-College in Cambrige, where himself had been Master: He expended
vast Sums of Money in public Benevolences to the King, in redeeming Christian
Captives at Algiers, in relieving the distressed Loyal Subjects, and in many
other public and pious Uses: So that both the City and Country have sufficient
reason gratefully to remember him, and to wish that such Prelates may
continually succeed him, who may approve themselves such Worthy Fathers of the
Church, such Noble Patrons to their Country, and such Glorious Pillars of
Religion.

Some three or four Miles distance from this Place is Binchester, Binchester.
now a small Village of little repute, save for its relicts of old Walls and
pieces of Roman Coin often dug up, here called Binchester Pennies, by which
it appears to have been formerly an eminent Station of the Romans, though now
it is nothing but a rude heap of Rubbish: And about the same distance from
Binchester stands Durham, the most flourishing and principal City of this
Province.

Durham is a City whose Situation is upon Hills and bottoms of Hills, Durham.
and all surrounded with Hills, but the lower parts watered by the River Ware,
which encircles the best part of it, and over which there are two Stone
Bridges, so that it is a Peninsula, which Dunholme, a name by which it was
formerly called, does denote, for the Saxons called an Hill Dun, and a
River-Island Holme, from whence the Latins have made Dunelmum, the Normans
Duresme, and the Commonalty corruptly Durham.

The Town is pretty large, but of no great Beauty, nor seems to bear any
considerable stamp of Antiquity, but to have received its first Original from
the distressed Monks of Lindisferne, who being driven thence by the Fury of the
Danes came hither with the Body of St. Cuthbert, which they preserved with
great care, and honored with the greatest Veneration imaginable; at which time
the Sea being removed hither by Bishop Aldwin, A. D. 995. he built a small
Oratory of wreathen Wands, and Hurdles over the Body of St. Cuthbert, on the
South Side of the City, which continued for some time, till William de
Careleph, pulling down that, began a new Foundation, which was afterward
finished by Ralph his Successor; after this it was enlarged by Bishop Fernham,
and Prior Melcomb, and by reason of St. Cuthbert's Shrine, to which Persons of
all Degrees did most solemnly repair with their choicest Offerings, it became
quickly a stately and magnificent Cathedral, making a fine lofty show, with an
high Tower in the midst, and two Spires at the West end: Whose Glory and Renown
the Tomb of Venerable Bede did still mightily increase, for, being a Man of
great Sanctity in his Life, innumerable Pilgrims flocked hither every Year to
visit his Sepulcher, which was enclosed in St. Mary's Chapel, built by Bishop
Skirlaw, at the West end of the Church, over which hangs an old Parchment,
which containing a large Catalogue of his Virtues and Graces, and extolling his
Person with the highest Encomiums, viz. that he was Omni Major, and Angelus in
orbis angulo, etc. does at last put a period to all with this Epitaph, the Wit
of that Age consisting most in such jingling Rhimes.

Hac sunt in fossa Bedae Venerabilis Ossa. Now how it came to pass that Bid
obtained this Title of Venerabilis, the Learned Dr. Heylin in his Geography
gives us a very pleasant Relation, concerning which, says he, the Legend tells
us, that being Blind, his Boy had Knavishly conducted him to Preach to a heap
of Stones, and that when he had ended his Sermon with Gloria Patri, the very
Stones concluded and said, Amen, Amen, Venerabilis Beda. But others of the
Monkish Writers do assign this reason, and both true alike, that at his Death
some unlearned Priest intending to honor him with an Epitaph, had thus far
blundred out a Verse, Hac sunt in fossa Bedae -- Ossa, but because the Verse
was yet imperfect, he went to Bed to consider of it, leaving a space betwixt
the two last words thereof, which in the Morning he found filled up in a
strange Character with the word Venerabilis, and so he made his Verse, and Bid
obtained his Title.

To this Church, which for decency in all public Administrations, for Order of
its Attendants, and Beauty of Ornaments gives place to none, being adorned with
such curious Tapestry, and costly Plate, and rich Copes, and melodious Music
of all sorts, which as well captivates the Eyes, as enravisheth the Hearts of
all devout and pious Christians, belong a Dean, two Archdeacons, and twelve
Prebendaries, Men of great Learning and Worth, who have each a very convenient
House allotted them in the College-Yard adjoining to the Cathedral, were,
during their residence, which they keep by turns every Month; they great use
Hospitality to Foreigners and Neighbors: And for the more convenient
conveyance of Water to their Houses, there stands a fair Fountain in the midst
of that Court very handsomely contrived, and placed there for that purpose, with
this Inscription engraven upon it; Hujus Nympha loci sacri custodia fontis
Dormio, dum blandae sentio murmur aquae.
Parce meum, quisquis tangis cava marmora, somnum
Rumpere, sive bibas, sive lavere, tace.


After some respite and diversion in this City, we marched on to Chester upon
the Street, Chester, on the Street, alias Cuncacester.
a Village very venerable for its remains of Antiquity, for it is credibly
believed to have been a Garrison of the Romans, where the first Wing of the
Astures kept their Station: and it has been famous for the Body of St.
Cuthbert brought hither, and kept obscurely by the Bishops of Lindisferne, who
retired to this place to secure themselves from the blustering Storms of the
Danish Fury; in memory whereof when Aegelric, Bishop of Durham, laid the
Foundation of a new Church in that place, he found such a vast and rich
Treasure buried in the Ground, as is supposed by the Romans, that growing
exceedingly Rich and Wealthy, he resigned up his Bishopric, and returned to
Peterborough, where he had formerly been Abbot, and became a generous
Benefactor to the Fen-Country thereabouts Angl. Sacr. T. 1. p. 699, and 702.
After him Anthony Beck, Bishop of Durham, and Patriarch of Jerusalem, erected
here a Collegiate Church for a Dean and seven Canons, in which are since placed
the Monuments of all the Ancestors of the Noble Family of the Lumleys, in a
continued Line of Succession from Liulph, who lived under King Edward the
Confessor, to the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

From hence the Road led us directly to Gateshead, the utmost limits of this
Province, Gateshead.
which standing on the hither side of the River Tine, has in all probability
been a great Colony of the Romans, and was called by the Latins Capreae Caput,
i. e. Goats Head, by occasion of some Inn, as is generally conjectured, which
had a Goats Head for a Sign, a thing not unusual in other places of the World.
Certain it is, that all Historians name this place Capreae Caput, when they
give us an account of the Tragical end of Walter Bishop of Durham, who being
placed here by William the Conqueror, as his Substitute and Vicegerent, became
a victim to the Fury of the enraged Multitude, and was slain in this place upon
some great distaste which they took to his Government.

From Gateshead there is a large Stone Bridge built over the Tine, a Town
large, Newcastle upon Tine.
populous and rich, and is the chief place for Trade in all the Northern Parts,
being enobled by a notable Haven of so great a depth, that it receives Vessels
of very considerable Burdens, and is so safe a Harbor, that all Ships find
here a sure Anchorage, without receiving any prejudice or damage by stress of
Weather: The Towns stands high and low, part upon a Hill, and part in the
bottom of it near the River, the Streets upon the ascent are exceeding steep,
the Houses most of Stone, some Timber, and a few of Brick; it consists of four
large Parishes with as many Parish Churches, the principal whereof dedicated to
St. Nicholas, stands very lofty on the top of the Hill, and looks more like a
Cathedral, than a Parish Church, with a fair Steeple of curious Architecture,
besides which it is adorned with a convenient Market, a handsome Townhouse,
and an useful Key.

Through this Town went part of that Wall, which ran along from Sea to Sea, and
was built by the Romans to defend the Britains against the violent Incursions
and Depopulations of the Picts; and at Pandon-Gate there remains, as is
thought, one of the Turrets of that Wall, differing much from the other Gates
of the Town in shape and Workmanship: And though formerly it had the Name of
Monks-Chester, yet after the Conquest, when Robert, Son to William the
Conqueror, had raised here a new Fort to keep off the Scots, it got the Name of
Newcastle upon Tine, to distinguish it from Newcastle under Line in
Staffordshire.

In the Reign of King Edward the First, when the Scots came hither and infested
these Parts, they took away Prisoner out of this Town a very opulent Person,
who having ransomed himself for a great Sum of Money, no sooner returned home
but he began immediately to fortify the Town, which the rest of the
Inhabitants joining with him, in a short time they environed it with a strong
and spacious Wall, since which time it has not only been enabled much better
to defend it self against all its Enemies, but is become a place so
considerable for all Merchandise, that diverse great Fleets of Ships go every
Year laden from hence with many Chauldron of Coals, and return home in lieu of
them other rich Commodities: And as its Commerce is great, so its Privileges
are as renowned, for our English Monarchs have ever afforded it all possible
Encouragement, for Richard the Second made it a Corporation, and ordered a
Sword to be carried before the Mayor, and Henry the Sixth enlarged its Charter,
by making it likewise a County Incorporate, and Queen Elizabeth still made more
honorable Additions to it.

During our abode in this place we took a pair of Oars and went down in a
Wherry to view Tinmouth Castle, which is about two Leagues from it.

As we passed along we found the River Tine very navigable and commodious, till
we came to the Mouth, where it empties and disembogues it self into the Sea,
and indeed it is there rocky and dangerous, for there stands two Rocks opposite
to each other, upon which if a Ship happen to touch, she is in danger of being
quite lost, so that the Saylors are forced to steer carefully through this
dangerous gulf, and if it be foul weather or Night, when they come near it,
keep off at Sea, till a fair opportunity present it self for their passage.

Upon the Mouth of the River is situated the Castle, which commands the Sea,
Tinmouth- Castle.
and defends the River; on the North and East side it can no way be stormed, by
reason of a high Rock, which reaching forth into the Sea, does render it
inaccessible; and in the other parts it is of so excessive a height, and so well
provided with great Guns and Ammunition, that a small handful of Men may be
able to hold it out against the violent assaults of a very potent Enemy: upon
which account Robert Mowbray, Earl of Northumberland, when he rebelled against
King William Rufus, made choice of this place, as the most convenient Fortress
to secure himself against the King's Forces; who notwithstanding besieged him
so closely and blocked up all Avenues by which any Provision might be conveyed
to him, that he was enforced to Steal away to a neighboring Monastry of
Benedictine Monks, founded by himself to the Honor of St. Mary and St. Oswyn,
who, though an Asylum or Sanctuary for Delinquents, could not secure his Person
from the Soldiers, who carried him away Captive to his injured Prince, from
whom he received a just Reward of his Treachery.

On the other side of the River, Sheals.
almost opposite to the Castle, is Sheals, a village very eminent for its
Salt-Pans, where great quantity of Salt is boiled and made, and on the Banks on
both sides are many convenient Houses for the Entertainment of Seamen and
Habitation of Colliers: And as here usually most of the Newcastle Coal-fleet
keep their Station, so not far from hence stands Jarrow, Jarrow.
for nothing so remarkable, as for being the Birthplace of Venerable Bede.

After we came ashore, we prepared for a further progress into these Northern
Climates, but traveling along we found the most fertile part of
Northumberland, Northumberland.
which borders upon the Time, to be left behind us, for that rest appeared very
rough and barren; and as the Country is Mountainous, so the Inhabitants are
generally Fierce and Hardy, participating in some measure of the nature of the
Soil; and as they are Stout, so it seems they are long lived, as appears from a
Story, which is related of one Mr. Macklain, Parson of Lesbury, who died in the
Year 1659. It seems that two Years before, in the Year 1657, he did renew his
Youth, so that though for Forty Years before he could not read without
spectacles, being then 116 Years old, he would read the smallest Print without
them, and had his Hair, which he had lost, come again like a Child's, which puts
me in Mind of an aged Dean, which had the like Renovation of Age, and when he
died, had this Epitaph bestowed upon him by some barbarous Pen.

Hic jacent Edentulus, Canus, atque Decanus,
Rursum dentescit, nigrescit, and hic requiescit.
Picts-Wall..
In diverse parts of this Country are still to be seen many ancient pieces of
that vast Wall of Stone, which the Roman Emperor Serverus by the assistance of
the Britains, did erect in that place, where the the Rampire and Trench was,
which the Emperor Hadrian had before cast up of Turf, it it was eight Foot
broad, and twelve Foot high, ann stood in a direct-Line from East to West, it
had many Towers or Fortresses about a Mile distance from one another, where
there continually stood Sentinels to watch and give notice of the approaches of
the Enemy, and betwixt every Tower was placed a brazen Trunk, or speaking
Trumpet, so artificially in the Wall, of which since several pieces have been
taken up, that if any Soldier in one Tower did but utter the Watchword, the
sound was immediately conveyed to the next, and so to the third, and so in a
trice to all the Fortresses from one end of the Wall even to the other. The
boundaries of this Wall were very large, extending even from Sea to Sea, and
contained in length, as is probably computed, above Fourscore Miles; and he who
is curious to know the direct tract thereof, let him consult Cambden's
Britannia, where he will find a very full and exact account of it.

But to return again on our way, coming to Morpeth, Morpeth.
a goodly Market Town with a Castle, on the River Wensbech, lying in the great
Road which leads to Scotland, we were here very generously entertained by some
Friends, who conducted us afterward in the way toward Warkworth, The Hermitage
by Warkworth.
where having visited an ancient Hermitage by the River Coquet, made out of a
Rock, in which is a litttle Chapel hewn out of it likewise, where the Stones do
appear to be worn by the frequent Prostrations of some Superstitious Papists,
who frequently repair hither out of a pretended Zeal and Devotion; we rode away
for Alnewick, which is about four Miles distance from this Religious Cell.
Alnewick.


Alnewick is situated upon the River Alne, and has had formerly an Abbey for
Praemonstratensian Canons, founded by Eustace Fitz-John, A. D. 1147, which was
dedicated to the Blessed Virgin; but chiefly has it been enobled by the
frequent Victories, which the English have obtained over the Scots; for in the
first place Malcolm the Third King of Scots, who did homage to William the
Conqueror for his Crown of Scotland, siding afterward against him and
besieging this place, was killed here by a cunning Stratagem, for Robert
Mowbray, created afterward Earl of Northumberland, pretending to deliver to him
the Keys of the Castle upon the top of a Spear, ran him through the left Eye
Mowbray was for that reason called afterward Pearce-Eie.
, of which he died immediately, and so relieved the Town again from all
Extremity; and his Son, Prince Edward, coming hither to revenge his Father's
Death, met with the same fatal Doom. After this, in the Reign of King Henry the
Second, the English Forces behaved themselves so bravely, that they took
Prisoner William King of Scots, and presented him as a Captive to their
Victorious Prince, having fortified this place with a strong Garrison; and in
the Reign of King Edward the Fourth the Scots coming against it with another
Army, were in hopes to have taken it, but the English Army retreating, as if
they had deserted it, by that means discouraged the Scots from any further
Onsets, who supposing it to have been a Stratagem of the English, and that they
had only retreated Scythico more, the more easily to entrap them, very fairly
left it to the possession of those Persons, in which at first they found it.

Bamborough- Castle.
Ten Miles further upon the Sea stands the Castle of Bamborough, called formerly
Bebbanbur, from Queen Bebba, who gave it that name: Some Writers say, that it
was built by King Ebrank, others by Ida Saxon Cron. A. D. 547.
, the first King of Northumberland, who fenced it at first with great Stakes
and Piles of Timber, and afterward with a Wall. It was one of the Receptacles
of Robert Mawbray, Earl of Northumberland, in his Rebellion against King
William Rufus, over against which the King placed a Fort to annoy him, which it
did so effectually, that it forced him to desert it. In the Reign of Edward the
Fourth, when the Scots invaded England in the behalf of Queen Margaret, they
took this Castle, but were quickly dispossessed of it by the English Forces,
who recovered it again for the King's Service, and delivered up the Governor,
Sir Ralph Gray, to the King, who was afterward executed for holding it out
against his Sovereign; but both its Beauty and Strength began visibly to decay,
during the Wars betwixt York and Lancaster, and since that, Time and Age have
more prevailed against it, than all the Attacks of its most furious Enemies;
for the Rampires are broken down, and the Trenches filled up, and there is
little now remaining of that famous Fortress.

About a League from this Castle we saw Farne-Island, Farne-Island.
being a little spot of Land enclosed with the Ocean, and encircled about with
craggy Cliffs, which render it almost every where inaccessible: Hither did St.
Cuthbert, about the Year 676, retire from Lindisfarne for Devotion, desiring to
sequester himself from the rest of the World, where for nine Years together he
lived a very solitary and religious Life, till by the great importunity of King
Eegfrid, and Trumwine, Bishop of the Picts, who came hither to him for that
very intent and purpose, he was at last persuaded to remove to Hexham, where he
succeeded Bishop Eata in that See: After two Years spent in this Bishopric,
this Holy Man foreseeing his Death approaching, betook himself again to this
very Island, where in the space of two Months, through the Malignancy of his
Distemper, he at last breathed out his pious Soul on the 20th of March, A. D.
687. We once resolved to visit this place, but the unseasonableness of the
Weather, which happened at that time, prohibited our Passage, the Wind being so
high, and the Sea so rough, that none of their small Cobble Boats durst venture
off to Sea; but we were informed, that there was then but one House standing
upon the Island, and continually such flocks of wild Fowl, who laid generally
in that place, that it was not possible to walk far upon it without treading
upon some of their Eggs, of which here the Fishermen make a considerable
advantage, by selling them abroad to the Neighborhood; they are of all sizes
and colors; we saw some that were much speckled, about the bigness of Hens
Eggs, and some larger than the Eggs of our ordinary Turkeys and Geese, but both
were no less pleasing and grateful to the Palate: As to the Air of this place,
whatever it was formerly, it is now reputed very unhealthy, subject to the
Dysentery or Bloody Flux, and other Diseases, by reason of the frequent Fogs
that happen here; and it is no less troubled with Tempests of Wind, Storms of
Rain, and Rage of the Sea; the Soil is barren and good for little, but what is
gotten from the Fowl, and the Fish which swim in shoals round about it.

Berwick upon Tweed.
We coasted on for Berwick, which is one of the strongest Holds in all Britain,
and is almost environed with the Sea and the River Tweed; whence the Town took
its name is not so well agreed upon, as that it is a large and populous Town,
well Built, and strongly Fortified; it is situated betwixt the two great
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and hereupon was always the first place they
took care of, whenever they began to be at open variance with each other; and,
according to the various and inconstant Successes of each Nation, has been
held in possession by one, and sometimes kept under the power of the other.
Before the Reign of Henry the Second we find little or nothing Recorded of it,
for William King of Scots being taken Prisoner by the English, did first
surrender it into King Henry's hands upon condition, that unless by such a day
he paid the Ransom that was demanded for his Liberty, it should always belong
to the Crown of England, hereupon the King built a Castle to strengthen it, all
which was afterward released to the Scots by King Richard the First, upon the
payment of that Money which before had been promised. Afterward King John, upon
a great distaste he took against the Northumbers, for doing homage to the Scotch
King, won it again; and not many Years after, when Baliol King of Scots had
violated his Oath, King Edward the First brought it under his Subjection, yet
within a while after, when the Fortune of the War began to smile upon the
Scots, it was unawares surprised, but in a few days the English regained it;
afterward, in that loose Reign of Richard the Second, it was betrayed to the
Scots, and for a long time after it was in vain besieged by the English Forces,
until King Edward the Third, that most Puissant Prince, came thundering against
it, and forced his entrance: Notwithstanding in the Reign of Richard the
Second, the Castle was surprised by certain Scotch Robbers, but they could not
hold it long, for the Earl of Northumberland in a few days dislodged them of
their Fortress. Scarce seven Years were over passed, when the Scots recovered
it again, not by force, but by Money, for which cause the aforesaid Earl was
Impeached of High Treason, but he being a very politic Man, corrupted both
their Faith and their Fortitude, and straitway restored it to the English
Crown. A great while after, when England was embroiled in Civil Wars, King
Henry the Sixth flying into that Kingdom for refuge, surrendered it up into the
hands of that King, to secure him his Life and Safety in that Country; but many
Years were not expired before Sir Thomas Stanley did again reduce it under the
command of King Edward the Fourth, but not without a great loss of his Men, and
much Blood spilt about its Walls; since which our Kings have been still
strengthening it with new Fortifications, especially Queen Elizabeth, who to
the Terror of the Scots and Safeguard of this Nation, enclosed it about in a
narrower compass within the old Wall, with a high Wall of Stone most strongly
compacted, which she has so forwarded again with a Couterscarp, a Bank round
about, with Mounts of Earth cast up on high, and open Terraces above-head, upon
all which are planted a double tire of great Ordnance; that when the Scots
entered England in 1640, they took Newcastle, but durst not attempt Berwick. In
this place is still maintained a constant Garrison of Soldiers, and the Guards
which are placed at the foot of the Bridge which is built over the Tweed, do
every Night pull up the Draw-Bridges, and lock up the Gates, which give
entrance into the Town, so that there is no admission when once the day is gone.

Tweed.
All along the Tweed is notable Fishing for Salmons, of which there is such
great store and plenty in this River, that they take vast numbers at one
draught, as we were credibly informed by the Fishermen of this place, who hire
out the Fishery from the Lords of the River, and have each Man his Bounds set
out and marked for him: The Salmon, which they catch, are dried, barrelled up,
and transported beyond Seas, and are purchased at such easy and cheap Rates,
that a Man may buy one of the largest for a Shilling, and boil it, and eat it
while the Heart is yet alive, a thing which is frequently practiced in this
place; nay, they are so common about these Parts, that the Servants, as they
say, do usually indent with their Masters, when they hire them, to feed them
with this Fish only some Days in the Week, that they may not be nauseated by
too often eating of it; but as for all other Provisions they are scarce enough
here, and dearer than in any other parts of the North; so that he that first
called Berwick the little Purgatory betwixt England and Scotland, by reason of
the hard Usage and Exactions which are customary here, did confer upon it a
very just and deserved Title.

The Borders of Scotland.
After we were past Berwick we came into that noted Ground lying betwixt the two
Kingdoms, called the Borders, the Inhabitants whereof have ever been reputed a
sort of Military Men, subtle, nimble, and, by reason of their frequent
Skirmishes, to which they were formerly accustomed, well experienced and
adventurous.

These Borders have been formerly of a far greater extent, reaching as far as
Edinburgh-Frith and Dunbritton Northward, and taking in the Counties of
Northumberland, Cumberland and Westmorland Southward; but since the Norman
Conquest, they have been bounded by Tweed on the East, Solway on the West, and
the Cheuiot Hills in the midst.

From these Borders we marched toward the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning
which I shall in the first place give a brief Account of some Observations we
made here in general, before I proceed to a particular Description of such
Places and Cities through which we traveled.

From whence at first it received this denomination is dubious and uncertain,
Scotland.
being formerly called Caledonia, from the Caledonii, a chief People of it, and
Albania, from Albany, a principal Province in the North; but as for the
Inhabitants, some will fetch their Original from thy Scythi, a Sarmatian People
of great Renown, who, after they had wandered about through many Countries, came
at last and settled themselves in this place; but the most probable Opinion is,
that they were no other than Irish, united in the name of Scot, about the
declination of the Roman Empire, the word Scot signifying in their Language a
Body aggregated into one out of many particulars, as the word Alman in the
Dutch Language: Though I find the Scotch Historians will rather derive it from
Scota, Daughter to Pharaoh King of Egypt, who being given in Marriage to
Gathelus, Son of Cecrops King of Athens, who with some valiant Grecians and
Egyptians transplanted themselves into a part of Spain, then called Lusitania,
but by reason of his arrival named Port-gathel, now Portugal; they afterward
settling themselves in Gallicia, sent from thence a new Colony into Ireland,
from whence at last they removed into this Country.

This Gathelus brought with him from Egypt the Marble fatal Chair, which was
transported to Ireland and to Albion, now called Scotland, wherein all their
Kings were Crowned until the time of King Edward the First, who transported the
whole ancient Regalia of Scotland with the Marble fatal Chair to Westminster,
where it remains to this day; by which was fulfilled that ancient Scotch
Prophecy, thus expressed in Latin by Hector Boethius.

Ni fallat fatum, Scoti, hunc quocunque locatum
Invenient lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
In English by Raphael Holinshead. Except old Saws do fail
And Wisards Wits be blind,
The Scots in place must Reign
Where they this Stone shall find.


By another Hand thus; The Scots shall brook that Realm, as Native Ground,
(If Weirds fail not) where ever this Chair is found.


This Kingdom being divided into two parts by the River Tay has thirty-four
Counties; in the South part are reckoned up these that follow: Teifidale,
March, Lothien, Liddesdale, Eskdale, Annandale, Niddesdale, Galloway, Carrick,
Kyle, Cunningham, Arran, Cluidsdale, Lennox, Sterling, Fife. Stratherne, Menth,
Argile, Cantire, Lorne.


In the North part are reckoned these Counties: Loquhabre, Braid-Albin, Perth,
Athol, Angus, Merne, Mar, Buquhan, Murray, Ross, Southerland, Cathaness,
Steathnavern.


These are subdivided again according to their Civil Government into diverse
Seneschallies, or Sheriffdoms, which are commonly Hereditary, and the People,
which inhabit each, are called High-landers and Low-landers

The Highlanders, High-landers.
who inhabit the West part of the Country, in their Language, Habit and Manners
agree much with the Customs of the Wild Irish, Elgin.
and their chief City is Elgin in the County of Murray, seated upon the Water
of Lossy, formerly the Bishop of Murray's Seat, with a Church sumptuosly built,
but now gone to decay. They go habited in Mantles striped, or streaked with
diverse colors about their Shoulders, which they call Plodden, with a Coat girt
close to their Bodies, and commonly are naked upon their Legs, but wear Sandals
upon the Soles of their Feet, and their Women go clad much after the same
Fashion: They get their Living mostly by Hunting, Fishing, and Fowling; and
when they go to War, the Armor wherewith they cover their Bodies, is a Morion
or Bonnet of Iron, and an Habergeon, which comes down almost to their very
Heels; their Weapons against their Enemies are Bows and Arrows, and they are
generally reputed good Marks Men upon all occasions; their Arrows for the most
part are barbed or crooked, which once entered within the Body cannot well be
drawn out again, unless the Wound be made wider; some of them fight with broad
Swords and Axes, and in the room of a Drum make use of a Bag-pipe. They delight
much in Music, but chiefly in Harps and Clarishoes of their own Fashion, the
strings of which are made of Brass-Wire, and the strings of their Harps with
Sinews, which strings they strike either with their Nails growing long, or else
with an Instrument appointed for that use: They take great delight to deck
their Harps and Clarishoes with Silver and precious Stones; and poor ones that
cannot attain thereto deck them with Crystal: They sing some Verses very
prettily put together, containing for the most part Praises of valiant Men, and
there is not almost any other Argument of which their Rhimes are composed: They
are great lovers of Tobacco, and a little Mundungo will make them at any time
very serviceable and officious; and as they are mostly tall and strong, they
are likewise so exceeding fleet, that some of them will make nothing of it to
run many Miles in a day upon an Errand, and return back again with no less
Expedition.

Low-landers.
The Low-landers inhabiting on this side the two Friths of Dunbritton and
Edinburgh, and the plain Country along the German Ocean, are of a more
civilized Nature, as being of the same Saxon Race with the English, which is
evident from their Language, being only a broad Northern English, or a Dialect
of that Tongue. These People have been noted by their best Writers for some
Barbarous Customs entertained long amongst them, one of which was, that if any
two were thoroughly displeased and angry, they expected no Law, but fought it
out bravely, one and his Kindred against the other and his; which fighting they
called Feids, and were reduced by the Princely Care and Prudence of King James
the Sixth. To this purpose I have read a very remarkable Story in the Life of
Robert the Third, King of Scots, how that a dangerous Feud falling out betwixt
two great and populous Families in the North, Thomas Dunbar Earl of Murray, and
James Earl of Craford were sent to reduce them, who, perceiving the great
Mischief likely to attend their endeavors of a forcible reducement, contrived
a more subtle way to quiet them; after a representation made to the Heads of
those Clans, a part, of the danger of those mutual Feuds, and of the King's
Wrath against both, they advise to conclude their Feuds, as the Horatii and
Curatii did at Rome, by the choice not of three, but of three hundred on each
side to fight, armed with Swords only, in the sight of the King and his Nobles,
whereby the Victor should gain Honor, and the Vanquished Safety from further
Punishment, and both regain his Majesty's Favor, whereof they gave them full
assurance; the Proposition is embraced, on both sides of St. John's Town Mounts
raised, and Galleries made for the accommodation of the Spectators, the
Combatants are chosen, and on the day appointed, together with a multitude of
Beholders, all of them appear upon the place, only one through fear privately
withdrew himself; this put some delay to the Encounter, the one Party looking
on it as a dishonor to fight with the other wanting one of their number, the
other Party not finding one who would engage himself to make up the number,
desire one of the Three hundred to be put aside, but of all that number not one
could be enduced to withdraw, accounting it an indelible Disgrace to be shufled
out of such a choice Company of valorous Men: At last an ordinary Tradesman
tendreth his Service, desiring no greater Reward than one single piece of Gold
in hand, as an honorable Badge of his Valor, and an Annuity of a small Sum
for Life should he survive the Combat; his Demands are soon granted, and
immediately begins the Conflict with as much fury as the height of Wrath,
the insatiable desire of Honor, and the fear of Shame, more than the fear of
Death, could produce, to the Horror and Amazement of the Spectators, whose
Hearts tremble within them to see (as indeed it was a horrid Spectacle to
behold) such a ruful sight of furious Men butchering one another; and observed
it was by all, that of all the Combatants none showed more, shall I call it
Valor, than the Tradesman did, who had the good Fate to survive that dismal
Day, and on the Conquering side too, whereof only ten besides himself outlived
that Hour to partake with many ghastly Wounds the Honor of the Day; the
Vanquished are killed on the place all to one, who perceiving himself to be
left alone, and being without Wounds, he skippeth into the River, by which
means none of the surviving Victors being able to follow him, by reason of
their Wounds, he makes a fair escape with his Life. Thus the Heads and most
turbulent of both Clans being cut off, their Retainers are soon persuaded to
Peace, and so for many Years after live quiet enough. This Fight happened in
the Year 1396.

The other Custom was that of Nature, that the like was scarce heard amongst
the Heathens, and much less in Christendom, which did begin, as the Scotch
Historians affirm, in the Reign of Ewen the Third, which Ewen being a Prince
much addicted, or rather given up altogether to Lasciviousness, made a Law that
himself and his Successors should have the Maidenheads or first Night Lodging
with any Woman, whose Husbands held Land immediately from the Crown, and the
Lords and Gentlemen likewise of all those whose Husbands were their Tenants or
Homagers; this was it seems the Knights Service which Men held their Estates
by, and continued till the Days of Malcolm Conmor, who at the Request of his
Wife Queen Margaret, the Sister of Edgar Atheling, abolished this Law, and
ordained that the Tenants, by way of Commutation, should pay unto their Lords a
Mark in Money, which Tribute is still customary to be paid.

The Republic, or Commonwealth of the Scots, like ours of England, consists of
a King, The Castles.
Nobility, Gentry and Commons; whose chief Castles are Edinburgh, Sterling, and
Dunbarton, which last is the strongest in all the Castles in Scotland by
natural Situation, towering upon a rough, craggy, and two headed Rock, at the
meeting of the Rivers in a green Plain; in one of the Heads above stands a
lofty Watchtower, on the other, which is the lower, there are sundry strong
Bulwarks; between these two, on the North-side it has only one ascent, by
which hardly one by one can pass up, and that with some labor and difficulty,
by steps cut out aslope traverse the Rock; instead of Ditches on the West side
serves the River Levin, on the South Clyde, and on the East a boggy Flat,
which on every side is wholly covered over with Water, and on the North side
the very upright steepness of the place is a sufficient Defense to it: Directly
under the Castle, at the Mouth of the River Clyde, as it enters into the Sea,
there are a number of Clayk Geese, so called, black of color, which in the
night time do gather great quantity of the crops of Grass growing upon the
Land, and carry the same to the Sea, then assembling in a round with a great
curiosity, do offer every one his Portion to the Sea Flood, and there attend
upon the flowing of the Tide, till the Grass be purified from the fresh taste,
and turned to the salt, and lest any part of it should escape, they hold it in
with their Bills; after this they orderly (every Fowl) eat their own Portion,
and this Custom they observe perpetually.

Universities.
The Universities are four in number, St. Andrews, Aberdeen, Glasgow, and
Edinburgh, from which every Year there is a fresh supply of learned Persons,
fit for public Employments and Dignities in Church and State.

St. Andrews.
St. Andrews was Founded by Bishop Henry Wardlaw, A. D. 1412. and is endowed
with very ample Privileges, the Archbishops of St. Andrews were perpetual
Chancellors thereof: The Rector is chosen Yearly, and by the Statutes of the
University he ought to be one of the three Principals, his power is the same
with that of the Vice Chancellor of Cambrige or Oxford. There are in this
University three Colleges, St. Salvator's, St. Leonard's, and New-College.

St. Salvator's College was founded by James Kennedy, Bishop of St. Andrews, he
built the Edifice, furnished it with costly Ornaments, and provided sufficient
Revenues for the Maintenance of the Masters: Persons endowed at the Foundation
were a Doctor, a Batchellor, a Licentiate of Divinity, four Professors of
Philosophy, who are called Regents, and eight poor Scholars called Bursars.

St. Leonard's College was Founded by John Hepburne, Prior of St. Andrew's 1520
Persons endowed are a Principal or Warden, four Professors of Philosophy, eight
poor Scholars.

New-College was Founded by James Beaton, Archbishop, A. D. 1530 The
Professors and Scholars endowed are of Divinity, for no Philosophy is taught in
this College.

Aberdeen.
In the Reign of King Alexander the Second, A. D. 121. there was a Studium
Generale in Collegio Canonicorum, where there were Professors and Doctors of
Divinity and of the Canon and Civil Laws, and many Learned Men have flourished
therein. King James the Fourth, and William Elphinstown Bishop of Aberdeen,
procured from Pope Alexander the Sixth the Privileges of an University in
Aberdeen, 1494. It is endowed with as ample Privileges as any University in
Christendom, and particularly the Foundation relates to the Privileges of Paris
and Bononia, but has no reference to Oxford or Cambrige, because of the Wars
between England and Scotland at that time, the Privileges were afterward
confirmed by Pope Julius the Second, Clement the Seventh, Leo the Tenth, and
Paul the Second, and by the Successors of King James the Fourth.

The Bishop of Aberdeen is perpetual Chancellor of the University, and has
power to visit in his own Person, and to reform Abuses; and though he be not a
Doctor of Divinity, yet the Foundation gives him a power to confer that Degree.

The Office of Vice Chancellor resides in the Official or Commissary of
Aberdeen: The Rector, who is chosen Yearly with the assistance of his four
Assessors, is to take notice of Abuses in the University, and to make a return
thereof to the Chancellor; if one of the Masters happen to be Rector, then is
his Power devolved upon the Vice Chancellor.

The College was Founded by Bishop William Elphinstone, Anno 1^00. and was
called the King's College, because King James the Fourth took upon him and his
Successors the special Protection of it. Persons endowed were a Doctor of
Theology, who was Principal; a Doctor of the Canon Law, Civil-Law, and Physic;
a Professor of Humanity to teach Grammar; a Sub-Principal to teach Philosophy,
a Canton, a Sacrist, three Students of the Laws, three Students of Philosophy,
six Students of Divinity, an Organist, five Singing Boys who were Students of
Humanity.

The Marischal-College of Aberdeen was Founded by George Keith, Earl of
Marischal, A. D. 1593. Persons endowed were a Principal, three Professors of
Philosophy: Since that there has been added a Professor of Divinity and
Mathematics, a fourth Professor of Philosophy, twenty-four poor Scholars. Of
the other two Universities I shall treat afterward.

Mountains and Rivers.
The chief Mountains are Cheriot-Hill, and Mount Grampius, spoken of by Tacitus,
the safest shelter of the Picts or North-Britains, against the Romans, and of
the Scots against the English, now called the Hill of Albany, or the Region of
Braid-Albin: Out of these arises Tay, or Tau, the fairest River in Scotland,
falling into the Sea about Dundee on the East Side; Clayd falling into
Dunbritton-Frith on the West Side of the Kingdom; besides which there are other
small Rivers, as Bannock, Spay, Dee, well replenished with Fish, which furnish
the Country with great Store of that Provision.

The Nature of the Air Soil and Commodities.
The Air of this Kingdom has its variety according to the situation of several
places and parts of it, but generally it is healthful, because cold: the Soil
in the High-landers is poor and Barren, but in the Low-landers it is much
better, bearing all sorts of Grains especially Oats, which are much ranker than
ours in England. Their chief Commodities are Cloth, Skins, Hides, Coal, and
Salt; their Cattle are but small, and their best Horses are commonly bred about
Galloway, where Inhabitants follow Fishing as well within the Sea, which lies
round about them, as in lesser Rivers; and in the Loches or Meers standing full
of Water at the foot of the Hills, out of which in September they take in Weels
and Weer-nets an incredible number of most sweet and toothsom Eels: For
Bernacles, or Soland Geese, they have such an infinite number of them, that
they seem even to darken the very Sun with their flight; these Geese are the
most rife about the Bass, an Island at the mouth of the Frith going up to
Edinburgh, and hither they bring an incredible number of Fish, and withal such
an abundance of Sticks and little twiggs to build their Nests, that the People
are thereby plentifully provided of Fuel, who also make a great gain of their
Feathers and Oil: There has been a dispute amongst the learned about the
generation of these Geese, some holding that they were bred of the leaves of
the Bernacle-Tree falling into the Water, others that they were bred of moist,
rotten Wood lying in the Water, but it is of late more generally believed, that
they come of an Egg, and are certainly hatched as other Geese are. In the West
and North West Parts the People are very curious and diligent in catching a
Bird called the Erne, it is of a large size and a ravenous kind as our Hawks,
and of the same quality; they give him such sort of Meat in a great quantity at
once, that he lives contented therewith 14 16 or 20 Days, and some of them a
Month; their Feathers are good for garnishing of Arrows, for they receive no
Rain or Water, but remain of a durable Estate, and almost incorruptible; thus
People use them either in a Hunting, or at Wars.

In Galloway the one half of Loch Mirton does never Freeze, The Natural
Rarities of this Kingdom.
and by Innerness the Loch called Lochness, and the River flowing from thence
into the Sea does never Freez, but on the contrary in the coldest Days of
Winter the Loch and River do smoke and reek, signifying unto us, that there is
a Mine of Brimstone under it of a hot quality.

In Buquhan, Rats are never seen, and if any be Brought in thither they will
not live, this Country yields the finest Wool, and Lorne the best Barley; and in
Carrick are Kine and Oxen delicious to eat, whose Flesh is very tender and
pleasant, and the Fat so liquid, that it melts like Oil; and the wood or park
of Cumbernauld is replenished with Oxen wild, but of such a wonderful
whiteness, that there has never as yet been observed among the vast number of
them the least Spot upon any of their Skins, or Horns.

Wolves do here much mischief, but Foxes more, howbeit, to prevent them from
distroying their Poultrey, they have found out this device in Glenmoors every
House nourishes a young Fox, and then killing the same, they mix the Flesh
thereof amongst such meat as they give unto the Fowls or other Creatures, and
by this means so many Fowls or Cattle as eat hereof are safely preserved from
the Danger of the Fox by the space of almost two Months after, so that they may
wander whither they will, for the Foxes, smelling the Flesh of their Fellows
yet in their Crops, will in no wise meddle with them, but eschew and know such
a one, although it were among a Hundred of others.

Their Dogs.
In this Country there are some Dogs of a very strange Nature; the first is a
Hound of great swiftness, hardiness, and Strength, fierce and cruel upon all
wild Beasts, and eager against Thieves that offer their Masters any Violence:
The second is a Ratch or Hound very exquisite in following the Foot, (which is
called drawing) whether it be of Man or of Beast, yea he will pursue any manner
of Fowl, and find out any manner of Fish that lurks among the Rocks, or Otter
that haunts the land by that excellent sent of smelling, wherewith he is
endowed: The third sort is no greater than the aforesaid Ratches, in color for
the most part red, with black Spots, or else black and full of red matks,;
these are so skilful (being brought to it by practice) that they will exactly
pursue a Thief, who has Stolen any Goods, and finding the trespasser, they will
with great boldness set upon him, or if for his further safety he happens to
take the Water, they will pursue after him, and entering and issuing out at the
same place, where the party did, they will never cease their persuit, still
hunting him by the Foot, till they come to the very place where the Thief has
hid himself; which sort of Dogs are called Sleugh-Hounds: Upon which account
there was a Law amongst the Borders of England and Scotland, that whosoever
denied entrance to such a Hound in persuit made after Fellons and stolen Goods
should be holden as accessory to the Theft it self.

In Kyle is a Rock of the height of 12 Foot and as much of breadth, called the
Deaf-Craig, Deaf. Craig and the Rocking Stone.
on the one side of which, though you make never so great a noise, or shoot off
a Gun, it shall not be heard on the other side, except you be a good way off
from it, and then the sound may be easily perceived: And in the Country of
Steathern upon the Water of Farge by Balzward, there is a Stone called the
Rocking Stone of a reasonable bigness, which if a Man push with the least
motion of his Finger, it will move very lightly, but if he put the whole force
of his Body to it, it will signify nothing.

In Lennox is a great Loch called Loch-lowmond, Loch-lowmond.
Twenty-four Miles in length, and in breadth Eight, containing the number of
Thirty little Isles, in which is observed three wonderful things; the one is
Fishes very pleasant to the taste, that have no Fins to move themselves withal
as other Fishes do; One sort of Fish which is peculiar to this Loch alone is
called Powan. The second, tempestous Waves perpetually raging without Winds,
and that in the Summertime too, when the Air, is most calm and quiet: The
third, is one of these Isles, which is not like the rest united close to the
Ground, but is still loose and floating; and though it be so replenished with
grass, thar Cattle is kept upon it, yet it is transported sometimes toward one
point, and sometimes toward another, not unlike some little Isles near St.
Omers, or the Lake Vadimon, Pliny speaks of, which being covered over with
Rushes, and Reeds, and Grass, yet still keeps swimming up and down.

In Argile is a certain Stone found, The burning Stone.
which if it be covered but a while with Straw or Flax, will set them on Fire,
and by East the Isle of May, which is twelve Miles from all Land in the German
Sea, Inchape Roch.
lies a great hidden Rock called Inchcape, very dangerous for Saylors, because
it is overflowed every Tide; it is reported that formerly upon the said Rock
there was a Bell fixed, which rang continually, being moved by the Sea to give
notice to Seamen of the Danger, which Bell was put there and maintained by the
Abbat of Aberbothock, and being taken down by a Sea Pirate, a year after he
perished upon the same Rock with his Ship and all his Goods.

St. Katherines Well.
In Lothien two Miles from Edinburgh Southward is a Spring called St. Katherines
Well, flowing continually with a kind of black fatness, or Oil, above the
water, proceeding (as it is thought) from the parret Coal, which is frequent in
these parts; it is of a marvelous nature, for as the Coal, whereof it proceeds,
is very apt quickly to kindle into a flame, so is the Oil of a sudden operation
to heal all Scabs and tumors that Trouble the outward Skin, and the Head and
Hands are speedily healed by virtue of this Oil, which retains a very sweet
smell: The Well at Aberdeen.
and at Aberdeen is another Well very efficacious to dissolve the Stone, to
expel Sand from the Reins and Bladder, being good for the Chollick and drunk in
July and August, not inferior, they report, to the Spaw in Germany.

But to return now again to our Journey, passing through some part of the
Country of March, March and Lothien.
which lies upon the German Sea, we came to Lothien, called from the Picts
formerly Pict-land, shooting out along from March into the Scottish Sea, and
having many Hills in it, and little Wood, but for fruitful Cornfieldsd, for
courtesy and civility of Manners, commanded by some above all other Countries
of Scotland; about the Year 873 Edgar King of England (between whom and Kenneth
the Third King of Scots, there was a great knot of alliance against the Danes
their common Enemies) resigned up his right to him in this Country, and to
unite his Heart more firmly to him, he gave unto him some mansion Houses in the
way, as Cambden observes out of Matthew Florilegus, wherein both he and his
successors in their coming to the Kings of England, and in their return
homeward might be lodged, which unto the time of King Henry the Second
continued in the Hands of the Scotch King.

The first Town of any consequence, that offered it self unto us, was Dunbar,
famous formerly for a strong Castle, being the seat of the Earls of March,
afterward Styled Earl of Dunbar; Dunbar.
a fort many times won by the English, and as often recovered by the Scots: And
in the Reign of Edward the Third, the Earls of Salisbury and Arundel came into
Scotland with a great Army, and besieged the Castle of Dunbar Two and twenty
Weeks, wherein at that time was black Agnes the Countess: who defended the same
with extraordinary Valor, one time, when the Engine called the Sow, was
brought by the English to play against the Castle, she replied merrily, that
unless England could keep her Sow better, she would make her to cast her Pigs;
and indeed did at last force the Generals to retreat from that place: The Town
stands upon the Sea and has been fenced in with a stone Wall of great
strength, though by the frequent batteries it has of late Years received, it is
much impaired and gone to decay; the Houses here (as generally in most Towns of
Scotland) are built with Stone and covered with Slate, and they are well
supplied with provision by reason of a weekly Market which is held here: The
Inhabitants are governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, and talk much of great losses
and calamities they sustained in the late Civil Wars, for in this place was
that fatal battle fought betwixt Oliver Cromwell and the Scots, wherein he
routed and cut in pieces twenty thousand Scots, with twelve thousand English
Men, and obtained so strange and signal a Victory, that the very Thoughts of it
do to this very Day still strike a terror into them; when ever they call that
bloody Day to remembrance, and think what great havoc and Spoil was made
amongst them by the Victorious success of the English forces.

Edinburgh.
Our next Quarters we took up at Edinburgh, which is the Metropolis of Scotland,
and lies about twenty Miles distance from Dunbar: The Irish Scots call this
City Dun-eaden the Town Eaden or Eaden Hill, and which no doubt is the same
that Ptolomy calls (...), i. e. the winged Castle, for as Cambden observes
Adain in the British Tongue signifies a Wing, and Edenbourn, a Word compounded
out of the Saxon and British Language is nothing else but a Burgh with Wings:
It Is situated high, and extends above a Mile in length carrying half as much in
breadth, it consists of one fair and large Street with some few narrow lanes
branching out of each side, it is environed on the East, South, and West with a
strong Wall, and upon the North strengthened with a Loch: It Is adorned with
stately Stone buildings both private and public, some of which Houses are six
or seven Stories high which have frequently as many different apartments and
Shops, where are many Families of various Trades and calling, by reason of
which it is well thronged with Inhabitants, and is exceeding Populous, which is
the more occasioned by the neighborhood of Leith which is a commodious Haven
for Ships, and likewise, because as it is the seat of their Kings or Viceroys,
so it is also the Oracle or Closet of the Laws, and the Palace of Justice.

The King's Palace.
On the East side or near to the Monastery of St. Cross, that was a Holy Rood,
is the King's Palace which was built by King David the First, but being much
ruinated and impaired in the late unhappy broils betwixt the two Kingdoms, it
has been since enlarged and beautified, and is now become a Stately and
Magnificent structure: And not far from this House, within a pleasant Park
adjoining to it, rises a Hill with two Heads called of Arthur, the Britain
Arthur's Chair. Arthur's Chair.


A little further stands the College Founded and Endowed by that most eminent
Favourer of Learning, the Wise and Learned King James the Sixth, The College.
though afterward the Magistrates and Citizens of this place proved likewise
very considerable Benefactors to it, and upon their humble Address to the same
Prince, it was made an University, A. D. 1580, but the Privileges hereof were
not fully confirmed and thoroughly perfected till the Year 1582, and have been
since the same with those of any other University in this Kingdom.

The Dignity of Chancellor and Vice Chancellor does reside in the Magistrates
and Town Council of Edinburgh, who are the only Patrons, neither was the
Dignity, they say, as yet ever conferred upon any simple Person: The Persons
endowed were a Principal or Warden, a Professor of Divinity, four Masters, or
Regent for so they are called, of Philosophy, a Professor or Regent of Humanity
or Philology: Since the first Foundation the Town has added a Professor of
Hebrew 1640, and the City of Edinburgh has since added a Professor of
Mathematics.

The Library was founded by Clement Little one of the Officials or Comissaries
for Edinburgh A. D. 1635. The Library.
since which time it is much increased both by donatives from the Citizens, as
also from the Scholars, who are more in number, than in any other College in
the Kingdom: and here were presented to our view two very great Rarities, the
one was a Tooth taken out of a great Scull being four Inches about, and the
other was a crooked Horn taken from a Gentlewoman of the City who was fifty
Years old, being eleven Inches long which grew under her right Ear, and was cut
out by an eminent Surgeon then living in the Town who presented it to the
College.

Their Churches and Parliament Houses.
About the middle of the City stands the Cathedral, which is now divided into
six sermon Houses, for which Service there are seven other Kirks set apart
besides, and not far from the Cathedral is the Parliament House, whither we had
the good Fortune to see all the flower of the Nobility then to pass in state,
attending Duke Lauderdale who was sent down High-Commissioner: And indeed it
was a very Glorious sight, for they were all richly Accoutred and as nobly
attended with a splendid Retinue, the Heralds of Arms and other Officers, that
went before were wonderful gay and finely habited, and the Servants that
attended were clad in the richest Liveries; their Coaches drawn with six
Horses, as they went rattling along, did dazzle our Eyes with the splendor of
their furniture, and all the Nobles appeared in the greatest Pomp and
Gallantry; the Regalia, which are the Sword of State, the Scepter, and the
Crown were carried by three of the antientest of the Nobility, and on each side
the Honors were three Mace-Bearers bare headed, a Nobleman bare headed with a
Purse, and in it the Lord High Commissioner's Commission, then last of all the
Lord High Commissioner with the Dukes and Marquesses on his Right and Left Hand
it is ordered that there be no Shooting under the highest penalties that Day,
neither displaying of Ensigns, nor beating of Drums during the whole Cavalcade:
The Officers of State not being Noblemen, ride in their Gowns, all the Members
ride covered except those that carry the Honors* and the highest Degree and
the most Honorable of that degree rid last.

Nor is their grandeur disproportionate to their demeanor which is high and
stately, but courteous and obliging, having all the additional helps of
Education and Travel to render it accomplished, for during their Minority there
is generally great care taken to refine their Nature, and improve their
Knowledge, of which when they have attained a a competent measure in their own
Country, they betake themselves to foreign Nations to make a further progress
therein, where they do generally become so great proficients, that at their
return they are by this means fitted for all great Services and Honorable
employments, which their King or Country is pleased to commit to their care and
fidelity, and are thereby enabled to discharge them with great Honor and
applause.

On the West side a most steep Rock mounteth up aloft to a great height every
way save where it looks toward the City, The Castle.
on which is placed a Castle built by Ebrank the Son of Mempitius, as some
Write, though others by Cruthneus Camelon the first King of the Picts about
330, Years before the Birth of our Savior; it is so strongly fortified both by
art and Nature, that it is accounted impregnable, which the Britains called
Mined Agned, the Scots the Maiden Castle, of certain young Maids of the Picts
Royal Blood, which were kept here in old time, and which in truth may seem to
have been that Castrum alatum, or Castle with a Wing before spoken of: In this
Castle is one of the largest Canons in Great Britain, called Roaring Megg,
which together with two tire of Ordinance besides planted upon the Wall, can
command the City and all the Plains thereabouts: but most famous is it, in that
Queen Mary was brought to Bed here of a Son, who was afterward Christened at
Sterling, and called James, who at last became the Happy Uniter of the two
Crowns; and in that Chamber in which he was Born are written upon the Wall
these following Verses, in an old Scotch Character; James 6. Scot. 1. England.
Lord Jesu Christ, that crown it was with Thorns,
Preserve the Birth qubais badgir here is Borne,
And send her Son Succession, to Reign still
Lange in this Realm, if that it be thy will.
Als grant (O Lord) quhat ever of her proceed
Be to thy glory, honor, and praise, so beed.
July 19. 1566.

A little below the Castle is a Curious Structure built for an Hospital by Mr.
Herriot, The Hospital.
Jeweller to the aforementioned King James, and endowed with very great
Revenues for the use of poor Orphans, and impotent and decrepit Persons, but by
the ruinous and desolate Condition it seemed at that time to be falling into,
it became to us a very doleful Spectacle, that so noble a heroic design of
Charity should be so basely perverted to to other Evil Ends and purposes,
contrary to the Will and intention of the Donor.

The City is governed by a Lord-Provost, who has always a Retinue befitting
his Grandeur; and for the punishing delinquents there is a large Tolbooth,
Tolbooth.
for so they call a Prison or House of Correction, where all Malefactors are
kept in hold to satisfy the Law as their Offenses shall require.

Within seven Miles round the City there are of Noble and Gentlemen's Palaces,
Castles, and strong-builded Towers and Stone houses, as we were informed above
an hundred, and besides the Houses of the Nobility and Gentry within it, here
dwell several Merchants of great Credit and repute, where because they have not
the convenience of an Exchange as in London, they meet about Noon in the
High Street, from whence they adjourn to their Changes, i. e. Taverns, or other
places where their business may require them to give their Attendance.

The Fortune of this City has in former Ages been very variable and
inconstant; Its variable Changes.
sometime it was Subject to the Scots, and another while to the English, who
inhabited the East parts of Scotland, until it became wholly under the Scots
Dominion about the Year 960, when the English being overpoured and quite
oppressed by the Danes were enforced to quit all their interest here, as unable
to grapple with two such potent Enemies.

A Mile from the City lies Leith a most commodious Haven hard upon the River
Leith, Leith.
which when Dessry the Frenchman for the security of Edinburgh had fortified
very strongly by reason of a great Concourse of People, which after this
Flocked hither in abundance, in a short time from a mean Village it grew to be
a large Town: In the Reign of our King Henry the Eighth, the Sufferings and
Calamities both of it and its Neighbors were grievous and inexpressible, being
both Burnt and plundered by Sir John Dudly Viscount Lisle, Lord High Admiral of
England, who came hither with a puissant Army, and broke down the Peer, burning
every stick thereof, and took away all the Scotch Ships that were fit to serve
him, which kind of Execution was done likewise at Dunbar; afterward when
Francis King of France had taken to Wife Mary Queen of Scots, the Frenchmen who
in hope and conceit had already devoured Scotland, and began now to gape for
England, A. D. 1560. strengthened it again with new fortifications: But Queen
Elizabeth solicited by the Nobles, who had embraced the Protestant Religion, to
side with them, by her Wisdom and Prowess so effected the matter, that the
French were enforced to return into their own Country, and all their
fortifications were laid level with the Ground, and Scotland has ever since
been freed from the French, and Leith has become a very opulent and
flourishing Port, for the Peer is now kept up in so good repair, and the Haven
so safe for Ships to ride in, that here commonly lies a great Fleet at anchor
which come hither Richly laden with all sorts of Commodities.

After we had spent some time in this City we went from hence through
Linlithgow, Linlithgow.
a Town beautified with a fair House of the King's, a goodly Church, a pleasant
Park and a Loch a lake under the Palace Wall full of Fish, (of which lake it
seems to have derived its Name, Falkirk.
Lin in the British Tongue signifying a lake) to another Town called Falkirk
Famous for the notable Battle which was fought here betwixt King Edward the
First, and the Scots, wherein were Slain no less than two Thousand Men: not far
from which place likewise upon the River Carron was formerly situate the Famous
City of Camelon, chief City of the Picts, founded by Cruthneus Camelon before
the Birth of Christ 330 Year, which was destroy- by King Kenneth the Great,
about the Year of Christ 846, and what was left was afterward swallowed up by
an Earthquake, where the void place is now filled with Water.

Glasgow.
At last we came to the renowned City of Glasgow, which (lying in Liddisdail)
was indeed the furthest of all our Northern Circuit; it is situated upon the
River Glotta, or Cluyd, over which is placed a very fair Bridge supported with
eight Arches, and for pleasantness of Sight, sweetness of Air, and
delightfulness of its Gardens and Orchards enriched with most delicious Fruits,
surpasses all other places in this Tract; the Buildings in this Town are very
large and beautiful; and the Tolbooth itself so stately a Structure, that it
appears rather to be a Palace than a Prison: This has formerly been the Sea of
an Archbishop, The University.
and in the Year 1554 an University which consists of one College, was founded
here by Arch Bishop Turnbill for a Rector, a Dean of Faculty, a Principal or
Warden to teach Theology and three Professors to teach Philosophy: Afterward
some Clergymen professed the Laws here, being invited to that Profession rather
by the convenience of a Collegiate Life, and the immunities of the University,
then by any considerable Salary. King James the Sixth, A. D. 1577. did
establish twelve Persons in the College, viz. a Principal, three Professors of
Philosophy, called Regents, four Scholars called Bursars, an Oeconomus or
Provisor, who furnishes the Table with Provisions, the Principal's Servant, a
Janitor and a Cook.

The Cathedral is a very fair ancient Fabric, The Cathedrel.
built by Bishop John Achaian, A. D. 1135. it owes Thanks to the Memory of
King James the Sixth; and which is most remarkable, to the Mob it self at that
time, for its preservation from Ruin: for the Ministers here having persuaded
the Magistrates to pull it down, and to build two or three other Churches with
the materials thereof, and the Magistrates condescending, a Day was appointed
and Workmen ready to demolish it, but the common Tradesmen having notice given
them of this design, convene in Arms, and oppose the Magistrates, threatening to
bury the Demolishers of it under the Ruins of that ancient Building, whereupon
the matter was referred to the King and Council who decided the controversy in
the Tradesmens Favor, and reproving very sharply the Magistrates for their
Order, so that it still continues with four other Churches here beside for the
exercise of their Religion.

The City is governed by a Mayor, and is very eminent for its Trade and
Merchandise, and is noted upon Record for being the place, where William
Wallace, the Renowned Champion of Scotland, was traitourously Betrayed by Sir
John Menteith, and delivered up to our King Edward the First, by whose Order he
was afterward publicly executed in Smithfield.

Hamilton-
Passing away hence by Hamilton, a famous Palace then belonging to Duke
Hamilton, which has a fair and spacious Park adjoining to it, we had two Days
journey very doleful and troublesome, for we traveled over wide Meers and
dangerous Mountains in the Company of some Scotch Gentlemen, who were going
that way for England, where the Weather was ill, the ways worse, and the long
Miles with their Way-bitts at the end of them worst of all, where our Lodging
was hard, our Diet course and our Bodies thin, that it might easily be
discerned how we had lately passed through the Territorys of Famine, who Reigns
very potently over that cold and pinching Region.

Dunfries.
But coming at length to Dunfries in the County of Nidisdail it made us some
amends, for being situate between two Hills upon the Mouth of the River Nid,
over which is laid a Bridge of large fine Stones, it appears to be one of the
most flourishing Towns in this Tract, notable no less for its ancient Castle
and Manufacture of Cloth, then for the Murder of John Cummins, one of the
most Renowned Personages for his Retinue and Equipage in all this Kingdom, whom
Robert Bruce, for fear he should fore-stal his way to the Crown, run quite
through with his Sword in the Friars Church, and soon obtained his pardon from
the Pope, though he had committed so great a Murder in so sacred a place.

Anandale.
After this we came to Anandale at the Mouth of the River Anan in the County of
Anandale, bordering upon our own Nation, which lost all its Glory and Beauty
upon the War, which was raised in Edward the Sixth's Days; in these two last
named Counties have been bred a sort of warlike Men, who has been infamous for
Robberys and depredations, for they dwell upon Solway-Frith, a fordable Arm of
the Sea at low Water, through which frequently they have made many inroads into
England to fetch home great Booty's, and in which they were wont after a
delightful manner on Horseback with Spears to hunt Salmons, of which there are
in these parts a very great abundance.

After we had passed these borders we arrived again safe in our own native
Soil, within the precincts of Cumberland, Cumberland.
which like the rest of the Northern Counties has a sharp piercing Air; the
Soil is fertile for the most part both with Corn and Cattle, and in some parts
hereof with Fish and Fowl; here are likewise several Minerals, which of late
have been discovered; not only Mines of Copper, but some veins of Gold and
Silver, as we were informed, have been found, and of all the Shires, we have,
it is accounted the best furnished with the Roman Antiquities: Nor is it less
renowned for its exceeding high Mountains; for beside the Mountain called
Wrye-Nose, The Hill called Wrie-Nose.
on the top of which near the high way side are to be seen Three Shire-Stones
within a foot of each other, one in this County, another in Westmorland, and a
third in Lancashire, there are three other Hills, Skiddaw, Lanvalin and
Casticand, very remarkable: Skiddaw rises up with two mighty high Heads, like
Parnassus, and beholds Scruffel Hill, The Hill of Skiddaw, Lanvellin and
Casticand.
which is in Anandale in Scotland, and accordingly as mists rise, or fall upon
these heads, the People thereby prognosticate of the change of Weather, Singing
this Rhyme, If Skiddaw have a Cap,
Scruffel wotes full of that.


And there goes also, this usual Byword concerning the height, as well of this
Hill, as of the other two.

Skiddaw, Lanvellin, and Casticand.
Are the highest Hills in all England.
Nay, so liberal to it is Nature in the distribution of her largesses, that she
seems to have enriched it with every thing, that may any way be conducible to
Health, as well as Wealth, for here are such Varieties of vulnerary Plants,
which grow plentifully in these parts, especially near to the Picts-Wall, that
in the beginning of Summer, many Persons, that are curious in these things,
come hither out of Scotland on purpose to Simple; here are likewise upon the
Seacoast very frequently discovered Trees at Low Water, which have been
covered with Sand, and that in many other mossy places of the Shire they digg
up Trees without boughs, and that by the directions of the dew (they say) in
Summer, which they observe never stands upon that Ground, under which they lie.

At Carlisle we took up our first qaarters in this Province, Carlisle.
an ancient City very commodiously situated, it is guarded on the North side
with the River Eden, on the East with Peterial, and on the West with Cawd, and
besides these Natural fences it is fortified with a strong Wall, with a Castle
and a Citadel; the Fashion of it is long running out from West to East; on the
West side is the Castle of a large compass which King Richard the Third, as
appears by his Coat of Arms, repaired; and on the East the Citadel built by
Henry the Eighth: In the middle almost of the City rises on high the Cathedral
Church, being formerly a stately and Magnificent Structure, adorned with rich
Copes, and other sacred Garments and Vessels, and two Unicorns Horns of great
Value, which by an ancient custom were placed here upon the Altar, but now
deplores the want of part of its Body being ruined by a wicked War, whilst it
was only intended for a House of Prayer and Peace: It was first founded by
Walter, Deputy of these parts for King William Rufus, and by him dedicated to
the Blessed Virgin, but finished and endowed by King Henry the First out of the
Wealth which the said Walter had amassed for that purpose: The Romans and
Britains called this place Lugoballum, that is says Cambden the fort by the
Wall, which Name it derived probably from that famous military vallum, or
Trench, which stands apparent a little from the City; and that it flourished
exceedingly in the time of the Romans, the famous mention of it in those Days,
and diverse remains of Antiquity, which have been here frequently discovered,
do sufficiently attest: After the departure of the Romans, it suffered
extremely by the insolent outrages of the Scots and Picts, and afterward being
almost quite ruined by the Danes, it lay about two hundred Years buried in its
own Ashes until it began again to flourish under the government and by the
favor of King William Rufus, who as the Saxon Chronicle tells us. A. D. 1092
coming hither with a great Army repaired the City and built the Castle, driving
from hence the Daulphin of France, who had got too sure footing in some of
those Northern parts, and planted here a new Colony of Flemmings say some
Historians, whom presently upon better advice he removed into Wales, and settled
in their room a more useful plantation of Southern Englishmen: After this here
having been formerly a Covent of Monks and a Nunnery built by St. Cuthbert A.
D. 686. which were both destroyed by the Danes. King Henry the First
established here the Episcopal See, A. D. 1135. says Mr. Wharton Ang. Sacr.
Tom. 1. P. 699.
and made Athulph Priory of St. Oswalds his Confessor Bishop hereof, and
endowed it with many Honors and emoluments; in the successive Reigns of our
Kings it was Subject to great casualties and misfortunes, the Scots, won it
from King Stephen, and King Henry the Second recovered it again; in the Reign
of Edward the First the City and Priory with all the Houses belonging to it
were consumed by Fire, and a little after King Edward the Second came to the
Crown, all the Northern parts from Carlisle to York fell under the subjection of
the Scots, at which time our Chronicles tell us, that the English by their
faintheartedness grew so Vile and Despicable, that three Scots durst venture
upon an hundred English, when a hundred English durst hardly encounter with
three Scots; but under victorious King Edward the Third the Englishmen plucked
up their Spirits, and recovered their ancient Valor, enforcing the Scots to
quit all their strong holds, and retire back again to their own Territories and
Dominions; nevertheless this City with the parts adjacent were frequently
pestered by Scotch Invasions, till the happy Union of the two Crowns, since
which time it is grown more Populous and opulent, being governed by a Mayor,
and having the Assizes and Sessions held here for that County. Salkelds.


We rode away from Carlisle by Salkelds upon the River Eden (where is a trophy
of Victory, as is supposed, called by the Country People Long Megg' and her
Daughters, being seventy seven Stones each of them ten Foot high above Ground
and one of them, viz. Long Megg fifteen Foot) to Penreth, Penreth.
which is says Cambden, if you interpret it out of the British Language, the
Red-head, or Hill, for the Soil, and the Stones are here generally of a reddish
Color, but commonly called Perith, sixteen Miles distant from this City.

This Town is but small in compass, but great in Trade, fortified on the
West Side with a Castle of the King's, which in the Reign of King Henry the
Sixth was repaired out of the Ruins of a Roman Fort, not far from it, called
Maburg, adorned with a spacious Church, and large Marketplace, where there is
an Edifice of Timber for the use of such as resort hither to Market, garnished
with Bears at a ragged Staff, which was the device of the Earls of Warwick; it
belonged in times past to the Bishops of Durham, but the Patriarch Bech taking
two much State upon him, and carrying himself with more haughtiness, than
became him, did hereby so displease King Edward the First, that he took from
him Werth in Tevidail, Perith, and the Church of Simondburn: But for the
commodious use of this town William Strickland Bishop of Carlisle descended from
an ancient Race in this tract, at his own proper charge caused a Channel for a
Watercourse to be made out of Peteril, which near unto the Bank had Plumpton
Park, a large plat of Ground, which the Kings of England had appointed as a
Chase for wild Beasts to range in; but King Henry the Eighth disparked it, and
converted it into a better Habitation for Men, it lying near to the Marches,
where the Realms of England and Scotland confine one upon another.

Not far from this Town begins the County of Westmorland, Westmorland.
being one of the worst Countries in England, and taking its Name both from its
Situation and the great number of Moors in it: It Is likewise a Hilly Country,
two ridges of high Hills crossing it as far as Cumberland, which besides their
Northern Situation, sharpen the Air, and make it less Subject to Fogs and
Vapors then many other Counties, by reason of which the People are free from
strange and infectious Diseases, being healthful, and living generally to great
Ages, but in the Southern parts of it, it is more fruitful and pleasant.

In this County, near the River Lowther, Piramidal Stones near the Lowther.
is a Spring that Ebbs and Flows many times in a Day, and in the same place
there are huge Pyramidal Stones, some nine Foot high and thirteen Foot thick,
pitched directly in a row for a Mile together, Cataracks near Kendale.
and placed at equal distances from each other and in the River Ken near
Kendale are two Cataracks, or Water-falls, where the Waters descend with a
great and mighty noise, and when that, which stands North, from the
Neighbors living between them, sounds clearer and louder than the other, they
certainly look for fair or foul Weather to follow but when that on the
South Side does so, they look for Foggs and Showers of Rain.

Appleby.
We arrived at Appleby, a Town in this County memorable for its Antiquity and
Situation, having formerly been a Roman Station, and standing very pleasantly
being almost encompassed with the River Eden, over which it has a Stone Bridge,
but so slenderly inhabited and the Buildings so mean, that all the Beauty of it
lies in one mean Street, which rises with a gentle ascent; in the upper part
whereof stands the Castle, and in the nether end the Church, and by it a
School, which Robert Langton and Miles Spencer, Doctors of Law, founded for the
advancement of Learning: That this Castle was surprised by William King of
Scots a little before himself was taken Prisoner at Alnwick, our
Chronicle-inform us, but King John, having afterward recovered it from the
Scots, bestowed it out of his Princely Favor upon Robert Vipon, for some
singular services he had done to him and the State.

Burgh under Stanemoor.
Six Miles further lies Burgh, commonly called Burgh under Stanemoor, which,
though now but a poor small Village, was in all probability the place, where
stood the ancient Town Vertera, in which in the declining Age of the Roman
Empire the Band of the Directores kept their Station, which Opinion is the more
likely, becase the distance thereof from Levatra, or Bows on the one side, and
Brovonacum, or Appleby on the other, being reduced to Italian Miles, do exactly
agree with Antonines Computation, as Cambden observes out of his Itinerary; and
further, for that the High Street of the Romans, as is yet evidently apparent
by the Ridges thereof, leads this way directly to Brovonacum or Appleby: But
besides this, there is nothing here remarkable at all, excepting only, that in
the beginning of the Norman government the Northern English conspired here
first against William the Conqueror, and that the most Heroic King Edward the
First died here of a Dysentery A. D. 1307. and was buried at Westminster.

When we were past Burgh we began to climb that hilly and solitary Country
exposed to Wind and Weather, Stanemoor.
which because it is all Rocky and Stony is called in the Northern Dialect
Stanemoor, and here round about us we beheld nothing but a rough, wide,
mountainous Desert, save only a poor homely Hostelry, rather than an Inn, in
the very midst thereof called the Spittle on Stanemoor, to entertain
Travelers, and near to it a Fragment of a Cross, which we call Rere-Cross,
Rere-Cross.
and the Scots, Re-Cross, i. e. the King's Cross, which formerly served as a
Landmark betwixt the two Kingdoms, the same being erected upon a Peace
concluded between William the Conqueror, and Malcolm King of Scots with the
Arms of England on the South Side and those of Scotland on the North; and a
little lower upon the Roman Highway stood a small Fort built apiece,
which they called the Maiden Castle, from whence, as the Borderers reported,
the said Highway went with many Windings in and out as far as to Carevorran in
Northumberland.

After we had made a shift to scramble over these Mountains we found a little
Village on the other side called Bows, Bows.
the same which I observed before Antonine calls Levatra, in which was formerly
a small Castle belonging to the Earls of Richmond, where in was a certain
Custom called Thorough Toll, and their Jus furcarum, i. e. power to hang, etc.

Through this place lies the Road to Richmond, Richmond.
the chief Town hereabouts, encompassed with a Wall, out of which are three
Gates, now well peopled and frequented: It was built upon the Norman Conquest
by Alan, Earl of Bretagne, who reposing small trust in Gilling (a place or
manner of his own hard by) to withstand the Violence of the Danes and English,
whom the Normans had despoiled of their Inheritance, fenced it with a Wall and
a Castle, which standing upon a Rock looks down upon the Swale, over which it
has a Stone bridge, which River was reputed Sacred by the ancient English, for
that Paulinus the first Archbishop of York, Baptized in it in one Day above
Ten thousand Men, besides Women and Children, and then gave it the Name of
Richmond, as a place of Strength and Beauty. Here is held a great Market to the
benefit of the Country, who expose to Sale great quantities of Stockings, which
being bought up at cheap Rates, are afterward sent into other parts of the
Nation.

This Town gives name to five Wapentakes or Hundreds within its Jurisdiction,
from hence called Richmond-shire, Richmondshire.
a wild and hilly tract of Ground, but yielding good Grass in some places; the
Hills are stored with Lead, Coals and Copper, and on the tops or surface
thereof are found many times Stones like Sea Winkles, Cockles, Muscles, and
other Fish; which says Cambden, are either natural, or else are the Relicts of
Noah's Flood petrified. Orosius speaks as much of Oysters of Stone found upon
Hills far from the Sea, which have been eaten in hollow by the Water; in all
likelihood these stone Fishes are of the same kind, which some Naturalists have
discovered at Alderby in Gloucestershire, and I my self have since taken up
upon the high Cliffs near Folk-stone in Kent, which I shall describe more
particularly, when I come to speak of that place.

But to return on our way, out of Richmond-shire we made an entrance into the
West Riding of Yorkshire, where we were first saluted by Rippon, Rippon.
situated upon the River Ure, which divides the North and West Riding, and is
full of Crea-Fishes, the breed whereof, as they say, was brought out of the
South parts by Sir Christopher Medcalfe: It received all its Dignity and
ancient renown from a Monastery built here A. D. 660. by Wilfrid, Arch Bishop
of York, which being together with the Town quite ruined and demolished by the
fury of the Danes, it was afterward repaired by Odo, Archbishop of
Canterbury, who translated thither the Relics of Wilfrid; his being brought to
this place from Oundle in Northamptonshire, says the Saxon Chronicle A, D.
709. The principal Ornament of it at present is the Collegiate Church with its
three lofty Spires: A Church noted of old for St. Wilfrid's Needle, where
Women's honesty was tried, it being a narrow hole in a Vault under Ground, through
which those that were Chaste could easily pass, if we believe Tradition, but
the Unchaste, it seems, stuck by the way: On one side of the Church is a little
College erected by Henry Bath, Archbishop of York, over which presides a
Reverend Dean, my worthy Friend Dr. Wyvil and on the other side of it is a
great Mount of Earth called Hilshaw, cast up as is reported by the Danes.

In the Reign of Edward the Second the Scots having invaded this Nation, burnt
all before them until they came to this place, which for the space of three
Days they ransacked, pillaged, and spoiled, receiving no less than a thousand
Mark of those who fled into the Church, as an Asylum or Sanctuary, upon
condition, they would not burn this place as they had done diverse other Towns
in the County; besides this there is nothing memorable, but the great number of
Spurriers, who being here incorporated in a Society, make the best Spurs which
this Nation affords.

Hereupon we forthwith withdrew our selves to a neighboring Village, which is
called Cock-grave, of great Note for a Well, called St. Domingo's- Well, St.
Domingo 's-Well at Cock-grave.
which is very effectual for curing many Pains and Aches, but more especially
the Rickets, which occasions in Summertime a great resort of Impotent and
decrepit Persons, and little Children too, which we observed they took in their
Arms, and dipped several times in the Water, which is as cold as Ice, and does
so pierce and chill the Body, that when we went out of curiosity to bath in it,
the coldness of the Spring did mightily allay the Pleasure we expected, not
being able long to continue in it, though as soon as we came out we began again
immediately to be warm, and were almost ready to sweat with extremity of heat,
which is generally the operation of this cold Well.

Knarsborough.
Two Miles farther is Knarsborough, a place where grows great quantities of
Liquorice, which by reason of its Marle is supposed to be a more kindly Earth
for the production of that Plant; but more especially it is of great repute for
three Rarities; the First is St. Roberts Chapel, St. Roberts Chapel.
which is a small vaulted Hermitage hewn out of a Rock, visited very frequently
by the Votaries of Rome, of which St. Robert there goes a Story, that being a
Person of great Austereness and Sanctity, he begged of King John as much
ground, as he could plough over from six of Clock till four with two Stags;
which the King presently granted, believing that the compass of Land could be
but small, which he could till in so little a time, especially with such wild
untractable Creatures; but the the grave Hermit having tamed two Stags, for
the purpose, went to work with the Animals, and ploughed over in that time some
Acres if credit may be given to the relation, in memory of which great Days
work, himself and his Stags continue painted, as they were Yoked together, to
this day in the Church Windows: here was likewise a Priory of the Order of the
holy Trinity for the Redemption of Captives, founded by Richard Earl of Cornwall
A. D. 1218. of which St. Robert was the Tutelar Saint: to which Priory, as Mr.
Kennet informs us, he gave the Chapel of St. Robert, and the Advowson of the
Church of Hamstwait.

The Droping Well.
The Second is the Dropping Well, into which the Water distills and trickles down
from a Rock hanging over it, where if any kind of Wood is put it will in a
short time be covered over with a Stony Bark, as has been frequently
experimented; neither does it transform Sticks, but any other thing which is
thrown into it, for besides a wooden Dish, which lying for some considerable
time in this Water, was all over incrustated, in the inside like a smooth Hone,
and on the outside as rough and cragged as an Oister, we brought away with us
likewise a Mass of leaves and Stalks, which was petrified in a lump, and
observed that the very Mud which lay in the bottom of the Water was just like a
round congeries of Hailstones coagulated together, resembling very much some
which we had seen before at Ochy Hole in Somersetshire, and yet upon the top
of this Rock, where this Springhead is discovered the like operation is not at
all visible, nor does the Water petrifie as below, which makes some conjecture,
that the Water is impregnated with this Virtue by the Rock, from whence by
fetching so long a compass it still keeps continually trickling down.

The last are the Spaws lying two or three Miles from that Town upon a wide
Heath, The Spaws.
which are two Springs a little distant from each other, the Water of the one
is more toothsom and palatable, purging most by Urine, but the other is so
unsavory, and loathsome both to the taste and smell, that he, who is not used
to it, is at first enforced to Stop, his Nose, before he can take down so many
Glasses, as are prescribed him, of this laxtative potion.

We happened here at the season, when there was a great confluence of the
Gentry, who come hither to drink the Waters from diverse places, whereupon we
diverted our selves for some few Days in this place, and lighting by chance
upon some old Friends and Acquaintance, who lived hereabouts, they afterward
conducted us very kindly on our way to Leeds which is reckoned to be distant
about twelve Miles from Knarsborough.

Leeds.
This is one of the most opulent and populous Towns on this side of the Country,
the great Trade whereof consists in Clothing, about which an incredible number
of People are employed, not only in this Parish, which is of a large extent,
but in the Neighborhood too; on a Market Day it is scarce to be imagined how
many Packs of Cloth are bought up and sent away; at which time there is a
pretty custom observed, that as soon as the Merchants have done bargaining with
their Chapmen, they commonly go together to their Brig-end shot, being a kind
of Sixpenny Ordinary in a House near to the Stone Bridge, which is built over
the River Are, where their Market is kept, which having lovingly participated
together, away they return every Man about his business.

Otely.
Traveling away hence through Otely, a small Town belonging to the Archbishop
of York, situated under a high and craggy Cliff, called Cherin, and having
several times crossed over the Are, which Springing out of the bottom of the
Hill Pennigent; does, as it were, sport it self with winding in and out, as if
it were doubtful, whether it should return back to its Springhead or run on
still to the Sea, Skipton.
we came to Skipton in Craven a Country so rough and unpleasant with craggy
Stones, hanging Rocks, and rugged Ways, that it seems to have derived its very
name from Cragg, which in the British Language does signify a Stone; in the
midst hereof in a low bottom stands Skipton lying hid, and enclosed about with
steep Hills, and precipices not unlike Latium in Italy, which Varro supposes
to have been so called, because it lies close under the Apennine and the Alps;
the Town for the bigness of it, and manner of its buildings is Fair enough,
being more especially beautified with a Castle, which belongs to the Earldom of
Pembrook; in the Reign of Edward the Second it underwent the same dismal
calamities from the Scots, which the Neighboring parts at the same time
suffered.

A little further upon the edge of this County at Giggleswick (which is not far
distant from Settle Settle.
a small Market Town) we rode by a little Spring rising under a Hill, The
ebbing and flowing Well; and Robinhood's Mill by Giggleswick.
which ebbs and flows several times in an Hour, it flows about a quarter of a
yard high, and at ebb falls again so low, that it is scarce an inch deep with
Water; and on the other side of this Hill is heard a clacking noise, such as is
made by a Mill, which is caused, as is supposed, by some current of Water,
which creeping under Ground falls down upon the Rocks, and this the Country
people call Robin-Hood's Mill.

We arrived quickly from hence within Lancashire, commonly called Lonkashire,
Lankashire.
and the county Palatine of Lancaster because it gives a Title to a Count
Palatine Famous for the four Henry's, the 4th, 5th,, 6th, and 7th Kings of
England derived from John Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster.
: The Air hereof is thin and piercing, not troubled with gross mists or foggs,
which makes that People healthy, strong, and long-lived; the Soil differs much
in nature and situation, some parts being Hilly, and others flat, and of these
some being fruitful, some mossy, and others moorish, the Champain Country for
the most part good for Wheat and Barley, and that which lies at the bottom of
the Hill, yields the best of Oats; yet it breeds great number of Cattle, that
are of a huge proportion, and have goodly Heads, and large spread Horns, and
for Fish and Fowl here is great abundance, particularly in Winander Mere,
Winander Mere.
which is ten Miles long and four broad, and has such a clear pebly bottom,
that the common saying amongst them is that it is all paved with Stone; besides
Trouts, Pikes, etc. there is one most dainty Fish called a Char, not to be
found elsewhere, except in Vlles Water, Ulles Lake.
another Lake upon the borders of Cumberland, and that two principally in Lent,
at which time some zealous Romanists will tell you, that they more freely come
to Net, than at any other season, for afterward they scond, and are not easily
taken: Besides all this the Country abounds with Flax to make Linen, with
Turfs and pit Coal for fuel, and with Quarries of good Stone for building, and
in some boggy places are dug up Trees, which will burn clear, and give light
like touch-wood.

Here are three great Hills not far distant asunder seeming to be as high as
the clouds, Ingleborow, Penigent and Pendle.
which are Ingleborow, Penigent, and Pendle, on the top of which grows a
peculiar Plant called Cloudsberry, as though it came out of the Clouds: this
Hill formerly did the Country much harm by reason of an extraordinary deal of
Water gushing out of it, and is now famous for an infallible sign of Rain,
whenever the top of it is covered with a mist; and by reason of the excessive
height for which they are all three celebrated, there is this Proverbial Rhyme
goes current amongst them, Ingleborow, Pendle, and Penigent
Are the highest Hills betwixt Scotland and Trent.


Lancaster.
Lancaster is the chief Town of the County, of no large extent, but very sweet
and clean, fortified with a Castle, which is made use of for the Assizes, and
adorned with one large Church, both which are situated upon a high Hill, from
whence is a pleasant prospect into the adjacent Fields, which are delicately
enriched with the best of Earths Tapestry, and are watered by the Crystal
streams of the River Lone, which pays here a petty tribute before it posts away
to do homage to the Ocean; in the descent and sides of the Hill, where it is
steepest, hard by the Stone Bridge, which has five Arches, hangs an ancient
piece of Wall, called Wery-wall, supposed to have been some ancient Work of the
Romans, by reason of several Roman Coins, which have been found hereabouts; the
grants and privileges, which have been conferred upon this Town by the Kings of
this Realm, have been very great and considerable, and King John and Edward the
Third have ever been esteemed two of its principal Benefactours.

From hence the great Road led us directly through Garstange Garstange.
a small market Town (noted chiefly for a great Fair held here every Year in
the beginning of July) to Preston Preston.
being a delightful place, well peopled with the more wealthy and gentile sort,
situate upon the Ribble, with a fair Stone Bridge over it; the same is honored
with the Court of Chancery, and the Offices of Justice for Lancaster, as a
County Palatine, and not far from it stands Ribchester, Ribchester.
supposed to be the ancient Bremetonacum, counted in its flourishing times the
richest Town in Christendom, about which have been dug up so many pieces of
Roman Antiquity, that one may conclude it from thence to have been a place of
great account in the time of the Romans.

Passing after this through Wigan another Market Town and Corporation, Wigan.
well known by reason of the great Trade for Coverlids, Rugs, Blankets, and
other sorts of Bedding, which is made there, Leverpool.
we came to Leverpool a Sea Port Town situated at the Mersey's-mouth, where it
affords a safe Harbor for Ships and a convenient passage for Ireland; for its
denfence it has on the South side a Castle built by King John, and on the West
side a Tower upon the River being a stately and strong piece of Building.

We ferried over from thence into Cheshire, Cheshire.
which lies opposite to it on the other side of the River: This shire is a
County Palatine, and the Earls hereof have formerly had such Royalties and
Privileges belonging to them, that all the Inhabitants have Sworn fealty and
allegiance to them as to their King; the Air of it is so healthy, that the
People are generally long-lived, and the Irish vapors rising from the Irish
Sea do sooner melt the Snow and Ice in this County, than in places further of;
the Soil is very Rich, and is observed to be more kindly, and natural for
Pasturage than Corn, which occasions here great plenty of most excellent
Cheese, which together with Salt are the two grand Commodities of this County;
both Men and Women have here a general commendation for Beauty and Handsome
proportion, and for Meers and Pools, Heaths and Mosses, Woods and Parks, they
are more frequent here than in many other Counties, besides that it is in great
request for the two famous Forests Delamere and Macclesfield Forests.
of Delamere and Macklesfield.

River Dee.
In the River Dee is plenty of Salmons; and Giraldus Cambrensis, who lived about
the Year 1200, tells us, that this River prognosticated a certain Victory to
the Inhabitants living upon it, when they were in Hostility one against
another, according as it inclined more on this side or that, after it had left
the Channel; and it is still observed that the same River upon the fall of much
Rain rises but little, but if the South Wind beats long upon it, it swells and
extremely overflows the Grounds adjacent.

Salt Springs at Nantwich etc.
At Nantwich, Northwich, and Middlewich are the Famous Salt Pits of this shire:
the whitest Salt is made at Nantwich which is reputed the greatest and fairest
built Town of all this shire after Chester: it has only one Pit, called the
Brine-Pit about some fourteen Foot from the River Wever, out of which they
convey Salt Water by troughs of Wood into the Houses adjoining, wherein there
stands little Barrels pitched fast in the ground, which they fill with that
Water, and at the ringing of a Bell, they begin to make a Fire under the leads,
whereof they have six in an House, and in them they sees the Water, then
certain Women, which they call Wallers, with little wooden rakes fetch up the
Salt from the bottom, and put it in baskets, which they term Salt-barrows, out
of which the Liquor runs, and the pure Salt remains.

Chester or West- Chester as being in the Western part of the Kingdom is the
Metropolis of this County, Chester.
it was in ancient times called Legacestre, Caerleon, and Caerlegion, for
wherever the Britains built a Town they gave it the name of Caer which is
derived of the Hebrew Kir, and signifies a Wall in both Languages, and
wheresoever the English coming in found the Word Caer in the name of any Town,
they Translated it by the Word Chester, or Cestor, which was the same to them
as Caer to the old Britains, which undoubtedly occasioned the denomination of
this Place; and the addition of Legion to it, was because the Twentieth Roman
Legion was here placed: so that it is a City as famous for its Antiquity as
Situation, and of no less Renown of old for its Roman At Caerleon was formerly
an ancient School of Learning, placed here for the Britains by the Roman
Powers, Bishop Stillingfleet, Antiq. of the British Churches, P. 215.
, than it is now for a Dutch Colony, a People who carry Trade and Industry along
with them wheree'er they go; It Is seated on the Banks of the River Dee, over
which it has a fair Stone Bridge with eight Arches, and a Gate at each end, its
distance from the River's Mouth is about 25 Miles and from the new Key, where
the Ships ride, 6 Miles: It Is built in the form of a Quadrant, and environed
with strong Walls about two Miles in compass, with Towers and Battlements, and
withal so broad and spacious, that in some places two or three may walk
abreast upon it. The Castle, which stands upon an high Hill, near to the
River, with its thundering Peals of Ordnance prohibits access to any insolent
Invaders, whilst the sweetness and commodiousness of the City within affords
great pleasure to the Natives, and no less satisfaction to all foreigners, who
visit it; for besides the prospect of fair and uniform Houses, all along the
chief Streets are Galleries, or walking places, which are called Rows, having
Shops on both sides, through which a Man may walk dry in the most rainy Weather
from one end to the other.

Here are several Churches, which are very ancient and goodly Fabrics, and
though St. John's without Northgate had formerly the preeminence, yet now the
Cathedral founded in Honor to St. Werburga, Daughter to Wulpherus King of
Mercia, by Earl Leofrich, and afterward repaired by Hugh the first of the
Norman Blood, that was Earl of Chester, does deservedly bear away the Bell; of
great repute for the Tomb of Henry the Fourth Emperor of Almain, who, as they
say, gave over his Empire, and led here an Heremites Life: The Bishop's See was
first placed here by Peter Bishop of Litchfield, who translated it from thence,
but being afterward conveyed to Coventry, and from thence settled in its
primitive Station, this place continued devoid of all Episcopal Honor, till
King Henry the Eighth's Reign, who having dispossessed the Benedictine Monks of
their Mansions placed in their Room a Dean and Prebendaries, and made it for
ever a Bishop's See. The City is governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, and was made
a County incorporate by King Henry the Seventh; and glories in nothing more
than that this was the place, where the Saxon King Edgar in triumph had his
Barge rowed in the way of homage by seven petty Kings, or Princes (Kenneth the
Third, King of Scots, being one) from St. John's Church to his own Palace,
himself as supreme Lord alone holding the Helm; and here is farther a Tragical
Story reported, how Ethelfred, King of the Northumbers, who murdered at this
place barbarosly some hundreds of Christian Monks, was here afterward slain
himself by Redwald, King of the East Angles.

When we left this City, we took the opportunity of the Sands, and passed with
a Guide over the Washes into Flintshire in North Wales, Flintshire in
North Wales.
where Flint Castle saluted us upon our first arrival; 'This Castle was begun
by King Henry the Second, and finished by Edward the First, where King Richard
the Second, ws deposed, and King Edward the Second met his great Favorite
Gaveston at his return out of Ireland.

The Air is healthy, without any Fogs or Vapors, and the People generally very
aged and hearty; the Snow lies long upon the Hills; the Country affords great
plenty of Cattle, but they are small; Millstones are also dug up in these
Parts as well as in Anglesey: Toward the River Dee the Fields bear in some
Parts Barley, in others Wheat, but generally throughout Rye, with very great
increase, and especially the first Year of their breaking up their Land, and
afterward two or three crops together of Oats.

Upon the River Cluyd is situated St. Asaph (anciently Elwy) a Town of greater
Antiquity than Beauty, and more Honorable for a Bishop's See, St. Asaph.
placed here about 560 by Kentigerne, a Scot, Bishop of Glascow, than for any
thing else contained therein, by whom the Cathedral was built on the Elwy,
whence the Town is called Land Elwy by the Welsh, and the Bishop Elwensis in
the ancient Latin: After that he returned into Scotland, he deputed Asaph, a
Religious and Devout Man to succeed him in the Bishopric, from whom the Place
received its Denomination.

But most remarkable is this County for a little Village called Holy-Well, so
famous for the strange Cures which have been wrought (as is supposed) by the
Virtue and Intercession of St. Winifrid, Holy-Well, or St. Winefred 's Well.
who is the grand Patroness thereof: The Water hereof is extreme cold, and has
so great a Stream that flows from it, that it is presently able to drive a
Mill; the Stones which are at the bottom being of a sanguine Color, are
believed to have received that rubicund Tincture from the drops of Blood which
trickled down this holy Virgin's Body, when she was here Beheaded by the Bloody
Tyrant that would have ravished her; and the Moss which grows upon the sides,
and bears a very fragrant smell, is averred to have been the product of her
Hair, though I find by some we brought away with us, that in process of time it
loses all its sweetness. Over the Well stands a Chapel, dedicated to her,
built of Stone after a curious manner, to which formerly was much resorting by
Pilgrims, who came hither out of a blind Devotion, and the generality of the
Commonalty hereabouts, who are too much addicted to Popish Superstition, are so
extremely credulous to believe the Legend of this Martyred Virgin, and the
great Miracle that was wrought by St. Benno, who restored her to Life again, as
they say, by clapping on her Head immediately, after it was cut off, upon her
Shoulders; that we happening to smile at this fabulous Relation, which we had
from an old Romish Zealot, who gave his Attendance, it seeming indeed as
ridiculous to us, as the Story of Garagantua, or the Wandering Jew, he presently
observed us, and replied, That he supposed we ever long would not believe the
very Scriptures to be true; as if the Holy and undoubted Oracles of God had now
no more certain and infallible grounds of Veracity to enforce an assent to the
Credibility thereof, than such idle and extravagant Fables as these, which have
only been the Chemical Extracts of some Enthusiastic hot-brained Monks,
dressed up finely with some outward shows of probability to cheat the Vulgar
into a belief hereof.

At this place we met diverse Persons of as different Qualities as Designs; some
came hither for the good of their Bodies, and others, as they hoped for the
benefit of their Souls; some we saw kneeling about the Well, mumbling over
their Beads with such profound Murmurs, as the Conjurers did of old, who used
to invocate old Hecate's Assistance, and kissing the Stones on which they
kneeled with as great Reverence as if the sacred Feet of St. Winefrid, or the
Pope's Toe, had been there present before; others were crossing themselves from
Head to Foot with the Holy Water in which they bathed, supposing it as
effectual to drive away all Evil Spirits from their Bodies, as the Spaniard did
in Flanders, who seeing a Demoniack exorcised, who looking earnestly upon him,
a thing which he had never seen before, and being told that the Devil, when
dispossessed of his former hold, had a very great mind to enter into his
Posteriors; leaps up immediately and clapped his Backside into a Basin of Holy
Water, by that means hoping to keep it free from that Black intending Inmate:
Others were gathering up the bloody Stones, and picking up the sweet Moss from
the sides of the Well, which Holy Relics they resolved to treasure up as
carefully, as the Nuns in Britany did the Bones of the Eleven hundred Martyred
Virgins. And in fine, others went in purely for their Pleasure and Diversion,
to cleanse and purify themselves from bodily Pollutions, reserving their Souls
for other kind of Lustrations, more suitable and congruous to their Divine
Nature.

Amongst these Persons we passed away some days, in which time, by conversing
with the Welsh, we gathered up from them again an account of some Curiosities
in these Northern Counties, which we had not then time enough personally to
survey, which I shall next decypher with as much brevity as I can.

Montgomeryshire is a mountainous Country, Montgomeryshire
and yet very fruitful, because well irrigated, but in nothing more observable
than for its excellent Breed of Horses, which are of most excellent Shapes,
strong Limbs, and very swift.

The Hill Plim-limmon raises it self up to a wonderful height, The Hill
Plim-limmon.
and on that part where it boundeth on this Shire, it pours forth the
Severne, the greatest River in Britain, next the Thames; as likewise in the
other Parts of it rises the River Wye, and the River Rideal.

The Hill Cerdon.
Upon Cerdon-Hill are placed certain Stones in a round Circle like a Coronet, in
all probability to commemorate some notable Victory.

Merionethshire.
Merionethshire may have a wholesome Air, but is very barren, and exceeding full
of spir'd Hills, and good for little but Cattle: It was not conquered by the
English till the Reign of Edward the First, A. D. 1283. And in the Reign of
Henry the IVth, Owen Glendover having drawn this and all Wales into a
Combination against that Prince, endangered the loss of the whole, but that he
had to do with too Martial a Prince.

The Pool near Bala.
Near Bala is a great Pool of Water, that drowns at least 200 Acres of Ground,
whose Nature is such, as they say, that the High-land Floods cannot make this
Pool swell bigger, though never so great, but if the Air be troubled with violent
Tempests of Wind, it rises above the Banks; the River Dee runs into this
Pool with a swift Stream, and glides through it without mixture of Water; for
in this Pool is bred the Fish called Juiniad, which is never seen in the Dee;
and in Dee Salmons are taken, which are never found in the Pool. Upon the Sea
Coasts of this County great store of Herrings are taken at time of Year, and
upon the West side of it the Sea beats so sore and hard, that it is thought it
has carried away part of it.

Anglesey.
Anglesey is a considerable Island in the North-West part of Wales, parted from
the Continent by a narrow Arm of the Sea named the Menay: The Welsh call this
Island Mon or Tie-Mon, but since Edward the First conquered it from Llewellen,
King or Prince of North Wales, it got the Name of Anglesey, that is, the
English Island. It Is in length about Twenty Miles, though in breadth scarce
Seventeen; and herein are frequently found and dug up in the low Grounds
Bodies of huge Trees with their Roots, and Fir-Trees of a wonderful bigness and
length, which Trees some believe were cut down by the Romans; so that it
appears this Island was in times past full of Woods and Timber, but instead
thereof it yields now plenty of Corn, Sheep and Cattle; the Air is reasonably
Healthful, save only a little Aguish at some time and in some places, by reason
of the Fogs that do arise from the Sea. It yields also great store of
Millstones and Grindstones, and in some places a sort of Earth, of which they
make Alum and Copperas, but more especially it affords such plenty of Wheat, it
is deservedly entitled the Mother of Wales.

In Caernarvanshire the Air is sharp and piercing, and in it are the highest
Hills in Wales, Caernarvanshire.
for which reason it is justly called the English Alps; on some of which the
Snow lies long, and on others all the Year long hard crusted together.

In the Pool called Lin-paris there is, The Pool Lin-paris.
as it is reported, a kind of Fish called Torroch, having a red Belly, which is
no were else to be seen but here: It Is affirmed likewise, that on some of the
high Hills of this Shire are too Meres, one of which produces Fish, which have
but one Eye, and in the other is a movable and floating Island, which as soon
as any Person treads on it, presently falls into a moving posture.

Snowdown-Hills, Snowdown Hills.
although they have always Snow lying upon them, yet they are exceeding Rank
with Grass, insomuch that they are become a Proverb amongst the Welshmen, That
those Mountains will yield sufficient Pasture for all the Cattle in Wales: And
it is certain, that there are Pools and standing Waters upon the top of these
Mountains, and they are so coated with a snowy Crust that lies on them, that if
a Man does but lightly set his Foot upon the top of them, he shall perceive the
Earth to stir for several Foot from him, which probably might occasion the
story of the floating Island before mentioned.

Penmaen-Mour, i. e. The great stony Head, Penmaen-Mour.
is an exceeding high and steep Rock, which hangs over the Sea, when it is
Flood, affords a very narrow way for Passengers, having on the one side huge
Stones over their Heads, as if they were ready to fall upon them; and on the
other side the raging Ocean, lying of a wonderful depth under it; but after a
Man has passed over this, together with Penmean-Lythan, the less stony Head,
he shall come to an open broad Plain, that reaches as far as the River Conway,
in which are bred a sort of Shellfish, which being conceived of an Heavenly
Dew, as is conjectured, bring forth Pearl.

Bangor.
Within this County is Banchor, q. Penchor, so called, a Choro pulchro, being a
Bishop's See; the Church was dedicated to Daniel Bishop hereof, but that which
is now standing is but a mean Structure, for Owen Glendover, who designed to
have utterly destroyed all the Cities in Wales, set it on Fire, because the
Inhabitants of this Place chose rather to side with the King of England than
with him; hereupon the ancient Church being defaced, Henry Dean, Bishop hereof,
did afterward repair it about the Reign of Henry the VIIth. But that which is
most observable, was the famous British Monastery of this place, where, as the
learned Bishop Stillingfleet has observed, Men were bred up to Learning and
Devotion together, and so more resembling our Colleges than the Egyptian
Monasteries, where Men were brought up to Ignorance and Labor, as much as to
Devotion. The Right Reverend Bishop Floyd, in his Historical Account of Church
Government in Great Britain, tells us farther out of Bid, that here were above
Two thousand Persons together in seven Colleges, of which none had fewer than
Three hundred Monks in it. This we may believe by what we see, says another
Historian that writ Four hundred Years after Bede's time, we see, says he, so
many half ruined Walls of Churches, so many windings of Porticos, so great a
heap of Ruins, as you shall scarce meet with elsewhere; by which Account it
seems in its flourishing State to have been not much less than one of our
Universities at this Day. How Twelve hundred innocent Monks of this Place
(though the Saxon Chronicle mentions but Two hundred) who came along with their
Army, by Fasting and Prayer to intercede with Heaven for its prosperous
Success, were all cruelly put to Death by Ethelfrid, King of Northumberland, A.
D. 607. at the Instigation of Ethelbert, King of Kent, is too Tragical a Story
to insist long upon; but that Austen the Monk was the first Spring of this
fatal Tragedy, moving Ethelbert to it, as he did Ethelfrid, there are not only
strong Suspicions, says the Learned Dr. Cade in his Discourse concerning
Ancient Church Government, but the thing is expressly affirmed by several
Historians of no inconsiderable Credit and Antiquity.

In Denbighshire the Air is cold, Denbighshire.
but very wholesome, and the Snow lies long upon the Hills, which resemble the
Battlements of Walls, and upon the top of Moilenny-Hill, Moilenny-Hill.
which is one of the largest in this Shire, is a Spring of clear Water.

In this County is VVrexham, Wrexham.
a Market Town, distant about Fifteen Miles from Holy-VVell, and much admired
for the Steeple of its Collegiate Church, being a curious Fabric, contrived
according to the most exact Draught and Model of Architecture, and no where to
be parallelled in those Parts for Workmanship; of which taking a transient
view, we passed on again through Shrewsbury, and the Strettons to Wigmore,
Strettons. Wigmore.
which lies within the Confines of Herefordshire, where are the Ruins of a
Castle built by Edward the Senior, and fortified by William Earl of Hereford,
from whom the Mortimers, who were afterward Earls of March, did lineally
descend: That this Castle was formerly an Asylum or Sanctuary is generally
reported by such as live near it, who will tell you, that whatsoever
Malefactors fled hither for Refuge, and could but get his Hand within the
Ringle of the Gate, secured himself from the Hands of Justice, which indentical
wreathed Ring of Iron they showed us upon a Door of one of the Inns in the
Town. A. D. 1100. Ralph de Mortimer founded here a little College for Secular
Canons, which was 1197 changed into a Priory, and endowed with more Lands by
his Son Hugh Mortimer, who removed hither the Black Canons from Scobbedon,
there placed by Oliver de Merlymond his Steward; it was commended to the
Patronage of St. James. A. D. 921. a great Pagan Host of the East Angles and
Mercians came against this Place, which the Saxon Chronicle calls Wigingamere,
but were beaten off from it by the Valor of its Inhabitants, only with the
loss of some Cattle, which they took away with them.

Three Miles from Wigmore, in the Road to Hereford, is Mortimer's-Cross,
Mortimer's-Cross.
being a Way where four Roads meet, so called from Mortimer Earl of March, Son
to Richard Duke of York, betwixt whom and King Henry the Sixth's Friends and
Allies was fought a bloody and terrible Battle at that very Place, where were
slain on the King's Party, as was computed, 3800 Men; before which Battle it is
said that the Sun appeared to the Earl of March like three Suns, and suddenly
joined altogether in one, for which cause some imagine that he gave the Sun in
its full Luster for his Badge and Cognizance.

Having spent some short time again with our Friends and Acquaintance at
Hereford, and dispatched some Business which called us thither, we passed on
from thence to Dean, Dean.
a Market Town in Gloucestershire, which gives Name to a large Forest adjoining
to it, Dean- Forest.
a Forest formerly so shaded with Trees, and dangerous by reason of crooked
winding ways, that were generally infested with Robbers, that King Henry the
Sixth was fain to secure his Subjects by most strict Laws from the violence of
their Assaults and daily Incursions, but since the Woods have been thinned by
the Iron Mines, to whose uses they have been of late very subservient, the
Roads have not been annoyed with such troublesome Company.

After a short review of Bath and Wells, we traveled to Glassenbury,
Glassenbury.
which place is famous in our old Historians for the ancientest Church in Great
Britain, being, as they say, Built by Joseph of Arimathea, A. D. 41. But so far
is the most Learned Bishop Stilling-fleet from giving any Credit to this Story,
that he looks upon it only as an Invention of the Monks of Glassenbury to serve
their Interests, by advancing the Reputation of their Monastery, and instead of
Joseph of Arimathea, or Simon Zelotes, or Mary Magdalen's coming hither, he
very rationally shows us, how St. Paul is rather to be looked upon as the first
Founder of a Christian Church in Britain; and that there was Encouragement and
Invitation enough for St. Paul to come hither, not only from the infinite
numbers of People which Caesar says were here in his time, but from the new
Settlements that were daily making here by the Romans after the first Success,
which they had in the Time of Claudius, when diverse Colonies were drawn over
hither. Here was also the first Monastery in England, Founded by St. Patrick,
A. D. 425. and afterward liberally endowed by the Munificence of King Ina, who
caused his Subjects first to pay Peter Pence to Rome, whither he traveled
himself, and there at last ended his days. St. Dunstan introduced Benedictine
Monks, and dedicated it to the Blessed Virgin Mary, after which time it thrived
wonderfully, and became a small City full of stately Buildings, and encompassed
with a strong Wall a Mile in Circumference, and had a Vault under Ground
through which there was a Passage to the high Tower upon the Hill without the
Town, which is called the Tor: And, which is very remarkable, the Abbot's
Kitchen, being 20 Foot high, was built in the form of a Pyramid of pure Stone,
and divided in four Angles or Corners, to each of which was allotted a Window
and a Chimney, but all of them went to rack and were razed to the Ground, and
there is nothing now left but the Ruins to proclaim its former Glory and
Magnificence: It would be too tedious to reckon up all the Kings of the
West Saxons, with diverse other eminent Persons, who were all buried here; or
how at last Abbot Thurstan's Cruelty to his Monks, some of which he killed, and
others barbarously wounded, A. D. 1083. was very justly met withal, and he
severely fined by King William Rufus according to his Deserts: But this I must
not omit, that this Place was a shelter to the Britains in the latter Times of
the British Churches, when they were miserably harassed and persecuted by the
then Pagan Saxons, and it might be of far greater request amongst the Britains,
because it was the place where their King Arthur was buried; for I see no
reason, says the Learned Bishop of Worcester, to question that which Giraldus
Cambrensis relates concerning the finding of the Body of King Arthur there, in
the time of Henry the Second, with an Inscription on a Leaden Cross, which in
Latin expressed that King Arthur lay there buried in the Island of Avalon; for
Giraldus says, he was present and saw the Body, which is likewise attested by
the Historians of that time, as Leland proves at large: And the account given
that his Body was laid so deep in the Earth for fear of the Saxons, farther
confirms that this was a place of Retreat in the British times, but nor without
the apprehension of their Enemies Invasion.

The Wolln^^-Tree and Holy Haw-thorn.
But to come nearer to our own Days, here was something not many Years since
very notable and strange, the Walnut-Tree in the holy Church yard, that did
never put out any leaves before St. Barnabas Day, and upon that very Day, grew
rank and full of leaves, and the Hawthorn in Wiral Park, that always on
Christmas Day sprouted forth as if in May, both deserve Credit, as well as
admiration, of the truth of which we were credibly informed by diverse Persons
inhabitants of this place, who having then still some young Scions of each Tree
remaining in their Gardens, yet did not find them blossom like the other, which
through the malice and fury of some Person in the late Wars were cut down and
destroyed.

From Glassenbury we rode to Taunton q. Thonton from the River The One, which
runs through it, Taunton.
a large, neat and Populous Town, pleasantly situated, beautified with fair
Houses, and goodly Churches, and a spacious Marketplace, enriched with fertile
Meadows, and adorned with curious Gardens and Orchards, it is mostly inhabited
by Clothiers driving a good Trade in Cloth and Serges made here and in the
adjacent parts; here was formerly an old Castle built by King Ina, which Queen
Aethelburga destroyed A. D. 722. and a Priory of Black Canons was also erected
by William Gifford Bishop of Winton. (temp. Hen. 1.) to the Honor of St. Peter
and St. Paul.

Passing through Wellington, Wellington and Columpton in Devonshire.
another Market Town in this County, the Road then led us to Columpton, a small
market Town in Devonshire, which King Alfred by Will bequeathed to his younger
Son.

In Devonshire the Air is sharp and wholesome, the Land if not in some places
so fruitful, yet through the Husband-mans industry is made capable of good
emprovement; its chief Commodities are Wool and Kersies, Sea Fish and Fowl, and
the Western parts are stored with Tin and Lead Mines, and Load-stones have been
found upon Dartmoor Rocks of good value and virtue.

The People of this Country are strong and well made, and as they have a
peculiar sort of Food, which they call White-pots, so the Women have a peculiar
sort of Garment, which they wear upon their Shoulders called Whittles, they are
like Mantles with fringes about the edges, without which the common sort never
ride to Market, nor appear in public.

In diverse places of this County the ways are so Rocky and narrow, that it is
not possible for Wagons to pass, so that the Country People are forced in
Harvest time to carry home their Corn upon Horses, in Crooks made for that
purpose, which creates no small Toil and Labor to them.

Exmore Forest.
Upon Exmore Forest are some huge Stones, placed as confusedly, as those upon
Salisbury Plains, and one of them has Danish letters upon it, directing
passengers that way. Hubblestow.
And at Hubblestow in this County was a Battle fought by the Danes where their
Banner called Reafan, in which they reposed all confidence of Victory and
success, was notwithstanding taken, and Hubba their General slain.

Exeter.
Exeter is the Principal City of this Province, called by the ancients Isca and
Isca Damoniorum, and by the Saxs, on Ex or Exa; it is situate upon the Western
Bank of the River Ex, or Isc, upon a litttle Hill, gently arising with an easy
ascent to a pretty height, the pendant whereof lies East and West, environed
about with Ditches and very strong Walls, having many Turrets orderly
interposed, and six Gates, which give entrance into the City, and contains
about a Mile and half in Circumference. The Suburbs branch forth a great way on
each side; the Streets are broad, kept clean and and well paved; the Houses are
as gay within, as trim without and there are contained in it fifteen (...) and
in the very highest part of the City (...) Castle called Rugemont, for^^^ (...)
VVest-Saxon Kings, and afterward of the Earls of Cornwall, which Baldwin de
Reduers, as the Saxon Chronicle informs us, A. D. 1135. holding out against
King Stephen, was through scarcity of Provision enforced to surrender, and
after the surrendery he with his whole family was banished out of the Kingdom,
Just without the Eastgate are two pleasant Walks called Southney and Northney,
beset on both sides with rows of high Trees, which being mounted up aloft
afford a curious prospect to Topsham, Topsham.
the place where all the Ships and Vessels of the Citizens lie at Anchor; from
whence (since the River was stopped up by certain Wears and Dams that Edward
Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, from some distaste which he had took to the City,
caused here to be made) all their Goods and Commodities are brought home by
Land.

In the same quarter of the City stands the Cathedral in the precincts of whose
close were in ancient times three Religious Houses, as the Ingenious Mr.
Tanner's Notitia Monastica does inform us; the first was a Nunnery which is now
the Deans House, the other was a House of Monks reported to have been built by
King Ethelred about A. D. 868. the third was a Monastery of Benedictines
founded by King Aethelston A. D. 932. but the Monks not long after forsook it
for fear of the Danes till A. D. 968. at which time King Edgar restored them,
upon the removal of the Bishops See hither from Crediton A. D. 1050. the Monks
were translated to Westminster, upon which about the same time Bishop Leafric
Chaplain to Edward the Confessor, uniting the three forementioned Monasteries
into his Cathedral Church, placed here some secular Canons dedicating it to St.
Mary and St. Peter; but the Chapter was not settled, till Bishop Brewer A. D.
1235. established, and endowed a Dean, and twenty four Prebendaries, to which
have been since added four Archdeacons: In this Church are six private
Chapels, and a Library very handsomely built, and furnished by a Physician of
this City; the Quire is curiously beautified and adorned especially with an
excellent Organ, the Pipes whereof as they are of a much larger size, than any
which ever we beheld in any Cathedral besides, so likewise is its Music no
less sweet, and harmonious, and though this Church did through all its parts
extremely suffer in the late unhappy Civil Wars, yet it has returned to its
primitive beauty, and order, since the return of King Charles the second; in
this Church, as likewise in most of the other Churches and Churchyards of the
City, the Graves, especially of the Wealthier sort, are paved all over on the
inside with Bricks, and plaistered with white Lime, where after they have
interred the Corpse, all the company in general, who were invited to the
Funeral, return to the House of Mourning, from whence they came and there very
ceremoniously take their leave of the party, by whom they were invited to
perform these doleful obsequies.

On the West side of the City runs the River, over which is built a strong
Stone Bridge with four Arches, and about the middle of the City is the Town
Hall, where the Assizes and Sessions are held, it being both City and County of
it self, in which hangs the Picture of the Royal Princess Henrietta Maria,
Daughter to King Charles the First, who was Born here, and was given by her
Royal Brother King Charles the Second to this City, which is governed by a
Mayor, Recorder, two Sheriffs, and four and Twenty Aldermen, with all other
Officers befitting the Dignity of so Honorable a place: The chief Trade of it
consists in Stuffs, and Kerseys, of which there are innumerable Packs sent away
every Week for London, and other places, in lieu whereof all sorts of vendible
Commodities are imported hither, here being a knot of very eminent Merchants.

This City has been exposed to great Calamities and disasters, straightened with
sieges, and exposed to the fury both of Fire and Sword, the Romans had it in
possession about the Reign of Antoninus, and after them the East Saxons in the
Days of King Athelstan, from whom the Danes having forced it, Suenus raged here
with Ruin and Destruction, and scarce had it regained a little Strength and
Beauty, when it felt the fury of the Norman Conqueror; after this it was
besieged by Hugh Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, in the Civil Wars betwixt the
two Houses of York, and Lancaster; then by Perkin Warbeck, that imaginary,
counterfeit, and pretended Prince, who being a young Man of as mean a Family,
as Condition, feigning himself to be Richard Duke of York, second Son of King
Edward the Fourth, made strange Insurrections against Henry the Seventh: after
this it was pestered by the seditious Rebels of Cornwall, about the Year 1549,
when although the Citizens were extremely pinched with a great scarcity of all
things, yet they kept the City with Courage and Fidelity, till John Lord Russel
came to succor and relieve it: And again in the late miserable Confusions it
was strictly besieged by the Parliamentarian Forces, at which time it is
reported by several Persons of good Credit and Repute, that it being reduced to
great extremities for want of Provision, an infite number of Larks came flying
into the Town, and settled in a void green place within the Walls, where they
were killed in great quantities by the besieged, and eaten.

We departed from hence to Newton-Bushel, Newton-Bushel.
a Town well known in these Parts for its Market, and from thence to
King's-ware, King's-ware.
situated below a Hill upon the River Dart, and fortified with a Castle for the
defense of Vessels, which lie dispersed hereabouts, where we ferried over to
Dartmouth, opposite to it on the other side of the River.

Dartmouth.
Dartmouth is situate upon the brow of an high Hill, being divided into three
Streets, one rising above the other, to each of which is a gentle ascent
gradually by Freestone Steps contrived and laid there for that purpose: It Is
enriched with a safe and commodious Haven, and is guarded with a strong Castle
which commands the River, being placed aloft just at the very mouth or entrance
into it. The great Trade of this Place is fishing to Newfound-land, in which
there are employed a great many Ships every Year: Their Chief Magistrate is the
Mayor, for which Office there was a Charter granted to the Town by King Edward
the Third; since which it has been subject to diverse Changes and vicissitudes,
and has frequently courageously held out against the French, who have
endeavored to destroy it, but especially in the Reign of King Henry the
Fourth, for Monsieur de Castle having by his Men of War Stopped all intercourse
of Traffic in those Parts, and burnt Plymouth, and being come hither to serve
this place after the same manner, met with some shrewd repulses contrary to his
expectation, and was by a company of Women, and Country People prevented in his
designs, and having all his Men cut off, was himself also slain by the Hands of
such Boors, which he always had in the greatest Contempt and derision.

One days visit here having satisfied our curiosity, the next gave us a sight
of the renowned Town of Plymouth, Plymouth.
so called from the River Plime that runs along by it: Here is one of the
largest and most secure Havens in England, for before the very mouth of it lies
St. Nicholas Islands, strongly fortified both by Art, and Nature, and in the
Haven are fortifications laid on both sides for the safe riding of Ships, and
anoyance of Enemies: On the one side is Mount Batton, in which is a strong
Garrison, having twelve Guns mounted upon its platforms, and on the other side
the Citadel, which may for Strength compare with most Places in the Nation,
commanding both the Sea and Town at pleasure; Without the Walls of the Citadel
runs a Trench, out of which was diged a certain kind of Marble, with which they
were built, eleven foot thick at the bottom, and seven at the top, and about
three quarters of a Mile in compass; upon the Walls are placed diverse
Watch-Towers, and each of them are adorned with a round Ball upon the top so
curiously gilded, and painted with the King's Arms, that they make a glistering
show at a distance, and round about are placed between two, and three hundred
pieces of Ordnance: there are two Gates, and as many Draw Bridges which gives
entrance into the Castle, and upon the front are admirably carved the Arms of
his Majesty King Charles the Second, by which is placed his Royal Statue, with
the Arms of the Earl of Bath, who was then Governor thereof; within the Walls
is the Governor's House, and diverse Apartments for Soldiers, a Magazine for
Ammunition, and a Storehouse for Provisions, and for the Strength and
conveniences of this Fortress, which is almost impregnable, the Town was much
obliged to the excellent Ingenuity of Sir Bernard De-Gum, then his Majesty's
Engineer.

The commodiousness of the Harbor often causes a Fleet of Ships to ride here;
so that though this place was formerly but a poor despicable Village, it is now
so replenished with Mariners, frequented by Merchants, enriched by Traffic,
that it seems to outvye some great Cities of this Kingdom, being made a
Corporation by King Henry the Sixth, which consists of a Mayor twelve Aldermen,
and twenty-four Common Council Men, who have a stately Guild Hall for their
more solemn Conventions, and is adorned with two handsome Churches.

The story of the great Giant Gogmagog, who was here worsted by the famous
Champion Corinaeus, and thrown headlong from the Haw, a Rock standing between
the Town and the Ocean, has a little too much of the Romance to gain Credit;
but the magnificent House near to this Town, called Mount Edgecomb, Mount
Edgecomb.
adds so great a Luster to these Western Parts, that Plymouth has great reason
to be proud of its Vicinity: And, which is still farther observable, it was
from this Town that Sir Francis Drake set Sail A. D. 1577, when he went that
Voyage in which he sailed round the Terrestrial Globe; and it was out of this
Haven that the English Fleet commanded by the Lord Howard, Admiral of England,
was towed by Ropes A. D. 1588. to fight the Spanish Armada, unwisely called
Invincible.

Being now upon the very Borders of Cornwall, the unseasonableness of the
Weather, which then happened, and the short time allotted for our return to
Exeter, not permitting us to take a particular view of it, we made it our
business to inform our selves concerning some of the most remarkable things in
this utmost Region of England.

Cornwall.
Devonshire and Cornish Men are more active in Wrestling, and such like
boisterous Exercises, than any other Shires in England, being also more brawny,
stout, and able of Body. Ordulphus, a Devonshire Man, Son of Ordarus Earl of
Devonshire, was such a strong Gigantick Person, that, if William of Malmsbury
say true, he would break open any Bars of Gates, and stride ten Foot: John
Bray, a Cornish Man, carried on his Back at one time a good way six Bushels of
Wheaten Meal, and the Miller, a Lubber of Twenty-four Years of Age, upon the
whole: And one John Roman, a thick, short Fellow, would carry at one time the
whole Carcass of an Ox. There was also one Kiltor, who lying in
Lanceston-Castle Green upon his Back, threw a Stone of some Pounds weight over
the top of one of the highest Towers in that Castle. Which stoutness and goodly
stature of this People Cambden reflecting on makes this Observation, That the
Western People of most Countries are the tallest and stoutest.

The Cornish Men are very healthy and long lived, Eighty or Ninety Years of Age
is ordinary, as we were told, in every place, and in most Persons accompanied
with an able use of the Body and Senses. One Polzew lived an 130 Years; a
Kinsman of his 112; one Beaucamp 106; and one Brown, a Beggar, above 100; and
in one Parish in Queen Elizabeth's time, there died in Fourteen Weeks space
four People, whose Years added together made 340: And to urge no more Examples,
Mr. Chamond, who lived at Stratton in this County, was Uncle and Great Uncle to
at least 300; the cause of which Healthiness and longevity is in all
probability the rockiness and dryness of the Country, which though it be for
the most part environed with the Sea, yet it has few Marshes or Ouzy Shores,
but most Sandy, and withal the Air is cleansed by frequent Winds lying open to
the Sea.

The Spring is later in Cornwall than in the East Parts of England, the Summer
temperate, but Harvest late, especially in the middle of the Shire, where they
seldom get in their Corn till Michaelmas: The Winter is milder than elsewhere,
for the Frost and Snow come very seldom, and never stay long when they do come:
But this Country is much subject to Storms, lying (as I said) open to the Sea,
so that their Hedges are pared, and their Trees Dwarf-grown, and the hard
Stones and Iron Bars of Windows are fretted with the Weather; one kind of these
Storms they call a Flaw (and so indeed in some Countries they call any Storm of
Wind) which is a mighty Gale of Wind passing suddenly to the Shore with great
violence.

This Country is Hilly, which is one cause of the temperate Heat of the Summer,
and the lateness of Harvest, even as its Maritime Situation is the cause of the
gentleness of Winter; Hilly, I say, parted with short and narrow Valleys; the
Earth is but shallow, underneath which is Rocks and Shelves, so that it is hard
to be Tilled, and apt to be parched by a dry Summer: The middle of the Shire
lies open, the Earth being of a blackish color, and bears Heath and spiry
Grass; there is but little Meadow Ground, but store of Pasture for Cattle and
Sheep, and plenty of Corn.

They have a Stone called Moor-stone, found upon Moors and wast Ground, which
serves them instead of Freestone for Windows, Doors, and Chimneys, it is white
with certain glimmering Sparkles: They have a Stone dug out of the Sea
Cliffs of the color of gray Marble, and another Stone black as Jet, and out of
the Inland Quarries they dig Freestone: They have a Slate of three sorts,
Blue, Sage-leaf colored, and Gray, which last is the worst; and all these
Slates are commonly found under another kind of Slate that they Wall with, when
the depth has brought the Workmen to the Water: They also make Lime of a kind
of Marble-stone, either by burning a great quantity together with Furze, or
with Coal in small Kilns, which is the cheaper way, but the first Lime is
always the whitest.

For Metals they find Copper here in sundry Places, and the Ore is sometimes
shipped off to be refined in Wales. And though Cicero will have none in
Britain, yet Silver has been found in this County in the time of Edward the
First and Third, who reaped good profit by it; nay, Tinners do now and then
find little quantities of Gold, and sometimes Silver amongst the Tin Ore; but
for the generality, the Metal that the Earth abounds with here is Tin, which
they discover by certain Tin-stones, which are something round and smooth,
lying on the Ground, which they call Shoad. In their Tin-works amongst the
Rubbish they find sometimes Pick-Axes of Holm, Box, and Harts-horns, and
sometimes little Tool-heads of Brass; and there was once found a Brass Coin of
the Emperor Domitian's in one of the Works, an Argument that the Romans wrought
in those Tin-Mines in times past. Richard Earl of Cornwall, Brother to Henry
the Third, was the first that began to make Ordinances for these Tin-Works, and
afterward Edmund his Son granted a Charter and certain Liberties, and
prescribed withal certain Laws concerning the same, which he ratified and
strengthened under his Seal, and imposed a Rent or Tribute upon Tin to be paid
unto the Earls; these Liberties, Privileges, and Laws King Edward the Third
afterward confirmed and augmented.

On Hengsten-Down, a little above Plymouth, are found Cornish Diamonds, wanting
nothing but hardness to make them valuable, being of great Beauty, some of them
as big as a Nut, and which is most admirable ready shaped and polished by
Nature: and in some Places on the Sea Coasts there are Pearls found that breed
in Oysters and Muscles, which, though they are great, are yet not very good;
here is also sometimes Agat, and white Coral, as they report: It is likewise
very famous for those little Fish which they call Pilchars, swarming in mighty
great Shoals about the Shore from July to November, when being taken and
garbaged, and salted and hanged up in smoke, they are in infinite numbers
carried over into France, Spain and Italy, where they are very welcome
Commodities, and are called there Fumados.

Taking our leave of these Parts, and returning by Ashburton, a noted Market
Town, Ashburton.
we came back to Exeter, where passing away the time with some Friends we met
with there, till the Assizes were over, we departed for Honniton, Honniton.
a Town not unknown to such as travel into the West; from whence passing
through Axminster, Axminster.
called by the Saxons Exan-minster, from the River Axi, which runs by it, a
place famous for the Tombs of some Saxon Princes, who were slain in the bloody
Battle at Bennaburg, and translated hither, we came quickly into Dorsetshire,
Dorsetshire.
a fertile County, well shaded with Woods, enriched with Pasture, and covered
with innumerable Flocks of Sheep, where coasting along by the Sea side, Lyme.
Lyme was the first Place of Note which here appeared to us, to which there is
a very troublesome access, by reason of its Situation under a high and steep
Rock.

This Town, though it was formerly a poor Receptacle for Fishermen, is of late
Years reduced to a more flourishing Condition; the Houses, which are built of
Stone and covered with Slate, stand thick, and in that part which lies near to
the Sea, they are sometimes washed ten or twelve Foot high, to the great damage
of the lower Rooms. Here is a little kind of Harbor called the Cobb, which
being sufficiently defended from the Violence of Wind and Weather with Rocks
and high Trees which hang over it, does cause many Vessels to put in hither for
shelter. It Is a Corporation governed by a Mayor; but of late Years for nothing
more famous, than that it was the landing Place of James the late Duke of
Monmouth, who landing here with a few Forces out of Holland, was quickly
defeated, and himself brought shortly after to a very Tragical end.

Bridport.
Six Miles farther we saw Bridport, placed betwixt two small Rivers that there
met together; in this Town, says Cambden, in the Days of Edward the Confessor
were reckoned an Hundred and twenty Houses, but in William the Conqueror's
Reign One hundred, and no more; it is now in great Vogue for yielding the best
Hemp, and the great Skill of its Inhabitants in twisting Cables for the Royal
Navy; for the Monopoly of which they had once a peculiar Patent granted them:
Here was formerly an Alien Priory dedicated to St. John Baptist.

From hence the Shore, after several crooked flexures, shoots forth into the
Sea, and a Bank of Sand called Chesil heaped up thick together, with a narrow
Frith between, lies in length for nine Miles, which the South Wind, when it is
up, they say, commonly cuts in sunder, and dissperseth, but the Northern Wind
binds and hardens again: By this Bank or Sand-ridge, Portland, Portland.
formerly an Island, is now adjoined to the Continent, which Name although some
would derive from its lying against the Port of Weymouth, yet seems rather to
have received it from Port, a Noble Saxon, who about the Year 703 grievously
infested this Coast: This Place was formerly extremely exposed to the Danish
Outrages, and though by the Valor of Duke Aethelhelme they were here, A. D. 537.
routed and put to flight, with the assistance of the Dorsetshire Men, as the
Saxon Chronicle informs us, yet after this they got possession of it, and
killed Duke Aethelhelme on this spot. After these Wars were over it fell into
the Possession of the Church of Whinchester, when Emma, Mother to Edward the
Confessor, being accused by her Son of too great Familiarity with Aldwyn,
Bishop of Winchester, and having cleared her self from that unjust Imputation,
by suffering the Ordalium, (which in those Days was an usual Trial of Chastity)
in walking bare foot upon nine Coulters of red hot Iron, which she did to a
miracle without any harm or prejudice to her self; she, for a memorial hereof,
bestowed nine Lordships upon the Sea of Winchester, to which her Son added
this Island with many other Revenues, to expiate the Crime of his Defamatory
Suspicion, and unjust Accusation of his Mother's Honesty.

This Island, or rather Peninsula, is scarce seven Miles in compass, rising up
about the sides with high Rocks, but lying low and flat in the midst, inhabited
scatteringly here and there, plentiful enough with Corn, and very good to feed
Sheep, but so great scarcity there is of Wood, that for want of other Fuel they
make use of Ox and Cow Dung dried for Fire.

The Portland Men (like the ancient Inhabitants of the Baleares in the
Mediterranean Sea) were above all other English Men reputed the best Slingers;
and they do often find amongst the Sea-Weeds Isidis Ploramos, growing without
Leaves like Coral, which when it is cut waxes hard and black, but is very
brittle, and if it falls soon breaks: Here are likewise diverse Quarries of
excellent Stone, which being accounted the most durable and handsome for all
manner of Structure, is conveyed away in Vessels to diverse Parts, but more
especially to London for the rebuilding of Churches and other private Edifices.
On the East side there is only one Church, and some few Houses standing close
to it; and on the North side is a Castle built by King Henry the Eighth, which
being well Fortified commands the entrance into the Haven of Weymouth.

Weymouth and Melcomb.
This Town is large and populous, standing upon the mouth of a small River VVey,
over against which on the other side of the Bank is Melcomb, surnamed Regis,
both of them enjoying great Privileges apart, did heretofore cause no small
Animosities betwixt them, but, the Breaches being since made up, they are now
incorporated and conjoined by a Bridge, and grown much greater and fairer in
Buildings by Sea-Adventures than formerly.

Higher in the Country, about seven Miles from the Sea, lies Dorchester,
Dorchester.
which is the head Town of the whole Shire, watered by the River From, but
neither large nor beautiful, being much decayed, and long since dispoiled of
its Walls by the Danes, who raised, as it is thought, certain Trenches, whereof
one is called Maumbury, being an Acre inditched; another Poundbury, something
greater; and the third a Mile off, as a Camp with five Trenches containing near
ten Acres, called Maiden-Castle, which in all probability was a Roman Station;
but that which argues its Antiquity is the Coin of the Romans, both Copper and
Silver found there, and especially at Fordington hard by, Fordington.
which the common People call King Dorne's Pence, whom by some allusion to the
Name they think him to be the Founder of the Town: It had anciently a Castle in
that place, where the Gray Friars built their Convent out of the Ruins thereof;
it has three Parish Churches, and several Almshouses for the support and
maintenance of poor impotent People; and it was formerly a noted Place for the
Manufacture of Cloth, as it is still for Sheep, of which there are huge
numbers, to the great benefit and enriching of the Country.

Our next Stage was through Bear, a little Market Town, to Winburn, which, by
the distance of sixteen Miles from Dorchester, agrees right with the
computation in Antonius's Itinerary, which he reckons between Durnovaria and
Vindogladia, two Names by which those Places were formerly called.

Winburn is watered by the River Stowr, Bear and Winburn.
in which is found, as is reported, great store of Tench and Eel, from whence,
in Cambden's Opinion, it might receive its Name, Burn in the Saxon Language
signifying a River: It Is seated upon part of a Hill, and is a Town as well
inhabited now, as it was formerly by the Saxons, before whom the Romans were
Masters of it.

In the Year 718, according to the Saxon Chronicle, St. Cuthburga, Sister to
Ina, King of the West Saxons, Founded here a Nunnery for Benedictine Nuns,
which was afterward changed into a Collegiate Church, consisting of a Dean,
four Prebendaries, five Singing-Men, three Vicars, and four Deacons; the famous
Reginald Pool presided here as Dean, who was afterward a Cardinal and
Archbishop of Canterbury.

In this Church, A. D. 873. was interred King Aethelred, a Virtuous Prince,
Brother to Alfred, slain in a Battle against the Danes, near the Hill Wilton,
says the Saxon Chronicle, and about the Year 961. the Body of King Sigefirth,
who killed himself, was likewise buried in this Place.

Here is also interred Gertrude Blunt, Marchioness of Exeter, Daughter to
William Lord Mountjoy, and Mother to Edward Courtney the last Earl of
Devonshire of that House; and on the other side of the Quire, John de Beaufort,
Duke of Somerset, and Heir to Sir John Beauchamp of Bletneshor, whose Daughter
Countess of Richmond and Derby, and Mother to King Henry the Seventh, that most
Heroic and Unparalled Princess, of whom I have formerly spoken, erected here a
School for the Education of Youth.

Badbury.
That Aethelwald having broke the League that was made betwixt his Cousin King
Edward the Senior and himself, by the advice of the Danes, came hither A. D.
901. and strongly Fortified this Place, as is credibly related by Historians,
as that King Edward came against him with an Army, which he encamped at
Baddanbyrig, since called Badbury, upon which his perfidious Kinsman fled away
to the Danes, though he was afterward taken and brought before the King,
together with his Wife, whom he had stolen out of a Nunnery, and Married against
the Leave of the King or Bishop. This Badbury is a little Hill upon a fair Down
about two Miles from Winburn, environed with a triple Trench and Rampire, and
is reported formerly to have had a Castle, which was a Seat of the West Saxon
Kings, but of this there is not now the least Footsteps remaining.

From hence we traveled into Hampshire, Hampshire.
a Country enriched with all sorts of Commodities, but especially Kerseys and
Iron, Hogs and Honey; upon the edge of which stands Christchurch, Christchurch.
a Town well Peopled, where is a very good Trade, especially for Silk
Stockings, which are here made in great abundance: It received its Name from a
Church therein dedicated to Christ, being formerly called Twinamburn, because
it is situate betwixt the two Rivers of Avon and Stowr, which joining together
do empty themselves into the Sea at one Mouth, which, says Cambden, Ptolomy
called the Mouth of the River Alawn. It was of old Fortified with a Castle, and
beautified with an ancient College of Prebendaries before the Conquest, but
Baldwyn the Redvers, Earl of Devon, brought in Black Regular Canons (Temp. Reg.
Steph.) it was dedicated to the Holy Trinity, and endowed with great Revenues,
and continued in mighty Renown till the Days of King Henry the Eighth. The
Church appears to have been a very curious Fabric, the Altar whereof has been
most richly adorned with fine carved Work, and at the East end is a Chapel,
which has been as admirably beautified; and on the North side of the Altar is
a Chapel too, built formerly by three Virgins, which for Workmanship might
have outvied with any other in this Nation, had it not been quite defaced in
the late unhappy Times.

Along the East Bank of the River Avon, New-Forest.
William the Conqueror demolished all the Towns and Villages, both Houses and
Churches far and near, and likewise ejected the Inhabitants; and having done
so, he brought all the Ground within thirty Miles compass into a Forest, or
Harbor for Wild Beasts, and so it was called New-Forest: And this he did,
either that the Normans might arrive more securely in that Place ( Normandy
just lying over against it) in case new Broils should arise after his
Conquests, or for the Pleasure he took in Hunting, or else to increase his
Treasure, for being better affected and more favorable at that time to Beasts
than Men, he imposed very heavy Fines and Penalties, yea and most grievous
Punishments upon all such Persons as did meddle with the Game. But it seems the
Children suffered for the Cruelty of the Father, for Richard his second Son,
and William Rufus who succeeded him both perished in this Forest, the one with
a blast of pestilent Air, the other with an Arrow shot by chance by Sir William
Tyrrell; Henry likewise, his Grandchild by his Eldest Son Robert, whilst he
was here in a hot pursuit after his Game, was caught up by a Bough, where in a
very short time he underwent the miserable Fate with poor Absalom.

But least the Seacoast for so long a tract as that Forest is, should lie
without defense all open and exposed to any Invading Enemy, King Henry the
Eighth began to strengthen it with Forts; for in that Promontory which shoots
far into the Sea, and from whence we have the shortest cut into the Isle of
VVight, Hurst-Castle in the Isle of Wight.
he built Hurst-Castle, from whence we took Boat and crossed over to Yarmouth.

The Isle of Wight by the ancients called Vreta, by the Saxons, Whitland, is
pleasant in its Situation; the Air being excellent, and the Soil fertile; in
length about 20 Miles, and 12 in breadth, in form Oval, ending with two
Peninsules, one East and the other West; and the Seacoast naturally fenced
about with steep and craggy Rocks, amongst which the Shingles and the Needles
on the North-West are well known to Seamen. It is Southward, where it looks
toward France inaccessible, but toward the North-East something Flat and
level. The Island affords not only plenty of Fish, Fowl, and Venison, but great
Crops of Corn, rich Meadows and shady Woods; it has one small Forest and two
Parks, and through the midst of it runs a Chain of Hills upon which is special
Pasture and Forage for Sheep, the Wool of which is in as great Esteem as that
of Lempster and Cotteswold: The inhabitants, who are said to come from the
Juites, an ancient People in Germany, have the Character of stout, warlike, and
experienced Soldiers, and they did use to boast that their case was much
happier then other Peoples, because they had neither hooded Monks, nor
cavilling Lawyers, nor yet crafty Foxes.

The fortune of this Island has been various and inconstant according to the
alternate Conquests of the Romans, Saxons, or Normans, though at first it was a
Kingdom of it self, and had a particular King of its own, and received the
Christian Faith from Bishop Wilfrid. For Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction it belongs
now to the Bishop of Winchester, and for Civil Government to the County of
Southampton.

In the Reign of Richard the Second the French invaded and plundered this
Island, the like attempt they made again in the Reign of Henry the Fourth, but
were repulsed by the courageous Islanders; and here, as our Chronicles inform
us, in the Year 1176, it rained a shower of Blood for the space of two Hours
together; the like is reported to have happened at Pool in Dorsetshire, June 20.
1653.

We landed at Yarmouth, Yarmouth.
which is a handsome Town built of Freestone, having a Castle placed almost
over against Hurst, which by a mutual combination are Bulwarks to our
Merchantmen, and traveled from thence to Newport, Newport.
which is the chief Town of the Island, where the unhappy Treaty betwixt King
Charles the First, and the Parliamentarian Commissioners, which came to
nothing, was the certain Prognostic of his unfortunate Downfall; it is
incorporated, endowed with a Free School, and has the principal Market of the
whole Island.

About a Mile distant from Newport stands Caresbrok Castle called by the
Ancients Withgaraburgh, Caresbrook Castle.
i. e. Withgaria Castellum; for to Withgarus and Stuffus as the Saxon Chronicle
informs us, was the Isle of Wight given by Cerdick, the first King of the
West Saxons, and Cynrick his Son about the Year 534: It Is a strong and
impregnable Fortress, Seated upon a high an craggy Rock, where King Charles the
First being for some time confined, there goes this memorable Story concerning
him: How that some means being found out for his Majesty's escape over the
Castle Walls, and all things contrived for its speedy execution, there were
likewise two Soldiers made privy to the design, the one which kept Sentry at
his Apartment, and the other who stood on that side of the Wall, where he was
to descend, but the former's heart failing him did contrary to his promise,
just as the King was coming out to make his escape, alarmed the Castle and
prevented his Flight, but Vengeance not longer, as we were credibly informed,
overtook this perfidious Fellow, who was casually killed by the random Shot of
a Musket.

Cows.
Four Miles nearer to the Sea lies Cows, East and West Cows, both built by King
Henry the Eighth, East Cows, is now ruinated and altogether decayed, but West
Cows is a very commodious Haven defended by a Castle, where Ships frequently
put in both for Victualling and Fresh Water; Here we took Boat and set Sail for
Southampton, but no sooner were we got off to Sea, but there arose such a Storm
that the Seas and Winds seemed to be in a mutual Conspiracy for our
destruction, insomuch that we began to think Anacharsis the Philosopher's
saying to be true, That be that was at Sea was but four or five inches distant
from the Territories of Death, until we came into the Mouth of the River Test,
formerly called Terstan, and Itching, over against Calshot Castle, Calshot
Castle.
placed there by King Henry the Eighth to defend the Port of Southampton, which
lying up a little higher in the River, we at last arrived at in safety, and
came on shore very early in the Morning, where Cerdick himself, Mr. Gibson's
Glossary P. 20.
as some Antiquaries will have it, arrived, called from thence Caldshort,
corruptly for Cerdick-Shore.

After we had a little refreshed our weather beaten Carcasses, we took a view
of this Town, Southamton.
which is situated betwixt two Rivers, the one running on the West side, and
the other on the East; that this, or near unto it, was formerly Clausentum, is
not at all improbable, an ancient Colony of the Romans, which they planted
there to hinder ravenous Depredations of the Saxons; about the Year 981, old
Hanton, as it was afterward called, was ruined by the Danes, and in the Reign
of Edward the Third plundered and burnt by the French, out of the Ashes whereof
Sprung the Town now in being, which the fair and stately Buildings, with two
Keys for Shipping, do highly adorn; the great concourse of Merchants, and three
Markets a Week do mightily enrich; which five Parish Churches with one for the
French, and an Hospital called God's House does very much enoble; which a
strong Wall with seven Gates and a double ditch, and a Castle of Square Stone
upon a Mount cast up to a great height built by King Richard the Second does
sufficiently defend; and in fine, which a Corporation placed there by King
Henry the Sixth, who constituted it both Town an County, does abundantly
dignifie.

Memorable is a Story here of Canutus King of Denmark, who to convince the
fawning Flatterers of his Court, that his power was not, as they would have
persuaded him more then humane, used this Act; being once at this Town he
commanded his Chair of State to be set upon the shore, just as the Sea began to
flow in, and then sitting down before all his Courtiers he spoke to that
Element after this manner: I charge thee that thou presume not to enter into my
Land, nor wet these Robes of thy Lord which are about me; but the Sea giving no
heed to this his Royal Command, and keeping on its usual course of Tide, first
wet his Skirts and afterward his thighs, whereupon suddenly rising up he broke
forth into these expressions, Let all the Inhabitants of the World, know that
vain and weak is the Power of their Kings, and that none is worthy of that Name
or Title, but he alone, who keeps both Heaven and Earth and Sea in obedience.
After which he would never suffer the Crown to be put upon his Head, but
presently crowned therewith the Picture of Christ at Winchester, from which
perhaps, says Sir Richard Baker who relates this Story, arose the custom of
hanging up the Arms of worthy Men in Churches, as offerings consecrated to him,
who is the Lord of Battle.

Having spent a good part of the Day in this place, in the Afternoon we began
to advance toward Portsmouth, which being but twelve Miles distant from this
Town, we easily compassed about the shutting in of the Day.

This Town is situated in the little Island of Portsey, Portsmouth.
which is about 14 Miles in compass, floating at a full Tide in Salt Water, but
joined to the Continent by a Bridge on the North: it was probably so called,
say our most ancient Historians, from one Port a Noble Saxon, who with his two
Sons, Bleda and Magla, arrived here; it is now a place of great strength and
importance by reason of the Dock, where many of the King's greatest Men of War
are built, those impregnable Wooden Walls of our British Island; it is fortified
with a Wall made of Timber, and the same covered with thick Banks of Earth;
it is likewise environed with a double Trench, over which are placed two
Draw-Bridges, from which about a Mile distance is another, at all which stands
Sentries belonging to the Garrison, with a little Fortress adjoining to it,
which leads to the Continent: To the Sea-ward is a Castle and Block-Houses,
which being first begun by King Edward the Fourth, King Henry the Seventh, as
it is reported, did afterward complete, which Fortifications have of late Years
received exceeding great augmentations by the succeeding Monarchs, especially
in the late King James his Reign: Here is only one Church, and an Hospital
called God's House built by Peter Rock, Bishop of Winchester, and though it is
counted unwholesom for want of good Air and Water; yet it is much resorted unto
by Seafaring Men; and whereas formerly it had little Trade, but what arose
from the boiling of Salt, it begins of late to be in a flourishing condition,
and grows very populous, and is now become one of the best Nurseries that we
have for Seamen.

Our next remove was to Chichester in Sussex, Chichester.
which is not above half a Days Journey from Portsmouth, a good large City,
well Walled, rebuilt by Cissa, a Saxon, the Second King of this Province, and
of him so named; for by a Story of Sir Richard Baker's it seems to have had a
being before Cissa's Time; for, says he, Careticus, one of the Kings of the
Britains, setting upon the Saxons and being beaten fled into the Town of
Chichester, whereupon the Saxons, catching certain Sparrows, and fastening Fire
to their Feet, let them fly into the Town, where lighting upon Straw, and other
matter apt to take Fire, the whole City in a short time was burnt, whereupon
Careticus, after a three Years unhappy Reign, flying into Wales, and dying
there, the Saxons got all the East part of the Kingdom into their Possession.
Yet was it before the Conquest of as small repute as circuit, being known only
by an old Monastery founded by St. Wilfrid, A. D. 673. to the Honor of the
Blessed Virgin and St. Peter, and endowed by King Ceadwalla, A. D. 711.
Eadbert, Abbot of this House, being consecrated the first Bishop of the
South Saxons; the Episcopal Seat was first placed at Selsey, till by an Edict
of William the Conqueror, which ordered all Bishops Sees to be translated out
of small Towns into places of greater Name and Resort, Stigand translated it
hither; not many Years after which Bishop Rolfe built a Cathedral, which before
he had finished was consumed by Fire, but by his own endeavors, and the
bounteous Liberality of King Henry the first, it was raised up again; and
Suffering the same dismal Calamity in the Reign of King Richard the First,
Seffrid, the Second Bishop of that name, restored it once more to its primitive
Luster and Grandeur; since which the City began mightily to flourish, and had
been much more considerable than it now is, had but the Haven proved more
commodious, which lies a little too far distant from it; it is walled about in
a circular Form, the Lavant, a pretty River, running hard by it on the South
and West sides. It consists of five or six Parishes, and the Buildings are
indifferently neat and uniform; four Gates it has opening to the four Quarters
of the World, from whence the Streets lead directly and cross themselves in the
midst, where the Market is kept, and where Bishop Read erected a fair Stone
Market-House, supported with Pillars round about: as for the Castle, that stood
not far from North-Gate, it was in times past the ancient habitation of the
Earls of Arundel, who hereupon Styled themselves Earls of Chichester, but
afterward it was converted into a House of Franciscan Friars.

The Cathedral is not large, but very curious and beautiful, having a spire
Steeple of Stone, which rises up a great height, and an high Tower standing
near to the West Door, which was built by R. Rinan, as they say, when he was
forbidden to erect a Castle at Aplederham his Habitation hard by, of those
Stones which he had provided before for that Castle: In the South cross Isle of
the Church was formerly on the one side artificially pourtrayed and depainted
the History of the Church's Foundation, with the Images of the Kings of
England; on the other, the Images of the Bishops, as well of Selsey as
Chichester, at the Charge of Bishop Shirborne, who greatly adorned and
beautified the Church, and every where for his Impress set these Motto's,
Credit Operibus, i. e. Trust Men according to their Deeds; and again, Dilexi
decorem domus tuae, Domine, i. e. I have loved, O Lord, the Beauty of thy
House: But all these in the late Confusions were unhappily defaced, and there
is little now remaining but the memory of them.

We went from hence to Amberley-Castle, Amberly Castle.
which is about twelve Miles from Chichester, higher into the Country; it was
built by William Read, Bishop of Chichester, in the Reign of Edward the Third,
for the use of his Successors, but then leased out to the worthy Family of the
Butlers, who were the Inhabitants at that time. We staid here for the space of
a Week, where we were generously entertained with great Courtesy and Civility,
and there we had a full account given us of the nature of the Country, which by
a more particular survey we found afterward very true; Sussex.
for the Soil is for the most part rich, and the Ways deep; the Downs by the
Sea side standing upon a fat Chalk or Marle are abundantly fertile in Corn the
middle tract garnished with Meadows, Pastures, Cornfieldsd, Groves and Iron
Mines; the North side shaded with Wood, and here ran along part of that great
Wood, which was called by the ancients Andedsleage, by which, without question
says the Learned Bishop Stillingfleet, is meant that vast Wood, which
beginning in Kent, ran through Sussex into Hampshire, called by the Britains
Coid Andred, by the Saxons, Andred, and Andreswald, from whence, as Mr. Somner
observes, Andreswald Wood.
that part of Kent, where the Wood stood is called the VVeald; and Lambert
averrs, that no Monuments of Antiquity are to be met with in the VVeald either
of Kent or Sussex. Historians farther tell us, that this Wood was formerly
reputed 120 Miles long, and 30 Miles broad, where Sigebert King of the
West Saxons, being deposed from his Royal Throne, was Stabbed by a Swineherd.

But, though the Company was most obliging, and the Place no less divertive,
yet having not completed our designed Journey, we took a solemn leave of our
Courteous Friends, and retreated toward the Seacoast to Arundel, Arundel.
a Town situate on the brow of a Hill, of special Note for its Castle once of
great fame and strength, but far more famous for the Lords or Earls hereof; to
which Castle by an ancient Privilege, the Title of an Earldom is annexed, so
that whosoever is possessed of the Castle and Manor, is ipso facto Earl of
Arundel without any Creation, wherein it is singular from the rest of England.

Jews.
We proceeded on to Jews which for frequency of People and its goodly
Structure, is reputed the principal Town of the County, and therefore here
generally the Assizes are held for this Country, if not at East-Greenstead,
the remoteness of Chichester from the City of London being probably one reason
why they are not kept there: This Town is seated upon a rising almost of every
side, but that it has been Walled there are apparent Symptoms. Southward it
has under it a great Suburb called Southover, and beyond the River another
Eastward called Cliff, because it is under a chalky Hill, and has six Parishes
well inhabited.

In the time of the Saxons, when King Athelstan made a law for Coining of
Money, he appointed two Coiners for this Place. William Warren, the first
Earl of Surrey, built a large Castle in the highest ground for the most part
with Flint and Chalk, and in the bottom of Southover, A. D. 1078. he founded to
the Memory of St. Pancrace an Abbey, which he replenished with Cluniack Monks,
which since the dissolution fell into the possession of the Earls of Dorset.

But most memorable is this place for a mortal and bloody Battle fought here
between King Henry the Third and the Barons, in which the prosperous beginning
of the Battle on the Kings side was the overthrow of his Forces; for whilst
Prince Edward his Son, breaking by force through certain of the Barons Troops,
carelessly persued the Enemy over far, as making sure account of the Victory,
the Barons having reinforced themselves and giving a fresh charge, so
discomfited and put to Flight the Kings Army, that they constrained the King to
accept of unequal conditions of peace, and to deliver up his Son with others
whom they Demanded into their Hands A. D. 1264. See the Ingenious Mr. Kennet's
Paroch. Antiq. p. 262.

We passed away from thence by Seaford, which is in the liberty of the
Cinque Ports, a small Fishing Town built of Stone and Slate and defended with a
convenient Fort, to Bourn a place very Famous for its Wheat-ears, which are a
sort of Birds in Summer very palatable and delicious, and so Fat that they
dissolve in the Mouth like Jelly: and this lead us through Pevensey Marsh,
which has formerly most undoubtedly been overflowed by the Sea, to the Town of
Pevensey called by the Britains Cair-Pensavelcott, and by others Penvessel,
etc. Mr. Somner's Roman Ports and Forts, etc. p 104.
Pevensey, Famous for the Ruins of an old large Castle, but more for the
landing of William Duke of Normandy with 900 Sail of Ships for the Conquest of
England: the Sea is now near three Miles distant from the Town, which chiefly
subsists by the grazing Trade, and there is only a small Rill for Boats of
little Burdens to put in upon occasion.

Twelve Miles further is Hastings, Hastings.
a Seaport of good antiquity, consisting of two Parishes, it is situated under
very high Hills and Cliffs, is extended to a good length, and was formerly
fortified with a strong Castle, the Ruins of which are as yet invisible, but
now more conveniently strengthened with two useful Bulwarks, which command the
Sea: In the Reign of King Athelstan here was a Mint-House; afterward it was
accounted the first of the Cinque Ports, which with the Members belonging to
it, viz. Seaford, Pevensey, Hodney, Bulver-Hyth, Winchelsea and Rye, which are
called the two ancient Towns, were formerly bound to find one and twenty Men of
War for the King's Service; thus it flourished long being inhabited by a
warlike People, and skilful Sailors; and though the Peer is quite gone to
decay, yet here are still an industrious Colony of Fishermen, who very much
enrich the Town by their constant Fishery; it is governed by a Mayor and
Aldermen, who by their prudent measures very regularly keep up the Grandeur of
their Corporation: Here, or at Pevensey, was probably Anderida one of the
ancient Roman Garrisons, as Mr. Somner conjectures. See Somner's Roman Ports
and Forts, etc. P. 104.

Winchelsea by its Name betokens a waterish place seated in a Corner. Idem. P.
69.
Along the same Shore is situated Winchelsea, which, when a more ancient Town of
the Name was Swallowed up by the Sea in the Year 1250, was built by King Edward
the First: It was then enclosed with a Rampire, and after with strong Walls,
and scarce began to Flourish, when it was sacked by the Frenchmen and
Spaniards, and by the Sea's shrinking from it did as suddenly fade, and lose
all its Beauty, and is now only the Skeleton of a fair Town, as does appear by
the Quadrangular Streets, large Vaults, and other ruinous materials of ancient
Structures, having upon the level, which the Sea relinquished, a Castle built
by King Henry the Eighth, now quite gone to decay, and large Marshes, which are
defended from the Violence of the Sea with great earthen Walls and Banks, which
are preserved and repaired with no small charge and Trouble.

In this Town were formerly three Parish Churches, dedicated to St. Leonard,
St. Gyles, and St. Thomas, though the latter alone, in which are some ancient
Monuments to be seen, now serves the Town: in that of St. Leonard was formerly
erected the Picture of St. Leonard, the Patron of the place, holding a Fan or
Aeolus his Scepter in his Hand, which was moveable at the Pleasure of any that
would turn it to such a point of the Compass, as best fitted the return of the
Husband, or other Friend, whom they expected; and so after that was done, and
an Offering made, for without Offerings these Idols would be Idle, they
promised to themselves the desired Wind both speedy and prosperous: This is
likewise a Corporation, but yet a pitiful Spectacle of Poverty and Desertion.

Not many Miles from this Place is Battle, Battle.
where October 14. A. D. 1066 was fought the Bloody Battle betwixt King Harold
and the Norman Duke, which proved so fatal to the English and successful to the
Normans, for besides King Harold himself, who with an Arrow was Shot quite
through the Head, there fell with him likewise upon the spot, as we are told by
the most accurate Historian Sir William Temple, who has wrote the Life of
William the Conqeror, no less than threescore Thousand Men, upon which he makes
this observation, that nothing seems to show the greatness of England so much
at this time, as that Harold should be able to assemble so mighty an Army to
oppose this Invasion: which Ground, where this grand re-encounter was, has
been thought ever since to have worn the Conquerour's Livery, because, as they
say, after Rain it always looks of a reddish Color; though afterward this
Prince to make some atonement, as he thought, for the vast effusion of Blood
which had been Spilt there, the next Year erected a Abbey at this place to the
Honor of St. Martin, and placed here a Covent of Benedictine Monks, to pray
for their Souls who had fallen in the Battle.

Rye.
Three Miles from Winchelsey is Rye, which stands on the very edge of this
County toward Kent, and at the very fall of the Rother into the Sea. That it
was formerly in great vogue, and well fortified by William Ipres Earl of Kent,
Ipres Tower, now the Prison, and the great Immunities and Privileges it had in
common with the Cinque Ports, may sufficiently demonstrate; but by reason of
Winchelsey's Vicinity, or the Sea's retiring back, it was of little account
till the other Place decayed, and that King Edward the Third began by walling
it to make it more considerable than it was before; after which, though the Sea
did for many Years extremely befriend it, and a very convenient Haven lay open
for Trade and Commerce, yet so inconstant is the Favor of that changeable
Element, that it is now almost quite choked up, and a passage hardly left for
the smallest sort of Vessels, and were it not for its Fishery, and the
convenience from hence of a ready Passage into Normandy, it is to be feared it
would fall quickly under the same deplorable fate of its Neighbor, if some
other Privileges from the Corporation do not support and keep it up.

Kent.
We Ferried over the Camber from Rye into Kent, which is divided into three
several Portions: the first is a Ridge of Hills that runs by Boxley, Detling,
etc. and is called Health without Wealth; the second is that which runs by
Sutton, Boughton, Malherf, etc. and is called Health and Wealth; the third by
Tenterden, and is called Wealth without Health; Names very proper for them, and
the reason is very plain why they are so, Nature having so liberally
apportioned her Blessings, that she compensates the defect of one by the
collation of another, not suffering any peculiar Place to Monopolize all her
Favors at once; but thus, if the VVeald be eminent for Wool, the Fame of East
Kent shall be as great for Corn, and Tenham, Goddington, and Otham shall be no
less cried up for Orchards; if Shepey or Reculver produce the best Wheat,
Thanet shall bring forth as good crops of Barley; and if Cranbrook has the
Name for Beer, Tunbridge shall for Water. In fine, if either the fertility of
the Soil, or the safe Roads and sure Harbors for Ships, or the broad Streams
of a great navigable River, the noble River Thames, or the Vicinity of the vast
and opulent City of London, can be any way contributive to advance its
Prosperity, it must needs be one of the richest and most flourishing Provinces
of this Kingdom.

As this Country was first subdued by the Romans under Julius Caesar, not
without great resistance, so was it by the Saxons, who erected their first
Kingdom here, and were the first of that Nation who embraced the Christian
Faith; but the learned and judicious Antiquary Mr. Somner will by no means
allow of the common Story that goes so vulgarly amongst us, how the Commons of
Kent continue their Privileges by means of a Composition entered with William
the Conqueror at Swanscomb; No, under favor, says he in his Treatise of
Gavelkind, p. 62. we owe them not to that, or any such like specious Stratagem,
or are beholding either to Stigand the Archbishop, or Egelsines the Abbot's
Policy to contrive, or to their, or our Country-mens Valor to compass their
continuance for us in such a way: But this Story was raised by Spot, St.
Austin's Chronicler at Canterbury, living under Edward the First, and only by
him and such others as of later Times wrote after his Copy; for before him, and
in that interim of more than 200 Years between the Conquest and the time he
wrote, no published Story, no Chronicle, no Record of any time, Kentish or
other, may be found to warrant the Relation, a matter so remarkable, that if
true, it was not likely to escape all our Historians Pens that were before him,
especially about the Conquest. Nay, he adds farther from Gulielmus
Pictaviensis, who was the Conqueror's own Chaplain, and wrote his Life, that
the Conqueror, after his Victory near Hastings, made not first to London and
then to Kent, but after settling his Affairs about Hastings, presently took his
Journey toward Dover by the way of Romney, where having avenged himself of the
savage kind of Inhabitants, for the slaughter of certain of his Men by some
mistake landing at that Place, he thence advanced on to Dover, whither, though
a numberless multitude of People had betaken themselves as to a Place by reason
of the Castle inexpugnable, yet dismayed with the Conqueror's approach, the
Place with all readiness submitted to him, who after eight Days Fortification
of it marching from thence, at a Place not far from Dover the Kentish Men of
their own accord came in unto him, swear Fealty to him, and gave him Hostages
for performance. In fine, he calls it a mere Monkish Figment politickly devised
(says he) by a Monk, with a design to bring a perpetual Obligation on the
Kentish Men to his own Abbey, as owing forsooth the continuance of their
ancient Liberties partly to a quondam Abbot of that Place.

The Kentish Men have a peculiar Exercise, especially in the Eastern Parts,
which is no where else used in any other Country I believe but their own, it is
called Stroke-Biass, and the manner of it is thus; In the Summer time one or
two Parishes convening make choice of twenty, and sometimes more, of the best
Runners which they can cull out in their Precincts, who send a Challenge to an
equal number of Racers within the Liberties of two other Parishes to meet them
at a set day upon some neighboring Plain, which Challenge, if accepted, they
repair to the Place appointed, whither also the Country resort in great numbers
to behold the Match, where, having stripped themselves at the Goal to their
Shirts and Drawers, they begin the Course, every one having in his Eye a
particular Man at which he aims, but after several traverses and courses on
both sides, that side whose Legs are the nimblest to gain the first seven
strokes from their Antagonists, carry the Day and win the Prize: Nor is this
Game only appropriated to the Men, but in some Places the Maids have their set
Matches too, and are as vigorous and active to obtain a Victory: And on a Plain
near Chilham there is an annual Tie, as they call it, fixed in May for two
young Men and two young Maids of the adjoining Hundreds to make a Trial of
Skill, which can course the nimblest for a certain Stadium of 40 Rods, and the
Person of both Sexes, whose Heels are the nimblest, is rewarded with Ten Pound
each, there being a Yearly Pension settled for that Diversion.

As touching the more considerable Customs and Privileges of Kent, they have
been so fully Discoursed of by Mr. Lambard in his Perambulation of Kent, and
what was deficient in him supplied by the most accurate Pen of Mr. Kilburn and
Mr. Philpott, that I shall wave them all as heterogeneous from my design, and
betake my self rather to a short Survey of such Places which we visited in our
Journey.

Where in the first place Lyd seems to call for a remembrance of its Antiquity,
Lyd.
arising from the Ruins of its Neighbor Promhill, Promhill.
swallowed up by the Sea, when its poor distressed Inhabitants fled hither for
Refuge: The Sea has formerly with a large spacious Inlet, Arm and Aestuary
flowed in betwixt Lyd and Romney, and was there met with the River Limen, says
Mr. Somner, Roman Ports, etc. p. 51.
which of necessity must have a very large capacious Mouth or Bosom to receive
it, as it did a Fleet of 250 Sail, the number of those Danish Pirates being no
less, who in the Year 893 put in here, and towing up their Vessels four Miles
within the Land, even as far as to the Weald, (which then extended Eastward
unto Appledore) there cast Anchor, and destroying a Fort or Castle, as old and
imperfect as ill defended, built a new one, and kept their Rendezvous there.

In the Church (which is a fair Sea Mark for Mariners) is an old Inscription
upon a Tombstone, which speaks thus; Of your Charity pray for the Soul of
Thomas Briggs, who died on the Feast of St. Leonard the Confessor, who died in
the Year of our Lord 1442. and did make the Roof of this Church as far as 45
Copplings goes, which does cost 54 Marks.

Dengeness.
From this Town runs a Promontory near two or three Miles into the Sea, at the
end of which stands a Light House to give direction to Sailors in dark and
stormy Nights, and near to that upon the Beach is a Well of excellent fresh
Water, and in the utmost point of it, which is called Dengeness, for a Mile
together did grow abundance of Holm-Trees amongst the Beach and Pebbles; near
to which are to be seen an heap of greater Stones, which the Inhabitants call
St. Crispin and Crispianus, whom they report to have been cast upon this Shore
by Shipwreck, and from hence called into the glorious Company of Saints.

Old Romney.
Two Miles farther in the Marsh stands Old Romney, which gives a denomination to
the whole Marsh circumambient, where I shall only take notice from Mr. Somner
in his Roman Ports, etc. that as this Port in Doomsday Book was formerly called
Lamport, Lamport.
and the Hundred wherein it lay the Hundred of Lamport, so the Eldest mention,
that he found in Romney was in a Grant or Charter of Plegmund the Archbishop,
A. D. 895. But whether it received the Name Romney, q. Romanum mare, as if it
were Sea in the Romans time, or from the Saxon, Rumen-ea, the large Water or
watery place, to which he is most inclinable; it is certain, as my singular good
Friend Mr. Kennett has observed in his Life, he is more singularly happy in
fixing Limene, or the Mouth of the River Limene or Rother, at Romney, which is
since turned another way: To which I shall subjoin, that reckoning one Town and
Nineteen Parish Churches within the Precincts, being as is computed about 18
Miles in length and 10 in breadth, it contains 44200 Acres or thereabouts of
Pasture, which proves most excellent Forage both for Bullocks and Sheep, with
which it is stocked all over to a Miracle.

As for New Romney (as it is called) as it was formerly the Roman Port Lemanis,
New Romney.
by its distance from Canterbury, so now it is one of the Cinque Ports, of which
Lyd and Old Romney are accounted Limbs, and received that Epithet of New to
distinguish it from its Old Neighbor; which distinction, says Mr. Somner, I
find used near 500 Years ago, and from the Ruin of the latter it states the
Epoch of its first Original, when after that the Ocean in the Reign of Edward
the First had made an Inroad into the Land, and overflowed all this Tract with
its violent Inundations, it was forced to submit to the irresistible Conquest
of that implacable Enemy, who returned Triumphant with the Trophies of five
Churches, a Priory and an Hospital, besides great Depredations both of Cattle
and Houses into its restless and turbulent Dominions: Hereupon began this other
Town immediately to flourish, which though it appears of no large extent, yet
the subsistence which it now affords by Grazing, does very well comport with
the Genius of its Natives.

In this Town are generally held all Public Assemblies for the more speedy
dispatch of the Cinque-Port Affairs, and are called the Brotherhood and
Guestling: Now a Brotherhood is an Assembly held by the Mayors, Bailiffs,
Jurats, and Commons of the Cinque Ports, and their Corporate Members jointly.

For the better preserving the Lands there are three Guts or Sluices in Romney
Marsh issuing East-wards by the Names of Willop and Hoorney Gut, Marshland Gut,
and Clobsden Gut: One Gut more called the Five Waterings, issuing into the
Channel of the River Rother, and so falls into Rye Water; and Dengemarsh-Gut
issuing Eastward within the Liberties and Corporation of Lyd.

I shall likewise here set down the Order of Watches which were formerly kept
by the Seacoast, taken out of an ancient MS. now in my Custody.

At Dengemarsh by twelve Men of the seven Hundred.

At Helmes-Beacon by eight Men, viz. of the Hundred of St. Martin's two, the
Hundred of Oxney two, the Hundred of Allowes-bridge two, the Hundred of Lamport
one, and the Hundred of Ham one.

At Broad-Hall alias Dimchurch, by nine Men, viz. of the Hundred of Street two,
of the Hundred of Worth two, of the Hundred of Philipborough three, of the
Hundred of Newchurch two.

At Seabrook alias Shorn-Cliff, thirteen Men, viz. of the Hundred of Hane one,
the Hundred of Longbridge and Chart three, the Hundred of Calehill three, the
Hundred of Bircholt one, the Hundred of Wye five.

At Sandgate nine Men, viz. the Hundred of Folk-stone four, the Hundred of
Loningborough two, the Hundred of Pettam one, the Hundred of Stowting two.

At Coldham by four Men of the Hundred of Milton and Marden. A. D. 1614.

Dimchurch.
Four Miles farther is Dimchurch, a Village of great Note for the Lords,
Bailiffs, Jurats and other Officers of Romney Marsh, who keep here a general
Court called the Lath every Whitsun-Week, for the dispatch of all Affairs which
depend hereon. As for the great Wall or Bank which is here cast up against the
Sea, it is fenced with great Piles of Wood which are driven deep upon the Shore
by an incredible Charge to repress the Outrages of that merciless Element,
which by its propinquity does many times threaten a subitaneous Inundation; and
could it once gain a Conquest in this place, would quickly run in Triumph over
the whole Marsh besides.

Over this Wall the Road leads to Hyth, Hyth, West-Hyth and Lym.
another of the Cinque Ports, which has West-Hyth for a Member, a small
Neighboring Village Westward, which falling to decay by the retiring of the
Sea from it, occasioned in a short time the Plantation of the other, though
both are supposed to have received their beginning from the Ruins of Lym
standing hard by, which in times past was a most famous Port, until the Sands
cast up by the Sea had altogether choked and stopped up the Haven; which the
Bands of the Turnacenses under the Lieutenant of the Saxon Shore quartered in
this place; which the Port-way called Stony-Street, reaching from hence almost
to Canterbury, being doubtless a Work of the industrious Romans; and which, in
fine, the ancient Ruins of an old decayed Castle called Studfall, i. e.
Stodfold, says Mr. Somner, a Fold or Enclosure for Steeds, whose remains carry
still a resemblance of the obsolete Modes of Roman Architecture seem manifestly
to attest.

But though Hyth extracted all its Glory from those Places, yet so subject are
Towns and Cities to Vicissitudes as well as Men, that it seems to be involved
in the same Fate, and to decline into their perishing Condition, having of late
Years suffered a great Eclipse of all its pristine Splendour, and every day more
and more very sensibly decaying by the loss of its Haven, and the distance of
the Sea, which has almost withdrawn it self near a Mile from the Town.

The Town is situated upon the brow of an high stony craggy Hill, the lower
part consisting of one long Street, which extends it self about half a Mile in
length, and in the upper part are placed some few rows of Houses, together with
the Church, an ancient Fabric, which overlooks all the other Buildings, and
discovers it self at a great distance at Sea, capacious enough to receive a
greater Congregation than with which it is usually frequented: But that which
now more especially preserves still the Fame, and keeps up the repute of this
poor languishing Port besides the two Hospitals of St. John and St.
Bartholomew, the latter of which was Founded by Haymo Bishop of Rochester, who
was Born here, is the Charnel-House adjoining to the Church, or the arched
Vault under it, wherein are orderly piled up a great stack of dead Men's Bones
and Skulls, which appear very white and solid, but how or by what means they
were brought to this Place the Townsmen are altogether ignorant, and can give
no account of the matter; probably the first occasion of them might be from
what is related by Henry Knyghton, de Eventibus Angliae, lib. 3. p. 2503. How
that in the Reign of Edward the First, about the Year 1295, the then King of
France sending about 300 Ships for an English Invasion, one of them more
forward than the rest came directly for Hyth, where landing their Men, the
English who were there placed for the defense of that Port killed at that time
240 Men, all that whole Ships Crew, and afterward burnt the Ship out of which
they landed: Now after this slaughter these Men's Bones in all probability might
be gathered up and laid there, after which daily accessions of more might be
made till they increased to so vast a number as is still visible.

Saltwood Castle.
A little above the Hill, within the Parish of Saltwood, are to be seen the
remains of an old ruinated Castle, which did formerly belong to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, but is now in the Tenure of Sir Philip Boteler, Baronet. Here it
was that John Kirkeby being elected Bishop of Ely 1286, was confirmed by John
Peckam, Archbishop of Canterbury; and whither afterward proud Archbishop
Courtney, having taken a distaste at some of his Tenants, for not bringing him
Hay and Litter in Carts, but in Sacks to Canterbury, did peremptorily cite
them, and enjoin them this Penance, that they should each one march leisurely
after the Procession bare-headed and barefooted with a Sack of Hay or Straw
upon his Shoulder, open at the mouth, so that the stuff might appear hanging
out of the Bag to all the Beholders. It Is generally believed that the Sea has
come up to the very Walls of this Castle; for in the adjacent Grounds, and
particularly in a Field called Black-House, have been dug up Anchors and
Cables, which puts me in mind what the Poet Ovid sings in the Person of the
Samian Philosopher Pythagoras.

-- Vetus inventa est in montibus Anchora summit. Adjoining to the Hyth is the
Parish of Newington, Newington by Hyth.
a Vicaridge conferred upon me some few Years ago by my most generous Patron
James Brockman Esquire since deceased; concerning which Parish I have thought fit
to add an ancient Record taken out of Doomsday Book: 18 Willielmi Conquestoris,
sub tit. terra Archiepiscopi.

In Limwarlaed est Hundred de Selebrichtindaene habet Archiepiscopus de terra
Monachorum i Manerium Niwendene in dominio quod in T. R. E. tenuit Leofric de
praeterito Archiepiscopo and pro i sull. se defendebat, and subjacebat
Saltwode, Nunc est appretiatum VIII lib. and X s. garfumae. In English thus,
Within the Lath of Limn and the Hundred of Selbrightenden, the Archbishop has
of Lands allotted to the Monks one Manor called Niwendene (Newington) in
Demesne; which in the time of Edward the Confessor Leofric held of the last
Archbishop, and was taxed for one Hide, and did his Service to Saltwood. It is
now valued at 81. per Annum and 10 s. Fine.

Bitchborough.
In this Parish is Bitchborough, the Seat of my much Honored Friend William
Brockman, Esquire Son to that Worthy Gentleman beforementioned, a Seat to which
Nature has been so liberal of its choicest Blessings, that there wants nothing
to render it a very delightful Mansion; for the House it self, which not many
Years ago was new Modeled, is so curiously surrounded with pleasant Hills,
murmuring Streams, shady Groves, whispering Woods, and flowery Meads, besides
the charming Prospect of the Sea and Cliffs of France, which terminating the
sight do greatly enhanse the Rarity of its Situation, that the most curious Eye
cannot possibly find a more inviting Object to entertain it.

St. Nicholas Chapel.
In the same Parish in a Field belonging to Seen-Farme, called Chappel-Field,
formerly stood a Chapel belonging to St. Nicholas, who in the time of Popery
had the same Empire, says Mr. Lambard, that Neptune had in Paganism, and could
with his only beck both appease the rage of the Sea, and also preserve from
Wrack and Drowning so many as thought fit to be his humble Petitioners, and
therefore this was one of the Places (as the Poet said) Servati ex undis ubi
figere dona solebant, where such as had escaped the Sea, were wont to leave
their Gifts; insomuch, that if any of the Fishermen upon this Coast had hardly
escaped the Storm and taken any store, then should St. Nicholas have not only
Thanks for that Deliverance, but also one or more of the best Fishes for an
Offering: To which I may add farther, that if the Fishermen before such Voyages
did make their due Offerings at this Shrine, it was a certain means to secure
the Chastity of their Wives till their return, but if out of niggardly and
penurious Humor they neglected that Duty, it was ten to one but their
Punishment was that severe one which fell on poor Actaeon.

From Hyth there runs along a great ridge of Beach to Sandgate-Castle, which
glories not more in its Royal Founder King Henry the Eighth, Sandgate Castle.
than that it was graced once with the Royal Presence of Queen Elizabeth, who
in her Progress to these Parts was pleased to lodge in one of the Chambers of
this Castle.

The Castle is within the Parish of Folkstone, Folkstone.
a Town situated upon the brow of a Hill, about a Mile distant from it: It Is a
Place of greater Antiquity than Beauty, especially if it be allowed, what is
but reasonably suggested by that most Celebrated Antiquary Mr. Somner, and
confirmed by the most Judicious Bishop Stilling fleet, that this was the Lapis
tituli of Nennius, or rather Lapis populi, where Vortimer desired to be Buried
( Scipio like) as a terror to the Saxons, because of its lofty situation, and
not as he would have it Stonar in Thanet, which lying in a low flat level,
subject to Inundations, was a very improper place for such a daring project: it
was formerly of a far greater extent than it now is, for there were then in it
five Churches, four of which were long since by the assaults of the Enemies,
and devastations of Men utterly dismantled, besides a Nunnery founded by King
Eadbald about A. D. 630. which was Destroyed during the Danish Wars: only that
Church, which was erected by Nigellus de Munewell and devouted to St. Mary and
St. Eanswith, has been as yet too hard a morsel for the Teeth of time to
consume.

That there was formerly an Harbor adjoining to the Town made chiefly at the
great charge of the Honorable Sir Basil Dixwel Baronet, the ruinous Skeleton
of the demolished Peer, which is as yet visible, may be sufficient to evince;
but though the Haven be quite lost, the Fishery is still kept up by a
considerable Colony of Industrious Fishermen, who take great quantities of
Fish, which is every Week bought up and conveyed away to London by the Rippers,
as they are called, or taken in by Smacks which come hither for such lading,
the quickness of which Trade makes the Town mightily increase and grow more and
more Populous as well as Rich by their Industry.

But before I leave this place I cannot but take notice that as that great Man
of his time, John Salmon, Prior of Ely, Bishop of Norwich, and Lord Chancellor
of England, who being sent Ambassador by Edward the Second into France, at his
return into England, sickned and dyed here July the 6th A. D. 1325: so likewise
that this Town gave Birth to some Persons of the worthy Family of the Harveys,
especially to that Noble (...), the great Father of Physicians the Learned Dr.
Harvey, who made the first discovery of the Circulation of the Blood, by the
munificence of which charitable Fratermity was erected a Free School to the
great benefit of the Town, to which is allotted a very handsome allowance, as
also a comfortable Pension to be annually distributed amongst the poor of the
Parish, and to the end that all things may be fully Executed according to the
first Charitable design, there are appointed diverse Feoffees in trust to
supervise herein, who are Men of the best Condition and quality in that part of
the County.

Near this Town upon the Cliffs we met with some Stones of diverse Shapes and
Figures very strange and wonderful, some resemble a Muscle, but are a great
deal bigger than they, others were like a Kernel of an Almond large and somewhat
roundish, which are Streaked and crankled like a Cockle-shell, but of a more
dusky color; others we found somewhat bigger than a Hazlenut, and some much
less, which are like a Cockle too but are as smooth and as black as Jet; some
we discovered which were wreathed and intorted like Screws of smaller and
larger dimensions, others which resemble Cock-spurs being sharp at the end and
in every respect shaped like unto them, but as smooth and of the same color
with our ordinary Flint-stone, others which are formed like Quills clear as
Amber; some we observed whose lower parts seem to be effigiated into diverse
little Feet, bearing a resemblance to those that are visible in some little
creeping insects, others altogether resemble Snakes See Mr John Ray Fellow of
the Royal Society concerning Serpent Stones, and Petrified Shells. P. 113.114.
etc. of his Topographical observations Printed 1673.
with Heads, which the VVhitbay Stones are without, having a perfect Spina,
running as it were all along their Back, from Head to Tail, with little ridges
like Ribs on both sides, in the form almost of a Roman S. Now though the solidity
of all these Stones, without any Cavity which is visible amongst them, may be
sufficient to convince any Man, that they are by no means petrifications, but
natural, and such as they were always from the Creation, though how they came
to put on such strange and uncommon Figures is a secret not to be unravelled,
yet certainly since there are diverse real and natural Shells of Fishes too,
which are to be found upon these Cliffs, as likewise have been gathered upon
Mountains, particularly in Richmondshire before mentioned, far enough remote
from the Sea, of diverse magnitudes, shapes, and colors, sure in all
probability the latter must needs have been left there upon the ebb of the
Deluge, since otherwise there can hardly be any other satisfactory account
given, how such Shells should happen to be carried to such Mountainous places.

From Folk-stone, for five or six Miles together, is a continued Chain of
chalky Hills standing in a row hanging jointly one to another, about the middle
whereof is a Catarackt of Water, which coming a great way, as is supposed,
under Ground, and falling down from the Cliffs speeds away to Sea going usually
by the name of Lyddals Spout; and along these Cliffs grow abundance of that
excellent sallad, Lydal Spout.
which they call Samphire.

These Cliffs, I say, continue without the least interruption till they are
parted by Dover, which is seated betwixt two high Cliffs, Dover.
lying opposite to each other, on the one whereof stands the Castle, a place
formerly of that strength and importance, that it is Styled by Antiquaries the
Key and Lock, the Bar and Spar of England, and was ever reputed so mightily
conducive to the facilitating the Conquest of this Nation by getting it into
Possession, that Philip King of France told his Son Lewis, that notwithstanding
he had obtained many signal Victories in this Island, and won several Forts and
strong holds therein, yet he had not one Foot in England, till he was Master of
Dover Castle: Which though some are of Opinion, was founded by Arviragus a King
of the Britains, yet Mr. Somner is very possitive against those, who would have
it built by Julius Caesar, whose abode in Britain was too short for so vast an
undertaking; however whether the ancient Church belonging to this Castle was
built by Lucius our first Christian King or not, Mr. Somner is again pretty
well assured that as here was formerly placed a Roman Garrison, so the Square
Tower in the middle between the Body and the Chancel, fitted with holes on all
parts for speculation, was formerly a Roman Specula, or Watchtower, and he
farther observes out of Tuine, that that which at this Day they call the Devils
Drop, being a mouldring ruinous heap of Masonrey on the opposite Hill on the
other side of the Town, was the remains of a Roman Pharos, or Structure of
theirs, intended for the placing of Night lights to secure their Passage
(otherwise very perilous) who should put into this Port by Night.

On this Hill, in a Tenterected for that purpose, was that Noble Ceremony
performed of Inaugurating the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Romney, into that
great and Weighty Office of Constable of Dover Castle and Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports June 1. 1694, being there waited upon by the Barons, Mayors,
Baliffs, and Jurats of the Cinque Ports, two ancient Towns, and their Members,
with diverse other Persons of great Quality, who attended that Solemnity.

Below the Castle is placed a strong Fort, and on the other Cliff opposite to
it is erected another, both which Block-Houses are for the defense of the Haven
or Peer, which of late Years has been almost choked and quite Stopped up by a
huge quantity of Beach thrown into it by the Sea; however by reason of a ready
and speedy passage to Callice in France, to which some will fain have England
to have been formerly united by an Isthmus, there is daily in times of peace a
great concourse of Foreigners who frequent it.

The Town being one of the Cinque Ports, of which Folk-stone is a Limb, and
governed by a Mayor and Jurats is of a good large extent, being above a Mile in
length from Artclff Fort.
Artcliff Fort to the farther end of Bigginstreet, but it is nothing so
Populous, nor so well Inhabited as formerly: it is adorned with two Churches and
a commodious Market place, which is well replenished every Saturday with all
necessary Provision, of which there is brought great supplies constantly out of
the Country, and for the Victualling the Kings Ships, there is a large
Storehouse, from whence Provisions are conveyed to the Navy: But I must not
omit farther to observe that in this Town was formerly a House belonging to
that ancient order of the Knights Templars, wherein was Sealed the submission,
which King John made to Pandulphus the Popes Legate, wherein he yielded his
Realm Tributary, and himself an obedientiary and vassal to the Bishop of Rome.

The Cliffs beyond Dover being united are well stored with Samphire and reach
almost as far as Walmer and Deal Castles which together with Sandown Castle
were built by King Henry the Eighth: Walmer Deal and Sandown Castle.
near to which upon a flat or even plain lying full against the Sea stands
Deal, which of a small and poor Village is now become a place of great note and
eminency: hereabouts it was where Julius Caesar Landed, and though Mr. Somner,
would have Dover to be the place, where he first attempted to arrive, yet says
the Accurate Mr. Kennet in his Life of Mr. Somner, it is otherwise Demonstrated
from Astronomical computation by the very Ingenious Mr. E. Halley, who proves
the Year, the Day, the time of Day, and place the Downs, The Downs.
where he made his first descent.

Deal.
The Town is called lower Deal to distinguish it from the upper part, which
being the more ancient lies about a Mile farther distant from the Sea, and that
which has been the sole cause of raising it, was the commodious Riding for
Ships in the Downs, where Merchant Men making a stop both outward and homeward
Bound, and taking in here many times a great part of their Provision have by
degrees enstated it in a very prosperous condition: and indeed its buildings
have of late Years been so considerably enlarged and its Trade promoted by
great Fleets of Ships, who here take in Pilots to carry them up the River
Thames, that it has almost quite eclipsed the splendor of Sandwich, which is
three or four Miles distance from it.

Sandwich.
Sandwich, being another of the Cinque Ports, is on the North and West side
fortified with Walls, and on the other side fenced with a Rampire, Bulwark and
Ditch; it was called formerly Lundenwick, either from its being very populous,
which the British word Lawn imports, or by reason of the great Trade to and
from London, or from some more peculiar interest the Londoners had in this
Place above all other Ports, but the name of Sandwich, says Mr. Somner, occurs
not in any coetaneous Writer or Writing, until the Year 979, when King Egelred
granted it by that Name to the Monks of Canterbury for their Clothing, which
Canutus after his arrival restored again to the same Monks for their sustenance
in Victuals, with the Addition of his Golden Crown and (what perhaps was of
equal value in the estimation of those Times) St. Bartholomew's Arm: It is
supposed to have been the Daughter of Rutapis or Richborough, Richborough.
which was an eminent Fortress of the Romans hard by, and the first
Presidentiary Station that Antiquity represents them to have erected within
Britain; but like the Mother it is now very much gone to decay, for besides what
it suffered from the French in the Reigns of King John and Henry the Sixth,
after it was recovered again from its Sufferings, the Haven being choked up by
the Sand, and a great Ship belonging to Pope Paul the Fourth, in the Reign of
Queen Mary, sinking down at the very entrance into the Haven, has ever since
reduced it to so great Extremities, that the mischief, it is to be feared, now
will prove utterly incurable; however, it is yet beautified with three
Churches, and a Free School which was Built and Endowed by Sir Roger Manwood,
Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer; and what at present chiefly makes for the
Town is the Dutch Colony which is here settled.

Not far from hence lie those dangerous Sands so much dreaded by Sailors,
called Goodwyn Sands, Goodwyn Sands.
which though it is the common Opinion that they were Lands of the Earl of
Goodwyn, swallowed up by the Sea about A. D. 1097. yet with so great strength
of Reason is this vulgar Error confuted, and the true Cause of Goodwyn Sands
more plainly discovered by that indefatigable Searcher into Antiquity, Mr.
Somner, that I shall at present refer the Reader to his ingenious Discourse
about this Subject, printed with his Treatise of the Roman Ports and Forts in
Kent, and published A. D. 1693.

Over against Sandwich, on the other side of the River Stour, is Thanet, Isle
of Thanet.
a small but very fertile Island, where the chiefest Scenes both of War and
Peace have been formerly laid, for as Mr. Philpott observes, when Hengist
arrived with his Saxons to support the harassed and afflicted Britains against
the Eruption of the Picts, he first landed in this Island, and when his Forces
were broke by Vortimer at the Battle of Alresford, he made Thanet his retreat
and shelter; when Austen the Monk arrived in England to disseminate the
Christian Religion amongst the Saxons, he found his first Reception in this
Island. How often the Danes made Thanet a Winter Station for their Navies, when
they invaded the Maritime Coasts of this Nation, our Chronicles do sufficiently
inform us; and lastly, when Lewis the Dauphin was called in by the mutinous
English Barons to assert their Quarrel with additional Supplies against King
John, he laid the first Scene of War in this Island, which he afterward
scattered on the Face of this unhappy Nation.

And now being got to the utmost Limits of the Land, every Wave of the Ocean
ecchoed forth uno plus ultra, whereupon taking our leave of these Maritime
Coasts we began to withdraw again farther upon the Continent, and arrived at
Canterbury, Canterbury.
a City of great Antiquity, and the Royal Seat of the ancient Kings of Kent,
watered by the River Stour; the Buildings of it at present are but mean, and
the Wall which encompasseth it gone much to decay, and of late Years it has
declined no less in Trade than in Beauty: However, it is the Metropolis of the
County, and the Archiepiscopal See of the Primate and Metropolitan of all
England; and one Ornament still survives, (...) Cathedral, in which lie
interred diverse Kings of Kent, whose chief Palace was here till they afterward
removed their Station from hence to Reculver, Reculver.
a little Town now, by the Sea side, about seven or eight Miles distant from
it, by the Ancients called Regullium, where the Roman Captain of the Premier
Band of the Vetasians lay in those days in Garrison: The Episcopal See was
settled here A. D. 601. according to Birchington, who tells us, Ang. Sacr. Tom.
12
that after Austen the Monk had planted here the Christian Religion, and
Baptized on one Christmas day no less than Ten thousand Men in the River
Swalve, he was by the Order of Pope Gregory ordained the first Archbishop of
this See: But because the Antiquity of this City with all its Liberties and
Privileges, the Beauty and number of its Churches and Religious Houses before
their Dissolution, the Magnificence of its Cathedral with all its renowned
Tombs and Monuments are so excellently described by Mr. Somner in a Book
Printed for that purpose, A. D. 1640. I shall not undertake to pourtray that in
a contracted Landscape, which has been before represented to the Public with
so great applause, but refer those who are so curious as to desire a more
particular Account of this City, to that most ingenious Person, who has
pencilled out every part and Limb thereof with great exactness and accuracy:
only one thing I must not omit, that of late a Marble Monument has been
erected in St. Margaret's Church, Canterbury, in Honor of Mr. Somner (who lies
there interred) by his own Widow, who afterward Married to Mr. Hannington,
Vicar of Elam in Kent, upon which is engraven this ingenious Epitaph; H. S. E.
Gulielmus Somnerus.
Cantuariensis.
Saxonicam Literaturam,
Civitatis Cantuariae Historiam
(Tenebris utramque involutam)
Illustravit.
Cantii Antiquitates meditantem
Fatum intercepit.
Officium
Erga Deum pietate severa,
Erga Homines probitate simplici,
Erga Principem fide periculosa,
Erga Patriam scriptis immortalibus
Indicavit.
Ita Mores Antiquos
Studium Antiquitatis efformat.
Cantuariae Natus est Martii 30. 1606.
Cantuariae Omnem aetatem egit,
Cantuariae Obiit Martii 30. 1669.


Feversham.
Passing from hence through Feversham, a Town pretty large, and well inhabited,
famous formerly for its Abbey, erected here by King Stephen, wherein himself,
his Queen, and Eustace his Son were buried, the next place of consequence that
was obvious in the Road was Sedingbourn, Sedingbourn.
which being a great thorough-fare is well furnished with Inns, a Town of which
there are two things more principally Recorded, the one is, that in the Year
1232, Henry Bishop of Rochester, as Mr. Philpott has collected it out of some
old Monkish Writers, came with much exultation out of Sedingbourn Church, and
desired the People to express their joy, because on that day, by the
efficacious Prayers of the Church, Richard the First formerly King of England,
and many others, were most certainly ransomed from the Flames of Purgatory. The
other, that in the same Church was a Monument of Sir Richard Lovelace, inlayed
richly with Brass, who was an eminent Soldier in his time, and Marshal of
Calice under Henry the Eighth, with his Portraiture affixed in Brass, which the
Injuries of Time, and the Impiety of Sacrilegious Mechanics have utterly
defaced.

In the Neighborhood of Sedingbourn is Newington, Newington.
which though but a small Village has afforded some worthy Remarks of
Antiquity; for not many Years ago there were dug up Roman Urns not far
distant from the Highway or Common Road, it being agreeable to Roman Practice
to inter in those Places where their Monuments might be obvious almost to every
Eye, Memorials of themselves, and Memento's of Mortality to living Passengers,
whom the Epitaphs of great Ones did beg to stay and look upon them.

From hence the Road brought us directly to Chatham, Chatham.
where the repair of the Parish Church and new Buildings of the Steeple,
commend the Religious Care and Cost of King Charles the First's Commissioners
and Officers of the Royal Navy in the Year 1635; but the Arsenals,
Storehouses, and Ship-Docks erected by the same most incomparable Prince are
so magnificent, and universally useful, that they are become a principal Pillar
of the Nations support, and afford variety of Employment by the Manufacture of
Cordage, as also the Careening and Building of Ships.

Contiguous to Capham is Rochester, Rochester.
a City which in Elder times was as eminent for its Antiquity, as it was for
its Strength and Grandeur, and had not those violent impressions, which the
rough Hand of War made upon it, Demolished its bulk and bereaved it of its
Beauty, it peradventure might have been registered at this Day in the Inventory
of the principal Cities of this Nation; but so great and dismal Calamities did
frequently attend it, that the Fury of the Elements seemed to enter into a
Corrivalship or Competition with the Fury of Enemies for its Ruin, and the
Fire and Sword were joint Confederates to destroy it; nevertheless, maugre all
these Casualties, by the Favor of Princes, and their Royal Munificence, it
recovered all its Losses, and survives in Splendour. In the Year 1225, by the
indulgent Bounty of King Henry the Third it was invested with a Wall, and that
this Fortification might be of the greater importance, it was secured or fenced
with a Ditch; it was governed by a Port-Reeve until King Edward the Fourth, in
the second Year of his Reign, raised it to a higher Dignity, and decreed by his
Royal Grant, that it should henceforth be under the Jurisdiction of a Mayor and
Twelve Aldermen, and to this Monarch does the City owe much of its present
Felicity.

The goodly Skeleton of the Castle, which yet courts the Eye of the Beholder to
the admiration of its former strength, acknowledges for its most eminent
Benefactor, if not Founder, Odo Bishop of Baicux and Earl of Kent, half Brother
to William the Conqueror, which Fortress he afterward breaking forth into open
Rebellion against his Nephew Rufus did seize, but was quickly dispossessed by
the vigorous Expedition of his Prince, and enforced immediately to depart the
Kingdom. After this, when the Dauphin was invited into England by the Seditious
Barons, to wrest the Kingdom from K. John their native Sovereign, the Dauphin
uniting their strength with his, made such a furious Onset on the Castle, that,
like a Tempest which beats down all before it, he carried it by Assault; the
like had been achieved by Simon Montford, Earl of Leicester, when he raised an
Insurrection against King Henry the Third, had not that Prince arrived most
opportunely, and by a successful Encounter wrested both Earl Warren, who had so
resolutely maintained it, and that likewise from the Impressions of his Fury;
since which time there has been little of moment acted in this Place; tho it
is worth taking notice of what Mr. Philpott has observed farther concerning
it, that there being much Land in this County held thereof, whose Tenure is
perfectly Castle-guard, upon the day prefixed for the discharging the quit
Rents relating to it, there is a Banner displayed and hung out (anciently it
was on the Castle Wall) and all those who are Tenants to this Manor, and are
in default by their Nonappearance, and do not discharge their accustomary
Duties and Services, the penalty imposed upon their neglect is, that the return
of every Tide of the adjacent River Medway, which finds them absent, doubles
their Service or Quit-Rents.

The Cathedral, which the Bishopric of Rochester united to it, was founded and
established by that pious Monarch Ethelbert King of Kent, and the first Bishop
to whom was entrusted the Pastoral Staff or Crosier by Austen the Apostle of
the Saxons, was Justus, who being sent over hither as an Adjutant to Austen in
the Propagation of Christianity, about the Year 601, Angl. Sacr. Tom. 1. p. 329.
was afterward ordained Bishop of this See A. D. 604. much about that time that
Mellitus was consecrated Bishop of London: The abovementioned Prince not only
assenting to his Consecration by his Presence, but likewise largely
contributing to the support of the Person chosen and his Successors, by
enriching them with great Possessions. This Cathedral was dedicated by
Ethelbert to St. Andrew, as that which he built likewise at London was to St.
Paul, but whatever the Piety of that Prince, and other Religious Persons after
him, did in former Ages contribute to its enlargement and beautifying, the late
prevailing Faction of some injurious Incendiaries, did in a few Months dispoil
and almost abolish; and the Scars, which still remain in its Sacred Body, are
too pregnant Symptoms to convince the World what usage it received from those
Sacrilegious Boutefeus, whose great Triumphs would have been over its Ruins,
and chiefest Glory to have laid its Honor in the Dust, had not he, who sets
bounds to the tempestuous Ocean, limited their Fury, and rescued it from their
Malice.

From Rochester the curious Stone Bridge built over the River Medway by Sir
Robert Knolles (which is one of the largest Bridges in England, being fixed
upon 21 Arches, and coped above with Iron Bars by Archbishop Warham) leads us
to Stroud, Stroud.
a Place where the Knights Templars had formerly an eminent Mansion, and the
Chapel of St. Nicholas was improved to a Mother Church, and endowed, being
divided by too great a distance from the Church of Frendsbury, to which it had
been annexed, and which was supposed incapable for so great a conflux of
People, as began every day to multiply within the Liberties of Stroud.

Medway.
The River Medway is carried into the Aestuary of Thames by two Mouths, the one
whereof Westward, is called West-Swale, as the Eastern one which seems to have
cut the Isle of Shepey from the Continent, East-Swale; but by Bid, Genlad and
Yenlett: Now it is rather probable, that this was the Swalve mentioned by
Birchington, P. 216.
wherein Austen the Monk baptized Ten thousand Men, and not the Swale in
Richmondshire, P. 163.
that being the River where Paulinus his great Friend and Coadjutor baptized
the like number.

Island of Shepey.
And now having made mention of the Isle of Shepey, I cannot but observe, that
it was formerly very famous for two Religious Princesses, Sexburga and
Hermenilda; Sexburga the Daughter of Anna the Seventh King of the East Angles,
and his Wife Hereswyda, Sister to the Holy Abbess St. Hylda, was married to
Erconbertus King of Kent, in the Fifth Year of her Father's Reign; by whom she
had two Sons, Egbert and Lotharius, and two Daughters Ermenilda and Erkengota:
Sexburga, after her Husband's Death, governed the Kingdom of Kent twenty-four
Years, until her Son Egbert was grown up to be fit to undertake the Government,
which having once committed to him, she laid aside her Royal Robes, and
betaking her self to this Island, built here a Nunnery, A. D. 710. and endowed
it liberally for Seventy-seven Nuns: Afterward committing it to the care of
her Daughter Ermenilda, she went into the Isle of Ely to her Sister Ethelreda,
where after her Death she was Abbess of the same Nunnery, all this while living
a very severe mortified Life, and giving up her self wholly to Prayer and
Devotion: Afterward the Nunnery being burnt by the Danes, it was re-ediffed by
William Archbishop of Canterbury, A. D. 1130. to the Honor of St. Mary and
St. Sexburg.

But on the 21th of September the Festival of St. Matthew, our Journey began to
draw near to an end, Gravesend.
for our last Stage being by Gravesend (a Town notorious as well for its
Block-Houses opposite to each other, as the great convenience of a Passage in
Wherries every Tide up and down the River Thames) to Dartford, Dartford.
a Market Town of no small account for all sort of Grain, by reason of its
Vicinity to the Grand Emporium of this Nation, we departed from thence to the
City, and arrived again at London in great Health and Safety, after some months
Circuit about the Maritime Coasts of Great Britain.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table, containing the Names of all the Cities, Towns, Islands,
Hills, Rivers, Meers, Wells, and other Curiosities mentioned in this Book.
A
ABerbarry Cave in Wales Page 24 Abington, Berkshire 104 Allfretton, Derbys. 86
Alnwick, Northumb. 135 Anglesey Island. 226 Appleby, Westmorl. 210 Are, a River
in Yorks. 216 Arundel, Sussex. 258 Ashbourn, Derbys. 95 Aukland, Bishopric of
Durham. 166 Avon, a River in Gloucester, Worcester, and Hampshire. 10 St. Asaph
in Wales. 223 Astroites. 12 Ariconium. 17 Acamannum or Akemancester. 37
Adderbourn. 42 Aeton- College. 112 Alum- Mines. 162 Alne, a River. 135 St.
Andrews. 188 Aberdeen. 188 Albany, a Hill in Scotland. 181 Argyle. 193
Anandale. 204 Anan, a River. ibid. Ashburton. 243 Axminster. 244 Axi, a River.
ibid. Aven a River. 249 Amberly- Castle. 257 Andreswald- Wood. 257 Anderida.
260 Aberdeen- Well. 188
B
Beray. 108 Bakewel. 89 Bangor. 228 Berkshire. 104 Barkway. 57 Berwick, upon
Tweed. 178 Bath, in Somersets. 37 Battle, Suss. 261 Bay, of Robinhood. 123
Beaconsfield. 3 Beverly, Yorks. 152 Bosworth, Leicest. 75 Bourn, in Sussex. 259
Bramyard, Herefords. 16 Brecknock-shire and Brecnock. 22 Brentford. 113
Bristol. 27 Brent, a River. 131 Burgh, in Westmorl. 210 Buckinghamshire. 2
Buddesdale, Suff. 127 Bungay. 132 Burford in Oxfords. 5 Burntwood, in Essex.
115 Burlip Hill. 9 Black Mountain. 20 Barnewel. 58 Bennet College. 61 Bodleian,
Library. 5 Buxton Well. 93 Betheny. 96 Battlefield. 100 Bone Well. 102 Blithe,
a River. 133 Boston, Lincolns. 144 Barton. 149 Binchester. 167 Bamborough
Castle. 176 Borders, of Scotland. 180 Bannock a Scotch River. ibid. Bass, a
Scotch Island. 147 Buqhan. ibid. Burning Stone. 183 Brovonacum. 210 Bows,
Westmorl. 211 Bremetonacum. 219 Bala, Pool. 174 Bridport. 244 Bear. 247
Badbury. 248 Bitchborow. 272
C
Caerlegion. 221 Caermardenshire, and Caermarden. 24, 25 Cambridgeshire. 57
Cambridge. 58 Christ's College, 62 Calshot Castle, Hamps. 252 Canterbury. 216
Cardiganshire, and Cardigan. 25 Carlisle. 206 Caernavenshire. 227 Chatham. 218
Clemsford. 115 Chepstow. 21 Cheshire. 219 Chester. 221 Chichester. 255
Christ-Church, Hamps. 249 Church-Stretton, Shrops. 101 Ciciter, Glocest. 8
Cleveland, Yorks. 164 Colchester. 116 Colebrook, and Cole a River. 113
Columpton. 233 Cornwall. 240 Coventry. 72 Cows in Isle of Wight. 252 Cumberland.
205 Coleshil. 74 Colne, a River 2 Cherwel, a River. 3 Cotswold Hills. 6 Churne,
a River. 8 Corinium, Dobunorum. ibid. Caer-Gloyn. 9 Caergorangon. 14 Cadier,
Arthur. 22 Cardiff Town. 23 Caves, near Carreg Castle. 25 Chorea, Gigantum. 40
Caer-Gwent. 45 Came, a River. 58 Camboricum. 59 Christ-Church, Oxford. 5
Carleton. 77 Castle in the Peak and Castleton. 90 Chatsworth. 94 Caerpengren
100 Corve, a River. 101 Chelmer, a River. 115 Can, a River. ibid. Cerdick Sand.
134 Castor. 135 Caerludecote. 146 Caer Ebrank. 154 Coal, Mines. 127 Chester, on
the Street Alias, Cunacester. 170 Capreae Caput. 171 Coquet, a River. 175
Cheriot Hills. 180 Clayd, a River in Scotl. ibid. Carrick. 181 Cumbernauld
Park. ibid. Camelon, a City. 202 Carron, a River. ibid. Copper Mines. 205
Casticand Hill. ibid. Cawd, a River. 206 Cataracts, near Kendale. 210
Cockgrave. 213 Cerdon Hill. 226 Conway River. 228 Chars. 217 Carisbrook Castle.
251 Clousentum. 195 Cinque Ports. 260 Camber, River. 262 Carreg Well. 25
Charnwood, Forest. 79
D
DErbyshire. 87 Derby. 93 Dartford. 221 Deal. 214 Downs. ibid. Dartmouth, and
Dart River. 238 Dean, in Glocest. 230 Dean, Forest. ibid. Dee, a River. 220
Denbighshire. 229 Derwent, a River. 88 Devonshire. 233 Dorchester, Dorsets. 246
Dorchester, Oxfords. 106 Dorsetshire. 224 Dove, a River. 95 Dover. 276 Durham,
with its Bishopric. 165, 167 Durolipont. 68 Devils Arse, in Peak. 90 Dunwich.
132 Darlington. 166 Dunholm. 167 Dunbarton, Castle. 196 Dee, a Scotch River.
180 Deaf Cragg, or Rock. 193 Dunbar. 195 Dunfries. 204 St. Domingo 's Well. 213
Dropping Well, at Knarsborough. 214 Delamire Forest. 220 Durnovaria. 247
Dengeness. 266 Dimchurch. 268 St. David's. 26
E
Essex. 115 Exeter. 234 Ebri, a River. 23 Ellandum. 42 Edmunton. 55 Elden Hole.
92 Elgin, in Scotland. 183 Edinburgh. 196 Eden River. 96 Elwa, and Elay: 223
Exmore Forest. 234 Edgcomb, Mount. 240 St. Ethelberts Well. 18 St.
Edmund's-Bury. 121 Eden, River. 206
F
FAirfold, in Glocest. 104 Faringdon. ibid. Farnham. 49 Feversham. 218
Flintshire, and Flint Castle. 222 Folkstone. 273 From, a River. 27
Fenny-Stanton. 67 Farne Island. 177 Fryth, a Scotch River. 181 Falkirk, Scotl.
202 Fordington. 247
G
GArstang, Lancas. 219 Gateshead. 171 Gisborough. 163 Glamorganshire. 23
Glassenbury. 231 Glocestershire: 6 Gloucester. 7 Gravesend. 287 Guy Cliff,
Warwicks. 72 Grismund's- Tower. 8 Guilford. 50 Grantbridge. 58 Grantchester.
ibid. Godmanchester. 67 Gumicastrum. ibid. Gatford- Gate. 74 Grampius, a Hill.
181 Galloway. ibid. Glenmoors. 192 Glasgow. 202 Glotta, a River. ibid.
Giggleswick. 216 Goodwyn Sands. 279
H
HAlesworth, Suf. 132 Hampshire 249 Hertfordshire 56 Hertford 47 Hastings 259
Henley 107 Herefordshire 16 Hereford ibid. Hyth and West-Hyth 269 Holland,
Lincolnshire 142 Hull, and Hull River 149 Humber, a River 150 Hurst- Castle 250
Huntingdonshire 67 Huntingdon 69 Homes- Castle 13 Hogmagog-Hills 67
Higham-Ferrers 71 Huntley 103 Huntcliff 163 Hell-Kettles 166 Hermitage at
Warkworth 175 Highlanders 183 Hamilton 204 Holy-Well 223 Hubblestow 234
Hensten-Down 243 Honniton 244 Hot Well at Bristol 30 Hot Well, Derbysh. 93
I.
INgerstone 115 Ipswich 119 Isis, a River 3 Isc, a River, and Isca Dammoniorum
234 Islington 57 St. John's College, Camb. 46 Iron Mills 98 Jet 165 Jarrow 175
Inchcape Rock 194 Ingleborow Hill 218
K
KEnt 262 Kesteven, part of Lincolnshire 145 Kingston in Surrey 150
Knarsborough 214 Kencester 17 Kilgarran 16 Kingsware 237 Kendale, and Ken River
209 Kaergrant 58 King's College, Camb. 46 Kettering 71 Kirkley 85 Kedlaston
Well 93 Kingston upon Hull 150 Kyle, Scotland 193 St. Katharine 's Well 194
L
LAncashire 217 Lancaster 218 Landaff 23 Leeds in Yorkshire 216 Leicestershire
75 Leicester ibid. Lempster, Herefordsh. 102 Lestoff 133 Leverpool 219 Jews
258 Litchfield 74 Lid in Kent 265 Lime, Dorsetsh. 224 Lincolnshire 142 Lincoln
146 Linsey, part of Lincolnsh. 145 London 1 Loughborough 78 Ludlow 101 Lug, a
River 17 Lyn, Norfolk 140 Lassington 12 Lampreys 13 Lynsavathan Mere 22 Levenny
River ibid. Ley, a River 56 Longe-Birch 97 Leith, Yorkshire 162 Leaden Mines
31, 127 Lowlanders 184 Loch Mirton and Lockness 191 Lorne ibid. Lennox and
Lochlomond 193 Lothien 194 Leth, Scotland, both Town and River 201 Linlithgow
202 Liddisdale ibid Lanvellin Hill 205 Lugoballum 207 Lowther River 129
Levatrae 210 Lone, a River 218 Linparis Pool 227 Lavant River 256 Limen, a
River 267 Lamport 266 Lemanis 267 Lym 265 Long-Meg, Cumberl. 208
M
MArches of Wales 99 Maidenhead 107 Malton, Yorkshire 159 Medway, a River 286
Merionethshire 226 Mersey, a River 219 Middlesex 2 Monmouthshire 19 Monmouth
ibid. Montgomeryshire 225 Mountsorrel 78 Morpeth 175 Mountains in Wales 20
Mounth-denny- Hill 22 Minyd Morgan 24 Mendip Hills 30 Moreford 50 Musaeum at
Oxford 5 Mam Tor 91 Marble Stones 92 Middlewich 220 Marden, Herefords. 103
Marcly Hill ibid. Mulgrave Castle, and the Rarities near it 163 Monks-Chester
172 March in Scotland 194 Mined Agned, or the Maiden Castle at Edinburgh 199
Macclesfield Forest 220 Moilenny Hill 229 Mortimer's Cross 230 Melcomb Regis
246
N
NAntwich 220 Newcastle upon Tine 171 Newport, Isle of Wight 251 Norfolk 133
Northamptonshire 70 Northampton 71 Northumberland 174 Norwich 135 Northwich 220
Nottinghamshire 79 Nottingham 80 Newton in Wales 24 Newington, Middles. 55
New-River 57 New-College, Oxford 5 Nen, a River 70 New Windsor 112 Needham 112
North-Elmham 137 Niddisdale, Scotland, and Nid, a River, 204 Newton-Bushel 237
New Forest 249 Newington by Hyth 271 Newington by Sedingbourn 283 St. Nicholas
Chapel 272
O
OTely, Yorkshire 216 Oxfordshire 2 Oxford 4 Ogmore, a River 24 Ochy-Hole 32
Ouse-River 57 Oak Royal 97 Ounsberry-Hill 164
P
PEak, Derbyshire 87 Peaklond 89 Pembrokeshire 25 Perith, Cumberland 208
Pevensey 259 Picts-Wall 174 Plymouth and Plime-River 238 Portland 245
Portsmouth 254 Preston 219 Puckeridge 57 Public Schools and Library at
Cambrige 62 Public Schools and Physick-Garden at Oxford 5 Pools Hole 94
Pitchford 101 Pandon-Gate 172 Peteril River 206 Pyramidal Stones 209 Penigent
and Pendle Hills 218 Plimlimmon Hill 225 Penmaen-mour 227 Pilchars 243 Promhill
265 Penreth 208
Q
QUarndon Springs near Derby 93
R
RAdnorshire 23 Radnor ibid. Reculver Regulbium 279 Richmondsh. and Richmond in
the County of York 211 Rippon. 212 Rochester. 283 Ross, Heref. 103 Rother, a
River. 267 Rumford. 115 Romney, old and new Castle. 266, 267 Rye, in Sussex.
262 Rotheras. 19 Ratcliff Church. 29 Richmond, in Surrey. 415 Robinhoods Well,
Chair and Mill. 85 Robinhood 's Bay. 123, 160 Rhie, a River. 159
Roseberry-Topping. 164 Rocking Stone. 193 St. Roberts Chapel. 214 Ribchester,
and Rible, a River. 219 Rideal, a River. 226 Richborough. 215 Redmore. 75
S
SAlisbury. 42 Shropshire. 99 Shrewsbury. 100 Sandwich 278 Old Sarum. 42
Scarborough. 159 Seaford. 259 Severn, a River. 7 Sheals, in Durham Bish. 173
Sleeford, Lincolns. 145 Somersetshire. 30 Southampton. 253 Southwold, Suff. 132
Staffordshire. 95 Stafford. 96 Stour, a River. 120 Stroud, in Kent. 286 Surrey.
49 Sussex. 257 Swale, a River: 183 Somergil, a River 23 Stonehenge. 40
Sturbridge Fair, 66 Sherborn, a River. 72 Swaneswel. 74 Soar, a River. 78
Sherwood, Forest. 80 Stanly, Spring. 93 Sow, a River. 96 Sutton Walls. 103
Suffolk. 119 Sow. 121 Scole Inn. 127 Spaw, at Scarborough. 160 Skerne, a River.
166 Salt Pans. 173 Salt Pits. 220 Scotland. 181 Sterling Castle. 196 Spay, a
Scotch River. 180 Strathern. 193 Solway Fryth. 204 Skiddaw Hill, and Scruffel.
205 Salkelds. 208 Stanemoor. 211 Spaw, at Knarsborough. 166 Skipton, on Craven.
216 Settle. ibid. Snowdown Hills. 227 Stretton. 101 Stone, a River. 249
Saltwood Castle. 270 Sandgate Castle. 273 Sandown Castle. 277 Sedinbourn. 285
Shepey Island 286 Swanscomb. 263
T
TAme. 107 Thames, a River. 2 Thanet, an Island. 280 Tetteshal, Norf. 139
Taunton. 233 The One, a River. ibid. Tewksbury. 12 Thrapston. 71 Trent, a River.
80 Tweed, a River. 180 Tot, a River. 23 Tivy, a River. 25 Totnam. 55 Trinity
College, Came. 61 Theater, at Oxford. 5 Tongue 98 Tees, a River 163 Test, a River
252 Tine, a River 172 Tinmouth Castle 173 Tay, or Tau, a Scotch River 180
Topsham 235 Tin-Mines 242 Twinamburn 249
U
UNiversity College, Oxford 4 Utoxeter, Staffords. 95 Uxbridge, Middles. 2
Uske-River 23 St. Vincents Rock 29 Venta Belgarum 45 Venta, Simenorum ibid.
Venta, Icenorum 135 Ure-River 154 Verterae 210 Ulles Water 217 Vindogladia 247
W
WAles. 19 South Wales 21 North Wales 222 Waltham 55 Ware 56 Warwickshire 72
Warwick ibid. Wells, Somersets. 31 Westmorland 209 Wey-River ibid. Wonders of
the Peak seven 89 Well, in the Peak that Ebbs and flows 92 Wirkworth Well 93
White Ladies 97 Witham 116 Wulpit 121 Waveney-River 132 Winsder-River 135
Witham-River 144 Ware-River 166 Wensbick-River 135 Warkworth 175 Wrye-Nose Hill
205 Wever-River 220 Wigmore Castle 229 Wellington 233 Winander Mere 217
Weymouth, Dorsets. 246 Whitbay, Yorks. 161 Wicomb, Bucks 3 Wigan, Lancas. 219
Wight, an Island 250 Wiltshire 40 Wilton 42 Winbourn, Dorsets. 247 Winchelsea
260 Winchester 45 Windsor 108 Worcestershire 13 Worcester 14 Wrexham, in Wales
229 Wye-River 225 Whispering place at Gloucester 11 Three W. W. W. noted in
Herefordshire 16 Waredike 40 Willy Brook 42 Washes, Lincolns. 142
Y
YArmouth, Norf. 133 Yare-River 134 Yarmouth, in the Isle of Wight 251
Yorkshire 149 York 154
The End.

