THE QUEENS EXCHANGE, A COMEDY Acted with general applause at the
BLACKFRIARS BY His MAJESTY'S Servants.

WRITTEN BY MR RICHARD BROM,

Regia res amor est -- LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Hand in Paul's
Churchyard. 1657.

The Stationer to the Readers.
Gentlemen and Ladies,
THis short account I thought fit to give you of this Poem, that it came to my
hands among other things of this nature written, and left by Mr. Rich. Broom a
person whose excellency in Comical wit has been sufficiently proved, and needs
not my partial and weak commendation. There are published already of his
Plays, the Northern Lass, the Antipodes, the Sparagus-garden, the Merry
Beggars, the Lancashire Witches, besides the 5. Plays lately published in a
Volume. The good acceptance of all which encourages me to publish this, being
no way inferior to the rest; but when 'twas written, or where acted, I know
not. Your kind entertainment of this will enable me to make known to the World
diverse more of the same Authors works of this kind, which have not yet seen
light; for my aim is, and prodesse and delectare, by delighting thee to profit
my self.

H. B.
Farewell.
The Queens Exchange.
The Persons in the Play.
OSriick, King of Northumbria. Theodrick his Favorite and Ambassador.
Ethelswick, his Substitute. Theodwald, Eaufride, Alfride, Edelbert,
Lords of his Council. A Physician. Jeffrey, the Kings fool. 4. Clowns.
BErtha Queen of West Saxons. Segebert, Alberto, two banished Lords. Anthynus,
Offa, Segeberts Sons. Mildred, Segeberts daughter, Osriicks Queen. Arnold, an
old servant of Offa. Kelrick, Elkwine, Elfride,
three sycophant Lords. Hermit and his Servant. Keeper of Prison. Edith,
Mildreds Nurse. A Carpenter, A Mason, A Smith,
three Thieves*
Scene England.

Prolouge to the Queens Exchange.
THe writer of this Play who ever uses
To usher with his modesty the Muses
Unto the Stage, He that scarce ever durst
Of Poets rank himself above the worst,
Though most that he has writ has past the rest,
And found good approbation of the best;
He as he never knew to bow, he says,
As little fears the fortune of his Plays:
He yields their right to us, and we submit
All that they are in learning or in wit
To your fair censure. All is then but thus,
As you approve they are good or bad to us;
And all by way of favor we can crave,
Is that you not destroy where you may save.
The QUEENS Exchange.
ACT. I.
SCEN. I.
Enter Celerick, Elkwin, Segebert, Bertha, and Attendants. Hoboyes. Bart. SInce
it has pleased the highest
Power to place me
His substitute in Regal Sovereignty,
Over this Kingdom, by the general vote
Of you my loyal Lords, and loving Subjects,
Though grounded on my right of due Succession;
Being immediate heir, and only child
Of your late much deplored King my Father.
I am in a most reverend duty bound
Unto that Power above me, and a well-
Befitting care toward you my faithful people,
To rule and govern so (at least so near
As by all possibility I may)
That I may shun Heavens anger, and your grief.
Which that I may, at our last consultation
The better to pass through my weighty charge,
I gave you to consider of the Proposition
Is made to me by the Northumbrian King
Of marriage, not only to enable me
In my government, but thereby to strengthen
This Kingdom in succeeding times, by a line
Of lawful Successors. I gave you all
My strong and most unanswerable reasons:
To which you seemd contented, all but one,
Who with the rest by this I hope is satistisfied.
It Is you, Lord Segebert, you it is I mean*
Does it appear to you yet reasonable,
That I be matched to the Northumbrian King?
I have with patience waited a whole month
For you to rectify your scrupulous judgment,
Whereby it might comply with these, no way
Inferior to your self, but are your Peers,
As well in their kown wisdom, as my favor.

Seg. Thus low unto your sacred Majesty
I here devote my self; and thus I meet
With equal love, the embraces of these Lords.
I Will join and grow one body, and one voice
With them, in all may add unto your Honor,
And your dear Kingdoms good. But pardon me
My soverain Queen, and I beseech you my Lords,
To weigh with your known wisdom the great danger
This match may bring unto the Crown and Country.
It Is true, the King Osriick as well in person.
As in his dignity, may be thought fit
To be endowed with all you seem to yield him.
But what becomes of all the wholesome Laws,
Customs, and all the nerves of Government
Your no less prudent than Majestic Father
With power and policy enricht this Land with;
And made the Saxons happy, and your self
A Queen of so great eminence. Must all,
With so much Majesty and matchless beauty,
Be now subjected to a strangers foot;
And trod into disorder? All your wealth,
Your state, your laws, your subjects, and the hope
Of flourishing future fortunes, which your Father
By his continual care, and teadious study
Gave as a Legacy unto this Kingdom:
Must all be altered, or quite subverted,
And all by a wilful gift unto a stranger:

Bart. Peace: stop his mouth. Unreaverend old man,
How dare thou thus oppose thy Sovereigns will,
So well approvd by all thy fellow Peers;
Of which the meanest equals thee in judgment?

Seg. Do you approve their judgments, Madam, which
Are grounded on your will? I may not do it.
Only I pray, that you may understand,
(But not unto your loss) the difference
Betwixt smooth flattery, and honest judgments.

Bert. Do you hear this, my Lords?


Celr My Lord Segebert,
Though you except against this King,
He may hereafter thank you in your kind.

Seg. Mean time I thank you for your prophecy.


Col. You cannot but allow succession is
The life of Kingdoms; and if so, you cannot
But wish the Queen (which Heaven grant speedily)
An happy husband.

Bert. I thank you, good my Lord.


Elk. And if an husband, why not him she affects?
Can it befit a Subject to control
The affection of his Princess? Heaven forbid.

Seg, This is ear taking Music.


Elk. Or suppose,
You might control it; whom in your great wisdom
Would you allot the Queen?

Seg. I see your aim;
And know, when I have said all that I dare,
What censure I must undergo. And thus
I Will meet it boldly: you are sycophants all,
And do provide but for your selves, though all.
The Kingdom perish for it. May the justice*
That follows flattery overtake you for it.

Seg. Take hence the mad man.


Colr. We are sorry for you.


Elk. And wish the troublesome spirit were out of you,
That so distracts your reason.

Elf. We have known you
Speak and answer to the purpose.

Seg. Your question to no purpose, Sir, was this:
Whom my great wisdom would allot the Queen?
You are not worth my answer. But my Sovereign,
I do implore your gracious attention
To these few words.

Celr. Less sense.


Elf. No mattet.


Elk. Silence.
Speak your few words, the Queen can give you hearing.

Seg. I wish your Highness would command your women,
That know their qualities to take up your Beagles.
Their Petulances sort not with this place
Nor the more serious matter of my speech.

Bert. Speak, I can hear you though. Forbear him Lords.


Seg. The King your Father, and my never to be
Forgotten Master, (please you to remember.)
Although his memory be lost with these,
Who nere had grace to know him rightly, gave me
Before his death strictly this charge; and in
Your presence too, charging your self withal
To give it due obedience: That you should
Before all men's advice take mine for marriage,
And that especially I should take care
Against Innovation. That the laws he left
Established with such care for good oth' Kingdom
Might be maintaind by whomsoere you matchd with.
I know, and you, if you knew any thing,
Might know the difference twixt the Northumbrian laws
And ours: And sooner will their King pervert
Your Privileges and your Government,
Then reduce his to yours: pure common sense,
Even you me thinks, my Lords, may foretell that

Bert. You have said enough.


Seg. I do beseech your Highness
But for this little more.

Bert. I Will hear no more.


Celr. Pray hear his little more although you send him
Out of your hearing then for evermore.

Seg. Your Father added this to his command,
That rather then by marriage you should bring
Your Subjects to such thraldom, and that if
No Prince whose laws coher'd with yours did seek you
(As some there are, and nearer then th'Northumbrian)
That he would have you from some noble Stock
To take a Subject in your own Dominion.

Bert. Traitor!


Seg. To urge your Fathers Testament?


Celr. But did the King your never forgotten Master
Bequeath her an affection to such blood?

Bert. Forbear. Now he is not worth your speaking to.


Celr. Now she will ha'me I hope. What a foul beast
Was I to undervalue subjects blood?

Bert. I have forborne you long, for the old love
My Father in his life conferred upon you
And still I yield to it so much as saves
Your head, bold talking fellow. But Sir hear
Your doom. Since the Kings love has puffed your dotage
With swollen conceit (for what can it be less
That you are now my King (for sure you think so)
I Will try my Title with you. Hence you Exile:
Go in perpetual banishment from this Kingdom.
Speak not a word for him.

All. Insooth we meant it not.


Celr. But may it please your Majesty, you mentioned
His head erewhile. Now if I might advise --

Bert. A way, you will be too cruel.


Celr. Another hope lost.


Elkw. His lands and goods, Madam, would be thought on.


Bert. No, he has children.


Elfr. I Will take his daughter with all faults, and half his lands.


Bert. Why are ye not gone?


Seg. I have not much to say.


Bert. Out with it then, and then out with your self.


Seg. In the large History of your Fathers life
You find but one example for this doom
Of Banishment. And that was of Alberte five years ^^nce,
For wronging me unto his Highness, when
He stood in competition with me for
The Honor in the State the King then gave me.

Bert. And what of this?


Seg. But thus. I stood by then, and then all knowing Heaven
Saw that though he for wronging me was Banished,
I was right sorry, and much pleaded for him.

Bert. It follows now that you would have these Lords,
Whom you have so abused, to plead for you.

Seg. Quite contrary, for they are my Abusers;
Yet I do grieve for them, but more for you.
To think on all your sorrows, when too late
You Will wish for me to steer the State.

Bert. Pray if you meet that good old Lord Alberto,
Now in your exile, send him home to us;
I Will promise him your Honor in the State.

All. Ha, ha, ha.


Bert. Go from my sight, and if after three days
Thou art seen in my Dominion, I will give
A thousand crowns to him that brings thy head.
See Proclamation sent to that effect.

Celr. I will, and as many Informers after
The Proclamation, as there be crowns in it.
Come we have spoken for you all that we can.

Elsr. The Queen's implacable.


Bert. Be gone I say, why do thou stay?


S^g. But to applaud your Mercy and Bounty,
In that you post me from a world of care
And give me the wide world for my share.

Exit Seg. and Celr. Elk. Your Majesty has performed a point of justice
Mingled with clemency beyond all president.

Bert. Enough to give a warning to all such
As dare oppose their Princes purposes;
Conduct in now the Ambassador of Northumbria.
Whilst I review his Masters brighter Figure Exit Elkw. Elf.
As ardently, (but with more pure affection)
As ere did Cynthia her Endimion. Ent. Emb.
My Lord, you have attended long, but now
I shall return that answer to your King,
That if his love be as you have pretended
May well excuse your stay. Tell him this story,
A King sent forth a General to besiege
A never conquered City. The siege was long,
And no report came back unto the King,
How well or ill his Expedition thrived;
Until his doubtful thoughts had given lost,
His hope oth' City, and his Army both.
When he being full of this despair, ariv'd
Oth' suddam his brave General with Victory;
Which made his thanks, as was his conquest double.
You may interpret me my Lord.

Emb. If so,
I am to tell the King he has won your love.

Bert. A blush may be excused in the confession:
It Is my first answer to the question: Yes.

Emb So from the doubtful darkness of the night,
The blushing morn Ushers the cheerful Sun,
To give new light and life unto the World:
I shall revive my King with these glad tidings.

Bert. You have said well,
Let us enform you better,

Talk aside with him Elkw. I can but think what old Segebert said
Concerning Laws, Customs and Priveledges.
And how this match will change the Government.
I fear, how ever the Laws may go, our Customs will
Be lost; for he me thinks out-flatters us already.

Elsr. He Is the Kings Favorite; and has woed so well
For him, that we may fear he will wrigle in
Twixt him and us, the prime man in her favor.

Bert. Let it be so. The tenth of the next month
I Will be prepared to entertain his Highness:
First to confirm a contract; then as soon
As he shall please to consummate our marriage.
In the mean time this Figure, which you say
Resembles him, as Painters skill affords:
Indeed it is a sweet one. Shall be daily Kisses it
My deer companion most unseparably;
And when I sleep it shall partake my Pillow.
Does he love mine as well do you think my Lord?

Emb. Just with the same devotion; If I durst
I would say more.

Bgrt Nay, speak my Lord, pray speak.


Emb. He does allow't a Table, Waiters and Officers
That eat the meat.

Bert. Indeed.


Elkw. O horrible.


Elsr. Nay, We shall never come near him.


Emb. And at night
He lodges it perpetually on his bosom.

Elkw. We are dunces to him.


Emb Here, just here;
And't please your Majesty of the hearts side.

shrugs Bert. Indeed I am pleased. I Will stay you but to night,
To morrow you shall hasten toward the King.
And for your speed wear this.

Emb. Most gracious Queen


kisses her hand. Exeunt Omnes. SCEN. II.
Enter Segebert, Apthynus, Offa, Mildred. Seg. It Is the Queens pleasure
children;
I must bear it.

Off. To Banishment, good heaven forbid. And Heaven
I hope will not yet suffer it.

Seg. Whilst we expect the best from Heavens high will,
It suffers Princes to reward us ill.
Yet can I think it shakes an angry hand
Over my head, for some misdeed of mine,
Which I have unrepented let go by.
It must be something sure was pleasure to me.
What in the World has most delighted me?
To love my King and Country, Neighbors, Friends,
And sometimes Enemies. (I Will pass over that)
I have done well (though I do not to boast it)
To succor and relieve all kind of wretches;
Poor souls that have half deafned me with Prayers,
Loud Prayers. They Will miss me now; and I
Shall have a miss of them too. (Let that pass)
What have I done at home, since my Wife died?
No Turtle ever kept a widowhood,
More strict then I have done. Then for my Children,

Offa. Come you hither.


Off. My Lord Father.


Anth. He might have called me first, I am the Eldest.


Seg I am sure thou wilt answer in behalor one.
Have I not loved thee always?

Off. O dear Sir,
I am all unworthy to acknowledge half,
Half of your pious bounties on a Son,
A wretch so ill deserving as my self;
Your hand has evermore been open to me,
Your' blessings still more readily have showered
Upon my head, then I had grace to ask them.
(For to my knowledge I never asked blessing yet
With a good will in all my life; some would
Do Penance in the Church with less perplexity.)

Seg. I, thou wast ever an obedient child,
Next, you my Daughter.

Aath. Then I must be last.


Seg. How have you found my love?


Mild Sir, far above my duty.


Seg. Do not weep, but speak good child.
I have not long to stay with ye; my three days
Will scarce afford this hour to bide with you.

Weep, Mild. Had I no tears nor sobs to interrupt
My flattering Tongue, but had speech as free
As the best Orator that speaks for fee
Could, or durst I attempt to express your goodness,
More then to say, it is more then I can say.

Seg. It Is a good maid; O Queen thou art too cruel!


Mild. But honored Father, grant me yet one Bone.


Seg. What Is that my Girl?


Mild. You shall know presently Dries her eyes.
Pray give me leave to kneel unto the Queen
To try what I can do for your repeal.
'Twere shame we should sit down and lose you thus.
The Queen affects me well. You know she loves me.
And promised once she would deny me nothing.

Seg. For this thou shall not trouble her: besides
You put me well in mind to charge you Daughter,
Upon my Blessing, go no more to Court.
Shun it I charge thee as thou would my curse.
If you have lovers there whom they call Servants,
Do as neat Surgeons do when they have touched
Loathsome or pestilent Sores; wash clean your hands
Of all of 'em, that are far more infectious.
And hear me daughter Mildred, I am told
The Northumbrian Ambassador now at Court,
The great Kings greater Favorite made hot love to you.
And that he obtained your Picture which he wears,
More proud often then his undeserved Honors.
Let me now charge you further, and observe it,
Shake off all thoughts of him. Upon the match now
He and whole Sholes of upstart Braveries,
Must hither needs attend their King. But if
Thou marry with him, or any amongst them,
Though the greatest subject that his Master has,
Thou art divorcd for ever of my blessing.

Mild. I will in all obey you.


Off. I shall look to that Sir.


Seg. Enough. Anthynus.


Anth. At last, yet I am thought on.


Seg. Now there rests
Of all my children but you to resolve me,
How you have found my love?

Anth. You ask me last
Sir I presume, cause you have had me longest,
To crown their testimony.

Seg. Yet you seem
Anthinus, by your leave, the least to know me,
But like a stranger look upon me when
These give me due respect.

Anth. Less then due
I dare not give you; and more were to abuse you.
Though I do not applaud, I must approve
You are a right good father.

Off. Umh.


Seg. Yet you speak in this but coldly.


Off. No, no, it sounds not well. But you are wise.


Anth. I have observed, but specially at Court,
Where flattery is too frequent, the great scorn
You have ever cast upon it, and do fear
To come within such danger of reproof.
Knowing your reason may as well detest it
In your own house, as in Kings Palaces.
And when I hear another (my dear Sister,
Heaven know I mean not you)
Speak like a flatterer, I hold my peace,
And so come short of doing what I would,
For fear of over-doing. But honored Sir,
When a Son can be found that dares do more
For's Fathers life or honor then my self,
I Will forfeit mine inheritance and your blessing;
So much your love engages me.

Off. If this were hearty now, not hollow.


Seg. No more,
Time calls away apace, and I am satisfied
Since I must undergo the Queens hard censure,
That it falls not upon me like a curse,
For wronging Crown or Country, Neighbors, Friends,
Or you my dearer children. I will take it
Not as a punishment but blessing rather.
To be removed from miseries
Are like to fall on this unhappy Kingdom.
And I will think the Queen has done me favor
To ease me of my cares a thousand ways,
To make my rest of life all holidayes.
Now take my last directions. Son Anthynus.

Anth. Son! It is holyday with me to. It Is
The first time he called me Son these three years.

Seg. Though you are eldest, and my lawful heir,
And must be Lord at my decease of all
My large Possessions. Yet it is my will
That till my death my Offa have the sway
And government of all, allowing you
That yearly stipen formerly I gave you.
Let me not hear of any grudge betwixt you.
And be you both respectful of your Sister,
And you of them good Girl. It is decreed
That I shall never see you more.

Mild. Ay me.


Cries Seg. Go get thee in I prithe Mildred,
Go in I say, thy brothers shall a little
Show me my way. Go in, I shall not speak else,
And I have more to say to them. Good now go.

Mild. O, O, O.


Seg. You will not disobey me? Heaven bless my Girl (go and come again)


Mild. But must I never see you more?


Seg. Yes child in Heaven; and then for evermore.


Mild. To wait your coming thither I Will before.


Exit. Seg. Thither shall be my first journey.
But after you shall still hear from me where e're I wander.

Anth. Not I Sir, by your favor.


Seg. Why I pray?


Anth. I must be nearer you. I kneel for it Sir,
And humbly pray I may not be denied
To wait on you in Exile. Take me with you.

Off. Do you not find him?


Seg. This is but your stoutness
(Though you seem humble unto me) against
Your brother, because I leave the rule to him.

Anth. Far be it from my thoughts dear Sir, consider
He has had that rule already diverse years
Ere since my mother die, and been your darling
Heaven knows without my grudge, while you were pleased.

Off. Heaven knows his thoughts the while alack a day.


Anth. I never envied him, though I have found
You have severely over looked my Actions,
When you have smiled on his, though but the same.
I have been still content while I have found my duty firm.

Seg. You shall along.


Anth. You have new begotten me.


Off. Sir.


Seg. Peace, I know thy fear my dearest Boy.


Off. Does not your blood begin to chil within you?
Great heirs are overhasty Sir,
And think their Fathers live too long. Pray Sir
Take heed of him. Though he should act the
Parricide abroad, our laws acquit him.

Seg. I Will give my self to Heaven, quit thou thy fear.
I am not worth a life. I Will take him hence
That thou may be secure from bloody spite.
I fear him not, mischief has spent her self
And left her sting within me for a charm
That quit me from the fear of further harm.
Go get thee home, my blessing and farewell.

Off. Pray Sir excuse me, I cannot speak for laughing.


aside Seg. And farwell Country, shed not a tear for me;
I go to be dissolved in tears for thee.

ACT. II.
SCEN. I.
Enter Ofriick the King, Theodrick, Theodwald, Eaufrid, Alfrid, E lelbert, 2.
Lords. OSr. Let your dispatches instantly be sent
Through all the Kingdom to incite the people
(As many as are mine, or would be thought so)
To express with me their joy, for the enjoying
Of the so long desired happiness,
In this our beauteous and magnificent Queen.

1. Lor. See that through all the Cities, Towns and Villages,
With solemn Feasts, and public sign of joy
They celebrate a day for these glad Tidings.

2. Lor. Post every way, that the third day from this
The general joy may sound and shine through all
The Kingdom.

Attend. That Is with Bells and Bonefires.


1. and 2. Lor. Go.


Ex. Attendants. Kin. And now my Lords, I must require your care
To set down a fit order for our journey
Unto this Queen, to perfect my worlds bliss.
I would not fail in the least Article
Of state or decency in this Affair.
Provide so that we may in all appear
Worthy the Achievement of our fair ambition.
And let our followers be chosen such
Whose inward worth no less then outward show
May make us glorious in this expedition.
Do speedily and effectually good my Lords,
The time hasts on.

1. and 2. Lor. Our duty shall prevent it.


King. Methinks the silent Picture seems to say,
It Is fit I should anticipate a day, Ex. Lords.
Rather then lose one minute from that light
Whose very shadow is so Angel bright.

Emb. But when your Highness shall behold, nay more
Shall touch, nay more and nearer shall embrace,
Nay more and nearer yet, enfold and handle,
Nay more and nearest of all, enjoy
The lively (that is too little) heavenly substance
Of this poor imaginary, which is as short,
As far inferior to the life,
As a weak starlight to the mid day Sun.

King. O do not ravish me with expectation.
This is a way to make each hour until
I shall enjoy my bliss, a tedious night;
Each night a death: Yet can I not desire
To shift the Argument off our discourse.
Did she appear so fair, so lovely?

Emb. Sir,
Suppose you see a glorious Firmament,
Bedek'd with heavenly Stars; so shines her Court
With Ladies might be thought of matchless beauty,
Striking mere humane sight with admiration.
Imagine now you see break through a Vail
Amidst those Stars, though heavenly lesser beauties
The bright Cynthia in her full of Luster.
So this no less to be compared Queen,
Shines above beauty to an humane eye
That is not mixed with powerful Majesty.
You may behold her your Divinity,
My King may comprehend what can befit
Me only to confess, I do admire.

King. O thou art mine. In such a Queen
And such a Servant never was King so blessed.
But are there in her Court (although inferior
To her more Excellent) such special Beauties,
And in my Theodricks apprehension?
You have made choice of one then?

Emb. I have seen
One so agreeable to my affection
Above all the rest, I cannot but confess
I strove to be her Servant.

King. Doubtless then
She was a fair one. Theodrick, never fear.
She is thine own, my self will be thy Spokesman
If she be worthy of thee.

Emb. For fair Virtue
With all the graces which adorn the mind,
In best opinion she is unparalled
By any Subject, Lady, (I must ever
Allow Supremacy unto the Queen)
And for her Person, it appears in all
Most answerable to her face. Of which here is
The exactest Copy that I could get drawn,
And without flattery by the Queens own Lymner.

King. Pray let me see it. Indeed it is a sweet one.
Did he that drew this of the Queen, draw that?

Emb: With the same hand.


King. But not with the same colors.
Trust me they are much unlike,
He wrongs the Queen
And merits her displeasure even to death,
To Advance a Servants beauty 'bove her own.

Emb. What says your Majesty?


King. Keep off a little,
You stand just in my light. And so he does,
Twixt me and the prime beauty of the world.
But I Will be even with him, and cause my Picturer
To set this Crown upon this head, and then --
Fie, what a fancie's this? He will perceive me.
But now I note this Forehead, and this Brow,
This Eye, this Lip. --

lets fall the other Emb. You have let fall the Queen. Sir.


takes it up King. I cry her mercy. What a shame it is
That I should fall in his discovery?
Are Courts so fraught with fraud and flattery?
And can a King that governs such professors
No whit dissemble to obscure his passions?
I must, and thus begin to practice it.
Theodrick, did thou note my contemplation
Over these Pictures?

Emb. I could but perceive
Your Highness viewing them well. And I have learned
To make no search into my Sovereigns thoughts.

King. Thou art ever modest. Thus it was Theodrick.
(Protest it raped me bove the pitch of Mortals)
First to consider what an absolute beauty
This Queen has in herself; but then to gather
The circumstances, many such as this
(As thou affirmst) inferior lights to her,
That shine about her, rendering her more glorious.
Lights her above affection, to an height
That claims her adoration. Then marvel not
That now when this but in Effigy
Was but placed by her. By which her Majesty
So much the more appeared, I could not hold
This Figure of that all to be commanding beauty
When my high thoughts were fled up to her presence.
Now take thy piece of craftsmanship again,
Which trust me is a pretty one; whilst I
Devote my service to this Deity.

Emb. Sir, you have given me the Queens Picture.


King. Ha!
What a mistake was here? But thou art honest,
And covetest but thy own; Take it Theodrick.
Now tell me of what house er Parentage
Your Mistrisse is.

Emb. I told you first her Virtues,
Her person next, and by this her beauty,
Which you are pleased to deem not much amiss.

King. It Is such Theodrick that had I not seen
This so much above it (pardon my hypocrisy)
I should have envied any man but thee
In such a choice. But speak her parentage.

Emb. That Is all her blemish.


King. Is she of tainted blood?


Emb. You search with Kingly wisdom. She is daughter
To that hold obstinate Baron I enform'd you of,
Whom the Queen in her just displeasure banished.

King. Thy love to her may hereafter plead for him.
But soft, I am not well.

Emb. Heaven bless the King.
Who waits within there?

King. Tarry, let me see
That Picture once again. It wants exceedingly
Of this in many things.

Emb. I should want judgment
Not to grant that.

King. Here it wants palpably
The drooping of the brow; and here again
The dullness of the Eye, which here shows deadly
But for a little squint it has. Good Queen
You look a squint. Then look you Sir, yours wants.
You shall not hear me neither, cause I will not
Spoil your conceit of it. Your Lady wants
The furious sharpness of the nose, which here
My Queen has very shrewly. And again,
You have not the hanging of the nether lip,
Which the best Phisiognomists do tell us
Shows women apt to lust, and strong incontinence.
Phew, This is all too sweet for mortal sense,
Here, take it again, and keep mine for me with it.
Lay'em together, the one may mend the the other.

Emb. I have known women often marry one another.
Their Pictures may perhaps have greater virtue.

King. I am not well, what kind of Changeling am I?
A wild confusion rumbles in my brain,
My thoughts are all at strife.

Emb. How fares your Highness?


King. Sick, sick, Theodrick.


Emb. Retire Sir to your Couch.


Enter 2. Lords. 1. 2. Lor. Where is my Lord the King.


King. Here yet my Lords.


Emb. The King's not well.


1. Lor. We have provided for your Highness journey,
In such a sort as never King went forth.

King. Whither, to Heaven my Lords?


2. Lor. Yes, to the Queen.
Lovers count marriage Heaven before they wed,
But afterward I know what some have said.
Oh this is your honey moon.
Yes, yes, you shall to Heaven, your Heaven as you call it,
In such a royal manner. See the Order.

King. Pray peace.


Emb. You do not well to vex the King
You see he is sick.

1. Lor. Sick? marry Heaven forbid.


2. Lor. Sick of the Wife before he has her.
Come, a very trothplight qualm, into your Chamber,
And at we find you we will our selves bestir.

Emb. Who waits within there? call the Kings Physicians.


Exeunt omnes. SCEN. II.
A shout within, the Music, sound the Bells. Enter 4. Clowns with tools. 1.
AND what is the reason of all this merry glee?


2. The King, the King man must be married.


3. And must he have a Wife?


2. A Wife? a Queen man, and all the Wives in her Dominion
Must be his Commonwealth, and under us.

4. O brave.


2. And we must son and daughter it upon their Nation.


4. That will be brave indeed.


1. O but where is Jeffrey, jolly Jeffrey now? the prick and praise,
The very prick and praise, and prime Spark of our Parish, to set our Bonefires
and our
Mirth a blazing.

3. The Bells a ringing, and the Bowls a trowling, the Fiddlers fumbling and
Tumbling. O Jeffrey, where art thou Jeffrey?

2. He Is at hand I warrant you, he went but to Church
Even now.

4. What, to pray at such a time as this?


2. No but to help to rear the Tennor, and will come
Presently.

3. That Is to be born withal. It is indeed a divelish
Lopheavy Bell. I would the Churchwarden that
Should have mended it when he robbed the poor, were
Hng'd in's place.

2. There said you well. The Curate could say almost as much
When 'twas. But it makes no matter what he says, I see
Little amended.

3. Whoop, here comes Jeffrey sweating in these affairs.


Ent. Jeffrey. Jeff. The great Bells of our Town, they tingle they tangle,
They jingle they jangle, the Tenner of them goes merrily.

4. O Jeff ey, welcome Jeffrey.


Jeff. And shall we have a Queen?


All. So* they say Jeffrey. O the bravest Woman!


Jeff. Take heed o'that, woman did you say? Take heed, I
Give you warning. No man must know she is a woman
But the King himself. But a brave Queen she is they say,
And loves a man with all her heart.
Where art O Queen? we will make thee
Such an holy day, as shall
Justle all the working days out of our Almanac. It
Shall be said that we will work no more till thy
Seventh Son, O Queen, who must be born a Prophet, shall
Foretell, the Age to come shall not have a true labourer
Or honest workman in it.

1. So we may make a long holyday indeed.


Jeff. Let work no more be thought on, we will revel it out
Of remembrance, we will not cease our joy to sleep, for
Fear we dream of work again. Down with your profane
Tools, and Implements of Husbandry, the very sight of 'em
Dishonours our new holy day.

1. But Jeffrey, our Masters grudge to give us wood
Enough to make a beaking Bonefire*

Jeff. How?


2. They say it is waste.


Jeff. Not wood to make a Bonefire?
Your Sheeplocks, Flayles, Spades,
Shovels, Rakes and Pitchforks, shall all be made a Bonefire.

2. And so we may be sure to make holy day till
We get new ones.

Jeff. The maids shall bring their Rocks, their Wheels and Reels, their Tubs,
their Pales and Buttocks.


4. Buckets thou would say.


Jeff. Where was my mind?
Their Buckets shall they bring, Washbowls and Butter-churns,
Their Buckingtubs, Baskets and Battledoors;
And all be made a Bonefire for the Queen.

3. My mother will not let her householdstuff go so.


Jeff. We Will burn her for a witch then with all her trash,
And her thatcht mansion too about her Ears,
But we will show our zeal unto the Queen
In fire sufficient.

All. 4. Ah good Boy.


Jeff. Sfoot, if our Masters do rebel against us
Now Majesty's on our side, and not give fuel,
When we mean to give fire, as duty binds
We Will have their Carts by the arses, Hardles, Wheelbarrows,
The Ploughs and Harrows, and the Whips;
Because the Beasts shall play too; only we will spare
Their Racks and Mangers. All that is made of wood
Belonging to our work besides, shall perish,
Shall perish, I have said it. Not the Politic
Molecatchers staff shall escape the flame.
Not low us wood? we will drink up all the drink to the Queens health
And burn the Hogsheads, Barrels, Kilderkins,
Firkins and Rundlets, all to the wooden dish
Shall smoke for it in our bonefire for the Queen.

All. Good boy again.


1. But where shall we make this
Houge and monstrious Bonefire?

Jeff. Here, here, just here, in this very place, I come to mark
The ground, here it shall blaze up to the Heavens, and
We will roast our Town Bull at it, with a thousand
Puddings in his belly.

All. 4. Ah good Jeffrey still.


Ieff. Nothing too dear to signify our loves to the
King and Queen, let us bestir us therefore,
And enact this as a law amongst us, That
He that does not gall his hands to day with
Ringing, shall be hanged up in the bellrope;
And he that is not soundly liquor'd by night shall
Be made fuel for our Bonefire; such dry Rascals
Will burn better then Heretics.
And last of all, he that does not keep his wench
Waking in the way that we wot of till to morrow milking time, shall either be
Gelt, or else led through the Town by that which
Shall be namelesse in a cleft stick. And so God save
The Queen.

1. And the King to.


Jeff. The King we make no doubt of, we have prayed
For him these seven years.

All 4. A Jeffrey, a Jeffrey.


Enter a Constable and Alfride. Constable. Whither away my friends?


Jeff. To make the bravest bonefire that ever blazed since
Troy, or that which the Tyrant Emperor warmed
His hands at.

Constable. You must forbear.


Jeff. We must forbear, what Hebrew's that?
We understand not what must forbear means.

Constable. You must forbear to make your Bonefire.


Jeff. Must? that word had never been named had all been Jeffrey;
We must forbear to set our loves on fire
Unto the King, Do thou not feel thy self
O man what e're thou art, becoming a Traitor?
Know thou the words thou speak against the King?

Constable. I know what I do speak, and what I am.


1. It is the Constable.


Constable. I know my Office too, by virtue whereof
I charge you in the Kings name, lay by
Your sports and pastimes, I Will lay you by the heels else.
Will you Sir know a reason? the King is sick.

Jeff. Then let us drink his health.


Constable. He is sick exceedingly.


Jeff. Then let us drink exceedingly.


Constable. He Is sick even unto death.


Jeff. Then let us ring our Bells for that, and make a Funeral Bonefire.


Constable. I say no drinking at all, no Bells, nor no Bonefires,
It is his Majesty's command.

Jeff. I say his Majesty's first word shall stand for Bells and Bonefires,
Though we set the Town a fire, and ring the Bells backwards.

Constable. Ye will not be all hanged will ye? see
Here Is a Gentleman and a Courtier, that so signifies his Majesty's pleasure.

Jeff. A Gentleman and a Courtier, where be they?
I see but one.

Alfr. Sir I am both.


Jeff. What monsters are bred in Africa? I take you but
For one at most; well, for the Gentleman that you
Are, thus I salute you; Now for the Courtier that
Is within you, I must wait upon it here; this posterior posture did
I learn of a Spanniel whose name was Courtier.
Now let me tell you Master Gentleman and Courtier, that we are
Sorry that sickness should make our King and Master
So fickle headed as to cross our sports thus, that we
Meant to have made him such an holyday as might
Have proved more worth to him than a Wife and
Twenty sicknesses besides: Yet can we not be so sorry for his sickness as that
it
Was his mishap to play mock holyday with us.

Alsr. The King shall know your loves, and for your part Master
Speaker.

Jeff. Your Friend and Jeffrey.


Alfr. Then Jeffrey be it, I Will promise you preferment, if
You will up to Court with me.

Jeff. Up to the Gallows shall I not?


Alfr. My life for thine. And thou shall not deny me,
Here Is Gold in earnest, take it. The Kings disease
Is melancholy, and thou may do him more good
Then a whole College of Physicians.

Jeff. He takes me for a fool, I Will make a venture on it,
The best is, many a Fool has thrived at Court; and
The worst is, I am not the first that has forsaken
His Country. I Will along with you Sir, and if I rise
By you, I shall quickly learn Courtship enough
To forget to thank you: And for your parts my
Old Friends, what need soever you may have of
Me, you must be sure I Will be a stranger to you.

All 4. Will thou forsake us Jeffrey? then who shall dance
The hobby horse at our next Revel rout?

Jeff. The hobby horse of preferment gallops me from you;
If you chance to see me in my rohes hereafter
When I come to be the Fool Royal, you may admire my
Garments, and whisper to your acquaintance very softly,
That you knew me once, But on your Allegiance look
Not that I should know you then.

1. Nay, we are not such Clowns but we have heard that
Courtiers in favor will know no body.

Jeff. It Is true, for when they are in disgrace the silliest
Clown will not know them.

Constable. You were best look to your fast footing then when
You are high in favor.

Jeff. High in fooling thou would say silly Constable; yet there is no
Great danger. One fool may outstand six favorites.

Alfr. Away then as thou art.


Jeff. I Sir, I Will take no shift with me, I shall shift
The better when I come there.

All 4. Well, farewell Jeffrey, thy like will never come here.


Jeff. Commend me to all the Lasses, and let not them, nor
Do not you grieve for my departure, nor for
The holyday that here is lost; instead of which, that
You may have a new one, I wish that one of you, even he
That loves me best, as speedily as may be would deserve
Hanging, that the rest may make holyday for him.
Sic valete valetote.

1. Now the Dee'l brast crag of him.


2. He Is a right Courtier already.


4. I Am glad he used us no better, If he had
I should have cried out mine eyes for him.

Exeunt omnes. SCEN. III.
Enter Segebert, Anthynus. Seg. 'TWas a miraculus escape. Good Heaven
Is with me still. I have not heard
That any of these native Salvages,
These homebred monsters in humanity,
These outlaws, these-detested Thieves and Robbers,
Have enterpriz'd a villainy like this,
To set with such a violence on men
Of our weak seeming, poor and needy Pilgrims,
When I did offer them to shun their blows,
All that we had even to our bare apparel

Anth It seems their aim was at our blood, not means.
And doubtless they were some that knew our persons
Through our disguises, and persu'd us hither
With an inveterate malice to destroy us
In this wild Desert.

Seg. Was it not enough
Thou impious Queen* and more unnatural unnatural,
To banish me unjustly? but thou must
Pursue my life by treacherous cruelty?
Art thou not hurt at all my Son?

Anth. Not touched,
To the least danger of one drop of blood

Seg. They are three sturdy Knaves and strongly weapon'd.


Anth Had they been forty Sir, while I was armed
By your white Innccence and holy Prayers,
Heavens justice lent me hands to beat them off.
Yet give me leave dear Sir, to ask you now
Why you have bent your Pilgrimage this way?
Leading into a country of more danger
Unto your life and safety, then your own
Nerhtumberland, whose King cannot but rage
In greater heat against you then the Queen,
That so unjustly banished you; you may fall
(Though you escape the danger of this Forest)
Into the reach of his revengeful fury.

Seg* It was and is my purpose to appear
In person to that King at my life's price,
Which I am no more fond of then my Country
Is of my truth. And when I have made known
The unfitness of the match, by the dishonor
He Will run into if he proceed in it;
If then he take my life, I am at home,
Eternally at home.

Anth. But made you none
Acquainted that you meant to travel this way?

Seg. None
But my dear son Offa.

Anth. Then sure the Queen
Sent her Bloodhounds after you; I perceive
They could not be mere Thieves.

Seg. Good Angels guard us;
They have made head again in greater numbers.

Enter Offa disguised and Outlaws. Anth. Take greater courage then.


Off. Faint hearted slaves
Must I give hire and do the talk my self?

1. Outl. It Is not amiss to help for expedition.


All. Upon 'em all at once.
They fight. Anthynus knock down 1. Outlaw. Offa wounds Segebert in the head,
he sincks.
Anthynus disarms Offa. Offa runs off, whilst Anthynus speaks.

Anth. This sword thou never handlest more. Take you it and fresh courage Sir.
Anth. Beats off the other and speaks on
May you not cease your flight till you reach Hell,
That bred ye villans; to pursue ye further
Were to neglect a nearer duty.
Dear honored Sir, look up;
Father, how do you?

Seg. Even almost well I hope.


Anth. He means with death*
Alas he is deeply wounded and bleeds much.
But what do I in this? I have not tears
Enough to wash these wounds, although some linen
To bind them up. But mearly to bewail him
With looks and lamentations is as fruitless
As here to leave him languishing to death,
And run in pursuit of his enemies
To work revenge, Neither of these bring ease.
Mount up my thoughts to Heaven then for a blessing
Upon my ready industry, and let each faculty
Of mine as prompt to works and prayers be.
How is it now Sir? do I not bind it too hard?
Pray Sir speak to me.

Seg. Offa, oh son Offa!


Anth. Offa is not here Sir, it is I, your son Anthynus.
Why look you on that sword so?

Seg. O son Offa!


Anth. Pray Sir look on me, I fear his memory fails him.
And as his mind was ever on Offa
Before unfortunate me; so now he gives
The merit that belongs (if any be)
Due to the duty of a son in this
From me to him. But envy be thou from me.
Why look you on that sword, and not on me?
'Twas I that won it for you.

Seg. O Anthynus!


Anth. That Is well said Sir, speak though but faintly to me,
I had rather hear your groans then find you speechless,
Better will come I hope.

Seg. Help me to rise.


Anth. That Is comfortably spoken; so, well done
Like a strong man again.

Seg. O I am weak.


Anth. Rest upon me, my strength, my all is yours.
Aeneas that true Trojan son, whose fame
For piety ever crowns his name
Had not a will (although my means be poor)
Exceeding mine to answer nature more,
Well said, that step became you, we shall on
I see apace, give me your sword, it troubles you.

Seg. No, not this sword.


Anth. That Is the best sign of all.
Keep it and hold it fast Sir, we will back
A little to the Spring we came by, where
I Will somewhat more accommodate your wounds.
Heaven, which men's honest pains does ever bless,
Will when we least can hope afford redress.

Exeunt. 1. Outl. Oh, oh, some help, oh.


Enter an Hermit and Servant with a Basket. Herm. Hark, did thou not hear a
cry?


Serve. Of nothing but
My guts that cry within me Sir for meat.
I hear no other cry, nor have not done.

Outl. Oh.


Serve. Almost these 5. years.


Herm Peace thou belly-god, 'twas there again.


Serve. It is a belly-divel rather, that has tormented me
E're since I served you under ground hereby. No man
Above ground could have fasted like me.

Herm. Have thou not daily food thou Caterpiller?


Serve. Yes, such as Caterpillars eat;
Blossoms and Buds, many green growing things,
Such as you make your medicines of, and Roots, would I could get
Some of the Caterpillars. A dish of Caterpillars fried,
Let me see in what? in Usurers grease, if one
Knew where to get it, might serve to feast an Emperor.
But we live out oth' world by Prayer and Fasting.

Herm. Thou sarest as I fare, feedest as ost as I.


Serve But Sir, there is difference in our exercises. If I
Could spend my time, whole days in prayer, as
You do, this kind of fare or fasting
Rather, would not be so bitter to me.

Outl. Oh.


Herm. Did thou not hear it now?


Serve. Yes, something like the croaking of a Frog me thought. If it
Were one, I would wade up to the waste for it
For my supper. Here, here Sir, here it is, here is more
Work for you. Once a week we are commonly troubled
Either to cure or bury one or other, thank the
Outlaws, they make us work for nothing here, as if we dwelt
Here for the purpose, nor do I know other indeed.

Herm. Look up man, can thou speak?


Outl. O no.


Serve. There Is great hope of recovery, you hear he
Says he cannot speak.

Herm. Can thou hold up thy hands, and lift up thine eyes?


Serve. He does, he does; hanged he will do well enough.


Herm. Help up his body, then down into my Cave.


Serve. And to morrow up with him again, and then down
Into a grave. Better let him lie now Sir,
You Will never do good on him I doubt; He looks
So damnably as if the Devil were at my elbow
For him.

Herm. Peace knave, in charity I Will do my best.
Heaven hitherto my labors well has blessed.

Serve. Nay, had I his weight in Venison so near killed, and might be allowed to
Eat it; I would ask no more flesh while I lived.

Here enter Offa and the Outlaws assuring him they are dead. Enter Anthynus
carrying Segebert in his Arms. Anth. Can no release be had? is this the place,
That cursed piece of ground which Nature meant
Should be called Hell on Earth? where outrage reigns,
Murder and cruelty beyond it; deep despair
To a poor remnant of distressed life
Of al reviving comforts, food, or medicine?

Seg. Oh set me down.


Anth. And must we needs be set
By the malicious ignorance of Fortune
On this internal way?

Seg. Patience good Son.


Anth. Where ill abounds, and every good is wanting,
Was It not enough that so much blood was spilt
From this white reverend head, from which has flowed
Counsels that have preserved the blood of Nations?
And fitter now to wear a Diadem
It self, then thus be stained with his own wrong.
Had it not been enough to have left him so,
Thou Tyrant Fortune, but to take away
All means of Succor? no relief? no comfort?

Seg. Good Son, be not impatient.


Anth. And see, see,
Accursed Fate! he bleeds a fresh again,
As if his blood I now but washed away
Cried for the rest to follow it.

Seg. Indeed,
Son, this impatience hurts thy self and me.
Better let me bleed still (bleeding's an easy death)
Then thou displease the awful power of Heaven,
By chiding at the feigned ones, good take heed.

Anth. Me you have justly chidden, and I beg
Pardon of Heaven and you, and now methinks
I am inspired unto a further duty
Of seeking remedy. I Will leave no way untried
To find it, if I may. And though my absence
Will sore perplex me; I will with your grief
Leave you a while to forage for relief.
But first pray let me change a sword with you Sir;
Not that I think yours better, but because
I fear some* charm is in it, or secret ill
Against you, you sigh so when you view it still

Seg. Good Son, forbear't, and me unto my thoughts,
Till thou returnst. Heavens and my blessing with thee.

Anth. So strengthened I shall sure find remedy
To raise you out of this calamity.

Exit Anthynus. Seg. This sword Anthynus? no, should rhou but know
This sword as I do, it would raise thy Fury
Unto an execution of that horror
Would shake me in my grave: this sword
Which now I cannot but with tears remember,
Was once mine own. I gave it to thy Brother,
(I will not call him so) but to my Son,
(Why should I call him so?) but to Offa,
And so I fear I name my murderer.
For when I gave it him, I charged him never
To part with it; he firmly vowed the same,
And that whilst I or he should live, no man
Should ever give it motion but himself.
Were thou so greedy of my life, my Offa,
To snatch it from me thus? when as the wounds
Thy Parricidial hands has given me,
Are not so bitter as the wronged thoughts,
Though they are deep and overflow their btinks;
I have two wounds within me that are deeper,
Which have discovered in my heart and bowels
A trebbled Spring of deerer blood then this.
One pricks me with compassion for thee,
My good, my charitable, pious Son.
All blessing due to sanctimonious virtue
Be ever thy companion, till thou art crowned
Among Sons of men the pattern of true Piety.
What foul mistrusts? puddles of jealousy
Were lodged in this dark bosom against thee?
And of affection what a pure stream did run
By a false Current to my second Son?
Who by thy truth appears not now thine own.
Which makes my other wound, in that so long
I cherished him by doing of thee wrong.
Now from my heart issue two streams of blood,
One thick and clotty, the other clean Vetmilion.
In the gross blood I vent the wrong conceit
I swallowed against thee my good Anthynus.
And in the clear I see Offa's falsehood may
In both my blood runs forth apace. O
My thick blood Anthynu be forgiven by thee.
And the clear cleanse my Offa's treachery
Oh --
sincks
Enter Hermit and Servant. Herm. Did thou not heat a groan? a dying groan?


Serve. Not I Sir, I heard nothing.


Herm. Hark, look about; I am sure I heard a groan


Ser. Here Sir, here is something that perhaps has groand.
But it is out of hearing now.

Herm. And so is pity amongst men. Ay me* an old man
Murdered! A seeming simple innocent old man,
And yet he holds a sword.

Serve. So, more work still.
Whilst we are gathering Simples to cure one,
Here Is another John Simple laid in our way to bury.

Herm. He is yet warm.


Serve. I, but he has no breath, not so much I Will undertake as a
Scolding wife that has been 9. days in the grave.

Herm. Alas, he is gone indeed; What ruthless villains
Could have done this on such an aged man,
In this so harmless habit?

Serve. Good master, let it warn you; though we have hitherto
Passed by these man-Tygers, these wolvish Outlaws safely, early and late, as
not
Worth their malice. Yet pray Sir now since they
Begin to kill men of this coat, and these years, let us
Forsake this Salvage habitation, and live
In the world of meat again.

Herm. How ill are these white hairs bestain'd with red?
Methinks I should have known this face. Nothing to wipe
The blood off? come, help away with him.

Serve. He Is holp away, and made away enough already methinks.


Herm. Why do not lift?


Serve. Sure they have blown their sins into him that killed him,
He Is so heavy, he is deadly heavy. Pray Sir let me
Fetch my gtave instruments and your book and bestow him here.
You will not bury him in your Cave I Am sure.

Herm. I say I Will have him down; perhaps the wounded
Man that is there may know him.

Serve. I would I had but this Fellows weight in buttock Beef.


Exeunt. Enter Anthynus. Anth. I come my Father, chide not now my stay;
In which I was more tardy I confess,
Then e're I was in duty. I have brought you --
Where are you Sir? Ha! this was sure the place,
And this the very Oak at which I left him;
I marked it carefully, and took due heed
Even to the number of my steps in my
Departure, how to make my back return,
Nor was my tarriance such, that in that space
He could recover strength to shift his ground.
I wish it were so well with him. My Lord,
My father, what a mist of doubts stand I
Amazed in? and my unspeakable amazement
Is such, that I begin to call my sight
And memory in question, whither this place?
Or whither he? or I? or any thing
Be, or be not; good senses do not leave me,
My search will be in vain if you forsake me.
Father, my Lord! where are you? how? or where?

Ecch. Here.


Anth. That was well said, speak on.

Ex. Now where?


Ecch. Now here.


Anth. within Anth. Now here? where is that here?


Ecch. Here.


Ent. Anth. Anth. I hear and follow, but I know not where.


Ecch. Here.


Anth. At the same place again?
If there be place, or I know any thing,
How is my willingness in search deluded?
It is the Wood that rings with my complaint,
And mocking Echo makes her merry with it.
Cursed be thy babbling, and may thou become
A sport for wanton boys in thy fond answers,
Or stay, perhaps it was some gentle Spirit
Hovering in the Air, that saw his flight to Heaven,
And would direct me thither after him.
Good reason, leave me not, but give me leave
A little to consider nearer home;
Say his diviner part be taken up
To those celestial joys, where blessed ones
Find their inheritance of immortality.
I cannot think his earthly properties
So soon could find the passage to that height.
His body would be here, poor martyred body,
That though it yet did live, could not part hence
Without the help of others legs and hands.
And here haunt none, but such whose Cruelty
Would toss him into further misery.
Wild Beasts, if here were any half so ravenous
As those inhumane mankind monsters were,
(That drew his blood and these unusual tears)
Could not devour him all, some particle,
Some remnant would be left to bless a Son with.
But here is none but that too sure a sign
For me to know the place by, where I left him.
Part of the blood I saw run ftom him. O
Dear hallowed blood inspire me with this kiss
To find the fountain whence this stream did flow.
I will not eat, nor sleep until I know.
No? can thou tell me nothing? Then I Will take
A Sample of the precious store was spilt,
To keep me still in memory of the guilt:
And of my vow* never to feed or rest,
Until I find him here, or with the blessed.

Exit. ACT. III.
Enter Theodwald, and meet Ethelswick. Theod. I have not known, nor read, nor
heard since I
Was of discretion to know any thing
Worthy a man's capacity of the like.

Eth. You are well met my Lord.
And you as welcome to the Court my Lord, although a sad one.

Eth. Came you now from the King my Lord.


Theod. Even now.


Eth. How left you him good my Lord?


Theod. As the Physicians
I fear must shortly do, not knowing what
To say to him.

Eth. Heaven bless the King, is he
So dangerously sick?

Theod. He Is sick enough
To be prayed for my Lord:
Although I cannot properly call it
A sickness: I am sure it is a disease
Both to himself and all that come about him.
I fear he is brain-crack'd, lunatic and Frantic, mad;
And all the Doctors almost as mad as he,
Because they cannot find the cause: something
They guess afflicts his mind, but of what nature
It is, or how the strong conceit may grow
They can by no means win or wrest from him.
Such is the obstinacy of his disease.

Eth. Where is Theodrick then, his bosom Friend,
His special Favorite? He methinks might gain
The knowledge of his inmost thoughts.

Theod. It Is thought
He put these wild tormenting thoughts into him.
For which the King has banished him the Court
And with a guard upon his person sent him
To live confined at his house. My self and all,
The saithful body of the State have moved
The King for his repeal again to favor.
Even we that for these two years space have wished him
For good State-reasons, favourlesse and headless,
Have begged for his enlargement that the King
Might vent his troubled thoughts into his Breast,
And so find way to ease: but all in vain,
He will not hear of him.

Eth. You tell me wonders.
But good my Lord, how takes the King his rest?

Theod. Troth as mad mortals do; we cannot tell
Whether he sleeps at all or not. Sometimes
He seems to sleep, but then his troubled thoughts
Express themselves in sighs, in sudden starts,
In groans, and sometimes speech of od confused
And indigested matter; then he leaps
From off his bed, calls for his horse and Armor,
Swords, Spears and Battelaxes. But anon
Bids all be let alone; and calls for books,
Shoffels Divinity and Poetry,
Philosophy and Historical together, sports,
And throws all by. Then calls for merry
Which e're they be presented, he forbids,
With strong rebukes to all that spend their time
In any exercise but contemplation
In solitary places; then walks forth
Into the Groves and Thickets, charging those
That follow him (nor dare they disobey)
To keep aloof at such proportioned distance
As he unheard by all may vent his passions
Unto the Air, the Woods, the Rocks, the Springs.
And twice in these Retirements have we lost him
In those obscure Meanders which his melancholy
Has led him to; and when much industry
And care had found him out, 'twas double trouble
To wind him and his fancies home again

Eth. It is most pitiful.


Enter Physician. Theod. Now, how does the King?


Phys. Full now my Lord of a new fancy. He
Is now becoming Pilgrim.

Eth. A Pilgrim, why?


Phys. I know not why, nor to what shrine, nor do
I hold it fit to ask him; but to give
Free way unto his fancy yet a while,
In all to please and play with his infirmity.
It Is our best way to cool Phrenetique humors
Before we kill 'em Sir.
His Pilgrimage shall not be far, though he pretends a long one.
He has on his weeds already.
And who associates him?

Phys. Only my self, and his new fool he says.


Theo. Good, a fool and a Physician.


Phys A Physician and a fool you would say. The Physician ever
Before the fool, my Lord.

Theod. And why the fool before my Lord, I pray?


Phys. Your Lordships pardon, we must have no Lord
Along with us; though I was sent to enquire
If you Lord Ethelswick were come to Court?
Whom the King sent for.

Exit Physician. Theod. Sent the King for you,
After your long retirement in the Country?

Eth. He did indeed my Lord.


Theod. There Is something in it then
That savours not of madness altogether.
That having put by your Antagonist,
The trouble of the Court, his favorite,
He sends for you immediately upon it. Enter King, Jeffrey, Alfride and Edelbert.
Here comes our Pilgrim King.

King. Stand all apart.
To be completely armed from head to foot,
Cannot advance the spirit of a King
Above the power of love, nor to be clad
In poorest habit of humility
Can mortify the least of the desires
That love enflames man with. No outward dress
Can change or make affection more or less.
I have tried all the ways I can to conquer
Or to humiliate my raging passion,
Which still grows more predominant ore my reason.
I find it in my self, and know my error,
Though no means to correct it. I do know
It Is foully done to slight the Queen that loves me.
And it was an act no less unprincely
To cast into suspense my friendly servant
For what transgression was it in him to love
One fairer then my choice? before he knew
My wavering inconstancy. I know
Withal my punishment is just, how e're
My sufferings make me wish it less severe.
For my unjust removing of Theodrick,
I lose all helpful counsel, all relief,
That my oreburdend breaking heart cries out for.
Into his breast I could unload my grief,
Were it composed of ought but his abuse
I must not, dare not trust him with this story,
Lest for redress I meet revenge. Who Is there?

All. My Lord the King.


King. O you are welcome Ethelswick, I am now
To trust you in a serious affair.

Eth. My duty binds me to your Highness service.


Kisses the Kings hand. King. We will walk forth together Ethelswick.
Let none presume to follow. Not a man
Give the least motion this way on your lives.

Jeff. not I, neam King? will thou not take me with thee?


King. Pull the fool off me.


Jeff. O but they shall not neam, it is more then they
Can do.

2. Lor. No Sir, we will try.


King Again, I charge you all that none presume
To follow us.

Ex. King and Ethelswick. Jeff. All? will thou leave all thy fools behind thee
neam?


1. Lor. All fools, Sir, shall be whipped.


Jeff. And where will you find wise men to whip 'em all?
We shall make whipping one another shortly.
Trust me a trim Court-complement. I am advanced
To high promotion, am I not? to wear long coats again,
And feed on whipping cheer? but hark you
Cousin Lord, do you reward fools at Court?

1. Lor. Yes fool, if they deserve it.


Jeff. And is desert rewarded here too?


1. Lor. Yes.


Jeff. Then it is desert gets whipping, and Fooling gets reward.
I Will not forsake the Court for that yet, where I hope to
Get enough to raise half my Country.

2. Lor. By what project I pray thee?


Jeff By begging a monopoly, Cousin Lord. You know fools will
Always be begging, they are naturally inclined to it,
Else none would be Courtiers.

4. Lor. And what is your monopoly?


Jeff. I hope the King will give it me, if the Lord that
Walked with him bring him in again as wise as
He went out.

3. Lor. What is it thou would beg?


Jeff. It Is a monopoly of fools my Lords. That the King
Would carry no fools with him but of my election, and
By my allowance, and that when he comes
Back into his own Country, he bring no new
Ones from thence, but by the same Authority.

1. Lor. And what price or fee will you set upon a fools head
For his admittance?

Jeff. According to the degree, or estate, or quality of the fool,
Cousin Lord.

2. Lor. This is a covetous and a politic fool.


Jeff. Not so politic Cousin Lord, as a Statesman that paid his
Head for his learning, nor so covetous as a Churchwarden
May be, when I am dead and gone. But as I was
A saying, I Will use my fools according to their quality
Or breed. If he be a poor fool, I Will make him pay the more
For It. If he be rich, I may be beholding to him another way.
If he be a fool natural and poorly born, he is
Sure to pay enough for it. But if he have more breeding
Then Capacity, and be a nobly descended fool, I Will use him
The better for your sakes Cousin Lords, and the rather because
I hope you will further my suit to the King. And so
I Will wait his coming in at the back Stairs.

Exit 3. Lor. This is a precious Fool.


1. Lor. The King (would his infirmity give leave)
Would be delighted in him.

2. Lor. I am glad
The King has chosen one yet to impart
(I hope) his grief unto.

3. Lor. But is it true,
The King sent for Lord Ethelswick to Court?

4. Lor. Now in his melancholy, and so presently
On the removing of his loved Theodrick.

1. Lor. It is most true, in which we may observe
A turn of State. Good Ethelswick was dear,
Dearly beloved indeed by our late King,
And worthily deserved his royal Favor.
But with his son, our sovereign Lord that is,
Youthful Theodrick was prime man in grace,
And quickly shouldred Ethelswick from Court.
Theodrick's absence now resignes new place
For Ethelswick to reassume the grace.
Thus the Court-wheel goes round like Fortunes ball,
One Statesman rising on another fall.
Let Us wait the coming of the King my Lord.

3. Lor. We are for the Woods to make a flight or two
At the Phesant Edelberts.

4. Lor. Alfride agreed.


(...) Anthynus. Anth. To fast and watch is duty, and no Penance,
When such affairs as mine are in pursuit.
How dare I think of meat or sleep, which are
Such hin drances to a devotion
Whose least neglect would pull down Thunder on me;
And to take sense of weariness were a sin
Unpardonable. But to have lost 3. days
And tedious nights in painful diligence,
In such a search as this, for such a father;
And now to lose the hope of finding him
Is torment unexpressible. Where? which way
Shall I make further inquisition?
Yes, I will on to the Northumbrian Court,
And make my griefs appear unto the King.
My wandering steps have almost lead me now
Unto his Court; where if I may find grace,
Nay but humanity, I shall prevail
To have these woods, the dens of barbarous Outlaws,
In which I lost my Father, strictly searched. Recorders
Ha! do I hear or dream? is this a sound,
Or is it but my fancy? it is the music,
The music of the Spheres that do applaud
My purpose of proceeding to the King.
I Will on; but stay; how? what a strange benummednesse
Assails and siezes my exterior parts?
And what a Chaos of confused thoughts
Does my imagination labor with?
Till all have wrought themselves into a lump
Of heaviness, that falls upon mine eyes
So ponderously that it bows down my head,
Begins to curb the motion of my tongue,
And lays such weight of dullness on my Senses,
That my weak knees are doubling under me.
There is some charm upon me. Come thou forth
Thou sacred Relic! suddenly dissolve it.
I sleep with deathlesse; for if thus I fall,
My vow falls on me, and smites me into Ruin.
But who can stand against the power of Fate?
Though we foreknow repentance comes too late

Enter six Saxon Kings ghosts crowned, with Scepters in their hands, etc. They
come one after another to Authynus; then fall into a dance; loud music; after
the dance, the first leads away the second, he the third, so all: the last
takes up Anthynus, and leaves him standing upright. Anth. Am I among the dead?
or in what Region
Either of Earth or Air? Heaven? Hell? or whither?
Or into what am I translated? Am I
Alive, or dead, awake, asleep, a man,
Or airy ghost? or did I see or dream?
If now I be awake, and am Anthynus,
That grieved Anthynus who has lost a
Then did I see in apparition
The ghosts of our 6. last West Saxon Father, Kings,
As each succeeded other now passed by me.
Of which the last Kenwalcus our late King,
And father to the Tyranness that banished
Mine, seemed to take me up to his succession;
It were more idle then a dream can be,
For me awake to think it possible
I should become a King, and of that land
From which my father was exild; it must
Be then a dream. As I have heard of men
That sleeping stand, nay walk and talk as I do,
At least as I suppose. Now if I sleep
Not having seen my father, I have broke
My vow; I Will rather think me dead; then why
Was I not blessed with my dead Fathers sight?
Why was not he with King Kenwalcus now
That living loved him so? O my wild thoughts!
You are become a whirlwind in my brain
Lifting me up to hurl me down again

Falls. Enter to him Alfride, Edelbert, and two followers, as from Hawking.
Alfr. Go, carry home yout Hawks; they are as good
As er'e made flight.

Edel. I would the King had seen
(His melancholy set apart) our princely sport.

Alfr. I hope my good Lord Ethelswick by this time
Has taken the burden of his discontent
(The cause of his strong malady) from his mind.

Edel. I rather think the King has lost him too
Among the bushes, as he did us last night

Alfr. It Is a strange humor in a King; and as
Unheard of a disease that works it in him
To hide himself in by-Walks, Caves, and Thickets.

Edel. We shall search hollow Trees, and Crows nests shortly
For him, if these fits hold him.

Alfr. Bless us? look here,
Is not this he? a witch could not guess righter
Then thou have done. Old Ethelswick has lost him;
And here is the King asleep.

Edel. This is the habit,
The Pilgrims weed he went in; has he not
Ended his Pilgrimage here? is he not dead?

Alfr. No, he is warm; and breathes like health it self.


Edel. It Is so, my Lord, I vow he sleeps as if
All the seven sleepers had taken up their lodging
In his fantastic brain-pan.

Alfr. He has not slept
We know these four nights.

Edel. Hear you, my Lord the King.
I think he sleeps for them 4, and 4. more.
I Will undertake a drum, or a whole kennel
Of scolds cannot wake him.

Alfr. It Is the better for us.


Edel. I do conceive you; for we will take him home,
And have him put in bed before he wakes
If it be possible. ( up with him) And there
When he has slept it out, he will perhaps
Be cured, and give us answerable thanks:
If not, and that he be offended for
The breach of his command, in coming near him;
He shall never know who did it.

Alfr. Be it so.


Edel. Away then, softly, softly, so so, softly.


Exeunt with Anthynus asleep. Enter King as though to bed, and Ethe^swick King.
Now my good Ethelswick, I have told thee all,
By which I find much ease, and hope to sleep:
But not to take a thought unto my fancy
By my soft dreams, but of my beauteous Mildred.
Nor will I in sleep or waking think of any
Other adventure, till I do attain
The sight of her, and prithe Ethelswick
Help me, and suddenly, in my device
How to contrive a journey secretly
Not with above one or two trusty servants
To make this blisseful visit.

Eth. There are ways
Enough considerable, by which your Highness
May pass, and be received there undiscovered.
Seeming a private Gentleman, or a Pilgrim;
But here will rise the difficulty, how
The miss of you at home will be received
By your Nobility and doubtful People;
Who cannot long, not knowing where you are,
But rage in high desire to see your Majesty.

King. For that I Will give command before I go,
That no affairs of State or otherwise,
No not my diet nor Attendants
Shall pass to me but by your hands; pretending
For twenty days a studious privacy,
To which your self shall only have admittance,
And take for all that come my Answers, which
Frame you as you think fit; and who shall dare
To think me from my Closet or my Bed,
When you avouch me there?
As for example, we are now in private,
Answer you all comers,
I am busy, or asleep; see how they will take it.

One knocks. Eth. That trial is soon made; there is one already;
Who Is there? what is your business?

Theod. Within. My business is to wait upon the King;
My Lord, you know me, I am Theodwald

Eth. My Lord, the King is private, and desires to be so;
And needs now no attendance but mine own.

Theod. How fares his Majesty?


Eth. Reasonable well.


Theod. That Is well, he was unreasonable well to day.
Good night my Lord; Let the King know I pray
I gave attendance. You understand Court-service
Is it be not in the eye, it is half lost.

Eth. Your service my Lord, though the King take it not in
At the eye, shall have entrance at the next
Door, the ear; I Will make it known to him.
Good night.

Exit Theodwald. King. You see how easily he is answered now;
So will the rest hereafter when they find
It is my pleasure to be thus retired.

Eth. Who are you?


another knocks within. Phys. One that must have entrance; the Physician;
One that brings the King a Preparative to sleep.

Eth. What is it composed of Prayers and meditations?


Phys. My books yield no such reading.


Eth. Nor your Coat any such practice.


Phys. I come not to be mocked, but as you tender
His Highness rest, let me approach him presently.

Eth. Good Sir, the King's at rest already.


Phys. Not asleep?


Eth. Fast, fast, and welcome Mr. Doctor.


Phys. My Lord, you will let him know my care I hope.


Eth. I Will wake him with it when he has slept enough.


Phys. Believe't my Lord, it was my care that charmed him.


Eth. He had not slept this fortnight else I warrant.


Phys. Pray let him know so much.


Ex. Physician. King. Ha, ha, they all desire to have their care considered,
Although in real act they merit nothing.

Eth. How now? what saucy Knave is that?


Knock hard, Jeffrey within. Jeff. You are cosen'd Cousin Lord, it is the Fool,
Cousin;
How does my neam, the King?

Eth. Go Fool, follow the Physician, he can tell you.


Jeff. I asked my Cousin Doctor already, and he says,
My neam King's asleep.

Eth. And would not you be whipped to come to trouble him then?


Jeff. No Cousin Lord, I come to sing him a lullaby
Out of the dream of the Devil and Dives, shall
Make him sleep till he wakes again, and't be this month.

Eth. Away you Fool, I Will set you a going.


Jeff. O Lord, O Cousin Lord, I cannot go for running.


Eth. This will become a business.


King. But Ethelswick, when I have declared my pleasure,
As I Will appear, and publicly to morrow,
To give command that none upon their lives
Shall give you less respect in this behalf
Then I my self might claim, it will be easy.

Eth. Again?


Knock* Eaufrid within. Eaufr. Where are you, my Lord E thelswick?


Eth. Your pleasure my Lord Eaufrid.


Eauf. May I not see the King?


Eth. If you dare take my word, the King commands
The contrary to all men but my self
For this night; to morrow you may know
His highness further pleasure.

Eauf. May you enjoy
This night the greatness of your Office;
To morrow if I have a King, I Will see and speak with him.

Eth. Not if he sleep my Lord.


Eauf. You say he sleeps,
Go to, sleep (quoth a!) yes, perhaps he sleeps,
It Is with his Ancestors I fear.

Eth. What shall I say my Lord?


Eauf. I say, you do not well, my Lord, to keep
Our duties back from's Majesty, that have
As well been trusted -- I will keep the rest:
But it is not well.

Eth. I say, that you do worse,
Officiously to interrupt his rest.

Eauf. I wish his rest as well as you, my Lord,
Nay more: But I will keep the rest till morning,
And so joy to the greatness of your Office.

Exit. Eth. How thinks your Majesty of this? How will
Such as he is be satisfied in your absence?

Knock King. I Will school 'em all.


Eth. Yet more?


Alf. Edel. My Lord, my Lord.


Eth. What would you have?


Alf. Open the door, and quickly.


Eth. I may not.


Edel. But you must; it is for the King.


King. How Is that?


Alf. Delay not, as you will answer't;
The King's here.

King. Is the King there? what traitors voice is that?
Let 'em appear; enter ha! who made you King-makers?

Edel. God save the King, and bless us all from witchcraft.


Alf. We durst have sworn we had had him fast enough here.


King. How?


Edel. Fast asleep Sir, asleep Sir, look you here.


King. Let Us see your may game.


Alf. Look you my Lord, and judge.


Edel. Or if your Majesty will know your self,
(A lesson which a King should not disdain
To learn) look here, and read the difference,
If you can find it.

King. Is he so like me to your apprehension?


Eth. I am amazed to see it; your own eyes, Sir,
Cannot in likeness answer each the other,
More then this Face does yours; his hands, his legs,
All his dimensions bear the same proportion
To outward seeming as your Royal Person.
Nature herself were she now to behold
Her work on both of you, could scarce distinguish
By an exterior view, a difference.
Where did you find this sleeper?

King. Peace, no more, never question that; Cupid has heard my prayers.
Who saw you take him up?

Edel. None but our servants,
Whom we dismis'd in the same says that we
Were of our selves, that 'twas your Majesty;
And as we passd the Court none saw our carriage,
Which we brought thus obscured that none might take
Notice of your infirmity.

King. 'Twas well done;
Be secret still; nay, I must charge you strongly;
And if my power be not a spell sufficient
To work your secrecy, I Will take your heads
To mine own custody.

Both. Sir.


King. Nay, I must trust ye; hark you Ethelswick.


Eth. I understand your course.


King. Come, into our bed with him; gently, so:
Nay Sir, you shall have Noble Kingly usage;
Never had stranger entertainment like him.
I Will give him all I have during his stay.
Exchange my self with him, and be beholding
To him besides for the use I Will make of him.
I Will tell you all within: Love, that has sent
This blessing in my way, when I was in
So great a straight (I cannot think enough on it)
To bring new life unto my fainting hopes,
If now I serve thee not with strength and skill,
Remove me as a Rebel to thy will.

Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV.
SCEN. I.
Enter Offa, 2. Outlaws. Offa. YOu are sure they both are dead?


1. Outl. Both dead and buried;
The Mould is not more dead from which
The gold was taken, which we attend for,
Then are their corpse.

2. Outl. Nor is the Mine so deep,
As we laid them in grave; not out
Of charity, but for our own security*
That none might find or know them.

Off. That was well; but are they dead indeed?


1. You saw the old one dead before your sword
Failed you, and you gave ground.

2. When a man's sword is taken away, it fails him,
And when he runs away, he gives ground in our
Language.

1. Then we being two against one, we soon dispatched him.


2. Alas he was even spent before, you saw
The worst of him.

Off. But he is dead to you are sure?


1. Dead? sblood, I have told you threescore times
They are both dead; so is our fellow too, poor Rogue:
He bid us take his share betwixt us, and drink it
To the health of all the Furies in hell, to use
Him the more kindly. Will you discharge us Sir? we have
Waited for our hire, while we have lost another bargain
Of blood worth two on it.

Off. They are both dead you say?


2. Give us our money Sir, and find 'em you alive, we will kill
'Em again for nothing; and you or any friend of yours into
The bargain if you please.

Off. Stay* let me think.


1. What Is the matter? your conscience sure is crop-sick.


Off. My conscience tells me 'twas a bloody business, and that
To pay the price of their dear blood were to
Augment my sin.

2. Is It come to this? -- draw.


Off. Nay here is your money Gentlemen, but you must stoop for it:
I dare not look upon the giving of it.

1. If that be all, the sight of it shall never trouble you-oh. they sink.


Off. Ha, ha, ha. You have made my conscience whole
Again with laughing. Why took ye not your money with ye to
Drink among the Furies? Ha, ha, ha. Do You hear my friends?
Pray stay, take your money; are you so
Quickly out of hearing? What shallow Rogues were
These till now? now they are deep enough, men of
Profound understanding; this Gimcrach I devised for
Their entertainment; where you shall fast and welcome
Gentlemen, till you have tried the conclusion, whether Famine
Can break stone walls; I am sure they are thick enough
To drown your cries, though they be louder then the
Voice of vengeance. So ends their Scene. Some conscience now
Would ask me, why have thou
Dispatched thy Father and thy Brother thus?
But mine informs me, I did very well.
Your reason Sir, replies the scrupulous conscience?
Mine roundly answers that my brother was
Elder then I, and by right to inherit
My Fathers fair possessions, of which
I have so sweetly tasted. But your Father
By a most dear and supernatural love
Gave you the greater blessing; and in time
Might have conferred all on you by your policy.
To this again I answer, that my Father,
Whose dotage merely and not my deserts
Made him so good to me, might in my absence
Have idly grown as fond on the other side.
For to speak truth, and not to wrong the dead,
My brother was religious, pious, honest*
And was endued with all these unknown gifts
Which holy men call virtues; which in the end
If they be suffered to run on will find
Double reward, they say. His could not be
Found here, but in my loss, and by my Father.
Now if they may be had in the the other world,
I am so far from being their hinderance,
That I have sent them both the nighest way.
Many good reasons more I could deliver,
But that I am prevented.

Enter Mildred, Edith. Ed. Ods my pity,
Be comforted good Madam, can you think
By casting down your self to raise them up
From death again? what? you have yet a Brother
May stead you for a Father, Husband,
Friend, or what you will.

Mild. Gentle Nurse, forbear me.


Off. Go prate among the servants.


Ed. I have a mind to watch you though a little.


Off. You Have heard the news, and mourn for it I perceive,
Of the unfortunate ends of our dear Father,
And our beloved brother.

Mild. Even drowned in grief too Brother.


Off. Troth I was
Sunk over head and ears; but am ^ept out
Of sorrows lake even dropping dry, as they say;
And have done what I can to shake it off.
And would now counsel thee, my beauteous Sister,
To clear those looks again, that only can
Revive my drooping heart, we only are
Left now to be each others comforter.
I have made known my love to you.

Mild. O my brother,
That knowledge is a grief of no less horror,
Then was the bloody news that pierced my heart.
Mention that love no more, nor call it love,
Which is but foul desire.

Off. Peace, hear but this,
Do You think it is not love? would I desire
You in that nearest kind, if I not loved you?

Mild. What? love a Sister so? are you a man?


Off. Sure I do hope so, and that you shall find it.


Mild. Can you unto your shame seek my dishonor?
To damn us both, in that abhorred way
Which by avoiding, man is best distinguished
From the most brutish beasts.

Off Peace again.


Mild. I cannot, may not peace, nor suffer word
Importing such a purpose pierce mine ears.
Twice have I beaten back your monstrous lust,
(Could I but call it lust, it were too much
Though in a Monarch to my Virgin honor;
But in you beastly Incest) and before
I Will live in danger of one offer more,
I Will die by mine own hand.

Off. You shall not rob
Me so of my revenge, if you deny me.
And it is another argument of my love,
If It please you to collect it, that you have lived
Till now, still obstinate. But be you warned
And take withal to your consideration
Your provident Father, and your valiant Brother,
(Whom you so prized above me) are not now
To oversee or side you.

Mild. He indeed
Was a most virtuous Brother.

Off. Therefore take
This for your latest warning;
This night to meet me in my full desires,
In your as free embraces, or pale death.
Go clear your eyes, and think on it; but be sure
You think to do withal as I command you.
I Will pitch thee headlong into Hell else. Come,
I know thou will affect me; can there be
A nearer or more requisite love indeed
Then the sweet mixture of a Brother and Sister?
Well said, there was a blushing smile, that gave me
Thy full consent; O thou will ravish me.

Mild. Pray, let me think a little.


Off. Prithe do.


Mild. H'as taught me to dissemble; Heaven that knows
My thoughts are chaste and pure, will pardon me
I hope, if to preserve my life and him
From greater sin, I use a little of
The art too too much practiced among women,
Of smooth hypocrisy. I know his heart is bloody;
And he may be too sudden, if I win not
Time on him, by some subtiler shift to wave
His foul attempts, until I get free
Out of this gripe to use my liberty.

Off. What says my Sister now?


Mild. My Lord and brother.


Off. I marry, this begins well.


Mild. That I love
Your noble person, nay am taken with it,
With more then sisterly affection, is
A truth no way to be dissembled; you
Already like a well read scholar find it,
In Cupids love letters my friend, my maiden blushes.

Off. This has some sound in it.


Mild. But when I consider,
What scandal, or what too near Affinity
In noble blood, and the Nobility of our house,
(Unfit to fall within the center of the Law,
Or the constructions of men's ruder manners)
May cast upon us.

Off. Stay my lovely Mildred;
What? or whose eye, or thought, shall glance at us?
Whilst we in safest privacy enjoy
The bliss of mutual pleasure.

Mild. It is yet
Too intricate a doubt for me to find
A resolution in. But my sweet Lord,
(Oh that I could not call you Brother) then
I would be nearer to you then a Sister.
So eager and so equal is my love
With yours; if you please but to give me time,
But one weeks liberty, to frame my self
Obedient to your will in all, I now
Will give you a faithful pledge to render
The satisfaction you demand.

Off. A week; what pledge?


Mild. A loving kiss.


Off. You could not name a better,
Short of the further happiness I covet.
Give me't.

Mild. But you shall swear by it that you will not
A bridge my liberty, nor urge your suit
Further these seven days.

Off. By this kiss I swear.


Mild. My patience never bought a kiss so dear.
But keep your vow.

Off. Well, well, I Will do my best.


Mild. He Is not yet perfect, you must strive my love,
To curb your hot desires, as I do mine.
I could my self dwell ever on your lips,
Never outgo the circle of your arms.
Could I but hope to be your wife. But O,
What I have promised you, I must allow
At the time limited; till then urge it not.
For take my vow with yours, if you dare break it,
I dare to kill my self; and by that time,
If I not yield my self unto your will,
My life is yours either to save or kill.

Off. Go, thou art a noble wench, enjoy thy liberty.


Enter Edith. Ed. I have enough, listening is good sometimes.
Good Heaven! who would have thought it? stay,
Let me not be too hasty.

Off. Yet I fear,
I shall hardly hold out a week;
It Is a great while believe't in such a case
As this, for one to forbear his own Sister,
That has so good a mind to it. And perhaps
This may be cunning in her to delude me.
Were not I better take her by surprise,
In a soft sleep to night? sure I shall keep her
From killing of her self, till I be satisfied.
And then if she be weary of her life,
I may be kind enough to help her out on it;
Because she says she loves me. Out you Beldame,
How in the name of Lucifer came thou hither?

Ed. O my good Lord, I do beseech your Honor,
Forbear your fury; I have such a business.

Off. To eavesdrop have you not? I am not safe,
Unless I kill this Witch.

Ed. My Lord, my Lord,
You are the Lord that I do look to live by.
And if I die my Lord, you lose the knowledge
Of such a secret.

Off. Pox upon your secret.


Ed. It Is such a privity.


Off. Hell take your privity.


Ed. You will repent in Hell my Lord, if you or I
Should leave the world before you know the thing
That I can open to you; which when I have unfolded,
Kill me if you please. I did but watch occasion
To find you private to reveal it to you.

Off. Will you be brief then?


Ed. Thus it is my Lord,
My Lord, your Father's dead.

Off. And what of that?


Ed So is your elder Brother.


Off So they say forsooth.


Ed. But are you sure they are dead?


Off. I fear this jade
Has overheard me.

Ed. For do you see my Lord,
I would not in their life time have disclosed
This hidden matter for a whole worlds good.
And thus it is, your Father and your Brother
Being dead, Heaven rest their souls.

Off. What Is that to me?


Ed. Nothing my Lord, but now comes that concerns you;
Your Father and your Brother being gone,
(Heaven rest their souls) there I begin.

Off. You began there before, if that be the beginning,
Your for ever world without end
We shall never come at it.

Ed. Now that concerns you;
You think you have a Sister.

Off. Do I but think so?


Ed. No truly my good Lord, you do but think so.


Off. Is Mildred dead? has she destroyed herself?
Now since she left me here, to spite my love.

Ed. You hear me not say so, I saw her not
Since I left both of you together here.

Off. Unfold your riddle Sphinx, I Will dig it else
Out of your rotten belly. What Is your meaning?

Ed. Mildred is not your Sister.


Off. How? not my Sister?


Ed. Not your own natural Sister.


Off. Because she is unnatural; did thou but know
What a poor easy request she denied me
Thou would say she were unnatutal indeed.

Ed. I mean, she was not born of the same mother,
Nor got by the same father that you were.

Off. Speak that again; make but that good, I Will Saint thee.


Ed. My Lord, I can and will maintain it, I,
Not only for some wrong she did me lately,
Nor for the good my Lord that you may do me,
Though all the estates your own when she is discarded;
But to let truth appear, which has been long
A burden, and an heavy burden, though I say it;
And so will any woman say, it is to keep council
So many years together as I have done,
I had much a do to keep it in, I wis,
In my good old Lords days. Lord how he loved her!
But few men know their children, that is the truth on it;
And let that go.

Off I, quickly to the point.


Ed. The point is this, I loved my old Lord well;
Therefore was loath to grieve him; and I loved
My good old Lady better; therefore I kept
Her council to this hour: You now are all
That Is left of them; and whom should I love now
But your sweet self my Lord? I Will tell you all:
This Mildred, whom you so long called Sister,
Was not your Fathers, nor your Mothers child;
But in the absence of your Father, when
Sixteen years since he was sent by the King
Upon an embassy, your mother then with child,
By sad mischance brought forth a still born babe;
At the same time a Lady nobly born
Whose husband was in Exile, brought forth this,
This Lady Mildred.

Off. Then she is nobly born?


Ed. Yes, and by woman's slight, of which this is
Not first example, the Infants were exchanged;
Because your loving father might find joy
In a fair daughter at his home-return.

Off. Can thou prove this?


Ed. If in three days I do not
Make it appear most plain to you, multiply
Your wrath upon me.

Off. Do so; and do hear?
I Will never call old woman witch hereafter
What e're I think. We may be married now,
And Mildreds love may freely answer mine.
We now may safely mix, and to it again,
Strange strong events are laboring in my brain.
Come you with me.

Exeunt ambo. Enter Ethelswick, and Edelbert. Eth. What fury has possessed 'em?
all our art,
And the Kings policy will be prevented,
By the brain-giddiness of these wilful Lords.

Edel. We have no way my Lord, but to give way
Unto theit violent rage, and quit the Court.

Eth. And since we can make good our place no longer,
Post after our King Master, and leave them
With their new King at home here, that is as mad
As they.

Edel. And madder too; I cannot wonder
More what he is, then at the fate that sent him.

Enter Theodwald, Eausride, Guard, Physician, 2. Attendants. Theod. My Lord,
both in the King and States behalf,
In which you may excuse us.

Eauf. Sh't, sh't, let*him take it
How he or will or dare, we have agreed.
The body of the Council have decreed it
You must depart the Court.

Eth. Must?


Eauf. Must and shall,
You and your trim confederate; you have had
The rule here over your Ruler, till you have made him
Wild, frantic, mad, and us too; God forgive me
For saying so, almost as mad as he;
I hope it is no treason.

Edel. No, cause you said almost;
But had you said you had been full as mad,
You had passed a Subjects boldness.

Eauf. Take 'em hence;
Thrust 'em out oth' Court.

Theod. Nay, without violence.


Eth. Well my Lord, when we see the King in's wits,
We Will tell him of our usage, that he may thank you.

Eauf. In the mean time go travel on adventures,
Whilst we do our endeavor to amend
What you have marred by screwing the Kings brain
Into the nick of Order once again. Put forth a bed, Anthynus on it bound
See, see, my Lord, how they have kept him dark,
Manacl'd and bound on's bed? was ever King
Used thus? for pities sake unbind him quickly.

Anth. What Fiends or Fairies are ye?


Phys. Let his passion
A little vent it self, e're you unbind him.

Anth. What? new tormentors? or into what way
Of further mischief do ye mean to throw me?

Theod. We come to bring your Highness comfort.


Anth. Highness?
Have you that mockery for me too? I told
The rest that slav'd me with that attribute,
From whence I came, who, what I was, and all
The story of my fathers wrongs, and mine
(Too many ever to have been, but heaven
Marked 'em out for us) and I told 'em too
What I had undertane by Watching, Fasting,
Prayers too (unfit to boast of) with the Industry
I practiced to have found my wounded Father.
For which (as though I durst have faith in merits)
They mocked me with the title of a King,
And bound me here as they thought to believe it.
It Is a new way of punishment; and were due
To one that thought his duty meritorious.
But I will break these Gives, and with my teeth
Tear off these manacles.

Phys. O do not strive my Liege.


Anth. Thy Liege, Dog-leech? are you at that garb too?
I wish I had one finger loose to fillip out
Thy brains and skill together for the Ratcatchers.

Phys He thinks my skull's made but of urinal metal.


Theod Be patient Sir.


Anth. Sir, yet may be endured.


Eauf Have but a little patience, we will unloose you.


Anth. A grave persuasion to a man that is tied to it.
Humb, humb, humb.

Eauf. Beshrew their herds that used him thus to vex him.
How do you like him Doctor?

Theod. Did you mark
His talk of wrongs, and of a wounded Father?
And how he will not hear of being a King?

Phys. I, all, all, I know all; such fancies fall
Naturally into this disease, which now
Is almost a wild Frenzy, that will seldom
Suffer the Patient think himself to be
The person that he is; nor oftentimes the Creature,
But some four-footed Beast, or feathered Fowl:
But could I fasten but a slumber on him,
Which must be the first entrance to my work.

Anth. Have you concluded yet your barbarous council?
If not, take my advice with ye: call the King,
The King with whose authority you scorn me;
Let him but hear (for you will never tell him)
From my own lips how willingly I Will give
My voice unto his marriage; and I Am sure
He Will set me free; at least by death.

Eauf. Alas,
What King? what freedom would you have?
You are our King, and shall command your freedom,
And all our lives, would you but sleep a while.

Anth. Sleep? make no doubt of that; look, I can sleep,
With as much ease as one bound in a Cart,
Driving to execution. But do you hear?
My vow was not to sleep nor eat until
I had performed a work, which I shall never,
Never accomplish, now my vow is broken.
For they by witchcraft charmed me into sleep,
And tempted me with meat atunawares,
Before my sleep-drown'd senses were collected;
And put me on these unknown garments here,
With an hayl Master; so betrayed me into
This irksome folly, or this foolish thraldom.

Theod. 'Twas a rash vow, and so well broke; you now
Shall be released: unbind him at my peril.
These rigorous courses have done hurt upon him;
We have provided otherwise to please you;
For we have called Theodrick home again
Your Favorite, whose absence was a grief to you;
Nay more, because it is thought your languishing love
Bred your distemper, we have taken care
For hastening of your marriage; your fair Queen
Is sent for, and at hand to ease your sorrow.

Anth. My Favorite, and my Queen! leave these abuses;
My hands and feet are now at liberty

Strikes and kicks. Theod. So is our duty, and if your Majesty
Will tread cur due allegiance into dust,
We are prepared to suffer.

Anth. Would to heaven,
I could unfold this mystery.

Eauf. See my Lord,
Theodrick is come.

Ent. Theodrick. Theodr. Most gracious Sir,
That I have suffered under your displeasure,
In being barred your presence, which no less
Then the all cheering Sun gave life to me,
Was not so much my grief, as not to know
What my transgression was; and let me now
Implore your mercy so far as to name it;
Which if I cannot clear me of, I Will lose my life, and willingly.

Anth. If I could think this serious, 'twere enough
Almost to turn my sorrows into laughter.

Theodr. O turn not from me royal Sir, to augment
Your Highness displeasure; but in case you will not
Be pleased to name my trespass, give me leave
To speak what I suppose has troubled you,
And caused me causelessly to be suspended.

Enter Genius whispering him. Anth. I feel a secret instigation in me,
I hope by some good Angel that inclines me,
At last to yield a little to these men.
What would thou say?

Theodr. My Lords, and all forbear
The presence; never fear, all shall be well.

Theodw. Heaven grant it.


Eauf. Was not this my policy,
To send for him? more, was it not my wit
To fashion letters as with his own hand
To fetch the Queen? you will see more at her coming.

Exeunt all but Theodrick, Anthy. Theodr. May't please you now but to review
these Pictures.


Anth. Good memory help me; this is of the Queen,
The cruel Queen that banished my good Father;
And this the lively Image of my Sister.

Theodr. Now may it please your grace to recollect,
How when I told you this was my fair Mistress,
Your passion first siez'd on you; and pardon Royal Sir,
If I have since conjectured my transgression
Was merely this, that I loved one so fair,
I dare not yet say fairer then your choice.
But freely thus, to expiate my trespass,
As I resign the Picture, I give up
All interest in her person, never more
Beyond your free consent to see that Beauty.

Anth. I have found all the error, and am taught
By hidden inspiration to make use on it. Genius still whispers him.
Give me fresh raiment, I Will take all upon me
(Their Crown if they will give it) yet me thinks
This is so like a dream -- where else can be
King Osriick all this while, that he comes not
To throw me out of this usurped right?
Strange and new thoughts possess me. Genesis whispers
Now I call
To mind the vision that I had of being
Called to the Throne of the west Saxons Kings.
It must be by this Queen, whom how to love
I cannot find. My Genius promps me, yes
I hear it now, as by an Angel spoke.
And that my vow was rashly made, well broke;
I am confirmed, and come she I am for her. puts on Hat, Feather, and Cloak)
ex. Genius.
Well said Theodrick; (Theodrick is his name?)
How do I look Theodrick?

Theodr. I can find
But little change, which I allow to sickness.

Anth. Well said, thou never flatterest.


Enter Jeffrey winding an Horn. Jeff. News, neam King, news, news;
News that will make thee well, be thou never so sick.
News that be thou never so well, will make thee sick.
News that will make thee mad, be thou never so tame.
News that be thou never so mad, will make thee tame.

Anth. What Is thy news?


Jeff. A wife, a wife, a wife can do all this.
The Queen is come, and all my Cousin Lords
Are gone to fetch her in in pomp: Oh ho,
Knight me, oh Knight me quickly for my news.

Theodr. Away you fool.


Jeff. Away you Favorite.
Hinder me not unless I prophecy,
Kings, Fools and Favorites never shall agree.
And many years after we are in our graves,
Fools shall be Knights, and Favorites shall be -- known
From black Sheep, I prophecy.
Oh ho, she comes, she comes; now neam King,
Bear up stiff before and meet her. Here Is a day,
And a night toward indeed. Oh ho, the house
Begins to reel already, and all our brains turn
Round; oh ho.

Enter Ushers bare, Kelriick and Elkwin, Theodwald and Eaufride, a Cardinal,
the Queen, two Ladies bearing up her Train, Followers, the Queen Bertha kneels,
Anthynus as King takes her up; kisses her; they confer, the four Lords salute
and confer; Theodwald and Eaufride give their supposed Kings hand to the
Cardinal. Kelriick and Elkwin give their Queens hand to the Cardinal; the
Cardinal joins their hands, Anthynus and Bertha kiss; all the Lords embrace;
the Exeunt in state as before. Jeff. Oh what a night will here be? what a night
will here be?
What a beast am I? that I have not at least half (Lasses with child now,
A score of my wholesome Country
That forty weeks hence the Queen might have her
Choice of Nurses; there had been a thriving way to raise
My fortunes indeed. Oh what a night will here be!

Exit. ACT. V.
SCEN. I.
Enter Mildred, Offa. Mild. HElp, help, oh help.


Off. Your cries will be in vain.
It Is not in the power of any flesh but yours,
To allay, or to prevent my heat of blood.

Mild. O you diviner powers that ordained chastity
To be a virtue, lend your strength to guard it.

Off. Thy cries shall be as fruitless as thy life
If thou offend'st me with 'em; hear but this
Impertinently peevish maid, and tremble
But to conceive a disobedient thought
Against my will. Can thou without my favor,
Be better then a beggar?

Mild. Yet a beggar
Is better then a Whore.

Off. How can thou judge
That know not what is either? let a wench
That knows what is what, or has been both, maintain it;
But this is from the purpose; I am so far
From casting of thee off to be a beggar,
As I intend to make thee my rich equal,
And not a Whore, but wife; you know your Nurse
Has undertaken to find it lawful for us
To marry; and can thou with modesty
Deny me present pleasure, that within these three days
Shall confer honor on thee for thy life?

Mild. Would you first spoil my honor to repair it?


Off. It Is mine when I contract for it.


Mild. Not before
Our Covenant is passed; that is, the Priest
Has joined our hearts and hands.

Off. By this account,
A man backs not his Horse before he is paid for it;
Nor puts his nose into a house before
He buys the Lease on it; leave your precise folly,
Madam formality; force me not to force thee,
Yield with that very breath thou now drawest in,
Or it returns thy last.

Enter Edith. Ed. My Lord, my Lord.


Off. This Witch or Devil haunts me.


Ed. O my Lord,
I told you late a wonder; I bring now
A miracle, a miracle.

Off. What with a mischief?


Ed. Your Brother is survived from death again;
My Lord Anthynus is come home and safe*
The Heavens be praised.

Mild. O grant that it be true.


Off. Out Hag.


Ed. Nay, run me in as far as you can if I lie;
Up to the Hilts if I lie.

Off. What can thou mean by this?


Ed. Nay, what he means I knew not, for he denies his name,
Says he is not Anthynus, but a Northumbrian Gentleman;
And desires conference with my Lady Mildred
From the fine Lord was here (what call you him?)
The Kings great Favorite; But if I am I,
If you are you, if any thing be any thing,
It is Anthynus.

Ex. Mildred. Ex. Edith. Off. Go you to your Chamber,
And be not seen I charge you. Let him enter,
But first send in my servants.
I did mistrust he lived; O those false Villains,
That faced me down they killed him, may they be
A year a famishing. Have you tricks Anthynus?
How can he think, though he disguised his name
Or Country, that we should not know his person?
What should his aim or drift be? stay, perhaps
He does suspect I was in the action
Against my fathers life and his, and thinks him dead,
So steals upon me thus as his own ghost,
To terrify my conscience, shallow, shallow;
But I Will so fit him; It is most evidently he.

Enter Osriick, Alfride, four Servants, at the other door Arno^d. Osr. My Lord,
how e're
Some of your servants are pleased to make themselves
Merry with a pretended knowledge of me,
I do presume your honor cannot know me.

Off. From one so false never came clearer truth.


Osr. What means your hono^r?


Off. It is true, my honor
Cannot, nay, dares not know thee for a Brother,
Although mine eyes through tears of grief and anger,
Discern the monster I have often called so.

Osr. This is most strange.


Off. Look that he come not near me;
Perfidious Parricide, have thou killed my Father?
Destroyed the life that gave thee life? and now
Seek'st by surprise to take mine too?

Osr. Pray hear me.


Off. Upon him all at once, hew him in pieces;
I Will bear you out in it; he has killed your Lord.

Osr. Forbear your outrage.


Alsr. Give us leave to speak.


Off Villains, are they to be obeyed or I?


Arn. My Lord, your judgment is too rash upon them.
Fellows forbear, and forbear you my Lord,
You shall not so heap blood upon your head;
I loved my Lord your father, and do prize
His blood and memory, as becomes a Servant
Of the best rank: And if at most and worst
My Lord Anthynus here stand guilty of
His fathers death, you must not be his Judge,
Nor we his Executioners.

Off. Are you
Become my master, you old Ruffian?

Arn. No,
Your Servant Sir, but subject to the Law;
The Law that must determine this man's cause,
Not you, nor we, what ever he deserves.
And till he shall be censured by that law
We Will find a Prison for him.

Serve. I, to Prison with him.


Osr. Will you but hear yet how you are mistaken?


Arn. Pray heaven we be, as you may clear your self;
That Is all the harm we wish you; this must be
Your course my Lord; would you heap blood upon you?

Alsr. Let me but speak a word.


Arn. As we go twenty.


Off. Away with 'em. Exeunt.
I could have liked the other shorter way
Much better; but my knaves will have it thus,
Yet not to wrong 'em, simple honesty
May be in such sometimes as well as me.

Exit. Enter Carpenter, Mason, Smith, in Devils habits; two dark Lanthorns, a
Pickaxe and a Rope, with an Engine fastened to a Post, and a bunch of Picklocks.
Mas. Prithee tread softly yet a little further,
And we are safe.

Smi. Hark, heard ye nothing? whist.


Carp. I never knew Thieves so timorous as you are.
Can we expect a booty without boldness?
Besides, have we not shapes if we were spyed,
Able to fright better Believers then
My politic Lord oth' house here.

Mas. Hark prithee.


Carp. All Is sure I warrant thee.


Smi. I pray it prove so.


Carp. Pray on I prithee; prayers become this coat,
Like swearing in a Surplisse; tush, they are all,
All the whole house asleep, and I heard nothing
As we passed through it, but usual sleepy sounds,
Puffing and blowing, snorting farting and such like.
Yes, I cry mercy, as we passed by the Butlers chamber,
I heard his bed crackle shrewdly, and I doubt,
The Dary-maid and he were jumbling of
A Posset together. Come, now we are safely arrived at the
Fountain of our hopes, the well of comfort. Smith, lay
Down your Picklocks, they have done well their office in our passage hither.
Mason,
Advance your Pickaxe, whilst the Carpenter squares out
Our new work; now for the honor of Artificers; here, here,
Here is the Trap-door, the mouth of the rich mine, which
We Will make bold to open. And let men of our Occupations
Learn the way that many grow rich by, and
No body knows how they come by their wealth. That
Is, when they make such concavities as these, for
Rich men to hide their treasure in, that they
Make also a privy way for themselves to come and
Take a share on it.

Mas. This covetous Lord by this time has laid in
An unknown deal of wealth, I warrant you.

Smi. But we will not take away too much at once.


Carp. No, we will but piddle; we will not take above
A thousand pounds to night. opens So, I Will go down;
And when I shake the rope, then crane me up again; give me one of
The Lanthorns: So, so, so, let me down handsomely;
I Will warrant you money, the Devil and all before day yet.

Smi. Nay, if we get off clear but with a thousand pound
Amongst us, it will serve for drinking
Money till we come for more.

Mas. This money will come luckily for a better purpose.
I have three bastards at nurse and a fourth in the Paniers.
The rope stirs; pull lustily, this pull for a
Thousand pound.

Outlaw comes up Smi. I fear it is light gold, methinks he does not weigh
So heavy as he went down. Comrade, what have thou
Brought? what ail'st thou? can not speak? I hope thou
Were not frighted.

1. Outl. O help! where am I? drawn from one hell into another? ha!


Mas. Come, leave your fooling, what money have you?


1. Outl. Had I the price of Kingdoms I Would give all
But for one bit of meat; but I have none.

Smi. Slid, he would cosen us; how do you look when you lie?
Oh me!

Mas. What ailest thou?


Smi. This is not he; it is a ghastly spirit.


1. Outl. What? are you men?


Mas. Yes, but we have played the Devils, till we have
Got a spirit betwixt us.

1. Outl. If you be men, help me to food, a little food.


Mas. What art thou that can look thus Piepeckt, Crowtrod, or
Sparrow-blasted? ha!


1. Outl O, I am pined with hunger.


Mas Here, stay thy stomach; there is a crust I brought
To stop the open mouth of the Mastive, if he had flown at us.

Carp. O pull, pull away.


Smi. There he is now I am sure.


Carp. I shall be devoured else.


Mas. What Is the matter Fellow?


Carp. Take his teeth out of me, I cannot tell you else.


Pull up Carp. an Outl. hanging on him Mas. O Cannibal! will thou eat a
Carpenter?


2. Outl. O meat, meat, if you be men.


Mas. No, we are Devils; but here is another crust for thee
What e're thou art; we have played the Thieves to
Very good purpose.

Carp. He has gnawed a piece of my Flank out with his teeth;
And missed very narrowly certain members of more moment,
They Would have gone down glib with him; now in the
Devils name, what are ye?

Smi. Until their crusts be done they cannot tell us.


Mas. Come, I do suspect the subtilty of this cruel politic
Lord; would we were well out on's house. No noise my
Masters, and we will bring you to meat enough; and then
We Will hear your story, and tell our own; a word more
Here, may cost all our lives.

Smith. Take up your tools and lead the way.


Enter Mildred and Edith. Smi. Come, softly, softly then.


Mild. I will away this night.


Mas. Peace, hark.


Ed. But Madam.


Mil. Had you the only Tongue of all persuasion,
So much I prize my life, and honor more,
I would not miss this opportunity
For all that you could say.

Smi. Are not these Sprites?


Carp. No evil ones I Will warraut, they are so white;
Hark a little more.

Ed. To night he is troubled 'bout Anthynus coming,
So that he will not think of lust or wantonness.

Mild. That trouble keeps him waking; and I fear
Will rather spur him forwards then withhold him.

Smi. They talk methinks; but I cannot hear what
For shaking.

Carp. Take heed thou do not jingle thy Picklocks,; slid,
They Will ring up the house like a larum bell.

Ed. Well, since you are so resolute, would we were out of the
House once, if we be taken, it is not the price of
A million of Maiden-heads, as the market goes, can save
Our lives.

Carp. Good, I have found what sprites they be. They
Must needs be the wenches that I suspected were in
The Butlers chamber, and made the stiff standing bedstead that
I set up but last week, crack like a wicker chair.
Ah Rogues! I heard ye.

Ed. Oh me! we are undone and taken.


Mas. I Am glad it is no worse.


Carp. Peace, if you have a mind to escape out oth' house alive.


Mild. Come Nurse, my fear is over, if they be
Men, and bring us out oth' house,
They cannot be so dangerous as he I escaped.

Carp. Did he so put thee to it, my little Bustlepate? what a stout blade's this
Butler?


Mil. These are good Fellows Nurse.


Carp. Yes faith, and fear you nothing for all our divelish
Outsides; if we escape out of the house, you escape, and
If we fail, our necks are sure to hang by it; and so
On there before once more in the name of darkness.

Off. If my attempt now fail, may my repulse
Strike lust for ever out of countenance. Ent. Offa, light and Dagger.
It is decreed she sleeps with me or death

1. Outl. God's Death, it is he.


2. Outl. Let us fall to and beat him.


Carp. As you can hope for meat again, or life,
Look big, and use no words; and so glide by.

Off. The night, the place, her fate, and my desire,
Do all conspire unto my wished advantage.
And so I come coy Damosel. Hide the women under their habits, and so Exeunt
all but Offa.
Ha? how? why? where? who? or what can you or I be?
They are all gone, and I am tottering left
Upon an Earthquake; gentle, holla, holla,
Set not too hard old Ops, thou wilt shake thy rider,
Through thy chinky wrinkles into Limbo.
I shall sink piecemeal if thou trot so hard.
So, so, so, Holla, holla, gentle earth.
Open not here, not near that part of thee
That has but now disgorg'd those famished ghosts,
That with the Furies would have beckned me
Along to hell with them; so, let me down,
I must not follow yet, but sleep and think upon it.
I will come time enough you need not fear.
But first creep back to bed, as nothing were.

Enter Osriick, Ethelswick, Edelred, Alfride. Osr. You have told me wonders,
which have pierced my soul
With horror and amazement; yet I must confess,
In all that I am like to suffer, heaven is just,
Whilst wrath my wilfulness has pulled upon me;
Yet pardon, since thou gav'st me that affection
That wandered with me in this oblique course,
This unquoth way, with which I have not strayed
Further then love might lead an humane frailty.

Eth. You do consider well, my Lord, and we
Beseech you strive to counter-check these crosses
Still with your Kingly reason.

Osr. Yes, and fall upon our present business; there you find me
Out of a spacious Kingdom of mine own,
Shut in a narrow Prison; whilst the brother
Of her, whose love I came to seek, has married
The Queen I might have had; before I have seen
His Sister; there was a quick expedition.

Eth. My Lord, for that before you left the Court
In your supposed distraction; the orebusie Lords
Eaufride and Theodwald, out of strong conceit
The sight of her would cure you, feigned your letters
Which fetched the Queen; then banished us the Court,
Before we could take notice; we had been
Strong Traitors else to let that match go forwards.
Nor heard we of it until now the Post
That brings the news oth' Kings and Queens approach
Arrived here in the City.

Osr. All think him then their King still?


Eth. Yes, yes, and though he told us who he was;
The overwise Lords imputed that to his madness.

Osr. It seems he was not so mad, but he could take
The Queen into my bed.

Eth. Where she liked him so well
That she now brings him home unto her own.
Still thinking him your person.

Osr. Whilst I lie here for his,
Accused of Parricide; but I will not
Reveal my self till trial. Ent. Mildred
Now all my sufferings are turned into delightful recreations.
Fairest of Virgins welcome; marvail not
That at first sight I knew you, when my heart
Wears the Impression of your Portraiture;
And all my intellectual faculties
Bow to no other object but your beauty.

Mild. O Sir, lay by this high dissimulation;
For though I find you now are not my brother.

Osr. Lo ye, she knows I am not Anthynus.
Her virtue like the Sun will clear the mist
Of error we were lost in.

Mild. Not Anthynus?
Yes, the bright Sun discovers not a truth
More evident then that you are Anthynus
Nor ever shined on man I loved so well,
Or hoped to marry, since you are not my brother.

Osr. I understand not this.


Mild. Indeed I came
To tell you so, and could you clear your hand
Of the foul stain of blood you are accused of,
Were I sole monarchess of all this Island,
I Would kneel to beg a brides place in your bed.

Osr. If I can clear my self?


Mild. Nay, mark me further;
If you clear not your self, I Will not outlive you,
To call to mind the man that I so loved
Butchered his Father; though he w^^ not mine,
I loved him as a father; oh good heaven!
How good? how reverend a man was he?

Osr. Weep not, but hear me; or hear me though you weep;
I am not Anthynus.

Mild. I may say as well,
I do not love you.

Osr. I never had an hand
In blood of any man.

Mild. Prove that, I am yours.


Osr. Fetch me a Priest.


Edel. I saw one in the next room
Drinking and singing catches with some Prisoners.

Ed. Withhold your hands, Anthynus now again,
Fair Lady, is your brother.

Mild. Why did you mock me then?


Ed. To save you from your brother Offa's lust,
I feigned that you were not his Sister; that
In hope to marry you, he might forbear
His divelish purpose.

Mild. Now I am lost for ever,
In being the Daughter of a murdered Father,
And made incapable of you in marriage.

Osr. Yet hear me, and be comforted.


Mild. O me!


Ed. Hark my Lord Anthynus.


Osr. I do not know that name.


Ed. Go to, go to; nor you do not remember
How I behaved my self upon the eating of Spurging
Comfects, that your Brother Offa gave me,
And laid the fault on you; pray Jove, I say, this murder
Be no more his fault then yours.

A shout within. Enter Keeper. Osr. Hark, the wide world abroad is filled with
joy,
And must we only be shut from it? now.

Keep. My Lord Anthynus.


Osr. Still must I be Anthynus?


Keep. You are called unto your Trial.


Osr. Who are my Judges?


Keep. Those that are bribe-free I dare warrant 'em.
It may perhaps go somewhat the harder with you;
For nothing but white innocence can quit you,
Pray heaven you hav't about you; even the King
And Queen, the Queen and King I should have said,
For she is our Sovereign, it is her Law must do it.

Osr. What King do you mean then?


Keep. King Osriick; you know nothing.


Osr. Yes, I know him as well as he knows himself.


Keep. Take heed Sir what you say.


Osr. I fear him not,
But am as good as he; now carry me for something.

Mild. O pray take heed.


Keep. How?


Mild. Peace, he did not say so.


Keep. Slid, he is as mad as his brother Offa.


Osr. Is Offa mad?


Keep. O quite besides himself, and talks the strangliest
Of his fathers murder, your running away
And the desire he has to hang his brother here;
And then he is haunted with sprites too, they say;
You will know all anon; will you go my Lord?

Osr. Yes, will you be so kind as to see my Trial?


Mild. Indeed I must not leave you.


Keep. It Is a kind part indeed, and may become
A Sister; like the wife that would not leave
Her husband till she saw him totter.
Set the best foot forward, and the best face
You can, my Lord, upon the business. Exeunt.
Hoboys.

Enter Theodwald and Eaufride, Kelrick and Elkwin, Theodrick, Anthynus and
Bertha. Omn. Long live King Osriick and Queen Bertha.


Anth. I join with ye in your wishes for the Queen;
And wish well to King Osriick as a stranger.

Omn. How Is this?


Anth. But will no longer personate him;
For now be it known to you that I am no Osriick;
But he that warns you call me so no more.

Bert. What means my love?


Anth. Nay, Madam, it is most serious.


Kelr. Elkw. Bless us!


Theodw. He Is madder now then e're he was.


Eauf. I am at my wits end too; if marriage
Will not tame him, I know not what to say to it.

Anth. I have told you truth, and your fair grace can witness
How violently I was thrown upon the fortune,
I thank those provident Lords, against my vow.

Bert. I take it as the providence of Heaven;
And from the Son of that most injured Father,
Whom now in my joys strength I could shed tears for.
I yield you are my head, and I your handmaid.

She sets him down, and kneels; he takes her up. Eauf. So, so, a few nights
trial has got her liking
For ever fast enough; what notable old Cockscombs
Have we been made? nay, made our selves indeed.

Anth. Now further know, my Lords, I am Anthynus,
The Son of that old honest Lord, against whom
Your sulphurous malice kindled the Queens anger.

Elkw. Who Will have an head now for an half penny?


Kelr* And for the other two Tokens mine into the Bargain.


Enter Keeper, with Osriick, Ethelswick, Edith, Alfride, Edelred, Guard. Keep.
Make way there for the Prisoner.


Eauf. See King Osriick.


Theodw. I, this is our King indeed.


Theodr. O let me wash your feet Sir with my tears.


Osr. Thy trespass is thine honor my Theodrick*
And I must thank your care my Lords, as it deserves,
Your overreaching care to give my Dignity
As much as in you lay unto another.
And for your Letters counterfeit in my name,
By which the Queen is mocked into a marriage.

Theodw. That was your policy, your wit, my Lord.


Eauf. A shame on it. would I were hanged, that I
Might hear no more on it.

Bert. Fair Sir, the Queen is pleased, and hopes you are
In her that is so much fairer in your thoughts.

Anth My Sister Mildred.


Osr Yes, my noble Brother,
She stands in fortune equal with your self,
In being mine.

Anth. But not great Sir, until
You are acquitted of my fathers murder.

Osr. I am clear of that, as I am not Anthynus.
Anthynus is accused, not Osriick Sir,
Your father is required at your hands.

Bert. Ha!


Arn. But his accuser reads another lesson
Now Madam.

Offa brought bound in a Chair. Off. Whither do you hurry me?
If I must answer't, give me yet some time,
To make provision of befitting Presents,
To supply the hard hands of my stern Judges,
Into a tender feeling of my cause:
I know what Eacus loves, what Mines likes,
And what will make grave Radamanthus run.

Anth. He is distracted.


Arn. Yes, and speaks heinous things
Against himself, both of my Lords murder,
And an intended rare against his Sister.

Anth. Incestuous monster!


Off. Hark, how the Devil lies;
I have no Sister.

Ed. How he is possessed
Of that strnge error; I must satisfy you?
That was merely feigned by me to save her honor
From his outrageous lust.

Arn. But here comes that
Clears all at once.
Welcome my honored Lords.

Enter Segebert, Alberto. Jeff. Outlaw. Jeff. A boon, a boon, my gracious Liege.


Arn Hold your peace fool.


Seg. My Son Anthynus living?


Osr. You are my Father in your Daughters right.


Seg. My blessing on my Girl.


Osr. But see Anthynus at a greater height.


Anth. My Father.


Bert. And my Father noble Sir.
Your pardon, and for ever welcome.

Seg. If this were real now, and not a Dream!


Jeff. Come, leave your fooling, hear a wise man speak:
Great King according unto thy behest
With Knights adventurers I went in quest,
Through the Woods and Forests wild
To scour the Dens of Outlaws vild;
Whence these old men, this Knave I bring
Together with this Starveling;
Whom I present not dead, but quick
Unto thy grace King Osriick.

Arn. Look this way fool,
This is King Osriick man.

Jeff. Whose fool am I then?


Osr. Mine.


Mild. And mine.


Anth. Mine.


Bert. And mine.


Jeff. Whoop, hold a little, best let me be every bodies fool
Round about the house.
But amongst you all, let me not lose reward;
I must not fool for naught; the times are hard.

Osr. Still the fool's covetous.


Bert. I ow thee a just reward, for I proclaimed
To him that brought this man alive or dead
A thousand crowns; but since thou art so fortunate
To bring him home alive and well recovered
Out of such danger --

Jeff. I shall have nothing shall I?


Bert. I Will double thy reward, give thee two thousand crows.


Jeff. It is enough in conscience; who bids more?
For till you are out-bidden, I Will be your fool.
But can you tell whose Favorite you are then?

Theodr. Where I was first, I Will ever wish to be.


Osr. And I Will be thine Theodrick; for thou in this
Have above favor shown me unto bliss.

Seg. I have performed your Majesty's command,
Though not in sending, yet in bringing home
My banished friend, Lord Alberto, the preserver
Of my now happy life.

Bert. It shall be to his honor; welcome Alberto.


Outl. Oh what an heavenly smell of meat is here!


Seg. All the unhappiness I now can see
Is but an argument of tears for thee,
In whom I Am justly punished.

Anth. Take him hence
From my grieved fathers sight.

Seg. And pray let care
Be had for his recovery; his senses may
Bring a new soul into him, for which I pray.

Off. What am I freed?


Arn. Yes, yes, my Lord, all is well.


Off. I knew my bribes would do it.


Jeff. I Will off with him, for it is unknown to you
What good a fool may on a mad man do.

Ex. Arn. Offa, Jeffrey. Seg. This sword was evidence enough against him;
But here is one of the Outlaws that confessed it;
For whom, since he is penitent, I beg pardon.

Mild. The other two his fellows are both extant:
For whom together with three theevish workmen
That were strong instruments in my delivery,
Let me beg mercy.

Anth. I have heard of them that robbed my brothers Jewel-house.
It Is a day of grace,
And we are taught by heavens abundant mercy
Shown upon us beyond our expectation,
To imitate that goodness.

Bert. I forgive
All on my part.

Osr. I pardon all on mine.


Bert. And now right royal Sir, let me entreat
For former love, to make our last complete,
You will be pleased a month with us to stay
In triumphs to commemorate this day.

Osr. Next to my sum of happiness my Bride,
I should have sought that honor, royal Sister.

Anth. Thus through tempestuous sighs and showers of tears
Joy at the last more cheerfully appears.

Exeunt. RIC. BROM
Deus dedit his quoque Finem.
FINIS.

