THE SPOILS OF THE Forest of Deane Asserted in answer to a scurrilous Libell,
lately set forth, to blast the Justice and proceedings of some Commissioners of
Parliament, in that behalf.

By Isaac Bromwich Esquire a well willer to the Preservation of that Forest, and a
Joynt-Commissioner.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1650.

The Spoils of the Forest of Deane Asserted in answer to a scurrilous Libell,
lateIy set forth, to blast the justice and proceedings of some Commissioners of
Parliament, in that behalf.
IT has pleased God in these latter days (whether in mercy, to Confirm the
good; or judgment to harden the wicked) to draw us down so low and near the
very dregs and lees of impiety; that for ought I observe, those men think
themselves, most meritorious and politic* who (far from the blushes of a
modest brow) can with greatest impudency and daringnesse defame, traduce and
scandalize all such, who either out of Conscience toward God, as Christians,
or the scene of honor as Englishmen, cannot commit those their iniquities with
greediness, or at last connive or join with them in those villainies and false
actions: which being but once shined on by a true light, would grow abominable
not only to Christians, but meaner tempers: who acting but little above the
beast, barely preserve humane society.

Were not this an approved truth, men would take heed how they called good
evil, and evil good, how they sharpened their tongues like rasors, and with
envenomed quils, dart at those, who dare question or discover their wickedness.

This as to mine own particular, appears largely by a late scurrilous libel,
the conception and issue whereof bespeaks the Fathers, both dictator and scribe
to be men of a beggarly and needy invention, of little breeding or judgment,
language or honesty, otherwise they would not, (under that common cheat and
cover to infamous persons) like the Panther, cover their heads, and conceal
their names while they seek to swallow up their neighbors quick, and eat and
devour the reputes of those who in the end will be found to deserve better then
themselves.

When I first read my name therein, and observed it but the sickly and false
product of some spurious fancy, I esteemed contempt thereof the most suitable
revenge, but when the judgment of some friends above answered, that some thing
in point of honor ought to be opposed, I submitted, and was willing to rip up
that threadbare-peece, which indeed is fitter for the kennell, then a modest
pen containing as many falsehoods as lines.

And to begin with the first, it enters the stage with an apparent deceit, as
if Colonel Massey were the first, who began these pranks in the Forest of
Deane, and to that purpose insinuates, that Coll. Kyrle and Captain Phillips,
about a year since, bought that Bargain which neither Massey nor his assigns,
could or would make good, with the Committee of Revenue, and how Captain Pury
to hedge in a marriage portion, bought that again by retaile. But whether some
persons to fetch in desperate portions, might drive on desperate designs, sure
I am it is notoriously known, that six years since, long before Colonel Massey
entered upon that business, both Colonel Kyrle and Captain Brain, cut down
great sums of wood, engrost great store of iron, and for that end truckt with
those who had to do with neither, (not the Committee of Revenue but) some
Committee men of Gloucester. And whereas it is said Colonel Kyrle let out two
iron works, I would likewise know, how he came by them? and if they put a
queritur, what offense it was for Captain Pury to secure himself, by such
collusive bargains there may be another queritur, by what power the one could
let, or the other take, what was ravished and still kept by force and fraud
from the right owners. Yet the libeller takes the privilege to say, that the
iron works were enjoyed quietly without the least exception, three or four
years together if any thing of this be true what was the reason in the
beginning they were so careful, to nominate such Commissioners, as knew
nothing of their jugglings, or scarce what belonged to the Forest, and was not
Captain Pury, a very fit Commissioner, to sit and sell the wood, who must have
a share of the profit? They knew full well, if they had suffered some other men
to be nominated, they did and would have opposed it from the beginning, as well
as the whole Country Complained thereof.

But it is strictly objected, page 2 and 3. That Master Pury could be none of
those destructive offenders, for wonderful weighty reasons. Because the profit
of good and bad timber, or wood, is alike to him, and it being referred to
Captain Philips he could be but a passive offender; that he gave order to the
woodcutters, in public, not to Cut down the good trees; that he good man was
at Parliament, and therefore could know nothing, and very much stuff to this
tune. Whereas it is replied, there is much difference betwixt sound and smooth
timber, and knotty and decayed wood, both in the Coarding wages, and the Coal
that proceeds thereof; Besides it being the custom of the iron Masters (to
whom the former Officers were not servants, but slaves) to have particular
assignations for their several Felletts, can any man believe Master Pury
should send up and down the Forest for decayed trees, when once his allotment
is made amongst good Timber? will any man of reason be convinced, that his zeal
of preserving could be so serious being at his own liberty, when afterward,
notwithstanding orders of restraynt, he Commanded 400. trees to be destroyed,
not only in a neglecting, but a Contemptuous manner? A very ill example to
others who were not Parliament men as well as himself. But for his referrence
of the mannagery of the wood to Captain Philips, it is all one as if the Grand
Signior did refer a business to one of his Mutes after his pleasure were once
known.

It Is a cheap and easy way of requital, when a man has stolen a goose to stick
down a feather, and when Master Pury has been not only assenting to, but
active in the spoil of so brave a Forest, to give afterward a chill and
phlegmatic charge, that no trees should forsooth be cut down, but what the
preservators allotted, is an excellent satisfaction to the state, and if they
please to be paid with such Copper-Coyne, I will undertake they shall have
chap-men by the dozens, the true English of that charge being no more but this,
that he left command to (the Yeoman of his guard) the officers of the Forest,
they should take especial heed, that only the well grown and goodly Oaks and
Beeches should be hewn down for the future preservation thereof; It being now
grown a stale proverb, of five years standing let us cut down the best first,
and the rest will follow, which is so well observed, that those men who knew
the goodly plot of timber in 88, and consider it now, and does but cast up the
spoils done within these six years, will almost join with the usual and bold
assertion made by the iron Masters, when they Come for contracts, that the
Committee need not now stand so nice upon terms of preservation, for that
there is scarce a tree left fit for shipping in the whole Forest.

For his being above at Parliament, I do aver it, that its happy God has sent
us other manner of members, who take Care of this Nation; For while a person of
that society should indeed be above, and carefully assistant in the
preservation of his Country his neighbors and their just interests, to be
then terrifying and tampering, to be skaring and affrighting almost all sorts
and sizes, who will not comply with the sordid gains and reaches of wicked
men, is a thing which makes the poor people, even faint, and believe that the
members which they have chosen are but like the bramble in a storm, to which
while the poor sheep flies for succor, he does but lose his wool. Though the
more knowing sort, are not yet grown such woeful zanies, or of so implicit a
faith, but they believe Master Pury might have shown more of his duty at
London, then in that Forest. And as I am persuaded the Parliament never
obliged the hearts of Englishmen more in these parts, then by those excellent
and seasonable Votes of Januar. 1. Last past, and afterward managed with so
much prudence and Care by the Council of State, so they never suffered a
greater alienation and distaste in the hearts and affections of well minded
people, then by the Collusive and mean juglings of some persons in the bargains
of the Forest. And much more is brought to light and discovered in this
business then the parties themselves Concerned do think or imagine.

But to go along with this libell, we must for their methods fake, chop it into
their own Sections. And in the first place it is by all means desired to
consider the persons prosecuted, that is to say like to be discovered, and
there are 1. Colonel Kyrle, who says the libeller was in arms for the
Parliament, and I say he was in arms for the King, wherein we are neither of
us liars. But the Parliament owes him and his four Brothers 3000. pound (I
hope Col. Kyrle does not cut down the Forest because the House owes other men
money) But pray lets see the Bill of Debt, and if it shall be made appear that
this noble Collonell owes the State six thousand, I hope some eminency of
merit, or great disbursments of money must be produced, else how will he cut
skoares for the other three? That his brother received a wound at a Battle
with Prince Rupert in the North may be true, yet possibly it may be as true
that himself might give it him, as well as lately he bestowed the like favor
upon Colonel Cromwells quartermaster, as a pledge of his good affection to
the Parliament. That business with a few other pretty small transgressions,
deserves the armies consideration, that they may know what a trusty and divine
champion they are like to have, if ever a just occasion should be given. But
what consideration he deserves, for one of his Brothers vouchsafing to ride in
the Lifeguard, or because his Father died of a Fever in Gloucester, I leave
to better judgments, as I do the man and his merits to God, but am afraid to
write those abominations which he has with confidence acted upon the
housetop, and in the sight of the people.

I confess for Captain Griffantius Phillips (by the way that is a cruel hard
name and scarce given by his British Godfathers) I never heard of his
imprisonment in Oxford till now, but do know that that gentleman very well
deserves it in Gloucester, If Col. Walton was in the first place a testimony of
the one, the rest of the members of the house may happily think it fit to
adjudge him to the other: if this Welsh Don-Quixott were the penman of this
libell (as by the excellency of the style and strength of the Syllogismes is
imagined) he cries out much of his body being once taken in execution* let him
take heed; if he be once dissected to the Parliament, in his true colors it
may be delivered to execution once more without a reprival, I dare say did his
honest Mother, the good Ale-wife, know how her Son (descended of so lofty and
great a progeny) does discommend drunkards she would give him but slender
entertainment, at her palace at Mercatt O Waene. And however he be now pleased
to throw such indignities in my face, undeservedly; yet within these few
years, I thought my self in a condition, fit to have received better language
from him. Neither would this nimble squire have offered it, when he was humbly
pleased to foot it, in his Irish stockings and Battoone in Querpo.

It will, I take it, be easily admitted, that this man has, like a Mushrom,
suddenly sprunge up by his pretenses of public service, yet if it should be
proved, that (had it not been for the Lieutenant Generals army in his way) he
would have run into Pembrok to his dear Countryman Monsieur Poyer, the
Parliament cannot but think him traiterous and ungrateful. Though it be no
news, when such gallants, get on horseback, for an ordinary man (without
witchcraft) to tell you whether they will ride; By that time he has answered
the State for his feats in the Forest, and some other very fine pranks, as
ordinary a person may hold his stirrup.

No desire or desert of mine could produce that ill opinion of Master Pury
which his late actions has wrought against him, my apprehensions of his
ingenuity exceeding my judgment of his avarice. Neither when I was usually
told of his abuses behind my back, was I so much moved at him, as when I
observed him delivered up to that fatal passion, I thought my self concerned
to decline him. What his services have been, let those who know them cry them
up, I confess I live so far off, being near a bow-Shot, that I have not heard
of them. Sure I am; he has been extraordinarily well paid for his long
marches, and hard labors. But of his stormings and dangerous adventures, his
continual hot and close fights and skirmishes, I hope there are some who live
in and about the Deanery can give a readier account. As for us, who are more
remote, we dare confidently believe and say, there is not a person of the
masculine gender, will ever rise up in judgment for the bloodshed of that
pretty manslayer.

It Was very ill done, I must acknowledge, of the Commander in chief, to
destine him to so many and desperate on-flattes, yet, being at least for two
years together preserved from harm, as the writer confesses, by the Lord of
Hosts, it argued a great want of faith and remembrance of former deliverances,
when afterward, at the sight of the enemy, he made such unreasonable haste,
and in so much distemper. But what is this to the case of these 3. Gentlemen
the libeller says, the Iron-works were set up by authority of Parliament; I
say no, they were set up too long before, and repaired by authority of their
own, But must to the joy of all men, be pulled down by authority of Parliament;
and for selling of wood at reasonable rates we know the meaning of that; the
trick is not forgotten, nor the means by whom it was procured. That command
has been well obeyed, otherwise they could not brag they could, and had bought
as much wood for a groate a cord, as they pleased, and others that they might
sell cheaper their iron then others, for that their wood cost them little or
nothing. Here went the Hare away, and from these persons it is not hard to find
what is become of the Forest; yet for such people to make it such a heinous
business for one of them to be imprisn'd, when he deserved something else, and
the other for his lands to be questioned, when it ought to be extended by the
law, is so foolish an apology, that it deserves, nothing but contempt from wise
or honest men.

Now to wind up the first part of the libell, into one Bottom, we must once
more consider, the good affection, services, and hardship of these 3.
Gentlemen, (certainly Master Phllipps is one upon the welsh account) how they
have adventured their lives (one or two of them may do it once more) their
great estates, and which is more then all their families and fortunes too
besides, what the Parliament truly owes them.

Me thinks it is a shame, to read this effrontery, look upon these men, but 5.
years since, in their full equipage and furniture, take away these destructive
gains of the Forest from some, the large concessions, blessings, and
donatives of the Parliament from the other, and what the hazards of their
families, fortunes, and estates were, may be cast up without great insight in
Arithmetic. And for such men to prate what the Parliament owes them, when they
owe all they have and more to them* is so bold an impudence, that it deserves a
sharp inquisition and a sharper punishment, and what the demerits of some of
them are, may shortly and sooner be made known to the world, then they do
imagine.

But leaving a little, the tragical part of their high achievements and
sufferings for them, their great losses and crosses, let us look to the
Comicall progress of the libell, and observe, with what kindness it visits
the Commissioners of enquiry, who are said by a Commission ex part, to be in
the general but mere prosecutors, of those just, quiet, and harmless people,
in comparison of whom, we are made in our persons and conditions as the vilest
and most mean creatures, a pack of mischeivous and partial wicked people, that
seek only our own ends, and what not? Yet a little before I go to the persons.
I would ask what they mean by a commission ex part? is it lawful for a theif,
when he is arraigned, to accuse the justice of the judge and jury, because he
likewise has not a Commission to examine negative witnesses on his side? our
Commission was to inquire what spoils were committed in the Forest, and not
what was not committed, several witnesses come and depose, that Master Kyrle
and Philips cut down above ten thousand timber trees; and were it usual or
handsome for them, to have commissioners to examine that they cut down none?
Did the kings former commissions run in this sort, or what nonsense is it this
foolish libeller drives at? If we enforced or skrew'd out what was not true,
let several depositions be read to the same thing, or else at least let the
interests be discovered we did drive at. But if for our acting according to
duty, to trust, to our conscience and country, we shall be styled prosecutors, if
by lies and reproaches we shall be scandalized, and by underhand threats and
combinations be overawed and menaced, to be no less forsooth then totally
ruined, if we must be told by some of our friends, we must give off in time, to
search the gross injuries done to the state, though commanded* or less we
shall be undone; That it is not our integrity or innocence shall be our
protection, but the mere power of our opponents in this business of the
Forest, that shall destroy us if the Commission under the great seal, and
Commissioners shall be bafled and comemned, so far that they were like to have
fallen into force, and that by a member of the house styling it in the face of
the Country a hedge Commission. I would feign know what person of honor or
fortune will engage in the Commands of State? or will not their authority by
degrees grow cold and neglected, and so their affairs grow waste and desolate?
certainly these things being well considered, the Encouragement seems to be
very small.

And now to the persons of the Commissioners, to these the libeller says,
Master Bromwich and Master Borrow (nominall Colonels) with some Citizens of
Bristol (good men and true I hope) are the prosecutors, and procured (as may
forsooth be conceived only) themselves to be Commissioners (the airy figment of
the libeller) to their own great costs and charges and to be believed by none
but such a pragmatick fellow as the scribler, and so fully and substantially
answered by that honest Gentleman Captain Bishop, my fellow labourer and
Commissioner, that I hate to trouble my pen with so improbable a vanity. Only
let me say this for my own part (and I really believe the rest may say as
much)* that as I never saw the faces of many of the Commissioners before they
met, So I knew no more of my name being used, till casually I heard thereof,
then I did that the libeller was a very honest and a faithful Gentleman to the
Commonwealth!

But why nominall Colonels I pray? Neither of them but had their Commissions
long before Master Kyrle turned to the Parliament, and some of their friends
stick not to say, they kept to their trust, and ever hated dishonorable
plundring, robbing, stealing, taking away other men's estates by horrid force
and violence, and never murdered any of the poor Parliament Soldiers in cold
blood; are these Gentlemen, so quoted for presidents, free from these, 'twere
well for them if they were.

For Colonel Berrow, it is well known he had a Command in his Country, and had
for Officers and Soldiers, (one officer or two in Master Kyrles regiment
excepted) another manner of regiment then he had. For my own part, after I had
entertained Officers in London, I might easily have raised my regiment in the
Country, and was desired by Coll. Massey, but it pleased God the troublesome
weather beginning to break, up I saw it needless. And I can without vanity
say, I was never fond (as some men are and have bin) by my own advance to put
my Country to an unnecessary expece.

Touching my debauched behavior toward the Lord General, I wish my heart
toward that Lord, were written in my forehead, but lest I should be thought,
to flatter a person, whose power and merit is so far above me, (which I detest)
I will take the liberty only to say this; my education and birth I hope will
render me so much a civilized man, and above that we call ungrateful, as to
give the General his due, whom upon several applications and addresses, I
found regardfull to me and my business beyond my desert or expectation; and
for the Election at Cyrencester, I appeal to my Lord General himself, what my
humble entreaties and several offers to him have been in that business; In
short I do here openly defy that man, Soldier or else, who upon a good
ground, should dare act more for him, or in defense of his repute and known
worth then my self; whom I profess I have ever honored:

For my opposition of Coll. Rich, he being a mere stranger to the relations and
several interests of this Country, I understand not what law, reason, or
Parliamentary practice could or may condemn me* But it is very well known, the
fancy and knack of that Election, proceeded out of the same shop as the
Election of Gloucester; if Colonel Rich sits in the house duly returned and
duly chosen, I am satisfied I wish in this business of the Forest he may show
himself as forward and faithful as the other members, that the Country may
take Some Comfort in his sitting there. But for any proof against me at the
Committee of Elections, that ever I heard, or was guilty of, or called to
answer, I say it is a notorious lie, as well as that of Coll. Birch, and sticks in
the throat of him, that spoke it, and him that writ it; and for the abuse I
suffered from Birch, I question not but in due time, and in another opportunity
to have reparation from him. What this libeller means by the Committee of
Coventry, I know not, but this I must say of those Gentlemen of that
Committee, with whom I was an unworthy associate, that, as I was a stranger to
them, so I never received more regards from any, and in all their actings they
were the only people ever I sat with, that carried their business with
authority, honor, and justice, and with whom as I have shared in some
difficulties, So I never received any Command from them, which I did not
undergo, I thank God, with readiness and cheerful submission, if any contest
appeared in a transitory point of judgment, it was merely temporary and no
way, as to me, disobliging, and of so little consequence, that I shall love and
honor them while I am able to regard my self.

If he means the City of Coventry, truly for 3. years and above al my estate
and means of subsistence, was seized on and kept from me by the Kings party,
and for all that time, they let me want nothing. And I do acknowledge I was
constrained to borrow even my bread; drink, and clothing from them, which they
freely lent me in as free a measure, as if I had possessed ten times my estate
neither did my self or family want any thing in that City, and I hope I did
honestly requite it, and as a token of gratitude, I shall be very forward, to
do any respect or service for those people, and am confident shall be lovingly
treated, where this scandalous libeller must not show his face.

That I protect Papists, delinquents, and scandalous Ministers, (titles which
they put upon most sufficient men, who will not bring their tools to the
Philistines Grindstone) is a delusive falsehood; how can I protect where any
three will condemn? Neither did I to my knowledge ever do that thing in a
Committee for any by respects but for justice, and this I dare make good with
my life or fortune, and if some of those will do so it is something beyond
expectation. But shall every member of the house that says No be termed a
protector of delinquents. I have indeed many times put a check and stop to the
impetuous and beastly rage of avaritious men, when by the plottings of Cabinet
and dishonorable jugglers I have observed, the ruin and desolation of families
intended, who never deserved it, and this merely to satisfy the rapinous and
devouring eye of some men, who by the laws and acts of this very Parliament
have deserved the justice, rather then the countenance or compliance of a
Committee. And when I have satisfied my conscience toward God, and my trust to
the state (which has commanded me to do no wrong) I value not a rush what this
scurrilous fellow, or the proudest of his abettors can say against me. It Is
known what my sufferings have been both in my purse at Coventry (where Master
Knightly, Master Pim and my self lost at and immediately after the siege of
Coventry above 7000. pounds) and my estate in the country for almost four
years which was wholly lost to an inconsiderable sum: I will not speak of
arreares and moneys lent (when God knows then how ill I could spare them)
though I might and must with far more justice, and truth, then the others named
in the libel. Yet I never clamoured the House as most men do, who lie cursing
and banning, to puzzle the House and business of the Kingdom; I have waited
with patience and will, till a conveniencie, and a temperate opportunity show
themselves. If my self or sufferings may be thought worthy of any regard, I
shall be thankful, and desire to be useful, if not I will sit down with a
manly patience, and rely on that God which hitherto has been merciful to me,
and has not utterly forsaken me, and hope to be preserved from that rancor and
discontent, which have thrown imprudent and hair-brained men upon contrary
violencies. That this committee ever refused to act with me, is a falsehood of
that nature, that I perceive the libeller cares not what he writes, how many
times have I been sent to both of late and heretofore, is well known, and the
thing is so notorious, that when the libeller shall come to Gloucester and be
known, the stones and timber of the houses will declare what he is; and for any
drunken behavior, I can say, as my constitution, so my judgment abominats that
unmanly sin, and there is much difference betwixt civil converse and society*
and the meaness of that condition; I live here open to the censure and view of
this city, both Soldiers and others, and I believe children will rectify the
libeller and his falsehoods. If some of those the scribler voucheth as patterns
of merit be as free, let the example left in Gloucester, Bathe, Bristol,
London, Hereford, Mounmouth, Rosse be judges, and then 'twill be seen, who is,
or has been guilty of that fault they would so fain pin upon the shoulders of
honester men.

I do a little wonder at the libeller, when I observe whom he commends, how he
dares venture upon the irreligion, scandal, and disaffection of Colonel
Berrow, that gentleman is able to answer for himself, and I question not but he
will and to the purpose, but this I will say, take only one out of the three
forenamed persons, and for the other two, there are those besides my self, who
will go near to prove it, that if all the evil and wickedness in Europe were
contracted into England, and all the impiety in England concentered into one
place, it would be found seminally in intention, or fruitfully in action, in
those two men; for he that shall read that bed role of their continued and
multiplied exorbitances, and converse with the story of their lives, will find
the wickedness of their heart and practice, and the principles by which both
are managed, to be as dangerous and investigable as the head of Nilus, which
River by the unparrallel'd conflux, and multitude of thirsty Animals shaped in
such a diversity of forms and qualities, it is no mervell, if every year it
becomes the fruitful mother of strange births and monstrous productions. It Is
nothing for those men to stamp vices and make it current by being theirs, to
commit such prodigious and exotic impieties, that a man would hearken to them
rather as paradoxes of iniquity, then the actions of men who bear Gods image
about them; who carry with them, not only in their faces, but their daily
practices such terror and slavish awe amongst the poor people, as thinking
them supported by some in Parliament (the last and utmost refuge to timorous
wretches) who seemed to be sold to a lasting slavery, that it is the usual
word of Command, do this or that, let me have such or such a bargain at such or
such rates, or take it perforce, and threaten the owners or refusers with
death, they say what need we care for the whyning of the women, so we may gain
one hundred pound a week by the iron works.

If these men were truly scanned, and their high insolences detected, Nero,
Donitian, Caesar Borgia, or Johannes Vesilowich will seem the Fathers of the
Country. These are they which make their miserable neighbors like Spaniels
lick their feet; and as Mules and Camels kneel down to take up their burdens,
at the beck of whose terror they offer up their estates, as the poor Indians
sacrifice to the Devil not for love or Devotion, but for fear he should hurt
them. And yet these good souls with Solomon's strumpet, wipe their mouths and
ask what have they done? Whilst like ungrateful sieves they let out and
conceal the flower and goodness of Gentlemen their neighbors, and retain
nothing but the bran and skurffe to throw in their faces.

It seems his quarrel must end where he was afraid to begin, with the
Commissioners of Bristoll, and is very angry that they will not leave trading at
Sea for iron, and run a more short and less hazardous voyage into the Forest
or Can-Wood, (as I take it they might have made their Choice) for their
Merchandise. Master Libeller, I must tell you, I have converst with those
Gentlemen, and do find that they do out-honest and out wit-you, It Was not the
cleanly tempering of your Noune Relatives, could disoblige them from their
duty, or the search of your knavery, They who Commerce with the Princes of
Christendom, are not that sort of Seafish to be Caught in the net of such a
gull as you are; if it be an offense to you, to go to Sea for Iron, it will
appear a crime to others, to make it at home of Shipping Timber.

Those Gentlemen have done their duty upon my knowledge like discreet men, and
impartial, who by their sedulity and faithfullnes have fixed such a feather in
your Cap, that where ever you come, you will carry it as a badge of a knave or
a fool; One of them has practiced so far upon you with his pen, and advanced
so honestly and stoutly upon your faults, that he will endanger to bring you
and your abettors to the stocks, and then we shall have some whipping cheer.
You belie them fearfully in their vast quantities of Iron, I have with some
diligence inquired, and for ought I hear, all that any of the Commissioners
have to spare you, is only that they were by their sides.

But supposing all you have said to be true, may you because the Commissioners
are faulty, cut down, destroy and ruin! O learned argument, certainly you have
learnt the Mood and figures of your Logic no farther then Radner.

For the long tale of Sir John Winter, and those who long since cut down trees
in Avenhall, it was before the Parliament sat, and they were fined 40.
thousand pound, and for what is cut down since, is chargeable only upon those
who^ this libell would defend, who have Committed such notable spoil and
devastation, as is not to be parralell'd in any age, let the offenses and
offenders be examined and brought to punishment, who by studying their own
grandeur and profit, have dishonored the Nation, cheated the State, and almost
ruind the goodliest plot of shipping timber in the world, and what good or
virtue can there be in riches or estate thus basely gotten? for my own part, as
I was courted, and indeed intended a share till I discovered the falsehood and
damage, so I thank God, from the beginning I have ever opposed it, and
observed with some wise men, that those who roasted their meat by the Forest
fire, were lightly choked afterward with the bones.

For it will be proved within the space of 6. years they have cut that quantity
of wood and timber, which Sir John Winter contracted for at 120. thousand
pound, and paid 20. thousand in earnest, and what account is given to the
State must be sought after in the vain and lavish expenses of some immoderate
iron Masters. Commonly ill gotten greatness, though men may roll it under their
tounges as a sweet morsel, yet it will turn to gall and bitterness in the
end, and while it pleases the palate, it becomes gravel and rottenesse in
the belly.

The Devils themselves have Thrones, Principalities, and dominions (as a
gallant Patriot observed) but wanting true goodness they must for ever want all
true honor and happiness. A false heart is abominable before God, and they who
Crook public trusts to private and sinister ends, are and ought to be
abominable before just and good men. And seeing the Parliament has so
gratified the Country, in their just and sensible apprehensions of their
destructions, I confess I am hearty in the cause and justice of the Parliament
(which my soul loves above all that is mortal:) And for advancement whereof, I
dare suffer as much as he deserves who shall endeavor by force or fraud to
oppose them in it.

1 Nil magnum mundo nisi magnus animus. 2 Magna Contemnens non magna metuens. 3
Solum sit magnum magnificans deum.

I. Bromwich.


