SOME NEW CASES OF THE Years and time of King Hen. 8. Edw. 6. and Qu: Mary;
Written out of the Great Abridgement, Composed by Sir ROBERT BROOK, KNIGHT. etc.

There dispersed in the Titles, but here collected under years.

And now Translated into English by JOHN MARCH of Gray's Inn, Barrister.

All which said Cases are by the Translator Methodised, and reduced
Alphabetically under their proper Heads and Titles.

With an exact Table of the principal Matter contained therein.

London, Printed by T. N. for Richard Best, and John Place, and are to be sold
at Gray's Inn gate, and Furnivals Inn-gate in Holborn, 1651.

To the READER.
READER,
WHEN I considered what great care our Parliament had taken of the public
good; in enacting our Laws to be translate^ into English, the^^ which,
certainly nothing more equal, that the people might in some measure instruct
themselves in that to which they are bound to obedience; and of which by the
Law it self, they cannot, nor must not plead ignorance. And when I had
likewise considered the excellent, and most useful Law that is contained in
this little volume called Petty Brock; I thought it a labor servicable to the
public to Translate it, which I here present you in your own Language: make
use of it, and you will find Magnum in parvo, great benefit in this little
work; and I doubt not give him thanks for it, who is ambitious of nothing more
then to be yours, and the Commonwealths

most Faithful Servant, Jo: MARCH:

THE TABLE.
Abridgment. page 1 DAmages increased after issue and verdict upon it page 1
Costs ibid
Acceptance. Lease of a Tennant for life is void by his death 1 Void, and
voidable Lease, diversity 2 Acceptance by the issue in Tail of the second
Lessee ibid Privity ibid Diversity ibid Apportionment ibid Acceptance by him in
remainder ibid Acceptance by the successor of a Bishop ibid Payment at another
place 3
Action Popular 3 Within the year ibid
Action upon the Case 3 Mill 4 Where an Action upon the Case lies, where not,
diversity ibid Delivery of goods traversed in detinue ibid Negat Pregnans ibid
Action upon the Case for calling a man perjured ibid Action upon the Case for
caling him perjured and justification in it. ibid Of his own wrong. 5 Bar in an
Action upon the Case, by Law wager in det. ibid Plea to avoid double charge ib
Travers ibid Action upon the Case upon finding of goods 6 Evidence ibid Action
upon the Case upon a devenerunt to the hands of the defendant ibid Evidence ib
Place in an Action upon the Case. Assumpsit is not local 7 Place in det. is not
traversable ib Action upon the Case against executors. ib Not guilty a good
plea in an Action upon the Case, and where not 8 Hiis similia in an Action upon
the Case ib Action upon the Case, upon trover. ib The conversion to use
traversed ib Evidence ib Action upon the Case, for not payment of marriage
money 9
Action upon the Statute His freehold no plea in an Action upon the statute ib
Upon the statute of 5. R. 2. his freehold. ib Avowing upon the statute, and by
common Law 10 Diversity ib Disclaimer ib His freehold is an Action upon the
statute of 5. R. 2. ib Disseisor ib
Account 10 Account against disseisors ib Privity necessary ib Account against
a GardJan ib Pleading ib
Adjournment 11 Cause and place of Adjournment. ib Demurrer ib Dubious verdict
ib Foreign Plea ib Certificate. ib
Administrators ibid Administration committed, pending the writ ib Who shall
commit administration vacate ib Episcopatu. ib Relation ib Power and interest
certain; diversity 12 Who shall be said proximo de sanguine to take letters of
administration by the statute ib Civil Law, the law is since adjudged otherwise
13 See Ratcliffes Case my Lord Cook ib Land which is a Chattel shall by office
14
Age 14 Arreares of rent ^or^ of Annuity and damage ib Diversity ib Scire fac,
against the heir ib Thing real and thing personal diversity ib Avowry ib Costs
ib Where debt lies, and where a scire fac. 15 Diversity ib Where the King shall
have his age, where not ib Age of a parson, prebend, etc. 10
Alienations ibid Where the heir within age shall be in ward, where not ib
Alienation by Tenant in Fee and by Tenant in tail diversity ib Relation of an
office diversity 17 Fine for alenation, intrusion, license to alien inmortmaine
ib Variance from the license ib Fine levied ib Averment ib Two Joyntenants, the
one releases to the other diversity 18 Fine upon release, and upon conu^ance of
his right, etc. diversity ib Estoppel ib License to Alien for life ib Burgage
tenure ib Devise is an Alienation ib
Alien see Tit. Denizen 18 Alien 19 Alien purchase ib Office ib Information ib
The King shall have a Lease for years 20 Purchased by an Alien. ib
Amendment ibid Variance amended after judgment ib Amendment after a writ of
error came to the common Bench ib In what thing the King shall amend his
declaration in another term 21
Appeal ibid Not guilty in an appeal ib Se defendendum ib Evidence ib Justify
ib Indictment before the Coroners and before oath Justices ib Diversity 22
Appeal for Homicide ib Woman intiuled to an Appeal of death of her husband,
loses it by marriage ib Quarentine ib Coroner and his power ib
Apportionment 23 Contract Apportion ib Approportionment by the common Law upon
purchase ib Quaere ib Where a rent service shall be apportioned, where not, see
before ib Recovery or descent of parcel 24 Rent Charge ib
Arbitrament ib Pleading of a Condition in Bar ib Replication ib See Tit.
Conditions ib
Assets in their hands, see Tit. Extinguishment 25 Demurr upon Evidence ib
Legacies shall not be paid before Debts ib
Assets per Descent Assets by Descent. Judgment upon Assets found false plea ib
Assign 26 Assignee charged with the Covenant of his Grantor ib Audita quer. ib
Assise 26 Baily examined in Assise ib Attachment shall not be de bones
alterius quam ten. ib Of what things an Attachment ought to be 27 Election of
his Tenant ib
Assurances 27 Fine with proclamation to bind Tenant in tail, and his issue 28
The Law is now otherwise: see the Case of Fines in my Lord Coke ib Five years
for the issue in tail to claim ib Equity ib Quaere ib 4. Hen. 7. cap. 24. ib
Rast. Fine. 8. ib Privity ib F^ne confessed and avoided ib Intendment 29
Averment ib Fine by Conclusion ib Stranger ib Fi^e with proclamation by the
tenant in tail, the reversion or remainder to the King and common Recovery ib
Diversity ib See my Lord Cokes first book ib Quere 30 Common recovery by the
common Law, and after the Statute diversity ib Assurance that the heir should
not sell 31 To except the last obligation ib
Attaint 32 False quantity in demands ib Attaint upon an Appeal of Maihew ib
Ataint for termor ib GardJan and Tenant by Stature Merchant ib Jurors take
conusance and notice of a thing in another County 33 Place not traversable ib
Trespass transitory, and Local diversity 34 Information ib
Attorment 34 Where the attornment in the absence of the purchaser shall be
good, where not, ib Quaere 35 Avowry made without attornment, and the contrary
ib Fine Levied ib Per que servitia ib Where a grant shall be good without
attornment ib Attornment necessary, where not 36 Attornment upon grant of a
reversion of a term ib Diversity ib Whether services pass by Feoffment of the
Manor without Attornment 37 Lease for life, and grant of a reversion for
years, to commence after ib
Attorney 38 In what case a man shall make an Attorney, what not ib
Audita Querela ib Feoff or the heir of the Conusor shall have contribution ib
Contra of the Conusor himself 39 Averments see Tit. Pleadings 39 where a man
ought to aver, that the one, and the other, are one, and not diverse, and where
econtra ib Predict serves for an Averment ib
Averment upon Avowry 40 Avowry 40 Land charged with two distresses by Dower of
part ib Partition is cause of two distresses ib Avowry changed without notice
and econtra ib Sale by Deed enrolled 41 Fine ib Recovery ib Descent ib Quere ib
How and in what place notice shall be made ib Que estate in another person ib
Diversity ib Avowry upon the land by the Statute of 21. H. 8. cap. 19. and the
answer in it 42 His Free hold in avowry for damage feasant ib No seisin, and
yet ward 43 Limitation in avowry ib Seisin traversed in avowry ib
BAR. Bastardy. 44 What divorce may Bastardise the issue, what not ib Divorce
after death ib
Battle. 45 Before whom bartell shall be made and tried ib
Bill 45 Praemunire by Bill ib
CERCIORARY. 46 MIttimus ib Cerciorary to remove Indictments ib
Certificate of the Bishop. ib Averment contrary to the Certificate of the
Bishop ib
Challenge 47 Many hundreds ib Challenge ib
Charge. 48 Charters of pardon 48 For what thing pardon shall serve, and for
what gift or restitution is necessary ib Pardon before office, and after
diversity ib Where relation of an office shall not defeat a mean Act ib Pardon
of Alienation by Parliament, and Letters Patents diversity 49 Amoveas manum ib
Intrusion pardoned before office and after office diversity ib Livery ib Full
age ib
Chattels 49 Remainder of a Chattel devised ib Diversity 50
Chose in Action 50 Thing in Action ibid Thing in Action vested in the King by
the Stat. 31. H. 8. ib Thing in Action personal, mixed and real 51 Diversity ib
Clergy 52 No Clergy in petty larceny 52 Bishop or Metropolitan has his Clergy
ib Laps for the ordinary Metrop. and the King ib Bigamus ib Heretik ib Excom.
ib Jew ib Turk ib Greek ib Roman ib Cecus ib Quere ib Bastard 53
Color 53 Matter in law ib To the Plaintiff ib To one mean ib To the defendant
ib Poss. determined ib Poss. defeated ib Feoff. Release ib Fine recover ib
Diss. Reentry ib Property ib Upon a bar ib By a mean ib Writ. ib Justify as
servant 54 Poss. in Law ib
Commission 54 Made Knight after the Commission ib Where one commission shall
determine another ib Et e contra ib Diversity betwixt commission of Goal
delivery, and Oyer and Termyner 55 Justice of the common bench, made Justice of
the Kings bench ib Kings bench error 56 Justice of the common bench, chief
Baron of the Exchequer or of Oyer and Termyner, or Goal delivery ib Voydence
by creation a Bish* ib Quere ib Oyer ib Oyer and Termyner ib Peace ib Goal
delivery ib Error in pleas 57 Process or out law. ib Justice of Peace made
Knight of every commission ib Grant, and commission, diversity ib Commission
read or proclaimed ib Notice 58 No such in rerum natura ib Commission unica
vice ib Commission determined in part ib Commission in Eyer ib Kings bench 59
Diversity ib Justice for term of life ib Commission determined for want of
adiournment. ib Where the Records shall remain. ib
Conditions 59 Special showing of the performance of the condition contained in
Indentures ib Limitation of payment, and not condition 60 Executors ib Ordinary
ib Testament ib Tenure, and condition diversity ib Avowry ib Causa matrimony
praelocut. ib Condition performed by reason of death, Et econtra 60 Ad
intentionem, is no condition 61 He which will have advantage of a condition,
must give attendance ib Condition shall not be apportioned ib Conditions
performed 62 Where proviso shall make a condition, where not ib Quere 63 Infra
terminum 10. an. and infra terminum predict. diversity, surrender. Foreiture ib
Reading 64 Defeasans ib Arbitrators ib The reason seems because the submission
is conditional ib Acquitted saved harmless, and discharged ib Diversity ib Non
damnificatus est ib Payment at another place ib Pleading of a condition in the
Negative, and in the affirmative, diversity 66 Condition that the estate shall
cease ib
Confess and avoid 66 Where a man confesses and avoids, there he shall not
traverse ib
Confirmation 67 Bishop charges with the assent of the Dean and Chapter ib
Misnamer ib Sigillura ib Relation 68 Where a confirmation shall be (...) by the
Bishop, Dean, and Chap Et e cont ib Interest and judicial power, diversity ib
Patron has Fee ib Where the conformat. of the new King is necessary, where not
69 Franchise ib These words for him and his heirs in the grant of the King ib
Et e contra ib
Conscience 70 Subpena to execute an estate ibid Vendee shall have see without
words heirs ib
Continuances ib Imparle to a day in the same term in a common recovery ibid
Contract 71 Contract cannot be divided ib Obligation determines contract ibid
Diversity ib
Corone Crown 72 A man pleads not guilty, and after pleads pardon ib Felon
after judgment, had the privilege of the Church ib Attainder by praemunire,
and attainder of felony, diversity ibid Woman with child shall not have the
benefit of her belly but once ib Woman bigg judged to be burnt 73 Indictment ib
Appeal ib Who shall be said principal ib A man killed at sword and buckler or
at justing 74 Indictment in the time of one King, shall serve in the time of
another ib Certiorari ib Indictment, not discussed pending the commission of
Oyer and Terminer ib Cerciorari mittimus ib Indictment before Justices of Oyer,
etc. and before Just. of Gaol delivery, diversity ib Burglary 76 Burglary ib
Clergy of the principal, shall not serve the accessory ib Acquit as accessory,
and after arraigned as principal ib Woman abjured 76 Accusation in case of
Treason, and misprision ib Trial of treason by the common Law ib Trial of petty
treason 77 Civil Law ib Witnesses, and Accuser diversity. ib Challenge ib
Abjure for treason ib Quere ib Trial of felony ib Removing of the prisoner out
of the Kings bench to the Country 78 A man takes the Church, and will not
abjure ib Church serves for forty daye^ 79 Abjuration, and day to do it ib
Sanctuary pro vita hominis ib Grant, or prescription to have Sanctuary for
debt, good, and where not 80 Church suspended ib Church, and Sanctuary ib
Abjuration discharges felony ib Abjure for petty larceny ib Judgment of life
and member is felony ib
Corporations Fail of the name of corporat. ex part quer. and ex part def.
diversity ib Quere 81 Abbie extinct ib Quere ib Creation and gift in one patent
ib Patent to two intents ib
Costs 71 Costs in a Quare impedit. 72 Penalty given by Statute ibid Nonsuit
ib Defendant shall have costs by Statute ib
Covenant 72 Covenant without words of Covenant for him, his heirs and execut:
ib
Coverture. 73 Deed enrolled by a feme cover by the common Law, and by custom
diversity 73 London ib
Count 73 Count against the tenant, and prayee in aid 73
Court Baron 74 It Is no Manor, without Suitors ib Where Steward, or under
Steward may let by copy, and econtta ib Quere ib
Customs. 74 Custom per tot. Angliam, and Custom in a City or County Diversity
74
Damages 76 Damages abridged and increased upon inquest of office ib Contra
upon issue tried betwixt parties ib Costs ib Where attaint lies, where not.
Default Default after receipt 76
Demurrer. 77 Demur upon office ib For what tenure, livery due to the King ib
Misrecital of a Statute 77
Denizen. See Tit Alien 77 Denizen and Alien ib King cannot alter his Law by
his Patent ib Escheat ib
Deputy 78 Office assigned over 78
Detinu. Debt 78 Debt upon Indent. of Covenant, in which are words obligat. ib
Where payment is a good plea in Debt, without acquittance, or writing, and
econt. Showing of deed ib Once barred upon an obligation, it is for ever ib Debt
for release ib
Devise 80 Testament by a feme covert by assent of the husband ib
Countermandable after her death ib Devise by the husband to the wife ib Estate
for life by intent, and devise good by implication ib Devise to a common person
in London, and devise in Mort. in London Diversity 81 Where survivor shall not
hold place in a devise ib In feodo simplici ib Where all the executors shall
sell, and where one may ib Quere ib Devise that his executors shall sell post
mortem I. S. 82 Devise that the Feoffees shall make an estate, where he has no
Feoffees ib Sale of Land by executors after disseism, recovery 82 Fine levied,
or descent 83. Title of entry, and right of entry, diversity ib Where the
property is devised, and where the occupation, diversity ib Devise the
occupation ib Devise that every one shall be heir to the other ib Words to make
a remainder 84 Devise to do at his pleasure ib Where the heir may waive a
devise, and econtra. Descent ib Diversity ib Devise tols a descent, and no
remitter 85 waive devise ib
Divorce 85 Acts executed before the divorce ib Diversity ib Cui ante divorcium
ib
Descent 86 Remainder to the right heirs ib None can be heir to a man attaint.
ib Gavelkind ib Diversity. ib Casus Sir John Hussy 87 Ouster l' main ib Heirs
males, name of purchase. ib Treason 88 Diversity where the ancestor has some
estate, where not ib Remainder 89 Remainder ib Remainder ib Remainder in
abeyance 90 Remainder Heredibus Mascul. de corp. and rectis hered. Diversity ib
Descent to an heir in ventre mirs ib Recovery against Tenant in tail, the
reversion in the King ib The King tenant in tail cannot discontinue by grant by
patent 91 So it was determined in the case of the Lord Barkley ib
Discontinuance of process 92 Diversity betwixt discontinuance, and parol saus
jour ib
Dismes, Tithes 92 Lay man shall pay Tithes for spiritual land, otherwise of a
man spiritual ib
Disseisor. 93 Lease of land of another man ib Commander is a disseisor ib
Distress Pound overt ib Pound breach: ib
Done, Gift 94 What passes by words omnia terras and tenementa ib Gift of a
Chattel by the King ib What passes by grant of omnia bona ib
Dower 95 Dower of a rent reserved upon a lease for years, and for life ib
Judgment, and cesset executio. ib What Jointure shall be a bar of Dower, and
what not ib Devise by the husband to the wife ib
Dum non fuit compos mentis 96 Fine levied before a Judge off non save memory,
and a gift of an office by him diversity ib
Ejectione Custod. 96 Ejectione custod. of a rent before seisin ib Contra of
land ib
Enquest 97 Where a Peer of the Realm is party, Knight shall be in the Jury ib
Quere ib Enquest taken de been esse ib Enquest recharged after Verdict ib
Enter Congeable. Lawful Entry. 97 Land given habend to the grantee, and
^e^^dit^pro termino no vita ib Where he in reversion shall falsify recovery had
against tenant for life, where not 98 Aid prayer of a stranger is cause of
forfeiture ib Entry Lawful where not ib Recovery against Cestuy que use in
tail ib Recovery against Cestuy que use in tail 99 And the entry of the feoffes
tolled ib Use in tail ib Quere 100 Equity ib Exposition of a Statute ib Fine by
ten in tail in use, or possession ib Casus Wimbish ib Recovery void 101
Averment ib Recovery upon a true title falsified ib Covin ib Entry or distrain
upon the Patentee of the King, contras. upon the King ib Who shall travsere an
office. ib Entry by a purchasor of a reversion, for condition ib Equity ib
Error 103 Test misordred in a writ ib
Escape First Sheriff suffers the escape, and retakes, and the second Sheriff
suffers him to escape again ib
Escheat 104 Foundership escheated, or forfeited ib Heir ib Writ of escheat
where the Tenant died not seized ib Right of entry^ escheat ib Acceptance ib
Disseisor 10 Diversity ib Acceptance ib Alience ib
Essoigne Essoign upon the vJew, or voucher ib Error ib Diversity ib
Estates Casus Sir T. Lovel, heredib. mascul. by Patent of the King, and in
grant of a common person, diversity 106 Estate in fee during the life of I. S.
ib Grant or Feoffment, and devise diversity ib Diversity ib Tail executed by
reason of an immediate remainder 107 Devi^ee shall have fee without words,
heredibus, or imperpetuum ib
Estoppel Prescription gone by acceptance of a grant ib Who shall plead a Record
for estoppel ib Privity 108 Respit of homage by 2. ib Livery ib Partition ib
Lease confessed and avoided ib A man makes a fine upon an indictment of
extortion, or trespass, and after pleads not guilty 109 The entry in making a
Fine ib Protestation ib Estoppel by pardon pleaded ib Quamdiu lease for years
of his own land shall be an estoppel ib
Stranger 110 Defeasance to a stranger, and where to the defendant ib Diversity
ib Showing of deeds ib
Estray 110 Who shall have property in an Estray ib
Executions 111 Of a thing executory, a man shall have execution for ever, by
Scire fac. ib Execution upon an obligation conjunctim and devisim, and
satisfaction diversity ib Vinica executio 112 Capias ad satisfaciend, not
returned ib
Executors 112 Executors denied the deed of their testator ib Judgment thereon
113 Executor of executor ib Two executors, the one not to meddle by a certain
time ib Executor has a term and purchases the reversion in fee 114 Assets ib
Exposition Extinguishment Corporation ib Restitution by Parliament revives a
seigniory or tenure which was extinct by attainder of Treason by Parliament 115
Extinguishment and suspension Diversity ib Seigniory ib Executor has a term
and purchases the reversion in fee 116 Assets ib Devastavit ib Diversity ib The
first lessee for years purchases the fee simple ib
Faits, Deeds 117 Deed bears date beyond sea ib Place traversable ib Verba post
in cujus rei, etc. ib
Faits inroll; Deeds enrolled 117 Deed enrolled by a feme covert, by the common
Law, and by custom, diversity ib London 118 Examination ib Fine levied ib
Livery of seisin ib Feoffment to the King ib Relation of an inrolment ib
Fauxefier, Falsifying 120 Who shall have attaint* or error ib
Faux imprisonment, False imprisonment Authority of a Constable, or a Justice
of Peace ib In nullo est erratum ib
Trial in false judgment, and in writ of error, diversity ib Fealty 121 A man
shall not do 2 homage for 2 tenures to a man; nor to the King ib King ib Homage
ib Corporation ib
Feoffements 122 Feoffement of a house cum pertinen. ib Feoffement for
maintenance ib Exposition of a Statute ib Remitter 123 Feoffement to four, and
livery to the Attorney of the one for all ib Second Lessee suffers Livery ibid
Feoffement of a moyty ib Feoffement and delivery of the Deed upon the Land 124
Acre in possession and another in use ib Plead Feoffement infra visum
Feoffement infra visum terre 124 Feoffement to many, and livery to one in the
name of all. Diversity 125 Feoffement void by Statute ib
Feoffements to uses 125 Fitz. seized to the use of the Father ib Tenant in
Tail shall not be seized to another use 126 1. ibid Use express. ibid 2. ibid
Who shall be seized to another use, who not ibid Corporation cannot be seized
to a use. ib In the post 127 Mortmaine ibid Escheate ib Perquisite ib Recovery
ibid Dower ib 3. ibid Courtesy ib Use in Tail ibid 4. ibid Tenure is
consideration in Law ibid Termor shall do fealty ibid Rent reserved a good
consideration ib Use changed by buying ib Use at common Law 128 Tenure ibid To
whose use the Feoffee shall be seized before Statute of Tenures, and to whose
after, diversity ib Feoffee by collusion shall be seized to a use. Ward ib
Feoffee causa matrimonii prelocut. seized to a use. Quere 129 Deceit ib Cestuy
que use in ^remainder or reversion may sell, but not make a Feoffement ib
Recovery against Feoffees to a seisen Tail ib Notice of the use ib Statute
expounded 130 Notice of the use material ib Et e contra ib When a man may
change a use, when not ib Use in tail determined ib To make a use to commence
expectant by covenant 131 Mesne to bind Lands with a use, to whose hands soever
they shall come ib Notice of the use ib Recovery against Cestuy que use in
Tail. And the entry of the Feoffees taken away ib Use in tail 132 Quere ib
Equity ib Exposition of a Statute ib Fine by Tenant in Tail in use, or
possession ib Recovery to the use of Covenants and agreements in Indent. etc.
133 Where a Covenant shall change a use ib A woman seized to the use of her
husband 134 Where these words (shall take the profits) makes a use, and where e
contra 135 Use cannot be contrary to the consideration ib What is sufficient
covenant to change a use ib Recovery against Cestuy que use in tail by
sufferance 136 Vendee shall have fee though he has notice of the use ib Use to
alter the free hold from one to another by Statute ib Entry ib Quere ib Ex post
facto 137 Recovery to bind the Tail in use ib Use vests in the heir as heir of
his father, where the father was dead before the use came ib Relation 138 Quere
ib Ward ib Gift of Chattels to a use ib Statute expounded ib
Fines levies, Fines levied 139 Covenant for assurance of a Jointure by fine
139 Infant shall not levy a fine ib Who shall take the first estate by fine, who
the remainder ib Fine sur conusance de droitame ceo by A. to I. and I renders
to A. the remainder to the wife of A. who was not party to the Writ ib Fine
levid by Cestuy que use for life 140 Use forfeit ib quaere ib Fine levied by
cestuy que use in Tail ib Use in tail. Quere ib quaere ib London 141 Deeds
enrolled ib Another of the same name levies the Fine ib Error ib Dedimus
potestat. 142 Conventio ib Lease for years by Fine to bind the tenant in tail
ib Estoppel ib Infancy ib Coverture ib Reservation to a stranger ib Distress ib
Lease for years made by Fine 143 Who may take a fine by the Statute de finibus
and attornatis ib Quere 144 Fine in Hamlet ib Fine in Hamlet, or ville decayed
ib Writ of dower ib
Forcible Entry Where a man may hold with force, where not ib Remitter 145
Quaere ib
Forfeiture of marriage ib Tender not traversable ib
Forfeiture de terre, etc. ferfeiture of Land, etc. 146 Forfeiture in an
attaint and praemunire, diversity ib Attainter by Parliament 146 Clerk convict
shall forfeit his goods ib
Formedon 147 Diversity 147 Formedonupon tail which commenced in use and is
executed upon the Stat. 27. H. 8. ib General writ and special declation ib
Formodon upon a use, general writ and special declaration 148 Diversity ib
Form 149 Wood before pasture in plaint of Assise ib
Frankmarriage. 150 Frankmarriage with a man ib Frankmarriage, the rem. in Fee
ib
GUARD, WARD Where the heir within age shall be in ward, where not ib Woman
out of ward by marriage ibid Livery at fourteen years ib Remainder to the right
heirs 152 Reversion and remainder diversity ib Livery of Soccage Land 151 Lord
in Knights service shall not ouste the termor, etc. ib Where one person shall
be twice in ward, where not ib Grant of a ward 15^ King shall not ouste a term
of his tennant, because he has his heir in ward 155 Knight in ward ib Viscount
Mountague ib Diversity where an heir is made Knight within age in the like of
the anncestor, and where Knight within age after the ancestors death. ib Writ
of ward without seisen infra tempus memoriae Tenure traversable 156 No seisen
and yet ward 157 Assent and dissent to marriage ib Divorce ib Ordinary ib Ward
and marriage 158 Tenure ib Two Joyntenants and the heir of the one in ward
living the other ib
Garranties; Warranties. 159 Collateral warranty ib Coverture shall not avoid
a collateral warranty upon a discontinuance ib Warranty without heirs 160
Warranty to rebut, but not to vouch ib
General writ. 161 General issue. ib Things to be pleaded and not given in
evidence ib Command ib Common ib Rent 162 License ib Lease for years and at
will diversity ib Manumission in deed, and in Law, diversity. ib Not escaped
pleaded, and not arrested given in evidence 163
Grants 164 Office of charge and of profit, diversity ib Ousting the officers
ib Quere 166 Grant void for incertainty 137 Diversity betwixt grant and devise
ib Quere ib Lease for life and four years over ib What shall pass by grant of
lands and tenements, or omnes firmas ib Ejectione Firm by
HARIOTS 138 HAriot custom and service diversity ib Detinue ib
Heresy 138 Where a writ de haeret. comburend. shall issue, where not ib
Abjuration 139 Diversity ib Homage, see Tit-Fealty 139
IDIOT 1^0 Idiot and unthrift diversiverty ib
Imprisonment 140 Incident 140 Court Baron incident to a manor, Pipowders to a
Fair ib Grants 141 Recovery of a rent service, good titie to homage and fealty
ib
Indictments 141 Indictment of death and poisoning ib Justice indicted ib
Diversity ib Alter trespass in felony ib
Intrusion 142 Relation of an office, diversity ib Where pardon of Intrusion
excuses, the issues, livery, etc. where not ib Diversity 143
Joyntenants 143 Where successive holds place, where not ib Habendum ib Reentry
by two or against two where the one dies 144
Journeys accounts 144 Judggment 145 Nonage saves default ib Recovery against
an infant by default, and by action tried, diversity ib Where a man shall be
restored to his first action, and where he shall have error, etc. ib Recovery
of land in one County which lies in another ib VJew 146 Intendement ib Assise
in N. and recovery p^eaded in H. ib Condition determined by judgment 147
Judgment given with original ib
Issues joins; Issues joined 148 Action upon the case upon an assumpsit ib
Special verdict where the issue is upon an absque hoc ib Americiament. ib Issue
found in part, diversity ib Preignancy ib Issue in wast ib Americiament 149
Issues retornes; Issues returned. 159 See Tit. intrusion Debate of tithes
betwixt lay persons ib Spiritual Court ib Trial of a thing ultra mare 150
Jurors 150 Jury took a scroule not delivered to them in Court ib
LEET 150 PAin in the Leet for redressing anusance forfeited by presentment ib
Where the Lord shall have debt upon a pain in a Leet, and where distrain for it
151 Leet of the torn of the Sheriff ib Exposition of a Statute
Leases 151 Void lease ib Acceptance by the successor of a Parson upon a lease
for years, and for life diversity ib Lease during a lease 152 House ib Averment
ib Lease for life by a Parson, and lease for years diversity Lease determined
for a time and yet good after ib GardJan in Chivalry, nor Lord by escheat, shall
not ouste the Lessee 153 Lease for life, and lease for years after ib Convenit
ib Concessit ib Dimisit ib Locavit ib Acceptance of rent by the successor of a
Parson 154 Parson shall not have a writ of right ib A man leases for twenty
years, and after leases for forty years ib Lease of a Bishop ib Dean 155
Parson ib Prebend ib Confirmation ib Habend, after such a lease ended where
there is no such lease ib Lease of a Prebend. Equity ib Lease for years before
livery sued 156 Relation of office ib Where the wife shall lose her Dower ib
Lease till a hundred pound be paid ib Diversity ib Lease by a Bishop not
sacred, and by a Bishop deprived diversity ib Confirmation 157 Lease till he
has levied 20. pound ib Where the one Feast is put before another in a Lease ib
Ley gager, Law wager ibid Law in detinue of an Indent. of Lease ib Law lies
not in a Q^o minus ib
Licenses. ibid Contra formam collationis 158
Lieu place ibid Scire facias upon a recognisance ib
Limitations ib Copyhold 159
Livery ib Where ward, because of ward, shall not sue livery, but ouster l'
maine. Seiginory revived by suing livery ib Where livery shall be of Duchy land,
where not 160 General Livery and special, diversity. ib Manor purchased by the
King shall be in him as in the grantor ib Livery, Primer seisin ib Guard 161
Ouster l'main ib Where a man shall hold of the King as of his person, and yet
not in Capite. Et econtra ib Extent of Livery, and of intrusion, diversity ib
Attainder of Cestui que use by Parliament, and of attainder of a sole Tenant by
the Commonlaw, diversity ibid Exposition of a Stat. 162 Livery by the heir
during a leas or devise for years ib Where a man shall sue Livery? where not ib
What is Livery? what Ouster l' main 163 Livery of Soccage land ib Tenure of the
King in Knights Service, and in Capite, diversity. ib Soccage in capite, and
Knights service in capite, diversity 164 What Livery is ib What Primer seisin
ib Livery in Wales, and County Palatine ib Primer seisin of cestui que use 165
Will not performed ib
MAINPRIZE. SVrety upon arrest in London ib Privilege ib Procedendo ib
Revivings. ib Where surety upon a Bil in Banco regis is discharged, where not
ib Repleader ib Power of the Justices of the Gaol delivery 166
Maintenance. ib Maintenance by him in remainder or reversion ib Sale, where he
has not been seized by a year ib Statute expounded.
Manor. 167 Making of a Manor ib Court Baron ib Suitors ib
Misnosmer, misnamer. 168 Statute avoided by misnamer ib
Monstrans de faits, Showing of Deeds. ib Showing of Deeds, and Records ib
Mortdauneester. ib ^eoffment to two, and the heir of the one ib Mortdauncester
ib Descent of reversion, Dower ib Forfeiture, Feoffment, Right ib
Mortmain. ib When a remainder is granted in Mortmain, and when a reversion,
diversity ib Claim ib Remainder waived, Use ib Appropriation without license,
is Mortmain ib Lease for 300 or 400 years is Mortmain ib Otherwise of a
covenant for so many years ib 99 or 100 is not Mortmain years ib Mortmain ib
Deseisin and descent takes not away the entry of the Lord for Mortmain ib
NONABILITIE. ib Obligation for usury ib Conclusion ib
Non suit. King nonsuite ib Nonsuit upon demur ib
Nontenure a good plea in an attaint for a stranger; contra for a privy ib
Where non Tenure shall be a good plea in attaint, where not ib Entry in attaint
after the last continuance ib
Nonse name 214 Where a woman shall lose her name of dignity by marriage ib
Notice. ib Notice of resignation shall be given by the Ordinary ib
Office de Vant. 215 Where the King shall not seize without Office ib Tenant
for life, the reversion to the King dies ib Full age shall be expressed, when
216 Office ought to be certain ib Office finds dying seized, but tenuram
ignorant. ib Where an Office intitles the K. to the Seigniory, and Tenancie ib
Servitia ignorant. ib Melius inquirend. ib Foundation not observed 217 Land
which is a chattel shall be by office ib Where the King shall seize without
office, and where econtra ib Fees granted to him, who after is made Justice ib
Steward and after made Justice ib The same man made Bailey and Steward ib
Justice of the Forest, and keeper of the Forest ib Parson created a Bishop
(...) Forfeiture of office i^ Steward of a Forest and Justice ib Authority of
the Justice of Forest 219 Sheriff and Escheater ib
Obligation. ib A man bound to B. ad usum ^. who releases; and good ib
Oyer of Records, etc. See Tit. ib Monstrans de Faits. ib Oyer and Terminer ib
Commission of Oyer and Terminer ib Kings Bench, always Justices of Oyer and
Terminer 220
PAIN. Pain for striking a man in the presence of the King ib
Panel. 221 Part of Aliens; and part of Denizens ib Tales. Error ib
Parliament ib The King shall hold of no man ib What words in acts will revive
Seigniories extinct before, what not 222 Office for the King ib Remitter shall
not be where land is assured by parliament in case of a common person, nor in
case of the King 223 Lease or charge by Tenant in tail ib Of relation of an act
of parliament, diversity 218 Pleading of a stat. 224 Amendment of the count of
the King in another term, Contrary of a common person ib Elect new Burgesses ib
Parnour, taker of the profits. ib Recovery against parnour of the profits, who
is in ward of the King 225 Travers by Feoffees in use ib Pernour ib
Patents ib License of the K. not p^rsued ib K. grants by general words ib Tail
extinct by surrender of the Letters Patents ^26 Formedon without showing the
Patent ib Assurance ib Constat. Surrender 217 Patentee leases or gives, and
after surrenders his Patent. ib Constat. Quaere 228 Bailywick or Sheriffwick
granted, absque compot. ib Tol. Fair. Market ib Assise of fresh-force ib
Borough English, etc. ib Diversity betwixt false suggestion, and false
consideration Quoere 229 Of what Lease recital shall be in the Kings patent, of
what not ib Recital in a Patent 230 King shall take notice ib Constat and
inspeximus, diversity ib
Peace ib Breach of the peace ib
Peremptory 231 The first Nihil in a Scire Facias per emptory ib
Petition. ib Where a man shall have Petition where Travers ib Petition and
Travers 233
Pledgee. ib Gage delivered for debt ib Distress it as a Gage ib
Pleadings. ib Averment of his Title ib Recovery by default, and action tried;
diversiry ib Non tenure no plea in wast Entry to avoid a warranty. Seisin
during the coverture in Dower ib Aver the like of tenant for life, or in
Tail ib Where a man shall show the commencem ent of a use, where not 234 Fee
Simple. Fee Tail ib
Plenartie ib Where Plenarty is no plea ib Mortmain. Parson inpersonee ib
Praemunire 235 Where a Prohibition lies, and where Praemunire ib Praemunire lies
for a thing which never appertained to the spiritual Court ib
Preregative ib Priority and Posteriority ib Land in use 236 Where the King may
waive issue, where not ib Gift of goods by the King ib Precipe quod redd. for
the King Escheat 237 Information ib
Mine. Quere. Prescription 238 Custom shall serve, where a prescription will
not serve ib
Presentation ib Two grants de prox, presentatione. ib Grant de prox.
presentatione ib The King shall present to another benefit by his prerogative,
for that the ineumbent is made a Bishop 239
Privilege. ib Privilege shall dismiss the Plaintiff. Bill of Middlesex ib
Procedendo. 240 Where Sureties in London shall remain after the action removed,
and econtra ib
Proclamation, ib Pena for making Proclamation without authority
Prohibition 241 Surmise to obtain a prohition ib Admiralty ib
Property. 242 Alien inhabiting before, and coming after war proclaimed:
diversity ib
Quare Impedit 243 Presentment of the one Joynttenant puts the other out of
possession ib Quare^ Impedit against the presentee of the King sole ib
Executors shall not have a writ by Journies by the death of the Testator,
Diversity 244 Writ and count special ib Writ to the Bishop ib
Que estate, Whose estate, etc. 245 Que estate pleaded by the recoveror or
disseisor ib Que estate to a mean ib Que tstate of a particular Estate ibid
Quinzisme. 246 Borough and Upland ib Tenth and fifteen, who pays them, and
whereof levied. ib
Quo minus 247 Wager of Law lies not in a Quo minus ib
Rationabili paerte, etc. ib Rationabilisi part is by the Common law ib
Recognisance. ib Cognisee purchases, and cognisor repurchases ib Recognisance
to be recorded by Justices out of term. Place ib The King cannot take a
Recognisance ib Who may take a Recognisance ib Constable. ib
Record 249 Exemplification, and sub quo sigillo ib Court baron, and Court of
Record, diversity Where the Record it self shall be removed by writ of error
Mittimus.
Recovery in value 250 This assurance was made by the advice^ of Brudnel and
others Justices ib Recovery in value to bind the tail ib Recovery to bind
him, reversion by aid, prayer, and voucher ib Ancient demesne ib Quere ib
Warranty ib Recovery in value shall not go to him in reversion 251 Assurance for
to bind the tail Vouch 252 Recovery to bind him in remainder ib Diversity
where the remainder only is warranted, and where the estate for life 253
Formedon ib Recovery to bind him in rem. etc. ibid Joynder in aid ib
Relation 254 Relation of forfeiture by act of Parliament ib Relation of
forfeiture of felony by verdict, and by outlawry diversity ib
Releases 255 Release no continuance ib Release of all demands, bars, entry,
and seizure ib
Relief, see Tit. Debt 256 Remainder, see Tit. Descent Remitter The Statute of
uses 27. H. 8. does not make remitter ib Diversity ib Title of entry does not
make ^remitter, contary of a right of entry ib quere 257
Repleder Jury discharged by Jeofail ib
Rescous; see Tit Distress Reservations 258 Soil excepted, by excepting of the
wood ib
Restitution Restitution by Parliament ib
Restore al primer action Restored to the first action Remitter to the first
action, and e contra ib Where an action shall be restored after a feoffment;
where not ib
Retorn de avers Discontinuance, or nonsuit in second deliverance ib
Revivings: see Tit. Extinguishment Rit, Rout, and unlawful assembly
Difference betwixt Riot, Rout, and Assembly ib
Sanctuory. See Tit Corone saving default. See Tit. Judgment Scire fac ias.
Second deliverance. See Tit. Retorn de aeverse Seisin 262 Seisin by the hands
of an intrudor ib Livery ib Distress suspended, not Seigniory 262 Seisin of the
King loses not the arrerages ib
Several precipe Debt and de^inue in the same Writ ib
Several tenancy 263 Uncertain demand in an assise
Statute Merchant Part of the land extended in the name of all; no reextent. ib
process in another County upon a nihil returned upon a testatum est ib Deiberate
ib Surrender ib When a man may hold the land beyond his term upon a Statute 264
Judgment ib Reversion not extendable ib Diversity betwixt a purchase after the
Statute, and before execution, and where it is purchased after execut' had 265
Execution by Executors in the name of the Conusee who is dead ib Execution for
the Executors of the Conusee 267 Conusor returned dead ib Retorn of extendi
facias, liberate ib
Supercedias 268 Attaint ib
Sureties Death of the King id
Surrender 268 Surrender extra terram ib Trespass ib The King cannot record a
surrender ib Surrender by the first termor ib Termor makes the Lessor his
Executor 279 He in remainder surrenders where there is a Lease for years in
possession ib
Suitor* Two suitor onel Coyurt Baron ib
Tail. 270 Single voucher and double voucher, diversity. ib Where the assets
aliend shall be a bar in a Formedon, where not. 271 Two sons by diverse venters
ib Collateral warranty by release ib Quere ib Tail extinct ib Surrender ib
Tenant at will. 272 Tenant by sufferance, and at will ib Disseisor ib
Tennant by Copy. ib Formedon in discender by a copyholder ib Intendment ib
Where Tenant at will, or a termor of a Manor may grant copyhold for life 273
Demise rendering the ancient rent or more ib
Tenant by sufferance, See Tit. Tenant at will. ib Tender. ib What shall be the
attendance in a condition ib Diversity 274 Condition of reentry for non
payments ib At what time the lessee ought to make tender ib Tender upon the
land ^e contra ib
Tenures. 275 Tenant makes a Feoffment of a moiety, this is not pro praticula.
The like matter in the Cheq. 5. H. 6. To. 4. ex part ib Remember Thesaurarij
276 Tenure in capite ib Et de honor diversity ib Ouster IN main ib Socage in
capite ib Diversity ib To hold by suite of court ib Court. Manor 277
Testament. 277 Where a man shall have for life and where see simplely devise
ib Payment by the Heir, Executor or Assignee ib Quere ib Will of 3 Manor by
the stat. 32. H. 8. 278 Testament cannot be without Execut. ib Where a legacy
or devises shall be good, though the devisor names no Executors ib Feoffment of
all after the Stat. of 32 H. 8. ib Ward 279 Primer Seisin ib Explanation of
Wills, by Stat. 34 and 35 H. 8. ib.
Testmoignes, Witnesses. 279 Age of Witnesses in Etate proband. ib
Titles. 280 See Tit. Pleadings ib
Travers of Office. 280 Title made upon traverse tendered ib Traverse dying
seized, found by Office ib Termor cannot traverse 281. Monstrance de droit ib
Traverse against the King ib Where the King shall have Prerogative, where not
ib. Nonsuit in Traverse and Petition, diversity ib. Judgment in Traverse ib.
Travers by, etc. 282 Action upon the Case for making of false clothes ib.
Seisin in Fee Traversed in Assize ib. The King shall waive his issues. contra
of an Informer ib. Without that that he had any thing 283 The mean conveyance
in the Title shall not be traversed, where the Plaintiff in his Title binds the
Defendant ib. Remitter ib. Seisin in Fee traversed 284
Treason. Misprision of Treason ib. Where Trial shall be per pares 285
Forfeiture for misprision of Treason 286 Compass or imagine ib. What shall be
said Treason ib. Deprive ib. Quaere ib. Fine for misprision of Treason ib.
Alien commits Treason 287 Diversity ib.
Trespass. 287 Quare vi and armis of taking in another soil ib.
Trial. 288 Trial of a Peer of the Realm arrained upon an Indictment and
appeal, diversity ib. Trial in Court Baron, by wager of Law. ib. Trial of the
Law shall be by the Justices, and of a particular custom per patriam ib.
Trial of a Bishop 289
Variance. 289 Quare imped. and the Writ and the Deed vary ib.
Verdict. 289 Verdict at large in a Writ of entry ib.
Villeinage. 290 Asserts in their hands ib. Diversity ib. Where the King shall
have the Villeine of another in Ward, or Idiot ib. Quaere ib.
Voucher. 291 See B. Tit. Voucher ib.
Usury. 291 Diversity, where the day is certain, and where uncertain to make
usury ib. Defeasance ib. Usury, and where not 292
Waife. 292 Waives his proper goods for Felony ib.
Waste 29^ Waste by a Termor, who dies before action brough^ ib. Cutting of
Beech of 20. 0^ under 20. years of age shall be Waste 293 Locus vastat. waste
in hedgrows ib. Where the Termor may take all the under-wood, and e^ contra ib.
Silva cedua 294 Waste for not covering of a new frame and house ib. Waste by
the Heir ib. A man shall be named Heir or Executor in the Premises, and not in
the alias dictus ib.
Conclusion to the Writ 295
Abridgment.
HOlden by the Prothonatories of the Common Bench in Trespass of Battery; 3 H.
4. 4. by Read.
That of such matters which lie in Conusance of the Justices; they may increase
damages after a Verdict upon Issue; otherwise of such matter which lies not in
their Conusance; 34 H. 8. ^38 3. H. 4. 4. by Thirn. 19. H. 6. 42.
as Trees cut. But yet there they may increase costs. 3. Mar. 1. B.
Abridgement, 36. the end.

Acceptance.
Note, 24. H. 8. 54 See Tit. Leases.
By Fitzjames and Englefield, Justices: if Tenant in Dower Leases for years,
rendering rent, and dies, the Lease is void; and acceptance by the Heir of the
Rent will not make the lease good for it was void before: otherwise of voidable
Leases. 22. H. 8. B. Acceptance, 14.

If Tenant in Taill Leases his land for twenty years, rendering rent, and dies,
and the Lessee leases to another for ten years, and the issue accepts the rent
of the second Lessee, this is no affirmance of the Lease: for there is no
privity between the second Lessee and him; contrary, if he paies it as Bailiff
of the first Lessee; and B. seems if the first Lessee had Leased over all his
Term in parcel of the land let, and this Assignee paies the rent to the issue
in tail, that this affirms the entire Lease: for Rent upon a Lease for years,
is not apportionable 32. H. 8. B. Acceptance. 13.

Tenant in Tail, the Remainder over Leases for years, rendering Rent, and dies
without issue, he in the Remainder accepts the rent: this shall not bind him
because that when the tail is determind, all that is comprised within it is
determined, and so the Lease void, and he in the Remainder claims not by the
Lessor. 1. E* 6. B. Acceptance 19.

Bishop Leases Land of his Bishopric for years, rendering Rent, and dies; the
Successor accepts the Rent; this shall bind him; for the Bishop has a
Feesimple, See Tit. Leases.
and may have a Writ of Entry Sine assensu capituli: otherwise in case of a
Parson or Prebend, who can have but a Juris utrum. 2. E. 6. B. Acceptance. 20.

If a man be bound in an obligation to pay ten pound to the Obligee at Paris
beyond Sea at a certain day, Jay accords 11. H. 7. 17. 34* H. 6. 18. by Brisot,
19. E. 4. 1. by Catesby.
if the Obligor pay at another place, and the same day in England, and the
other accepts it, it is good clearly. 38. H. 8. B. Conditions. 206.

Acceptance of Rent by the Lord from the disseisor of the Tenant, shall not bar
him of his escheat: otherwise if he had avowed for it in Court of Record, etc.
See Tit. Escheat.

Action popular.
Note, 7 H. 8. c. 3.
By the Statute the party which sues an Action Popular, ought to sue it within
the year after the offense done, and not after: and this as well of offenses
done against the Statute then made, as against Statutes after to be made; so
see that it goes to a Statute after made. B. Action Popular. 6.

Action upon the Case.
If I have a Mill in B. and another makes another Mill there by which I lose my
Toll by going of diverse to it, Agrees Newton 22 H. 6. 15. 11. H. 4 47. by Hank.
yet no Action lies: otherwise, if the Mill disturb the water from coming to my
Mill; there I shall have an Action upon my Case. 24. H. 8. B. Action upon the
Case. 42. the end.

In an Action upon the Case where the Plaintiff delivers goods to the
Defendant, and the Defendant for ten shillings promises to keep them safe, and
does not, to the damage, etc. And by Fitzherbert and Shelly Justices, Non
habuit ex deliberac', is a good Plea. 26. H. 8. B. Action upon the Case. 103.

Note, in an Action upon the Case betwixt Awsten Plaintiff, 30 H: 8. 127. 27 H.
8. 22. Petty Br.
and Thomas Lewis Defendant, for calling him false and perjured; he justifies,
because that the Plaintiff was perjured in the Starchamber in such a matter,
etc. and a good Plea by the Court. 28. H. 8. B. Action upon the Case. 3. more
of this in the next.

Action upon the Case for calling the Plaintiff false perjured man; 28 H. 8. 85
the Defendant justifies that such a day and year in the Starchamber the
Plaintiff was perjured, and pleaded certain in what, etc. for which he called
him false perjured man, as before, as it was lawful for him: and a good Plea by
the Court in the Common Bench. Wherefore the Plaintiff said of his own wrong,
without that he swore in manner and form, etc. 30. H. 8. B. Action upon the
Case. 104.

If a man bring debt of 10. l. the Defendant wages his Law: and after the
Plaintiff brings an Action upon the Case against the same Defendant, that he
promised to pay the 10. l. etc. The Defendant may plead that for the same sum
the Plaintiff brought before an Action of Debt, in which the Defendant waged
his Law, Judgment, if Action. And a good Plea, for he was once barred of the
same sum. And in Action upon the Case, that the Defendant promised to pay 10.
l. to the Plaintiff, which he ought to him for a Horse, and a Cow, the
Defendant may say, That he promised to pay 10. l. to the Plaintiff, which he
did ow^ to him for a horse, which he bought of him, which sum he has paid to
the Plaintiff without that that he promised to pay 10. l. which he did ow^ to
the Plaintiff for one Horse, and one Cow, as etc. Or without that that he did
ow^ to the Plaintiff 10. l. for a Horse and a Cow, as etc. 33. H. 8. B. Action
upon the Case. 105.

Action upon the Case, 3 M. 1. agrees.
for that the Defendant found the Goods of the Plaintiff, and delivered them to
persons unknown there; that he did not deliver them in manner and form, is no
plea, without saying not guilty where the thing rests in doing. And if the
Action were, That whereas the Plaintiff was possessed, etc. as of his proper
goods, and the Defendant found them, and converted them to his proper use, it is
no Plea that the Plaintiff was not possessed as of his proper Goods, but he
shall say not guilty to the misdemeanour, and shall give in evidence that they
were not the goods of the Plaintiff: and yet it is true, not guilty against him.
33. H. 8. B. Action upon the Case. 109.

In an Action upon the Case, 2 E* 6. and see 4* E. 6. after under this title.
that the Goods of the Plaintiff came to the hands of the Defendant, and he
wasted them, the Defendant says that they came not to his hands, etc. and a
good Plea, and gives in evidence that they were not the proper goods of the
Plaintiff. 34. H. 8. B. Action upon the Case. 103. the end.

Action upon the Case was brought in London by A. B. See 33 H 8 before.
that whereas he was possessed of certain wine and other stuff (and shows in
certain) in such a ship, to the value, etc. and does not show the place certain
where he was thereof possessed, and yet good. And alleged that the Defendant
such a day, year, and place in London, promised for 10. l. That if the said
ship and Goods did not come safe to London, and put upon the Land, that then he
would satisfy to the Plaintiff 100. l. and that after the ship was robbed upon
the Trade on the Sea, for which he brought the action for not satisfying: and
the truth was, that the bargain was made beyond sea, and not in London. But in
an action upon the Case upon an Assumpsit and the like, which is not local, 2
Mar. 1. 451. Time, H: 8. 366. Petty Br.
the place is not material (no more then in debt) for he alleged that the said
goods in the parish of S. Dunstons in the East London, before they were set to
land, or etc. were carried away by persons unknown, etc. and the action lies
well in London, though they were perished upon the high sea. 34. H. 8. B.
Action upon the Case. 107.

'Twas agreed, 5 M. 1. Com. 182. 9 Rep. 87. etc. Pinchons case cont.
That an Action upon the Case does not lie against the Executors, upon the
Assumpsit of the Testator, though they have assets. 37. H. 8. B. Action upon
the Case. 4. the end.

In an Action upon the Case for a thing which lies in Feasans, See 33 H 8.
before.
as for burning of Goods or Deeds, and the like, not guilty is a good plea:
contrary, for non Feasons of a thing which he ought to do; as to make or repair
a Bridge, House, Park, Pale, scouring a Ditch, and the like, and does it not,
there not guilty is no plea. 2. E. 6. B. Action upon the Case. III.

Action upon the Case for calling the Plaintiff false Justice of Peace, vel his
similia, these words (his similia) were ordered to be struck out of the book by
the Court, for the incertainty. 4. E. 6. B. Action upon the case. 112.

Action upon the Case whereas the Plaintiff was possessed of such Goods, as of
his proper Goods, and lost them, and the Defendant found them, and conver-them
to his own use: the Defendant said, That the Plaintiff pledged them to him for
10. l. by reason of which he detrains them for the said 10. l. as it is lawful
for him, without that that he converted them to his own use, as etc. and a good
plea by some. By others he must plead not guilty, See. 33 H 8. before.
and give this matter in evidence for the Detainer. 4. E. 6. B. Action upon the
Case. 113.

It Was agreed in the Common-Bench, that if a man for marriage of his daughter,
assumes to pay 20. l. a year Easter, for four years, and fails two ^ars, that
the Plaintiff may have an A^^ion upon the Case upon the promise ^r the non
payment of the two years, ^^ough the other two years are not ^et come; for this
is in nature of Covenant. 4. M. 1. B. Action upon the Case. ^08. the end.

Action upon the Statute.
In an Action upon the Statute of 8. H. 6. of forcible entry. See 24 H. 8 after.
Or in Trespass upon 5. R. 2, Vbi ingressus non datur ^er legem, Non ingressus
est contra for^am statuti, is a good plea: but his freehold is no plea, as it is
said by Sher^ood and others. 23. H. 8. B. Action upon ^he statute. 40.

In Trespass upon 5. R. 2. to say that ^he place, etc. is the Freehold of I.
N. and he by his commandment entered, is no plea,: for the action is given by
the Statute, and therefore ought to have a special answer, and not as in a
general Writ of Trespass. 24. H. 8. B. Action upon the statute. 15.

See by Fitz. Justice, 21 H. 8: c:
That a man may avow upon the Land by the new Statute and then the Tenant shall
not disclaim ^ contrary, if he avow by the Common Law, and relinquish the
statute. 28. H. 8. B. Action upon the Statute. 6.

'Twas said for Law, See 27 H: 8: 26: and 2 E: 4: 6:
That it is no plea in Trespass upon the Statute of 5. R. 2. for the Defendant to
say, That the place where is twenty acres which is parcel of the Manor of B.
is his Freehold. For the Defendant ought to entitle him to a Lawful entry:
for a Disseisor has a Freehold, and yet ingressus est, ubi ingressus non
datur per legem, in the time of H. 8. B. Action upon the statute. 27.

Account.
Account lies not against Disseisors, for then the Disseisee shall avoid the
discents at his pleasure: and also the Defendant was never his Receiver for to
render account, for this cannot be without privity in Law, or in Deed; as by
Assignment, or as Guardian, or the like: or by pretense the Defendant to the
use of the Plaintiff, and where the Defendant claims to his own use, there the
plea is true; neither his Receiver, nor his Baily, to render account: 2 Mar. 1.
B. Account 89.

Adjournment.
The Justices of Assise may adjourn the Assizes upon every demurrer, and upon
every dubious plea or Verdict; and upon every foraign plea, and to what place
they will; and adjournment may be upon Certificate of the Assizes, as well as
upon the assise. B. Adjournment 28.

Administrators.
Debt is brought against the Ordinary, 31. E. 3. ca. 11. Rast: Administ. 1. 21
H: 8: ca^. 5.
who pending the Writ, commits the administration to I. S. the first Writ shall
abate: Rast: Probat of Test: 3.
for the Ordinary is compellable to commit the Administration, by Statute, 34.
H. 8. B. Administrators 39.

Nota, per omnes legis peritos, and by those of the Arches, that at the time of
vacation of an Archbishopric, or Bishopric, the Dean and Chapter shall commit
the administration, 36. H. 8. B. administrators 46.

Nota, 27 H: 8. 26 by Fitz.
where the Ordinary commits the administration, he may revoke it, and commit it
to another (but mean acts done by the first administrator shall stand) and so
'twas put in ure between Brown and Shelton, 4 H: 7. 14. by Trema: See 5 E: 6:
after.
for the goods of Rawlins; the administration was committed to Brown, and
revoked and committed to Shelton: for it is not an interest, but a power or
authority; and powers and authorities may be revoked; contra of an interest
certain. In the time of H. 8. B. administrators 33. the end.

Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, had issue son by one Venture, and daughter by
another Venture, and devised goods to the son, and dies, and after the son dies
intestate, without Wife and Issue; and the mother of the son who was of the
second Venture (for the daughter was of the first Venture) took the
administration by the Statute; which is, That the administration shall be
committed to the next of kinn of the intestate. And upon great argument in the
Spiritual Court, 21 H: 8. c. 5 Rast: Administ: 1.
Tam per legis peritos regni, quam per peritos legis civilis, the
administration was revoked. And so see that the administration may be revoked;
and so 'twas likewise in the case of Brown and Shelton before, of the goods of
W. Rawlin Clerk, which was committed, to Sir H. Brown, who married the sister
of the said Rawlins, and after came W. S. and J. S. son of the Wife of the said
Sir H. (which Wife was the mother of the said Shelton by a former Husband) and
reversed the first administration, and obtained the administration to them. And
the said Duke had issue Frances by the French Queen; and after this Wife dyed,
he married the daughter of the Lord Willoughby, and had issue by her one Henry,
and dyed; and after Henry dyed without issue, and without Wife, and the mother
of the Heir took the Administration; and after the said Frances Wife of the
Marquess of Dorset sued, and reversed the administration, and obtained the
administration to her self, though she were but sister of the half blood to the
said Henry, because that she is next of kinn to the said Henry, for that Henry
had not any Children; for the mother is not next of kinn to her own son in this
respect of this matter; for it ought to go by descent, and not by ascension,
by the Law of England, nor by the Law civil. And the children are de sanguine
patris and matris, sed frater and matter non sunt de sanguine puerorum. And by
Isidore, Pater and matter and puer sun^ una caro; and therefore no degree is
betwixt them; contrary between brother and sister; and the half blood is no
impediment as to goods (B. administrators 47.)

Note, that in the argument of this case, 'twas agreed by the Justices, that
the King is not entitled to the land of his Ward, without office, though he
has but a Chattel in it, yet it comes ratione tenurae, 3 Eliz. Com: 229:
which is the Seigniory and Freehold in the King, 5 E. 6. B. Office before,
etc. 55.

Age.
A man recovers Rent and arrearages by assise, Or if he recovers an annuity and
arrearages of it in a Writ of annuity, the Defendant dies, the Plaintiff brings
a Scire facias against the heir, he shall not have his age of the arrearages,
for they are real, and parcel of the rent or annuity. But if the Judgment be
of arrearages and damages, there he shall have his age (B. age 50.) And where
he recovers in a Writ of annuity, or assise, as before: Or has avowed for a
Rent, Kirton agrees 43 E: 3, 2, 15.
which is Freehold, and recovers the arrearages without costs and damages, he
shall not have an action of Debt of that, but a Scire facias, for it is real. But
where he has Judgment of it, with costs and damages which go together, so
that that it is mixed with the personality, then lies a Writ of Debt against the
Heir, of the arrearages and damages (and this B. thinks in default of
Execution) per curiam, 23. H. 8. B. Debt, 212. and age 50.

Note, 4 El. Com: 213. ^21. Cont.
That of the Land of the Duchy of Lancaster, and other Lands which the King
has as Duke, or the like, his age is material, and he may have his age as
another common person may; for he has them as Duke, not as King (B. Age 52.
and 78.) As if the King alien Land, parcel of his Duchy of Lancaster within
age, there he may avoid it for Nonage for the reason aforesaid: otherwise of
Land which he has as King, Com. ibid: See the Stat. Com: 218.
for the King cannot be disabled by Nonage, as a common person shall (B.
Prerogative. 132.) Yet by the Statute of 1. E. 4. (which is a private act not
printed, but enrolled in the Duchy Chamber, by which King H. 6. was attainted
of Treason, How separated, See Com: 219: and 220. See this Act, Com. 214,
and that all the Lands of the said Duchy should be forfeited, and should be a
Duchy separated and incorporated, etc.) it is annexed to the Crown: but by
another private act, 1. H. 7. it is disannexed, and made as in the time of H. 4.
1. E. 6. B. Age. 52.

Note, it was in a manner granted by all the Justices in the Common Bench, That
if a Parson, Prebend, or the like be within age of 21 years, and makes a Lease
of his Benefice within age, that yet this shall bind him: for where he is
admitted by the Law of holy Church to take it within age, so the Common Law
inables him to Demise his Benefice within age. 4. Mar. 1. B. Age. 80.

Alienations.
If the Tenant of the King alien in Fee without license, See 29 H. 8.
and die, his Heir within age, the King shall not have the Ward, because that
nothing is descended to him, and that the Alienation is good, save the Trespass
to the King, See 33 H. 8. 8 E. 4. 4. by Coke, Stp. 84:
which is but a Fine by Seiser. B. Alienations 29. Guard 85. But otherwise if
the Alienor were Tenant in Tail; and if the Alienation without license be found
by office, the King shall have the Issues of the Land from the time of the
Inquisition taken, and not before. (B. Alienations 26. in medio.) But where the
Tenant dies, and his Heir enters upon an office found for the King, of the
dying seized of the Ancestor, 8. E. 4. 4. by Choke.
there the heir shall answer the profits taken by him before. 26. H. 8. B.
Intrusion 18. the end.

It Is said for Law, See 29 H. 8.
That a fine for alienation is one years value of the land aliened. and the
same Law of a Fine for intrusion upon the King. But the Fine to have license to
alien, is but the third part of the yearly value of the land which shall be
aliened: and for license to alien in Mortmain, the Fine is the value of the
Land for three years. 31. H. 8. B. Alienations. 29. the end

If a man obtain license to alien the Manor of D. and all his Lands and
Tenements in D. he cannot alien by Fine: for the Fine shall be certain: 46. E.
3: 45 by Persay.
so many acres of Land, so many of Meddow, so many of Pasture, and the like:
and the alienation ought not to vary from the License. Yet by B. it is otherwise
used with an averment, that all is one. 32. H. 8. B. Alienations. 30.

Note, 40 E. 3. 41. By Thoro
if there be two Joynt-tenants who hold of the King in Capite, and one releases
to the other all his right, this is no alienetion; nor does he need License, or
pardon of it: for he to whom the Release is made, is in by the first feoffor,
and not by him that Released: nor shall he Fine for such release: and so it is
used in the Chequer, Stp. 30. cont. 33 H. 65. by Wangf: Lit. 68.
that it is no alienation. But if three Joint tenants are, and the one Releases
to one of the others, there he is in of it by him that releases: Contra, if he
had released to all his compagnions: and where a man Releases by Fine to the
Tenant of the King, this is no alienation. Otherwise of a Fine Sur Conusans de
droit Com ceo, etc. for this is an estate made by Conclusion. 37. H. 8. B.
Alienations 31.

Tenant of the King in Capite cannot alien for term of life without License:
for it alters the Freehold. 45 E: 3. 6.
Time H. 8. B. alienations 22. the end.

Note, That for Burgage Tenure of the King, a man may alien without license
well enough. 6. E. 6. B. Alienations 36.

Note, That a Devise by Testament was taken to be an alienation. 3. Mar. 1. B.
alienations 37.

Alien. See Tit. Denizen.
Note, See 1 E. 6. next after.
by the whole Court in the Kings Bench an alien may bring an action personal,
and shall be answered without being disabled, because he is an alien born:
otherwise in an action real (and the same B. seems in an action mixed.) and he
may have a property, See Dyer the beginning.
and buy and sell. 38. H. 8. B. Denizen 10. Nonability 40.

It Was said in the Kings Bench, See 38 H. 8. before.
That to say that the Plaintiff is an alien born, Judgment; if he shall be
answered, is no plea in an action personal, otherwise in an action real. Yet
this has been in question after this time in the same Court: and it was said
that an alien born is no plea in Trespass, if he does not say further, That the
Plaintiff is of allegiance of one such a one, enemy to the King: for it is no
plea in an action personal against an alien, that he is of the allegiance of
such a Prince, which is of amity with the King. 1. E. 6. B. Nonability 62.

If an alien born purchase, See 5. Mar. 1. after. See Coke upon Lit.
the King shall have it: but the purchase ought to be found by office: and so
it was in the case of Alien King: and B. seems that an information in the
Chequer, will not serve in this case. Time, E. 6. B. Denizen 17. the end.

It Was said in Parliament, See before. See Coke upon Litt.
That if an alien born obtain a Lease for years, that the King shall have it;
for he cannot have Land in this Realm, of no estate. 4. Mar. 1. B. Denizen 22.

Amendment.
By Fitzherbert, See 24. H. 8. after.
and the Court; where a Writ of Error was sued to remove a Record out of the
Common Bench, into the Kings Bench, betwixt an Abbot and I. N. the Warrant of
Attorney varied in the Roll in the name of the Abbot; and it was amended after
Judgment: and if they had not amended it, they said, that those of the Kings
Bench would have amended it. 23. H. 8. B. Amendment 85. the end.

Note, See before 23 H. 8.
That where a Warrant of Attorney varied from the name of the Corporation of
the party, and a Writ of Error was brought to those of the Common Bench, they
amended it presently: and they said that those of the Kings Bench would have
done the like. 24. H. 8. B. Amendment 47.

Note, 1 E 5. 7. by V^vi^or and ^^^tesby. See 6, and 7
it was agreed by the Kings learned Council, That the King may amend his
Declaration in another Term, in omission, and the like: E. 6. Com. 8^: See 33.
H. 8. Tit. Parliament
as where an information misrecites the Statute, this may be amended; for
misrecital is the cause of Demurrer: for if it be misrecited, then there is no
such Statute: but he cannot alter the matter, and change it utterly; yet the
same Term he may. 4 Eliz Com. 243. by Weston. 30. H. 8. B. Amendment 80.

Appeal.
Note, by the Justices of both Benches, a man shall not have the plea in an
appeal; That the dead assaulted him, and that he killed him in his defense, but
shall plead not guilty in manner and form, and shall give this matter in
evidence: and the Jurie is bound to take notice of it; and if they find it, he
shall go acquitted in form aforesaid. 1 M. 1 Com 101.
Nor he shall not have this for plea with a traverse of the murder: for the
matter of the plea is murder. Nor murder cannot be justified; and when the
matter of the plea is worth nothing, there a traverse the like: 4. E. 6. Com.
12. 14 (...). 2. by (...) E 4. 3 (...). 1^1. ^.
(B. Appeal, 122. Corone. 1.) the end. And where the Jury acquits the Defendant
upon an Indictment before the Coroners, they ought to find that he killed the
man: and there they may say, That the same Defendant killed him se defendendo:
but upon an Indictment before other Justices, it suffices to say, not guilty
only, without more. 37. H. 8. B. Appeal, 122*

The Heir of a man killed shall have an appeal, as well of Homicide of his
ancestor, as of Murder. 2. E. 6. B. Appeal 124.

Note, M. 2. M. ^ by the Justices accord. St. 59 B. See 21 E 4. 78. By Hussy.
if a woman who has Title of an appeal of the death of her husband, takes
another husband; he and the wife shall not have an appeal; for the woman ought
to have it sole: for the cause of an appeal is, that she wants her husband; and
the reason is, because the wife wanting a husband, is not so well able to live:
and therefore when she has another husband, the appeal is determined: for the
cause ceasing, the effect ceases. (B. Appeal, 109.) as where a woman has a
Quarentine, and she marries within the 40. days, she loses her Quarentine. 1.
Mar. 1. B. Appeal, 109. Dower, 101:

Appeal of death may be commenced before the Coroner, Time H. 7.
and Process awarded to the Exigent: but the plea shall not be determined before
him. See St: 64. A.
Reading 113. B. Appeal 62. the end. Corone 82.

Apportionment.
It Is said that if I sell my Horse, See 24. H. 8 Tit. Contr.
and the Horse of W. N. to A. for ten pound, and W. N. retakes his Horse, that
A. shall render to me the entire ten pound: because a Chattel cannot upon a
contract be apportioned. 30. H. 8. B. apportionment. 7.

If the Kings Tenant of four acres, alien one to the King: Or if he has two
Daughters, and dies: and the one aliens to the King, the Rent shall be
apportioned if it be severable: and this by the Common Law, See after.
by some. Quaere, for the reading of Fitzjames is otherwise, 32. H. 8. B.
apportionment 23.

Before the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, Sir John Fitz. James
if the Lord had purchased parcel of the land holden of him, his entire Rent
was extinct, though it was severable: Yet now by the said Statute it shall be
apportioned, be it purchased by the Lord, or by another: But this does not help
a Rent Charge: because the Statute is only for the loss of the chief Lord. But
of a Rent service upon recovery of parcel, or of a descent of parcel, and the
like, which are the acts of God, or of the Law, there was an apportionment at
the Common Law, contrary of his proper act, as purchase: because before the
Stat. aforesaid, it was of a rent service, as it is at this day of a Rent charge,
which is extinct by purchase of parcel of the Land, Reading B. Apportionment.
28.

Arbitrament.
Debt upon an Obligation: the Defendant pleads the Condition: if he shall stand
to the award of I. and N. so that the award be made before such a day, and
says, that the award was not made by the day: the Plaintiff may say, That they
made such an award before the day, 8 H. 6: 18. by Newton B. Arbitrament 18.
which the Defendant in such a point (and show in certain in what) has broken:
for he must show the breach in some point certain: otherwise the action lies
not: 31. H. 8. B. Arbitrament 42.

Assets inter maines. Assets in their hands. See Tit. Extinguishment.
Note, 21 E 4. 21. by Choke and Nele. Perk. 94 E 190. E. D. S. 79. 37 H. 6. 30:
by Prisot: 2 H. 6. 16. per curiam
if Executors plead fully administered in an action of Debt, and give in
evidence payment of Legacies, the Plaintiff may demur upon it; for such
administration is not allowable in Law, before debts paid. 33. H. 8. B. Assets
inter maines 10.

Where a perquisite of a Villain shall be Assets: See Tit. Villeinage.

Assets per descent. Assets by descent. 34 H. 6. 22. contra by Wangf: 40 E: 3:
15: by Belk:

In an action of Debt against an Heir upon an obligation of his ancestor, who
pleaded nothing by descent; and it was found that Land descended to him, but not
assets; it was adjudged that the Plaintiff should have Execution of all his
Lands, as well of Land purchased, as of Land descended: and B. seems the reason
to be for his false plea. 3. Mar. 1. B. Assets per descent 5. in the end.

Assignee.
A man Leases a house and Land for years; and the Lessee Covenants that he and
his Assigns will repair the house; and after the Lessee grants over his Term,
and the assignee does not repair, an action of Covenant lies against the
assignee; for this is a Covenant which runs with the land: (B. Covenant 32.
Deputy 16.) and also it lies clearly against the Lessee after that he has
assigned over his Term: and B. seems that if he bring several Writs of Covenant
against both, that there is no remedy till he takes execution against the one:
(...)
and then it seems to him, that if he sues against the other, he shall have an
Audita Querela. 25. H. 8. B. Covenant 32.

Assise.
Assise: the Tenant pleads not attached by fifteen days; the Bailiff was
examined, who said that he attached him by the horse of a Farmor which was a
Termor to the Tenant of the land in plaint, which matter was recorded: and B.
seems that it is no good attachment; for the Tenant cannot forfeit the beasts of
his Farmor: (...) 6. 2.
and an attachment ought to be made of such things which the Tenant may forfeit
by Outlary. Note, between Dudly and Leveson, for the Manor of Parton, in the
County of Stafford. 31. H. 8. B. Assise 480.

Note, by the Justices in the Common Bench, That in an assise against two, the
one takes the Tenancy and pleads no wrong, and the other takes the Tenancy
without that, that the other has any thing, and pleads in Bar: there the
Plaintiff shall be compelled to choose his Tenant at his peril, as well as if
both had pleaded in Bar, and accepted the Tenancy severally: and if it be found
that he mis-elects his Tenant, the Writ shall abate, but he shall not be
barred. And there when the Demandant elects his Tenant, and he pleads, there
they shall be at issue, before that the Tenancy shall be inquired, and then the
Tenancy shall be Inquired first, and after the other issue. 6. E. 6. B. Assise
384.

Assurances.
Note, that Tenant in Tail who levies a Fine with Proclamation, shall be bound,
and his Heirs of his body also after the Proclamation made, and not before: so
that if the Tenant in Tail die before all the Proclamations made, this shall
not bind the issue in Tail; and the Proclamation cannot be made in shorter
time then in four Terms (B. Fine Levies 109. assurances 6.) But Tenant in Tail
who is not party to the Fine, shall not be so bound after the Proclamations, but
that he shall have five years to make his claim: and if he fails of them, and
dies, his issue shall have other five years by the equity of the Statute of W.
2. Quod non habeat potestatem alienandi. Westminster 2: ^: 1:
Yet it is said, if the first Issue neglect the five years, by which he is
barrable, and dies, his issue shall not have other five years; for if the issue
be once ba^rable by the Fine, the Tail is by this bound for ever: (Quaere) And
the Statute says, That it shall bind parties and p^i^^es: and therefore where
Tenant in Tail is party to the Fine, with Proclamation, and his issue claims
Performam doni, the issue is privy: for he cannot convey to himself as heir in
tail, but as of the body of his Father, which is privity. But a Fine with
Proclamation, may be confessed and avoided; and then it shall not bind: for
the Statute is intended De finibus rite levatis. And therefore he may say, that
the parties to the Fine had nothing tempore finis, etc. For if none of the
Parties had nothing tempore finis, then it is a Fine by conclusion betwixt the
parties: but all strangers may avoid it by the averment as before. See Ti^.
Fines Levied: Fitz: 142: A:
(B. Fines, Levies, 109.) And by the Statute of 32. H. 8. Fine with
Proclamation by Cestui que use in Tail, shall bind him and his heirs after
Proclamation made: and a Fine with Proclamation, the Reversion or Remainder in
the King, and the Conusor dies, the Proclamation made it is no Bar, nor
discontinuance; because that the Reversion or Remainder in the King, cannot be
discontinued: therefore there the issue in Tail may enter after the death of
the Tenant in Tail. 3* H 8. (...) 9: 4: H: 7: cap. 24:
(B. Bar 97. Assurances 6.) And B. seems, that neither the Statute of 32. H. 8.
nor 4. H. 7. shall not bind the issue in Tail, nor the Reversion to the King
by Fine with Proclamation, though that the Proclamation be made: and yet the
Statute of 4. H. 7. wills that after Proclamation made, it shall be a final end,
and shall conclude as well privies, as strangers, except infants, Fem Coverts,
and the like, etc: And the issue in Tail is privy. Yet B. thinks that the
intent of the Statute was not that the issue in Tail, See Cokes 1. Book.
the Reversion to the King should be bound: for by him after this Statute, this
was taken to be no discontinuance: and therefore it seems to him that it shall
not bind the Issue in Tail, the Reversion in the King. (B. Fines, 32 H. c. 36.
Levies 121.) Yet Quaere, for the Statute of 32. H. 8. which wills that the heir
in Tail shall be barred by Fine* with Proclamation, after the Proclamation
made, has an exception of those, of which the Reversion, or Remainder, is in
the King, so that it shall not bind such issue in Tail. B. assurances 6. the
end.

But otherwise it is of a recovery, and Execution had by writ of entry in the
Post, with voucher by the Common Law,: See 32. H. 8 Tit. discontinuance after.
for though that the Reversion, or Remainder be in the King, such recovery
shall bind, and was a bar against the Tenant in Tail, and his issue presently;
but not against the King. But at this day by the Statute of 34. and 35. H. 8.
Recovery against Tenant in Tail; the Remainder, or Reversion in the King shall
not bind the issue in Tail, but that he may enter after the Death of Tenant in
Tail. 30. H. 8. B. Bar 97. the end. Assurances 6.

Note, That for assurance of land, that the heir should not sell, it was devised,
That a man should make a Feoffment in Fee to two, to the use of himself for
Term of life without impeachment of wast, and after to the use of his son, and
his heirs, until the son should assent and conclude to alien it, or any part of
it; or to charge or incumber it, and after imediately upon such consent and
conclusion to the use of A. and his heirs, until as before, and then etc. to the
use of B. and his Heirs, until, etc and so of more, etc. and by such assent and
conclusion by the Statute of uses. Anno, 27. H. 8. c. 10. the other shall be in
possession, etc. 38. H. 8. B. Assurances 1.

Where men enter into an arbitrament, See 21. H. 7. 28. by Brudnel.
and every one is bound to the other in an obligation, or other such Covenants,
and are bound to perform it: and it is awarded that every one should release to
the other all actions, and the like: there it ought to be expressed all actions
before such a day, which shall be before the date of the Obligation for
otherwise the Obligation of the award, or the last Obligations to perform the
Covenants, shall be also released. Regulae B. Assurances 4.

Attaint.
Caveatur in every action triable by Jury, of the quantity of the land, as
where a man demands 200. acres, where they are but a hundred sixty or the like:
and the title is for the demand, there if the Jury find that he deseised him
of 200 acres, or the like, this is matter of Attaint. 1 E: 5: 6: by Suliard: 1:
R: 3: 3: by Hussy:
And so where they find him gulty in trespass or the like, of more trespasses
then he did, or of excessive damage, and the like. 24. H. 8. B. Attaint 96.

Quaere by B. if an Attaint does not lie upon a Verdict in an appeal of Maihem
at this day, by the Statute of 23. H. 8. cap. 4. For this year it was doubted.
38. H. 8. B. Attaint 10. the end.

Assise is brought against Tenant by Statute Merchant, 43 Ass: 41:
and against the Conusor Tenant of the Freehold, and the Assise acquits the
Tenant by Statute Merchant, and attaints the other of disseisen: the Tenant by
Statute Merchant shall not have an Attaint, nor the Lord where Land is
recovered against him, and the heir, where he has the heir in Ward; nor the
Termor, where land is recovered against him, and the Lessor, because they lose
not any Freehold: and because that they are acquitted by W. Whorewood the
Kings Attorney. Yet by B. it is not reasonable where they are named, and lose
their interest: yet it seems to him, that he that is acquitted shall not have
an attaint; but if they are found disseisors, they shall have an attaint by
him. Time, H. 8. B Attaint 82. the end.

Note; For Law, where Trespass of battery, goods carried away, or a writing
broken (which are transitory) is done in one County, yet an action may be
brought in an other. (B. Attaint 104. And so it was agreed in Trespass in London,
of breaking of at D. in London, where indeed D. was in the County of E. for
these are not local. B. Lieu. 65.) And therefore in Trespass transitory, the
place is not issuable, See 24 H. 8. Tit. Action upon the case
nor traversable. No more then in Trespass upon the case, upon a promise; and
these may be continued. (B. Traverse, etc. 283.)

And in those cases, the Jury of another County may take Conusance thereof, 39
H. 6. 8. by Ashton 9 E. 4. 45. by Choke.
but is not bound to it: but if they take Conusance, attaint lies* not.
Otherwise of Trespass of Trees cut, or Grass trod, which are local, and shall
be brought in the proper County. 2. Mar. 1. B. Attaint 104. Jurors 50.

Note; See 20 H. 7 5.
It Is said that upon an Information for the King, which passes upon the issue
tried, the King nor the informer shall not have an attaint: for the informer is
not fully party. And when the Defendant has answered, the Kings Attorney
replies for the King; Com. 2. See 7 E. 6.
and after, no further mention of the informer: and therefore neither the one,
nor the other shall have an attaint. 4. Mar. 1. B. Attaint. 127.

Where an attaint lies, where not. See Tit. Damages. And Tit. Fanxifier.

Attornment.
Note; That Attornment may be made by Tenants, See my Lord Cokes. Rep.
to the Lord in his Court: to the Steward in absence of the Lord, or purchasor.
But Attornment to the servant of the purchasor out of Court, and in absence of
the Purchasor, is not good: but by payment of one penny for every Tenant to the
servant of the Purchasor; and in his absence, in name of Seisen of their
several Rents, is a good attornment: for a servant may receive Rent for his
Master.

Quaere. If no Rent then is due, nor the rent day come. 28. H. 8. B. Attornment
40.

It Was agreed, Conc. Lit. 39 H. 6. 24. c. 16. Rast. Inrolments. 2 c. 10. Rast.
Uses 9.
That where Land is fold by Deed, indented and enrolled according to the
Statute of 27. H. 8. c. 10. there because the use is changed by the bargain and
sale, by the said Statute, and the buyer in possession; and has no means to
compel the Tenant to attorn; there he may distrain, and avow without
attornment. Otherwise upon a grant by Fine; Lit. 230.
for there he may have a Writ of Por quae servitia. 30. H. 8. B. attornment 29.
the end.

Note, Abr. of Ass. 22.
That if a man has Common of Pasture to a certain number; or Common of
Estovers to a certain number of Carts and with Grant them over; they pass
without attornment; because they are not to be taken by the hands of the
Tenant, but by the mouth of beasts, and by cutting, and carrying. See 2 E. 6.
after.
So see that when no attendancy nor payment is to be made by the Tenant, there
the thing passes without attornment. 31. H. 8. B. Attornment. 59.

See by Whorewood the Kings Attorney; where a man Leases for forty years, See 2
E. 6. Com. 379.
and after Leases the same Land to another, to have from the end of the first
Term for twenty years, this needs no attornment: otherwise where he grants the
Reversion as before, there ought to be attornment. (Quaere, and see after.) See
Tit. Leases See after.


And if a man Leases for ten years, and after Leases to another for twenty
years, this is good for ten years without Attornment: otherwise if there were a
word of Reversion. 37. H. 8. B. attornment. 41.

A man Leases Land for twenty years, the Lessee Leases over for ten years,
rendering Rent, and after grants the Reversion of the Term, and Rent to a
stranger, this shall not pass without attornment, by reason of the attendancie
of the Rent: otherwise, if no Rent were reserved upon the second Lease for ten
years, See 31. H. 8. before:
for then there is no attendancie to be made, nor action of Waste, nor the like
to be brought. For as B. seems, attornment is not necessary; but to have
avowry, or an action of Waste. 2. E. 6. B. attornment. 45.

See by Mountague, Lit. 125. and D. ^. 35: and 9. E. 4. 33. contra.
chief Justice, and Townsend, That by a Feoffment of a Manor, the services
pass without attornment of the Freeholders. But B. seems that the Tenants
ought to attorn. 4. E. 6. B. attornment 30.

Note; If a man let a house, and 200 acres of Land for Term of life: Com. 145.
and 152.
and after grant the Reversion to another, to have the said House, Land, and
Tenements, a Festo Sancti Micha^lis proxpost mortem vel determinationem
interesse of Tenant for life for twenty one years then next following: See 37
H. 8 before.
the Tenant for life dies before attornment, yet the grant of the Reversion is
good, because that the words in the Habendum of the house and land, is intended
to be a Lease; and a Rent was also reserved upon it, and so a good Lease
without attornment. By Brown, Sanders, and Stamphord, Justices. Yet by B. Chief
Justice, it is but a Grant of a Reversion, and no Lease: but yet the grant is
good without attornment; because that it is to Commence after the death of Tenant
for life, so that the Tenant for life shall not be attending to the Grantee,
nor shall he avow upon him, nor have an action of Waste, or the like: by
judgment of the Court. 3. Mar. 1. B. Attornment 60. Leases 73.

Attorney.
In these Cases a man shall not make an Attorney, except in special case. viz.
Attaint, Register 9.
Premuniri, Appeal, Per quae servitia. Quid juris clam. Quem redd. reddit. Nor
in assigning of Errors: nor at the Plures in case of contempt: nor the Tenant
in a Cessavit upon tender of arrearages. Nor the pray' to be received in a Pr.
quod redd. Nor in an assise; Register 9.
nor in an attachment. Nec contra finem levat: nor in any case where the
Defendant shall be imprisoned.

Audita querela.
A man seized of 20. acres, 45 E. 3. 17 13 H. 7. 22 by Read. 16 H. 7. 6. by
Keble. 5 E. 6. Com 72. 9. H. 4. 4. by Gas^. 36 H. 8. B. Audita querale 2. the
end. 48 E. 3. 5. by Finch. 17 E. 2. B. Suit 13. econt. See Cokes Rep:
is bound in a Statute Merchant; and makes a Feoffment of 15. to several
persons, and Execution is sued against one of them, he shall have an Audita
querela upon his surmise, to have the other Feoffees to be contributory with
him. But if execution be sued against the Conusor himself, he shall not have
such contribution: for this is upon his own act (B. Audita querela 39.

Yet if the Conusor dies, and the Conusee sues Execution against the heir, he
shall have Contribution of the Feoffee. So every of them shall have of the
heir. 25. H. 8. B. Audita querela 44. the end.

Averments. See Tit. Pleadings.
Note, Where a man pleads a recovery by a strange name of the thing demanded
(B. Averments 42.) as if a Precipe quod redd. be brought of the Manor of B. or
the like, the Tenant pleads a Fine, Recovery, or the like, of the Manor of G.
he ought to aver that the one and the other, 21 E: 4: 52
are one and the same Manor, not diverse: contrary, if he pleads a Fine, or
recovery de predict. Manerio de B. for this word (predict.) is in effect an
averment that all is one. 3 M: 1: Com: 150:
(B. Pleadings* 143.)

And where a man pleads a Recovery by a strange name of the parties, he ought
to aver that the first person, and this person, are all one, and not diverse.
Otherwise B. seems where he pleads it by this word predict. 33. H. 8. B.
Averments 24.

It Was said for Law, That an averment is not necessary in an avowry. 3 M. 1.
Com. 163. 10 Eliz. ibid. 342.
viz. and hoc parat. est verificare; for it is in lieu of a Declaration; and the
avowant is actor. 3 M. 1. B. averment 81.

Avowry.
Lord and Tenant by Fealty and 3 pence Rent, the Lord dies, his wife is endowed
of the Seigniory; she may distrain for 1 penny, and the Heir for 2 pence, and so
now the Land is charged with two distresses, where it was charged but with one
before: but this is not inconvenient: for he shall pay no more Rent then
before. The same Law where the Lordship is divided by partition, between Heirs
Females, and the like. 24. H. 8. B. Distress 59. Avowry 139.

If two Copartners make partition, and give notice to the Lord, he ought to
make several avowries. 27 H. 8. c: 10.
And if a man sell his land by Deed indented, enrolled within the half year
according to the Statute, Perk 131: 39 H: 6. 25. by Prisot: 37 H. 6. 33. by
Prisot. 7 E. 4: 28. by Choke.
the avowry is not changed, etc. without notice, no more then upon a Fine. Yet
B. doubts of of a Conusans de Droit com. Ceo. etc. but if a man recover against
the Tenant, or if the Tenant is deseised, the disseisor dies seized, and his
heir is in by descent, so that the entry of the disseisee is taken away, the
avowry shall be changed without notice. The same law, if the Tenant make a
Feoffment, 2 E. 4. 6. 34 H. 6. 46. by Prisot.
and dies, the Lord shall change his avowry without notice; for nothing is
descended to the heir of the Feoffor. And where notice ^s necessary, it shall
be done upon the Land holden, with tender of the arrearages; for otherwise the
Lord shall lose his arrearages, 7 H. 4. 14: by Tillesley.
if he avows or accepts service of the Feoffee, etc. before the arrearages
paid, Ideo caveatur inde. 29. H. 8. B. avowry 111. 146.

In a Replevin, if the Defendant avows because that A. was Lord, and was seized
by the hands of B. then Tenant, etc. of such servises, he may convey the estate
of the said B. in the Tenancy to the Plaintiff in the Replevin, See Coke upon
Lit.
by a que estate, without showing how, but he cannot convey to himself of the
said A. in the Seigniory by a que estate, without showing how; for the
Seigniory is there in demand, and not the Tenancy: 34: H. 8. B. avowry 7. que
estate 2. the end.

Note, That he which avows upon the Land, as within his Fee or Seigniory, by
the Statute shall aleadge a seisen, as in other avowry; and then shall conclude
his avowry upon the land, as within his Fee and Seigniory: and in such avowry,
every Plaintiff in the Replevin (be he Termor or other) may have every answer
to the avowry; as to traverse the Seisen, the Tenure, and the like, which are a
good answer in an avowry: or plead a release, or the like, as Tenant of the
Free hold shall, though he be a stranger to the avowry; for such avowry is not
made upon any person certain; therefore every one is a stranger to this avowry:
and so the Plaintiff may have every answer which is sufficient 34. H. 8. B.
Avowry 113.

'Twas agreed that to say, Wimbishes Case, ^ime H: 8: Com: 21 H. 7: 1^ 21 E:
^15: Com: 269.
That the place where, etc. is 4. acres, which is, and was the time of the
caption his Freehold, for which he distrained, and took the beasts for damage
Feasent, was a good avowrie. 4. E. 6. B. avowrie 122.

'Twas holden by the Justices of both Benches, That where a man holds by Rent
and Knights service, and the Lord and his ancestors have been always seized of
the Rent, See 6 E: 6: Tit: Ward
but not of the homage, escuage, nor of ward, yet if a ward falls, he shall
have the Wardship of the heir, for the seisen of the rent suffices to be seized
of the Tenure, as to this purpose. yet otherwise B. seems to make avowry. 7. E.
6. B. avowrie. 96. the end. Ward, 69.

Note, 32 H: 8: c: 3: Limitation 3:
That 'twas agreed that at this day by the limitation of 32. H. 8. the avowry
shall be made generally, as was used before: and if there were not seisin after
this limitation, then the Plaintiff in bar of the avowry may allege it, and
traverse the seisin after the limitation (B. avowry 107.) Also where a man
brings an action real, or mixed; or makes avowry, or Conusance, and issue is
taken upon the seisin infra tempus Statuti, and it is found against the
Demandant, Plaintiff, or Avowant; this is peremptory by the same Statute. 1. M.
1. B. Peremptory 78.

Averment is not necessary in an Avowry. See Tit. Averment.

Bar.
WHere a Fine with Proclamation, or a Recovery shall bar an estate tail; where
not, and where the Reversion is in the King, with other good matter concerning
Fines. See Tit. assurances.

Bastardie.
Note, That it was taken by the Commons house of Parliament, if a man marry his
Cousin within the degrees of Marriage, who have issue, and are divorced in their
lives, by this the espousals are avoided, and the issue is a Bastard.
Otherwise, if the one die before divorce, 39. E. 3. 31. by Thorp.
there divorce had after shall not make the issue a bastard; for the espousals
are determined by death before, and not by the divorce. And a dead person
cannot bring in his proofs; for divorce after the death of the parties, is but
ex officio, to inquire de peccatis, for a dead person cannot be cited nor
summoned to it. 24 H. 8. B. bastardie. 44. D'arraignement 11.

Battle.
It Is said that if an appeal of Murder be brought in the Kings Bench, the
Defendant joins battle, it shall be before the Justices of the Kings Bench, and
not before the Constable, and Marshal. 5. M. 1. B. battle. the end 16.

Bill.
'Twas said, 27 H. 6. 5. econt^a.
That a Praemunire shall be maintainable by Bil in the Kings Bench, though that
the party be not in custodia marescalli. (B. Bill. 1.) And 'twas common that
many Clerks were compelled to answer to bills there, who were not in Custodia
marescalli. 22. H. 8. B. Praemunire 1.

Cerciorari.
It Was agreed in Chancery, That there is no Certiorari in the Register to remove
a Record out of a Court into the Common Bench immediately, but it shall be
certified in the Chancery by Surmise, then to be sent into the Common Bench by
Mittimus. And indictments may be removed out of the Country by Cerciorari to
the Chancery, 44 E: 3. 28 accord:
and may be sent to the Justices of the Kings Bench by Mittimus, and then they
shall proceed upon it. 36. H. 8. B. Certiorari 20. the end.

Certificate of the Bishop.
'Twas holden that if the Bishop certifies that such a person paid not his
Tenths, Time E: 6 accords 26 H: 8: c:
according to the form of the Statute, which wills, That ipso facto, the
Benefice shall be void; that in this case a man shall not have an averment
contrary to the certificate. Time H. 8. B. Certificate devesque 31. the end.

Challenge.
Note by the Exchequer, Time E: 6: accord:
and both Benches, where the parties are at issue in a plea of land, where the
land lies in three or four hundreds, there if the Juror has land in any of the
hundreds, or dwells in any of the hundreds, it suffices. 4. M. 1. b. Challenge
216.

In Treason it is a good challenge to witnesses, to say that he was one of his
accusers (b. Corone 219.) And note, that by the Statute of 33. H. 8. a
peremptory challenge is ousted in case of high Treason: See Coke upon Lit:
yet by the said Statute Queen Mary, it is enacted, That all trials of Treason
shall be according to the order of the Common Law, and not otherwise. And
therefore it seems that he may have a challenge peremptory, as at Common Law.
S. 35. Jurors. 4. M. 1. B. Challenge 217. Trials 151. the end.

Where a Grant of the Bishop, or charge by him, with the assent of the Dean and
Chapter, shall bind the successor, and where not? See Tit. Confirmation.

Charters of Pardon.
Note, Note that these words (executione eorundem) are necessary, 6 E. 4. 4. by
Choke, See my Lord Coke.
if a man be attained of murder, or Felony by Outlawry or otherwise, and the
King pardons him all Felonies, Murders, and Executions eorundem, and
Outlawries, and Waivings; and Sectam pacis. And a pardon and release of all
Forfeitures of Lands and Tenements; and of Goods and Chattels, shall serve but
for the life; and for the land, if no Office be thereof found. But it shall not
serve for the goods without restitution or gift. For the King is entitled to
them by the Outlawry, without Office: but the King is not entitled to the
Land, till Office found. See 30. H: 8: after:
And if an Office be found after, yet the pardon shall serve; for it shall have
relation to the judgment* and then the mean pardon serves well; contrary,
where an Office is found before the pardon granted; for then the King is seized
by the Office, and there a release or pardon cannot give it; but there ought to
be a Gift or Grant. 29. H. 8. B. Charters of Pardon 52.

Note, if alienation without license be pardoned by Act of Parliament, the
party may enter without Ouster l'main; or amoveas manum. Otherwise by another
pardon, by letters Pattents. 29. H. 8. B. Charters of Pardon 53.

If intrusion by the heir, Filpot 16. E. 4. 1: accord: See 29* H: 8: before and
33 H: 8. Tit: Intrusion.
post mortem antecessoris be found by Office, and after the King pardons it by
act of Parliament, or by letters Pattents, yet the heir shall sue Livery: for
this is not restored to him by a pardon: but if the pardon were granted before
Office found, and at the making of the pardon, the heir is of full age, he
shall retain the land, and the Office found after the pardon shall not hurt
him. 30. H. 8. B. Charters of Pardon 54.

Chattels.
If Lessee for years devise his Term, See Time H: 8: Tit: devise. and Cokes Rep
or other his Chattel or Goods, by Testament, to one for term of his life, the
Remainder over to another, and dies, and the Devisee enters, and aliens not the
Term* nor gives, or sels the Chattel, and dies, there he in Remainder shall
have it: but if the first Devisee had aliened, given, or sold it, there he in
the Remainder had been without remedy for it (B. Chattels 23. Done 57.) And so
B. seems if they be forfeit in his life, he in remainder has no remedy. 33. H.
8. B Done. 57. the end.

Choice in Action. Thing in Action.
Note, where the Statute of 31. H. 8. gives to the King the possessions of
Abbeys, See 32 H. 8 after, and Cokes Rep 4 M. 1. Com. 173:
and all rights of Entries, Actions, Conditions, and the like, which the Abbeys
might have had; and that he shall be in possession without office, and that he
shall be adjudged in actual and real possession of them, in such plight and
sort as they were at the time of making of the Statute. Yet if an Abbot were
disseised of 4 acres of land, the King cannot grant it over before entry made
by him in it, because it is a thing in action real, and not like to a thing in
action personal or mixed, as debt ward, and the like, by some. And some e
contra, by reason of these words, That the King shall be in possession. Yet by
B. this seems, that he shall be in such possession as the Abbot was. S. of a
thing of which the Abbot had possession, the King has of this actual
possession: and of such of which the Abbot had but a cause of entry, or right
in action; of these the King shall be vested of a Title of entry, and Title of
action. But the thing to which he has such cause of entry, or of action, is
not for this in him in possession: and therefore cannot pass from the King by
general words; but B. seems, if the King recites the diseisen, and how the
right and action thereof is given to him by the Statute, and grants it
specially that it is good. 33. H. 8. B. Choice in Action 14.

'Twas said for Law, See 33 H. 8 before, 2 H. 7. 8. by Hussy: See Cokes Rep
That the King may grant a thing in action, which is personal; as debt, and
damages, and the like, or a thing mixed; as the ward of body: but not a thing
real, as an action of land, and the like, as Rights, Entries, Actions, and the
like, which Abbots might have. (And that the King shall have these by the
Statute of dissolution of Abbeys. 31. H. 8.) These things in action the King
cannot grant. Yet by B. see if there be not words in this Statute, to put the
King in possession, though the Abbot were put to his action. 33. H. 8. B.
Pattents 98.

Clergy.
No man shall have his Clergy but where his life is in jeopardie: and therefore
not in petty larceny. And the Bishop is Ordinary: all Priests, Abbots, and
others inferior to him, which demand Clergy, or have Clergy: and if the Bishop
has his Clergy, the Metropolitan shall keep him, as his Ordinary: and if the
Metropolitan offend, and has his Clergy, the King shall have him and keep him:
the same is of Laps. Reading B. Clergy 19. Corone 183.

Note, That at this day Bigamus shall have his Clergy by the Statute: but a man
attainted of Heresy shall not: 1 E: 6: c. 12 Clergy 21.
otherwise of a man excommunicated: and a Jew, nor Turk shall not have their
Clergy: and a Greek and Roman, who use not our letters shall have their Clergy,
and shall stay till a book of letters of their country comes. (B. Clergy 20.)

And if a man who is captus oculis prays his Clergy, he shall have it if he
can speak latin congruously. Quaere, for he cannot be a Priest, nor he cannot
Minister. Casus B. clergy 21.

A Bastard shall have his Clergy; for he may be a Priest by license. Casus B.
clergy 22.

Color.
Note, See Cokes Book.
That Color ought to be matter in law, or doubtful to the lay people; and
shall be given to the Plaintiff, and not to one who is mean in the conveyance:
and shall not be given to a stranger who infeoffed the Plaintiff: nor shall be
given to the Defendant: and shall not be given by a possession determined. S.
where it appears in the pleading, that the possession is determined: but shall
be given by an estate defeated: and where the Defendant binds the right of the
Plaintiff by Feoffment with Warranty, Release, Fine, Recovery, Disseisin, and
Re-entry, and the like, there needs not any color. And he which claims no
property in the thing, but takes it as a distress, and the like, shall not give
color. Color shall not be given but upon a plea in bar. B. color 64. Color
shall not be given but by him, by whom you commence your Title, and not by a
mean in the conveyance. He which pleads to the Writ, shall not give Color. It
behooves that color be such, so that if it be true, that of such possession,
the Plaintiff or Demandant may have their action. He which justifies as
servant, and conveys Title to his Master, shall give color: color by
possession in law, is good. Regulae.

Commission.
Note, 35 H. 8. accord. See after.
for Law, That where a Commission of the peace issues to I. N. and others; See
Tit. Officer.
and after I. N. is made Knight. yet the Commission remains for him. (Yet Anno
primo, E. 6. cap. 7. is a Statute made, That making of the Plaintiff Knight,
shall not abate the action, nor the Commission in which such person is named.)

And where a man learned in the same Law is put in Commission, and after is
made Sergeant at Law, yet he remains in authority by the same Commission. And
when a Justice of the Bench is made Knight, yet he remains Justice, and this
Commission shall serve him. 36. H. 8. B. Commissions 22:

Note, See Tit. Officer.
by coming of a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, the Commission of Jail
Delivery is not determined; for the one stands with the other. Otherwise, where
the one Commission is contrary to the other.

As of a Commission of the Peace where there is a former Commission thereof to
others, this is contrary that every of them should be Commissioners of one and
the same thing, and both in force. And the Commission of Jail Delivery, is
only to deliver the Jail. Commission of Oyer and Terminer, has words ad
inquirendam audiendam, and determinandam. But most commonly the Justices of
Gaol delivery are also in the Commission of the Peace, and by this they indict,
and after deliver the Gaol as well of them, as of others.

And note, That the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, cannot by this authority
arraign no Prisoners, but those which are indicted before them: but contrary,
if they have Commission of Gaol delivery also, for these both may be executed
simul and semel 3. M. 1. B. Commission 24.

If a Justice of the Common Bench be made Justice of the Kings Bench, though
that it be intended but Pro illa vice: as it was of Sir James Dier this year; yet
this shall determine his pattent of the Common Bench, though he surrenders the
Pattent of the Kings Bench the next day: for the Kings Bench is the highest
Court: and if the Common Bench err, this shall be controlled by the Kings
Bench. And therefore a man cannot be Judge of the one Bench, and the other
together to reverse his own judgment. And as often as a Justice of the Common
Bench, is made Justice of the Kings Bench (as it has been often seen) the
Commission of the Common Bench by this is determined: The same admitted 1 H. 7.
10:
for the one Court is within the controlment of the other: but a man may be a
Justice of the Common Bench, and chief Baron of the Exchequer together, and may
be Justice of the Common Bench, and Justice in Oyer, and Terminer, or of Gaol
delivery together: for none of these Courts has controlment of the other. And
if an Incumbent of a Benefice be made a Bishop, the first Benefice is void: for
he which has the office of Sovereignty, cannot have the office of inferior,
by some of the Justices. D. S. 127. 29 H: 8. 116. Petty Br: See before:
Yet B. doubts; for a Justice de banco regis, may be a Justice in Oyer, or of
Oyer and Terminer, or of Peace, or of Gaol delivery; and yet if they err in
their pleas in the Oyer, or Oyer and Terminer, or in their Process, or outlawry
before Justice of Peace, Writ of Error lies thereof before the King in his
Bench. But the Pleas in the King Bench are holden coram rege ubicunque fuerit
in Anglia, and so the Kings Bench, is a Court removable: and by the Statute the
Common Pleas teneatur in loco certo, Magna-Charta. c. 11: Rast: Common Pleas 1:
then it is contrary of the Oath of the Justice of the one Court, and the other;
for the one is certain, and the other uncertain. 5. M. 1. B. Commissions 25.

Where a Justice of Peace is made Knight, 36. H. 8. accord: before.
or takes other dignity, yet his authority shall remain. Marrow Sergeant in the
Inner Temple upon the Stat. of Peace.
And so of a Justice of the Gommon Bench made Knight, his Commission remains in
force. 1. E. 6. c. 7. B. Commission 4.

If the King grant to a Major and Commonalty, and their successors to be
Justices of Peace in their Town, and after makes a Commission of the Peace to
another there, yet the first Commission shall remain in force; because that it is
a grant to them, and their successors, and so not revocable as a Commission is.
(B. Commission 5.)

If a new Commission of the Peace be proclaimed, or read in full County, the
ancient Commission of the Peace is determined. And all the Justices ought to
take notice, and if they sit by the ancient Commission, all they do is void.
And if a Commission be directed to A. and B. who are not in rerum natura, or
are dead at the time of the Test, etc. The ancient Commission remains in
Force, for this new Commission is void.

If a Commission be directed to N. pro hac vice, this shall determine the
ancient Commission of these matters. And yet the new Commissioners cannot sit
but Vnica vice. (B. Commission 6.) If a commission be directed to hear and
determine Felonies, this shall determine the ancient commission of the Peace,
as to Felonies, but not as to the Peace: and so determined in part, in part
not, (B. Commission 7.) commission in Eyer is made to the county of N. and
Proclamation there, this determins the Commission of the Peace. (B. commission
8.) Commission of the Peace is in the county of N. and the Kings Bench comes
there, this shall not determine the Commission of the Peace: contrary, if they
make Proclamation of the coming of the Kings Bench (B. commission 9.)
Commission of the peace is made to 4. in the County of N. and after the King
makes I. S. Justice of Peace there for term of his life; the first Commission
is determined. (B. Commission 10.)

If Justices sit by Commission, and do not adjourn it, the Commission is
determined. 1. E. 6. c. 7. See after 1 E 6. Tit. Corone.
And see a Statute where new Commissioners of Gaol delivery, may sit upon the
Records of the ancient Commission of the Gaol, which is determined.

And when a Commission of Oyer and Terminer is determined, the Records of that
shall be sent into the Kings Bench; but Records of the Justices of Gaol
delivery, shall remain with the Custos rotulorum of the County. And the next
Justices of Gaol delivery shall proceed upon them, upon judgment of death by
the said Statute. Quaere, if they should proceed by the words to allowance of
Clergy, or Sanctuary, it seems so, by the equity. B. Commissions 11.

Conditions.
Debt upon an Obligation, with a condition to perform all covenants contained
in certain Indentures; See after 33 H. 8. and 37. H. 8.
the defendant cannot plead the condition, and rehearse the covenants, and say
generally that he has performed all the covenants, without showing how, by the
Prothonotaries, 20. H. 8. B. conditions 2.

If a man devise 20. l. to W. S. to be paid in four years after his death, and
dies, and after the Devisee dies within the four years, yet the Executor of the
Devisee shall have the Money, or the rest of it by suit before the Ordinary in
the court Spiritual; for it is a duty by the Testament, or devise. 24. H. 8. B.
Devise 27. 45. conditions 187.

By Fitz. Fineux agrees, 11 H 7. 12. and 12 H. 7: 18
if a man before the Statute of Tenures had made a gift of Land to one in Fee,
for to repair a Bridge, or for to keep such a castle, or for to marry yearly a
poor virgin of S. this is a Tenure, and not a condition; and the Donor may
distrain, and make avowrie.

But if a woman give land to a man for to marry her, 14 H: 8: 10 by Brudnel
Fitz: 205:
this is a condition in effect, and no Tenure, which no body denied. 24. H. 8.
B. condition 188. tenures 53.

If a man Mortgage his land to W. N. upon condition that if the Mortgager, and
I. S. repay 100 l. by such a day, that he shall re-enter, and he dies before
the day, but I. S. paies by the day, the condition is performed; and this by
reason of the death of the Mortgager, Accord: 15 H: 7: 2: and 13:
notwithstanding that the payment were in the copulative; otherwise, if it were
not in the case of death, 30. H. 8. B. conditions 109.

By many, D: S: 123: See 27: H: 8: 15: by Knightly:
if a man make a Feoffment in Fee, ad intentionem to perform his will, this is
no condition, but a Declaration of the purpose and will of the Feoffer, and the
heir cannot enter for non performance. 31. H. 8. B. conditions 191.

If a man be bound in a bond to pay 20 l. the Obligor in whose discharge the
condition goes, 6 H: 7: by Bryan Cont.
ought to be ready at the place, etc. all the day, and the Obligee may come any
time of the day, 32. H. 8. B. conditions 192.

A man gives land in Tail, Perk: 163: C: See Cokes Rep Knights case:
Lillingstons. c Damport^ c:
or Leases it for life, or for years, rendering rent, with a condition of
re-entry for default of payment, there if he Leases part of the land to the
Donor, or Lessor, or if the Donor or Lessor enter in part of the land, he
cannot re-enter for the rent arrear after; for the condition is wholly
suspended; for a condition cannot be apportioned nor divided. 33. H. 8. B.
Extinguishment 49. conditions 193.

Debt upon an obligation, 20 H: 8: 9: 26 H: 8: 5: by Engelf: 6 E: 4: 5: by
Rogers 27 H: 8: 1: 27: See before 20 H: 8: Pleading of Covenants performed
to perform all covenants contained in certain Indentures, it is no plea that he
has performed all the covenants generally, S. Quod performavit omnes and
singulas conventiones inindentura pred. specificat. ex part sua perimplend. if
they be in the affirmative; but must show in certain in every point how he has
performed them, (B. condition 198. covenant 35.) And where in a Covenant the
Defendant says, that the covenants are that he shall pay 10 l. by such a day,
and infeoff him by the same day quas quidem conventiones idem defensoris been
perimplevit, this is no good plea; for he must show in certain how he has
performed it. 33. H. 8. B. covenants 35. the end.

Note for Law, That Proviso semper put on the part of the Less upon the words
of Habendum, See Cokes Rep:
makes a condition; otherwise of a Proviso of the part of the Lessor, as it is
covenanted in the Indenture, That the Lessee shall make the reparations;
Proviso semper, That the Lessor shall find the great Timber, this is no
condition.

Nor by some it is no condition when it comes amongst other covenants on the part
of the Lessee, as it is covenanted after the Habendum, and after the Reddendum,
That the Lessee shall scowre the ditches, or the like: Proviso semper, That the
Lessee shall carry the Dung from it to such a field; this is no condition to
forfeit the Lease for not doing of it: contrary, if such proviso be put
imediately after the habendum, Quaere:
which makes the estate; or after the redendum. Quaere, by B. conditions 195.
35. H. 8.

If a man Mortgage his land upon defeisance of repayment to re enter, and the
bargain to be void: and the vendee Leases the Land to the vendor for ten years
by Indenture of defeisance; and further grants to him, That if he paies 100 l.
infra terminum dict. 10 annorum, that then the sale shall be void, etc. and the
Lessee surrenders the Term, yet the tender of the 100 l. is good within the ten
years; because that the ten years is certain, though the lease is surrendered or
forfeited. Otherwise, if it were to repay infra terminum predict. See my Lord
Coke Cheddingtons c.
without these words, ten years; for in the one case the Term, S. the Lease is
the limitation of payment, and in the other case the ten years, by Whorewood in
his Reading in the Lent. (B. conditions 203. Defeasans 18.) The same law if B.
holds certain land for term of ten years of A. and it is covenanted betwixt A.
and B. That if B. pay 100 l. to A. within the said ten years, that then he
shall be seized to the use of B. in Fee, and B. surrenders his term to A. and
after pays him 100 l. within the ten years, there B. shall have Fee; for the
years are certain: otherwise, where it is covenanted, That if he pays 100 l.
infra terminum predict. and he surrenders, and after pays the 100 l. this is
nothing worth; for the Term is determined: but in the other case the ten years
remain, notwithstanding the surrender. 35. H. 8. B. Exposition, 44.

It Was holden clear in the Kings Bench that where M. and other two are bound to
stand to the award of I. N. so that it be made and delivered by the Arbitrators
in writing to the parties before Michaelmas, they make the award, and deliver
it to one by Michaelmas, See Coke lib. 8 97. 98. Baspoles case Dyer fol. 216.
b. See 38. H 8. after. 4 H. 7. 12. by Keble. 22 E. 4. 43. by Catesby 35 H. 6.
11. per cur. 40 E 3. 20. M. 35 H. 8. B. cond. 18. the end 38 H 8 31. 6. H. 7.
6. by Hussy. Admitted 18. E. 4. 27. See before Jay accords 11 H. 7. 17 34 H.
6. 18. by Prisot. 19. E. 4. 1. by Catesby. See before 37. H. 8.
and cannot find the other by the day, this shall not bind the others to whom
it was not delivered. And the reason B. seems; because that in this case they
might have made 3 parties, and have delivered to every party one. 37. H. 8. B.
conditions 46. the end.

It Is said by the Court in the Kings Bench: in Debt upon an obligation to keep
without damage, S. harmless, where the Defend. pleads that he has saved him
harmless, it is no plea without showing how; for he which pleads a discharge, or
saving harmless, ought to plead it certain when he pleads in the affirmative.
Otherwise, where he pleads in the negative; for if the Plaintiff be not
dempnified, he may plead quod non damnificatus est generally 37. H. 8. B.
conditions 16. 198. in finibus.

If a man be bound in an Obligation to pay 10 l. to the obligee at Paris beyond
Sea, at a certain day, if the Obligor pay at another place, and the same day in
England, and the other accepts it, it is good clearly. (B. conditions 206.) And
it is said in debt upon an obligation to acquit and save without damage, quod non
damnificatus est, is a good plea, for it is in the negative, and therefore good
without showing how, but where he pleads, that he has kept him without damage
in the affirmative, he shall show how. 38. H. 8. B. Conditions. 93. the end.

If a man let land for term of life upon condition, 21. H. 7. 12. cont. by
Frowick. 6. E 6. Com. 135. 1. M 1. Com. 142. See Coke Penants case.
that if he does not go to Rome by such a day, that his estate shall be void,
and the lessor grants the reversion over, the Tenant attorns, and after he does
not go, yet it is not void till entire, by Bromley chief Justice: 2. M. 1. B.
Conditions. 245. the end.

Confess, and avoid.
Replevin, the defendant said that B. was seized in fee and leased to E. for 40
years, which E. granted his interest to the defendant. 38. H. 8. by which he
was possessed, and distrained for damage feasant, the plaintiff said that the
same E. 28. H. 8. granted his interest to him, he shall not traverse the Grant.
38. for he has confessed and avoided it, by the eldest grant obtained. 2. E.
6. B. Confess and avoid: 65.

Confirmation.
Bishop charges, or grants an office with the assent of the Deane and Chapter,
and dies, this is worth nothing, by some, for it ought to be confirmed by the
Dean and Chapter; And this fell out in the grant of the Stewardship of the
Bishop of London, betwixt Aldred Fitzjames, and John Edmunds of the middle
Temple, where the Bishop granted the Stewardship of his lands to A. F. by the
assent of the Dean and Chapter, and died, by which the grantee lost the office,
as it is said, because the Dean and Chapter had not confirmed it, yet more was in
the grant of the Bishop, as Misnosmer, and the like, for the said A. F. was
named Etheldredus, where it should be Aldredus, and so he was misnamed. Also
there was a default in the Seal (B. Charge 58. Confirmation. 30) And also the
Deed was Quod sigillum nostrum apposuimus, which may be referred to the Bishop
only, and not to the Bishop, Dean and Chapter: And therefore by more, to this
day the grant was avoided for these causes, and not for the other cause; and so
a grant with assent of the Dean and Chapter, with all perfections is good. 33.
H. 8. B. Confirmation. 30. the end.

If the bishop be patron, and the parson makes a lease or grant by deed, Casus
Hill for the Parsonage and glebe of Stoke, super Derne in Com. Salop. where the
Parson, Patron, Dean and Chapter made the assurrnce B. Charg 40. the end.
there the Bishop patron, and the ordinary, and the dean and chapter ought to
confirm, if the grant or lease shall be sure; otherwise where a lay man is
patron in fee, and he and the ordinary confirms, this suffices without the
dean and chapter, for in the first case, the Bishop patron has an interest in
inheritance to the Bishopric. But in the other case, he has but a judicial
power, therefore it suffices that he who has the power at the time, etc.
confirms, for it is a judicial act. But in the other case, it binds the
inheritance, which he has in jure Ecclesiae which he cannot do against his
successor, without confirmation by the dean and chapter. (33. H. 8. B.
Confirmation. 21: Charge. 40. Leases. See Tit. Leases.
64.) Patet hic that the patron ought to have a fee simple, and this juri
proprio, because of the dean and chapter, to be joined with the Bishop, where
he is patron. B. Charge 40.

Note, that if the King for him and his heirs grants Catalla felonum and
fugitivorum, or the like, which lie in grant, and dies, the grantee needs no
confirmation of the new King. But if it be a fair, or market, or the like, and
it is abused or misused, as it may be, or if it be a judicial, or ministerial
office or power, as to be a Justice of peace, Escheator, 1. R. 3. 4. See Cokes
Rep.
or the like, there he ought to have a confirmation of the new King (B.
Confirmation. 19. and 29.) yet B. seems that the grant of a thing which lies in
grant, is good clearly, without these words, for him and his heirs; But of
warranty, covenant, Annuity, or the like, there he ought to make it for him and
his heirs. 33. H. 8. B. Confirmation. 19.

Conscience.
If a man buys land, See Time. H 8. after. 7. and 8. E. Com. 302.
and the vendor executes an estate to the vendee, Habendum sibi imperpetuum,
without words of heirs, where the intent of the bargain is to pass a fee
simple, and the vender upon request refuses to make other assurance, there lies
a writ of Subpaena. 32. H. 8. B. Conscience 25.

Audely, See 4. E. 6. Tit. Estates. and 6. E. 6. Faits inrolle 27. H. 8. cap.
16. Rast. Inrolments.
Chancellor of England held clearly that if a man sell his land before the
Statute of Uses, this shall change the use of the fee simple. And the same Law
of a sale by Indenture, by the Statute of 27. H. 8. without words heirs. Time
H. 8. B. Conscience. 25. the end.

Continuances.
Note, that in the common recoveries by sufferance, for assurances, the Tenant
tenders issue, the demandant may imparle to a day in the same term, and then
the Tenant is demandant, and retracts, and judgment is given for the demand:
against him, and after the Tenant over in value upon the vouchee, etc. Regulae.
22. H. 7. B. Continuances 69.

Contract.
A man sells a lease of land, See 30. H 8. Tit. Apportionment. and 12. H. 8. 18.
and certain cloth for 10 l. the contract is entire, and if the one of these
were by defeasible Title, yet the vendor shall have the entire sum, though
the one part were divested from the vendee, See 33. H* 8. Tit Prescription. 18.
H. 7. 21. 24. Fitz. 121. M. 9. E 4* 25 by Genny and Choke 50.
for contract cannot be severed. 24. H. 8. B. Contract 35.

If a man be indebted to me upon contract, and after makes to me an obligation
for the same debt, the contract by this is determined, for in debt upon the
contract, it is a good plea, that he has an obligation for the same debt. So if
the obligation be made for parcel of the contract, which is entire. 1. H. 6.
8. by Babing. 22. H. 6. 56. by Choke. 20.
3. H. 4. 17. But if a stranger makes an obligation to me, for the same debt,
yet the contract remains, because that it is by another person, and both are now
debtors* 29. H. 8. B. Contract 29. H. 6. 21. by Newton 28. H 6. 4. 21. H. 7. 5.
by Cutler.


Corone, Crown.
Note, A man pleads M* 3. M. 1. cont. 11. H. 4. 41. by H^ls and Firwith accord.
St. 34. C. see 9. E. 4. 28 by Neele.
if a felon has a pardon to plead, and pleads not guilty, he shall lose the
advantage of his pardon, and shall not plead it after. 18. H. 8. B. Corone. 199.

Note, that at the Sessions at Newgate, a man was judged to be hanged, and
delivered to the Sheriff to make execution, and after escapes, and flees to the
Church: and had the privilege of it. 22. H. 8. B. Corone. 1 10. the end.

Note, St. 13. D. See Coke upon Lit. S. D. S* 134. 35. H. 6. 58. St. 13. C.
it was holden by all in the house of Parliament, that if a man kill one who is
attainted by Praemunire, this is no felony, for he is out of the protection of
the King, which is, as if he were out of the Kingdom, and power of the King.
Otherwise of him who is attainted of felony, St. 198* C. 23. Ass. 2.
and judged to death, the killing of him is felony. 24. H. 8. B. Corone. 196.

It Is said, where a woman is arraigned, and adjudged to be hanged, or burnt,
according to the Crime, and because that she is with child, Execution is
respited until she be delivered, 12. Ass. 11.
and now she is with child again, because that once execution was spared for
the same cause, now execution shall be commanded to be done: and the Jailer
shall not be punished 28. H. 8. B. Corone. 97.

A man steals goods in one County, 4. H. 7. 5. by Frowick. B. Corone. 139. St.
182. C.
and flees with them into another, he may be indicted, or appealed in any of
the Counties, for it is felony in every of the Counties, for felony alters not
the property. 34, H. 8. B. Corone. 170.

Note, 1. M. 1. Com. 98. See Coke. Lib.
that if 12 come for to do robbery, affray, riot, or the like, which are
unlawful acts, one of them enters into the house, and kills a man, or does
other unlawful act, all the others which came with him to do the unlawful act
are principals. See 33. H. 8. Tit. Trial.
The same Law in the case of Fines Lord Dacres, one of his company killed a man
in hunting in a Forest, and the Lord Dacres, and the other hunters, as Mantel,
and others were principals, and were all hanged. 34. H. 8. B. Corone. 171.

A man shall not plead that the dead assaulted him, and in his own defense,
etc. but not guilty in an appeal, and give it in evidence, and murder cannot be
justified. See Tit. Appeal.

Note, 11. H. 7. 20. accord. by Fineux.
by the Justices, that it is felony to kill a man in Justing, or where men play
at sword and buckler, and the one kills the other, and the like notwithstanding
the commandment of the King, for it was against Law. Time. H. 8. B. Corone. 228.

Note, by all the Justices, that if a man be indicted of felony, 1. E. 3. 4. by
Borous.
in the time of H. 8. the King dies, he shall be arraigned for it in the time
of E. 6. But by some this indictment shall be removed by Cerciorari from the
ancient custos Rotulorum, and put to the new commissioners. 1. E. 6. B. Corone.
177.

Note, See 38. H. 8 Tit. Oyer and Terminer.
that Indictments and Records, which are taken before Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, and not determined before their commission be ended, these shall be
put into the Kings Bench to arraign the parties there. 44 E. 3. 43. accord.
S. by Cerciorari out of the Chancerie, which shall be to commissioners of Oyer
and Terminer, and after shall be sent into the Kings Bench by Mittimus (B.
Corone. 178. Oyer and Terminer. 2.) But indictments taken before Justices of
Gaol delivery, and not determined, shall be delivered to the Clerk of the
peace, See Tit. Commission the end.
or shall remain with the custos rotulorum of the County, where, etc. and when
other Justices of Gaol delivery come there, they may proceed upon them upon
judgment of death, 1. E. 6. cap. 7.
and this by Statute. And B. seems that they shall proceed by the equity of the
words, to allowance of Clergy or Sanctuary; Clergy. Sanctuary.
and the like. 1. E. 6. B. Corone. 178.

Note, See Tit-Commission the end.
that it was holden, that where a stable is near a house inheritable, as parcel
of the house, and a man breaks it by night, See Cokes Rep.
to the intent to rob in it, it is felony, though he takes nothing, for it is
burglary. 2. E. 6. B. Corone. 179.

Burglary shall not be judged, but where there is breaking of a house by night.
And by the Justices, where the principal and accessarie are arraigned, St. 30.
B. 3. H. 7. 12. by Justices.
and the principal has his Clergy, this shall not serve the accessarie, but
he shall be arraigned and hanged, See St. 47. H. and Cokes 4. Book.
where both are found guilty. 4. E, 6. B. Corone. 184.

A man is indicted as accessory to a felony, and acquitted, and after is
indicted of the same felony, as principal, he shall be arraigned and hanged,
notwithstanding the acquittal as accessory. And so was Thomas Knightly first
indicted and arraigned as accessory of I. S. and acquitted, and after was
indicted of the same murder as principal, and arraigned of it again. 4. E. 6.
B. Corone. 185.

A woman took the Church for felony, and abjured the Kingdom. 6. E. 6. B*
Corone. 213.

Note, 5. and. 6. E. 6 cap. 11.
that 'twas agreed by all the Justices at Sergeants Inn in Chancery Lane 25
October. 1556. as to the Trial of Treason, and misprison of Treason, that by the
Statutes, 2 accusers or testes ought to be at the indictment, or the sayings
and accusations in writing under their hands, or the testimony of others of the
same accusation, which shall be read to the Jury at the indictment; and if the
accusers are dead at the time of the indictment, yet it suffices if the
accusation be there testifying it, Rast. Treason 23. St. 9. A.
for then there were two accusers. But for any Treason de Anno 25. E. 3: there
needs no accusers at the trial, because that it is enacted by the Statute of 2.
M. 1. cap. 10. That all trials of Treasons, shall be by the order of the common
Law only, and non aliter. And the common trial by common Law, is by Jurie, and
by witness, and by no accusers. And the same Law of Treason of coining, that
accusers need not at the arraignment, but at the indictment ut supra only. But
for all treasons done by the said Act of 2. M. 1. there ought to be witnesses,
or accusers, as well at the indictment, as at the arraignment, according to an
Article contained in the said Statute, in Fine. And for misprision of treason
there ought to be witnesses, Rast. Treason 18.
or accusers, as well upon the indictment, as upon the arraignment, by the
Statute of 1. E. 6. cap. 12. the end, for the said Statute of Q. Mary, does not
restrain accusers at the trial, but only in cases of treason, and not for
misprision. And it was agreed that petty treason ought to be tried as high
treason, S. by accusers by indictment; But at the trial there needs not
accusers, And at this resolution, were Sir William Portman chief Justice, Mr.
Hare Master of the Rolls, Sir Robert Brook, Sir David Brook, Sir Humfrey Brown,
Sir John Whiddon, Sir Edward Saunders, Sir William Stampforde, and Master
Dalyson, Justices, Dyer Serjant, and Griffine, and Cordell Attorney and
Soliciter. And it was agreed, that Counselors who give evidence against
Traitors, are not accusers. And by the Civil Law, accusers are as parties, and
not witnesses, for witnesses ought to be indifferent, and not come till they
are called, but accusers offer themselves to accuse, for it is a good challenge
to witnesses, to say, that he was one of his accusers. 4. M. 1. B. Corone. 219,

'Twas said for Law, St. 116.
that a man cannot abjure for high treason. Quaere of petty treason, for it is
manifest in a Chronicle in the time of H. 6. that a woman that killed her
Mistress abjured the Realm. 5. M. 1. B. Corone. 180. the end.

Manningt'. and another were indicted of felony in the high way in the County
of Bedford, for robbery of one Edward Keble Clerk with daggs, and the
indictment and the body were removed into the Kings Bench, and there they were
arraigned, and pleaded not guilty to the country, and were tried. But after a
writ was sent with the body into the country with Nisi prius to try them in
the county of Bedford. And this is a common course, so to remove the body and
the Record out of the Kings Bench to the country again. 4. M. 1. B. Corone.
230.

A man takes Church, and the Coroner comes to him, Lectura. W. N. Time. H. 7.
and demands of him for what cause he does it, who said that he would be
advised by 40. days before that he would declare his cause, the Coroner may
draw him out presently; but if he will confess to him felony, he may remain
there by 40 days, before that he abjures. Otherwise where he takes Sanctuary,
as Westm'. Knoll, and the like, for this may hold him for term of life, except
in case where a Statute changes it (B. Corone 180. Sanctuary. 11.) But if he
will abjure within the 40 days, the Coroner shall give him a certain day to
do it. (B. Corone supra.) None shall take privilege of the church, except that
he be in danger of his life (B. Corone. 181.) Nor none shall have the privilege
of Sanctuary except he in periculo vitae. And note that Sanctuary cannot have a
lawful commencement, Nisi pro vita hominis, as for treason, felony, or the
like; and not for debt, therefore where a grant, or prescription is to have
Sanctuary for debt, it is worth nothing, for it is against the Law. But if his body
were in execution, and he escapes, and comes to a Sanctuary ordained for
safeguard of the life of a man, he shall enjoy it, for by long imprisonment his
life may be in jeopardy. And if the church be suspended for bloodshed, yet he
which takes the church for felony, shall enjoy it by 40 days (B. Sanctuary
supra.) There are two manner of Sanctuaries. S. private, as Westminster Knoll,
and the like. And general sanctuaries, as every church (B. Corone. 181. the
end.) Abjuration for felony, discharges all felonies done before the
abjuration. A man cannot abjure for petty larceny, but for such felonies for
which he shall suffer death. Lecture B. Corone. 182.

Note, See St. 6. C.
that these words (Quod pred. vitam and membra) in a Statute, are intended
felony, without the word of felony in it. Regula (B. Corone. 203.)

Corporations.
Note, 1. E. 4. 7. Mark. accord.
that the Justices of the common bench accords in case of a corporation, that
known by the one and the other, in a suite by a name known, is no plea for the
plaintiff, 21. H. 6. 4. by Newton.
for he ought to acknowledge his proper name. But if the defendant be named by
the plaintiff by a name known, See 20. H 6. 29.
though the defendant be corporate, it suffices. Yet Quaere; if there be not a
diversity betwixt an action real, and an action personal. 25. H. 8. B.
Corporations. 82.

By Fitz. ^f the Abbot and Covent sell all the lands and the Abbey, See 10. H 8.
10. See Coke lib.
yet the Corporation remains Quaere by B. of what he shall be Abbot, for there
is no church nor monastery. And by him Quaere if the Abbot die, if they S. the
Covent, may choose another, the house being dissolved 32. H. 8. B, Corporations.
78. See Tit Extinguishment.

The King makes a Duke or Earl, See 2. H. 7. 13. by Keble.
and gives to him 20. l. of land, or the like, by the same name, so that the
creation and the grant, is all by one and the same patent, yet it is good. And
the same Law of making a corporation and giving to them land by the same
patent, and name. 2. E. 6. B. Corporations. 89.

Costs.
Note, 9 H. 6. 32 by Newton. 27. H. 6. 1^.
by Spilman Justice, that at common Law, a man shall recover costs in a Quare
impedit: but otherwise, after the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 5. because the
Statute gives great damages in a Quare impedit. 22. H. 8. B. costs. 25.

Note, T. 4. M. 1 accord.
where an action penal is given by Statute, to recover a great sum by action
of Debt for engrossing, or the like, there the Plaintiff shall not recover
costs nor damages in this action of Debt 35. H. 8. B. Damages 200. costs 32.

It Was said, 23 H. 8. c. 15. Rast. dam. 6.
That if a Lessor brings Debt against his Lessee for years, for Rent, and the
Plaintiff is nonsuit, or if the inquest pass against him, he shall render costs
to the Defendant by the Stat. for a Lease for years rendering rent, is a
contract. 2. M. 1. B. costs 23.

Covenant.
Where an assignee shall be charged with the Covenant of his Grantor. See Tit.
Assignee.

Plea of Covenants perform generally, without showing how, is no good plea, See
Tit. conditions.

It Is said by the Justices, That a Writ of Covenant lies upon an Indenture,
Sta^. 1. 8.
without this word Covenant and grant for him, his heirs and executors. 1 M. 1.
B. covenant 38. the end.

Coverture.
Note, 19 H. 8. 19. See Coke l. 19. Mary Portingtoes case.
that a Statute Staple, nor Deed enrolled, shall not be accepted of a Fem
Covert, by the Common Law: contrary, by the custom in London of a Deed
enrolled; for this shall bind in London as a Fine at Common law, ^9 H. 8. See
30. H. 8. Tit Fines.
(B. coverture 59. 76. the end.)

Nor a Fine, Statute, nor Deed enrolled, shall not be suffered by an Infant.
32. H. 8. B. coverture 59. the end.

Count.
Precipe quod reddat against Tenant for life, who prays in aid of him in
reversion, who appears gratis, and joins in aid; and the Demandant counts de
Nono against the Tenant, and the Prayee, and they vouch the common Voucher, and
suffer recovery for assurance. And yet it is said, That the Priee shall not have
Oyer, but of the Count. cusus 22. H. 7. B. count 87.

Court Baron.
It Was said that the Lord of a Manor cannot hold Court, See 33. H 8. Tit.
Manor.
nor do justice without two Suitors: and if they die, or if that there be but
one suitor, the manor is determined; for it is not a Manor without Suitors. 23.
H. 8. B. Court baron 22. the end.

If an understeward holds a Court Baron, and grants Copy-holds to the Tenants
by Copy of Court Roll, without authority of the Lord, or high Steward this is a
good grant; for in plena curia Contrary if he does it out of Court, without
such authority. Yet the high Steward may demise customary land by copy out of
Court by some. Quaere thereof by B. if he has not a special authority from the
Lord to demise. 2. E. 6. B. Court baron 22. Tenant by copy, 26.

Customs.
Information in the Exchequer against a Merchant for lading Wine in a strange
Ship; the Defendant pleads the license of the King made to I. S. to do it,
which I. S. had granted his authority thereof to the Defendant and quod habetur
consuetudo inter mercatores per totam Angliam: that one may assign such a
license over to another, and that the assignee shall enjoy it, etc. to which
it was demurred in law: and it was agreed for law, That a man cannot prescribe a
custom per totam Angliam: for if it be per totam Angliam, this is the Common
law, and not a Custom: contrary, if the custom had been pleaded to be in such a
City or County, as Gavelkinde, Borrow-English, Glocest. Fee, and the like, 35.
H. 8. B. Customs 59.

Damages.
NOte in Trespass local, 19 H. 6. 10. 27. H 8. 2. contra. 3. M 1. See tit.
Abridgment.
That upon an inquest of Office to enquire of Damages, the Court may abridge,
or increase them. But otherwise upon the Principal, S. upon issue tried
betwixt party and party, 34 H. 6. 12. by Moyle.
(but there it may increase costs.) For the party is at his attaint: but upon
an inquest of Office he cannot have an attaint, 34. H. 8. B. damages 144. See
Tit. costs.

Default.
If a woman be received in default of her Husband, 22 H. 6. 14. per. ^ur.
and after she makes default, judgment shall be given upon default of the
husband; and no mention shall be made of the receipt. Time H. 8. B. default 85.

Demurrer.
Inquisition found that I. S. held certain land of the King, See Tit. Livery.
ut de honor suo Gloucester, which is not in Capite, upon which process issued
against W. S. who had intruded, etc. and to sue Livery: and because that this
Tenure is not in capite, and therefore Livery not due; the party demurred upon
the record; for it is no cause of Livery. And where a man declares upon a
Statute, and recites it otherwise then it is, or pleads it otherwise then it is,
See 33 H* 8. Tit. Parliam.
the other may demur upon it; for no such Law if it be misrecited. 32. H. 8. B.
Demurrer in Law 25.

Denizen. See Tit. Alien
Note, for Law, That where an Alien born comes into England, and brings his son
with who was born beyond Sea, See Tit. Restitution. and Coke upon Lit. the
beginning.
and is an Alien as his Father is, there the King by his Letters pattents
cannot make the son Heir to his Father, nor to any other: for he cannot alter
his law by his letters Pattents, nor otherwise, but by Parliament; for he
cannot disinherit the right heir, nor disappoint the Lord of his escheat: and
the son of an Alien, which son is born in England, he is English, and not an
Alien, 36. H. 8. B. Denizen 9.

Deputy.
It Is said that a Deputation of an Office which lies in grant, ought to be by
Deed, and not by word, 28. H. 8. B. Deputy 17.

Detinue.
By Shelley and others, 27 H. 8. 13. cont. by Fitz.
if a man meddle with goods, as by trover of them, he shall be thereof charged,
though that he deliver them over before action brought, 32. H. 8. B. Detinue de
biens 1. The end.

Debt.
Where Debt lies, and where a Scire facias? See Tit. Age.

Debt upon Indentures of Covenants: where the Defendant had Covenanted to do
many things, and the Plaintiff the like, to do many other things, ad quas
quidem conventiones per implendam uterque obligatur alteri in one hundred
pound, and the one breaks Covenant, by which the other brings Debt, and the
Defendant pleads payment of ten pound to D. which was all to which he was
bound: Curia.
judgment if action, and no plea per curiam, because he did not show thereof a
Deed, 45 E. 3. 5 Chetle accord.
where the Plaintiff declared upon the Indenture, which is a Deed, And yet
otherwise in pleading of payment of Rent reserved upon a Lease for years, made
by Indentures: For there he may levy it by distress, and therefore an averment
may come in ure.

But otherwise where all rises by specialty, where it lies in payment. 25. H.
8. B. Debt 173.

Debt upon an obligation with Condition, B. debt 126. the end accord.
where the condition is not broken, by which he is barred, he shall never sue
this obligation again: for once barred est pro imperpetuo, 29. H. 8. B. Debt
174.

Administrator of a Lord brings an action of Debt for relief, See Coke l. and
his Lit.
which fell tempore intestati, and the Defendant pleaded in Bar, and traversed
the Tenure, and so at issue.

And therefore B. seems that the action lies clearly for him: for the Defend.
did not demur: 9 H. 61. 13. by Rolfe.
so if it be brought by an Executor of the Lord for relief due to the Testitor,
Rot. 5^9: in the Common Bench. 32. H. 8. B. debt 193. Relief 11. the ends.

Devise.
Not, The same case 34 H. 8. at S. Albons
that a Fem Covert with assent and will of her husband, may make her Testament,
and devise the goods of her Husband, yet if the Husband prohibit the probat of
the Testament of the Wife after her death, then all is void: For the husband
may countermand it: B. devise 34. the end. Testament 21. the end.

And a Devise by the husband to his Wife is good, Lit. 37. N. B. 86.
though they are one and the same person in the Law; for the devise takes not
effect till after the death of the husband, and then they are not one person,
24. H. 8. B Devise 34:

It Was agreed by all, 13 H. 7. 17. by Fineux. 3. M. 1. com. 158
that if a man wills that I. S. shall have in his Land in date after the death
of his Wife, and dies, now the wife of the Devisor by these words shall have
the Land for her life, by reason of the intent of the Will. 29. H. 8. B devise
48.

Note, ^ H. 7. 10 D. S. 21.
That in London a man may Devise by Testament to a common person, though the
Testament be not enrolled. but if he Devises in Mortmain he ought to be a
Citizen, See 45 E. 3. 26.
and a Freeman resident: and the Testament o^ght to be enrolled at the next
Hustings. 30. H. 8. B. devise 28.

A man Devises to two and heredibus eorum, and dies; and after one of the
Devisees dies, and the other survives, he shall not have the entire by
Survivor, but only a moytie; for this was the intent of the Devisor: by Audley
Chancellor of England, B. devise 29. and by B. there the end. Perk. 106. G.
If one devise to another in feodo simplic^, the devisee has a Fee simple. 30.
H. 8.

A man wills that his land Devisable shall be sold by his Executors, and makes
four Executors, and dies, all the Executors ought to sell, See Coke upon Lit.
for the trust is put jointly in them. Quaere, for B. seems, That if one or two
die, that the three or two which survive, may sell; for there is the plural
number, Executors: and death is the act of God (B. Devise 31.) and by him where
such will is made, and some of the Executors refuse, and the other prove the
Testament, 21 H. 8. c. 4. Rast. Probat. of Test. 3
those, or he which proves the Testament may sell by the Statute, (B. devise
29. 31.) where it is expressed that it was doubted at Common Law, if the sale by
one executor were good, or not (B. Devise 31.)

And by some, See Coke upon Lit
where a man wills that the Land shall be sold post mortem I. S. by his
Executors, and makes four Executors, and dies, and after two of the Executors
dies, and after I. S. dies, there the two Executors that survive may sell, for
the time is not com til now, 30. H. 8. B. Devise 31.

It Was said that Baldwin, Shelley, and Montague, Justices, determined for Law,
That where a man has Feoffees to his use before the Statute of uses made 27.
H. 8. and after the same Statute; and also after the Statute of 32. H. 8. of
Wills, he wills that his Feoffees shall make an estate to W. N. and his heirs
of his body, and dies, that this is a good Will and devise ratione intentionis,
etc. 38. H. 8. B. Devise 48. the end.

If a man devises his land to be sold by his Executors, See Coke upon Lit and
Tit. Mortmain.
and dies, the heir enters, and after is deseised, yet the Executors may sell,
and the Vendee may enter, B. Devise 36. Enter congeable. 134. the same Law if
the heir suffer a Recovery or levies a Fine. And the same law by some, where a
man disseises the heir, and dies seized, and his heir enters, the Executors
shall sell, and by the vendee may enter; for he has no right, nor no action is
given to him: for he has but a Title of entry by the sale, and therefore he
may enter, for otherwise he has not any remedy, by Hales Justice 1. E. 6. B.
Devise 36.

Agreed for good Law, See 2. E. 6. after. and Tit. Chattels.
that the occupation of a Chattel may be devised by way of Remainder, but if
the thing it self were devised to use, the Remainder is void; for a gift or
devise of a Chattel for an hour, is for ever; and the donee, or devisee may
give, sell, and dispose it, and the remainder depending upon it, is void, Time
H. 8. B, Devise 13. the middle. See before and T^t chat*
Where a man devises that W. O. shall have the occupation of his plate for term
of his life, and if he dies, that it shall remain to I. S. this is a good
remainder: For the first has but the occupation, and the other after him shall
have the property, 2. E. 6. B. Devise 13. the end. Note if a man has issue 3.
sons, and devises his Lands: S. one part to the two of his Sons in Tail, and
another part to the third son in Tail, and that none of them sell any part, but
that every one shall be heir to the other, and dies, that in this case if one
dies without issue his part shall not revert to the eldest son; but shall
remain to the other son: for these words (That every one shall be heir to the
other) implies a Remainder; because that it is a Will, which shall be intended and
adjudged according to the intent of the Devisor. 7. E. 6. B. devise 38. Done 44.

A man Devises his Land to another, 19 H. 8, 9 by Norwich. Fitz. and More See
Coke upon Lit.
for to give, sell, or to do with it at his pleasure; this is a Fee-simple: for
his intent shall be taken to give a Fee-simple. 7. E. 6. B. Devise 38.

Note, by Bromley Chief Justice, and others; where a man Devises his land to a
stranger for Term of years, the Remainder to his son in Fee, and dies; the son
may waive the Devise, and claim by descent, and yet he shall not avoid the
Term: No more then where a man Leases for years, and dies, the Lease is good:
and yet the dying seized is good also to toll the entry, B. devise 41. And B.
seems where the Father devises to his son and heir in Fee, that the heir may
waive the Devise, and take himself to the descent, (^. Descent 4.) Contrary,
where the Father Devises to his son in Tail, the remainder to a stranger in
Fee, there the Heir shall not claim in Fee, nor waive the Devise, for the loss
and prejudice of him in remainder in Fee. 2. M. 1. B. Devise 41.

Tenant in Tail of Land Devisable, discontinues in Fee, and retakes in Fee, and
Devises to a stranger in Fee, and dies, the issue in Tail is remitted; for
nothing is descended to him by reason of the Devise, which Tolls the descent,
except that the Devisee waives it. 4. M. 1. B. Devise 49. Remitter 52.

Divorce.
What divorce may Bastardize the issue? what not? See Title Bastardie.

Note, for Law, That where the husband and wife are divorced where she is an
Inheritrix; yet mean acts executed shall not be reversed by the divorce; as
waste, receipt of Rents, taking of Ward, presentment to a Benefice, gift of
goods of the wife, otherwise of inheritance, as if the husband had
discontinued, or charged the land of his wife, cui ante Divorcium lies. The
same of a release of the husband, or Manumission of villains, See Coke upon Lit.
or the like. And if the husband and wife purchase jointly, and are disseised,
the husband releases, and after are divorced, the wife shall have the Moytie,
though there were not Moyties before the divorce; for the divorce converts it
into Moyties. 32. H. 8. B. Deraignment 18.

Descent.
If Land be given for Term of life, 38. H. 8. B. Discents 59. accord. vide infra
the Remainder to the right heirs of W. N. which W. N. is attainted of Felony,
and dies, and after the Tenant for life dies, the Remainder shall not take
effect, nor none shall have the Land; for he has not heir ratione attincturae.
And though all be a name of purchase, yet none can take it, but he which is
heir, (B. Descent 59. Done 42.) And where Land in Gavelkinde is given to one
for life, or in tail, the Remainder to the right heirs of W. N. who has issue
4. sons and dies, and after the Tenant for life, or the Donee dies, the eldest
son shall have the land, for he is right heir at Common Law, and this is a name
of purchase, which shall be ordered by the Common Law.

But otherwise of discents to heirs in Gavil kind, See 26. H 8. 4.
for then it shall go to all the sons. 37. H. 8. B. Descent, and Done. 42.
Nosme. 6. B. Done. 61.


Note, See 32. H 8. Tit. Livery.
that Sir John Hussy Knight, enfeoffed certain persons in fee to the use of
Anne his wife, for term of her life, and after to the use of the heirs males
of his body, and for default of such issue, to the use of the heirs males of
the body of Sir William Hussy his father, and for default of such issue, to
the use of his right heirs, and after had issue William Hussy the elder; and
after Sir John was attainted of Treason. 29. H. 8. and put to execution, and
after Anne died, and the said William Hussy the son prayed an Ouster l'main of
the King. And by Whorewood the Kings Attorney he shall have it, for this name
heirs males of the body, See Coke upon Litt.
is but a name of purchase, and Sir W. H. shall not have it as heir to Sir
John, but as purchaser. (B. Nosme. 1. Livery 1. Descent. 1.) As if land is
given to a man and his heirs males of his body, and he has issue 2 sons, the
eldest has issue a daughter, and the father, and the eldest son dies, the
younger brother shall have the land, and yet he is not heir to his father. And
the same Law where land is given to a man, Litt. 5.
and to his heirs females of his body, and he has a son and daughter, Litt.
169 3. E.
and dies, the daughter shall have the land, and not the son. (B. Nosme. 1.
40.) Com. 237. c. 13 Rast*
And so where Tenant in tail is attainted of Treason before the Statute of 26.
H. 8. his son shall have the land, Treason 12. W. 2. c. 1.
for he does not claim only as heir, but by the Statute and per formam doni
(B. Nosme. 1.) Yet some were of a contrary opinion, and took a Diversity, 9. H
6. 24. by Ellerker.
where the gift is to the father himself, and where it is to the heirs of his
body by remainder (B. Nosme. 1. and 40.) See Coke upon Litt.
And therefore in 9. H. 6. if lands are given for term of life, the remainder
to the heirs females of the body of I. S. who is dead, and has issue a son
and daughter, and after the Tenant for life dies, the daughter shall not have
the land, for she is not heir: for by Hare Master of the Rolls an ancient
apprentice, there is a difference betwixt a gift in possession to a man and his
heirs females, etc. and a gift to a stranger, the remainder to the heirs
females of another, for there he ought to be heir indeed when the remainder
falls, or otherwise the rem' is void for ever. (B. Done. 61.) for though that
the case holds place in the two cases put by Whorewood, this is because that
the gift was once vested which was in the father, and therefore good law there,
otherwise in the principal case, where the rem'. is not vested. Yet by some
the opinion of Whorewood is the better, for where land is given to a man and
his wife for term of life, the rem' to the heirs males of the body of the man,
this remainder cannot be vested in the life of the wife, for it is not a tail in
the man, by reason of the estate of the wife; yet, if he has issue 2 sons, and
the eldest has issue a daughter and dies, the father and mother dies, the
younger son shall have the land, as heir male, and yet he is not heir indeed;
The same Law, if such gift were, the rem' to the heirs females of the body of
the man, who has a son and daughter and dies, the daughter shall have the land
though she is not heir; The same Law where land is given to W. N. for life, the
remainder to I. S. for life, the remainder to the heirs males of the body of
the said W. N. who has 2 sons, the eldest has issue a daughter and dies, W.
N. and I. S. die, the younger son shall have the land as heir male, yet he is
not heir indeed, See before. B. Nosme 1. Whorwood. 35 H. 8.
but his Niece is heir to his father; for it is not matter of the first vesting,
nor of the remainder, for where the first estate for term of life is executed,
the remainder over ut supra, the remainder may depend in abeyance quousque,
etc. ut supra. But otherwise of a remainder to the right heirs, for none can
have that, but he which shall be heir indeed. (B. Nosme. 40.) and therefore
it was agreed, that the 2 remainders to the right heirs of Sir John Hussy was
forfeited by the attainder. 37. H. 8. B Nosme.

If land discends to the daughter within age, and after she is disseised, the
disseisor dies and his heir enters, and after a son is born, he born shall avoid
the descent, for he claims not as heir to his sister, nor was he in esse at the
time of the descent. Lecture. B. Descent. 40.

Discontinuance of Possession.
Recovery against Tenant in tail, See Tit. Assurances, and. Recovery in value.
the reversion or remainder in the King in fee, shall bind the Tenant in tail,
and the issue in tail, but not the King. But now by the Statute it shall not
bind the issue in tail, but that he may enter. 32. H. 8. B. Discontinuance of
possession. 32.

Note, The like was agreed 37 H. 8. B. Patents 101. See Time H. 8. Tit. Patents.
that it was agreed in the case betwixt the King and Anthony Lee Knight, if the
King Tenant in tail of the gift of another makes a lease for years, or for
life, and has issue and dies, the issue may make another grant without
reciting them; for they are void by the death of the King Tenant in tail, who
granted, and the heir of the King shall avoid it, so that this shall not bind
but during the life of the grantor, for a grant without warranty or livery, is
no discontinuance, and the King upon his grant does not make livery. And also
every discontinuance is a wrong, which the King cannot do; the same law if he
had granted in fee, 4 ECom. 250. 2. 1. B. Tail 39. and 4. ECom M 234.
it is no discontinuance; (B. Patents. 101. Discontinuance of Possession. 35.
Tail. 39. Leases 61.) And so see that the King may be Tenant in tail, for when
a man gives to the King in tail, he cannot have a greater estate then the donor
will depart with to him. 38. H. 8. B. Tail. 39.

Release no Discontinuance. See Tit. Releases. Discontinuance of Process.
Note, that a Discontinuance puts the party to a new original, but where the
Parol is without day, this may be revived by a re-summons or re-attachment, for
the original remains. Regulae. B. Discontinuance of process. 43.

Dismes, Tithes.
It Was said that if a Parson demise his Glebe to a lay man, there he shall pay
Tithes; contrary of the Parson himself, that reserves them in his proper hands.
And that land first discharged of Tithes, shall be ever discharged of them. Yet
if he which has purchased a Manor and Rectory, which is discharged of Tithes,
Leases part of his demeanes, the lessor shall have Tithes of that, because that
he has the Parsonage. 32. H. 8. B Dismes 17.

Disseisor.
It Was said for Law, if A. leases the land of I. N. to me for years, T. 25. H.
8. accord Fitz. 179 G.
rendering rent, the lessee enters, and pays the rent to the lessor, the lessor
is a disseisor, See Coke upon Litt.
for countervails a commandment to enter, and he which commands is a disseisor,
which note by his void lease. 23. H. 8. B. Disseis'* 77.

Distress.
Where land shall be charged with 2 distresses by Dower of part, and so of
partition. See Tit. Avowry. See 4. E. 6. Com. 68 by Mountague, and Coke upon
Litt.


Note, for Law, that he which distrains beasts may put them into a close house,
if he will feed them; for the distress in pound overt, is but to the intent,
that the owner may feed them. 33. H. 8. B. Distress. 66.

It Was agreed for Law by the Justices, that if a man distrain without cause, the
owner may make rescous, but if he impounds them, the owner cannnot justify the
breaking of the pound, and taking them out, for they are in Custodia Legis. 4.
E 6 B. Distress 74. Rescous. 12. the end.

Done, Gift.
Devisee for life of a Chattell, the remainder over, See Tit. Grants.
he for life gives the Chattell, whether this shall bar the remainder. See
Tit. Chattells.

It Is said for Law, that if a man gives omnia terras and tenementa sua in D by
this leases for years do not pass, for these words lands and tenements shall be
intended free hold at least. 37. H. 8. B. Done. 41.

The difference betwixt a gift in Remainder, Heredibus masculis de corpore and
rectis Heredibus. See Tit. Descent.

It Was granted by Shelly Justice, See Tit. Prerogative. 37. H 6 10. by Davers
26. H. 8. 8. cont.
and others, that if the King give a Chattell without deed, and the donee takes
it by his commandment, it is good. 2. E. 6. B. Done. 16. the middle.

If a man gives or grants omnia bona sua, leases for years, nor award, shall
not pass, for they are Chattels reals. And B. seems that a grant of Prox'
present. Ecclesiae unica vice is a Chattell, and non bona, for bona are goods
moveable, living and dead, but not Chattels. 4. E. 6. B. Grants. 51. Done. 43:

Dower.
A woman shall not be endowed of a rent reserved upon a lease of her husband
for term of life, 7. H. 6. 3. by Jane Perk. 68. See Coke upon Lit. Dower. Perk.
67. Perk. 69.
for the rent is not an inheritance, and it is determinable upon the death of the
Lessee, and yet the heir shall have it, for it is incident to the reversion. And
where a man seized in fee, leases for years rendering rent, and afterward takes
wife and dies, the wife shall have dower of the land, but shall not have
execution during the term of years, for elder title, etc. and she cannot be
endowed of the rent for the cause aforesaid. 1. E. 6. B: Dower: 89.

Note, by the Justices, by the Statute where a man makes his wife joint
purchaser with him after the coverture, 27. H. 8. c. 10. See Vernons c. Coke. l.
of any estate of freehold, except it be to him and his wife, and their heirs
in see simple, this is bar of Dower, if she agree to the jointure post mortem
viri, otherwise of fee simple, for such jointure is not spoken in the Statute.
Nor a devise of land by the husband to the wife by testament, is no bar to
Dower, for this is a benevolence, and not a jointure. 6. E. 6. B. Dower* 69*

Dum non fuit compos mentis
Note, See Coke Beverlies c. lib.
that if a Judge or Justice be of non sane memory, yet the Fines, Judgments,
and other records which are before him, shall be good. But otherwise of the gift
of an office or the like by him; for this is matter in fact, and the others are
matters of record; for matters in fact may be avoided by non sane memory,
otherwise of matter of record. 1. M. 1. B. Dum non fuit compos mentis. 7.

Ejectione Custod.
It Was said that a man shall have a Writ de Ejectione custody of a rent, and
this before seisin of it; for seisin in Law shall be thereof adjudged, 14. H.
8. 23. by Brudnel.
by reason that he cannot receive it before the rent day. Yet otherwise of
land, for there he may enter* 23* H* 8* B. Quare ejecit infra terminum. 5.

Enquest.
Note, See Tit. Trial.
betwixt the King and the Bishop of Rochester for Treason, the Bishop shall not
have Knights in his Jury* where Knights ought to be returned, when a Peer of
the Realm, as a Bishop, and the like, is party* yet quaere, if it were
challenged. 27. H. 8. B. Enquest. 100.

It Was holden in the common Bench by the Prothonatories, if a protection be cast
at the day of Nisi prius, 35. H. 6. 59. Moil accord.
and the Justices take the Jury de been esse, and at the day in bank, the
protection is allowed, now though the first ^aking is void, yet the Inquest
shall not be recharged by resummons, for when the Inquest is once sworn, and
give verdict, they shall never be sworn again upon this issue. 2. M. 1. B.
Enquest 86.

Enter congeable: lawful Entry
Tenant for term of life aliens to B. to have to him and his heirs for term of
life, See 21. H. 8. 1. Fitz. and Brook. accord. 12. H. 8. 7. N. B. 124. 4. H.
7. 2. 14. H. 7. 6.
of Tenant for term of life, this is no forfeiture, for all is but the
limitation of the estate. See Coke. l. 23. H. 8. 39. 30. H. 8. 143. book at
large. 1. H. 7. 22. 10. H. 7. 20. by Keble 25. H. 8. 70.
B. Forfeiture of lands. 87.) And if Tenant for term of life suffers a
recovery, he in reversion cannot enter, but is put to his Writ of Entry, ad
terminum qui preteriit, or Writ of Right, and shall falsify the recovery in
it, if he has cause. (And if he will have it sure, the Tenant for life ought
to pray in aid of him in reversion, and if he joins in aid, and both vouch
over, then well upon recovery had, etc. as betwixt Corbet and Clifford in the
County of Buck' this year.) But if Tenant for life be impleaded, and prays in
aid of a stranger, he in Reversion may enter, for this is a forfeiture. But if
he does not enter till the other has recovered, then he cannot enter, but is
put to his writ of Entry, ad terminum qui preteriit, vel ingres. ad communem
legem, and shall falsify the recovery there. 24. H. 8. B. Entrecongeable. 115.
Fauxifier. 44. Forfeiture of Lands. 87. the end.

Cestuy que use in tail suffers a recovery against him upon a faint title
before the Statute of Uses, See 20. H. 8. after. See Coke upon Litt.
and dies, the Feoffees cannot falsify it in an assise by way of entry, but
shall have a writ of entry, ad terminum qui preteriit, or a writ of right, and
shall falsify it by this action. B. Enter congeable. 123. Fauxifier. 49.) And
if he Leuies a fine with proclamation, and dies, if a stranger of his own head
enters in name of the Feoffees, or to their use within the 5 years, this shall
avoid the ^ine though the Feoffees did not command him; for by this the
freehold is in them till they disagree, or till another enters. 31. H, 8. B.
Enter congeable. 123. the end.

It Was doubted, See 29. H 8. 111. the book at large. and antea. See Coke upon
Litt. 19. H. 8. 13. See Fines levies. W. ^ cap. 1.
if a recovery had against cestuy que use in tail, shall bind the heir in
tail. But by Hales Just. by such recovery the entry of the Feoffees seized to
the use of the estate tail is taken away, but after the death cestuy que use,
who suffered the recovery, the Feoffees may have a writ of right, or writ of
entry, ad terminum qui preteriit in the post, or the like. And by some, there
is no use in tail, but it is a fee simple conditional at the common Law, as it was
of a tail before the Statute of W. 2. And this Statute makes not mention but of
gifts in tail, which is tails in possession. And therefore quaere, if the tail
in use cannot be taken by the equity of it, yet it was doubted if the issues and
the Feoffees shall be bound after the death of cestuy que use, 1. R. 3. cap. 5.
See before. 32. H. 8. cap. 36.
who suffered the recovery, by reason of those words in the Statute of 1. R. 3.
which wills that the recovery shall be good against the vendor, and his heirs,
claiming only as heir, and against all others, claiming only to the use of the
vendor and his heirs, and this is intended by some of a fee simple, and in the
case before the issue in tail, claims as heir in tail in use. (B. Feoffements to
uses. 56. the middle.) Yet see the Statute of 32. H. 8. that a Fine with
proclamation levied, or to be levied by Tenant in tail in possession,
reversion, remainder, or in use, after proclamation had, shall bind those
Tenants of those tails and their heir for ever. And see that the same Statute
is as well pro temporibus preteritis, quam futuris. 30. H. 8. B. Feoffements to
uses. 57. the end.

G. T. Knight seized in tail to him and the heirs males of his body,
discontinues, and retakes to him and E. his wife, and to the heirs of their
two bodies, and had issue, T. and W. and died, The like case betwixt Villiers
and Beamont was adjudged in the Common bench. T 4. M. 1. 4 E. 6. Com 42* 11. H.
7. 20. Rast Discontinuance of process. 1.
and after E. his wife survived, and T. had issue E. nuptam T. W. and died, and
after W. by covin of E. his mother, Tenant in jointure, brings a Formedon upon
the elder tail against his mother, and she appeared the first day, and W.
recovered by Nihil dicit, and T. W. and E. his wife heir to G. enters by the
Statute of 11. H. 7. and the entry adjudged lawful by the same Statute, which
wills such discontinuances, alienation, warranties, and recoveries shall be
void (B. Enter congeable 140. Judgment. 153.) And it need not to say that the
recovery was executed, for because it was void, it shall never be executed. And E.
the heir averred that he is the same person to whom the reversion appertained,
and showed not how heir to it, and yet good by Molineux, and Hales Justices,
contra Brown and Mountague chief Justice of the Common Bench. But all agreed
that it was a recovery by covin, notwithstanding it was upon a true title. And
good, notwithstanding he did not show cause of covin. 32. H. 8. B. Enter
congeable. 140. Collusion. 47.

Agreed for Law, that if land escheat to the King, which is in lease for years,
or charged with a rent charge, and office is found for the King of the escheat
(the lease or grant not found in the office) the lessee cannot enter, nor the
Grantee cannot distrian, but if the King grant the land over, the lessee may
enter, and the grantee may distraine. But a man which claims free hold in the
land, cannot enter without traverse of the office, by B. 33. H. 8. B. Enter
congeable. 124.

Note, 4. M. 1. Com. 175. 32. H. 8. cap. 34. Rast. Com. 1. 4. E. 6. Com. 34* 4.
M. 1. Com. 177. See Coke upon Litt.
that it is ruled in the Sergeants case, that where a common person leases lands
for years, rendering rent with a clause of reentry, and after grants the
reversion over, the tenant atturns, the grantee may reenter for condition
broken, by the Statute by express words. And the same Law of the grantees of
the King. E. 6. and all others heirs to King H. 8. by the equity of the said
Statute, which provides remedy for the patentees of the King. H. 8. And for
grantees of common persons. 4. M. 1. B^ Enter congeable. 139.

It Was said that where the interest of the King is certain and determined, the
party may enter, quaere by B. Time. H. B. Reseiser. 36. the end.

Error.
'Twas said in the Kings Bench, where a writ of Error bears test before the
first Judgment, and the Record is certified in the Bench, that it is good; and
yet the Writ says, quod si judiciu^ reddit. fit, tunc Record. and process.
habeatis, etc. 5 E: 6. B: Error.

Escape.
Debt upon an Escape, against the Sheriff, who said That before the Escape the
Prisoner was condemned in the said condemnation, and in Execution, ut in
narratione, in the time of a former Sheriff, who suffered him to Escape, and
after re-took and imprisoned him, and was removed, and this Defendant was made
Sheriff, and after suffered him to Escape; judgment is, Of this second Escape
you ought to have your Action: and a good Plea, 10 E. 4. 11 by Billing see
Cook lib. 3. Ridgways Case.
for he has confessed and avoided the Plaint; for when the Prisoner first
Escaped, and the first Sheriff re-took and imprisoned him: This second
Imprisonment is no Execution for the party, but the Party is put to his Action,
for the Escape against the first Sheriff, 5 E: 6. B: Escape 45.

Escheate.
Foundership cannot Escheate by death without Heir, nor be forfeited by
attaindor of Felony or Treason; for it is a thing annexed to the blood, which
cannot be divided, as 'twas said, after the augmentation Court took
commencement; for a man who is Heir to another, cannot make another to be Heir,
Time: H: 8. B: Corodies 5. the end.

Note, by Brown, Hales and Cook, Justices; if there be Lord and Tenant by
Fealty and Rent, the Tenant is disseised and dies without Heir, the Lord
accepts the Rent by the hands of the said disseisor, yet he may enter for the
Escheate, or have a Writ of Escheate, and the receipt of the Rent no bar;
Fitz. 144. C.
for the Disseisor is in by wrong: Otherwise if he had allowed for it in a
court of Record, Fitz. 144. N. accord see Cook upon Lit.
or had taken corporal service, as Homage, etc. So of acceptance of Rent by
the hands of the Heir of the Disseisor, or of his Feoffee, which are in by
Title, 7 E: 6. B: Escheate 18.

Essoign,
If the Tenant in a Praecipe quod redd: prays the vJew by Attorney; his
Attorney shall be Essoyned upon the vJew: But if he himself prays the vJew
in proper person; then per plures, none shall be Essoyned upon the vJew but the
Tenant himself; for after Process upon a Voucher, he himself shall be
Essoyned, and by consequence in like manner shall be upon the vJew. So of aid
prayer, 5 H. 7, 8, and 9.
And note, That granting of an Essoyn, whereon Essoyn lies not, is not error.
Contrary of denying of Essoyn where it lies, 33 H: 8. B: Essoine 116.

Estates.
The King gives Land to I: S: and heredibus masculis suis; Rast. 60. M 9. and
10 Eliz. Com. 335. Lit. 6. and Cook upon it. Rast. 60. 27 H. 8. 27
and 'twas adjudged by all the Justices in the Exchequer Camber, that the Grant
is void; because the King is deceived in his Grant; for it sounds in Fee
simple; whereas it seems the King intended but an estate tail, which is not so
expressed; and therefore now he is but Tenant at will. Otherwise in case of a
common person, 18 H: 8. B: Patents 104, Estates 84.

'Twas said for Law, 27 H. 8 29 cont sec 24 H 8 tit Enter congeable: and Cook
lib.
That if a Feoffment be made to W: N: during the life of I: S: these words
(during the life of I: S:) etc. shall be void; for they are contrary to a Fee.
Contrary of a Feoffment in Fee so long as Paul's Steeple shall stand, 21 H: 8.
B: Estates 50.

A man gives Land to two and heredibus, 22 E 4. 16 by Genney 4. E. 6 Com* 28.
20 H 6 36 by Poroing. See Cook lib. and his Li^. ^o. 8. b.
and does not say suis; This is no Fee-simple: And 'twas said that the reason
is, because that two are named in the Deed; and therefore it is uncertain to
which of them heredibus shall be referred. But if there were but one in the
Deed, then it shall be referred to the one only. But in a Devise 'twas said by
some, that the words before are a Fee-simple. Contrary in a Gift and Feoffment;
for the one shall be taken by intendment, the other not, 31 H: 8. B: Estates 4.

A man gives land to a Husband and Wife for term of their Lives, and diutius
eorum vivent. the remainer to the Heirs of their bodies, this is a tail
executed, by reason of the immediate remainer, notwithstanding the words of the
Statute, W^stm. 2. c. 1. Rast. Tail. 1.
quod voluntas Donatoris in omnibus observetur, by all the Justices, 35 H: 8.
B: Estates 78.

By opinion in the kings Bench, See 29 H. 8. Tit. Testament and Cook upon Lit.
etc Tit. Conscience.
If a man devises his Land to W: N: solvend ten pound to his Executors, and
dies, the Devisee has a Fee-simple, by reason of the payment, without words,
Heredibus, or in perpetuum, and this shall be intended the intent of the
Devisor: The same Law if a man sell his Land to W: N: for twenty pound, this
shall be intended a sale in Fee-simple, without words, Heirs, for Conscience
etc. and est equum and bonum, which is a ground in every Law, 4 Ed: 6. B.
Estates 78.

Estoppell.
If a man has Liberties, Rent, Common, or the like, by prescription, and after
takes a grant thereof of the King by Patent, or of another by Deed, this
determines his prescription by conclusion (B: Prescription. 102. Estoppell
210.) for Writing shall determine Contracts and matter in Fait, 29. H. 8. See
Tit. Contract.
33 H: 8. B: Prescrip. 102.

'Twas agreed that a stranger to a Fine or Recovery, 30 H. 6. 2. by Fortescue
accord See Cook upon Lit. Estoppell.
shall not plead it for Estoppell; contra, If he claim the same Land under
the Fine or Record, by those which were parties, or claims the same Estate, or
part of it, and that this estate continues, for then he is privy in the Per: 36
H: 8. B: Estoppell 216. the end.

If two joyn-Tenants are which hold of the King in chief, and the one releases
to the other in Fee, and after both respit Homage in the Exchequor; 33 H 6 7.
by Laken D. 8. 33.
by this, he which released has gained the moity by conclusion, as it shall be
where two join in suite of livery out of the hands of the King, where the one
has nothing, by the opinion of some: And the same of Partition by two, Lit.
12. see Cook 34 H. 6. 48. Danby accord. see 5 H 7. 19
where the one has nothing, 37 H: 8. B: Estoppell 218,

Note that a man which Leases by Deed poll for years, or by Parol, may avoid
this Lease to say, That he had nothing in the Land, tempore dimissionis:
Contrary, Upon a Lease by Indenture, 9 H. 6. 60. per Cur.
for this is an Estoppell 38 H: 8. B. Estoppell 8.

If a man Indicted of Extortion, or Trespass, puts himself upon the grace of
the King, and makes a Fine, and after the party sues him for it, by Bill or
Writ, and he pleades Not Guilty, he shall have the Plea, and the making the
Fine to the King shall not estop him; 9 H. 6. 60. by Babington.
for there the Entry is, quod petit se admitti per Finem, and does not confess
it precisely, and therefore no Estoppell: Yet B seems to make the Fine by
protestation that he is not guilty, and then it is all clear, See ^8 H. 8.
before.
Time: H: 8. Estoppell 82.

A man pleads a Pardon of the King, in the Exchequer, for alienation, without
License, where the Land is not holden of the King in capite: This is an
Estoppell, to him to say after that, He does not hold in capite, See Cook upon
Lit. Jo.
7 Ed: 6. B: Estoppell 222.

By Hales and Montague, If a man Leases to N: his own Land, by Deed intended;
the Indenture is no Estoppell, but during the Lease; and not after, Casus B:
Estoppell 221.

Estranger.
A: is bound to B: in a 100. l. and B: makes a Defesance to W: S: That if W: S:
pays 40. l. that the Obligation shall be void. This is worth nothing per
opinionem; because that A: that should plead it, is a Stranger to the Deed:
Lit. 82. 14 H. 8. 10. by Brudnell. Hussy accord. 22 E. 47.
But where two are bound to me, and I make a Defesance to one; this shall serve
the other to plead, if he can show it: as in Trespass against two, a release to
one shall serve the other, if he can show it, 34 H: 8. B: Estranger al fait 21.

Estray.
If a man takes Beasts as an Estray, Eliot accord. 12 H. 8. 10.
and keeps them three quarters of a year, and after they stray from him, and
another happens on them; the first Lord which kept them for three quarters,
cannot take them again, because that he had no property in them till he had
kept them a year and a day, and Proclamation passed in the two next Market
Towns, and two Market days, the one in the one Town, and the other in the
other; for the possession of the second Seizor is good against him who has no
property, 33 H: 8. B: Estray 11.

Executions.
Note, 11 H. 4. 34. by Thirning 6 E. 6. Com. 137. 2 H. 6. 9. cas. 6.
by Fitz: and the Court, If a man recover in a Writ of Annuity, he shall have a
Fierifacias of the Arrearages incurred within the year, and a Scire fac: after,
as soon as the Annuity is Arrear, and never a Writ of Annuity again; for it is
executory, and the same Law of an Action, and Judgment upon composition, which
is executory de tempore in tempus, and the like. And in every Scire fac: in
which he recovers after the first Judgment, he shall have execution of the
Arrearages within the year, by Fiere fac: for every one is founded upon the
Judgment, 23 H: 8. B: Executions 119. Scirefac: 213.

By the whole Court in the Common-Bench, If two are bound in an Obligation
conjunctim and divisim, the Obligee impleads the one, and has execution of his
body; and after impleads the other, and condemns him, he may have execution
against him also; for the taking of the body is a good execution, but it is no
satisfaction; 4 H. 7. 8. 45 E. 34 by Thorpe
and therefore he may take the other also. But if the one satisfy the
Plaintiff, he shall not have execution after; and therefore this Order, That
the Plaintiff upon an Obligation shall have but one execution, is intended such
execution which is a satisfaction, and where both are impleaded by one
original, by several Precipes, etc. 29 H: 8. B: Execution 132.

Scire fac: upon recovery of Debt and Damages; the Defendant said, that once
the Plaintiff sued a Capias ad satisfaciend. by which the Sheriff had took his
body, Judgment, etc. And there it is said, That a Capias ad satisfaciend. is
not of Record before the retorn of it; therefore no Plea: Yet B: seems the Plea
good by the taking of the Body, though no Writ be returned, 37 H: 8. B:
Executions 6.

Executors.
'Twas noted by Fitz: 6 E. 4. 1. 7 E. 4. 9. by Ch^ke.
and others, That in an Action of Debt against an Executor, 34 H: 6. upon an
Obligation of his Testators, who pleaded not his Deed, and found against him,
the Judgment by the Record was, That the Plaintiff should recover of the dead,
if he has any; and for that, the book at large, fol. 24. is reported further
in these words; and if he have not, then de bonis proprijs, which words are not
in the Record; 'Twas commanded by them to mend the Book; for it is contrary to
the Record, and so mis-reported, 23 H: 8. B: Executors 22.

A man makes two Executors, Moile and Ashton ^ccord. 39 H. 6. 45.
and dies; the one Executor makes an Executor, and the other survives, and dies
intestate; the Executor of the Executor shall not meddle; for the power of his
Testator was determined by his death, and by the survivor of the other; so that
now the Ordinary shall commit the Administration of the goods of the Executor
which survived, and de bonis non Administratis of the first Testator, 32 H: 8.
B: Executors 149.

A man makes A: and B: his Executors, 19 H 8 8. by Fitz. See Dyer. 19 H. 8.
and wills that B: shall not meddle during the life of A: and good; for he does
not restrain his entire power; for he may make one Executor of his goods in C:
and another Executor of his goods in D: and so he may divide the time ut supra,
32 H: 8. B: Executors 155.

A man has a Lease for years as Executor B: and after purchases the reversion
of the Land in fee, Hales and Whorewood accord. 2 E. B. Surr. 52. the end See
Cook upon Litt. Jo. See Tit. Extinguishment
the Lease is extinct. But yet the Lease shall be against the Executor assets
by Whorewood and Hales Justices. (B: Extinguishment 54. Leases 63. Surrender
52.) And if it shall be extinct, B: seems to be a devastavit ad ultim: 4 E: 6.
B: Extinguishment 57. the end.

Exposition.
The several exposition of infra terminum 10. annorum and infra terminum
predict: See Tit: Conditions.

Extinguishment.
If the Abbot and Covent give all their Lands and Possessions to another in
fee, See 32 H. 8. Tit. corporation.
yet the corporation remains by Fitz: Justice, 20 H: 8. B: Extinguishment 35.

Lord and Tenant; See 27 H. 8. Tit Parliament.
the Tenant is attainted of Treason by Act of Parliament, and to forfeit all
his Lands; and after he is pardoned, and restored, by another Parliament,
habend. sibi and heredibus, as if no such attainder, nor former Act had been.
Or if the Heir of him who was attainted, be restored by Parliament in such
form; now the Seigniory which was extinguished, is revived, and he shall hold
of the common person as before; and yet once the tenure was extinct by the
forfeiture of the Land to the King, 31 H: 8. B: Extinguishment 47. Revivings 8.
Tenures 70.

Lord and Tenant; See Tit. Apportionment. Lit. 48. 11 H. 7. 13. by Davers
accord. Perk. 16. C.
The Tenant holds by third three Acres of Land, the Tenant infeoffs the Lord in
fee, of one Acre; the Seigniory is extinct for the third part, and remains for
the other two parts; but if the Tenant had let to the Lord one Acre for years,
there the Seigniory is suspended in the whole, during the term; for the
Seigniory may be extinct in part, but not suspended in part, but for the
entire, 32 H: 8. B: Extinguishment 48.

Where a Condition shall not be apportioned, but extinct, See Tit: Conditions.

A man has a Lease for years as Executor B. and after purchases the reversion
of the Land in fee, 2 E. 6. B. Surr. 52. the end. See Tit. Executors and
Surrendor.
the Lease is extinct; but yet the Lease shall be against the Executor assets,
by Whorwood and Hales Justices. (B: Extinguishment 54. Leases 63. Surrender
52.) And if it shall be extinct, B: seems to be a devastavit ad ultimum,
Extinguishment 57 the end. But where he has it as Executor, and there is a
mean Lease in reversion for years, and he purchases the reversion in fee; the
first Lease remains by reason of the mean remainder (B: Leases 63.) And by
Hales, If a man Leases to another for ten years, and after Leases the same Land
to another for twenty years; the first Less^e purchases the reversion in fee;
yet the first Lease is not extinct, because that the second Lease, which is for
twenty years, is mean betwixt the first Lease and the Fee-simple, which is an
impediment of the extinguishment, 4 E: 6. Extinguishment 57.

Where an Action by Entry and Feoffment shall be extinguished, See Tit: Restor:
al primer action.

Faits, Deeds.
NOTE, 48 E. 3. per accord
If an Action be sued upon a Deed, bearing date at Cane in Normandy, 5 Dat:
apud Cane, etc. That the Plaintiff shall count that the Deed was made at Cane
in Com: See 34 H. 8. Tit. Action upon the Case. 21 E. 474 per Cur. see Cook
upon Lit. so.
Kanc: and good; for the place is not traversable (B: Faits 95. the end) And
also where it truth it was written in Cane, it is suable in England, where it
bears date at large, and at no place certain: But if it be (dat: apud Cane
in Normandy, etc.) quaere If the Action lies, etc. Time: H: 8.

Note, That 'twas agreed by the Justices, that this clause which comes after
these words, In cujus rei, etc. Sigillum apposui, etc. is not any part of the
Deed, though 'twere written before the sealing and delivery, 1 M: 1. B: Faits
72.

Faits inroll: Deeds enrolled.
Note, that a Deed of Husband and Wife shall not be enrolled in the common
Bench, See 32. H. 8. Tit. coverture. 7 E. 4. 5. by Lit.
except for the Husband only, and not for the Wife; by reason of coverture: Nor
she shall not be bound with her Husband in a Statute-Marchant, nor the like:
But if they make a Deed enrolled of Land in London, and acknowledge it before
the Recorder and an Alderman, and the Wife examined; See Tit. Fines, Levies.
this shall bind as a Fine at Common Law, by their custom, and not only as a
Deed, and it suffiseth without Livery of Seisin, 29 H: 8. B: Faits inroll: 14.
and 15.

A man infeoffs the King by Deed, and makes Livery; 12 H. 4 21. see 37 H 6. 10
by Davers. 4 Eliz Con. 213. and 242
this is worth nothing, for the King shall not take but by matter of record:
But if he inroll the Deed, then it is good to the King without Livery, for the
King takes not by Livery, 29 H: 8. B. Faits inroll: 16. Feoffments 69.

Note, 27 H. 8. ca. 16.
by the Justices, That where two joyn-Tenants are, the one aliens all his Lands
and Tenements in D: after the Statute of Inrollments, and before the Inrollment
the other joyn-Tenant dies, so that his moitie survives to the Vendor, and
after the Vendor, within the half year, inrolls the Deed; yet nothing passes
but the Moitie, for the Inrollment has relation to the making and delivery of
the Deed, so that it shall give nothing but that which was sold by it at the
time of delivery of the Deed: And by more Justices, Where a man sells his Land
by Deed Indented to one, and after he sells it by another Indenture to
another, and the last Deed is first Enrolled, and after the first Deed is
Enrolled, within the half year, there the first Vendee shall have the Land,
for it has relation to make it the Deed of the Vendor, and to pass the Land
ab deliberatione facti; for the Statute is, That a Freehold, nor use of it
shall not pass, nor change from one to another by bargain and sale only,
except it be by Deed Indented and Enrolled within the half year; Ergo, if it
be by Deed Indented and Enrolled within the half year it shall pass as the
use might pass at common Law, See Tit. Conscience.
by sale of the Land which was presently upon the sale, 6 E: 6. B: Faits
Inroll: 9.

Fauxifier, Falsefying.
Where he in reversion shall falsify a recovery had against Tenant for term of
life, where not, See Tit. Enter Congeable.

Where the Feoffees may falsify a recovery suffered by Cesty que use in tail;
where not, See Tit: Enter Congeable.

'Twas holden that an attaint shall go with the Land, as a Writ of Error
shall, Fitz 21. L.
Time: H: 8. B: Fauxifier 50. the end.

Faux Imprisonment, false Imprisonment.
It Is said, That a man, as Constable, cannot Arrest another for an Affray,
after that the affray is past, without Warrant: contrary, before the Affray,
and in the time of the Affray etc. And the same Law of a Justice of Peace, 38
H: 8. B: Faux Imprisonment 6. the end.

Faux Judgment, False Judgment.
Note, by Fitz: for clear Law, That in a Writ of falfe Judgment in nullo est
erratum is no Plea; for they join issue upon some matter in fait certain
alleged by the party, and shall be tried by the Country; for it is no Record,
contra, in Error, 23 H: 8. B: Faux Judgment 17.

Fealty.
Note, in the Chequer, That if Land descend to me, which is holden of I: S: by
homage, and I do to him homage; and after other Land descends to me by another
Ancestor, holden of him by homage, I shall do fealty, but not homage again;
for I became to him his man before. And if both the Tenements are holden of the
King by homage; he shall not respit both the homages in the Exchequer; but one
homage only, 24 H: 8. B: Fealty 8.

Note, in the Exchequer, That a Dean and Chapter, and other bodies politic,
shall not do homage; for this shall be done in person: And a Corporation
cannot appear in person, but by Attorney; and homage cannot be done by
Attorney, but only in person, 33 H: 8. B: Fealty 15.

Feoffments.
A man makes a Feoffment of a house cum pertinentiis, 9 E. 4 32. See 31 H 8.
Tit. Leases 6 and 7 E. 6 Com. 86. by Hal^s Just. 4 M. 1. Com. 171. 6 and 7 E.
6. Com. 85 3. M. 1. Com. 168 27 H 6 2.
nothing passes by these words cum pertin: but the Garden, the Curtilage, and
Close adjoining to the house, and upon which the house is built, and no other
Land, though other Land has been occupied with the house, 23 H: 8. B:
Feoffments 53.

Note, by Fitz james ch: Justice, Englefield Just: and diverse others, where a
Disseizor makes a Feoffment for maintenance, and takes the profits, the
Feoffment is void by the Stat: of 1 R: 2. ca: 9. as to a Stranger which shall
have an Action, 27 H 8. 23 by Fitz.
for he shall have it against the pernour of the profits; but it is not betwixt
the Feoffor and the Feoffee. And also a man who vouches by such Feoffment, one
of the Feoffees, the Demandant, shall counter-plead by the same Stat: 21 H 6.
Counter-plea of Voucher 3.
because the Feoffment was void. And B: seems that such Feoffment shall not be
a remitter in prejudice of a third person, 24 H: 8. B: Feoffments 19.

If a man makes a Feoffment to four, See Time. H. 8. after.
and the one of the four makes a letter of Attorney to I: N: for to take livery
for him and his companions, who does it accordingly; nothing passes, but to him
who made the Letter of Attorney only, 27 H: 8. B: Feoffments 67.

'Twas said for Law, That if a man Leases Land for ten years, and the same
Lessee lets it over to another for four years; the Lessor makes a Feoffment to
a Stranger by sufferance of the second Lessee; this is a good Feoffment without
Attornment of the first Lessee, 28 H: 8. B: Feoffments 68.

It Is said, Lit. 67. 21 E. 4. 22 by R^de accord.
That a Feoffment of a moity, is good, 31 H: 8. B: Feoffments to uses 19.

If a man makes a feofme^t of a house, ac omnia terras, tenemeta et
hereditame^ta eidem messuag: pertinen: aut cum eodem occupat: locat: aut
dimiss: existen: by this the Land used with the house shall pass, 32 H: 8. B:
Feoffments 53. the end. See 31 H. 8. Tit. Leases.


A man makes a Deed of Feoffment to another, and delivers the Deed to him in
the Land, or upon the Land; this is a good Feoffment by all the Justices in the
Common-Bench, 35 H: 8. B: Feoffments 74.

If a man be seized of one acre of Land in Fee, Accord Frow. 9 H. 7. 25. and 7
E. 4 20. 3. M. 1. Com. 154
and another is seized to his use in Fee of another acre, and he makes a
Feoffment of both acres, and Livery of the acre which he has in possession, by
this the acre in use passes not, though he made the Livery in the one in the
name of both, for this is not his acre, but the acre of the Feoffees, 1 R. 3.
ca. 4.
and the Stat: says that his feofment shall be good, but it is no Feoffment
except he makes Livery in the same Land: Otherwise if Livery were made in the
Land, in use, by reason of the Stat: 37 H: 8. B: Feoffments 77. Feoffments to
uses, 55.

If a Feoffment be made within the vJew, when this is pleaded; it is said that
express mention shall be made in the pleading, that the Land was within the
vJew, Time H: 8. B: Feoffments 57. the end.

Feoffment is good of the Land by Deed, by Livery of the Deed within the vJew,
so that the Feoffee enters accordingly: But if the Feoffor dies before the
Feoffee enters, then the Land is descended to the Heir of the Feoffor, and the
Feoffment shall not take effect, Time H: 8. B: Feoffments 72.

A man makes a Feoffment by Deed to twenty, 10 E. 4. 1. by Choke see 27 H. 8
before 40. E. 3. 41 by Finch 18 E 4. 12. by Collow and Towns.
and delivers the Deed and Seisin to one in the name of all, this is good to
all; but if he Infeoffs twenty without Deed, and delivers Seisin to one in the
name of all, this is no feofment to any but to him who takes the Livery, Time
H: 8. B: Feoffments 72.

Note, 1 R. 2 c 9. Rast. Feoffments 1. See 24 H. 8. before.
that by the Stat: of 1 R: 2. where a Disseizor makes a Feoffment, for
maintenance, and takes the profits; the Feoffment is void by the Stat: to all
intents, Lecture Whorwood 35 H: 8. B. Feoffments 19.

Feoffments to uses.
By Shelly Just: See the next sect. prope fine.
Where the Father Infeoffs his Son and Heir apparent, to the intent to defraud
the Lord of his Ward, this Feoffment was to the use of the Father, 33 H 6. 16.
by Prisot.
during his life, and he takes the profits during his life, and so see that
uses were in ancient times, 24 H: 8. B: Feoffments to uses 20. the end.

A man makes a Feoffment in Fee, See Cook upon Lit.
to four, to his use, and the Feoffees make a gift in tail without
consideration, to a stranger, who had not conusance of the first use, habend:
in tail, to the use of cestuy que use, and his Heirs; the tenant in tail
shall not be Seized to the first use, but to his own use, West. 2. ca. 1.
for the Stat: of Westminster: 2 cap: 1. wills, quod Voluntas Donatoris in omnibus
observetur; 27 H. 8. 10 by Montague. See Cook lib. 1. Chudleighs case
that a man ought to refer his Will to the Law, and not the Law to his Will:
Also none can be Seized to the use of another, but he which may execute an
Estate to cestuy que use, which shall be perfect in Law, which tenant in tail
cannot do; for if he executes an Estate, his Issue shall have a Formedon; And
the best opinion that an Abbot, Mayor and Commonalty, nor other Corporations
shall not be seized to a use, for their capacity is only to take to their own
use: And also if the Abbot execute an estate, the successor shall have a writ
of Entry sine assensu capituli: and those that are in the ^ost, Of the Escheat,
14. H 8 8. by Pollard: of the Recovery, 4 E. 6. Com 54. by Halles. 1 R. 3. ca.
5.
as by Escheate, Mortmain, Per^uisite of Villeine, Recovery, Dower by the
courtesy, and the like, are seized to their own use and to another use: And
also the Stat: of 1 R: 3. is, That all Gifts, Feoffments and Grants of cestuy
que use shall be good against all, etc. saving to all persons their rights and
interests in tail, as if this Stat: had not been made; and therefore Tenant in
tail shall not be seized to a use. And 'twas agreed by the Court, That the
words in the end of the Stat: See 29 H. 8. after. 14 H. 8. 8. by Br. Just.
Perk. 103. C.
of 1 R: 3. saving such right and interest to the Tenant in tail, etc. is taken
Tenant in tail in possession; and not Tenant in tail in use: for cestuy que use
in tail has no right nor interest. And also here there is a Tenure betwixt the
Donors and the Donees, Litt. 29. Perk. 103. D. see after.
which is a consideration that the Tenant in tail shall be seized to his own
use: And the same Law of Tenant for term of years, and Tenant for life, their
fealty is due; and where a rent is reserved, there, though a use be* expressed
to the use of the Donor, or Lessor; yet this is a consideration that the Donee*
or Lessee shall have it to his own use: See Dyer 5. M. fo. 155.
And the same Law where a man sells his Land for 20. l. by Indenture, and
executes an Estate to his own use; this is a void limitation of the use: for
the Law by the consideration of money, makes the Land to be in the Vendee. Et
opinio fuit, That a use was at Common Law before the Stat: Westminster. 3. ca. 2.
Rast. Tenure 4. 45 E. 3. 15 by Finch. Perk. 103. B.
of Quia emptores terrarum, but uses were not common before the same Stat: For
upon every Feofment before this Stat: there was a Tenure betwixt the Feoffors
and the Feoffee; which was consideration, that the Feoffee shall be seized to
his own use; but after this Stat: the Feoffee shall hold de capitali domino,
and there is no consideration betwixt the Feoffor and the Feoffee without money
paid, or other especial matter declared, for which the Feoffee shall be seized
to his own use: For where the Stat: Cap. 6. see before.
of Marlebr: is, that a Feofment by the father, Tenant in chivalry, made to his
son by covin, shall not toll the Lords Ward, etc. In these Cases the Feoffor
after such Feofment takes the profits of the Land all his life. See Cook lib.
And the same Law by Shelley of a Feofment made by a Woman to a Man to marry
her, the Woman takes ^he profits after the esponsalls: Quaere ^nde; for this is
an express consideration in it self. And by Norwich, If a man deliver money to
I: S: to buy land for him, and he buys it for himself, and to his own use,
this is to the use of the buyer, 20 H 6. 34 by Wangf.
and to the use of him who delivered the money; and there is no other remedy but
an action of deceit, 14 H: 8. B: Feofments to uses 40.

Note, if a Feofment be made to the use of W N, for term of his life, and after
to the use of I: S: and his Heirs, their cestuy que use in remainer or
reversion, may sell the remain or reversion in the life of W N, 10 El. Com. 350.
but he cannot make a Feoffment till after his ^eath, 25 H: 8. B: Froffments
to uses 44.

It Is holden that if the Feoffees seized to the use of an Estate tail, See
before Time. H. 8 and after 30 H. 8.
or other use, are impleaded, and suffer the common recovery against them upon
bargain, this shall bind the Feoffees and their Heirs, and cestuy que use and
his Heirs, where the buyer and recoveror has not conusance of the first use:
And by Fitz: it shall bind, though they had notice of the use; for the
Feoffees have the Feesimple: Et per plures, if cestuy que use in tail^ be
vouched in a recovery, and so the recovery passes, it shall bind the tait^ in
use s: 1 R. 3. ca. 5. Rast. Uses 4.
cestuy que use and his Heirs* and otherwise not; And this B seem to be by the
Stat: which excepts tenant in tail, which is intended tenant i^ tail in
possession, and not cestuy que use in tail, for cestuy que use in tai^^ is not
tenant in tail, 29 H: 8. B* Recovery in value, 20. Feoffments to uses, 56.

Feoffees in use make a lease for years rendering rent, See before
to another who has notice of the first use, yet the Lease shall be only to
the use of the Lessee himself: 19 H. 8. 1. accord.
And the same Law per plures though no rent be reserved: And if a man makes a
Feofment, and annexes a Schedule to the Deed containing the use, he cannot
change the use after; and so if he expresses the use in the Deed of Feofment,
but otherwise where he declares the use by words of his Will s: See 20 H. 7.
11.
I will that my Feoffees shall be seized to such a use, there he may change
this use, because by Will, etc. And that if a Feofment be made to the use of
the Feoffor in tail, and after he execute an estate to him in ^ee, the use of
the Estate tail is determined, 30 H: 8. B: Feofments to uses, 47.

If A: Covenants with B: That when A: shall be Enfeoffed, by B: of three acres
of Land in D: that then ^he said A and his Heirs, and all others seized of the
Land of the said in S: shall be thereof seized to the use of the said B: and
his Heirs, there if A: makes a Feofment of his Land in S: and after B: Enfeofs
A: of the said three acres in D: there the Feoffees of A: shall be seized to
the use of B: notwithstanding they had not notice of the use; for the Land is
and was ^ound with the use aforesaid, 14 H. 8 9. by Pollard
to whose hands soever it shall come; and it is not like where a Feoffe in use
sells the Land to one who had not notice of the first use; for in this first
Case the use had not being till the Feofment be made of the three acres, and
then the use does commence, 30 H: 8 B: Feoffments to uses 50.

'Twas doubted if a Recovery had against cestuy que use in tail, See 29 H. 8.
before.
shall bind the Heir in tail; But by Hales Just: By such Recovery the entry
of the Feoffees seized to the use of the Estate tail is taken away, but after
the death of cestuy que use who suffered the Recovery; the Feoffees may have a
writ of right, or writ of entry ad terminum qui preteriit in the post, or the
like: And by some there is no use in tail, but it is a fee-simple conditiona^
at common Law, as 'twas of the tail before the Stat: of W: 2. And this Stat:
makes no mention but of gifts in tail, which is tail in possession; and
therefore quaere, if the tail in use cannot be taken by the equity of it, ye^
'twas doubted if the issues and the Feoffees shall be bound after the death of
cestuy que use, 19 H 8 13 see before. Westminster. 2. ca. 1. 1 R. 3. ca. 5.
who suffered the Recovery, by reason of those words in the Stat: of 1 R: 3.
which will that the Recovery shall be good against the Vendor and his Heirs,
clayming only as Heir, and against all others clayming only to the use of the
Vendor and his Heirs; and this is intended, by some, of a Fee simple* And in
the case aforesaid the issue in tail claymeth as Heir in tail in use, (B:
Feofments to uses 56, the middle) yet see the Stat: 32 H. 8. ca. 36.
of 32 H: 8. That (...) Fine with Proclamation, levied or to be levied by
tenant in tail in possession, Reversion, Remainer, or in Use, after
Proclamation had, shall bind those tenants of those tails and their Heirs for
ever: See Tit. Fines.
And see that the same ^tat: is as well for the time past, ^s to come, 30 H: 8.
B. Feofments to uses, 57.

If Covenants and Agreements are ^onteined in Indentures and not uses; and it is
Covenanted by the Indentures that A: shall recover against B: his Land in D: to
the use of the recoveror and his Heirs, and to the uses of the Covenants and
Agreements in the Indentures; there if he recovers, the re^overy shall be to
the use of the recoveror and his Heirs; and not to the uses of the Covenants
and Agreements in the Indentures, where no uses are in the Indentures. But
otherwise, if uses are contained in the Indentures, and it is Covenanted, That
A: shall recover to the use of A: and his Heirs, and to the uses in the
Indenture; there the recovery shall go according, 27 H. 8. ca. 10. Rast. Uses
9.
and shall be executed by the Stat: 32 H: 8. B: Feoffments to uses 58.

'Twas agreed by all the Justices, upon great deliberation, in the case of
Mantel Esquire: of the County of North: who was attainted with the Lord Dacres of
the South, for the death of a man (which see Tit: Corone.) that where he at his
marriage 31 H: 8. after the Stat: of uses made, 27 H: 8. Covenanted, That for a
100. l. and in consideration of marriage, that he and his Heirs, and all
persons seized of his Lands and Tenements in H: shall be thereof seized to the
use of his wife for term of her life, and after to the Heirs of his body by her
engendered, that this shall change the use well enough, and very good: And by
this the Land was saved, and was not forforfeited, 34 H: 8. B: Feoffments to
uses 16. the end.

A man purchases Land, and causes an Estate to be made to him and his wife,
and to three others in Fee, this shall be taken to the use of the husband
only; and not to the use of the wife without special matter to induce it. See
4 E. 6. Com. 44.
And so see a Woman may be seized to the use of her husband, and by him such
Feofment was, 3 H: 7. and intended as aforesaid, 34 H: 8. B: Feoffments to uses
51.

A man makes a Feofment in Fee to his use for term of life; and that after his
decease I N shall take the profits; this makes a use in I N, contrary if he
says, that after his death his Feoffees shall take the profits and deliver
them to I N, this does not make a use in I N: for he has them not but by the
hands of the Feoffees, 36 H: 8. B: Feoffments to uses, 52.

A man cannot sell Land to I S, See 24 H. 8. before More held time M. 1. that a
use may be well changed for a consid. past. See ^. 8. El. 309. cont.
to the use of the Vendor, nor let Land to him rendering rent, habend: to the
use of the Lessor, for this is contrary to Law and Reason, for he has
recompense for it: And by Hales, a man cannot change a use by a covenant which
is executed before, as to covenant to be seized to the use of W S, because
that W S is his Cousin; or because that W S before gave to him twenty pound, See
Mildmayes case Cook lib. 7. and 8 El. Com. 302.
except the twenty pound was given to have the same Land. But otherwise of a
consideration, present or future, for the same purpose, as for one hundred
pounds paid for the the Land tempore commentionis, or to be paid at a future
day, or for to marry his daughter, or the like, 36 H: 8. B: Feoffments to uses,
54.

Note, a Recovery was suffered by Graseley of the County of Stafford, by advice
of Fitz Sergeant and others, and he was only cestuy que use in tail, and after
he died without issue, and his brother recovered the Land in the Chancery, See
30 H. 8. before.
for at this time 'twas taken that a Recovery against cestuy que use in tail,
should not serve but for term of his life, by which it is not but a grant of his
estate, Time H: 8. B: Feoffments to uses 48. the end.

By Fitz Just: See 29 H 8 and 5 E. 6. before.
if the Feoffees to the use of an Estate tail, sell the Land to him that has
notice of the first use, yet the buyer shall not be seized to the first use,
but to his own use, by reason of the bargain and sale, for the Feoffees have
the Fee simple, and therefore their sale is good, Time H: 8. B: Feoffments to
uses 57. the middle.

Note, 27 H 8 ca. 10. See Cook. lib. 1. Chudleighs case
per plures, If a man makes a Feofment in Fee before the Stat: of uses, or
after this Stat: to the use of W: and his Heirs, till A: pay forty pound to
the said W, and then to the use of the said A, and his Heirs, and after comes
the Stat: of uses and executes the Estate in W, and after A paies to W the 40.
l. there A is seized in Fee, if he enters; yet by some A shall not be seized in
Fee by the said payment, except that the Feoffees enter: B doubts thereof, and
therefore it seems to him best to enter in the name of the Feoffees, and in his
name, and then the one way or the other the entry shall be good, and shall make
A to be seized in Fee; and also see by B, that a man at this day may make a
Feoffment to a use, and that the use shall change from one to another by act ex
post facto, by circumstance, as well as it should before the said Statute, 6 E:
6. B: Feofments to uses 30.

'Twas holden per plures in the Chancery; See before
if a Recovery be had, in which cestuy que use in tail is vouched, and the
demandant recovers, then this shall bind the issue, Time E: 6. B: Feofments to
uses 56. the end.

If a Covenant be by Indenture, that the son of A shall marry the daughter
of C, for which C gives to A a hundred pound, and for this A covenants with C,
That if the marriage takes not effect, that A and his Heirs shall be seized of
a hundred and fifty acres in D, to the use of C and his Heirs, quo usque A his
Heirs or Executors repaies the hundred pound, and after C has issue within age
and dies, and after the marriage takes not effect by which the State is
executed in the Heir of C, by the Statute of uses made 27 H: 8. notwithstanding
that C was dead before the refusal of the marriage, 27 H 8 ca. 9 Rast. uses 9.
See Cook lib. 1. Shellies case.
for now the use and possession vests in the Heirs of C, for that the
Indentures and Covenants shall have relation to the making of the Indentures,
for these Indentures bind the Land with the use, which Indentures were in the
life of C: But by B: quaere if the Heir of C shall be in Ward to the Lord, for
he is Heir, and yet a Purchasor, as it seems, 3 M: 1. B: Feofments to uses.
59.

Gift of Land for years, 8 H 7 ca. 4 Rast. uses 6.
or of a Lease for years to a use, is good; notwithstanding the Statute; for
the Statute is intended to avoid gifts of Chattells to uses for to defraude
Creditors only, and so is the preamble and intent of this Statute, 3 M: 1. B:
Feofments to uses, 60.

Fines levies, Fines levied.
Note, H 38. H 8 accord be^ween W. Roch. and Radm.
That 'twas Covenanted that A shall make to B his wife, daughter of I K, a
jointure by Fine, and the Writ was brought by I K against A and B his wife,
Latharne, etc. See Tit Coverture.
and they offered to acknowledge to I, to the intent that I should render to
them, for life of B, and because B, the wife, was within age, therefore she
was drawn out and rejected: And then because that none can take the first
estate by the Fine, but those who shall be named in the Writ of Covenant (but
every Stranger may take a remainder) therefore the Writ was made between I and
A, only by which A acknowledged the Tenements to be the right of I, ut illa
que, etc. and I granted and rendered it to the said A for term of his life,
without impeachment of Waste, the remainder to the said B, his wife, for term
of her life, the remainder to the said A and his Heirs, 30 H: 8. B: Fines,
Levies, 108.

Fine with proclamation to bind Tenant in tail and his issue, the time for to
make proclamation, etc. See Tit: Assurances.

If cestuy que use for term of life levies a Fine with Proclamation; there none
need to enter nor make claim within the five years, because that it is but a
Grant of his Estate, which is lawful, and no forfeiture; for he has nothing
in the Land; nor he cannot make a forfeiture of the use. 10 H 7. 20. by Keble.
The same Law of a Fine levied by Tenant for life in possession: Yet B doubts
thereof and thinks otherwise if he levy it in Fee (B: Feoffments to uses 48.
Fines levies 107.) Et per plures, 27 H. 8. 20 Fitz. accord.
if it be levied by cestuy que use in tail, it shall bind him and his Heirs;
but not cestuy que use in the reversion nor the Feoffees after the death of the
Conusor, 1 R. 3. ca. 5. Rast. uses 4. See Tit. Feoffments to uses.
for the Statute of 1 R: 3. is, That it shall bind him and his heirs and
Feoffees clayming only to the same, which is not so here, Quaere inde; for B
seems by the same Statute, that tail in possession is remedied by this Statute;
but not tail in use: for this seems to him to remain at Common Law, as a
Fee-simple in use conditional; for it is not a Gift of the Land; yet quaere,
for by him, by the equity of the Statute of W: 2. of tails, W. 2. ca. 1
devises in tail are taken; yet this is in nature of a Gift; yet not at this
day by the Statute of 32 H: 8. fine with Proclamation by cestuy que use in
tail, 32 H. 8. ca. 36.
shall bind the tail after Proclamation, 30 H: 8. B: Fines levied 107. the end.

Note, See Tit. faits inroll
That a Deed enrolled in London, binds as a Fine at Common Law (but not as a
Fine with Proclamation;) and there need not livery of Seisin upon such Deed:
And this is a discontinuance without livery, because that by the custom there
(which is reserved by diverse Parliaments) it shall bind as a Fine, 31 H: 8. B:
Fines Levies 110.

'Twas granted for Law, where two are of the same name (as if there be two R
B) and the one levies a Fine of the others Land; 34 H 6. 19 by Danby.
there the other shall avoid it by Plea, s: to say that there are two of the
name; and that the other R Blevied the Fine, and not this R B, 33 H: 8. B:
Fines levies 115. the end.

Note that if the Writ of Dedimus potestatem, to levy a Fine does not bear
test after the writ of Covenant, it is Error; for the Dedimus potestatem says,
cum Breve nostrum de conventione pendet betwixt A B and C D, etc. 35 H: 8. B:
Pines, Levies, 116.

Note, that 'twas devised to have a Lease for years to bind Tenant in tail,
that the tenant in tail and the Lessee should acknowledge the tenements to be
the right of one A, a stranger, and that A should grant and render by the same
Fine to the Lessee for sixty years, the remainder to the Lessor and his
Heirs, and 'twas with Proclamation, which shall bind the tail after
proclamation made (And so see that the Devise after will not serve for tail,
but for Fee simple, for he which takes by Fine, See Time. H. 8 after.
shall not be concluded if he be an Infant, or Feme covert, or the issue in
tail of the Conusor:) And in this case no rent can be reserved; for A was a
stranger to the Land, by which the Lessee granted ten pound of rent, and extra
terra: illa: with a clause of distress during the years or term aforesaid to
the Lessor, 36 H: 8. B. Fines, Levies, 118. See 36 H. 8. before.


Lease may be made by Fine for term of years rendering rent, and first the
lessee to acknowledge the tenements to be the right of the Lessor come ceo, etc.
and then the other grant and render to him for term of sixty years, rendering
therefore yearly ten pound per annum, etc. And with Clause of Distress, Time,
H: 8. B: Fines, Levies, 106.

Note, Fitz 97. A.
by Fitz Just: That a Fine levied by A and B his wife, where the name of the
wife is M, shall bind her by estoppell, and the tenant may plead that she by
the name of B: levied the Fine, and so 'twas in ure by him, and 'twas pleaded
according, Time H: 8. B: Fines, Levies, 117.

Note, by Bromeley chief Justice, and others, That a Writ of Error was brought
in the Kings bench, because a Fine was acknowledged by Dedimus potestatem,
before one who was not a Judge, Abbot, Knight nor Sargeant: and for this cause
it is refused to admit any which is taken by such; for the Statute de finibus
and Attorn: gives power to none except to Justices, Abbot and Knight; quaere,
by B: if a Sarjeant at Law, be not taken as a Justice by the equity of the
Statute, Time H: 8. B: Fines, Levies, 120.

'Twas granted that a Fine may be levied in a Hamlet; for if a Scire fac: lies
upon a Fine in a Hamlet (as it appears 8 E: 4. that it does) therefore a Fine
is well levied there, 8 E. 4. 6. per Cur.
6 E: 6. B: Fines Levies 93.

Note, See 6 E. 6. before.
that 'twas agreed by the Justices, that a Fine may be well levied in a Hamlet,
and this, notwithstanding all the houses are decayed but one. 8 E. 4. 6. per
Cur.
The same of a Writ of Dower: And the same Law of that which has been a Ville
and no wis decaid; yet the name of the Ville remains, as old Salisbury, which
has at this day Burgesses of Parliament, and the like, 7 E: 6. B: Fines Levies
91.

Forcible Entry.
He which has been seized peaceably by three years, 27 H. 6. 2.
may retain with force: But if a Disseizor has continued possession three
years peaceably, 22 H. 6. 18.
and after the Disseisee reenters (as he may lawfully) and after the Disseisor
reenters, he cannot deteine with force, because that the first disseisin is
determined by the entry of the Disseisee, and the Disseisee by this remitted,
and this Entry is a new Disseisin: But if a man has been seized by good and
just Title by three years, and after is disseised by wrong, and after he
reenters, he may retain with force; for he is remitted* and in by his first
Title, by which he first continued peaceably by three years, per quosdam: for
it seems to them, by the Proviso in the end of the Statute, 8 H. 6. ca. 9.
that this is good Law in the last Case, and stands well with the Statute; yet
by some this is not Law, therefore quaere 23 H: 8. B: Forcible entry, 22.

Forfeiture of Marriage.
'Twas said, Fitz. 141. D.
if a man brings a Writ of Intrusion maritagio non satisfac: for the single
value, and makes mention in the Writ of tender of marriage to the Heir, and
that he refused, etc. that the tender is not traversable, Time H: 8. B:
Forfeiture of Marriage 7. Intrusion 23. in finibus.

Forfeiture de Terre, etc. Forfeiture of Land, etc.
What shall be a forfeiture of the Estate of Tenant for life, what not, See
Tit: Entry Congeable.

Richard Fermor of L: was attainted in Praemunire, and his Lands forfeited in
Fee in perpetuum, and not only for term of life: And so see it is not only a
forfeiture for life, as in an attaint; for the one is by Statute, the other by
the Common Law, 34 H: 8, B: Praemunire 19. the end, Forfeiture 101.

Note, 4 H. 7. 11. by Towns.
If a man be attainted of Treason by Parliament; by this his Lands and goods
are forfeited, without words of forfeiture of Lands or Goods in the Act, 35 H:
8. B: Forfeiture 99.

Foundership cannot Escheate, nor be forfeited by attaindor of Felony or
Treason, See Tit: Escheate.

Note, by Hales Justice clearly, that ^ Cleark convict, St. 185. 20 E. 4. 5. by
Billing 40 E. 3. 42.
shall lose his goods, ^ E: 6. B: Forfeiture 113.

Formedon.
It Is said that if the issue in tail be ^arred by Judgment, See 24 H. 8.
Tit. Tail.
by reason of warranty and assets descended, and after he aliens the assets,
and has issue and dies, the issue of the issue shall not ^ave a Formedon of
the first Land tay^ed; but if such thing happens before ^ee be barred by
Judgment, the issue of the issue shall have a Formedon, Time H: 8. B. Formedon
18.

Note, This matter was in ure P. Rot. 505. in the Common Bench betwixt Jarveis
Demandant and Brown Tenant.
If the Feoffees are infeoffed ^o the use of the Feoffor, for term of ^ife,
and after to the use of A in tail, before the Statute of 27 H: 8. of uses, and
after the Estates, in uses are ve^ted in possession by the same Statute, and
after the tenant for life dies, and ^he tenant in tail enters, and
discon^inues and dies, and the issue brings a Formedon, See 7 E. 6. after.
upon this matter he shall ^uppose the Feoffor to be Donor, and ^ot the
Feoffees, See 1 M. 1. after, and 7 E. 6.
and the Writ shall ^ee general quod dedit, etc. but the Declaration shall be
special and declare the whole matter, That the Feoffor was seized in fee, and
enfeoffed the Feoffees to uses ut supra, and show the Execution of the Estates
by the Statute of uses made 27 H: 8. briefly and not at large, and the seisin
etc. and the death of tenant for life and tenant in tail and quod post mortem,
etc. descend: jus, etc. 2 E: 6. B: Formedon, 49.

Formedon upon a gift in Fee to the use of the Feoffor and the Heirs of hi^
body, 4 E. 6. Com. 59. by Montague.
which is executed by the Statute of uses 27 H: 8. and after the Feoffor aliens
and dies, his issue shall have a Formedon that the Feoffees (...) derunt
tenement: See 2 E. 6. before.
predict: to the father of the Demandant, and discend^ jus, etc. for it cannot
be suppose^ that the Feoffor gave to cestuy que us^ which was himself; for a
man cannot give to himself: and he sha^ make a special Declaration upon the
Feoffment to the use of the tail: But where A makes a Feoffment in Fee, to
three, to the use of a Stranger and the Heirs of his body, which is exempte^ by
the Statute aforesaid, and after who was cestuy que use aliens in fee^ and
dies; there his issue shall have a Formedon, and shall say that the Feoffor
gave to his father, and not the Feoffees gave, and shall make a special
Declaration, 7 E: 6. B. Formedon 46. General Brief 14.

Note by Bromeley chief Justice, That the Demandant (in the case 2 E: 6.
before) may declare generallly if he will; and if the Tenant pleads ne dona
pas, the Demandant may reply and show the special matter, as appears there,
and conclude, and so he gave, etc. and good, 1 M: 1. B: Formedon 49. the end.

Form.
Note, 3 M. 1. Com. 169. See Cook. lib.
that Wood was put before Pasture in a Plaint of Assize, and exception thereof
taken, and yet good, though it be contrary to the Register, Time: E: 6. B: Faux
Latin and Form 66.

Franke-marriage.
Note, 7 E. 4. 12. cont. by Moile and Fitz. 172. H. Litt. 4. accord.
that 'twas said for Law, that Land cannot be given in Frank-marriage with a
man who is Cousin to the Donor; but it ought to be with a woman who is Cousin to
the Donor. Time: H: 8. B. Frank-marrige 10. Perk. 48. E.


Note, See 4 E 6. Com. 14. by Harris. Fitz. 136. B. of the acquittall. See Cook
upon Litt.
it is said for Law, that a Gift in Frank-marriage, the remainder to I N in Fee,
is not Frank-marriage; for warranty and acquittall is incident to
Frank-marriage, by reason of the Reversion in the Donor, which cannot be where
the Donor puts the remainder and Fee to a Stranger upon the same Gift, Time. H:
8. B: Frank-marriage 11.

Guard, Ward.
IF the Kings Tenant, Alien in Fee, without license, and dies, his Heir within
age, the King shall not have the Ward, because that nothing is descended to
him; and that the alienation is good, save the Trespass to the King, See Tit.
Intrusion.
which is but a Fine by Seizure: 26 H. 8. B: Alienations 29. Guard 85.

If the King has an heir in Ward, which is a Woman, and marries her before the
age of Fourteen years; there she shall be out of Ward at Fourteen years, and
then may sue Livery, for the Two years to make Sixteen years are not given, but
to tender to her marriage, therefore when she is married sooner, she shall be
out of custody at Fourteen years, 28. H. 8. B. Guard 86. Livery 54.

A man makes a Feoffment before the Statute of execution of Uses, 27. H. 8. c.
10. See Dyer H. 8. Bockinghams. c.
to the use of himself for term of his life, the remainder to W. in Tail, the
Remainder to the right Heirs of the Feoffor, the Feoffor dies, and W. dies
without issue, the right Heir of the Feoffor within Age, he shall be in Ward
for the Fee descended; for the use of the Fee-simple, was never out of the
Feoffor. And the same Law where a man gives in Tail, the Remainder to the
right Heirs of the Donor, the Fee is not out of him. Otherwise, where a man
makes a Feoffment in Fee upon condition to re-infeoffe him, and the Feoffee
gives to the Feoffor for life, the Remainder over in Tail, the Remainder to
the right Heirs of the Feoffor, for there the Fee, and the use of it was out of
the Feoffor; and therefore he has there a remainder and not a reversion, 32.
H. 8. B. Guard 93.

Where a man holds certain land of the King in Soccage in Capite, Fitz. 25^ c.
See 38. H* 8. Tit. Livery Stp. 10. 13
the King shall not have livery of more then the Soccage land. The same where
he holds of the King in Knights service, and not in Capite, the King shall not
have more in ward, but only that which is holden of him immediately, 32. H. 8.
B. Guard 97.

Note by all the Justices of England, 5. H. 7 37 See 36. H 8. Tit. Leases.
that a Lord in Knights service, by nonage of the Heir, shall not ouste the
grantee of Wreck, See Time H. 8. after 5. H. 7. 37. by all.
or de proxima presentatione; nor the termors which are in by the father of the
Heirs B, Grants. 85. Guard 66. Lease 31. in finibus: So of a Lease for term of
life. 35. H. 8. B. Guard 61: the end:

A man dies seized of lands holden in Knights service, his brother and Heir
within age, the Lords seises the ward, the wife of the Tenant privily with
child with a son, and after the wife is delivered, the brother is out of ward.
But if the Infant dye, the brother yet within age, there the brother shall be
in ward again. And the same Law where a daughter is heir, and after a son is
born, the daughter is out of ward: And if the son dies without issue, the
daughter within age, she shall be in ward again; so see that one and the same
person may be twice in ward by two several ancestors. But where the Lord seises
the son for ward for land to him descended from his Father, and grants the
marriage of him to another, and after other land holden in Knights service,
holden of the same Lord descends to the same son from his mother, there B.
seems that the Lord shall not have the ward again, because he had him, and
granted his marriage before, and the body is an entire thing* 35. H. 8. B.
Guard 119.

It Is granted by all the Justices that the King shall not ouste the termor of
his tenant, See 35. H. 8. before.
because he has the heir of his tenant in ward by office found for him; 11. H.
6, 7. by Babing.
nor execution upon a Statute Merchant made against his tenant; nor a rent
charge granted by his tenant, nor a grant de prox. presentatione of an
Advouson. Time H. 8. B. Guard 44.

If the son and heir of the Kings tenant, See 15. E 4. 10. 6. El. Com. 268.
co^tra. And see Cokes Books.
or of another Lord be made a Knight in the life of his Father, and after the
Father dies, the heir shall be in ward; for otherwise the Ancestor may procure
his son within age to be made a Knight by collusion, to the intent to defraud
the Lord of Ward, which shall not be suffered. And so it fell out of the Lord
Anth. Brown of Surrey, who was made Knight in the time of his Father, who died,
the son within age, and it was holden he should be in ward, notwithstanding he
was a Knight; wherefore he agreed with the King for his marriage: 6. El. Con.
268.
Otherwise B. seems where he is in ward, and is made Knight in ward, Magna
Cart. ca. 3. Rast. ca. 1.
this shall put him out of ward, and by him the Stat. which is, Postquam haeres
fuerit in custodiam cum ad aetatem pervenerit S. 21, annorum, habeat hereditat.
suam sine relevio, and sine Fine: Ita tamen quod si ipse, dum infra aetatem
fuerit, fiat miles, nihilominus terra sua remaneat in custodia dominorum usque
ad terminum supradict. is intended where he is made Knight within age being in
ward after the death of the Ancestor, and not where he is made Knight in the
life of the Ancestor. 2. E. 6. B. Guard 42. and 72.

'Twas agreed for Law in the Common Bench, See Cokes Books, and 7. E 6. after.
that if the Lord has not been seized of homage within time of memory; but
has been seized of rent, it suffices to have a Writ of Ward, and to count that
he died in his homage; for there is seisin of something, though it be not of
the entire services: And for this cause, and also for that the seizin is not
traversable, but the Tenure; therefore the action lies without Seisin of the
Homage, 6. E. 6. B. Guard 122. the end.

It Was holden by the Justices of both benches, See 6 E. 6. before. See Coks
Books.
That where a man holds by Rent and Knights Service, and the Lord and his
ancestors have been always seized of the Rent, but not of the homage, escuage,
nor of Ward: yet if a Ward fall, he shall have the ward of the heir, for the
seisin of the Rent suffices to be seized of the Tenure, as to this purpose. Yet
otherwise B. seems to make avowry, 7. E. 6. B. Avowry 96. the end. Guard 69.

Where a use vests in the heir, as heir of his Father, where the Father was
dead before? Whether the heir shall be in ward, or not: Quaere, See Tit.
Feoffments to uses. 3. M. 1.

Note that it was declared by the Doctors of the Civil Law, That where an heir or
other is married infra annos nubiles, and after disassents at the age of
discretion, or after, before assent to the Marriage, that this suffices: and
the party may marry to another without divorce, or witnessing of it before the
Ordinary: but the Ordinary may punish it per arbitrium judicis; but the second
espousals is good, as well by the Law of the Kingdom, as by the Law of the
Church, 5. M. 1. B. Guard 124.

Ward and marriage is by the Common Law: Frowike Lect. upon the stat. de
Praeroga tiva Reg. 55. 33 H. 6.
and the Father shall have the Ward of his son or daughter, and heir apparent,
before the King or other Lord; and Soccage Tenure by 20 years, and Knight
service after, B. Guard 120. the end.

If an estate be made to many and the heirs of one of them, and he which has
the Fee dies, his heir within age, he shall be in Ward by the Statute of Wills,
notwithstanding the others survive which are Tenants by the Common Law, 32 H.
8. ca. 1 Rast Wills 1.
Casus B. Guard. 100.

Garranties, Warranties.
If the husband and wife alien land of which she is dowable, there to have
collateral warranty, it is good to have the Warranty of the Wife against her and
her heirs; and then if she has issue by the husband, and she and the husband
die, the Warranty shall be collateral to the issues, because that the land came
by the Father, and not by the Mother, 31. H. 8. B. Garranties 79.

Note if the husband discontinues the right of his wife, and an ancestor
collateral of the wife releases with Warranty and dies, to whom the Wife is
heir, and after the husband dies, the wife shall be barred in a Cui in vita by
this Warranty, notwithstanding the Coverture; because that she is put to her
action by the discontinuance; for Coverture cannot avoid Warranty, but where
the entry of the wife is lawful, which is not upon discontinuance. 33. H. 8. B.
Garranties 84.

If a man says in his Warranty, Et ego tenement a predict. See Coke upon Lit
cum pertinent. prefato A. B. the Donee Warrantizabo, and does not say, eg^ and
heredes mei, he himself shall warrant it, but his heir is not bound to warrant
it; because that (heirs) are not expressed in the Warranty, 35. H. 8. B.
Garrenties 50.

Sir Robert Brudnel, late Chief Justice of the Common Bench, devised a Warranty
now in use, viz. That the warrantor for him and his heirs Warrantizabit contra
ipsum and heredes suos, and by this the Feoffee shall rebut, but not vouch,
Casus B. Garranties 30. the end.

Where upon a Formedon upon use, there shall be a General Writ, and special
Declaration? See Tit. Formedon.

General issue.
In an Assise or Trespass, if a ^an entitles a stranger, and justifies by his
Commandment, his ought to be pleaded; and not given in evidence upon Null tort.
or not guilty pleaded.

So of Common Rent Service, Of the License 4 E. 6. com. 14. by Harris
Rent Charge, License, and the like, these ought to be pleaded and not given in
evidence upon a general issue. Contrary of a Lease of Land for years upon not
guilty pleaded, the Defendant may give it in evidence (B. General issue, 81.)
otherwise of a Lease at will; 12 H 8. 1 by Brook
for this is as a License, which may be Countermanded, or determined at
pleasure.

And if a Villen plead Free, and of Free Estate he may give manumission in
evidence; for this is Manumission indeed.

But where he is Manumitted by act in Law, Lit. 45. See the Act of this present
Parliament which in ables to plead the general issue and to give the special
matter in evidence
as a suit taken against him by his Lord; or an Obligation made to him by his
Lord, or a Lease for years, and the like, which are manumissions in Law, of
which the Jury cannot discuss, and therefore these shall be pleaded, 25 H. 8.
B. General issue ^2.

Debt upon an escape in the Exchequer against the Sheriffs of London, for
leting a man arrested by them by capias ad satisfaciendam, and ^n Execution to
escape: the Defendants cannot say that he did not escape, and give in evidence
that he was not arrested for the arrest is confessed, if he says that he did
not escape, 34. H. 8. B. General issue 89.

Grants.
Nota per plures Just. M. 5. E. 6 accord. See 34 N. 8. after.
and alios legis peritos, That where a man grants an office of Bailiff,
Steward, Receiver, Parker, and the like; and a Fee certain for his labor
only, there the Grantor may expulse such Officers.

But they shall have their Fee, for it is but an Office of Charge.

But where the Steward, and Parker have profits of Courts, Winde-Falls,
Dear^kinnes, and the like casu^ll profits, it is said that they cannot be
expulsed, and that of such Offices they may have an Assise.

And it is said that it was so taken in the time of James Hobert Attorney of King
HENRY the 7. And the Officers may relinquish their Offices when they will, but
then their Fee ceases.

And Whorewood Attorney of King HENRY the 8. granted the Cases aforesaid, 31.
H. 8. B. Grants, 134.

It Was said for Law, That I may Ouste my Bailiff, See 31 H. 8. before.
Receiver, and the like, giving to them their Fee; for it rests in Charge, and
no profit.

B. doubts of the Steward, for an Assise lies of such Ousters, 34. H. 8. B.
Grants 93. the end.

What shall pass by a Grant of omnia ^ona sua. See Tit. Done.

A man possessed of a Lease for term of forty years, See Coke Litt. and the
Rector of Chedingtons case.
grants so many of them to ^. N. which shall be arrear tempore mor^is suae, and
held void by Hales Just* and others, for the incertainty, because it does not
appear how many shall be behind at the time of his death: for the Granter may
live all the 40 years, and then nothing shall be arrear at his death, quare.
Accord. Finch 46. E. 3. 31. 11 H. 4. 34 by Hank.
(B. Grants 154. Leases 66.) ^ut such Devise by Testament is good, (B. Grants
154.) And it is not like where a man leases Land for term of life, and four
years over: this is certain, that his Executors shall have four years after his
death. (B. Leases 66.) And also, if a man leases his Land to have from his
death for four years, it is good: for this is certain; and he has authority to
charge his own Land. 7 E. 6. B. Grants 155.

A man grants omnia terras and tenementa sua in D. a Lease for years shall not
pass. See 37 H. 8 Tit. Done.
Contrary, if he grants omnes firmas suas, there by this a Lease shall pass:
for of this an ejectione Firm lies, and by this he shall recover the Term; and
therefore it is a good word of Grant. 7 E. 6. B. Grants 155.

Hariots.
It Is said that for Hariot-custom a man shall always seize; D. S. 76. 8 H. 7.
10. 7 E. 6. Com. 96.
and if it be esloigned, he may have detinue* And for Hariot-service esloigned,
he may distrain^ but not for Hariot-custom. Time. H. 8* B. Hariots. 6. the end.

Heresy.
Note, that 'twas agreed by all the Justices, and by Bake, learned in the Law
and Chancellor of the Exchequer; and by H^re, 2 H. 4. c. 15 Rast. Heresy, 1.
learned in the Law, and Maste^ of the Rolls, That by the Statute of Heretics
and Lollards, that if a Heretic be convicted in presence of the Sheriff, the
Ordinary may commit him to the sam^ Sheriff; and he ought to burn him, without
having a Writ de haeretico comburendo. But if the Sheriff be absent, o^ if the
Heretic shall be burnt in another County in which he is not convicted, ther^
in these cases the Writ de haeret. comburend. shall be awarded to that Sheriff
(...) Officer who shall make execution. And ^e said Statute in the end wills,
that the ^heriff shall be present at the convicti^^, if the Bishop requires
him. And ^erefore the use is that the Ordinary shall ^ll the Sheriff to be
present at the con^tion. And so in the Writ de haeret. ^mburend. F. N. B. 269.
in the Not. Brin. that the ^^chbishop and his Province in their Con^^ation
might and used to convict Here^^ks by the Common Law, and to put (...) to lay
hands: And then the Sheriffs Writ de haeret* comburend* burnt them. ^t because
that this was troublesome, to (...) the Convocation of all the Province, was
ordained by the Statute aforesaid, that every Bishop in his Diocese may ^^nvict
a heretic, and after abjura^^n upon relapse, put him to lay hands be burnt.
And B. seems that if the ^^retick will not abjure at the first Con^^tion, that
he may be burnt at the first ^^^nviction without abjuration. Other^^e, if he
will abjure: for then he shall (...) be burnt the first time, but upon re^^se
he shall be burnt. 2. M. 1. B. ^eresie.

Homage. See Tit. Fealty.

Idiot.
BRent of the County of S^^merset, who was presen^^ed for an Idiot, cou^^ write
Letters and Acqui^tances, and the like; an^ therefore was adjudge^ an Unthrift,
but no Idiot. Time. E. Idiot 4. the end.

Imprisonment.
'Twas determined in Parliament, the Imprisonment almost in all cases is but
retain the offender till he has made Fine; and therefore if he offers his Fi^^
he ought to be delivered presently; (...) the King cannot retain him in prison
af^^^ the Fine tendered. See 33 H. 8 Tit. Manor. DS. 11 8 H. 7. 5. by Vav^our.
12 H. 7. 16. by Yaxley. and 17. by Tremaile. 12 E. 4. 9. by Genny. 22 E. 4. 33.
by Suliard. Ske Cokes books.
2 M. 1. B. Imp^^sonment 100 the end.

Incident.
Court Baron is incident to a Man^^ and Court of Pipowders to a Fair; a^ 'twas
sed arguendo, that therefore Lord of the Manor or Fair cannot gr^^ over the
Court Baron, nor the Court Pipowders: or if they grant the M^^

^^or with the Fair, they cannot reserve ^^ch Courts, for they are incident,
etc. 9 H. 8. B. Incidents 34.

'Twas said, 39 H. 6. 25 by Moile, and 44 E. 3. 19. p. Cur. and Perk. 24 cont.
See Cokes books.
that if a Seigniory rests in ^omage, Fealty, and Rent, and a man ^^covers the
Rent; by this is the Homage ^^covered: for a Precipe lies not of it. ^ime. H.
8. B. Incidents 24. the ^^id.

Indictments.
An Indictment of Death ought to com^rehend the day of the stroke, St. 21. D.
and day of (...) death; and the same Law of Poy^ning; so that it may be known
if he ^^ed of the same stroke or not. 24 H. 8. ^. Indictments 41.

By Fitz Just. a Justice of Record may (...) indicted of taking of money, Fitz.
243.
and other ^^ch falsity, but not of that which goes in ^^lsifying or defeating
of the Record, as (...) say that he altered the Record from ^respass into
Felony, and the like, which ^^lsifies the Record. Casus B. Indict^ent 50. the
end.

Intrusion.
Tenant in Tail of Lands holden of (...) King, See Tit. Gard^, and 33 H. 8.
after 8 E. 4 4 by Choke Stp. 84. See Tit. Leases.
aliens without license, which found by Office, the King shall have (...)
Issues of the Land a tempore inquisiti^^nis capt. and not before. (B.
Alienat^ons, 26. in medio.) But where the t^^nant dies, and his^ heir enters,
upon Off^^^ found for the King of the dying seized the ancestor; there the heir
shall answ^^ the profits taken by him before. 26 H. B. Intrusion, 18. the end.

Note, M. 4. M. 1. accord in casu Mainwaring. See Tit. Leases.
where it is found by Office the I. N. tenant of the King was seized, a^ died
seized, and that W. his heir intrude^ and after by Act of Parliament the Ki^^
pardons all Intrusions; in this case the e^try and the offense is pardoned, but
not (...) issues and profits: for the escheat or sh^^ be charged of this by way
of accou^^ whether he has received them or not: (...) when the office is of
Record, he ought receive them, except where it is found the Office that such a
man took the pro^^ thereof. But where the King pardon where no Office is found,
See 30 H. 8 Tit. Charters de Pardon.
the heir is ^^^charged as well of the issues and prof^^ and also of Livery as
of Intrusion, by r^^son of the pardon: for by this is p^^doned.

And there though the Office comes after which finds the intrusion of the
heir, yet all is gone by the Pardon; and this shall serve, because all was
pardoned before, to which the King was entitled of Record, 33 H. 8. B. Charters
de pardon, 71. Intrusion 21. Issues returns 22.

Office shall have relation to the death of the ancestor, See 26 H. 8. before.
See Tit. Leases.
as to Land descended to the heir of the Kings tenant and as to intrusion. (B.
Relation 18. the end.) Otherwise, as to alienation made by the Kings tenant
without License: this shall not relate before the finding of it. (B. Relation
18. Intrusion 19.) And such entry by purchase is not called Intrusion, but a
Trespass; and so are the words of the pardon thereof, quod pardonamus
transgression' praedict. etc. 33. H. 8. B. Intrusion 19.

Joyntenants.
If a Lease be made to three of Land at Common Law, See Coke upon Litt. and
Baldw. case, lib. 3.
for term of life, or for years habendum successive, yet this is a ^oynt
estate, and they shall hold in Jointure, and successive is void: But where the
custom of Copie-holds is, that this word successive shall hold place, this is
good there by the custom. 30 H. 8. B. Joyntenants 53. Leases 54.

If a man inf^offs two, 41 E. 3. 18. by Finch.
upon condition that they shall infeoff W. N. before Michael' and the one dies,
the other sole makes the Feoffment; this is good. The same Law if two lease
Land rendering rent, and that if it bearrear by two months, and lawfully
demanded by the said Lessors, that they may re-enter, the one dies, and the
other that survives demands it, and it is not paid, he may re-enter. And the
same Law if the Lease were made to two, with words that if it be arrear, and
demanded of them two, etc. and the one dies, and the Lessor demanded it of the
other that survived, and he does not pay, this is a good demand, and the Lessor
may re-enter. 33 H. 8. B. Joyntenants 62.

Journeys accounts.
Grantee of a next presentation brings a Q. impedit, and dies after the six
months past, and his Executors bring another Q. impedit by Journeys accounts,
and by the Justices it will not lie. See Tit. Q. impedit.

Judgment.
A man recovers by default against an ^^fants, 2 M. 1. accord B. Judgment 147.
the end.
and the Infant brings a Writ of ^^rour, and reverses it for his nonage.
^therwise, if he had appeared, and lost (...) plea, or by voucher, he shall not
re^^rse it for nonage. B. 6 H. 8. Saver de fault 50.

If I have Title by Formedon, See after Tit. Restore al primer action.
or cui vita, and enter, and the other recovers against me, I am remitted to my
first acti^^: But if a man recovers against me by ^^lse Title, by Action tried,
where I was by good Title, I shall then have Error, (...) Attaint, or a Writ of
Right. 23 H. 8. ^. Judgment 111.

Assise in Com. B. the tenant pleads in ^^ar a recovery by Assise by him
against (...) Plaintiff of the same Tenements in ^om. O. and this now Plaintiff
then ^^nant pleaded in Bar by release of the ^ncestor of the Plaintiff with
Warran^^, which was void by nonage: and ^his found for the Plaintiff* by which
he ^ecovered, against this Plaintiff judgment si, where he accepts the Land to
be in the Country of O. now he shall be received to say, that it lies in the
County (...) B. And 'twas said in the Common Bench^ that though this Land were
then put (...) vJew, the Plaintiff shall not be bound (...) the recovery: for
it cannot be intended one and the same Land. 25 H. 8. ^. Judgment 62.

Assize of Land in N. the Defendan^^ said that once before he brought an assiz^
of the same Land in H. against the sam^ Plaintiff, and these Lands put in vJew*
and this now Plaintiff then took the ^^nancie, and pleaded in Bar, and said the
H. and N. are one and the same Ville, an known by the one name and the other*
and that A. brought a Formedon of th^^ tenements, and pleaded certain, etc. an^
recovered by Action tried, and the esta^^ of the Plaintiff mean betwixt the
title (...) and his recovery, judgeme^^ si of such an estate assize, etc. to
wh^^ the other said, that every of the said (...) and N. were Villes by
themselves, and (...) at issue: and 'twas found that they we^^ several Villes,
and the seisin and disseis^^ by which 'twas awarded that this tena^^ then
Plaintiff should recover. And because that he has recovered these saint Lands
against the Plaintiff himself in H. judgment si assise. 44 E. 3. 45. cont. 23.
Ass' 16.
And Shelly Just. held strongly, that this recovery of Land in H. is no plea in
an assise of Land in N. and therefore the assise ought to be awarded: and so it
seems to B. 25 H. 8. B. Judgment 66.

If A. infeoffs B. upon condition etc. to re-enter, there if a man impleads B.
who vouches A. and so recovers; or if A. reenters upon B. without cause, and
^s impleaded and loses; there in the one case, and the other, the condition is
determined: for the Land is recovered against him who made the condition. 26 H.
8. B. Judgment 136.

Note, by Bromley chief Just. that a Judgment, Tr. 13. El. Com. 394 cont.
where there is no original, is void, (as in an assise the Plaintiff appears,
and after makes a retraxit; and after the Justices of Assize record an
agreement betwixt them, in nature of a Fine: this is void, and coram non
Judice, and shall not be executed, by reason that no Original was pending, but
was determined before by the retraxit.) For without Original they have not
Commission to hold Plea; and then they are not Judges of this cause. 2 M. 1. B.
Judgment. 114.

Issues joins, Issues joined.
Trespass upon the case, quod def. assumpsit deliberat. quer. 4 pannos laneos,
and he pleads, quod assumpsit liberare 4 pannos lineos, without that quoth.
assumpsit modo and forma, and so at issue. And it is found that he assumed to
deliver 2 pannos laneos, sed non 4 (so see that this issue, See 2. M. 1. after.
though that it comes in a traverse, does not amount but to the general issue)
the Pl. recovered damages, for the 2, and was barred and amercied for the
rest. But otherwise it is if the issue be; If A. and B. infeoffed the tenant in
a Precipe quod reddat, necne, and it is found that A. infeoffed him, but that A.
and B. did not infeoff him, this is found against the tenant in toto, 10. E. 4.
2. by Litt.
or against him who pleads such Feoffment, which is so found, 32. H. 8. B.
Issues joins. 80, Verdict 90.

Informed in the Excheq. against A. B. for buying Wools betwixt shearing time
and the Assumption, 24 H. 8. cap.
such a year of C. D. contra forma Statuti, where it is not cloth, nor he did
not make thereof cloth nor yarn; He sees that he did not buy of C. D. contra
formam Statut. propt. etc. And no issue* for it is not material nor traversable
whether he bought of C. D. or of E. F. or of another, but whether he bought
them contra formam Statut. necne. And therefore the Issue shall be that he did
not buy modo and forma, etc. 33. H. 8. B. Issues joins. 81. Negativa pregnans.
54. Travers, per 367.

In waste issue was taken if the defendant cut twenty Oaks, See 32. H. 8.
before.
there if the Jury find ten and not the rest, the Plaintiff shall recover for
the ten, and shall be amercied for the rest. 2 M. 1. B. Issues joins 80. the
middle.

Issues returns; Issues returned. See Tit. Intrusion. Jurisdiction.
If the Lord of a Manor claim the Tithes of such Lands in D. to find a
Chaplain in D. and the Parochians claim them also for the same purpose, it is
said for Law, that the Lay Court shall have jurisdiction betwixt them, and not
the Spiritual Court. 25 H. 8. B. Jurisdiction 95.

'Twas said where a man pleads a plea in Banco ultra mare, Thorp accords, 41 E.
3. 4.
it shall be condemned at this day, because that it cannot be tried in England.
36 H. 8. B. Jurisdiction 29.

Jurors.
Trial of a Peer of the Realm arraigned upon an Indictment, and appeal
diversity. See Tit. Trial, and Tit. Enquest.

Where Jurors may take conusance and notice of a thing in another County. See
Tit. Attaint.

Jury took a Scroll of the Plaintiff, M. 11. H. 4. 18.
which was not delivered to them in Court, and passed for the Plaintiff: and
because that this matter appeared to the Court by examination, therefore the
Plaintiff shall not have Judgment. 3 M. 1. B. Jurors 8.

Leet.
NOte, for Law, if a pain be put upon a man in a Leet for to redress a Nuisance
by a day sub poena 10 l. and after it is presented that he did it not, and shall
forfeit the pain; 10 H. 7. 4. by Keble. Vavisour accord. 13. H. 7. 19. See
Coke, Beechers Case.
this is a good presentment, and the pain shall not be otherwise affeered. And
the Lord shall have an Action of Debt clearly; but he cannot distrain, and make
avowry, except by prescription of usage to distrain and make avowry. 23 H. 8.
B. Leet 37.

Note, Magna Chart. c. 15.
where the Statute of Magna Charta cap. 25. says, Et visus de Fran^hi-plegio
tunc fiat ad illum Terminum, St. Michaelis, sine occasion; this is ^^tended
the Leet of the Turn of the Sheriff, and not other Leets. 25 H. 8. B. Leet 23
the end.

Leases.
By Fitz-James chapter Just. 22 H. 8. 16 14 H. 8. 14 by Brudne^ 22 E. 4. 27. by
Wood, 4 E. 6. Com. 30. 4 and 5. El. Com. 264. See 32 H. 8. after, and Coke lib.
and Tit. Acceptance.
Englefield ^ust, and many others, if tenant for life ^ases Land for years,
rendering rent, and ^^es, the Lease is void, and then the rent is ^etermined.
The same Law of a Parson. and though the successor receives the rent, ^he Lease
is not good against him: for ^hen it is void by the death of the Lessor, (...)
cannot be perfected by no acceptance. B. Leases 19. Debt 122.) Otherwise (...)
seems of a Lease for life made by a Par^^^ rendering rent and the successor
accepts (...) rent, this affirms the Lease for life. 24 (...). 8. B. Leases 19.

A man leases for ten years, See 37 H. 8. Tit. Attornment.
and the ne^ day leases the same Land to another for twenty years: this is a
good Lease for the last ten years of the second Lease. 26 H. 8. B. Leases 48.

Where a Lease for 300 or 400 yee^^ shall be Mortm in. See Tit. Mortmain.

A man leases a house cum pertin. M. 3. M. 1. accord. 23. H. 8. 31. 3. M. 1.
Com. 168. See 6. and 7 E. 6. Com. 85. See 2 M. 1. Com. 103.
^ Land shall pass by these words cum per^ Contrary, if a man leases a house
cu^ omnibus terris eidem pertin. there (...) Lands to this used pass: and many
Gra^^ are de omnibus terris in D. nuper M^ nasterii de G. pertin. and
especially^ heavers that it has pertained de tempor^ etc. 31 H. 8. B. Leases
55.

If a Parson of a Church leases for (...) and dies, 11 E. 3. Fitz. Abbe ^. See
before, and see tit. Acceptance, and 38 H. 8 after.
the successor accepts fealty; (...) shall be bound by this during his (...)
Contra upon a Lease for years made (...) him; this shall not bind the
successor (...) acceptance of the rent: for 'twas void (...) the death of the
Lessor. 32 H. 8. (...) Dean 20. Encumbent 18. Leases 5^*

Where a confirmation shall be by (...) Bishop, Dean and Chapt, of a Lease
(...) by the Parson. Et contra. See Tit. C^^^firmation.

A man is a purchaser with his wife (...) them and to the heirs of the husband;
(...) after the husband leases for years and ^dies, See 37 H. 8 after: and 35
H. 8 tit. Guard.
the wife enters, this shall avoid the Lease for her life; but if she dies
during the term, Fitz: 142. C. cont.
there the rest of the term is good to the Lessee against the heir of the
husband. Fitz: 198. F. accord.
And the same Law of a Rentcharge granted out of it: for the husband had thee
Fee-simple tempore, etc. and might well charge it. And note by all the
Justices, that the GuardJan in Knights service shall not ouste the termor of
the ancestor of the heir. And the same Law of the Lord by Escheat. 36 H. 8. B.
Leases 58.

If a man leases for life to I. S. and the next day leases to W. D. for twenty
years, H. 1. E. 6. accord. See before.
the second Lease is void, if it be not a grant of a Reversion with Attornment:
for in Law the Freehold is more worthy and perdurable then a Lease for years.
Yet if the Lessee for life dies within the term, See 36 H. 8 before.
the Lease for years is good for the rest of the years to come. 37 H. 8. B.
Leases 48. the end.

'Twas agreed per plures, Admitted P. 1. E. 6. in Chancery.
that where I. N. convenit and concessit to W. S. that he shall have 28 acres
in D. for 20 years, that this was a good Lease: for this word concessit is as
strong as dimisit vel l^^avit. 37 H. 8. B. Leases 60.

King tenant in Tail makes a Lease for years, or life, his issue may avoid it.
See Tit. Discontinuance in possession.

If a Parson lets Land for term of years rendering rent, See 32 H. 8 before, and
Tit. Acceptance. 44 E. 3. 11 plur Fitz: 5. contr. Lit. 144.
and dies, the successor receives the rent, the Lease is not good against him,
for he has not Fee-simple. Nor he cannot have a Writ of Right but Juris utrum
therefore the receipt of the rent by his successor, does not affirm the Lease;
for this was void by the death of the Parson who leased. 38 H. 8. B. Leases 18.
the end.

'Twas holden by Bromley Just. and others, See 26 H. 8 and 37 H. 8 before.
that if a man leases for 20 years, and the next day leases for 40 years, the
second Lease shall take effect for 40 years, s. after the twenty years past.
Time. H. 8. B. Leases 35. the end.

'Twas agreed for Law in the Chancery by the Justices, Goosan Abbot. 14. H. 8.
12. by Carel. and 21 H. 7. 38. by Lee.
that if a Lease for years be made by a Bishop, that it is not void, but
voidable; for he had a Fee-simple. Otherwise of such a Lease by a Parson; this
is void by his death: for he has not the Fee-simple, but it is in abeyance. And
the Bishop may have a Writ of Right, or a Writ of Entry sine assensu capituli,
where a Parson shall have but a Juris utrum. And therefore if the successor of
a Bishop, Dean, Prebend, and (...) like, who have a Fee and Lease, and (...),
accepts the Rent, this affirms the Lease (...) be good. And otherwise of such
ac^^ptance by the successor of a Parson who ^ade such Lease: See before, and
Tit. Acceptance.
for this Lease is void ^resently. But if a Chantry Priest makes ^ Lease, his
successor shall avoid it, not^ithstanding the predecessor had a Fee, because
that it is donative, or presentative, and then such Lease is not perdurable,
ex^ept it be confirmed by the Patron in the (...) case, and by the Patron and
Ordina^y in the other case. 2 E. 6. B. Leases ^3. the end.

A man leases for years, See Coke upon Lit.
habendum post ^imissionem in facta^ to I. N. finita^, and (...) truth I. N.
has no Lease in it, there the Lease commences immediately, H. 1. M. 1. accord.
See Coke upon Lit.
by Hales ^ust. and many others. And by him if ^ Prebend makes a Lease for 21
years by ^ndenture rendering the usual rent, this shall ^^inde the successor by
the Statute of Lea^es: for where the Statute says, 23 H. 8. ca.
in Jure Ecclesiae, and the entry for a Prebend est ^^isitus in jure Prebende,
yet it shall bind by the equity. 3 E. 6. B. Leases 62.

An Executor has a term and purchases the reversion in Fee, whether the term
be extinct, or no. See Tit. Extinguishment.

Tenant of the King in Capite dies, 1 H. 7. 17. See Tit. Intrusion.
and the heir before Livery sued, makes a Lease for years, it is good, if no
intrusion be found by Office, and an Office found after, which finds the dying
seized, and no intrusion, has not relation to the death of the ancestor, but
for the profits, and not to defeat the Lease: for the Freehold and Inheritance
remain in the heir. But if intrusion be found, tunc nu^^lum accrescit ei
liberum tenementum* and then the Lease, and dower of the wife of the heir, are
void. 5 E. 6. B. Leases 57.

A man possessed of a Lease for 40 yeer^ grants so many of them as shall be
behin^ at his death, it is void. See Tit. Grants.

Note, See 3 M. 1. after: contra. See Coke upon Litt.
by Bromley and others Justice (...) if I let Land to W. N. habendum (...) 100
l. be paid, and without Livery; the it is but a Lease at will for the
incertaint^ But if he makes Livery, the Lessee she have it for life upon
condition implied (...) cease upon the 100 l. levied. 2 M. 1. ^ Leases 67.

It Is said that Bishops in the time (...) E. 6. were not sacred, See 37 H. 6 26.
and therefore we (...) not Bishops, and therefore a Lease (...) years by such,
and confirmed by the (...) and Chapter, shall not bind the success^^^ for such
never were Bishops. Contra of a Bishop deprived who was Bishop indeed at the
time of the demise, and confirmation made, 2 M. 1. B. Leases 68.

What shall be said to be a Lease in reversion, and what a grant of reversion?
see Tit. See 2 M. 1 before, contra.
Attornment.

'Twas holden by all, if a man Leases Land to another till the Lessee has
levy^d 20l, 14 H. 8. 14 by Brudnel. 4 and 5 E. 6.
that it is a good Lease, notwithstanding the incertainty. 3 M. 1. B. Leases 67.
the end.

'Twas ruled in the Serjants case, Com. 70. 4 M. 1. Com. 171 172.
that if a man let Land 4 Ian. habend. for forty years, Reddend, annuatim at
Mich. and Easter 20. s. the tenant shall pay at Easter and at Mich. I. equales
porciones, and the Lessor shall not lose the rent at Easter. 4. M. 1. B. Leases
65.

Ley gager, Law wager.
Detinue of a Deed indented, where an obligation of a Lease for term of years
the defendant shall not wage his Law, for this concerns Land, and a Chattel
real. And so 'twas late adjudged in the King's Bench 34. H. 8. B. Ley gager 97.

'Twas said for Law, 8 H. 5. Fitz. Ley 66.
that a man shall not wage his Law in a Quo minus. 35. H. 8. B. Ley 102. Quo
minus 5. in finibus.

Licenses.
'Twas agreed, that if a Bishop, De^ and Chapter give their Land in Fee with
out License of the King, who is Founder and is found so by Office, the King
shall have the Land. And another Founde^ may have a contra formam collationis
And if he aliens sine assensu Decani and Capituli, Litt. 145.
then lies the Writ de in^ gressu sine assensu Capituli. 36 H. 8* B. Licenses
21.

Lieu, Place.
Place is not material in actions transitory. See Tit. Attaint.

Where a Recognizance is acknowledged in London before a Justice of the Common
Bench, and certified in banco^ and there engrossed, a Scire facias shall be
brought there directed to the Sherif^ of London, and not to the Sheriff o^
Middlesex where the Bench is, by all the Prothonotaries of the Common Bench. 4
M. 1. B. Lieu 85.

Limitations.
Note, that it seems clear, that the new Limitation, 32 H. 8. ca. 2. Limitation
3.
and also the ancient Limitation extends to Copie-hold, as well as to
Freehold: for the Statute is, that he shall not make prescription, title, nor
claim, etc. And those who claim by Copy, make prescription, title, and claim,
etc. And also the plaints are in natura and forma Brevis Domini Regis ad
communem Legem, etc. And those Writs which now are brought at Common Law, are
ruled by the new Limitation, and therefore the plaints of Copiehold shall be of
the same nature and form. 6 E. 6. B. Limitations 2.

Livery.
Note, See 13. E. 4. 10.
if the King has a Ward because of Ward, and the first Ward comes to full age,
and sues Livery, the other Ward being within age, there the Ward shall not sue
Livery, but ouster le maine; for now the Seigniory of his Land is revived by
the Livery, so that he holds not of the King as before, but of his immediate
Lord. But if the Ward because of Ward had been of full age before the first
Ward, 28 H. 6. 11 Stp. 18.
he should sue Livery^ 25 H. 8. B. Livery 47.

Where a woman out of Ward by Marriage shall sue Livery at fourteen years. See
Tit. Guard.

He which holds Land within the County Palatine of Lancaster of the King in
Knight service* ut de Ducato Lancastr. Time. H. 8. after contra. 28 H. 6. 11.
shall sue Livery. Contra of him who holds Land which lies out of the County
Palatine of the King in Knight Service* etc. 28 H. 8. B. Livery 55.

Note, that general Livery cannot be, but upon Office found: but special Livery
may be without Office, and without probation of age, but there he shall be
bound to a rate and sum certain to be paid to the King. (B. Livery 56.) And by
B. ibidem 31. this cannot be claimed by the Common Law, as general Livery may,
but is at the will of the King. 28 H. 8.

If the King purchases a Manor of which I. S. held in Knight service, the
tenant shall hold as he held before, and he shall not render Livery nor primer
seisin: See after.
for he holds not in Capite, but holds, ut de manerio: And if his heir be in
Ward by reason of that, he shall have an ouster le maine at full age. and it is
said, See 33. H. 8. Tit. Tenures. and 3. E^. Com. 241.
if the King after grant the ^annor to W. N. in fee, excepting the ^^rvices of
I. S. now I. S. holds of the King, ^sof the person of the King, and yet he
^^all not hold in Capite, but shall hold (...) he held before, for the act of
the King shall not prejudice the tenant. But if the ^ing give Land to me in
fee, 33 H. 6. 7. by Brisot.
tenend. mi^i and heredibus meis of the King, etc. and expresses no certain
services, I shall ^old in Capite, for it is of the person of ^^e King. 8 H. 7.
13. 13. H. 7. 11 by Davers.
And note that tenure in Ca^ite, is of the person of the King. 29 H. ^. B.
Livery 57. Tenures 61.

Extent of livery is the value of the ^and by half a year. See 30. H. 8. Tit.
Office devant. etc. 3 El. Com 243. by Carus.
But if he intrudes and enters without livery, he shall pay the ^early value by
experience of the Ex^hequer. And where cestuy and use (...) attainted of
Treason, and it is enacted ^y Parliamen, That he shall forfeit his ^and in
possession, See 31 H. 8. Tit. Alienation. and 32 H. 8. after.
and in use, that ^here the King is but a purchaser, and therefore those who
hold of him that was ^ttainted, shall not sue livery. Quaere, ^f it be enacted
that he shall forfeit it ^o the King, his heirs and successors. E^contra, if he
had been sole seized, and ^ad been attainted by the Common Law, ^or there the
King has the Land as King, and there those who held, and^ shall sue livery.
Magna Charta. cap. 31. Ratt. Tenures.
And yet the Statute ^ Si quis temerit de nobis de aliqua (...) chaeta, ut de
honor Wallingford* Bose^ etc. non faciet aliud servivum qua^ fecit preantea.
And therefore this ^ intended of a common escheat. And a^ so some Honors are
in Capite, as pa^ of Peverel, and others. 29 H. 8. ^ Livery 58.

The Kings tenant leases for years an^ dies, Stp. 13.
the heir shall sue livery notwith^standing the Lease indures. And the same
where the Father declares his wi^ of the Land for years and dies. 30 H* 8. B.
Livery 59.

If a man holds of the King before the Statute of uses, and infeoffs others
(...) his for term of life, See 37. H. 8. Tit. descent Sir John Husseys case.
the rem' over in tai^ the rem' to his right heirs, and dies, an^ after the
tenant in tail dies without issue^ the heir of the Feoffer shall sue livery for
the fee simple was never out of him and therefore it descends to his heir, an^
if he has it by descent, he shall sue livery. And the same Law and for the
sam^ reason, if at this day a man gives in tail^ the rem' to his right heirs.
Otherwise B. 2. seems where a man makes a Feoffment in fee in possession, and
dismisses ^^mself of all, and retakes for term of (...), the rem' in tail, the
rem' to his ^^ght heirs, and dies, and after the te^ant in tail dies without
issue, there the ^^eir, who is right heir is a purchaser. and if the King
seises, he shall sue ^ister le main, and shall not be com^elled to sue livery;
But if the tenant (...) tail had dyed without issue in the life ^f tenant for
life, and after the tenant ^or life dies, there his heir shall sue livery, for
the fee simple was vested in the tenant ^or life, by extinguishment of the mean
^em' and therefore the fee simple descends. See 29. H. 8. before, and 38 H. 8.
after.
And note, livery is that the King shall have the value of the land by half ^
year. And ouster le main is a Writ ^o ouste the King of the Land without a^y
profit given to the King, 32 H. 8. B. Livery 61.

Where a man holds certain Land of the King in Soccage in Capite, F. N. B. 256.
C. See 38. H. 8. after.
the King shall ^ot have liberty of more then the Soccage-Land, 32 H. 8. B.
Guard 97.

He which holds of the King in Knight service and not in Capite, See 33. H. 8.
Tit. Fenuces.
shall not sue livery, because he holds not in Capite, and there when the heir
comes to full age, he shall have an ouster le main, for none can enter upon the
King. But if he be of full age at the time of the death of his ancestor, Stp.
13. See 32. H. 8. Tit. Demurrer in Law.
then he shall render relief to the King and go quite, as if he had holden of
a common person. Contra, of Tenure in Capite. 32 H. 8. B. Livery 62.

Note, that the heir of him who holds of the King in Capite in Soccage shall
not render primer seisin to the King for all his Lands, Stp. 13. 2. M. 1 Com.
109. 2. El. Com. 204 See 32. H. 8. before.
but only for those Lands holden in Soccage in Capite. Contrary of him who
holds in Knight service in Capite, by the experience of the Exchequer. And the
heir which sues Livery shall have in every County a several livery. And note
that livery is where the heir has been in Ward, and comes to full age, he
shall have livery extra manus Regis. Stp. 13. 44. E. 3. 12. Fitx. 257 L. See
the extent of it. 32, H. 8, before, and 29. H* 8.
And primer seisin^ is, where the heir is of full age at the time of the death
of his ancestor, or where his tenant holds in Soccage in Capite, and dies,
there the King shall have primer seisin of the Land, which amounts to the like
charge to the heir, as the livery is. 38* H. 8. B. Livery 60.

Note that a man cannot sue livery in the Chancery for Land in Wales, 28 H. 8.
before contra.
Nor in a County Palatine by experience. Time H. 8. B. Livery 63.

If the heir of cestuy que use be of full age at the time of the death of his
ancestor, the King shall not have primer seisin, 27 H. 8. 4. Mountague accord 4
H. 7. c. 17 Rast. Wards 20.
for it is not given by the Stat. but only the ward of Land and body. And if a
will were declared by cestuy que use, which is not performed during the nonage
of the heir, there the King shall not have the Land, but the heir at full age,
shall prove his age, and shall go quite by experience in the Exchequer. Casus
B. Livery 77. the middle.

Mainprise.
IF a man be arrested in London, and finds sureties to the Plaintiff there, See
^1 H. 8 Tit. Procedendo cont.
and after is dismissed in banco by Writ of privilege, and after a Procedendo
comes in the same suit to the court of London, this shall not revive the first
mainprise, or suretiship, for once dismissed, and always dismissed. And it is
said that after a man has found mainprise to a Bill in the Kings Bench, and
after is at issue or demurrer, and after is awarded to replead, and to make a
new declaration, the Mainprise is by this discharged. Contrary, where they
manuceperunt usque ad finem pliti, and where the original remains. 32 H. 8. B.
Mainprise 96.

If a man be convicted of Felony, and remains in prison, and after the King
pardons him, there the Justices of Jail-delivery may bail him till the next
Sessions o^ Jail-delivery, so that he may then com^ with his Pardon, and plead
it. 2 E. 6. B* Mainprise 94.

Maintenance.
Note, 19 E. 4. 3. Ascue and Markham accord. 21 H. 6. 16. 14* H. 7. 2. by Read.
See H. 6 and 7. E. 6. 33.
by all, where Tenant in Tail, o^ for term of Life, is impleaded, he in rem^ or
reversion, may maintain, and give of his proper money to maintain for safeguard
of his interest: for 'twas agreed that he who has an interest in the Land may
maintain to save it. 1 E. 6. B. Maintenance 53.

Note, that upon the Statute of buying Titles, and to maintain that a man shall
not buy Land, except the vendor has been in possession, 32 H. 8. ca. 9. See H.
6 and 7. E. 6. Com. 88, 89.
etc. by a year before, 'twas agreed by Mountague chief Justice, and by all of
Sergeants Inn in Fleet Street, that if a man morgages his Land, and redeems
it, he may sell his Land infra unum annum prox. etc. without danger of the
State aforesaid: for so is the intendment of the Statute: for the ancient
Statutes are, That none shall maintain; and yet a ^an may maintain his Cousin,
and so of ^e like: for it is not intended, but of un^wful maintenance; and so of
a preten^d Title, and not of that which is clear ^itle. 6 E. 6. B. Maintenance
38.

Manor.
A man cannot make a Manor at this ^ay, See 35 H. 8 Tit. Tenures.
notwithstanding that he gives Land (...) many severally in Tail, to hold of
him (...) Services, and suit of his Court: for he ^ay make a Tenure, but not a
Court: for ^ Court cannot be but by continuance cu^^ contrarium memoria hominum
non ^^sist it. See 23 H. 8 tit. Court Baron, and Time. H. 8 Tit. Suitor.
And it is said for Law, that if a ^annor be, and all the Free-tenures es^eat to
the Lord, but one, or if he pur^hases all but one, there after this the Manor
is extinct: for there cannot be a Manor, except there be a Court Baron (...)
it. And a Court Baron cannot be ^olden but before Suitors, and not before (...)
Suitor: therefore one Freeholder ^^ely cannot make a Manor. 33 H. 8. ^.
Comprise 31. Manor 5.

Misnosmer, Misnamer.
A Statute was acknowledged by man in the name of I. S. de D. in Co^ E.
Butcher, and he was taken upon Pr^cess, and said in avoydance of the Statut^
that he was always dwelling at S. a^^ not at D. and was a Husbandman, and n^ a
Butcher; and that I. S. of D. acknowledged the Statute without this, that he
the same person that acknowledged i^ which Plea was refused, for a great
inconvenience that might fall upon it. 36 H. B. Misnosmer 34. the end.

Monstrans de faits, Showing of Deeds.
See that he which pleads a Deed Record, See Cokes books.
or which declares upon a Deed Record, it behooves him to show it: Oyer of those
is always to be had by (...) which is charged by it. Regulae Monstrans 165.
Oyer de Records 1^ the end.

Mortdauncestor.
By the best opinion in the Comm^^ Bench, if two purchase jointly to them ^ to
the heirs of one, See Cokes Rep.
and he which has the Fee dies, and after the other dies, the heir of the
first shall not have a Mortdauncestor (and B. seems the reason to be, because
the Fee was not executed in Possession, by reason of the survivor of the other,
and it is in effect now but the descent of a reversion) and the wife of him who
had the Fee, shall not have Dower, and yet he might have forfeited the Fee
simple or given it by Feoffement, but not by grant of the Reversion. 12. E. 4.
2. and join the Mise in a Writ of Right, for he in Reversion, and the Tenant
for life may do it. Quaere, if he may release it. 29. H. 8. B. Mortdauncestor.
59.

Mortmain.
Lord and Tenant, the Tenant leases for life to I* S. the remainder to an Abbot
and his successors, the Lord need not to make claim, till the Tenant for life
be dead; for if he will wave the Remainder it is not Mortmain. But of a grant of
a Reversion with Attornment, it is otherwise. And if the Tenant makes a Feoffment
in Fee, to the use of A. for life, and after to the use of an Abbot and his
successors, there it is not Mortmain, till the Tenant for life in use dies, and
he in Remainder takes the profits. Note that appropriation of an advowson
without license is Mortmain. 25. H 8. B. Mortmain. 37.

If a man leases to an Abbot and his successors, 8. H 4. 15. B. Mortmain 11.
or to another Religious person for a 100 years, and so from a 100. years to a
100 years, until 300 years be incurred, this is one Lease, and such Lease is
Mortmain by the words of the Statute de religiosis. 6. El. Com. 273.
7 E* 1^ S. color termini, for the said Statute is, quod nullus emeret, vel
sub color donationis aut termini, aut ratione alterius tituli ab aliquo
reciperi, aut art vel ingenio sibi appropriare presumat, etc. And the same Law
o^ a Lease for 400 years, or the like, Contrary, if a man leases for a 100
years, or the like, and covenants that he or his heirs at the end of a 100
years, will make another Lease for another 100 years, and so further, this is
not Mortmain, 3. E* 4. 13. by Nele accord.
for it is but one Lease for a 100 years, and the rest is but a Covenant, but in
the first case, for that is for 300 years at first in effect, and all by one
and the same Deed, 3. E* 4. 13. by Nele contra.
(B. Mortmain 30. Leases 49.) And 99 years is not Mortmain. And also a Lease
for a 100 years is not Mortmain by B. for it is a usual term. 47. E. 3. 11. see.
1. E. 6. It Is. Devise.
29. H. 8. B. Mortmain 30.

By Br. if an alienation in Mortmain be, and the alienee is disseised, and the
disseisor dies seized, his heir is in by descent, yet the Lord may enter within
the year, for he has but only a Title of Entry, and cannot have an Action.
But otherwise of him who has right of Entry, and may have an Action. 1. E. 6.
B. Mortmain. 6. the end.

Negativa preignans;
see Tit. Issues joins.

Non-ability.
Where, and in what Case a^^ Alien is disabled from bringing of an Action,
what not? See Tit Alien.

Non est factum.
Note, See Cokes Rep. Whelpdales case*
that in Debt upon an obligation made for Usury, and the Defendant pleads this
matter, he shall conclude, and so the obligation is void Judgment si action,
and shall not conclude non est factum. 7. E. 6. B. Non es^ factum. 14. the end.

Nonsuit.
Note, that the King cannot be nonsuited; Yet B. seems that he who tam pro
Domino rege, Entries?
quam pro seipso sequitur may be nonsuited. 25. H. 8. B. Nonsuit. 68.

Note, 14. H. 8. 24. per Cur. 28.
when the parties in an Action have demurred in judgment, and have a day over,
H. 6. 8. and 4. E* 4. 24* accord.
there at that day the Plaintiff may be demanded, and may be ^onsuited, as well
as at a day given after issue joined. 38. H. 8. B. Nonsuit. 67.

Nontenure.
Where a man is barred by a false verdict, See 20 H. 8. after.
and brings an attaint against the first Tenant, nontenure is no plea, for he
is privy; contrary of a stranger, as where the Tenant infeoffs a stranger
after. 19. H. 8. B. Nontenure 6.

In an attaint Non tenure is no plea ^or a privy to the first action: 29 H. 8.
2* see 19 H. 8. before.
contra ^or a stranger to the first Action (B. Nontenure 16.) And it is said that
it is ^o plea in an attaint, to say that the Plaintiff in the Attaint has
entered after the last continuance. 20. H. 8. B. Nontenure 22.

Nontenure is no plea in Waste. See Tit. 14. H. 6. 2. See Cokes Rep. the
Countess of Rutlands Case: noble: by marriage loses her dignity: in such case
not noble by descent.
Waste.

Nosme. Name.
What shall be a good name of Purchase. See Tit. Descent.

Note, if a Duchess, or other such state marries with a Gentleman or an
Esquire, she by this shall lose her dignity and name by which she was called
before as in the case of the Lady Powes, and Duchess of Suffolk, the one
espoused R. Haward, and the other S. the Duchess, AdrJan Stokes; and therefore
Writs were abated in their Cases; For by the book of Heralds; quando mulier
nobilis nupserit ignobili, desinit esse nobilis. 4. M. 1. B. Brief; 546. Nosme.
69.

Notice. Fitz. 35. H.

The Patron shall take notice of every voidance of an Advowson, except
resignation, and of this the ordinary shall give him notice. Lecture Frowick.
B. Notice 27.

Office devant, etc. Office before, etc.
NOTE, See 35. H* 8. Tit. Forfeiture. St. 54.
by those of the Exchequer; where a man is attainted by Parliament, and all his
Lands to be forfeited; and does not say that they shall be in the King without
Office, there they are not in seizure of the King without Office, for non
constat of Record what Lands they are. 27. H. 8. B Office devant 17.

If the King grant Land for term of life, 18. H. 6. cap. 6.
and after the Patentee dies, yet the King cannot grant it over till the death
be found by office, and this by reason of the Stat. that a grant before office
shall be void. 29. H. 8. B. Office devant ^6.

If an Office find the death of the Kings Tenant, and that his heir is of full
age, and does not say when, there it shall be intended that he is of full age,
tempore captionis inquisitionis, but that he was within age tempore mortis
tenentis, and therefore it ought to be expressed certain when he was of full
age. 29. H. 8. B. Office devant 58.

Note, that it is an ancient course in the Exchequer, See 13. H. 7. 11.
that if it be found by Office that I* S. was seized in Fee and died, sed de
quo vel de quibus tenementa tenentur, ignorant; that a Commission shall issue
to enquire of it certainly, de quo etc. and if it be found that of W. N. then
the party shall have Ouster l'main of the King. But if an Office be found,
Kings and Fineux accord.
quod tenetur de Rege, sed per que servitia ignoratur, 13. H. 7. 5 and 9. 26. H
8. 9. by Bromley see 29. H 8. Tit.
this is good for the King, and it shall be intended to be holden in Capite per
servitium Militare, for the best shall be taken for the King. But now in these
cases, Livery. 2* E. 6. cap. 8.
a Melius in quirendum shall be awarded by the Statute 30. H. 8. B. Office
devant. 59*

Land was given by the King pro erectione Collegii Cardinalis Eborum, 3. E.
Com. 229. See after.
and the College was not erected, and upon office found thereof, the King
seized. Time. H. 8. B. Office. 4. the end.

It Was agreed by the Justices, See 5. E. 6. before.
that the King is not entitled to the land of his ward without office, though
he has in it but a Chattell, yet it comes ratione tenure, which is a seigniory
and free hold in the King. 5. E. 6. B. Office devant. 55.

Note, that of a Chattell the King is in possession without office. And ^contra
of land and of free hold, except of a term; And sometimes he shall be in
possession of inheritance without office; yet the King shall not have the land
of his ward without office, though he has in it but a Chattel; for the ward
comes by reason of the tenure, which is a seigniory and free hold in the King,
and therefore a difference betwixt this, and a lease for years of a man
outlawed: For if a man has a term for years, or a ward, and is outlawed, this
is in the King without office. Lecture B. Office devant. 60.

Officer.
Note, for Law, if a man has a fee of a Lord, and after is made Justice, this
fee is not void by the Law, but after the making of him Justice, he is not to
take any fee, but of the King; and the same law of him who has an office of
Steward, and after is made Justice. Et per plures where a man is a Baily of a
Manor by patent, 39. H. 6. 5. by Prisot. See. 5 M. 1. Tit. Commission.
and after is made Steward of the same Manor by another patent, both patents
are good; For the Suitors are Judges, and not the Baily. But per plures if a
man be a Forrester by patent, and after is made Justice of the same Forest,
the first patent is void. As where a Parson is made a Bishop, the Parsonage is
void, for he cannot be ordinary of himself, 10. H. 7. 7. by Vavisor. 15. E.
4^3. by Brian.
nor punish himself. And B accords that a man cannot be Keeper of a Forest,
and Justice of the Forest, for the killing of the Deer by the Keeper, and the
like, is a forfeiture of his office, which shall be adjudged by the Justices of
the Forest, and he cannot judge him ^ self. But a man may be a Steward of a
Forest by patent, and Justice of the same Forest by another patent, and both
good, for both are judicial, And Justices of the Forest may make a Steward of
the Forest. 29. H. 8. B. Officer. 47.

Note, See Coke Rep. Case of Discontinuance.
that the Sheriff and Escheator void their office by demise of the King, for
they are made by patents, which are as a commission is, and therefore it is used
at the demise of the King for to sue out new patents, as 'twas this year. 1. M.
1. B. Officer. 25. the end.

Obligation.
If A. be bound to B: in 40. s. ad usum ^. S. there I. S. may release the
obligation, See Billing, 2. E. 4. 2.
because that (ad usum) is expressed in the obligation. Et econtra if this did
not appear in the obligation. 36. H. 8. B. Obligation 72.

Oyer of Records, etc. see Tit. Monstrans de faits. Oyer and Terminer.
It Is said that if a Commission of Over and Terminer expire or discontinue, ^hen
the indictments and record shall ^e sent into the Kings Bench, and there they
shall be finished (see how Tit. Corone.) 38. H. B. Oyer and Terminer. 1. the
end.

It Was granted in the case of Ben: Smith upon the Statute of 2. E: 6. cap: 24.
of Felony in one County, and accessory in another County; that the Justices of
the Kings Bench are Justices of Oyer and Terminer of Felony, Treasons, and the
like, by the Common Law, and Custom of the Realm. 3. M. 1. B. Oyer and
Terminer. 8.

Pain.
It Was adjudged in Curia hospitii Domini Regis apud Greenwich versus Edmundum
Knivet militem, See St. 38. C.
that he should be disinherited, imprisoned for ever, and his hands cut off,
quia percussit quendam hominem ibidem, the King being there in his Court. 33.
H. 8. B. Pain 16. the end:

Panell:
It Was agreed in the Exchequer where (...) jury is awarded de medietate lingue,
where an alien is party, and the panel ^eturned, that the one of the denizens
and the other of aliens shall be sworn, till they have 6 denizens, and 6 aliens
sworn. See Coke upon Lit. and Dyer econtra. 32. H. 8. cap.
The same Law there, where the jury remains for default of jurors, there a Tail
shall be part of English, and part of aliens, and this if the party prays it.
But if he does not pray it, B. seems it is error, except by the Statute of
Jeofails it be helped. 32. H. 8. and so by him where the panel is party, the
party is not compellable to take the jury, except 6 of the one, and 6 of the
other are sworn. 4. E. 6. B. Panel 2. the end.

Parliament.
If the King be entitled to the land of I. S. by forfeiture of Treason, See 31.
H 8. Tit. Extinguishment.
or Felony, by act of Parliament or office, by this all tenures are determined,
as well of the King, as of all others. And there, if this land after be given
to another, by another Act of Parliament saving to all others all their Rights,
Interests, Titles, Rent-service, and the like, as if no such Act had been,
there the Seigniories and the like shall not be revived, for no Seigniorie was
in esse at the time of the second Act made. And here are not words of Gift, 35.
H. 6. 34. Danby accord.
nor Reviving, but words of Saving, which serves not but to save that which in
esse at the time of the Saving, etc. But such Proviso in the first Act would
serve; for this comes with the Act which Intitles the King. And where the King
is Entitled to Land by Office for Escheat, and after it is enacted by Parliament
that the King shall enjoy it, saving to all others their Seigniories, and the
like, there such Saving will not serve (for the reason aforesaid) for all was
extinct before by the Office, and nothing was in esse at the time of the Saving
(which was in ure between the King and Keckwich in the County of Essex, where
R. lost his Seigniory) But there ought to be words affirmative, that the Lords
shall have their Seigniories. 27. H. 8. B. Parliament 77.

Note by Englefield Justice, See 34 H 8. Tit. Remitter. and Dyer.
in the Case between Button and Savage, that where a man has Title to Land by
a Tail, and after the same Land is given to him by Parliament, that his Heirs
shall not be remitted; for by the Act of Parliament all other Titles are
excluded for ever; for this is a Judgment of the Parliament: And where the
Land is gi^en expressly to any person by name, by Act of Parliament, he, nor his
Heirs shall not have other Estate then is gi^en by the Act, but that that only
shall stand. (B. Parliament 73. Remitter ^9. the end.) And the same Law where
^he King had Title in Tail, and the ^and is given to him by Parliament in ^ee,
the Tail is determined. So that ^^e Heir shall not avoid Leases made (...) his
Father, nor Charges, and the (...); for the last Statute binds all for^er
Titles and Estates not excepted. ^9. H. 8. B. Parliament. 73.

If diverse Sessions are in one and the (...) Parliament, H. 6 and 7. E. 6. Com
79. per Justiciarios.
and the signs not a (...) till at last, there all is but one and (...) same
day, and all shall have relati^^ to the first day of the first Sessions, (...)
the first day and the last, all is but (...) and the same Parliament, and one
(...) the same day in Law, except special ^^ntion be made in the Act when it
^ll take force. But every Sessions in which the King signs the Bills, H. 6.
and 7. E. 6. Com 79 by Hales Just.
is a da^ by it self, and a Parliament by it self and shall not have other
relation but to the same Sessions. 33. H. 8. B. Parlia^ment 86. Relation 35.

Note, See 32. H 8. Tit. Demurror in Law. 6, and 7. E. 6. Com. 79. 84.
if a man in an Action, or pleading alleges a Statute, and mis-recite it in
matter, or in year, day, or place the other may demurr generally, for there is
no such Statute, and then ther^ is no such Law, for every one that med^dles
with it, ought to show the La^ truly. But in case of the King it man be
amended, and this in another Term Contrary for a common person. 33. H* 8. B.
Parliament 87.

Memorandum, that at the Parli^^ment holden by adjournment H. the year, it was
admitted by the Kings (...) and so accepted, that if one Burgess (...) made
Major of a Town which has j^^^dicial jurisdiction, and another is (...) that
these are sufficient causes to ele^ new ones, wherefore they did so (...) the
Kings Writ out of the Chancer comprising this matter, which was a^^mitted and
accepted in the Common House of Parliament. 38. H. 8. B. Par^^^ament. 7.

Parnour, Taker of the profits.
An Office is found after the death Cestuy que use that he died seized, and the
heir is in ward of the King, 27. H. 8. cap. 10.
and after a Recovery is had against the Heir during the Possession of the King
as against the Pernour of the profits, Rast, Uses 4. 9. E 4. 24. 26. H. 8. 3.
8. 13. H. 7. 15. Vavisor accord.
before the Statute of Uses 27. H. 8. the Feoffees traverse the office, or sue
an Ouster l'main, this Recovery shall bind the heir, but the Recoverer cannot
enter during the Possession of the King. 29. H. 8. B. Pernour 32:

A man cannot aver another Pernour of the Profits of other things, which are
not in demand. B Pernour 4. the middle.

Patents.
The King gives Land to I* S. Et heredibus masculis suis, the grant is void.
See Tit Estates.

If the King Licenses his Tenant to alien his Manor of D: See Stp. 31.
and he aliens it except one acre, the license shall not serve it, for the King
is not assertained of his Tenant of all. And if I have a License to impark 200
acres, and do it according, and after increase by other 10 acres, there this is
not a Park. 23. H. 8. B. Patents. 76.

If the King grants omnia terras and tenementa sua in D. this is a good grant
these general words. 30. H. 8: B. Patents 95.

The King gave to the Earl of Rutland in Tail, and after intended to give to
him in Fee simple, and to extinct the Tail, and it was doubted that the surrender
of the Letters. Patents of the Tail, and the cancelling of them, and of the
Inrollment and Bill assigned, will not extinct the Tail, for the Tail executed
may be averred without showing the Patent. 4. E 6. Com. 5. econtra.
And a Formedon lies after the Tail executep, without showing the Patent. And
it was taken that it was not a good surety for the King, for his services to give
the reversion, to to hold the reversion by such services when it vests, and to
except the first services during the Tail, for when the reversion is gone, the
Rent and Services reserved upon the Tail, are gone as well in case of the King,
as a common person. And therefore the devise was, that the King by a new
Patent, reciting the first Patent, shall give the Reversion, and the first Rent
and Services to have in Fee, to hold by such Services, and rendering such Rent,
and by this the King shall have the new Tenur presently, and the Grantee shall
not be charged with double Services and Rents during the Tail, See 35. H 8.
Tit. Tail, contra.
and it was agreed for Law, that if a man loses his Letters Patents, he shall
have a Constat of the Letters, Patents out of the Inrolment, and Bill assigned,
which remains in the Chancery: And therefore B. seems that the Inrolment shall
not be cancelled (B. Patents 97) And it was agreed by Whorewood the Kings
Attorney, See 12. H 7. 12. by Fisher.
and optimos legis peritos, that if Tenant in Tail of the Gift of the King
surrenders his Letters Patents, this shall not extinct the Tail, for the
Inrolment remains of Record, out of which the issue in Tail may have a Constat,
and recover the Land, wherefore they made the Devise aforesaid, viz* that the
King shall grant to the said Earl Tenant in Tail the Fee simple also, and then
a Recovery against him will bar the Tail. See 32. H 8. Tit. Discontinuance de
possession.
Otherwise the Reversion being in the King (B. Surrenders 51.) And it is said for
Law, if the King gives in Fee, or in Tail, or for life, the Patentee Leases for
years, or grants, Leases, or gives part of the Land or of the Interest to
another, and after surrenders his Patent, by which it is cancelled, this shall
not prejudice the third person, that he shall lose his interest by it: for he
may have a Constat out of the enrolment which shall serve him. Quaere inde,
because a Statute is made of it. 4. E. 6. c. 4.
And Quaere if the Common Law shall not serve: for it appears in the book of
Entries fo. that a man pleaded a Constat, 32. H. 8. B. Pattents 79. the end.
Surrender 51.

What thing in action the King may grant, what not? See Tit. Choice in action.

If the King grant a Balywick, or sheriffwick to I. S. absque compotoreddend.
the word absque compot. is worth nothing: for it is contrary to the Nature of the
thing granted, 36. H. 8. B. pattents 99.

If Conusance of plea be granted by the King, he ought to show where; as in
Guild Hall, or the like; and before whom, as before his Steward, etc. And the
King may grant Toll, Fair, Market, and the like: but not to have Assise of
Fresh force, nor Toll traverse, nor Through Toll, nor that the Land shall be
Devisable, 2. H 7. 13. by Keble 37. H. 6. 27. by Litt.
Borrough-English Gavelkinde, nor the like: for these are by Custom, which
cannot commence at this day by grant: for the King cannot make a Law by his
grant: Abr' of the Ass. 56 9. H. 6. 27. by Martin.
and that by grant of Conusance of pleas, he shall not hold plea of an assise,
nor of a certificate of assise.

And it is said for Law, 44. E. 3. 18. by Thorp. Fi^z. accord. 26. H. 8. 1. and
21. E 48. by Hussy. 3. H. 7. 6. 11. E. 41. by Litt. See Coke Rep. Altonwoods
case.
That a false consideration in Letters patents shall not avoid them: as where
the King for ten pound to him paid, gave such Land, and the ten pound is not
paid, the patent is not void, shall not be repealed: Contrary of a patent
granted upon a false surmise: as to falsify that the land came to the King by
attainder of I. S. which is not true, or the like. Quaere, the diversity, 37.
H. 8. B. patents 100.

Where the King, Tenant in Tail, cannot discontinue, or charge by grant, by
patent, See Tit. Discontinuance de possession. Time E. 6. accord.


Note, that it was agreed, That where the King grants Land which is in Lease for
term of years, See 38 H 8. Tit. Discontinuance de possession. and Cokes Rep.
of one who was attainted, or of an Abbey, and the like, that the grant is good
without recital of the Lease of him who was attainted, or of the Abbey: for he
shall not recite any Lease but Leases of Record, Time H. 8. B. patents 93.

It Was granted in the case of Thomas Inglefield, Knight, where the King Receipts,
38. H. 6. 37. by Danby.
quod oum A. B. tenet manerium de B. protermino vitae suae de concessione
nostra, etc. Sciatis nos concessisse C. S. reversionem manerii predict, etc.
Habendum, etc. that this is a good Grant. Therefore B. seems that if the King
mis-recites the date of the first Letters Patents, or the like, yet if he well
recites the estate and the thing, and the name of the Lessee, that then the
Grant of the Reversion is good. For where the King takes notice of his Tenant
for term of life, and of his estate, and grants the Reversion, he is not
deceived in his Grant, for he takes upon him notice of the former Interest for
life, and then the date of the first Patent is not material. Time H. 8. B.
Patents 96.

By Mervin Justice, a Constat is pleadable; contrary of an Inspeximus, for in
the one case the Patent remains, Sec 32. H. 8. before.
and in the other it is lost, And by B. in the Book of entries a Constat was
pleaded, and aid granted of the King upon it. 1. E. 6. B. Patents 97. the end.

Peace.
A man is bound to the peace, and procures another to break, the peace, this is
a forfeiture of his Bond, as it was said Time. H. 8. B. Peace 20.

Peremptory.
A man recovers debt or damages and after brings thereof a Scire Fac' the first
return of Nihil against the Defendant is peremptory, 8 E 4. 15. by Danby.
if he makes default. 24. H. 8. B. Peremptory. 63.

Where a man brings an Action real or mixed, or makes an avowry or conusans, and
issue is taken upon the seisin infra tempus statuti, and it is found against the
demandant, Plaintiff, or avowant, this is peremptory by the same Statute. 1. M.
1. B. Peremptory. 78.

Petition.
It Is held for Law, 3. H 7. 3. by Keble 3. E. 4. 25. and 4. E 4. 25 See Cokes
Rep. Communalty of Sadlers Case and Tit. Traverss etc. 10. H. 6. 15. 4. E 4. 25.
if the King be Entitled by double matter of Record, as it is enacted by
Parliament, that I. S. shall be attainted of Treason, or Felony, and shall
forfeit all his Lands, and also an Office is found thereof, there the party who
has right, cannot traverse, but is put to petition. And the same Law if the
King grant it over after the double matter of Record found. 33. H. 8. B.
Petition. 35, Trovers de office 51.

Note, That Petition was at Common Law, but Traverse is by Statute, Lecture B.
Petition 41. Travers de office 54. See Tit. Travers de Office.

Pledges.
A man gages his goods in pledge for 40 l. borrowed, 22. E. 4. ^1. accord
and after the Debtor is convicted in 100 l. in debt to another, these goods
shall not be taken in Execution till the 40 l. be paid: for the Creditor has
an interest in them: and also goods taken for Distress, cannot be taken in
Execution, 34. H. 8. B. pledges 28.

Pleadings.
Note that it is said for Law, 22 E. 4. 32. by Brian.
That he which pleads a Recovery by default, ought to aver his Title of his
Writ. And also that the Defendant in the Recovery was Tenant of the Freehold
die brevis: but if the recovery were by action tried, he needs not to take the
one averment or the other. Yet it was said, that in a quod ei deforce at he that
pleads the recovery by defalt, need not aver the party tenant of the Freehold
tempore brevis sui, for it is proved that he was Tenant tempore, etc. by the use
of the Quod ei deforceat, for this is the effect of this action; because that
the Demandant in this action, lost by default in the first action: yet he shall
aver the Title of his Writ.

And he which pleads a Recovery in a Writ of Waste by default, 36 H. 6. 29.
needs not to aver the party Tenant; for Non Tenure in this action is no Plea.
24. H. 8. B. Pleadings 6.

He which pleads an entry for to defeat a Collateral Warranty, 3 H. 7. 2. 4 E.
6. Com. 46
ought to aver that he entered in the life of the Ancestor. And in Dower if the
Tenant pleads a disseism by the husband, and the wife pleads a Feoffment by I.
N. to the husband, who after infeoffed the Tenant, and after disseised him, she
shall say that the Feoffment of I. and the seisin of the husband, were during
the coverture; 19. H. 6. 74. 13 H. 8. 15. by Wilby.
and he which derives an interest by Lease from Tenant for life, or in Tail,
ought to aver the life of the Tenant for life, or in Tail, 26. H. 8. B.
pleadings 147.

Where a man ought to aver, that the one and the other are one, and not diverse,
See Tit. Averments.

Where a stranger to a Deed may plead it, where not? See Tit. Estranger.

Note, See Tit. Titles.
for Law, That it is good pleading to say, that I. N. and W. N. were seized in
Dominico pro ut de Feodo ad usum T. P. and his Heirs, without showing the
Commencement of the use^ as to say, that A. was seized in Fee, and infeoffed I.
N. and W: N. ad usum T. P. etc. But a man cannot plead that A. B. was seized in
Tail without showing the gift; for the one is a particular estate, and not the
other, 36, H. 8. B. Bleadings 160.

Plenartie:
Note, See 13. H. 8. fo. 13. by Newd. and fo. 14. by Brud. 33 H. 6. 12.
when there is no Patron, a^ where the Patron is a Priest and is admitted to
this Benifice himself. O^ where my Advowson is aliened in Mortmain, and
appropriated to (...) House of Religion, and the like: in these cases I. may
have a Quare impedit, and there Plenarty by six Month is no plea, 6. H. 8. B.
Plenartie 10.

Praemunire.
Praemunire by Bil in the Kings bench, See Cand. 44 E. 3. 32. and D. S. 57. 104.
See Tit. Bill.

A Prohibition lies often where a Praemunire lies not; as of great Trees, vel
pro decimis, de ceptima part, prohibition lies, and not a Praemunire; for the
nature of the action belongs to the Spiritual Court, but not the cause in this
form. But where it is of a lay thing which never appertained to the Spiritual
Court, 44. E. 3. 36. accord. See D. S. 106 and 8 E. 4. 13. by Catesby that a
prohibition lies.
of this a Praemunire ^ies. as of Debt against Executors upon a simple contract,
or pro lesione fidei, upon a promise to pay 10 l. by such a day, 24. H. 8. B.
Praemunire 16.

Where a man attainted in a Premu^ire shall forfeit his Lands in Fee
imperpetuum, See Tit. Forfeiture de ^erre, etc.

Prerogative:
A man has land in use; See 3 El. com 240
of which, part is holden of A. by prioritie, and the rest of the King by
Posterity in Knights service, and dies, the King shall have the ward of the body
by his prorogative, and by the Statute of 4. H. 7* which gives the ward of
Cestuy que us^ where no will is declared; 4. H. 7. ca. 17. Pre. Re. ca. 2. Stp.
9. and 4. E. 6. Com* 59. by Montague contra.
and per pre^rogativam regis: Yet otherwise it is sai^ of land in use holden of a
common per^son; for the Tenant in use dyed no^ seized, and therefore out of the
case o^ Prerogative for the Land, 21. H. 8. B* Prerogative 29.

Note, See 38 H. 8. Tit. traverse.
by Whorewood the Kings Attorney, and others: where an information is in the
Exchequer upon a pena^ Statute, and the Defendant makes bar, and traverses the
Plea, that the King is bound to stand to the first tra^verse, which tenders an
issue, and can^not waive such issue tendered, and traverse the former matter of
the Plea, See 6 and 7 E. 6. com 85. and 3. El. com. 263. 13 E. 4. 3 Stp. 65.
(...) he may upon a traverse of an office, an^ the like where the King is sole
party and entitled by matter of Record; for upon the information there is no
offic^ found before: and also a subject is pa^^ty with the King for to recover
the moytie or the like, 34: H. 8. B. Prero^gative 116.

Shelley Just. See 2 E. 6. Tit. Done.
was precise that a gi^^ of the King is good of Chattels movea^bles without
writing; as of a horse^ and the like 35: H. 8. B. Praerogat: 60. and 71. the
ends.

Note by some, the King shall not ^ave a Precipe quod redd. (as a Writ of
Escheat) but his Title shall be found (...) Office. Time H. 8. B. Praeroga^^ive
119.

Where the King shall have his age? ^here not? See Tit. Ag^*

It Is said if an information be by a subject for the King in the Exchequer, 34
H. 8. before. and 38. H. 8. Tit.
and ^^e Defendant pleads a Bar, and traver^s the information, Travers per etc.
e contra. Br. Traverse per 207.
the King may tra^erse the matter of the Bar if he will, and is not bound to
maintain the mat^er which is contained in the absque hoc ^. E. 6. B.
Praerogative 65. the end.

The Prerogative of the King is a ^reatise of the Common Law, Praerogativa* Reg.
and not ^^tute nor Declaration by Parliament. ^^d a Mine of Ore, or Argent is
to the ^wner of the soil. Quaere, Lecture B. ^raerog. 134.

Where the Incumbent is made a Bi^hop, the King shall present by his
Pre^ogative. See Tit. Presentation.

Prescription.
Where prescription shall be gone by acceptance of a grant of the thing, Se^
Tit. Estopel.

It Was said for Law, See Coke upon Lit
that a custom^ may be alleged where there is no person that can prescribe: as
inhabitants cannot prescribe: but they may allege a custom that the
inhabitants may Common in D. for the one goes with the place, and the other
with the per^son, which person ought to be able (...) prescribe; for otherwise
it is worth nothing, 2. M. 1. B. Prescription, 100 the end.

Note, 15. H. 7. 7. contra per curiam, as I take it See 33. H 8. after. and
Dyer.
by the Justices, that if a mangran^ prox. presentationem to A. and aft^^
before avoidance grants prox. presentationem ejusdem Ecclesiae to B. the second
grant is void: for this was gran^^ed over by the Grantor before: and (...)
shall not have the second presentatio^ for the grant does not import it, 20. H
8. B. Presentation 52.

A man grants prox. presentationem and has a wife and dies, See 20 H. 8.
before. and Dyer.
the Grant^ shall have the first presentation, the he the second, and the wife
for Dowre the third, 33. H. 8. B. Presentation 55.

Note, See 4 M. 1 Tit. commissions 41. E. 3. 5. accord See 11 H 4. 37. cont^a
by Hill.
by B. That the Bishop of E^y said to him, that he saw a presentation in the
time of E. 3. made by the said King: That he presented to a Be^ifice pro illa
vice, which was of another patronage, by these words, ratione praerogative sue,
which Benefice voided by reason that the King had made the in^umbent of it a
Bishop, who was conse^rated: so that when a Benefice becoms ^oid by making of
an incumbent a Bishop, the King shall present to all his ^ormer benefices pro
illa vice, whosoe^er is Patron of them, 4. M. 1. B. Presentation 61.

Privilege.
Note, when a Record is removed out of a Court of Record, as London, etc. ^^to
the Kings Bench, or into Common ^ench, there they shall not proceed upon the
Original which was in London: ^ut in the Kings Bench the party may ^d himself
by Bill of Midd. brought ^ere against the party upon his appear^nce: and in the
Common Bench to ^^ing an Original retornable the same ^ay. 36. H. 8. B.
privilege 48.

Procedendo.
If a man arrested in a Franchise, sue^ a Writ of Privilege and removes the
body and the cause, and after come^ not to prove his cause of Privilege, the
Plaintiff in the Franchise may have (...) Procedendo. And therefore B. seem^
that there the first sureties remain: See 32 H 8. Tit. Mainprize contra.
otherwise if it had been dismissed by allowance of the privilege, for then
h^^ Sureties are discharged. Yet it seem^ to him, that when they remove the
body and the cause, they remove no sure^ties: but then there is not any Recor^
against them; and then it seems tha^ the privilege being allowed, the
sure^ties are discharged. Otherwise whe^^ the privilege is not allowed; for
the^ the Prisoner and the cause was alwaie^ remaining in the custody of those
of the Franchise. 31. H. 8. B. Procedendo 1^^ Sureties 28.

Proclamation.
Note, that none can make Proclama^tion but by authority of the King, (...)
Majors and the like, who have priv^^ledge in Cities and Boroughs to do it, or
have used it by custom. And Sir Edmund Knightly, Executor to Sir William
Spencer, made Proclamation in ^ertain market Towns, That the Creditors should
come by a certain day, and claim and prove their Debts, etc. due by the
Testator; and because that he did it without authority, he was committed to the
Fleet, and put to a Fine, 22. H. 8. B. Proclam. 10.

Prohibition.
It Is agreed, That if a man be sued in the Spiritual Court, Fitz. accord 43. H.
for Tithes of seasonable wood, the party grieved may make a suggestion in
Chancerie, or in the Kings Bench, that he is sued in the Spiritual Court for
Tithes of great Trees, which pass the age of 20. years, by the name of Sylva
Cedua, which is seasonable wood used to be cut, where indeed it is great Trees,
and pray a Prohibition, and have it. And the same Law where a man is sued in
curia Admiral' for a thing done upon the sea, where indeed it was done upon the
land, there upon a surmise that it was done upon the land, he shall have a
prohibition. 31. H. 8. B. Prohibition 17.

Property.
It Was agreed by the Justices, That if a Frenchman inhabit in England; and after
War is proclaimed betwixt England and France, none may take his goods, because
that he was here before^ but if a Frenchman comes here after the War
proclaimed, be it by his own good will, or by Tempest; or if he yields, and
renders himself, or stands to his defense, every one may arrest him, and take
his goods: and by this he has a property in them, and the King shall not have
them: and so it was put in ur^ the same year, betwixt the English and Scotch; and
the King himself bough^ diverse prisoners and goods the sam^ year when Bullen
was conquered of hi^ proper subjects. 36. H. 8, B. Property and proprietate
probanda 38, the end.

Who shall have property in an estray^ See Tit. Estray,

Quare Impedit.
BY Whorewood the Kings Attorney, Contra P 36 H. 8. B. Quare imped. 2. the end.
by Bromley and Hales Sergeants See Coke upon Lit.
clearly; If two joint Tenants are, the one presents sole, and his Clerk
in^cted, the other is out of possession, ^ 5. H. 8. B. quare imped. 52. the
end. Quare imped. by Mark Ogle, against ^arrison, Clerk incumbent; who was in
^y the presentation of the King: and therefore the Writ was brought against ^im
soly: and pending the Writ of ^^are imped. the Plaintiff dyed after the ^
months past, who had but prox. pre^^tationem by grant, 14 H. 8. 3. by Fitz
James.
his executors ^ought another quare imped. by jour^es accounts, intending to
have saved ^e matter by the journies. And (...) the Justices of the Common
Bench, ^here the Plaintiff dies, the Executors ^all not have a Writ by journies
ac^^unts. (and B. seems that where the plaintiff dies, See Coke Rep case of
Journies accounts.
none can have another writ by journies accounts. But contra in some cases
where the Defendant dies having the writ. (B. Journeies accounts 23: Quare
imped. 58.) And note by B. where the Grantee de prox. presentatione brings a
Quare impedit as before, and dies, after the six months past pending the Writ,
and the Executors bring another Quare imped. by Jornies accounts, and take a
General Writ, and count how that the grant was made to the Testator, and he
brought a Quare imped. and dyed, and that they brough^ this Writ, and for that
reason pertine^ ad ipsos presentare, and the Defendan^ ipsos impedit, and then
this imports tha^ this is of a disturbance made to themselves after the 6 months
past, and the nth^^ Writ lies not; for all ought to have been comprised in the
Writ, and cou^^ specially and demand a writ to the B^^shop upon the
presentation, and wr^ of the Testator, and quia non ideo mal^ and nothing
thereof comes in the ca^ aforesaid, betwixt Mark Ogle, an^ Harriston, by B. 4.
E. 6. B. Quare in^ ped 160.

Que estate, whose estate etc.
It Is said for Law, 39 H. 6. 24. by Nedham
That if a man recovers land against I: S^ or disseises I. S. he may plead that
he has his estate, and yet he is in in the Post, 31. H. 8. B: que estate 48.

Que estate in another person of the the Tenancy without showing how, not so in
Seigniory. See Tit Avowrie.

It Was agreed that a Que estate shall not be allowed in one who is mean in the
conveyance; H 2. E. 6. in banco regis accord. 37. H. 6. 32. by Davers.
as to say that A. was seized in Fee, and Feoffed ^. whose estate C. has, who
Infeoffed the Defendant; for the que estate shall be allowed only in the
Defendant or Tenant himself, S. whose estate the Tenant has, 1. E. 6. B. Que
estate 49.

Note that it was agreed by the Justices, That a man cannot convey an interest by
a Que estate, of a particular Estate, as Tail for life or for years, without
showing how he has this estate, be it of the part of the Plaintiff, or
Defendant, 7. E. 6. B. que estate 31.

Quinzisme.
It Was agreed in the Exchequer, That Cities and Boroughs shall pay at Tenths,
and Uplands at Fifteens, 34. H. 8. B. quinzisme, etc. 8.

Note by Exposition of those of the Exchequer, That Tax and Tallage is not
other but Tenth, Fifteen, or other Subsidy granted by Parliament. And the
Fifteen is of the Layitie, and the Tenth is of the Clergy, and is to be Levied
of^ their Land. And the Tenth and the Fifteen of the Layity, is of their goods:
S. decimam partem bonorum in Civitatibus and Burg. Et quinsesimam partem^
bonorum of the Layity in patria, which was Levied in ancient time upon their
goods: S. of the beasts upon their lands, which was very troublesome. But now
it is levied Secundum rat. terrarum suarum by verges of Land, and other
quantities; so that now all know their certainty in every Town and Country
throughout the Realm. But it is yet Levied in some places upon their goods: but
in most places upon their Lands, which was granted by the Barons. 34. H. 8. B.
quinzisme 9.

It Was said for Law, 8 H. 5. Fitz. Ley. 66.
that a man shall not wage his Law in a quo minus, 35. H. 8. B. Ley. 102. quo
minus 5. the ends.

Rationabile Part, etc.
It Was said for Law, F. N. B. 122. L. Magna Chart. ca. 18. Rast. det. to the
King 2.
That the Writ de Rationabili part bonorum is by the Common Law; and that it
has been often put in ure, as a Common Law, and never demurred to: therefore
B. seems that it is the Common Law, 31. H. 8, E. Rationabili part 6. the end.

Recognizance.
Agreed for clear Law in the Chancery; See 36. H. 8. Tit. Stat. merchant.
if a man acknowledge a Statute staple, and after infeoffs the Recognisee, and
he makes a Feoffment over, now the Land is discharged; for the Feoffee is but a
stranger. 5 H. 7. 25 by Town send.
But if the Cognisor repurchases the Land, it shall be put in Execution, and
yet it was once dicharged, Time E. 6. B. Recognizance 9. the end.

Note, that it did appear by search of the Records of the Common Bench, that
the Justices of the Bench may take and Record Recognizance, as well out of
Term, as within Term; and as well in any County of England, as at Westminster
4. M. 1. B. Recognizance 20.

Note, Lecture 8.
That the King himself cannot take a Recognizance; for he cannot be Judge
himself, but ought to have a Judge under him to take it. And none can take a
Recognizance, but a Justice of Record, or by Commission: as the Justices of the
two Benches, Justice of Peace, and the like: for a Conservator of the Peace,
which is by the custom of the Realm, cannot take surety of the Peace by
Recognizance, but by obligation; the same Law of a Constable, Lecture B.
Recognizance 14:

Record.
A man shall not pleadia Record, except it be in the same Court where the
Record remains; 19 E. 4 9 See 21 H. 7. 9.
without showing the Record exemplified sub magno sigillo Angliae, if it be
denied: for it ought to come into the Chancery by Cerciorare, and there to be
exemplified sub magno sigillo; for if it be exemplified sub sigillo de communi
banco, See 11. H. 7. 2. by Fairfax.
Scaccario, or the like, these are but evidence to a Jury. 22. H. 8. B. Record.
65.

It Is said that he that pleads a recovery in a writ of right in a court baron
in bar of an Assise before the Justice of Assise, he ought to show it
exemplified sub sigillo cancel. otherwise it is no plea. But of a Recod in the
common bench, he may vouch it there, and have day to bring it in; the same law
by B. of any other court of Record, Yet otherwise in a court baron, for there
it is a recovery, but no Record, for it is not a court of Record. Time. H. 8. B.
Record. 66. the end.

Note that in the Kings bench they have diverse presidents, 1. H. 7. 20. Contra.
Com. 265.
that in a writ of error upon a fine, the Record it self shall be certified, so
that no plures proclam. shall be made, for if nothing be removed but a
Transcript, they may proceed in the common-bench notwithstanding that, and if
it be reversed, this makes an end of all: but if it be affirmed, 44. E. 3. 37.
by Knivet.
then the Record shall be sent into the common-bench by Mittimus to be
proclaimed and engrossed 4. M. 1. B. Record. 49.

Recovery in value.
Recovery against husband and wife, by writ of entry in the Post where the wife
is tenant in tail, See 25. H. 8. after.
and they vouch over, and so the demandant recovers against the husband and
wife and they over in value, this shall bind the tail and the heir of the
wife. 23. H. 8. B. Recovery in value. 27.

Where a writ of entry in the Post is against tenant for term of life to bind
the fee simple, See 24. H. 8. Tit. Enter congeable.
he ought to pray in aid o^ him in reversion, and then they to vouch upon the
joynder, etc. And such recovery with voucher is used for to doc^ the tail in
ancient demesne upon a writ of right, and voucher over; and this of freehold
there. Yet B. doubt of such recovery upon a plaint there o^ land of base
tenure, for this cannot be warranted, Ideo quaere. 23. H. 8. B. Recovery in
value 27. the middle.

Note, that it was taken, if my tenant for life vouches a stranger, See. 27. H.
8. after. 5. E. 4. 2. contra. by Haydon.
who enters into the warranty, and cannot bar the demandant, by which the
demandant recovers, and the tenant over in value, that this land recovered in
value shall not go to me in reversion after the death of the tenant for life,
See 25. H. 8 after
nor the reversion of the land recovered in value, shall not be in me in the
life of tenant for life, and so it is holden at this day. 25. H. 8. B. Recovery
in value. 33.

Note, See 23 H. 8. before.
by some, where a writ of entry in the Post is brought against a husband and
wife, where the wifis tenant in tail, and they vouch overe and so the
demandant recovers against the husband and wife, and they over in value; if the
wife tenant in tail dies, and the husband survives, this shall not bind the
issue in tail, for the recompense shall go to the survivor, and then it shall
not bind the issue in tail. Yet B. seems that this opinion is not law, for the
recompense shall go, See 25 H. 8. before.
as the first land which was recovered should go. And voucher by husband and
wife shall be intended for the interest of the wife. 25. H. 8. B. Recovery in
value. 27. the end.

Tenant for life, See 25. H. 8. before.
the remainder over, or tenant in tail the remainder over, is impleaded by a
writ of entry in the Post, and he vouches a stranger, the demandant recovers
against the tenant, and the tenant over in value, this shall bind him in
remainder by Monntague Just. and others, for the recompense shall go to him in
remainder. But yet in the case of the Lord Zouch and Stowell in the Chancery,
the law was determined otherwise by all the Justices. B. seems the reason,
because that when he vouches a stranger, the recompense shall not go to him in
remainder; contrary, if he vouches the donor or his heir who is privy. N. B. 148
But after this day many put in^ure to bind the remainder. 27. H. 8. B.
Recovery in value. 28.

Recovery against Feoffees seized to use in tails. See Tit Feoffements to uses.

It Is held, that where tenant for life is, the remainder over in tail, or for
life* and the tenant for life is impleaded, and vouches him in remainder who
vouches over one who has title of Formedon, and so the recovery passes by
voucher, there the issue of him who has title of Formedon may bring his
Formedon, and recover against the tenant for life, for the recompense supposed
shall not go to the tenant for life, and therefore he may recover; for his
ancestor warranted but the remainder, and not the estate for term of life, and
therefore the tenant for life cannot bind him by the recovery, See 24. H. 8.
Tit. Enter. congeable.
for he did not warrant to him. And therefore in such case the sure way is to
make the tenant for life to pray in aid of him in remainder, and they to join
and vouch him who has title of Formedon, and so to pass the recovery, for
there the recompense shall go to both. 30. H. 8. B. Recovery in value. 30.

'Twas agreed that if tenant in tail the reversion to the King, See 22. H. 8.
Tit. Discontinuance de possession.
suffers a recovery, this shall bind him and his issue, but not the King by the
common law. See now the Statute of thereof that it shall not bind the issue.
33. H. 8. B. Recovery in value. 31. Tail. 41. the end.

Relation.
Where an office found for the King shall relate, where not. See Tit. Intrusion.

Of the Relation of an Act of Parliament. See Tit. Parliament.

Note, that the attainder of Treason by Act of Parliament, shall not have elder
relation then to the first day of the Parliament, except it be by special
words that he shall forfeit his lands that he had such a day and after. 35. H.
8. B. Relation. 43.

It Is held for good Law, 30. H. 6. 5. Perk. 6 C. St. 192 A.
that by attainder of felony by verdict, a man shall forfeit all his lands that
he had the day of his felony done or ever after, for this shall have relation
to the Act, contra upon an attainder by out lawry; For B. seems there that he
shall not forfeit but those which he had, 30. H. 6. 5 and St. 192 A. Contra.
Perk. 6. B. See Coke upon Lit.
the time of the outlawry pronounced, or after, for outlawry has not relation,
as a verdict has. Time. H. 8. B. Relation. 42. the end.

Relation of an Inrolment: See Tit. Faitz inrol.

Releases.
Husband and wife purchase in fee, and after they lease for years by Indenture,
and after the husband releases to the lessee and his heirs, this is no
discontinuance, and yet this gives a freehold to the lessee during the life of
the husband; Per plures, without doubt: 29. H. 8. B. Releases. 81.

G. Chancery was possessed of an Indenture, See Lit. Sect. 508 509 accord.
and lost it, and I. S. found it, to whom the said G. C. released all actions
and demands, and after the said I. S. gave the same Indentrue to John Tison,
and after the said G. C. brought in action of detinue against the said I. T.
who pleaded that the said I. S. found the Indenture, and that the said G. C.
released to the said I. S. all actions and demandes, and after the said I. S.
gave the said Indenture to the said I. T. Judgment if action. And it was agreed
in the common Bench, the case being of land demanded ibidem, that this is a
good bar, and that the release of all demandes shall exclude the party of
seizure of the thing and of his entry into the land, 6. H. 7. 15
and of the property of the chattell which he had before. And it was moved in
the Kings bench, and they were of the same opinion, and said that the reason
is, because that entry in land, and seizure of goods are demandes in Law. 34.
H. 8. B. Releases. 90.

Relief,
See Tit. Debt.

Remainder:
See Tit. Descent:

Remitter.
No Remitter against an Act of Parliament. See Tit. Parliament.

Note a Per curiam, See 29. H. 8. Tit. Parliament. 2. M. 1. Com. 114. See Dier.
if Tenant in Tail makes a Feoffement to his use in Fee before the statute of
uses made, 27. H. 8. and dies before the said Stat^te, his heir within age, and
after the Statute is made before the full age of the heir, by which the heir is
in possession by the Statute, he shall not be remitted by it Contrary of a
descent after the Satute for this shall be a remitter. 34. H. 8. B. Remitter:
49:

If a man has a Tittle of entry, See Cok upon Lit.
and not a right of entry, as by escheat mort^maine, assent by a woman to a
ravisho^^ and the like, and takes an estate of the terretenant, he shall not be
remited for he has but a Tittle. (And a man cannot be remitted, but in respect
o^ a right before, as where a man is di^seised and takes an estate of the
disseisor, he is remitted, for he had a right of entry before.) And the same
Law where a man decaies his Tenements, or converts Land from tillage into
pasture against the Statute, 4 H. 7. ca. 19.
and makes an estate for life to his Lord, he shall have no other estate: for
he had but a Title of entry, and not a right of entry. Quaere, for Non
adjudicatur. 34. H. 8. B. remitter 50.

Where a Devise shall take away a descent, and will not remit: See Tit: Devise.

Repleder.
It Was in use in the Kings bench, P. 7. E. 4. 1 acccord
though that the Jury be ready to pass there, if there be a Jeofail aparent in
the Record, the Inquest shall be discharged, 35. H. 8. B. repleder 54.

Rescous,
See Tit. Distress.

Reservations.
If a man Leases his manor except the wood, 46. E. 3. 22.
and underwood, by this the soil of the wood* Fank. accord.
is excepted by Baldwine, wine Chief Justice of the Common-Bench: See 14 H 8.
by Brudnel.
Fitz. Justice, and Knightly, and Mart Sergeants: contrary, Spilman, and W.
Conigs' Just. 33. H. 8. B. Reservations 39.

Restitution.
A man is attainted of Treason, See 32 H 8. Tit. Denizen and Coke upon Lit.
the King may restore the Heir to the Land by his Patent of Grant, but he
cannot make the heir to be heir of blood, nor to be restored to it without
Parliament: for this is in prejudice of others, 3. E. 6. B. Restitution 37.

Restore al primer action. Restored to the first action.
If a man enters* where his entry is not lawful, See Tit. Judgment. See Coke
upon Lit.
as the heir in Tail after discontinuance, or the heir of a Woman, or the Woman
her self after discontinuance, and the other upon whom he enters recovers
against him, there they, S. the heir in Tail, or the woman, or her heir, is
restored to their first action of Formedon, or, Cui in vita Yet, if such who
enters where his entry is not lawful, makes a Feoffment, and the other upon
whom he entered, recovers: 9. H 7. 25 Fineaux accord. and Thor. 41. E. 3. 18.
now the first action is not restored to the issue in Tail, nor to the Woman,
nor to her heir, by reason of the Feoffment, which extincts right and action.
But if he which so enters, makes a Feoffment upon condition, and for the
condition broken, reenters before that he upon whom he entered has recovered:
and then he recovers after the re-entry made by the condition, there he which
made the Feoffnient upon Condition, is restored to his first action: for the
entry by the Condition, extincts his Feoffment, 23. H. 8. B. Restore al primer
action 5.

Return de avers. Retorn of beasts.
Note by the opinion of the Court, 19. H. 8. 11. 6. and 7 E. 6. com. 82.
That if a man be nonsuited in a Replevin, and a retorn is awarded: and the
Plaintiff brings a Writ of second deliverance, and suffers it to be
discontinued, retorn irreplegible shall be awarded, as well as if the Plaintiff
had been non suited in the Writ of second deliverance, 17. H. 8. B. Return de
avers 37. Second deliverance 15.

Revivings. See Tit. Extinguishments. Riot. Rout, and unlawful Assembly.
Note, that Riot is where three or more do an unlawful act in Deed, and
execute it, as to beat a man, enter upon possession, or the like: unlawful
Assembly is, where a man assembles people to do an unlawful act, and does not
do it, nor execute it in deed. And Rout is, where many assemble themselves for
their own quarrel; this is a Rout, and against law, though it be not executed:
as inhabitants of a Town for to break down a hedge, wall, or the like, to have
Common there or to beat a man who has done to them Common displeasure, or the
like, Lecture B Riots 5.

Sanctuary.
See Tit. Corone.

Saver default, Saving default. See Tit. Judgment. Scire facias.
Of a thing Executory; a man shall have Execution for ever by scire facias, See
Tit. Execution.

Where Debt lies, and where a scire facias. See Tit. Debt.

Where a scire facias upon a Recognisance shall be brought? See Tit. Lieu'

Second Deliverance.
See Tit. Retorn de avers.

Seisin.
If a man holds of the King, 13. H. 7. 15
and holds other Land of another Lord, and dies, his heirs within age, who
intrudes at his full age, and pays the rent to the other Lord, 33. H. 6. 35. by
Davers. St. 9. 26. H. 8. 8. by Norw. 2 and 3. E. 6. ca. 8.
this is a good Seisin, and shall bind him after he has sued livery: for the
Seigniory was not suspended by the possession of the King, but only the
distress: for after Livery, the other Lord may distrain for the arrearages due
before, per optim. opinionem tune. See now the Statute thereof, That the
officers of the King shall render yearly the rent to the Lord, and the heir
shall not be charged with it by distress after upon livery sued, as he was at
Common Law, 34. H. 8. B. Seisin, 48.

Several precipe.
It Was agreed that a man may have Debt and Detinue by one and the same Writ by
several Precipe, ^1. H. 6.
the one shall be Debet, the other Detinet, Tim. H. 8. B. several precipe 5.
the end.

Several Tenancie.
In an Assise, 30 Ass. 14.
several Tenancy is no plea: and the same Law in other actions ^here no land is
demanded in certain, 24. H. 8. B. several Tenancy 18.

Statute Merchant.
It Was said for Law, That if a man sues Execution upon a Statute Merchant, or
Statute staple, and part of the Land is extended nomine omnium terrarum, which
is returned according, and the party accepts it, he shall never have an Extent,
nor re-extent of the rest.

And that upon a Nihil returned upon a Testatum est, 26 H. 8. 7 by Fitz. see 33
H. 8. after.
he may have Process in another County: for there the judgment shall be quod
habeat exeontionem de terris quousque summa Levitur.

Yet B. seems otherwise of such retorn of Goods, 29. H. 8. B. Statute Merchant.
40:

Note if a Statute staple be extended, and so remains by seven years without
Deliberate made, yet he may have a Deliberate at the end of 7* years, but he
who has the land delivered to him by liberate upon a Statute cannot make a
surrender conditional to the conusor, and enter for the condition broken, after
the time of the extent incurred; as land of 10 l. per an. is delivered in
execution for 40l. this may incur in 4. years, there the Conusee by such
condition, cannot enter after the four years incurred, 15 E. 4. 5 BrJan accord.
7 H. 7. 12. accord. by the ReReporter See 29 H 8. before 4 E. 6. Com. 61
for he ought to take the profits upon his Extent presently. And he shall not
hold over his time nisi in speciali casu, as where the Land is surrounded with
water, sudden tempest, or the like. And the judgment shall be Quod teneat
terram ut liberum tenementum suum quousque denarii leventur, 33. H. 8. B.
Statute Merchant. 41.

It Is said for Law, That if the Conusor upon a Statute Staple has a Reversion,
and grants it over, and after the Tenant for life dies, this Land shall not be
put in execution: for the Reversion was never extendable in the hands of the
Conusor, 33. H. 8. B. statute Merchant. 44. the end.

Note, by 45 E. 3. 22. by Finch. 13 H. 7. 22. by Keble: see Time E. 6. Tit.
Recognisance.
Bromley, Hales, and Portman Justices, and Rich, who was first Chancellor of
England, and Apprenticius Curiam That if the Conusee purchases parcel of the
Land after the Statute acknowledged or Recognized, this ^s no discharge of the
Statute against the Conusor himself. But the Feoffees of ^he Conusor of other
Parcels, shall be ^here of discharged. But if the Conusee ^ath the Land
delivered in Execution, and purchases parcel of the land of the Conusor, 11 H.
7. 4, 5. E. 6. com. 72.
this is a discharge of the in^ire Statute. 36. H. 8. B. Statute Merchant. 42.

It Was said for Law, that if the Conusee upon a Statute staple dies, and ^is
executors sue execution in the name ^f the Testator, as if he were in life, and
the Sheriff takes the body in the ^ame of the Testator, etc. yet this is ^ot
execution for the executors, but ^hey may after have execution in their ^wn
name; for the first execution in ^he name of him that was dead before ^he Test
of the Writ, was void, and ^he body cannot remain to satisfy him who was dead
before. Liber intrac. fo.
Nor the She^iff cannot deliver the land nor goods ^o him who is dead, juxta
formam bre^is. And by B. in the book of En^ies, the executors of the Conusee
shall have execution upon a Statute Merchant, without Scire Facias, and this
upon surmise as it seems to him. And if the Conusor be returned dead, yet
execution shall proceed of his Lands and Tenements without Scire Fac' against
his heir: And the exten^ and Liberate shall be served imediatly. Yet by B. no
remedy appears there for the goods of the Conusor* when the conusor is dead, to
have any execution of them. 36. H. 8. B. Statute Merchant. 43:

It Is said if a Writ of execution with extendi facias issues upon a Statute
Merchant, that the Writ ought to be returned, and the land upon thi^ delivered
to the Conusee by Liberate inde. Time H. 8. B. Statute Merchant. 32. the end.

Supercedias.
It Was holden for Law, th^^^ a writ of attaint a man shall ^ot have a
Supercedias for to ^isturb execution; 5 H 7. 22 4 E. 6. Com. 49 4. E. 6. Com.
49.
for the ^erdict shall be intended true ^ntill it is reversed, etc. And ^^at the
Register which gives (...) Supercedias there, is not Law. Contrary upon a Writ
(...) Error; for it may be inten^ed that Error is for the suit ^f the
Defendant, etc. 33. H. B. Supercedias. 24.

Sureties.
Where Sureties in London ^^all remain after the action ^emoved? and e contra.
See Tit. ^^ocedendo.

Affirmatur pro lege, 1. H. 7. 1. and 1. E 3 3.
that ^uretie of the Peace is discharged by the death of the King, for it is to
observe t^ peace of that King, and when he dead, it is not his peace. 1: M. 1.
Surety. 20.

Surrender.
Tenant for term of life surrenders him in reversion out of the land which he
agrees, 14. H. 8. 21. Br. accord.
the free hold by the is in him presently, and he is Tena^ to the action by
precipe quod redd^ without entry, but he shall not ha^ Trespass without Entry.
31. H. 8. ^ Surrender. 50.

Where tail shall be extinct by su^^render of Letters Patents, where no^ see
Tit Patents.

Note in the Case of Culpeper tw^ said that the King himself cannot r^^cord, or
receive a surrender of land (...) Letters Patents, made to him extr^ curiam,
but this ought to be before his Chancellor or other Justice to the authorized.
2. E. 6. B. Surrender. 53. the end.

If a man leases for years, the remainder over for years, See Coke upon Litt.
and after the fir^ Termor grants his interest to the Le^sor, this is no
surrender by reason (...) (...) mean interest of the term in re^^inder. See 4.
E. 6. Tit. Extinguishment.
And a Termor makes his essor his Executor and dies, this is no ^^rrender, for
he has this to another (...), contra whorewood inde. 2. E. 6. B. ^^rrender 52.

Note, Perk. 115. H. See Coke upon Lit.
where a man leases land for (...) of years, the remainder over for (...), the
remainder over in fee, or re^^rving the reversion, there he in remainder for
term of life, may surren^er to him in reversion, or to him in remainder in Fee,
and the estate for ^erm of years is no impediment, for ^^ough it cannot give
the possession of (...) land, yet it gives the possession of (...) free hold
which is in the thing which was surrendered. 3. M. 1. B. Surrender. 55.

Suitor.
It Was said for Law in the Star Chamber, See Tit. Court Baron, and Manor.
betwixt Brown Justice, and ^ion Grocer of London, that a Court (...) may be
holden before two sui^^rs, for the plural number suffices* ^ime. H. 8. B.
Suit. 17.

Tail.
REcovery upon voucher against Tenant in tail, is a bar by reason of the
recompense in value. And a recovery b^ writ of entry in the post by single
voucher does give but the estate which the tenant in tail has in possession
tempor^ recuperationis, so that if it were in o^ another estate then the tail,
there the tail is not bound against the heir. But the double voucher is to make
the tenant in tail to discontinue, and to bring the writ of entry against the
feoffee, and then the feoffee shall vouch the tenan^ in tail, and he shall vouch
over, and so shall lose; and this shall bind all interests and tails that the
vouchee had. 23. H 8. B. Tail 32.

Tenant in tail has issue and asiens with warranty, Lit. 160. N. B. 143. 13.
H. 7. 24. by Towns. 10. H. 7. 8. Vavi. sor accord. 2. M. 1. com 110.
and leaves assets and dies, the issue cannot recover by Formedon; for the
warranty and assets is a bar. And if the issue aliens the assets, yet he shall
not have a Formedon. But if he has issue and dies, there the issue of the
issue shall have a Formedon, because that the assets is not descended to him.
Yet is said that if the issue upon whom the warranty and assets descended
brings a formedon and is barred by judgment, N. B. 144. and 48. E. 3. 9. by
Finch. contra. See Time H 8. Tit. Formedon.
and aliens the assets and dies, his issue shall not have a Formedon, because
that his father was barred by judgment. B. Tail 33. And if the tenant in tail
has issue two sons, by diverse venters, and discontinues, and dies, and an
ancestor collateral of the eldest son releases with warranty, and dies without
issue, and the eldest son dies without issue, before (...) Formedon brought,
the younger son may recover by Formedon; for he is not heir to the warrantor,
and his brother was not barred by judgment. Yet B. doubts thereof; for it
seems to him that the descent of the Collateral warranty extincts the tail, But
if the eldest had been barred by judgment, then clearly the younger is gone
also. 24. H. 8. B. Tail 33. Formedon 18.

Tenant in tail, the reversion to the King, suffers a recovery quid operatur ^y
it. See Tit. Discontinuance de possession and Recovery in value.

If the King gives lands in tail by his Letters Patents, See 32. H. 8. Tit.
Patents.
and after the donee surrenders his letters patents to the K. the Tail by this
is not extinct. 35. H. 8 B. Tail 38.

The King Tenant in Tail cannot discontinue by grant by Patent. See Tit.
Discontinuance de Possession.

Tenant at Will.
Note for Law, that there is no Tenant by sufferance, See 22. E 4. 38. by
Hussy.
but he that first enters by authority and lawfully, as where a man leases for
years, or for term of another life, and holds over his term after the term
expired, or after the death of cestuy que vie. And Tenant at will is, where a
man leases his land to another at will; for he who enters of his own head is a
Disseisor. Time H. 8. B. Tenant per copy. 15. the end.

Tenant by Copy.
Note, that it was said for Law, M. 26. H 8. accord in Essex, and Fitzh. in the
Duchy Chamber. Lit. 16. 4. El. com. 233. Westminster. 2. cap. 1. Rast. Tail 1. See
Coke upon Lit. and the 3. Rep.
that Tail may be of a Copyhold, and that a Formedon mayly of it in Discender
by Protestation, in nature of a Writ of Formedon in Discender at common Law,
and good by all the Justices, for though that a Formedon in Discender was not
given but by Statute; yet now this Writ lies at common Law and it shall be
intended that this has been a custom there de tempore, etc. and the Demandant
shall recover by advise of all the Justices, 15 H: 8. B: Tenant per Copy 24.

Where a Stuard, or under-stuard may let by Copy, and e contra, See Tit: Court
baron.

Note, See Cook upon Lit. and his Rep.
that if a man leases a Manor for years, in which are Copy-holds, and after a
Copyholder dies, the termer of the Manor grants the land by Copy for three
lives, this is good; for the custom through all England is, that the Lord, for
the time being, may demise by Copy, etc. and this notwithstanding that he is
but durante been placit. or at Will. And it is held that such Tenant of a Manor
cannot demise, reserving less rent then the ancient rent, but he ought to
reserve the ancient rent, or more, quaere of that.

Tenant by sufferance,
see Tit: Tenant at Will.

Tender.
It Is said for Law, that upon a Lease for years, See 4 M. 1. contra. after.
rendering rent with re-entry the Lessee ought to be ready all the day and make
attendance to offer it; Cook upon Lit. and Cluns case in his Rep
and it suffices for the Lessor to come any time of the day, yet the entry is,
that the one and the other attended the entire day, quaere inde 36 H: 8. B:
Conditions, 192. the end, Enter Congeable, 2. the end.

Note that 'twas agreed in the Sergeants Case, 4. M. 1. Com ^72. 36 H. 8.
before cont. 6 H 7. 3 see Cooks 10 book, Cluns case
that where a man leases Land for years, rendering rent, and for default of
payment a re-entry, it suffices for the Lessee to tender the rent upon the
Land, the last hour of the last day of the Month, if the money may be told
in that time: And so it suffices for the Lessor to demand it the same hour, 4
M: 1. B: Tender, 41.

If a man Leases for years rendering rent at Michaelmasse, and other Covenants,
if he be bound in an obligation to pay the rent precisely, there he shall
seek the Lessor, but if he be bound to perform the Covenants, etc. The tender
upon the land suffices; for there the payment is of the nature of the Rent
reserved, Contrary in the first Case, 6 E: 6. B: Tender, 20.

Tenures.
What shall be a Tenure, and what a Condition, see Tit. Conditions.

What shall be a Tenure in Capite of the King, what not, see Tit. Liverie.

A man makes a Feoffment of the moytie of his Land, Perk. 129 D.
the Lessee shall hold of the Lord by the intyre services which the entire Land
was holden before, Westminster. 3. ca. 2. Rast. Tenure 4.
for the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, tenend. pro particula, holds not
place here; Fitz. 235. A.
for a moytie is not particula: the same Law of a third part, and the like,
which goes by the half and the whole; 22* E. 4. 36. by Catesby.
contrary of an acre or of two acres in certain: And if a man holds two acres
by a hawk, and makes a Feoffment in Fee of one acre; the Feoffee shall hold it
by a hawk, and the Feoffor shall hold the acre by another hawk, 29 H: 8. B:
Tenures 64.

Restitution by Parliament revives a Seigniory or Tenure which was extinct by
attainder of Treason, by Parliament, See Tit. Extinguishment. See Tit. Livery.


See in the Exchequer 3 E: 3. To: 2. 'twas found that a man held of the King in
Knight service in capite, ut de honor suo de Rayleghe, and 'twas taken no
tenure in capite, but a tenure of the honor; and therefore his heir shall have
ouster Omaine of his other Lands, 11 H. 7. 18 by Read.
which should not be if it had been in capite, for then the King shall have all
in Ward by his Prerogative: yet otherwise it is if the Honor be annexed to the
Crown; for then the Honor is in capite. And 11 H: 7. the Honor of Rayleghe
was annexed to the Crown; therefore now it is in capite. And where the King
gives Land to hold of him by fealty, and 2 d. pro omnibus servitiis, this is
Socage in capite, for it is of the person of the King, otherwise if it were to
hold ut de manerio de R. 33. H: 8. B: Tenures 94.

It Is held, Westminster. 2. ca. 2. Rast Tenure 4
that if a man made a Feoffment of land before the Stat: of Quia emptores
terrarum to hold of him, and to make suit to his Court; this is good if he has
a Court. But a man cannot commence a Court by tenure made, where he had not a
Manor before; for there the services should be holden of his person (B:
Tenures 34.) And a man cannot make a Manor at this day, See 33 H. 8 Tit.
Manor.
though that he gives Land in tail to hold of him, and by suit of his Court;
for he cannot make a Court; for a Court cannot be but by continuance. And so a
Man may make a tenure, but no Manor nor Court; for a Manor and Court cannot
be but by usage had de tempore cujus contrarium memoria hominum non existit.

Testament.
Testament by a Feme Covert of the assent of the husband, See Tit: Devise.

A man devises his Land to I S; 22 E. 3. 16 B. Devise. 33. See 4 E. 6. Tit.
Estates. See 24 H. 8. Tit. Conditions.
this shall be taken but for term of his life; but if he says paying a 100. l.
to W N this shall be intended a Fee-simple: and if he does not pay it in his
life, yet if his Heir or Executor pay it, that suffises; Quaere of his
Assignee, 29 H: 8. B: Testament: 18.

If a man holds three several Manors of three several Lords in Knight
service, and every of them of equal value; he cannot make his will of two of
the Manors, leaving the third Manor to the Heir; See Cook upon Lit.
but of two parts of every Manor; for otherwise he shall prejudice the other
two Lords, 35 H: 8. B: Testament: 19.

Note, 5 M. 1. Com. 185
by the Doctors of the Civill-Law, and Sergeants of the Common Law; if a man
makes his Testament, and names no Executors, this is no Testament; but yet it is
a good Will of the Land in it, for those are not Testamentary; but in the first
where Executors want, yet the Legacies shall be paid. But if it appears that he
made part of the Testament, and not the whole; there the Legacies shall not be
paid. And where a man makes a Testament and Executors, and they refuse, yet the
Legacies shall be paid; for there is no default in the Testator; and the
Testament shall be annexed to Letters of Administration, 37 H: 8. B: Testament
20.

Note, See Cook upon Lit.
for Law by the Chancellor of England and Justices, That if the Tenant who
holds of the King in Knight service in capite, gives all his Land to a
Stranger, by act executed in his life, and dies; yet the King shall have the
third part in Ward, and shall have the Heir in Ward if he be within age: And if
of full age, he shall have primer sesin of the third part, by virtue of that
clause in the Stat: Saving to the King Ward, 32 H. 8. ca. 1. Rast. Wills 2.
Primer sesin, Livery, and the like, by which it appears that the intent of the
act is, that the King shall have as much as if the Tenant had made a will, See
H. 10. El.
and had dyed seized; yet by all, after that the King is served of his duty of
it, the gift is good to the Donee against the Heir, 2 E: 6. B: Testament 24.

Note, that 'twas adjudged betwixt Vmpton and Hyde, that the explanation of the
Statute of Wills, is not to take effect only from the time of the explanation;
but the first Stat: which is explaned shall be so taken ab initio: So that the
Wills of Vmpton, Gainesford and others which are excepted in the explanation,
shall be taken good by the Stat: 32 H. 8. ca. 1 Rast. Wills 2.
of 32 H: 8. of Wills which was explaned, 4 M: 1. B: Testament: 26.

Testmoignes, Witnesses.
The age of Witnesses in an Aetate probanda, is 42 years, Lecture B:
Testmoignes 30. the end.

Titles.
Note that a man shall make a good title in an Assize to say, See Tit.
Pleadings.
that I N was seized in Fee to the use of T P, which T P infeoffed the
Plaintiff, who was seized and disseized, etc. without showing what person made
the Feoffment to the use of T P, or how the use commenced, 36 H: 8. B: Titles
61.

Travers of Office.
It Is said for Law, that none can traverse, 3 H. 7. 3. by Keble Stp. 63. 21 E.
4. 2. by Noting
except he makes title to the same land in the premises, or close of his
traverse, 22 H: 8. B: Traverse d' Office 48.

'Twas found that I S dyed seized, by which W S his son comes, and says that
the said I S in his life was seized in Fee, and infeoffed A B in Fee, to the
use of the said I S and his Heirs, and dyed; and after by the Stat: of uses 27
H: 8. he was seized in possession without that that I S his father dyed seized
pro ut, etc. and a good traverse: And a Termor cannot traverse an Office by the
Common Law, Stp. 62. See Cook upon Lit.
except it were found in the Office, and then he might have a monstrans de
droit, and ouster L'main the King, 29 H: 8. B: Travers d' Office 50.

Where a man shall have a Petition, where traverse, See Tit: Petition.

Where the King has no other title but by false Office, 35 H 6. 61 Laicon
accord.
there the party who can make title, may traverse as well against the King as
against the party, 2 E. 6. ca. 8.
if the King had granted it over; but now this is helped by Stat: 33 H: 8. B:
Travers d' office 51. the end.

Where a Tenure is found of the King ut de Ducat: See Tit. Age.
suo Lancastrie, which in truth is false; yet this need not to be traversed,
for the King has this Duchy as Duke, not as King; and a man shall not be put
to traverse but where the Office is found for the King, ut pro rege Angliae,
for then he has a prerogative, and as Duke none, 1 E: 6. B: Travers d' Office
53.

Nonsuit or relinquishing of a traverse is peremptory; contra of Nonsuit in a
Petition; and the Judgment of traverse is no other, 4 H. 6. 13.
sed quod manus domini Regis amoneantur, et quod possessio restituatur to him
that traversed, Lecture B: Travorse d' Office 54.

Travers by, etc.
What thing shall be traversable, what not, See Tit: Issues joins.

Action for making false clothes in Bartholomew-Fair, contrary to the Stat: The
other says, that he made them well and truly at D in the County of F without
that that he made them in Bartholomew-Fair in L, pro ut, etc. and a good Plea,
35 H: 8. B: Travers by, etc. 368.

If in Assize the Tenant Pleads that his Father was seized in Fee, See 4 E. 6.
after.
and dyed by Protestation seized: It Is said that the Plaintiff may make title
by a stranger, without that that the father of the Tenant was seized in Fee,
etc. 38 H: 8. B: Travers by, etc. 26. the end.

Information in the Chequer: See Tit. Prerogative.
the Defendant Pleads a Plea, and traverses a material point in the
information, upon which they are at issue; there the King cannot waive this
issue, as he may in other cases where the King alone is party without an
Informor ut supra, by the Kings Attorney and others learned in the Law, 38 H:
8. B: Travers by, etc. 369.

Tender not traversable in a Writ of ^ntrusion, maritagio non satisfac: for the
single value, See Tit: Forfeiture of marriage.

Trespass: The Defendant said, that I N was seized in Fee, and leased to him for
twenty one years, and gave color; the Plaintiff said, that his father was
seized and dyed seized, etc. and ^he entered and was seized until the Trespass,
absque hoc quod dictus J N aliquid habuit tempore dimissionis, and a bad
traverse; See 38. H. 8. before: And Time E. 6. after.
but he shall say without that that I N was seized in Fee modo and forma pro
ut, etc. in Communebanco, 4 E: 6. B: Travers per 372.

Assize. Casus Cooks and Green.
The Tenant makes a bar by a Stranger and gives color: the Plaintiff makes
title by the same person by which the Defendant made his bar, s: that I S was
seized and gave in tail to his father, who infeoffed W N who infeoffed the
Tenant, upon whom A B entered and infeoffed the grandfather of the Plaintiff,
whose Heir he is in Fee, who dyed seized, and the Land descended to the
Plaintiff, and so he was in in his Remitter, until by the Defendant disseized:
And in truth A B never entered, nor never infeoffed the Grandfather; and yet
'twas held clearly, that the Tenant in his bar to the title, cannot traverse
the Feoffment of A B, but ought to traverse the dying seized of the
grandfather of the Plaintiff which remitted him, for this binds the entry of
the Tenant, and is the most notable thing in the title, 4 E: 6. B: Travers per
154.

Trespass. See 4 E. 6. before.
The Defendant said that I was seized, and infeoffed him, and gave color; The
Plaintiff may say, that H was seized and leased to I at will who gave to the
Defendant, and R re-entered and infeoffed the Plaintiff; he ought to say,
without that that I was seized in Fee modo and forma pro ut, etc. Time: E: 6.
B: Travers per 217. the end.

Place not traversable, See Tit: Attaint,

Treason.
A Chaplain had affixed an ancient seal to a Patent of non-residenee, See St.
3. B.
made by himself, of the part of the King, and was imprisoned in the Fleet for
it: And 'twas holden misprision, and no Treason, by the Justices, and he
escaped and was not put to death; for 'twas said, That because he did not
counterfeit the Kings seal, but took an ancient seal, this is not Treason,
37 H: 8. B: Treason, 3. the end, 5.

Note, that in January this year, H: Howard Earl of Surrey, son and Heir
apparent of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, was attainted of high Treason, for joining
the Arms of England before the Conquest, and other Arms after to his own
Arms; and other pretenses against the Prince; and he was tried by Knights and
Gentlemen, and not by Lords; nec per pares regni, because that he was not
Earl by creation, but by Nativity as Heir apparent of a Duke, See 33 H. 8 Tit.
Trial.
which is no dignity in Law, for if he had been of dignity by creation, and
Lord of Parliament, he should be tried by his Peers, 38 H: 8. B. Treason, 2.
See 2 M 1 after; and so 'twas adjudged, M. 4. M. 1.


'Twas agreed that for misprision of Treason, or if a man knowing counterfeit
money, and imports it out of Ireland into England, and utters it in payment or
the like, a man shall lose his goods for ever, and the profits of his Land, for
his life, and shall be imprisoned for term of life, St. 38. B.
6 E: 6. B: Treason 19. the end.

Note that it appears by diverse Records and Presidents that these words
(compass or imagine the death of the King) are large words, See St. fo. 1. E.
fo. 2. H. and fo. 6. A.
for he that maliciously devises how the King shall come to death, by words or
otherwise, and does an act to explain it or the like, this is Treason: And he
who intends to deprive the King, in this is intended the death of the King;
quaere of the depriving, for by B: a man may deprive and yet intend no death:
And for this cause a Statute was thereof made, 1 E. 6. 12. Rast. Treason 18.
Time H: 8. and E: 6. And the detayner of a Castle, Fortress or the like,
against the King, is levying of war against him, all which words (levying of
war, and the others before) are in the Statute of 25 E: 3. And adhering to the
Enemies of the King, ibm: ayding and strengthening them, See 6 E. 6. before.
1 M: 1 B: Treason, 24.

'Twas agreed in Parliament that for misprision of Treason, the Fine used to
be the forfeiture of all his goods, and the profits of all his Land for his
life, and his body imprisoned ad voluntatem Regis, for misprision is finable, 2
M: 1. B: Treason, 25. the end.

Note, that if an alien borne of a Country which is in amity and peace with
this Realm, comes into the Realm with English Traitors, and levies war,
this is Treason in all; contrary, if the Country of the alien were in war
against England, for then the alien may be killed by Marshall Law, 4 M: 1. B:
Treason, 32.

Trespass.
Note, that in the Register amongst the Writs of Trespass, there are many Writs
of Trespass, quare vi and armis equum suum apud D inventum cepit and effugavit,
34 H. 6. 28. 12 H. 8. 2. by Brook.
etc. And so see that if they be taken in a Common, or other land which is not
to the owner of the beasts, yet he shall have Trespass vi et armis, but not
quare clausum fregit, 3 M: 1. B: Tenants, 421.

Trial.
Peer of the Realm shall be tried by his Peers, if he be arraigned upon
an Indictment; 10 E. 4 6. by Lit. St. 152. A. See Tit. Corone, and Treason.
contrary, if he be arraigned upon an Appeal, for at the suite of parties he
shall not be tried by his Peers: and so was Fines Lord Dacres of the South
this year, and hanged for Felony, for the death of a man who was found in his
company at a hunting in Sussex, 33 H: 8. B: Jurors, 48. the end, Trials, 142.

Note that in a Court Baron the trial is by wager of Law, 12 H 7* 18 Fineux
accord.
but they may be by Jury ex assensu partium: D. S. 14, 15 6 and 7 E. 6. Com.
82 D. S. 20.
And the Maxims and general Customs of the Realm, which is the Common Law,
shall be tried by the Justices: And the same Law of expositions of Statutes;
And by the Civill-Law, the Judges have the construction of Statutes likewise:
But particular Customs shall not be tried but per Patriam, 33 H: 8. B:
Trialls, 143. See 2 M. 1. Com. 117. and 27 H 8 Tit. Enquest.


Note that a Bishop is a Peer of the Realm, and shall be tried per pares
suos upon an arraignment of a Crime, and so put in use; therefore Knights shall
be of the Jury, and if not the Panel shall be quashed; yet see 27 H. 8. that
the Bishop of Rochester was not tried by his Peers, 2 M. 1. B. Trials 142. the
end.

Variance
Quare Impedit upon a grant de proximum presentatione granted to I: N.
Gentleman, and in the writ brought by I. N. this word [Gentleman] is omitted,
and the Defend'. demanded Oyer of the Deed, and had it, and the variance no
matter; for the Action of quare Impedit is founded upon the disturbance, 4 E.
3. 23 by Finc^
and not upon the Deed, as an action of Debt is founded upon the Obligation. 2
E. 6. B. Variance 109.

Verdict.
Note, Contra in a Formedon. 16. E. 3.
That the Court of Common Bench would not permit a Verdict at large in a writ
of entry in nature of an assise: Fitz. Verdict. 21.
because it was a Precipe quod reddat, at which B. admires: for it seems to him
that upon every general issue a Verdict at large may be given, 3. M. 1. Com.
92. 93 See Cokes Rep.
23 H. 8. B. Verdict. 85.

Special Verdict, where the issue is upon an absque hoc. See Tit. Issues,
Joins.

Villeinage.
If a Villein comes to an Executor, D. S. 92. 7. El. com. 292 See Coke upon
Lit. 3 El. com 235.
or to a Bishop, Parson or the like, in jure Ecclesiae, and he purchases Land,
the executor enters, he shall not have it j^re proprio, but as Executor, and it
shall be Assets. And if the Bishop, or the Parson enters, he shall not have it
but in jure Eccesiae, because that they had not the villein in jure proprio,
but in another right: contrary, if they had had the villein jure proprio, 33.
H. 8. B. Villeinage 46.

The King shall not have the villein of another in ward: and yet if there be an
Idiot, he shall have the villein of the other who is so Idiot. Quaere. And the
King shall have the perquisite of a villein of another if he has him as Idiot.
Lecture B. Villeinage 71.

Voucher,
See B: Tit. Voucher. 84.

Usury.
Note that where a man for 100l. sels his Land upon condition, That if the
Vendor or his heirs repaies the sum citra festum Pasche, or the like, tunc
prox. futur. that then he may re-enter, this is not usury: for he may repay the
day before, or any time before Easter, and therefore he has not any gain
certain to receive any profits of the Land: and the same Law where a
defeisance, or Statute is made for the repayment citra tale festum: E contra,
if the condition be that if the said vendor repays such a day, a year, or two
years after, this is usury: for he is sure to have the Lands and the Rents, or
Profits this year, or these two years. And so where a Defeisance, or Statute is
made for the repayment ad tale festum, which is a year or two after, 29. H. 8.
B. Usury 1.

If a man Mortgages his land upon defeasance of repayment to re-enter, See 29 H
8. before
by which Indenture the Vendee Leases the same land to the Vendor for years,
rendering rent: there if there be a conditition in the lease, that if the Vendor
repaies the sum before such a day, that then the Lease shall be void: this is
not usury. Otherwise if it be to repay such a day certain, a year, or more
after. 31. H. 8. B. Usury 2.

VVaife.
It Was agreed, ^. 186. A
if a man be pursued as a Felon, and he flees, and waives his own goods, they
are forfeited, as if they had been goods stolen, 37. H. 8. B. Estray 9.

Waste.
It Was said for Law, 46. E. 3. 31. B. Waste 48
That if a Termot commits Waste, and makes Executors, and dies, the action of
waste is gone: for it does not lie against his Executors (...) for waste done
by themselves, and not (...) the waste of the Testator: N. B. 38. Lit. accord.
10. E. 4. 1 See 4. E. 6. after.
for it is a ^mmon Trespass, which is an action ^^rsonal, and dies with the
Person. 23. ^. 8. B. Waste 138.

Nontenure no plea in waste, See tit. leadings.

It Was agreed that Beech of the age (...) 20 years, nor under 20 years, cannot
(...) cut by Tenant for term of years, or ^erm of life: for they are of the
nature (...) Timber, and may be Timber, and by ^is way they shall never grow to
be ^imber, Time H. 8. B. Waste 134.

Note by Bromley Chief Justice: See Coke upon Lit See Time H. 8. before. and
13. H. 7. 21. by Brian.
If a ^an does waste in Hedge-rows that ^^viron a pasture, nothing shall be
reco^red but locum vastatum, S. the circuit ^f the Root, and not the whole
pasture; and by him and Hales, Justice: the cuting of Beech of the age of ten
or eight ears is waste, 48. E. 3. 25 Finch accord. 10 H. 7. 215.
for they may be timber after.

And that where there is a wood, in which grows nothing but underwood ^he
Termor cannot cut all. Contra, of ^nderwood, where Beech, Ash, and other
principal Trees grow amongst them; for there he may cut all the underwood.

And a Termor may take Beech, A^ es, and the like, which are well sease^ able,
which have been used to be fel^ every 20, or 16, 14, or 12. year And by some
at 26, 27, or 30: years it be seisonable wood, which is calle^ Silvae cedua, 4.
E. 6. B. Waste 136.

It Was holden by the Chief Justice That the racing of a new Frame, See coke upon
Lit
which was never covered, is not waste: bu^ it was agreed, That if a house be
ruino^ for default of any covering at the time of the death of the Lessor, and
after the Tenant suffers it to be more ruinon that of this new Ruin the heir
sha^ have an action of Waste: for this waste which continues: for of the decay
which came in the time of the hei^ the heir shall have an action of Waste e
contra, of that which was in the life of his Father, 2. M. 1. B. Waste 117 the
end.

Writ.
It Was in ure in debt against I. N. o^ C. Yeoman, 30. H. 6. 5. see Dier.
alias dictus I. N. of C. for and heir of W. N. and charged him as heir, that
the Writ abated, because that he charges him as heir, and he ^t named heir in
the premises, but in ^e alias dictus.

So in Debt against I. N. of C. Yeoan, alias dictus I. N. of C. Executor of the
Testament of W. P. and declares against him as Executor, 24. H. 8. B. Brief 418.

Note by Fitz: and Shelley Justices, that if a man pleads a plea which goes ^o
the action of the Writ, Prot. accord. 21. H. 6. 49. 34. H. 6. 8. by Prisot cont.
he may choose ^o conclude to the Writ, or to the Acti^n. 26. H. 8. B. Brief
405. 492.

Where a writ brought in such a ^ame of Dignity, which was lost by
in^ermarriage, shall abate. See Tit. Nosme.

FINIS.

