THE COURT BEGGAR.

A COMEDY.

Acted at the Cockpit, by his Majesty's Servants, Anno 1632.

WRITTEN By RICHARD BROM.

MART. Hic totus volo rideat Libellus.

LONDON Printed for RICHARD MARRIOT, and THO. DRING, and are to be sold at
their Shops in Fleet Street, 1653.

Drammatis Personae.
SIR Andrew Mendicant, an old Knight, turned a projector. Mr. Courtwit, a
Complementer. Mr. Swaynwit, a blunt Country Gentleman. Mr. Citwit, a Citizens
Son that supposes himself a wit. Mr. Daynty, a supposed Picture drawer, but a
Pick-pocket. Sir Raphael, an old Knight that talks much and would be thought
wise. Sir Ferdinand, a Knight distracted for love of the Lady Strangelove.
Frederick, in love with Charissa. Gabriel, servant to Mendicant. Doctor of
Physic. Three poor Projectors. A Sowgelder. A Boy. Lady Strangelove, a
humerous widow, that loved to be courted. Philomel her Chambermaide. Charissa,
Mendicants Daughter.
PROLOGUE.
WEe've cause to fear yours, or the Poets frown
For of late day's (he know's not (how) y' are grown,
Deeply in love with a new strain of wit
Which he condemns, at least disliketh it,
And solemnly protests you are to blame
If at his hands you do expect the same;
He Will tread his usual way, no gaudy Scene
Shall give instructions, what his plot does mean;
No handsome Love-toy shall your time beguile
Forcing your pity to a sigh or smile.
But a slight piece of mirth, yet such were writ
By our great Masters of the Stage and Wit,
Whom you approved: let not your suffrage then
Condemne't in him, and prayse't in other men.
Troth Gentlemen let me advise ye, spare
To vex the Poet full of age and care,
How he might strive to please ye, and beguile
His humerous expectation with a smile,
As if you would be satisfied, although
His Comedy contains no antique show.
Yet you to him your favor may express
As well as unto those whose forwardness
Make's them your Creatures thought, who in a way
To purchase fame give money with their Play,
Yet you sometimes pay dear for it, since they write
Less for your pleasure than their own delight.
Which if our Poet fail in, may he be
A Sceant of Mirth in their next Comedye.
THE COURT BEGGAR.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Mendicant, Charissa. Men. YO' have given him then his answer?


Cha. Forced by you,
Heaven knows with my much sorrow. Such a Lover
So in all points deserving of true worth,
And best indowments to make up a Man
That I shall never see -- your pardon sir,
Though you pulld back, by violence, my hand,
In which my heart was freely given to him,
It is not in your power or strength of art
To beat a sigh back, or restrain a tear
Which I must offer to his memory.

Men. Such storms soon wast themselves in absent Lovers
When light of Reason, and good Counsel shall
Break forth and shine upon 'em: and for your part
Daughter, I know it shall. And, presently,
I thus begin to dissipate your errors,
You love this Frederick.

Cha. Love knows I do.


Men. You say he is deserving in all points.


Cha. My love emboldens me to tell you he is.


Men. Charissa, take me with you. Is he not
Deficient in that only absolute point
That must maintain a Lady, an estate?

Cha. Love weighes not that.


Men. What can he show you more
To take you with, then a wild head of hair;
A very Limebush to catch Lady-birds?
A Tissue Doublet; and a Riband shop
Hung in his Hatbands, might set up a Peddler?
Can this maintain a Lady?

Cha. You but look
Upon his outside sir.

Men. I trust you have not
Bin over inwardly acquainted with him.

Cha. Sir, he has Valor, Wit, and Honor, you well know
He Is of a noble Family extracted.

Men. What Is that a year? those parts may be acquired
In winning of a strumpet. But what Joincture
Can he propound to you? or, (in case he dies,
Your Dowry being spent) what personal Estate
Is It like he will leave you, but his Powder glass,
His Comb and Beard-brush, and perhaps a Trunkfull
Of Elegies, Raptures, Madrigalls and Sonnets?
No let him go; discard him: and embrace
The hopes that I have for thee in the hopeful,
Exquisite Cavalier, Courtier and Soldier,
Scholar, (and what not!) brave Sir Ferdinando:
There Is a Man rising in the favor Royal,
And may in thee Charissa, make me happy.

Cha. Sir you have given me liberty of speech;
And may be pleased to let me tell you now,
You aim at your own fortune, not at mine.

Men. I seek no fortune, but for thy advancement:
All that I shall call mine must be thine own.

Cha. I would be playner yet; beseeching you be not thought too lose in my
obedience.


Men. Speak freely Girl.


Cha. Your aim has bin to raise
You state by Court-suits, begging as some call it,
And for that end you left your Country life,
And Lands too ever since my Mother died,
Who while she lived with best of woman's judgment
Which held you from that course of selling fair
Possessions to enable you with money
To purchase wit at Court. You pardon me?

Men. On, on.


Cha. And for the Exchange of a fair Mansion House
Large fruitful Fields, rich Meadows and sweet pastures
Well cropped with corn and stockd as well with Cattle,
A park well stored with Dear too, and Fishponds in it,
And all this for a lodging in the Strand now --
But do I not offend?

Men. No, no, on still.


Cha. Your own fed Beefes and Muttons, Foul and Poultry
Loaded your long boords then; and you had then
Neighbors could boast your hospitality,
And poor, that for the remnants prayed for you,
Now all concludes upon a two-dishd table.
And whereas then you had a numerous Family
Of Servants and Attendants, out of which
For profit or for pleasure you could call
Your Bayliffe, Groom, your Falconer, or your Huntsman,
Now sir, a Varlet Coachman, and Footboy
Are all your Retinue; and for the Hounds
You kept, that made you sport and Music, now
None but your project Beagles, that smell out
Where such a forfeiture is to be begged;
Where one would purchase a Reprieve, another
A Pardon or a lease of Life Rope-free
For ready money: Then where Goods or Lands
Are found of men that make away themselfes,
And so of fools and madmen; All to set
Your trade of Begging up* and still you beg:
But your own want of favor holds you back
From reaching any profit by it, because
You beg by Mediators tongues, which you
Call Favorites, who reap the crop of all,
And leave you but the Gleanings; some small pittance
To keep alive the itch of begging in you --

Men. She speaks home and within me, to the purpose.


Cha. Still wasting your own fortunes; till at last
You have no hopeful project left to thrive by
But to put me upon this supposed favorite
To beg for you when it is doubtful yet
Whether he will take me with the Dowry, which
Mine Uncle left me, though you add your projects.

Men. The noble Gallant loves thee, Girl, and holds
Thy Person and thy virtues Dowry enough,

Cha. He is a wanton Lover, full of change,
And at this instant singularly devoted
Unto that humorous Lady, the young Widow.

Men. The Lady Strangelove?


Cha. She is ambitious
To draw all men's affections to her service,
And then abuses all by scorns or slightings,
And this (they say) has made him almost mad.

Men. He mad! believe it not: his reason is
Married to him better then so. How now!
Have you seen the noble Knight from me?
How did he entertain my Message? ha!
Why speakst thou not? what answer has he sent?

Enter Gabrel. Gab. He Is not Sir to be spoken with or seen
^o any purpose, but by his Physicians.

Men. So suddenly and dangerously sick,
Where are my hopes?

Gab. I cannot say how sick
^e is; nor can himself give any account
Of his condition: for he is mad sir.

Men. How I mad?


Gab. Stark staring mad; as mad
^s you can think a Courtier must be
that is more mad then all the rest.

Men. If this be true I sink, what is supposed he cause?


Gab. That sir has puzzell'd all the Doctors
^ weighing all his several wild affections;
^ne finds he was ambitious of Court favor,
and guesses he was crossed in some great suite;
another takes him as he was a Soldier,
and losing cost and travail in the war
^ust lose his wits for that. A third collects
^e was a Poet that drunk too deep of Helicon,
and turned his brain in clyming of Parnassus:
^ fourth considering that he was a Gamster
^ng and much favored, and uprais'd by fortune
^ mountaynous heaps of Gold, conjectures, that
^me late unlucky hand or chance at play
^th with his money swept his wit away.

Men. Fie, these can be no causes to remove,
^ shake his settled judgment or his temper.

Gab. Then sir a fifth and youngst head among
^e learned men (what call you him for a Doctor?
^y that affects gay clothes and Flanders Laces,
^at trim effeminate Gentleman) he
Has known this noble patient to have been
An extreme Amorist, desperately devoted
Unto the service of some threescore Ladies,
And honored every one the most in costly presents,
Banquets and Verses; and thinks the disdain
Of one or all of them has turned his brain.

Cha. I told you sir, the cause before; and named
That humorous Lady for it, whom in heart
I can no less then thank.

Men. Go, get you up.
And stir not from my Chamber on my blessing
Till my return, nor admit any one
Unto a conference with you.

Cha. I obey you. Exit.


Gab. Some of your project searchers wait without si^
Laden it seems with new intelligences.

Men. They may come in: but as I fear they bring
Me little comfort, I am sure I shall
Afford them none. Now sirs, your business?

Enter 3 Projectors. 1. Pro. We wait upon your honor my good Lord
To crave the knowledge of what good success
Your honor finds in our late suits my Lord.

Men. Why honor? why my Lord?


2. Pro. We style you now.


3. Pro. As all must do hereafter.


1. Pro. Yes, and that
In a short space of time, the world holds no
Proportion else, nor shall it more be said
That money can buy Land; or great Estates
In Lands and Mannor-houses be called Lordships.

1.2.3. Or wealth joynd with desert attain to ho^


Gab. So now the Game's a foot. They hunt in full c^^


1. P. My Lord it is most apparent.


Men. How you torture me!


2. P. We Will mak't appear most plainly on our lives.


3. P. And credits too.


Gab. Their Lives and credits, ha, ha, ha.


1. P. That in the space of one whole year our projects
Shall bring in fifty thousand pounds to us,
And hundred thousand to your self; and to
The Coffers Royal for full seven years space
64 Thousand 783 l. 7 s. 9 d ob. q. per annum,
It Is here already cast. Which to make good
We Will venture Lives and Goods.

2. P. Our Wives and Children. Mend takes the scroll and peruses it.


3. P. We can engage no more.


Gab. A wondrous strange engagement
Your lives and goods; your wives and children gentlemen!
That Is too deep set, and questions the Kings Mercy:
Me thinks it were enough, for nonperformance
You would submit your bodies to perpetual
Imprisonment at the Kings charge; and leave
Your wives and children to their several Parishes
You are still faithless sir, in all projects.

1. But when you shall perceive the wealthy sons
Daily brought in, and be, continually,
Troubled with the Receipts (if you may be trusted
That have so little faith) when you shall soil
And gall your fingers ends with telling money,
Yet find the lickings of 'em sweet, you will then
Sing other Notes.

2. Mean time entreat my Lord
To put you to some Tellers Clearke to teach you
Ambo-dexterity in telling money.

Gab. Do you hear sir? Can you give me two sixpences
For a shilling -- or any single money?

2. P. Pish.

Gab. Cry mercy, you wear none in ready coin,
But all in Bullion locked up in your brave-chests,
And there you have the treasure of the Indies;
Of deeper value, could it be dug out,
Then all the Hollanders have waited for
These 7 years out of the Spanish plate fleets.

3. Pugh.

Gab. But put mine eye out (now I dare you to it)
With any single piece of ready money.

1. P. My Lord your man abuses us here strangely
With his old misbeliefe. But still we doubt not
Your honorable good opinion of us.

2. P. You have pervs'd this weighty paper here.


Men. It weighes not all twelve grains.


1. P. No more?
Nay the whole platform of a stately City,
Or a design to conquer a whole Nation,
But do you note the grounds, the Rules and Reasons,
First for the easiness of the several grants.

2. P. Next for performance of our undertakings.


3. P. And then the certainty of the propounded profits
Both to the King and us.

1. P. Without all grievance unto the subject.


Fab. That Is no little marvel.


1. P. Take 'em into particulars my Lord,
First this for Perrukes. The Monopoly
Of making all the Perrukes male and female,
Through Court and Kingdom.

Gab. There Is a capital project.


2. P. Note the necessity, that they be well made
Of no diseased or infectious stuff, of dead or living,
No verminous or sluttish locks or combings,
But harmless and sound hair, of innocent,
And wholesome people.

Gab. They must then reap none
From Gallowses, nor Hospitalls; from whence
They have had great supplies.

1. P. You have in that
Said very well; For here is a Reformation
Of that abuse intended in these words
Innocent and wholesome.

Gab. How if a man or woman shall desire
To wear a friends hair so departed; as
You his; or your wife yours; may't not be had?

1. P. Or if your friend or Mistress dye so, you
Procure the hair and bring it from the Gallows
To the office, and it may be done accordingly.

Gab. You have in that said very well Sir too.


1. P. Now out of this provision, what an infinite
Profit will rise in the general use of 'em,
And multiplicity that will be worn
By people of all sorts, degrees and ages:
The old to hide their natural baldness, and
The young and middle-ag'd their artificial
Or accidental.

Gab. By the pox or so.


1. P. They shall be brought into that reputation
That none shall be esteemed so sound or wise
As public wearers of them: which to effectuate
It Is requisite that you obtain a Mandat
Unto all Courtiers, that would be thought wise
To wear false hair: because clownes have been noted
To ralke like fools or mad men in their own.

Men. No more of that.


1. What say to this my Lord,
Touching new fashions of apparel; suits,
Hats, Boots, Swords, Belts, Ribands, etc.
For every wearer of his first of the fashion
To pay a groat to the King; and every Tradesman
Two pence on every several piece he sells
Of any such new fashion the first year?

Gab. And what may this pride money amount unto
Per annum, can you guess?

Men. I will not meddle in it.


2. No my good Lord.


Men. No, nor your Perrukes neither.


3. What say to this my Lord of the Balconyes?


Men. Nor that.


1. This then for sucking out of corns.


Men. Away with it.


2. This then: that on the birth of every Girl
The Father pay a groat; to hearten men
To live soberly and get Soldiers.

Men. Away.


1. This makes amends for all then. A new project
For buylding a new Theater or Playhouse
Upon the Thames on Barges or flat boats
To help the watermen out of the loss
They Have suffered by Sedans; under which project
The subject groans, when for the ease of one
Two abler men must suffer; and not the price,
Or pride of Horseflesh or Coach-hire abated.
This shall bring floods of gain to the watermen
Of which they will give a fourth of every fare
They shall board at the floating Theater,
Or set ashore from thence, the Poets and Actors
Half of their first years profits.

Men. Fie away.


1. This is a weighty one: For massy sums
That may be freely given out of the City,
To have but this assurance, that hereafter
They may ingrosse the getting of their own
Children: by order taken that Cavaliers,
And Courtiers may no more invade,
Or mix with Tradesmens wives: whereby it is thought
So many City Prodigalls have been gotten;
Only the thrifty country Gentlemen
To be excepted: for by them it is guest
So many Citizens grow landed men.

Gab. Were not they gotten by Projectors think you?


3. My Lord your servant jeeres us.


Men. To deal plainly
I do allow't in him --

Gab. Heaven has heard my prayers.


Men. And will hear him or any man oppose
All that is put to me by way of project
To put me by all further hopes in 'em:
For (with hearts grief I speak it) he by whom
I only hoped to climb (alas) is fallen.

1. What out of favor?


Men. No, out of his Reason.


2. The noble Cavalier sir Ferdinando.


3. That late stood candidate for the favor royal,
Is he now fallen besides himself?

Men. Even he.


1. What have you then to do my Lord
In lieu of all your service but beg him?

Men. His greater and his nearer friends at Court
Will prevent me.

2. They shall not, never fear it.


1. Come we will make quick work of this.
My Lord you shall disburse but twenty pieces.

2. Among us three. 3. And we will instantly
Find his estate. 1. And lay you down a way
So plain that you shall say All Is yours,
Before you stir a foot.

Gab. But when he has traveled
Till he has tired himself, he shall return,
And say All Is lost, is it not so Gentlemen?

Men. I will not part with any money sirs.


1. Trust me you do not well to put my Lord
Off of his benefit, by disheartning him
In this small venture. Will you then be pleased
To give us but ten pieces.

Men. Not a penny.


2. Five you shall my Lord,
And stand no longer thus in your own light.

3. Or but a piece a Man.


Men. Not a denier.


1. A dinner then my Lord, but of one piece.


Men. My answers cannot please you. Answer 'em you.


Gab. I wonder how you having stretched your throats
With the loud sounds of thousands, hundred thousands
Can, after all, so faintly whisper forth
One piece; and that as much in vain, as all
The massy sums: for all but brings you nothing,
It shows you Gentlemen of resolute patience;
And would take thankfully I warrant you
An od half crown amongst you: and what say you
To every man a kick on the condition?
What say you to one with the other?

1. This abuse
Shall lose your Master a hundred thousand pound.

Gab. Go coin your bullion brains into the money
And come again. My master was
Your Lord even now, as he was Lord of Beggars.

1. I hope to live to see him beg of us.


Gab. Out hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, hundred,
thousands, Millions, ten Millions, Millions upon Millions
Away, i will stamp your buttocks into coin else. Ex. Projectors.
The Devil ride that hindmost of 'em, for
A raw bon'd Jade: Sfoot he has lamed my toes.

Men. I am glad I am so rid of 'em, and now
As thou art my Servant and my loving Kinseman --

Gab. To follow you in all things but in Projects.


Men. Look to my House and Daughter, that she start not;
Nor any entrance be allowd to Fredrick
To re-intangle her in his Love. I know
Thy virtue and thy valor can make good
My trust imposed in thee.

Gab. You need not fear sir
But, good sir, no more projects.

Men. I have but one,
On which I Will set my rest. Thoult say it is good.

Gab. Except it be the begging of this Madman
It can be nothing.

Men. It Is the very same:
By which I will advance my house and name. Exit.

Gab. The Beggars best is that he feels no shame:
Sprecious what mean you? Have you forgot so soon
Your Fathers strict command, and he scarce gone yet?

Enter Charissa. Cha. Alas he will then meet Fredrick and divert him,
I saw him at the window making this way.

Gab. He gets no entrance to you. I must obey
A master though you can neglect a father.

Cha. Be not so cruel. Thou may live to love,
And need the pity of a friend.

Gab. I pity you,
And will do no more then you know how to ask
For your own good. I understand your cause
And can relieve you if you will yield to council.

Cha. You are my Kinsman; and have bin my friend,
Though you observe my father who, I fear,
Has not a fathers love toward me.

Gab. His love is great and certain,
And all his travel is for your advancement:
But he goes blindfold on unprosperous ways
Led by credulity. Projects! pox of projects
The patron of his projects is (it seems)
Peppered with madness. It Is but Justice on him,
And now i will give you a secret if you will promise
To be ruld by me.

Cha. You shall rule me cosen.


Gab. This Ferdinand, your fathers great Court-godling
Nere sought you for a wife; but to have whor'd you:
(That is the English on it) and to appear
A right great man in the act, he would have made
By hopes and promises your credulous Father
The instrument of your prostitution:
Which to effect, (though still he undertook
His hopeful projects) cunning Lawyer-like
He crossed or lost him still in all, on purpose
That poverty at length might urge him to
Give you to his dispose.

Cha. This was my fear.


Gab. Away: some body comes.


Cha. It Is Fredrick. I must see him.


Gab. You Will never see him more then. Go to your chamber. A little patience and
he shall be yours.


Cha. So dos a heart consume in lingering fire,
When cooling hopes are cast on hot desire. Exit.

Gab. Poor heart I pity her, and will labor for her.


Enter Frederick. Fred. O Gabriel! I am happy in finding thee,
Thy master absent, whom I saw, in have
N^w passing toward the Court. Where Is my Charissa?

Gab. You may not see her.


Fred. May not see her sir?


Gab. May not! nay must not: shall not see her.


Fred. You Are very plain with me.


Gab. Her own command
Warran^s me speak it sir.

Fred A villain speaks it. Draw.


Gab. I have a sword speaks other language for me.


Fred. Can she whose thoughts are truth, and written here,
Here in this breast, giving me ample welcome,
Give thee a countermand to bar me from it?
Would thou make her a double hearted monster?
Or like another woman?
Repent thee of thy trespass yet and live.

Gab. Sir, if you think to fight, talk not too much;
Or, if you needs must talk, then hear as well.

Fred. What would thou say?


Gab. Sir, I have more to say
Then fits this place, since you are apt to quarrel;
And this no ground to bustle on: nor indeed
Where I dare for my honesty and trust
Allow you longer stay. If therefore you
Will walk, I Will wait upon you; and direct you
In a more ready way to find Charissa.

Fred. Is she not here in the house?


Gab. O sir, a man
May come within his arme-reach of his money
In the Exchequer: but he must walk about
To find due order e're he draw it out.

Fred. The fellow's honest, valiant, and discreet,
Full man, in whom those three additions meet.

Gab. Sir, dare you trust me?


Fred. Yes I dare; and why?
Because if thou dare fight, thou dare not lie.

ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Philomel, Court-wit, Swayn-wit, Cit-wit. Phi. HEre in this gallery
Gentlemen you may, at your pleasure,
Until my Lady comes, walk or sit.

Cou. Or lie down if you please.


Ph. If you so, wrong not my Ladies Couch with your Spurs I pray: take heed
you leave not a Rowell there.


Sw. If one should, your Lady has no Lord to call her honor to question, whose
Knighthood it belonged unto.


Phil. You have a good country wit sir.


Sw. My name is Swayne-wit; and for all you twit me with the Country, I am a
Gentleman though.


Ph. I honor you the more sir, for I am a Country Maid my self.


Sw. Thou art a baggage, and a bold one, I am deceived else.
I would be further acquainted with you though. Kiss long.
Have you done now? You will have time enough for
Further and better acquaintance.
Thou art a Jackanapes of the basest tricks that ever I saw, for a halfe-penny.
She Is your choice, is she? Could not you let be though? I have bin acquainted
with thee but two days, and forgi 'me for swearing, I have found thee beating
ripe a skore of times at least. Take heed I begin not now, and handsell your
Ladies house, that is so much talked on, and your Gentlewomans presence here
with a fist about your ears.


Cou. Not for a thousand pound.


Sw. That Is a great deal of money. I could find i'my heart to do it though.


Cou. Slife we are all undone then.


Sw. He sets my teeth on edge to look upon him: He looks so like a wilding
crab, good neither for drink nor sauce.


Ph. Why would you press him then?


Sw. Thou have a verjuice wit.


Ph. For my poor sake forbear sir.


Sw. Let him stand further then, and look of toe side.


Cit. Well sir, this is no cause nor place to fight in, when --


Sw. What says he?


Ph. Nothing, you hear he whistles the other way.


Sw. The Other way, what backwards?


Ph. What new guest have you brought here Mr. Court-wit, for my Lady to laugh at?


Cou. One for that purpose Phil, you have spoke the man, But what company has my
Patroness, that she is yet busy.


Sw. I that! If she be long busy I will not stay, and she were ten great
Ladies, or one as big as twenty, for all she is your Patroness, must we wait
out of our wits, because Chalivere ran mad for her?


Ph. Have you heard of that sir?


Sw. My Cozen Court-wit's question was who is with her?


Ph. O sweet Mr. Court-wit, when will you bring the fine civil Gentleman, that
maintains himself so gallantly by picture drawing?


Sw. Here Is a new business! Fare ye well, pray tell your Lady I came not from
Pensans to grow here.


Ph. Nay sweet sir stay, there is sir with my Lady none but the grave and witty
talking Knight. Some call him the metrapolitane wit of Court; he that loves
Ladies society so much, and yet has vowed virginity.


Cou. As much as in man lies Phil; He is a perpetual vowed batchellor indeed,
and as constant to his vow as to his fashion in apparel, which is ever the
same, sir Raphael Winter-plum.


Cit. That old witherd piece. I know him.


Sw. Thou will bear up again.


Cit. He has licked up a living with his tongue; makes all great tables his
own; and eats for his talk. He may be conversant with women: for (they say) he
guelt himself beyond Sea for spite one did him; and now preaches chastity to
Ladies, and love to their husbands. He Is a Lay-gospeller among the married
sort, and an especial pedant to the youth of Court.


Cou. Fie, thou speakst too much.


Sw. There Is another humor I could beat thee for with all my heart, thou will
speak outragiously of all men behind their backs, and dare not answer Ba --
to the face of a sheep, O I could pommell thee.


Cit. This is not yet a cause to fight for, when --


Ph. But will not that fine Gentleman Mr. Dainty come, Mr. Court-wit?


Cou. I expect him presently.


Ph. I Will see if their conference be ended, or break it if I can, and hasten
my Lady to you. Exit.


Sw. This wench has a dainty wit.


Cou. She may, living with the prime Lady-wit in town.


Sw. But what Dainty is that she talks on so affectionately?


Cou. Troth a Gentleman that lives at a good rate; very civil in conversation,
keeps good company; yet none of his acquaintance that I am acquainted with
knows his beginning, or his present means.


Sw. A Gentleman borne.


Cou. I know no more but by his port, and fashion, you saw him with me last
night.


Sw. Forgi' me for swearing, Is It he?


Cou. He was at the Play with us too, do you not remember that?


Sw. Yes, that I was at the Play, by sure token and a sad one.


Cit. I Will show you somewhat of him. A Gentleman borne did you ask?


Sw. Now he bears up again.


Cit. He cannot be a Gentleman by birth or place. A fine-handed, and a fine
headed fellow he is; and pretends great skill and practice too in
Picture-drawing, Watch-making, and such like finger works; which he says he
uses as a Gentleman's exercise, not as a trade to live upon; when either he does
live on it; or else he has some more secret way, as perhaps pimping or pursing
for ought I know.


Sw. There he is again! Art thou bound in conscience to wrong all men in their
absence, till I beat thee into better manners?


Cou. Hold hold, I prithee hold.


Cit. Yet still the cause is insufficient, when --


Cou. Here comes the Gentleman.


Enter Dainty. Cit. Is he come? Noble Mr. Dainty -- The welcomst in the World.
I protest I suffered by your absence.


Dai. You do me too much honor Mr. Cit-wit.


Cit. Oh sir, your humble servant.


Sw. Ha, ha. Forgi' me for swearing, what a Spaniell's this?


Dai. Gentlemen you are well found, I was a little stayed by the way upon
receipt of moneys. Have you seen the Lady yet?


Cou. She Is yet a little busy. We shall all instantly take the opportunity
together.


Dai. But Gentlemen; you that have better knowledge of this Lady inform if you
please, why are we summond hither?


Cou. Thou speakst as if thou had guilt upon thee; fear nothing man.


Sw. I that is the thing that I would understand too. And why me of any man?
They say indeed she is a humorous Lady, and loves to busy her self. But what
are we to her? are there not greater men, and Lords enough for her to fool
away the time with, but we must dance attendance on her humors?


Cit. I protest Mr. Swayn-wit, I admire your ingenuity.


Sw. You will be meddling still.


Cit. It Is to your question sir, which I will answer.


Sw. I there is another of your cockscombly tricks, to answer any question,
that is asked another man, out with though.


Cit. This Lady sir, this humorous wity Lady is a wit-sponge, that suckes up
wit from some, and holds as her own, until she squeeze it out on others. She
will make use of ours, or any courser wits; and search 'em out to sift 'em.
She will collect from market-folkes; and hold conferences with the poor
Trades-people that cry their wares about the streets, She will rake wit out of
a dunghill Ragwoman.


Swa. So there he is again! dare thou abuse a noble Lady, in her own house
too? I dare not now but beat thee.


Cou. Forbear good cosen.


Cit. Still, still, the cause is naught, when --


Dai. Ods so the Ladies coming I think.


Enter Philomel. Phil. Gentlemen, my Lady cannot yet be rid of the tedious
talking Knight. But she will cast him presently. He is now following her into
this room, pray pass into the next; my Ladies Music room. There you shall
find a collation of good Tobacco and Sack and one to attend you, you know the
fashions of the House Mr. Court-wit.


Cou. Come away Gentlemen. Exit Gentlemen.


Phil. I could even love and look upon that sweet Mr. Dainty a whole hour
methinks.


Enter Strange-love, and Sir Raphael. Stra. Go your ways down Maid, and if
any ask for Sir Raphael here, say that I hope he will have done anon.


Ra. You would be rid of me: but pardon me Madam, I must hold your glass to
you.


Stra. That Is a poor Chamber-mayds office; and ill becomes your gravity Sir
Raphael.


Ra. I Will open then the book to you of your errors.


Str. Now you speak scholler-like, and your self: But have we spent all this
while in by, and idle talk, and have that volume to be opened yet? Pray read
me for the first Lesson for this Mornings Exercise, and my Edification, the
last Chapter of my book of errors as you call it.


Ra. You are a mocker of instruction, and good counsel.


Str. Begins it so? whom is that spoken to?


Ra. I speak to only you; to conjure (if I can) that spirit of scorn out of
you; which you have taken in, and long affected for a humor, your singular own
humor, till it is grown so familiar, so inherent in you, that you have won
the title of the humorous Lady by it; and drawn a scorn upon your self.


Stra. Why then all is paid, and welcome good Sir Raphael.


Ra. I am not gone so; nor is all so paid:
For there is a greater reckoning yet of Raylings,
Reviling, Curses by the many that
You Have scornd and slighted, shot at you in hot vollies.

Str. They hit me not. I am sure I do not feel 'em.


R. You may in time be sensible of their sufferings,
Whom you have violently, and wilfully abused
With scorn and pride; if you call to mind
The cause, bred merely out of humor; cause you would have it so.

Str. You come too near me sir, cause I would have it so?


Ra. Can it be otherwise? Has it not ever bin
Your practice, since your time of widow-hood
To catch all men's affections? It Is indeed
An honor to a Lady to have many suitors;
But to lay bait for 'em only to delude 'em --
Is impiously dishonorable.

Str. Have I done so?


Ra. Yes, and have gloried in it for your humor
To lead men into brakes with foolish fire.

Str. If they will follow it, I cannot help it.


Ra. You might though have prevented the mishaps
Of many, by a fair and free resistance
In the beginnings of their suits of Courtships,
And not to set your self at gaze to draw them on,
And then allure them with assured hopes
Of love and favor till you have wound their follies
Into the reach of your disdain; and then
To torture 'em, or having taken 'em captives
To slave and sell 'em to the worlds derision.

Str. O sir Raphael --


Ra. She feels compunction!
I will pursue it to the quick.

Str. On good Sir Raphael.


Ra. Consider then good Madam, since I know,
And your own conscience knows, that you have made
A secret vow from your late husbands death
Never to marry, how better and more glorious
It would be for your honor to declare
Your constant purpose to a single life,
Then to fall into the transgression
Of robbing men so of their wits and reason,
And all by wilful humor; as this late
Unhappy accident of madness in
The hopeful Knight Sir Ferdinando cries
Lowdly to your disgrace, and the worlds sorrow.

Str. Half the worlds sorrow is mine own
For that sad accident, I would I coold redeem't
With half my health or life. But let me tell you
(Now you have justly chidden me) that you
Have a fault too.

Ra. What is it in your construction?


Str. As I concealed my vow of single living,
And gave men leave to court me, by which means
I won them into hopes, and robbed their wits,
You in declaring to the Court and City
Your vow of chastity and single life,
Yet daily, nightly, howerly frequenting
The company of Ladies, with your sweet,
No less then grave discourse and conversation
Have robbed (nay I may say deflowered) more Ladies
Of chaste and honorable thoughts, then all
The cavalry of Court.

Ra. Who I Madam!


Str. Even you sir Raphael (if unchaste desires
Must be held sinful) I know some of them,
And one (I fear) too well, that have bin subject
Unto the breach of any vow for you,
Yet you to vow a single and chaste life;
And publish your intent!

Ra. It Is with intent,
And a religious purpose to decline,
And divert woman's fond affections from me.

Str. O, but forbidden things are women's longings!
You have read, you have read (sir Raphael) you have read. Falls on her Couch.

La. And traveled too: yet never could discover
Such an example.

Str. Pray sit down by me.


Ra. Good thoughts possess you Madam. I mus^ hence.


Str. I Will not be tedious to you. One word I pray sir?


Ra. Virtue, be thou my armor. Briefly then
Let me entreat you Madam:

Str. Pray refuse not
To sit down by me.

Ra. Sanctity protect me. Sit.


Str. Sir, you are famous, and cried up by all
For your great wisdom, Moral and Divine:
You are the Ipse dixit of the Court
As I have heard you styled by men of learning,
The Court Philosopher --

Ra. Madam to the point.


Str. What is our strength, and what is not our frailty?


Ra. Where is she wandering now? Be playner Madam.


Str. Do not my blushes (which I hope you pardon)
Deliver you a message from my heart?
Which I want words to utter? O these vows!
These rash and ill-made vows! dos not your judgment
Read something on this face? pray look upon me.

Ra. I am no good interpreter of looks.


Str. I dare not speak, till you have first removed
A weighty scruple, which does much perplexe me.

Ra. You must first speak it Madam.


Str. Whether these vows,
(I mean your own, and mine, for single life)
May safely be dispensed with or absolved,
And we become a lawful pair in Marriage?
Pray sir resolve and bless me in a Match.

Ra. Madam I Will pray for you. Starts up.


Str. You will first kill me
With your disdain, and then you will pray for me!
Is that your Charity?

Ra. I dare not hear you.


Str. Leave me not so.


Ra. Who waits upon my Lady here? Exit.


Str. I had no other way to shift him, would he would make
An errand now to Rome to quit my scruple;
And rid the Court of an officious fool:
Women some times have sent wise men to school.
Is the Knight gone?

Enter Philomel. Ph. And blessing of himself,
As witchcraft were in the house.

Str. But where is my favorite Court-wit, has he brought his country Kinsman
and the rest?


Ph. They are all in your wit-office Madam (as you call the Room)
Passing the time among the Pipes and Bottles,
And singing catches. Here you may hear 'em Madam. A catch.

Str. Marry, this takes past all sir Raphaels Lectures,
Go call 'em down. Exit Phi.
This Madam troubles me, 'would he were right again;
Or I quit of the scandal.
Enter Court-Swain, and Cit-wit. O Gentlemen! you are welcome,
And chiefly you that are the only stranger,
I have been so troubled with an overtalking sir, that he
Has wound me into melancholy --

Swa. I wish you mirth Madam. I come not as one of you fools to make you any
though -- Offer to go away.


Str. Be not so brief with me, let me entreat you though.


Sw. Forgi'me for swearing do you mock me though?


Str. Mistake me not sweet sir --


Sw. Sweet with a mischief! How sweet am I? I come not as a suitor to your
great Ladyship, I am a Gentleman of two hundred a year though.


Str. Not as a suitor to me sir?


Sw. No you are too great for me. Nor to your Mopsey without, though she be
snout-faire, and has some wit she is too little for me, I understand degree and
quality, respect and difference; and am scholar enough to know my unde and my
quare.


Str. You ga' me his true character. You are a complete Gentleman sir (if I
mistake not) the Kinsman of my favorite here, who has given me an ample
relation of your worth and virtue.


Cou. Yes, Patroness, it is he, who though not thoroughly versed, or conversant
in the Court or City garb, he understands both Men and Manners.


Sw. Prattle for your self sir.


Str. But to the business Gentlemen.


Sw. I that I would feign know if it be any.


Str. You have heard I doubt not of a disastrous blot lately cast upon my fame,
out of my own freeness.


Cit. Concerning the Mad courtier Madam, when it is as likely, that his Tailor
made him mad as you, for not hitting the fashion right in his last rich suit.
But it is most like he fell from a reasonable man, by over-studying himself what
Lord he should be at the next creation, whether of Gleek, or Cribbidge; In and
in, or Hazard.


Sw. Hark how this shotten headed Cocks-combe prates! And how he, that can
endure beating, dares speak any thing, or abuse all men! can not give the
Lady leave to speak though?


Str. Since there is an aspersion laid upon my freeness in giving
entertainment unto persons of great and noble qua^ity, the world deeming it to
be done by me merely for ostentation, to cry my own humor up, by drawing them
into Love-knots, and then to slight or scorn them: My resolution is from
henceforth, to exclude those great resorts, and friendly and freely be merry
within our selfs. I have four thousand a year to spend; and will be huswife
good enough to keep in compass. I will not entertain a servant, friend or
guest above your rank or fortunes --


Sw. Why -- (forgi'me for swearing) what do you think of us?


Str. I think you Gentlemen of worth and quality: and therefore welcome. I
think you able to maintain your selfs midle-sis'd Gent.


Cit. I am Midlesex indeed; borne in the City.


Sw. Give the Lady leave to speak though.


Str. I Will give access to none, that the censorious world shall dare to judge
a suitor to me,
Or to find favor further then meat and wine.

Sw. Yes, faith a little money to; and make's your Fiddlers.


Cit. Pray give the Lady leave to speak though. whew


Str. Mauger the greatness of my former visitants
I give you my election for the chiefes
Of my familier society.
I may perhaps call in, (at least admit)
People of meaner garb, without (I hope
Your grudge or envy. But they shall be men
Of Science, Art, and Action.

Sw. Of action Madam? who do you mean? the Players?


Str. Why not? I love their quality and them, and mean to have the use of some
of 'em shortly: Besides Musicians (Poets in the first place) and Painters: In
which last mentioned art I hear you are excellent, though all this while so
silent.


Dai. I boast no skill or practice Madam: but I have drawn some pieces that
have been worth my pains in my Rewards.


Str. I must commend their ingenuity for whom you took those pains. But
(where I left) I must make use of wits, of arts, and actions.


Sw. Here in your house Madam, I would be glad to see the Actors but I saw 'em
at their own too lately: for I lost my purse there, no matter let it go. There
was 15. pound in it tho!


Cit. Sprecious! How now! my Fob has been fubd to day of six pieces, and a
dozen shillings at least. Nothing but a bowd groat left as I hope for my
Grannums blessing.


Cou. Sure you have been in some ill company.


Cit. Pox of ill company I say. My watch is gone out of my Pocket too o'th
right side.


Dai. You rose of the wrong side to day it seems, were you in no crowd or
quarrel?


Cit. I never was in any quarrel i'my life. I always run from 'em.


Cou. I dare swear thou do.


Cit. I only stood to day at the Coranto-shop to read the last great news; and
I was hoop'd in I remember by some that seemed to wonder as much as I.


Dai. Then certainly there was a cutpurse amongst 'em.


Cit. I Will go to honest Moll about it presently.


Sw. But first stay and hear my Lady though.


Cou. I Madam you were speaking of the use you would make of Poet, Painter,
Music, Actor and the like.


Str. True favorite for a Masque that I intend to have shortly, you shall
perform the poetical part, your servant Citwit the Musical. And by your
skill and directions the Painters office for the scenes. Dancers and speakers I
have in store.


Sw. I must be something too though, must I not Madam?


Str. Marry and thank you too sir.

Enter Philomel. Now your News.


Phil. Sir Andrew Mendicant desires to see you Madam.


Str. You should have told him I would not be seen by him.


Ph. I told him you were busy. But he says he is to speak with you upon a
weighty business from the Court.


Str. It Is the Court-begger. You know him favorite.
Go not away, I Will bring him in amongst you,
And (as you love me) put some ridiculous projects to him. Exit.

Dai. What Is that sir Andrew Mendicant? do you know him well?


Cour. Thou ask still a question like a guilty person, with a look
resembling fear upon thy face.


Dai. My countenance is too blame then; not my conscience.


Cit. I Will tell you what he is.


Sw. Still answering others questions?


Cit. He is a Knight that hanckers about the Court, ambitious to make himself
a Lord by begging. His brain is all Projects, and his soul nothing but
Court-suits. He has begun more knavish suits at Court, then ever the Kings
Tailor honestly finished, but never thrived by any: so that now he is almost
fallen from a Palace B^gger to a spittle one. His business to my Lady now can
be nothing but to borrow money to buy a pair of wheels to set some Project a
going to Court for a Monopoly.


Sw. Thou were in have eene now to look after the money; but and thy Life lay
on it thou must stay to abuse a man hehinde his back, who is a noble Gentleman
thou know, and I have heard, yet (speak in thy conscience) would thou not
be beaten now?


Cou. Forbear, they come.


Enter Strangelove, Mendicant. Str. Sir, since it is requested by those great
ones
Whose power cannot command me in this case
(For it is my charity and not my duty)
I am content that the mad Ferdinand
Shall sojourne in my house for his recovery.

Men. It Is thought you were the groundwork of his frensy
The Doctors therefore moved their honors to it
For that your frequent presence may be helpful
Toward his care.

Str. He shall have it then
Toward the expiation of the crime
They charge me with. But in case sir Andrew
He should be cured by this means, I should then
Cross you in fortune and your future hopes
Of his estate; which you have begged you say
If he recover not.

Men. I must leave that to fortune Madam.


Str. Will you be pleased sir to take notice of
These Gentlemen my friends. They may be useful Salute
For they have all projective brains I tell you.

Men. Pray of what nature are your Projects Gentlemen?


Cou. Sir my affection leanes much to Poetry, especialy the Drammatick.


Men. Writing of strange Plays?


Cou. I am glad I speak sir, to your understanding. And my project is that no
Plays may be admitted to the Stage, but of their making who Profess or
endeavor to live by the quality: That no Courtiers, Divines, Students at Law,
Lawyers-clearks, Tradesmen or Prentises be allowed to write 'em, nor the Works
of any lay-Poet whatsoever to be received to the Stage, though freely given
unto the Actors, nay though any such Poet should give a sum of money with his
Play, as with an Apprentice, unless the Author do also become bound that it
shall do true and faithful service for a whole Term.


Men. Here Is a trim business toward, and as idle as the Players going to Law
with their Poets.


Cou. I have another sir, to procure a Patent for my self to have the only
privilege to give instructions to all the actors in the City, (especially the
younger sort) the better to enable them to speak their parts emphatically and
to the life.


Men. You were best take heed in time then that you well preserve your own
voice, for fear you do a spoil among 'em in teaching 'em to utter in
unsavory tunes. Do I come hither to be mocked?


Sw. Will you hear mine though? I am a Country Gentleman, young, healthful
and lusty. I hear complaints of barrenness in the City; and of men that
cannot get their wives with child; Get me but a Patent for it I Will undertake by
my self and deputies (provided that the woman be sound and handsome) to make
them multiply, and upon reasonable conditions: we will deal with the rich for
money, and the poor for charity.


Men. This is foolisher then the other. Do you abuse me Gentlemen?


Sw. Is that a wise man's question? you cannot tell th'o.


Cit. We have our projects too Sir.


Men. I would have yours first, you see me a civil and substantial Gentleman.


Dai. In more private if you please Sir.


Men. I like well his reservednesse.


Dai. Sir I am a Picture-drawer Limner, or Painter (if you please) and would
gladly purchase authority, by my self and deputies, for the painting of all
the Kings, and Q^enes-head signs for Tavernes, Innes, Ale houses, and all
Houses and Shops of Trade throughout the Kingdom upon this ground that they
draw and hang up their ^yall Images for signs in so hideous manner that men
bless themselves to see'r.


Men. I marry this hangs upon some ground. But are you an exquisite workman in
that art sir?


Dai. I am an Artist in that mystery sir, and have drawn some of his Majesty's
Pictures (by copy only but) so to the life, that Gentlemen have kneeled to
'em for suites, and knight-hoods.


Men. Indeed sir!


Dai. Yes sir, and great Lords I have pictured so powerfully, their own
followers suddenly rushing into the room have started back and solemnly stood
bare to 'em as they hung of the walls.


Men. Is It possible!


Dai. I drew a stern Judge, and a civil Lawyer so to the life, that after
their corpse were in the Grave, a man durst not look upon their pictures
without a bribe, or double fee in's hand.


Men. I do admire you!


Dai. I have drawn Ladies too, with that alluring beauty, that men have loy'd
their dead pictures, for their painted looks, more then their living persons
for all their virtues.


Men. Thou boy! in troth you abuse me most merrily Gentlemen. Go.


Str. An excellent fellow: I like him for that fancy more then all the rest.


Cit. Pray hear my project too sir?


Str. Yes good sir Andrew, you shall not part so abruptly.


Cit. Mine is a good common wealths business, against the common Plague, that
reigns in the City of Pickpockets, and Cut-purses. I my self have bin robbed
to day, and am going to a good member that deals in private for the recoveries
of such goods: One that shall undertake if you will but get a Patent, for a
Cutpurse-hall, or Office, to help all men to their own again, allowing but
the Tithes of their Losses, and freeing the offending parties.


Men. Fie, fie. Here Is tithing indeed.


Cit. Provided that notice be brought to the Office within four and twenty
hours after any such loss.


Men. Enough, enough.


Cit. We may by the same course secure the Coun^^ too, and make the hangman
hang himself.


Men. Let every man be wise enough to look to his purse, and there will be no
Cut-purses, nor need of your patent.


Sw. As wise a man as you may lose his purse though, as I have done my self in a
crow'd.


Men. He puts me in mind of a crowd I was in once to day of company I liked not
-- ha --. For heaven it is gone: And I dare not discover it for being laughed at.


Cou. It seems none of your Projects will pass with you sir Andrew.


Str. Come sir, they are but (as you said) merry with you.


Men. Be you merry with them good Madam, you know the serious work I came
about. In which I suddenly shall presume to give you a re-visite.


Str. Pray do sir Andrew, bring your Madman. My garden Lodgings shall be his
bedlem. Come gentlemen it is Dinnertime.


Cou. We are your waiters Madam. Exeunt Omnes.


ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Philomel, Mendicant, Doctor. Ph. THese are the Lodgings, that my Lady
appointed*
For your distracted patient.

Men. Like you 'em Doctor.


Doct. Exceeding well. Excuse me Gentlewoman
That now entreat your absence.

Ph. Willingly. I am not taken with the sight you bring
For I see mad-folkes enough every day. Exit.

Doct. Here set him down. Unbind him, and unblind him. Ferdinand brought in a
chair bound and hooded, etc.


Fer. Am I then taken prisoner in the North?
Wounded, disarmed and bound? I shall be ransomed
To which of your rebelliously usurped
Castles have you brought me? you sir Presbiter,
That better can pugnare then orare,
And so abjure all duty and allegiance --

Men. He takes you for a Northern Pastor Mr. Doctor.


Doct. No matter what, let him run out his fancy.


Fer. You were best to use me well; and like a soldier
Order will else be taken (though you know none.)

Doct. You shall have all best usage sir.


Fer. And use my horse well too, and let my horse and armor
Be decently preserved and seen forth-comming
At my redemption.

Doct. With all best care sir.


Fer. For I shall soon be sent for, or fetched off
With ruin of your country 'bout your ears.

Doct. You shall have all content the country yields sir.


Fer. I shall have Oat-bread, Ale, and Bag-pipes, shall I?


Doct. If you will be merry sir.


Fer. Merry! why not? come let us have cards; and you and I to cribbidge
For an od hundred pound, I mean not Scotch,
But sterling English pieces, where is your money?
All gone in Ammunition, and charge Military.

Doct. I Will find you money enough.


Fer. O here is a third man, let us then to Gleeke.


Men. Crown Gleeke sir, if you please.


Fer. Crown Gleeke! no more?
You seem to be a thrifty Covenanter
To play but at crown Gleeke, whole piece Gleeke or nothing.

Men. High as you please sir, we will find money enough,
And pay us but our buyings.

Fer. Sir, you must bare me Aces. You will play Tib and Tom.


Doct. All in the Cards sir.


Fer. Away with cards. Bring dice, set all at hazard,
And though I lose all, I have yet a project
That at the end of the war, and the great sitting
Shall fetch all in again. But O my Muse!
How dare I so neglect thy inspirations?
Give me Pen, Ink and Paper.

Doct. All Is ready.


Fer. Now will I write, nor will I emulate
Ovids smoth vain, or Petraks buskind style.
Nor Laura, nor Corinna did deserve
To have their prayers written in such Verse
As i will bestow on her that I adore.
Listen to me you blessed Intelligences,
And, Phoebus, stay thy course to hear me sing
Her praises, for whose love the inamor'd Gods
Would leave their proper seats, and in stolen shapes,
Converse with mortals, your soule-ravishing spheres
Send forth your sweetest harmony whilst I sing --
But O she is disdainful; and her scorn
Has blotted all the glory of her praise,
Away, away with all.

Doct. Now sir, do you observe the root of his Disease?


Men. I guess at it, know you the remedy?


Fer. Disease! what is that? who is diseased? who wants a Remedy?

Are you sir a Physician?


Men. This Gentleman is, and brings you remedy, be you patient.


Doct. O you will move him.


Fer. You are a brace of Quacks,
That tie your knowledge unto days and hours
Marked out for good or ill in the Almanac.
Your best Receipts are candy for a cold;
And Carduus Benedictus for an ague,
Could you give life as Aesculapius
Did to unjustly slain Hippolitus,
You could prescribe no remedy for me.
Go study Gallen, and Hippocrates,
And when your rare simplicities have found
Simples to cure the Lunacy of Love,
Compose a potion, and administer't
Unto the Family at Amsterdam.

Doct. I Will Physic you to morrow and allay
The heat of this strong fit, or Leach it out.

Enter sir Raphael. Ra. I have venter'd to this house again, assured
That now the humerous Lady is from home
Forgetting not her Love-trick put upon me
Which she already boasts to my disgrace
For which I may requite her Ladyship,
How dos your patient? a sleep! That Is well.

Men. No he is but silent sir, and it is well
That he is so, so long.

Ra. The Lords in honorable regard unto
His health directed me to visit him.

Fer. Who Is that?


Ra. Do you not know me sir?


Fre. You are (I take it) the Ghost of Dionisius
The great tirannicall Court-schole-master.

Ra. Your Friends at Court commend them to you Sir.


Fer. What hither, unto hell? Extend their loves
So far, to find me out? Pray let 'em know
That here is a trobled world in want of Statesmen.
But tell the youths and beauties there, they never
Shall find a happier opportunity
To raise a new Plantation. They Will drive all
Before 'em here. For pride is at a stand;
Fashions are all worn out, and no invention
For new here to be found: all beauty's lost;
Nor have the greatest Ladies here the act
To make so much as their poor Chambermayds:
Let 'em come down, as many of the Gallants
As are made weary of their Wives or Mistresses;
And, of those Wives and Mistresses, as many
As can their husbands, or their servants spare:
And what a year of Holy Days, a Jubilee
Shall we have in hell then? Have old Lad!

Ra. What a wild fancie's this!


Doct. Cross it not good sir.


Ra. Pray give me leave to touch it though, a little.


Fer. But above all, find out the Lady Strangelove
That humorous Madam, and tell her from me,
The many Lovers she has sent before her
Into these shades (where we can find no torments
Like those that she inflicted) have prevailed
With the great Queen Proserpina, that she
Shall be in place next to her royal person.

Ra. The Lady Strangelove! you are in her house sir,
Where do you think you are? or who you are?
Pray call your self to mind sir, are not you
The noble Cavalier and hopeful Courtier
The most accomplished Knight sir Ferdinando?

Doct. Forbear sir, you will move him strongly else.


Ra. I have authority for what I do sir,
Can you forget your self sir, or neglect
The bounteous fortunes, that the Court and Kingdom
Have in store for you, both for past Atchievments,
And for the large endowments of court-vertue
Are found still growing in you, studied and practiced
So to the life, as if you were built up
Virtues own Mansion, on her four firm pillars? --

Men. I hope he cannot flatter him into's wits
When it is the way to fool men out of 'em.

Ra. The Wisdom, Justice, Magnanimity,
And temperance of court you are exactly
Framed and composed of, and endued with all
The excelencies that may adorn a man
By Nature, Fortune, Art and Industry!
And all this glorious light to be eclipsed;
And such Divine perfections seem to sleep?

Fer. Pray sir your ear.


Ra. Sir, most attentively.


Fer. What do you think of Salsbury steeple sir,
For a fit hunting spear to encounter with
The whore of Babilion? might I not firke her think you?

Men. Your Doctrine dos not edify sir Raphael.


Fer. Is Orator Demostines grown dumb
Of The sudden? what! no answer? give me a Knife
He is but tongue-tied.

Ra: Guard me Divinity.


Doct. I told you what you would do.


Men. Patience good sir.


Fer. Patience in tortures?


Doct. Help here suddenly!


Enter Servants. Fer. Do you sally forth in troops? Have I no troop?
Give me my horse and arms, and come a hundred.

Doct. We Will arm and horse you, since you are so unruly,
Away with him into his Bedchamber.

Fer. O do you make me then your Knight of the shire A tun of Wine for that.
Shoulder your Knight, advance your Knight, bear him out. Manent Men.


Al. A Ferdinand, a Ferdinand, etc.

sir Rap.
Men. This now to me is Music, Golden-chimes
That rings all in with an assured advantage,
How now Sir Raphael! Frighted?

Ra. In all my disputations all my travailes,
And all conspiracies that have bin had
Aagainst me, never met I an encounter
By man, or spirit that I feared so much,
Yet here is another fury.

Enter Strangelove. Str. By what oppression or tyranny (for Law
I Am sure could never do it) is my house here
Confiscated or usurped, and I become your slave?

Men. How Madam?


Str. Your slave, lay your commands on me, wh^ drudgery do you appoint me to?


Ra. She Is mad too.


Men. Did not your Ladyship give way?


Str. To make my house a hell?
The noise of Bedlem is soft Music to 't.
Could your Projectorship find no house else
To make a madman madder in but mine?
And me as mad as he too with the trouble.

Men. I was no principle in it good Madam. Exit.


Str. Was it your plot then sir Philosophaster,
That so you might under pretext of reading
Philosophy to him, to cure his madness
Make your adresse to me to prosequte
Your Love-suite when I thought I had answered you,
But if you must proceed, overcome me if you can,
Yet let me warn you to take heed withal
You pull not a disease unto you, that may
By your ungoverned have post into
Your grave: for I shall prove a torment to you,
Though you will take no denial, take yet a warning.

Ra. I take it to forsake your house; and never
More to resort where madness reigns. Did I
Make love to you?

Str. Pardon me virtuous sir, it is my love to you that tortures me into this
wild distraction. O sit Raphael.


Ra. Now virtue guide me. I will shun this place
More then I would the Spanish Inquisition.

Str. I shall in time be rid of all such Guests,
And have the liberty of mine own house
With mine own company, and to mine own ends
Where are you Phil? I were but dead if I had not this wench to fool withal
sometimes.

Enter Phil. Phil. Madam.


Str. I must be a little serious with you, shut the door.


Phi. Now am I called into correction,
When she is vexed and wants the company
She likes, then come I into question,
It Is common among Ladies with their women.

Str. Why that down look, as if you meant to fetch
An answer, or excuse out of your Apron-strings
Before you are charged or questioned? what new faule
Has past of late?

Phi. Do you read any Madam
Upon my face or looks? I never was in love
Much with my face, nor ever hated it. But if I thought
It had upon it, or in it, any trespass
Against your Ladyship (my heart being clear)
These Nails should claw it out. Tear.

Str. Nay be not passionate Phil. I know you cannot
Forget the care I have had of you; nor should you
Distrust me in the promises I have made you,
Bearing your self according to your covenant Phil,
Of which one Article is to laugh with me.

Ph. Go, you are such a Lady, ha, ha, ha.


Str. Now thou comst to me wench: had forgot?


Phi. You said you would be serious.


Str. Do not thou know my seriousness is to laugh in private,
And that thou art bound to stir that humor in me?
There Is but two things more conditioned in thy service;
To do what I bid thee, and tell me the truth
In all things that I ask thee.

Phi. I Madam, you had never known that same else.


Str. Of the clap thou had in the Country e're I took thee,
But have thou faithfully kept thine own e're since?

Phi. Yes most severely Madam on your promise --


Str. Well we will have a husband then to solder up the old crack,
I have already made my choice for you:
Your sweete-heart Cit-wit makes most suite to you,
And has a good Estate, and wit enough
Too for a husband, and a handsome person.

Phi. I find no fault in all that. But he is
So base a coward, that he may be soon
Beaten out of his wit and money.

Str. But if he should prove valiant!


Phi. If he were valiant now I could say something,
But to wait for growing to it were such a loss of time.

Str. What say to Swayn-wit?


Phi. He Is the others extreme. I might fear him but never love him.


Str. What think you of my special favorite Mr. Court-wit?


Phi. As of a Courtier Madam, that has tasted
So much of all waters, that when he has a fountain of his own
He Will be too jealous of it.
And feared that every man will drink of's cup
When perhaps none dares touch it, were I it.

Str. What say to Dainty then the curious Limner?


Phi. I am bound from lying. Madam he is the man.


Str. Well i will take thy cause in hand wench: But yet we are not merry. I am
inclined most jovially to mirth me thinks. Pray Jove some good be toward.
Laugh or i will pinch you, till you do.


Phi. Ha, ha, ha, ha, Madam, ha, ha, ha. O the picture drawer! ha, ha, ha.


Str. I, come, the Picture drawer.


Phi. O, I love drawing and painting, as no Lady better, who for the most part
are of their occupation that profess it. And shall I tell all Madam?


Str. By all means Phil. -- now she is entered.


Phil. I hope I am handsome enough too. For I have heard that Limners or
Picture-drawers, do covet to have the fairest and best featured wives, (or if
not wives, Mistresses) that they can possibly purchase, to draw naked Pictures
by, as of Diana, Venus, Andromeda, Leda, or the like, either virtuous or
lascivious; whom they make to sit or stand naked in all the several postures,
and to lie as many ways to help their art in drawing, who knows how I may
set his fancy a work? and with modesty enough. We were all naked once, and
must be so again. I could sit for the naked Shepherdess, with one Leg over
the the other Knee, picking the Thorn out of her Foot most neatly, to make the
Satyr peep under.


Str. Well thou shall have him.


Boy. Mistress Philomel. Within.


Str. Let in the Boy. Now sir your news?


Boy. The mad Knights Doctor Madam entreats to speak with you.


Str. Now seeks he my assistance in his cure.


Boy. And Mr. Court-wit, and the other Gentlemen are below.


Str. Go you and entertain the Gentlemen, while I consult with the Doctor,
let him enter.

Enter Doctor. Now Mr. Doctor! you come to ask my counsel I know for your
impatient Patient. But let me tell you first, the most learned Authors, that I
can turn over; as Dioscorides, Avicen, Galen, and Hyppocrates are much
discrepant in their opinions concerning the remedies for his disease.


Doct. Madam --


Str. Therefore I trust you will pardon my weakness, if my opinion jumps not
altogether with your judgment.


Doc. Madam, my purpose was not --


Str. My purpose is to advise you though, that, if his Frenzy proceed from
love as you conjecture, that you administer of the roots of Hellebore,
destill'd together with Saltpeter, and the flowers of blind Netles, I Will give
you the proportions, and the quantity is to take.


Doc. Mistake not me good Madam --


Str. But if his Malady grow out of ambition, and his over weening hopes of
greatness (as I conjecture) then he may take a top of Cedar, or an Oake-apple
is very sovereign with the spirit of Hempseed.


Do. Madam, I seek no counsel in this case, my cunning is --


Str. To let me know, that that part of my house which I allow you is too
little for you.


Do. She Is surely mad.


Str. But you must claim possession of the rest, You are come to warn me out
on it; are you not?


Doc. Mistake not so good Madam.


Str. Or do you call my attendance on his person, by way of a Nurse-keeper? I
can do little service.


Doc. For my part Madam I am sorry we are made the trouble of your house, and
rather wish me out on it then your favor. But if your Ladyship will be pleased
to entertain with patience the little I have to say.


Stra. Come to it quickly then.


Doc. First, let me tell you Madam, as it is manifest
You were the cause of his distraction,
You Are bound in charity to yield such means
(With safety of your honor and estate)
As you may render for his restoration
Which of all the earthly means depends on you
If I know any thing in my profession.

Str. Come to the point, you would have me visit him.


Doc. True Madam: for a sight of you, shall more
Allure his reason to him, then all medicine
Can be prescribed.

Str. By your favor sir, you say
Saving my honor and estate I am bound,
But may I with the safety of my Life,
And limbs, and a whole skin dare venture.

Doc. My life of that.


Str. You might more safely lay
Lives of a hundred Patients.

Doc. Now he is calm,
Now shall he see you, but at most secure
And modest distance.

Str. Come for once i will trust you. Exit.


Enter Swayn-wit, and Cit-wit. Sw. Come out into the Garden here; and let them
talk within, I say he shall talk with her; and his belly full, and do with
her too, her belly full, for all thou: an honest discreet Gentleman, and thou a
coward and a cockscombe. Besides he has an art and quality to live upon, and
maintain her Lady-like, when all thy money may be gone. And yet thou prat'st
of thy two thousand pound at use, when thou and thy money too are but an ass
and's load though.


Cit. Well, you may speak your pleasure. This is no cause to fight for.


Sw. I Will make thee fight, or promise to fight with me, or somebody else before
we part, or cut thee into pieces.


Enter Court-wit. Cou. But tell me seriously do thou love my Ladies woman so
well as to marry her, and suffer the Picture-drawer now to court her privately,
and perhaps to draw and carry her from thee?


Cit. Why he here will have it so you see, and pulled me out.


Sw. It is to do a cure upon thee, coward.


Cit. Coward! pish! a common Name to men in buffe and feather. I scorn to
answer to it.


Sw. Why do thou wear a Sword? only to hurt men's feet that kick thee?


Cou. Nay you are too severe.


Sw. Pray hold your peace. I Will jowle your heads together, and so beat ton with
the other else. Why do thou were a Sword I say?


Cit. To fight when I see cause.


Cou. Now he says something, yet, and may be curable.


Sw. What is a cause to fight for?


Cit. I am not to tell you that sir, It must be found out and given me before I
ought to take notice.


Cou. You may safely say for Religion, King or Country.


Sw. Dare thou fight for Religion? say.


Cit. Who that has any Religion will fight I say?


Sw. I say thou have none. Speak, have thou any?


Cit. Truly, in this wavering world I know not how to answer.


Sw. La you. He Will say he has no King neither, rather then fight.


Cou. Why if he will not fight for him he is no Subject, and no Subject no King.


Cit. I thank you sir, I would have said so.


Sw. O thou would make a special Soldier now!


Cit. Well sir, all are not choice dogs that run, some are taken in to make up
the cry.


Sw. And for thy Country, I dare swear thou would rather run it then fight
for it.


Cit. Run my Country I cannot, for I was borne in the City. I am no clown to
run my Country.


Sw. Dare thou tell me of clowns thou cockney chicken-hearted whelp thou?


Cit. Forbear good sir, there are country Gentlemen as well as clownes, and
for the rank I honor you.


Sw. Sirrah you lie, strike me for that now; or I will beat thee abhominably.


Cou. Up to him man: will thou suffer all?


Cit. I would -- but --


Sw. You lie I say again.


Cit. I think I do, I think I do, and why should I maintain an evil cause?


Sw. The wench thou love and doatest on is a whore.


Cit. Sir, if she be it is not my fault, nor hers: somebody else made her so
then I warrant you. But should another man tell me so!


Sw. What then?


Cit. I would say as much to him as to you. Nor indeed is any man's report of
that a sufficient cause to provoke me unless she her self confessed it, and
then it were no cause at all.


Sw. Here Is a true City wit now.


Cit. I should have wit sir, and am acounted a wit within the walls, I am sure
my Father was Master of his company, and of the wisest company too in the city.


Cou. What company's that?


Cit. The Salters sir. For sal sapit omnia you know.


Sw. Your Father was a cuckold though, and you the Son of a whore.


Cou. Fight now or you will die infamous, was your Mother a whore?


Sw. Deny't and dare, say, was she not?


Cit. Comparatively she might be in respect of some holy woman, the Lady
Ramsey, Mistress Katherine Stubbs and such, ha, ha. Is that a cause?


Cou. What! not to say your Mother was a whore?


Cit. He may say his pleasure, It hurts her not: she is dead and gone.
Besides, at the best she was but a woman, and at the worst she might have her
frailties like other women. And is that a cause for me to fight for the dead,
when we are forbidden to pray for'em?


Cou But were your Mother living now, what would you say or do?


Cit. Why, I would civilly ask her if she were a whore? If she confessed it,
then he were in the right, and I ought not to fight against him: for my cause
were naught. If she denied it, then he were in an error, and his cause were
naught, and I would not fight, 'twere better he should live to repent his
error.


Sw. Nay, now if I do not kill thee let me be hanged for idleness. Draw.


Cit. Hold I am unprepared.


Sw. I care not -- unless thou swear presently, and without all equivocation
upon this sword --


Cit. Scabberd and all I pray sir, The cover of the book is allowd in courts to
swear upon.


Sw. Well sir, now you shall swear to challenge the next that wrongs you.
sheathes it.


Cit. Yes, if the wrong give me sufficient cause.


Cou. Cause again! suppose that fellow within should take your wench from you?
which very likely he has done already: for I left 'em close on a couch together
Kissing and --


Cit. Gi' me the book, i will have her from him, or him from her if he be
without her belly, or Kill him if he be within her.


Sw. It Is well a cause may be found at last though.


Cou. I like a man, whom neither Lie, Kick, Battoune, scandal, Friends, or
Parents, the wrongs of Country, King or Religion can move, that will, yet,
fight for his wench. Thou will be one of the stiff blades of the time I see.


Sw. A wench is a moving cause: Unseen


Str. Help, help, here help -- ha -- Above.


Sw. Why do not draw and run in upon 'em?


Cit. After you I will sir.


Sw. A pox upon thee art thou down again?


Cit. No sir, I am drawn you see.


Str. Help, help, a rape, a rape, murder, help! Draw all


Sw. Cou. It Is time to fly then.


Enter Dainty (his sword drawn) and Philomel. Cit. I come my Philomel.


Cou. What Is the matter Phil?


Dai. What cry was that?


Sw. Was it not you that caused it sir?


Phi. Was it not here?


Cit. Was it not you that cried?


Str. Is there help, help, help? Above.


Phi. O it is my Lady in the Madmans chamber. Is her mirth come to this?


Sw. Where, which way?


Phi. Here, here the dore's made fast. Exe. omnes


Sw. I Will break it open. Pret. Cit. his sword drawn.


Doc. Help here, help the Lady; help the Lady. Doctor looks out above.


Cit. We are a coming, you shall have help enough
I warrant, what is the matter? you shall not lack for help -- Flourish his sword.

Fer. Away Medusa. Hence, thou have transformd me. Stone, stone, I am all
stone. Bring mortar and make a bul-wark of me. Above unseen


Cit. O that is the Madman! How madly he talks!


Fer. Hold me not down.


Cit. Stones to make a bul-warke quoth a! If he had but to make a brace of
Demy-culvering bullets, they were thumpers I think.


Fer. Hold me not down, but rear me up, and make me my own statue.


Enter Strangelove, Swain-wit, Court-wit, Dainty. Phil. Str. Was ever such a
practice?


Cou. A mere accident of madness.


Str. I say it was a practice in the Doctor.


Dai. Yet he called out for help.


Str. You had broke up the door first. That was but to color his treachery.


Sw. A new way, and a very learned one I promise you; to cure madness with a
plaster of warm Lady-gutts.


Cit. He would have had a mad bout with my Lady it seems. He would have vented
his madness into her. And she could have drawn better then the Leaches.


Cou. If you believe this Madam, though sir Ferdinand be by his madness
excusable in the attempt, you ought to be revenged upon the Doctor.


Sw. Let Us cut him into pieces Madam.


Str. I Will think upon some way to make him a dreadful example to all the
Pandarean Doctors in the Town. Come in Gentlemen, and help me with your
advices.


Cit. You shall want no advise Madam. No strength,
Let Us go sir. He snatcheth Phil. from Dainty, who took her by the arm.

Ph. What mean you Mr. Cit-wit?


Cit. I have sworn. Therefore I say no more, but I have sworn. Exeunt Omnes;


ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Frederick Gabriel. Fre. THou art so honest, that I am ashamed
The vice of Anger blinded so my Reason,
As not to see through thy transparent breast
A true and noble heart; such as becomes
A Kinsman and a friend to her I love;
I can see now, and read thy integrity,
And, by the light of that th'inhumane false-hood
Of that Court-monster, that compacted piece
Of Rapine, pride and Lust.

Gab. Yet this is he
That did aspire to be a glorious Courtier.

Fre. Courtier? A mere vain glorious imposture;
Pretending favor, having nothing less.
Witness his want of Merit. Merit only
It is that smoothes the brow of Majesty,
And takes the comfort of those precious beauties
Which shine from grace Divine: and he is a Traitor
(No way to stand a courtier) that to feed
His Lusts, and Riots, works out of his Subjects
The means, by forging grants of the Kings favor.

Gab. What my master has suffered by his forgeries
I know to be the Shipwreck even of all
Except his Daughter, and what his aim at her
Was I think appears to you; And what she might
Have suffered by it we both may guess: only we hope
Her virtue would have bin a guard to her beauty.

Fre. It Is plain he never loved her virtuously
That is fallen mad for another.

Gab. That madness is his fate; which renders him into my masters hands to
restore all again. I, note the Justice of it.


Fre. But as his fortune by the others ruin
Shall be advanced, I shall be more rejected.

Gab. That foul mistrust much misbecomes a Love
Rejected sir? by whom? Charissa's constant to you,
And time will clear his frowns: and put you on
Now, the same confidence you had before;
His wanting fortune raised a storm against you,
Your noble friend Sir Raphael has already
By learned reasons and court-oratory
Prevayl'd for you to visit her: and now
You Are come within the verge o'th'house, do you shrink?
See, a good Omen, they issue forth to meet you.

Enter Mendicant, sir Raphael, Charissa. Men. I Will hear no more on it sir, and
am much sorry
That so much Lip-labor is spent already
Upon so vain a Subject.
Give me leave then
To wonder at your light inconstancy,
Your want of resolution: yea of judgment.

Gab. He is flown off again.


Ra. Did you not give me leave to send for him;
Who, now is come to tender his affection
Unto your Daughter?

Men. Did not you first promise Ferd: Char. and Gab. aside
To give assurance of fit joincture for her,
Proportionable to her dowry, which
You now are started from?

Ra. I understood not
Nor can yet understand more of her dowry
Then a thousand pound which her Uncle left her,
And answerably to that I will make good her joincture.

Men. O you are short sir,
I mean to make her worth ten thousand more
Out of my estate in the mad Ferdinand.
Another ten thousand to redeem my Land,
Ten thousand more, i will keep in bank for purchase.

Ra. A judgement's fallen upon him: He Is mad too;
Struck lunatique with his o're-weening hopes
Sprung from the others misery.

Men. And so sir, as you came you may depart:
For 'lesse you bring a thousand pound per annum
T'assure upon her, she is no wife for you.

Fre. O sir, you had better left me in that peace
I lately slept in, without any hope
Of seeing her again, then by your summons
To startle me back from a quiet death
To Kill me thus with Tantalizing tortures.

Men. Thank then your learned friend, who failed me in
His undertaking for you, and for her
If walls and locks can hold her, she no more
Shall tantalize you.

Ra. Wherein have I failed sir?


Men. Sir, in assuring joincture to her Dowry.


Ra. Sir to no possible dowry you can give her,
But you propound the estate you have in the Moon;
When shall you take possession, think you, of your
Lordship of Lunacy in the Cynthian Orb?

Men. I shall climb thither sir without the help
Of your Heaven-scaling ladder of Philosophy.

Ra. Nay then sir hear me.


Men. What in private sir?


Fre. Remember, sweet, your vow.


Cha. Most constantly. And let me conjure you by this. Kiss.


Fre. And this --


Cha. That you forget not yours.


Gab. Quick, quick! i will stand before you.


Cha. And time at length will point us out a meane^
After a short long-seeming separation
To meet and reunite our vows and faiths
With greater strength and fervor.

Men. Ha! i will part you.
Was it for that you whispered, politic sir?
And could thou stand their screene? thou treacherous varlet out of my doors.

Gab. For what offense?


Men. Dare thou expostulate?
Thou death deserving Villain. Hurts him.
And Huswife get you in: you may depart sirs
Has your love blinded you? i will lead you then.

Ra. Madness at height.


Men. Will you along!


Cha. O sir you are unkind.
Love then a wilful father is less blind. Exit.

Ra. Friend, has he hurt thee?


Gab. I am sure I bleed for it.


Ra. Why how now Frederick? despair not man.
He has vexed me; and out of my vexation
Shall spring thy comfort. I will labor for thee,
I Will study nothing more then to beguile
This watchful fury; this Hisperian Dragon.
Say to thy self and boldly she is thine own,
And for thy means, ( Basta) let me alone.

Fre. You are my noble Patron.


Gab. Turned away:
As I was his servingman, I am rewarded;
It Is common with us creatures to served so:
But, as I am no more his servant, I
Am free to vindicate my self out of
The wrong done to my blood (which is the same
With his,) by him rejected and despised.

Enter Cit-wit. Cit. Sir Andrew Mendicant at home?


Gab. Not to be spoken with at this time sir.


Cit. Pray let him know that the Lady Strangelove
Requires him suddenly to remove his Madman
Out of her house; or she must take a course
Much to his disadvantage.

Gab. In good time sir.


Cit. This is a surly fellow, and though I have sworn
The humor of fighting is scarce warm in me yet,
And she advises him to find a better Doctor for him,
For this has taken a wrong course.

Gab. Say you so sir?


Cit. I Will tell't you as a secret. The Physician thought to have cured his
patient, (who has bin a notable Gamester at In and In) between my Ladies legs.
If I and two or three more (but chiefly my self indeed) had not rescued her,
the Doctor had held the Lady-cow to the Mad-bull.


Gab. May I believe this?


Cit. He thinks I lie now. And should he gi' me the lie, the virtue of my Oath
were questionable.


Gab. Is this upon your knowledge sir?


Cit. True upon my life. So farewell honest friend. Exit


Gab. This may prove sport and business too.


Ra. We will do something suddenly.


Gab. What if you take me into that something too?
I guess it is some stratagem to beguile
The cautious father of his injured daughter.

Ra. This fellow will betray us.


Fre. I will venture
^ll that I have, my fortune in Charissa
(...) his fidelity, sir his thoughts are mine.

Ra. Cupid and Mercury favor our design. Ex. Om.


ACT IV. SCENE II.
Enter Court-wit, and Doctor. Cou. YOur judgment (by your favor) Mr. Doctor
Much faild you in that case.

Doc. Your reason yet may plead
Mine innocence, that drew her but to visit him.

Cou. But that drew on his fury; and though reason
May argue much for you, she can hear none,
Nor any understand: The swift affrightment
Upon her strength of passion, struck so deep
A sense into her, that is has deprived her
Of all her proper senses. She is even mad sir.

Doc. Not past my cure; and by a present means
Pray, win her hither to see a madder object
Then is her self, and see how that will work.

Cou. I Will gladly ad my pains unto your skill. Exit.


Doc. Come forth into the air. Conduct him gently.


Enter Frederick with the servants. Fre. Into the air! Set me upon Mount
Lathmos,
Where I may see, and contemplate the beauty
Of my adored Diana; or carry me
Up to Hymettus top, Cytheron, Othris or Pindus
Where she affects to walk and take the air;
Or tarry, stay, perhaps she hunts to day
IN the woods of Merathon, or Erymanthus.

Doc. That Is a long journey sir.


Fre. You Are a long bearded fool.


Doc. I thought I had been a Physician. But sir
You shall not need to expose your self to travel,
Your Goddess will descend into this Garden,
Pass but time here a while and she will come to you.

Fre. We will have joviall pastime. Shall we run
At base, or leap frog, or dance naked
To entertain her, or what do you think
Of downright drink and singing?

Doc. That Is best of all.


Fer. Let Us have a mad catch then.


Enter Court-Swaine. Strangelove. Cou. Here Madam may you see the Madmans
Revels.


Sw. And after that the Doctors Tragicomedy.


Fer. Are not your wind pipes tuned yet? Sing
A Catch.
So now a Dance, I am all air -- Ahaigh -- Ahaigh
I thank thee Mercury that have lent thy wings
Unto my feet. Play me my Country Dance,
Stand all you by. These Lasses and these Swains
Are for my Company.
He Dances a conceited Country Dance, first doing his honors, then as leading
forth his Less. He danceth both man and woman's actions, as if the Dance
consisted of two or three couples, at last as offering to Kiss his Less, he
fancies that they are all vanished, and espies Strangelove. How now! all
vanished, ha!
It is no mervaile that the lesser lights
Become obscured when Cynthia appears,
Let me with Adoration fall before
Thy Deity great Goddess.

Str. Keep him from me.


Sw. You must approach no nearer sir. The Goddess
Is not so confident in her Divinity
As to trust you in reach of her.

Cou. Keep back sir.


Fer. What Hydras, Gorgons, and Chymaeras are you;
Centaures and Harpies that dare interpose
Between my hopes, and my felicity!

Cou. Doctor, away with him.


Doc. Carry him to his Chamber,
And hold him down. His raging fit is on him

Fer. Was Night made to surprise men at Noonday?
Or shall the charms of Heccate take force
To dimne Appolle's brightness? So't must be,
When Gods themselves give way to Destine. Exiunt with Ferd.

Sw. They are enough to hold, and bind him too. Swa. pulls back the Doctor.
Come you before the Lady.

Doct. What Is her pleasure?


Sw. It Is to do Justice upon thee O Doctor
Stir, or cry out, or give the least resistance,
And I will cut thy head off before judgment.

Doct. What outrage do you intend?


Cou. Outrage! Can you think of an outrage above the horror you offered to this
Lady, To violate her chastity? her honor?


Doct. You cannot say so.


Sw. It Is said, and you are guilty. Proceed to judgment Madam.


Str. I first would hear your censures.


Enter Cit-wit. Cit. And mine among the rest good Madam. I have taken care that
a new Doctor shall be brought. Therefore in the first place my censureis, that
this be presently hanged out of the way.


Cou. That Is too high straind. What think you Madam, if to rectify his
judgment, we picked all the errors of his brain; First, opening the
Pericranion, then take out the cerebrum; wash it in Albo vino, till it be
throughy clens'd; and then --


Sw. Pox of your Albo vino, and his cerebrum taking out, that were a way to
kill him. We must not be guily of the death of a Dogleach, but have him purged
a safer way.


Str. How? Proceed.


Sw. We will fill his belly full of Whey, or Butter-milke, put him naked into a
Hogs-head, then put into the same an hundred broken Urinalls, then close up the
Vessel and roll your Garden with it.


Doct. I trust they cannot mean any such mischief.


Str. Hark ye Gentlemen. Do you hear? A Guelders horn.


Cit. Yes Madam; it is a Sowgelder.


Str. Fetch in that Minister of Justice.


Cit. Who Madam? the Sowgelder?


Sw. We Will make a Doctor guelder of him though, and my Lady be so minded.


Cit. That will be sport indeed. Exit.


Cou. But will you see the execution Madam?


Str. Why not as well as other women have
Seen the dissections of Anotamies,
And executed men ripped up and quartered?
This spectacle will be comicall to those.

Doct. They dare not do the thing they would have me fear.


Sw. Now Doctor you look heavily methinks,
You shall be lighter by two stone presently.

Doct. You will not murder me?


Sw. Stir not; nor make least noise
As you hope ever to be heard again.

Doct. I would I could pray now to any purpose.


Enter Cit-wit, Guelder. Cit. I have brought him. The rarest fellow Madam,
And do you thank your fortune in him Doctor,
For he can sing a charm (he says) shall make
You feel no pain in your libbing or after it:
No Tooth-drawer, or Corne-cutter did ever work
With so little feeling to a Patient.

Str. Sing then, he shall not suffer without a Song.


Song. Sw. What must he be stripped now; or will letting down his breeches be
enough?


Doct. You dare not use this violence upon me
More rude then rage of Prentices.

Cit. Doctor it is decreed.


Doct. You cannot answer it.


Cou. Better by Law then you can the intent Guelder whets his knife and all in
preparation, Linen, Basin, etc.
Of Rape upon the Lady.

Doct. That was not to have been my act, nor was it done.


Sw. When this is done we will talk w' ye, come lay him cross this Table. Hold
each of you a Leg of him, and hold you your peace Dodipoll. And for his arms
let me alone, do you work Guelder.


Doct. Hold, I have a secret to deliver to my Lady.


Sw. You shall be delivered of your secrets presently.


Doct. If I tell her not that shall give her pardon
Then let me suffer. Hear me sweet Madam.

Str. Forbear him, let him down.


Sw. Sweet say? Thou art not i will be sworn.


Str. Well sir your weighty secret now to save your trifles.


Doc. In private I beseech you Madam: for I dare but whisper't.


Str. You shall allow me so much wariness as to have one at least to be my
Guard, and witness.


Doc. This Gentleman then Madam.


Cit. We are shut out of council.


Sw. No matter. I list not be no nearer him: no more would my cozen had he my
nose. But where is Mr. Dainty and your finicall Mistress Phil all this while though?


Cit. No matter, but I have sworn you know. Therefore I say no more, but I have
sworn.


Cou. What a strange tale is this! I cannot believe it.


Str. I do, and did before suspect it: and framed this counterfeit plot upon
you, Doctor, to work out the discovery: would I have seen you guelt dee think?
That would have renderd me more brutish then the women Barbers. Look sir this
is no Guelder, but one of my house Music. (Go, your part is done -- Exit. And
for the affright you gave me, Doctor, I am evenw'ye.


Sw. The Devil fright him next for a spurging, skitter-brooke. 'T were good
you would call to burn some perfumes Madam.


Str. But for the secret you have told me i will keep it secret yet, I will
keep you so too; and from your Patient. Enter Boy.

There Is a new Docter come already Madam to the madman.


Str. From sir Andrew Mendicant?


Boy His servant brought him.


Doc. I pray what Doctor is it?


Str. Engage your self with no desire to know,
But, for the good you find, fit thanks to owe;
So come with me, and come you Gentlemen. Ex. Omnes

ACT IV. SCENE III.
Enter Frederick in a Doctors habit, Gabriel with two swords under his cloak,
Ferdinand upon a Bed bound, and held down by servants. Fer. Heap yet more
Mountains, Mountains upon
Mountains, Pindus on Ossa, Atlas on Olympus,
I Will carry that which carries Heaven, do you
But lay't upon me!

Fre. Forbear you will stifle him,
Take off the needless weight of your rude bodies;
Unbind him and stand off, to give him air.

Ser. Sir though you are a Physician, I am no fool. Take heed what you do.
He Is more then six of (...) hold when his hot fit's upon him. He would now
tear you to pieces should you let him loose.


Fer. The danger then be mine. Let him sit up. Is not he civil now?


Ser. I, for how long? do you note that Hercules eye there?


Fre. I charge you quit the room.


Ser. It Is but to come again when we are called.


Fre. Be not within the hearing of a call,
Or if you chance to hear me, though I cry
Murder, I charge you come not at me.

Ser. It Is but a Doctor out of the way; and that is no loss while there are so
many, the best cannot live by the worst.


Fre. Keep the door fast. You are much mist abroad sir,
And chiefly by the Ladies, who now want
The Court-ships, Banquets, and the costly presents
In which you wonted to abound to 'em.

Ferd. Ha --

Fre. Nay, nay, sit still sir. They say you are mad;
Mad with conceit of being a favorite
Before your time, that is, before you had merit
More then a tumor of vainglory in you,
And in especial care for your recovery
I am sent to administer unto you: but first
To let you blood. Dagger.

Ferd. Ho! Murder, Murder, Murder.


Fre. Are you so sensible already? do not stir
Nor cry too loud. Dos the mere apprehension
Of blood-letting affright your madness? Then
Reason may come again.

Ferd. The Battle of Musleborough Field was a brave one.


Fre. O do you fly out again?


Ferd. Sings part of the old Song, and acts it madly.
Fre. This is pretty: but back from the purpose.


He sings again. Fre. Will you come to the point sir?


Ferdinand sings again. Fre. We but lose time in this sir: Though it be good
testimony of your memory in an old Song. But do you know me?


Ferd. Not know my Sovereign Lord? Cursed be those Knees, and hearts that fall
not prostrate at his Feet.


Fre. This wild submission no way mittigates
My wrongs, or alters resolution in me
To Cure or Kill you quickly. Do you know me now sir?
Or have you known Charissa? do you start sir? Off his beard and gown.
There Is sign of reason in you then: But be it
By reason or by chance, that you awake
Out of your frantic slumber, to perceive me,
My cause and my Revenge is still the same,
Which I will prosecute according to
My certain wrong, and not your doubtful reason,
Since reasonlesse you laid those wrongs upon me
When you were counted wise, great, valiant, and what not
That cries a Courtier up, and gives him power
To trample on his betters.

Ferd. Who talks this mortal to? I am a spirit.


Fre. Sure I shall find you flesh, and penetrable.


Ferd. I would but live to subdue the Pisidians,
And so to bring the Lydians under tribute --

Fre. You would but live to abuse more credulous fathers
With courtly promises, and golden hopes
For your own lustful ends upon their Daughters.
Think (if you can think now) upon Charissa.
Charissa who was mine, in faith and honor
Till you ignobly (which is damnably)
By a false promise with intent to whore her
Diverted her weak Father from the Match
To my eternal loss. Now whether you
Have wit or no wit to deny't, or stand to it,
Or whether you have one, or ten men's strength,
Or all, or none at all i will fight or Kill you
Yet like a Gentleman, i will call upon you Throw away his dags.
Give me the Swords. They are of equal length
Take you free choice.

Ferd. Pish. Run back.


Fre. I cast that to you then. Hand it, or die a Madman.


Ferd. O ho, ho, ho, --

Gab. All this sir to a Madam.


Fre. I have a cause to be more mad then he,
And in that cause i will fight.

Gab. He knows not what you tell him.


Fre. I tell't the Devil in him then to divulge it
When I have dispossessed him. I have further
Reason to kill him yet, to cross your Master,
Who has begged his Estate. Now fight or die a Madman.

Ferd. Hold Frederick hold. Thou have indeed awaked
Me to see thee and my self.

Gab. He Is not so mad to fight yet I see that.


Fre. I Am glad you are your self sir, I shall fight
Now upon honorable terms, and could
Suppose before your madness counterfeit.

Ferd. Yet hold. Has Mendicant begged me?


Fre. During your madness. What should hinder him?


Ferd. Put up thy Sword.


Fre. Upon no terms, and you alive.


Ferd. Not to obtain Charissa?


Fre. As you Guest sir.


Ferd. It shall be by means if gold can win
Her Fathers grant.

Fre. That Is most unquestionable.


Ferd. Not that I dare not fight, do I urge this,
But that the other is your safer way.

Fre. Your gold's too light. I will accept of nothing
From you while you dare tell me you dare fight,
Perhaps you doubt of ods, go forth. Nay I
Will lock him out.

Gab. You may: For I dare trust you while I go call the Lady. Exit.


Fre. Now are you pleased, or dare you now to fight sir?


Ferd. I neither will nor dare fight in this cause.


Fre. This is a daring Courtier!
How durst you wind your self in so much danger?
And why take madness in you, to be bound,
And grapled with so rudely?

Ferd. Keep my council,
And take Charissa.

Fre. It Is a fair condition.


Ferd. First, for the wrong I did thee, noble youth
In my design against Charissa's honor,
It is confessed, repented; and her self
For satisfaction to be given to thee,
I Will fall upon thy Sword else, or be posted,
And Ballated with all disgrace.

Fre. Well yet.


Ferd. And for my show of madness; 'twas put on
For my revenge on this impetuous Lady
To cool these flames (as much of anger as
Desire) with her disdain, and tempting malice
Had raised within me.

Fre. You would have ravished her.


Ferd. I rather thought, she like a cunning Lady
Would have consented to a Madman, who
She might presume could not impeach her honor
By least detection. Monkeyes, Fools, and Madmen,
That cannot blab, or must not be believed
Receave strange favors.

Fre. And on that presumption
You feigned your madness.

Ferd. True.


Fre. But rather then to fail,
With your bawd Doctors help you would have forced her:
And that is the council you would have me keep
On your assurance of Charissa to me:
That your proceeding in your madness here,
May yet find means and opportunity
To exercise your violence.

Ferd. Suppose so.


Fre. Thou art not worth my Killing now.
Justice will mark thee for the Hangmans Office:
Nor, were Charissa in thy gift, were she,
In that, worth mine or any good acceptance,
And for your council, had within there Madam.

Ferd. Frederick --


Fre. The Lady of the house! where are you?
Will you be pleased to hear a secret Madam?
Strangely discovered?

Enter Strangelove, Gabriel, Doctor. Str. I do not sl^ght your act in the
discovery,
But your imposture sir, and beastly practice
Was before whispered to me by your Doctor
To save his Epididamies.

Doct. O your pardon.


Fred. I am disgraced, undone.


Str. It Is in my power
To make you the perpetual shame of Court;
And will assuredly do it, if you comply not
With me to make this injured Gentleman's fortune
In his beloved Charissa.

Ferd. Madam most readily, I have offered it.


Sw. I have forecast the way and means already:
Which we must prosecute with art and speed*
Good ends often times do bad intents succeed.

Ferd. I Will be directed by you.


Fre. Noblest Lady. Exeunt Omnes.


ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Swayn-wit, Court-wit, Cit-wit. Sw. COme Sir, must I take you in hand
again?


Cit. My Lady will convery her Madman to sir Andrew Mendicants it seems.


Sw. Tell me that I know not; and answer my questions.


Cit. She and the Doctor, and the the other Doctor's gone with him too.


Sw. Leave you by flim flams, and speak to the purpose.


Cit. You know I have sworn. Do you not know I have sworn?


Sw. To live and die a beaten Ass; a coward have thou not?


Cou. Prithee forbear him: He Is not worth thy anger.


Sw. Anger! Is every Schoolmasters angry that gives Discipline with correction?


Cit. Would he were at Pensans again.


Sw. Did not thou tell my Lady that I was a coward in my own Country, and
Kicked out of Cornwall?


Cit. Comparatively I think I did in respect of Corineus, that wrastled and
threw Giant after Giant over the cliffs into the Sea.


Sw. Pox of your comparative lies; And did not thou say that he here was
peppered so full of the whatsha callums, that his spittle would poison a Dog or
a Rat?


Cit. That was comparatively too in respect of a pure Virgin; a chrisome child
or so.


Cou. He never shall move me, I forgive him.


Cit. Merely comparatively I speak it.


Sw. Forgi' me for swearing i will make thee speak positively, or beat thee
superlatively before I have done with thee.


Enter Boy. Boy. Gentlemen, my Lady --


Sw. Hold a little. Did thou not say this child here was a Pickpocket? and
that he picked thine of thy money, and thy watch, when he was singing between
thy Legs to day?


Boy. Who I a Pick-pocket? Flies at him.


Cit. Forbear good Lady it was comparatively.


Boy. A pick pocket?


Cou. Forbear and hear him Hercules.


Boy. Lend me a sword i will kill him, and hear him afterward.


Cou. Nay I must hold you then. How was he comparatively your Pick-pocket?


Cit. That is as much as any man I know; That is I accuse nobody; that is all
are as innocent as the child, and he as the innocent unborne. And let that
satisfy you.


Boy. Live. I am satisfied. Now Gentlemen my Lady prays you to follow her to
sir Andrew Mendicants.


Cou. I know the business, It Is about our Revells.


Sw. Suffer a child to beat thee!


Cou. His cause was bad you know.


Sw. Incorrigible coward! Say now; art not thou thy self a pick-pocket, and a
cutpurse? say.


Cit. Comparatively it may be said, I am to a Churchwarden, a Collector for
the poor or such.


Sw. The conclusion is, that if ever I hear thou mentionst my name again in any
sense whatsoever, i will beat thee out of reason.


Cit. In my good wishes, and prayers I may: Heaven forbid else.


Sw. Not in your prayers sir, shall you mention me, you were better never pray.


Cit. Heaven forbid I should then!


Sw. And make thine Oath good on that sly fellow that has taine away thy
wench, or --


Cit. He has not taken her yet.


Cou. You have not seen her or him these two hours; has not my Lady called
too, and she not to be found?


Cit. True, true: and if I be not revenged.


Sw. Do It then now, while thou art hot. She comes, here take, and keep her
while thou art hot and have her.


Enter Philomel and Dainty. Phi. Is she at your dispose sir? Court takes aside
with Dainty.


Cit. Your Lady gave you me.


Phi. Or am in her gift?


Cit. You are in my possession, nor shall Lucifer dispossess me of her.


Phi. So valiant on a sudden!


Cit. Have I not cause?


Phi. You Will have me with all faults?


Cit. Yes, and a match forever. Kiss.


Sw. How means she by all faults?


Cit. A word she always uses in waggery.


Cou. By all means take her from him. What! afraid of a coward?


Sw. You must do it or take the share, he should have had a downright beating.
Forgi' me for swearing, he is a veryer coward then the other.


Cou. He will serve the better to flesh him. And do but note his tiranicall
rage that is the vanquisher.


Sw. You will on.


Dai. Sir she is mine by promise.


Cit. She Is mine by act and deed sir according to the flesh, let her deny't
and she can.


Dai. That shall be tried by Law.


Cit. By Law of arms and hands it shall, take that, and let her go.


Dai. Bear witness Gentlemen he struck me.


Phi. O pitiful Picture-drawer!


Cit. Will you not draw? I will then. Draw.


Dai. What would you have sir? If she be yours take her.


Cit. That Is not enough, I will make thee fight, what blindness have I lived
in! I would not but be valiant to be Caesar.


Cou. O brave Cit, O brave Cit.


Sw. Why do not draw thou fellow thou?


Dai. She Is his he says; and she denies it not, shall I fight against him for
his own?


Cit. I Will make thee fight, or cut thee into pieces.


Cou. He turns your words over to him.


Cit. Why do thou wear a sword? only to hurt men's feet that Kick thee?
Kick.


Cou. Do you observe? Nay thou art too severe.


Cit. Pray hold your peace, i will jowle your heads together and so beat ^on with
the other else.


Sw. Forgi' me for swearing. He Will beat's all anon.


Cit. Why do thou wear a Sword I say?


Dai. Some other time sir, and in fitter place.


Cit. Sirrah you lie, strike me for that, or I will beat thee abominably.


Dai. You see this Gentlemen.


Phi. And I see it too, was ever poor wench so couzend in a man?


Cit. The wench thou love and doat'st on is a whore.


Phi. How Is that?


Cit. No, no, That was not right, your father was a cuckold though, and you the
son of a whore.


Sw. Good, I shall love this fellow.


Dai. I can take all this upon account.


Cit. You count all this is true then. Incorrigible coward! what was the last
vile name you called me Mr. Swain-wit? O I remember, sirrah thou art a
Pickpocket and a Cutpurse; And gi' me my money again, and him his or I will cut
thy throat.


Dai. I am discovered.


Cit. Do you answer nothing, do you demurre upon it?


Dai. Hold sir I pray; Gentlemen so you will grant me pardon, and forbear the
Law i will answer you.


Cou. Sw. Agreed, agreed.


Dai. It is confessed; I am a Cutpurse.


Cit. Comparatively or positively do you speak?
Speak positively, or I will beat thee superlatively.

Sw. Forgi' me for swearing a brave Boy.


Dai. Here is your VVatch, and Money; And here is yours. Now as you are
Gentlemen use no extremity.


Cou. Beyond all expectation!


Sw. All thought.


Cit. Miraculous! O the effects of valor!


Phi. Was ever woman so mistaken of both sides?


Sw. But do thou think thou art valiant for all this though?


Cit. You were best try; or you, or both, or come all three.


Sw. I swear thou shall have it to keep up while thou art up.


Cit. Is this your picture-drawing? are you the Kings Picture-drawer? A neat
denomination for a Cutpurse, that draws the Kings Pictures out of men Pockets.


Cou. Come sir, come in with us.


Dai. Pray use me Kindly Gentlemen.


Cit. Yes, we will use you in your kind sir.


Takes Phil by the hand. Exeunt Omnes. ACT. V. SCENE II.
Enter Mendicant, a Letter in his hand. Men. THis is the day of my felicity,
And is the same with that the Poet Sings
Is better then an Age. Come forth Charissa,
Enter Charissa. Now you appear my comfort; and I can
No less then thank thy sweet obedience
That have complied with my directions,
Bride-like and glorious to meet a fortune,
So great as shall beget the present envy
Of all the Virgin Ladies of the Court,
And a posterity, that through all ages,
Shall praise and magnify thy act.

Cha. Your acceptance of my duty sir
Is all that I can glory in.

Men. How are we bound unto this noble Lady
That sent us our instructions.

Cha. Sure I am. If this be a true Copy.


Men. Let Music in her soft but sweetest notes
Usher their welcome, whilst unto my thoughts Music
The lowdest harmony resounds my triumph.
Enter Doctor, and Fred. in Doctors habit, Strange. Priest, Ferd. in the chair
as before borne by servants, Fab. as one of the servants. Madam most welcome.

Str. In fewest and the softest words sir Andrew.
(He sleeps) and let him gently be conveyed
Only with those about him to his Chamber.

Men. Charissa, go: be you his conduct, softly, softly,
I see you have brought a Priest Madam. Ext. Om. Pret.

Str. By all best reason, Mend. and Strange.
For when we found he used Charissa's Name,
When he was calm and gentle, calling still
Charissa! where is Charissa? a good space
Before he slept, and being then demanded
What would he with Charissa? He most readily
Replied, Fetch me Charissa and a Priest.
The Doctors in their judgments (unto which
My full opinion assented) might
Foresee, that in removing him, where she
Might be his immediate object, when he wakes,
That fresher flames to instant marriage
Would then arise.

Men. Incomparably judicious Madam.


Str. Yet not without your leave would I attempt it;
Without your leave, knowing your watchful care
Over your Daughter.

Men. And that care of mine
Was (Madam) by your favor
Principal motive to this great effect.

Str. Take all unto your self, I am content.


Men. I Would feign steal in and watch the event of things.


Str. But have you heard sir Andrew the mischance
Of the unfortunate Lover, distracted Frederick?

Men. How! what of him?


Str. H'has made himself away.


Men. Is It possible?


Str. (He has by this time, or the Priest is tongue-ty'd.)


Men. He has left no estate worth begging, that is the worst often.

My joys come flowing no me -- yet I would see.


Str. And hear me good Sir Andrew, for the Love
I bring to ad unto your joys: for I
Foreseeing the event of this nights happiness
Have warned some friends to follow me with Revells
To celebrate the Marriage of your fortunes.
See they are come. Pray entertain 'em sir.

Enter Court. Swayn. Cit-wit, Dainty, Phil. Boy. Men. The Gallants that were to
day so merry with me.


Str. The same: but very harmless.


Cit. All but one sir. Did you not lose your purse to day?


Str. What Is the meaning?


Cou. Sw. We Will tell you Madam.


Men. My purse? (I mist it at my Lady Strangeloves.)


Cit. This Picture-drawer drew it, and has drawn more of the Kings-pictures
then all the Limners in the Town. Restore it sirrah.


Men. I will not take it, 'twas my nelect that lost it, not he that stole it.
This is my day of fortune; it comes home to me; more then I dare receive. O my
joys, let me be able to contain you.


Cit. Have you another purse to lose?


Men. I have a purse; which if I lose, i will blame my self, none else.


Cit. Let him but come so near you as to ask forgiveness for the last, and
if he do not take the next, though it be six fadome deep in your pocket i will
hang for him when his time comes.


Men. I Will watch his fingers for that. Sit.


Cou. Observe good Madam.


Dai. Sir at your feet I beg your pardon.


Men. It needs not, prithee rise.


Dai. Never, till you pronounce that happy word
I pardon thee: or let me have some token
Of sweet assurance that I am forgiven
Which I beseech you -- I beseech you grant.

Men. In sooth thou have it. Heaven pardon thee as I do.


Dai. I have it sit indeed, and as your gift i will keep it, promising before
all these witnesses, i will never venture for another.


Men. Fore me an expert fellow; Pity he should be hanged before we have more
of his breed.


Cit. Did not I tell you sir? And these are but his short arms; i will
undertake, when he makes a long arm, he shall take a purse twelve skore off.


Men. I do not like Thieves handfell though, This may presage some greater
loss at hand.


Sw. Now Gentlemen you know your task, be expeditious in it.


Cou. I have cast the design for it already Madam. My inventions are all flame
and spirit. But you can expect no great matter to be done extempore or in six
minutes.


Sw. What matter is it so we skip up and down? our friend Jack Dainty here, Mr.
Cutpurse dances daintily though.


Str. And Mr. Cit-wit, you have worthily won my woman sir.


Cit. I have her Madam, she is mine.


Str. I Will make her worth a thousand pound to you, besides all she has of her
own.


Cit. Her faults and all Madam, we are agreed of that.


Phi. Suppose this Boy be mine.


Cit. I would he were else, that I might have him under lawful correction, and
the cause of my side: for he beat me not long since.


Boy. And you be my father, and do not make much of me and give me fine things,
i will beat you again so I will; and my mother shall help me.


Cit. Agreed Billy, agreed Philly. Never was man so suddenly, so rich; Nay
never look Gentlemen, she is mine, and he is mine own, I am sure I have got
him now; And all faults are salv'd.


Sw. Her word in waggery is made good in earnest now though.


Str. To your business Gentlemen; if you have a They consult. short speech or
two, the boy's a pretty Actor; and his mother can play her part; women-Actors
now grow in request. Sir Andrew! melancholy?


Men. I was thinking on the omen of my purse. Court draws his Tables and
retires to Phil, writes and sometimes shows her.


Str. Fear no further mishap sir; it is ominous to fear.


Men. Pray let us go in and see how things proceed.


Str. Pray give me leave to make the first discovery;
Walk down into the Garden, i will come to you;
And here are some would speak with you. Ex. severally.

Enter two Projectors. 1. Into the Garden, good, let us follow him.


2. It Is not the repulse he gave us in the morning shall quit him of us.


1. No now his superintendent's turned away, we will once more fill his head with
millions. Exit.


Dai. I Will make the Dance, and give you all the footing. Practice footing.


Sw. Stand further off of my Pocket though.


Cit. No matter if we lose any thing, and he within ten miles of us i will make
him answer't.


Dai. I want a fifth man, I would have an od.


Enter Doctor. Doc. The Marriage is performed. The Priest has done his office
--


Sw. Doctor can you dance?


Doc. And sing too, I have forgot much else.


Phi. I Will speak the Speech: Have not I forgot my Actors tone tro? I shall
remember't, I could have acted 'em all ore.


Boy: I can speak a Speech too Mother, must I call you Mother now?


Phi. I my Boy, now I dare vouch thee.


Doc. What think you of this tune sir for your dance?
Tay dee, dee, etc.

Dai. I Will borow a Violl and take it of you instantly. Ex.
Enter sir Raphael. Pray sir, is sir Andrew Mendicant in the house. To Court-w.

Cou. Umh -- He writes in his tables sometimes scratching his head, as pumping
his Muse. Is he within sir, can you tell? He Is too busy it seems.

Can you tell me sir I pray, if sir Andrew be within? To Cit-wit as he moved
toward him, Cit-wit Dances looking on his Feet, etc.
Very strange! among what Nation am I arrived?
Here Is one in civil habit sure will answer me,
Sir may I be informed by you? saw you sir Andrew?

Ra. Te precor domine Doctor. He sings on. The Doctor stretches his Throat in
the Tune.
They are no Christians sure.
Sir may I be informed by you? To Swayn. He whistels and Dances Sellingers
round, or the like.
Bless me; the people are bewitched.
Enter Dainty. Do you belong to the house sir? To Dainty, he fidls to him and
the 4 dancing and singing practice about him.
I hope for courtesy here Lady will you be pleased -- To Phil. she speaks in a
vile tone like a Player.

Phi. O by no means, we must speak Charon fair,
Or he will not waft us over the Stigian Flood,
Then must we have a sop for Cerberus
To stop his yawning Chaps; Let me alone
To be your Convoy to Elysium.

Ra. This is most heathenish of all. Dainty plays softly and Doctor with him
aside.


Phi. I Will pass that snarling triple-headed Cur
Which keeps the pallace-gate of Pluto's Court,
And guide you safe through pitchy Acheron.

Ra. What Woman Monster's this? Sweet young Gentleman, let me ask you a
question.


Boy. Grim death, why rather did thou not approach
My younger days; before I knew thy fears?
Thy pains are multiplied by our years.

Ra. All Lunatic? or Gentlemen, do you want leisure
Or civility to answer me?

Cit. Have you done the speeches Mr. Court wit?


Cou. I have already from the forked top
Of high Parnassus fetched 'em.

Cit. And shall my wife and Billi boy speak 'em?


Cou. As i will instruct you.


Cit. You write admirably I confess; But you have an ill tone to instruct in;
I Will read to 'em my self, you give your words no grace.


Doc. You have the tune right, will you instruct the Music men?


Dai. And you all in the Dance imediately.


Sw. But shall we have no silken things, no whim whams
To Dance in though.

Cit. Perhaps the Bride can furnish us.


Sw. With some of her old Petticotes, can she?


Phi. No, no my Lady has taken care for all.


Dai. Come, come away to practice, and be ready. Exe. Om. Fidling, Footing,
Singing, Acting, etc.


Ra. Never was I in such a Wilderness.
But my revenge upon Sir Mendicant
Shall answer all my patience, in the Jeere
I mean to put upon him.
I will possess him with a braine-trick, now, wherein
A mere invention of mine own
Heaven pardon me for lying) shall so nettle him.

Enter Mendicant, and Projecters. Men. Go back and be not seen till I come to
you. Ex. Pro.


Ra. He Is come. Have you heard the news sir Andrew?


Men. What sir Raphael?


Ra. That Ferdinand's restored to's wits.


Men. I am glad on it.


Ra. Do you take the loss of his estate so mildly
Which might have bin your own?

Men. I hope you think me a Christian sir, but how should he arrive at such a
sudden knowledge of it, if it be so? I will pretend it is true, yes sir, he is
in's wits.


Ra. I thought I had ly'd when I did prophecy:
But sir my Nephew Fredrick --

Men. Has made himself away, I heard of that too.


Ra. (I hope not so) yet there is another accident
Of which you have not heard, may touch you nearer,
And that indeed's my business, you sir, furiously
Wounded your Man to day.

Men. Not dangerously I hope.


Ra. Flatter not so your self; He Is on the point of dying.


Men. How!


Ra. Nor be too much dejected,
His life you may get off for (as 'twas done
In heat of blood) marry sir your estate
(You Will pardon me) is begged; my self has don't,
And therein, begged the Beggar.

Men. Ha!


Ra. Take not too deep a sense of it: For if you will yield
That Frederick yet shall have it with your Daughter,
I will remit the Estate.

Men. O is it so?
Do you move this for a dead man?

Ra. No, he lives.


Men. Do you practice on me? Madam where are


Enter Strange. Ferd. Fred. Charissa. Gabriel behind. Str. Here sir, and am
become your Usher to such guests you?
As you must bid most welcome. Mend. stands amazed

Ra. She here! i am then again confounded.


Str. Nay sir Raphael, I potest we will be friends notwithstanding I have
outstript you in your plot of matching your Nephew Frederick, here to his love
Charissa.


Ra. But is it so? --


Fred. It is, in which I hope sir you are not offended,
Who gave me leave by any opportunity
To take her, I broke no locks nor walls for her.

Cha. I beg your pardon, and your blessing sir.


Ra. And is it so with you sir Ferdinand?


Ferd. It is, and sir in testimony of my recovery, I make demand of my estate:
of which you thought your self possessed.


Men. What hopes am I fallen from? and what misery fallen into; when the little
I have is begged for Manslaughter!


Gab. I quit you of that sir.


Men How could thou deal so with me?


Gab. To show my gratitude.
You overpaid me for all my former services,
For which I justly thought I ought you this.

Ferd. Nor think your Daughter undervalued sir,
Three thousand pound I give him to augment
Her fortune in him.

Men. Dreams, dreams, All these are waking Dreams.


Ferd. All real truth sir, whither fly you from us?


Men. Am I of all defeated; and by all
Abused and mocked? More room there: let me go.

Ferd. You mistake strangely. Flourish.


Str. Hark! the Revellers.


Fer. That come to celebrate your joys, which wilfully
You will not apprehend.

Men. It Is all but show, Let go, and I will do
Something shall ad to your delight imediatly. Exit.

Str. Let him go and wear out his fit by himself. Flourish.


Enter Boy, and Philomel, as Cupid and Venus. Boy. Venus and Cupid, my Mother
and I --
Help me. -- I have it now.
Venus and Cupid; my Mother and I
Help me again; Noe, no, no.
Venus and Cupid; my Mother and I,
Let me alone.
Venus and Cupid my Mother and I.

Fred. There Is an Actor now!


Fre. How doubtful of himself; and yet how perfect he was!


Ra. A self mistrust is a sure step to Knowledge.


Str. Sententious sir Raphel.


Ra. Quarrels are ended Madam.


Ferd. Come hither Cupid.


Phi. From my Italian Mount I did espy
(For what is hidden from a Deity?)
How faintly Hymen did his Office here
Joining two Lovers with the hand of fear;
Putting his Torch out for obscurity;
And made the Chamber (which belongs to me)
His Temple. But from hence let fear remove.
See here, the Champions for the Queen of Love.
Courage 1 Swain
, sent from Mars; The Muses 2 Court.
kill.
From wise Apollo. And the God, which still
Inspires with subtilty, sly Mercury
Sends this his Agent 3 Dainty.
. Here Is Activity 4 Cit-wit.

From Jupiter Doctor
himself; And from her store
Of Spies, the Moon sends This to keep the door.
With Art of Action, now, make good the place,
In right of Love to give the Nuptials Grace.

After they have Danced a while, Enter Projectors, breaks 'em off. Pro. Lay by
your Jolity, forbear your Sport,
And hear a story shall enforce your pity.

Fer. What black Tragedian's this?


Ra. Some Nuntius sent from Hell.


Ga. One of my Masters Minions, a Projector.


Pro. You had a Master: But to all I speak.
Your ^^actises have sunk him from the Comforts
Of all ^is hopes in fortune, to the Gulf
Of deep despair; from whence he rose inflamed
With wild distraction and fantastic fury.

Fer. He Is mad; is he?


Pro. Mad, and has hanged himself --


Cha. Alas my Father.


La. How! hanged himself?


Pro. All over sir, with draughts of Projects, Suits,
Petitions, Grants, and Pattents, such as were
The Studies and the Labors of his Life,
And so attired he thinks himself well armed
T'incounter all your scorns.

Enter Mendicant attired all in Patents; A Windmill on his head, and the other
Projector. Men. Room here: a Hall for a Monopolist,
You, Commonwealths informers lead me on.
Bring me before the great Assembly. See,
Fathers Conscript, I present all I have
For you to cancel.

Sw. Here Is a brave show, and out-shines our devise.


Men. This is a Patent for the taking of poor John and Barrell-cod alive, and
so to preserve 'em in salt water for the benefit of the Fishmongers.


Cou. There Is salt in this.


Sw. I this has some savor in it.


Men. This is a fresh one sir, For the catching, preservation, and
transportation of Butter-flies: whereby they may become a native commodity.


Cou. That Is a subtle one.


Men. This is for profits out of all the Common-Cryes in the City, As of --
Oysters -- Codlings -- wood to cleave, Kitching stuff, and the thousand more,
even ^o the Matches for your Tinder-box, and all Forrainers ^o pay double; And
a Fee out of the Link-boyes profits. ^t no cries to escape. It Is for a peace.


Dai. What if some should cry Murder, murder?


Cit. Or Thieves, thieves?


Cou. Or Fire, fire?


Sw. Or women cry out five Loves a penny?


Men. All all should pay. But I submit
My self to you most honorable censure.

Cit. What dos he take us for?


Sw. Powers, Powers; A lower house at least.


Men. And all my patents to be concealed.


Sw. Our Projects would not take with you, we will take yours though.


Dai. He shall dance out of 'em: Music! Play out our Dance, we will disrobe
you presently.


Cit. Yes, and dismantle his Projectors too.


They all Dance. In the Dance they pull off his Patents; And the Projectors
Clokes, who appear all ragged. At the end of the Dance the Projectors thrust
forth. Fer. An excellent Morrall! The Projects are all canceled, and the
Projectors turned out of doors.


Men. True Gallants, and now I am my self again,
I saw the event of all with good esteem.
And would as well as you a Madman seem,
And now my blessings on your Son and Daughter.

Sw. This Bride, Dame Venus here, cooles all this while though.


Dai. By Mr: Bride-groomes leave, i will stir her blood a little for the good
meaning she had toward me.


Cit. You may do so. He dare's not pick her pocket,
And for her Maidenhead I dare trust him though he should
Dance quite out of sight with her.

Dance. While they Dance the rest confer. Ra. It Is well: And all are friends.


Fer. You have my potestation: and in that,
Madam, my faith before these noble friends.

Str. Upon those honorable terms sir Ferdinando I will be yours.


Cit. Sheel' have him, it seems at last.


Sw. She Is a wise widow by it: for sure enough, she saw something in his mad
naked fit, when he put her to it, to choose a husband by, wo' not out of her
thought yet.

What is there more to say now Madam?


Str. You question well.


Sw. But to Supper and to bed?


Str. You consider well.


Sw. We have had other pastime enough.


Str. You reason well, Would all were pleased as well
TO absolve that doubt, to those we must appeal.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Strange. Ladies, your suffrages I chiefly crave
For the humble Poet. It Is in you to save
Him, from the rigorous censure of the rest,
May you give grace as you are with Beauty blessed.
True: He Is no dandling on a Courtly lap,
Yet may obtain a smile, if not a clap.

Ferd. I Am at the Cavaliers. Heroic spirits,
That know both to reward, and atchieve merits,
Do, like the Sunbeams, virtuously dispense
Upon the lowest growths their influence,
As well as on the lofty: our Poet so
By your Phebean favors hopes to grow.

Cit-w. And now you generous spirits of the City
That are no less in money then brain wity,
My self, my Bride, and pretty Bride-boy too,
Our Poet for a Boun preferres to you.

Phil. And though you taste of no such Bride-ale Cup,
He hopes y' allow the Match to be clapped up.

Boy. And, if this Play be naught (yes so he said)
That I should gi' ye my Mother for a Maid.

Swa. And why you now? or you? or you? I Will speak enough for you all, you now
would tell the Audients they should not fear to throng hither the next day:
for you will secure their Purses cut-free, and their pockts pick-free. It Is much
for you to do though. And you would say that all your projects are put down, and
you will take up no new: but what shall be (spectators) to please you. And you
Poetic part induces you, t'appologize now for the Poet too, as they have done
already, you to the Ladies, you to the Cavaliers and Gentry; you to the City
friend, and all for the Poet, Poet, Poet, when alls but begging tho. I Will speak
to 'em all, and to my Country folks too if here be any o'em: and yet not beg
for the Poet though, why should we? has not he money for his doings? and the best
price too? because we would have the best: And if it be not, why so? The Poet
has showed his wit and we our manners. But to stand beg, beg for reputation for
one that has no countenance to carry it, and must have money is such a Pastime!
-- If it were for one of the great and curious Poets that give these Plays as
the Prologue said, and money too, to have 'em acted; For them, indeed, we are
bound to ply for an applause. Because they look for nothing else, and scorn to
beg for themselves. But then you will say those Plays are not given to you; you
pay as much for your seats at them as at these, though you sit nere the
merrier, nor rise the wiser, they are so above common understanding; and though
you see for your love you will judge for your money, why so for that too, you
may. But take heed you displease not the Ladies though who are their partial
judges, being bribed by flattering verses to commend their Plays; for whose
fair cause, and by their powerful voices to be cried up wits of Court, the
right worshipful Poets boast to have made those enterludes, when for ought you
know they bought 'em of Universitie Scholars though, and only show their own
wits in owning other men's; and that but as they are like neither. As thus, do
you like that Song? yes. I made it. Is that Scene or that Jest good? Yes, It Was
mine; and then if all be good 'twas all mine. There Is wit in that now. But this
small Poet vents none but his own, and his by whose care and directions this
Stage is governed, who has for many years both in his fathers days, and since
directed Poets to write and Players to speak, till he traind up these youths
here to what they are now. I some of 'em from before they were able to say a
grace of two lines long to have more parts in their pates then would fill so
many Dry-fats. And to be serious with you, if after all this, by the venomous
practice of some, who study nothing more then his destruction, he should fail
us, both Poets and Players would be at loss in Reputation. But this is from
our Poet again, who tells you plainly all the helps he has or desires; And let me
tell you he has made pretty merry Jigges that have pleased a many. As (le'me see)
the Antipodes, and (oh I shall never forget) Tom Hoyden of Tanton Deane. He Will
bring him hither very shortly in a new Motion, and in a new pair of slops and
new nether-stocks as brisk as a Body-lowse in a new Pasture.

Mean while, if you like this, or not, why so?
You may be pleas' to clap at parting though.

FINIS.

