LONDON'S LAMENTATIONS: OR, A serious Discourse concerning that late fiery
Dispensation that turned our (once renowned) City into a ruinous Heap. Also the
several Lessons that are incumbent upon those whose Houses have escaped the
consuming Flames.

By THOMAS BROOKS, late Preacher of the Word at S. Margarets New-Fish-street,
where that Fatal Fire first began that turned London into a ruinous Heap.

Una dies interest inter magnam Civitatem and nullam.

There is but the distance of one day between a great City and none, said
Seneca when a great City was burnt to Ashes.

Come, behold the Works of the Lord, what Desolations he has made in the
Earth. Psalm. 46. 8.

LONDON, Printed for John Hancock and Nathaniel Ponder, and are to be sold at
the first Shop in Popes-Head-Alley in Cornhil, at the Sign of the Three Bibles,
or at his Shop in Bishopsgate-street, and at the Sign of the Peacock in
Chancery lane. 1670.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir WILLIAM TVRNER Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London.
Right Honorable,
IT is not my design to blazon your Worth, or write a Panegyric of your
Praises; your brighter Name stands not in need of such a shadow as men's
Applause to make it more renowned in the World; native Worth is more respected
than adventitious Glory: your own works Prove. 31. 31.
praise you in the gates. It is London's Honor and Happiness, Tranquillity and
Prosperity to have such a Magistrate that bears not the Sword of Justice in
vain, and that has not Romans 13. 4.
brandished the Sword of Justice in the defense of the friends of Baal, Balaam,
or Bacchus. My Lord, had your Sword of Justice been a Sword of Protection to
desperate Swearers, or to cruel Oppressors, or to deceitful Dealers, or to
roaring Drunkards, or to cursing Monsters, or to Gospel-despisers, or to
Christ-contemners, etc. might not London have laid in her Ashes to this very
day? yea, might not God have rained Hell out of Heaven upon those Parts of the
City that were standing Monuments of Gods mercy, as once he did upon Sodom and
Gomorrah? Woe to that sword Genesis 19.
that is a devouring sword to the righteous, to the meek, to the upright, and
to the peaccable in the land. O happy Sword! Psalm. 35. 19, 20.
under which all sorts and ranks of men have worshipped God in peace, and lived
in peace, and rested in peace, and traded in peace, and built their habitations
in peace, and have grown up in peace. Sir, every man has sit under your Sword
as under his own Vine and Fig Tree in peace. Words are too weak to express how
great a mercy this has been to London, yea, I may say to England. The Ancients
set forth all their gods with Harps in their hands, the Hieroglyphick of Peace.
The Grecians had the Statue of Peace with Pluto the God of Riches in her arms.
Some of the Ancients were wont to paint Peace in the form of a Woman with a
horn of plenty in her hands, viz. all blessings. The Orator, hit it when he
said, Dulce nomen pacis, the very name of Peace is sweet. No City so happy as
that wherein the chief Magistrate has been as eyes to the blind, legs to the
lame, ears to the deaf, a father to the fatherless, a husband Job 31.
to the widow, a Tower to the righteous, and a Terror to the wicked.

Certainly Rulers have no better friends than such as make The three things
which God minds most, and loves best below Heaven, are his Truth, his Worship,
and his People.
conscience of their ways: for none can be truly loyal, but such as are truly
religious, witness Moses, Joseph, Daniel, and the three Children. Sincere
Christians are as Lambs amongst Lions, as Sheep amongst Wolves, as Lillies
amongst Thorns; they are exposed more to the rage, wrath, and malice of wicked
men, by reason of their holy Prof^ssion, their gracious Principles, and
Practices, than any other men in all the world. Now did not God raise up
Magistrates, and spirit Magistrates to own them, to stand by them, and to
defend them in all honest and just ways, how soon would they be devoured and
destroyed? Certainly the Sword of the Magistrate is to be drawn forth for the
natural good, and civil good, and moral good, and spiritual good of all that
live soberly and quietly under i^ Stobaeus tells us of a Persian Law, Stobaeus
sermon. 42. p. 294.
that after the death of their King every man had five days liberty to do what
he pleased, that by beholding the wickedness and disorder of those few days,
they might prize Government the better all their days after. Certainly had some
hotheaded, and little-witted, and fierce-spirited men had but two or three
days liberty to have done what they pleased in this great City during your
Lordships Mayoralty, they would have made sad work in the midst of us. When a
righteous Government fails, then, 1. Order fails, 2. Religion fails, 3. Trade
fails, 4. Justice fails, 5. Prosperity fails, 6. Strength and Power fails, 7.
Fame and Honor fails, 8. Wealth and Riches fails, 9. Peace and Quiet fails,
10. All humane Converse and Society fails. To take a righteous Government out
of the world, is to take the Sun out of the Firmament, and leave it no more a
(...), a beautiful Structure, but a (...), a confused Heap. In such Towns,
Cities, and Kingdoms where righteous Government fails, there every man's hand
will be quickly engaged Genesis 26. 12.
against his brother. O the sins, the sorrows, the desolations and destructions
that will unavoidably break in like a Flood upon such a People.

Public Persons should have public Spirits, their gifts and There is a great
truth in that old Maxim, Magistratus virum indicat. In my Epistle to my
Treatise called A Cabinet of Choice Jewels, the ingenious Reader may find six
Arguments to encourage Magistrates to be men of public Spirits.
goodness should diffuse themselves for the good of the whole. It is a base and
ignoble Spirit to pity Cataline more than to pity Rome, to pity any particular
sort of men more than to pity the whole; it is cruelty to the good to justify
the bad; it is wrong to the Sheep to animate the Wolves; it is danger (if not
death) to the Lambs not to restrain or chain up the Lions: but, Sir, from this
ignoble Spirit God has delivered you. The Ancients were wont to place the
Statues of their Princes by their Fountains, intimating that they were (or at
least should be) Fountains of the public Good. Sir, had not you been such a
Fountain, men would never have be^n so warm for your continuance. My Lord, the
great God has made you a (...), a public Good, a public Blessing; and this
has made your Name precious, and your Government desirable, and your Person
honorable in the thoughts, hearts, and eyes of all people. Many (may I not say
most) of the Rulers of this World are as Pliny speaks of the Roman Emperors,
Nomine Dii, Natura Diaboli; Monsters, not men; Murderers, not Magistrates:
such a Monster was Saul, who hunted David as a Partridge, slew the innocent
Priests of the Lord, ran to a Witch, and who was a man of so narrow a Soul,
that he kn^w not how to look or live above himself, his own interests and
concernments. The great care of every Magistrate Exodus 32. 10, 11. 32. Nehem.
5. 6. to 19. Psalm. 137. 5, 6. Acts 13. 36.
should be to promote the public Interest more than their own, as you may see
by comparing the Scriptures in the Margin together. 'Twas Caesar's high
commendation, that he never had himself after the World had him for a
Governor; his mind was so set on the ^ublick, that that he forgot his own
private Affairs. The Stars have their brightness, not for themselves, but for
the use of others. The Application is easy.

My Lord, several Philosophers have made excellent and Carneades, Aristotle,
Socrates, etc.

The Roman Orator has long since observed, that the force of Justice is such,
and so great, that even Thieves and Robbers both by Sea and Land, who live upon
injustice and rapine, yet cannot live upon their Trade without some practice of
it among themselves.

Cleobulus one of the seven Sages was wont to say, that mediocrity was without
compare.

The very Heathen could set so much divine glory in the face of a Magistrate,
that he styled him (...), the living Image of the everliving God. Magistrates
are (as Nazianzen expresses it) Pictures drawn of God. Every Magistrate, though
in never so low a place, bears the Image of God; a Penny bears the Image of the
Prince as well as a Shilling. Magistrates are not immortal Deities, neither
have they everlasting God-heads, Those gods, as they had a beginning, so they
must have an end. Quicquid oritur, moritur. There is a Mean Mean on them, their
days are numbered, their time is computed. Hercules his Pillar stands in their
way. Non datur ultra.


legant Orations in the praise of justice: they say that all Ver^^es are
compre^ended in the distribution of justice. Justice, says Aristotle, is a
Synopsis and Epitome of all Virtues. All I shall say is this, the world is a
Ring, and justice is the Diamond in that Ring; the world is a body, and justice
is the soul ^f that body. It is well known that the constitution of a man's body
is best known by his pulse; if it stir not at all, then we know he is dead; if
it stir violently, then we know him to be in a Fever; if it keep an equal
stroke, then we know he is sound, well, and whole: So the estate and
constitution of a City, Kingdom, or Commonweal is best known by the manner of
executing justice therein; for justice is the pulse of a City, Kingdom, or
Commonweal; if justice be violent, then the City, Kingdom, or Commonweal is
in a Fever, in a very bad estate; if it stir not at all, then the City,
Kingdom, or Commonwealth is dead: but if it has an equal stroke, if it be
justly and duly administered, then the City, Kingdom, or Commonweal is in a
good, a safe, and a sound condition. When Vespasian asked Apollonius what was
the cause of Neroes ruin, he answered, that Nero could tune the Harp well, but
in Government he did always wind up the strings too high, or let them down too
low. Extremes in Government are the ready way to ruin all. The Ro^^ns had
their Rods for lesser faults, and their Ax for capital crimes. Extreme right
often proves extreme wrong: he that will always go to the utmost of what the
Law allows, will too too often do more than the Law requires. A rigid severity
often mars all: Equity is still to be perferred before extremity. To inflict
great penalties and heavy censures for light offenses, this is to kill a fly
upon a man's forehead with a Beetle. The great God has put his own Name upon
Mag^strates, Psalm. 82. 6. I said that ye are gods Yet it must be granted that
you are gods in a smaller letter, mortal gods, gods that must dye like men; all
the sons of Ish are sons of Adam. Magistrates must do justice impartially; for
as they are called Gods, so in this they must be like to God, who is no
accepter of persons, Deur. 1. 17. Levi^. 19. 15. He accepts not of the rich man
because of his Robes, neither does he reject the poor man because of his Rags.
The Magistrates eyes are to be always upon causes, and not upon persons. Both
the Statues of the Theban Judges and the Statues of the Egyptian Judges were
made without hands and without eyes, to intimate to us, that as Judges should
have no hands to receive Bribes, so they should have no eyes to see a friend
from a foe, or a brother from a stranger in judgment. And it was the Oath of
the Heathen Judges, as the Orator relates: Audiam accusatorem, and reum sine
affectibus, and person^rum respectione; I will hear the Plaintiff and the
Defendant with an equal mind, without affection and respect of persons. In the
twelfth Novel of Justinian, you may read of an Oath imposed upon Judges and
Justices against inclining or addicting themselves to either party; yea, they
put themselves under a deep and bitter execration and curse in case of
partiality, imploring God in such language as this: Let me have my part with
Judas, and let the Leprosy of Geh^zi cleave to me, and the trembling of Cain
come upon me, and whatsoever else may astonish and dismay a man, if I am
partial in the administration of justice. The Poet in the (Greek) Epigram
taught the silver Ax of justice that was carried before the Roman Magistrates
to proclaim, If thou be an offende^ let not the silver flatter thee; if an
innocent, let not the Ax (...) ^ight thee. The Athenian Judges judged in the
night, when the faces of men could not be seen, that so they might be impartial
in judgment My Lord, your impartiality in the administration of justice in that
high Orb wherein Divine Providence has placed you, is one of those great
things that has made you high and honorable in the eyes and hearts of all
that are true lovers of impartial justice. Some Writers say, that some Waters
in Macedonia being drunk by black sheep, change their fleece into white:
Nothing but the pure and impartial administration of justice and judgment can
transform black mouthed, black-handed, and black hearted men into white. There
is nothing that sweetens, satisfies, and silences all sorts of men like the
Isa. 1. 23, 24.
administration of impartial justice: the want of this brought desolation upon
Jerusalem, and the whole Land of Jury, and upon many other flourishing Kingdoms
and Countries, as all August. de Civitate Dei, lib. 10. cap. 21, etc. lib. 4.
cap. 4. Lipsius de constan. l. 2. c. 13.
know that have but read any thing of Scripture or History. S. Austin plainly
denies that ever the Rom^n Polity could be called properly a Common-weal^h,
upon this ground, that, Ubi n^n est Justiti^, non est R^spublica; he calls
Common wealths without justice, but magna L^t^ocini^: or in Lipsius his
language, Congeries, Confusio, Turba: it is but an abuse of the word Respublica,
Commonwealth, where the public Good is not consulted by an impartial justice
and equity, it is but a confused heap, a rout of men; or if we will call it so
at present, it will not be so long without impartial justice, partly because
injustice 1 Kings 12. 1 Samuel 8. 3.
and oppression makes the multitude tumultuous, and fills the peoples heads
with dangerous designs, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the
Margin together; and partly because it lays a Nation open and obuoxious to the
wrath and vengeance of God, as might easily be made good by scores of
Scriptures. Impartial justice is the best establ^shment of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths. The King by judgment establishes the Sea Numb. 25. 11. 2 Samuel
21, 14.
land, Prove. 29. 4. It is the best security against desolating judgments. Run
ye through the streets of Jerusalem, and seek in the broad places thereof, if
ye can find a man, i^ there be any that executes judgment, and I will pardon
it, Jer. 5 1.

My Lord, (...) the Honor of a Magistrate to do justice impartially, so i^ ^s
the Honor and Glory of a Magistrate to do justice speedily. Jer. 28* 12. O
house of David, th^s s^i^h the Lord, execute judgment in the morning, and
deliver him that is spoiled out of the h^nd of the oppr^ss^r, lest my God is
very speedy and swift in the execution of Justice. Joel. 3. 4. Genesis 19. Numb.
16. Ezra 7. 20. In this as in other things it becomes Magistrates to be like to
God.
sury go out like fi^e, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil
of your doings. After examination, execution is to be done with expedition.
When men cry out for justice justice, Magistrates must not cry out cr^s, cra^,
to morrow, to morrow. Magistrates must do justice in the morning; neither
noon-justice, nor afternoon*justice, nor evening-justice, nor night-justice is
so ac^eptable to God, or so honorable to Magistrates, or so advantageous to
the people, as morning-justice is: to delay justice is worse sometimes than to
deny justice; it is a very dangerous thing for Magistrates to be as long a
bringing forth their Verdicts as the Elephant her young. Delay of justice makes
many more irreconcilable; it makes many men go up and down this world with
heavy hearts, empty purses, and thread bare coats. I have read of a famous
passage of Theodorick King of the Romans, who when a Widow came to him with a
sad complaint, that she had a suit depending in the Court three years, which
might have been ended in a few days; the King demands of her the Judges names,
she tells him, he sends a special Command to them to give all the speedy
dispatch that was possible to the Widows Cause, which they did; and in two days
determined it to the Widows liking: this being done, the King calls for the
Judges, and they supposing that they should have both applause and reward for
their expedition hastened to him full of joy; but after the King had propounded
several things to them about their former delay^, he commanded both their heads
to be struck off because they had spun out that Cause to a three years length,
which two days would have ended. Here was Royal justice, and speedy justice
indeed, Psalm. 101. 8. I will early destroy all the wicked of the land,
Summomane, I will do morning-justice. Festinanter, so Genebrad, I will hastily
do it. Justice should be on the wing; delays are very dangerous and injurious.
Prove. 13. 12. Hope deferred, makes the heart sick; the Hebrew word
Memushshacah that is here rendered deferred, is from Mash^ch that signifies to
draw out at length. Men are short-breathed and short-spirited, and Hopes hours
are full of Eternity, and when their hopes are drawn ou^ at length, this makes
their hearts sick; and Ah, what a world of such sick souls lies l^nguishing at
Hopes Hospital all the world over. Hope in the Text is put for the good things
hoped for. Now when the good things men hope for (be it justice or a quick
dispatch, etc.) are deferred and delayed, this makes the poor Client sick at
heart. A lingering hope always breeds in the heart a lingering Consumption;
Julius Caesar's quick dispatch is noted in three words; Veni, vidi, vici, I
came, I saw, I overcame.
the harder travel hope has, and the more strongly it labors to bring forth,
and yet is deferred and delayed, the more deadly sick the Client grows. The
speedy execution of justice is the very life and soul of justice. Amos 5. 24.
Bu^ let judgment run down as waters, and righteous^e^s as a mighty stream. The
Hebrew word Veiiggal that is here rendered run down, is from Galal, that
signifies to roll down freely, plentifully, vigorously, constantly, speedily,
as the great Billows of the Sea, or as waves roll speedily over the Rocks.
Judgment and Righteousness like a mighty stream should bear down all before it.
Fiat justitia, tuat orb^s, let justice be done, whatever come of it. Deuteronomy. 16.
20. That which is altoge^her just shall thou follow, or rather as the Hebrew
has it (...), Tsedek, Tsedek, justice, justice shall thou follow, that is, all
manner of justice thou shall follow, and nothing but justice shall thou follow,
and thou shall follow justice sincerely out of love to justice, and thou shall
follow justice exactly without turning to the right hand or the left; and thou
shall follow justice resolutely in spite of the world, the flesh, and the
Devil; and thou shall follow justice speedily without delays or excuses. A
Magistrate that has the sword of justice in his hand, must never plead, there
is a Lion in the way. My Lord, this will be your Honor while you live, and
your Comfort when you come to dye, that whilst the Sword was in your hand, you
did justice speedily as well as impartially: You did justice in the morning,
and justice at noon, and justice in the afternoon, and justice at night; what
has been your whole Mayoralty, but one continued day of justice? Who can sum up
the many thousand Causes that you have heard and determined, and the many
thousand differences that you have sweetly and friendly composed and ended? If
the Lawyers please but to speak out, they must ingenuously confess, that your
Lordship has eased them of a great deal of work.

My Lord, as it is the Honor and Glory of a Magistrate to do justice speedily,
so it is the Honor and Glory of a Magistrate to do justice resolutely,
courageously, valiantly. It is observable, that as soon as ever Joshua came
into the office of Magistracy, God charges him no less then three times (in a
Josh. 1. 6, 7. 9.
breath as it were) to be very courageous. A Magistrate that is timorous, will
quickly be treacherous. A Magistrate that is fearful, can never be faithful.
Solomon's Throne was supported with Lions, to show that Magistrates should be
men of metal and courage. The Athenian Judges sat in M^rs Acts 17. 22.
street, to show that they had Martial hearts, and that they were men of
courage and metal. The Grecians placed justice betwixt Leo and Libra, to
signify that as there must be indifferency in determining, so there ought to
be courage in executing. Where there is courage without knowledge, there the
eye of justice is blind; and where there is knowledge without courage there the
Sword of justice is blunt. A Magistrates heart, a Judges heart and his Robes
must be both dyed in grain, else the color of the one, and the courage of the
other will quickly fade. Why should not the Standard be of steel, and the chief
posts of the house be heart of Oak? It has been long since said of Cato,
Fabricius and Aristides, that it was as easy to remove the Sun out of the
Firmament, as to remove them from justice and equity; they were men of such
courageous and magnanimous spirits for justice and righteousness. No Scarlet
Robe does so well become a Magistrate as holy courage and stoutness does. As
bodily Physicians, so State-Physitians should have an Eagles eye, a Ladies
hand, and a Lions heart. Cowardly and timo r^us Magistrates will never set up
Monuments of their Victories over sin and profaneness. It is very sad when we
may say of our Magistrates as the Heathen did of Magistrates in his time, they
were very good, si audeant quae sentiunt, if they Cic. de Mil.
durst but do what they ought to do. My Lord, had not the Lord of Lords put a
great spirit of courage, boldness, and resolution Rev. 1. 5, 6. Chap. 1^. 14.
upon you, you had never been able to have managed your Government as you have
done, counting the various winds that have blown upon you, and the several
difficulties and discouragements that have risen up before you.

My Lord, once more give me leave to say, that in a Magistrate justice and
mercy, justice and clemency ought to go hand Truth in Scripture is frequently
put for Justice.
in hand. Prove. 20. 28. Mercy and truth preserve the King, and his Throne is
upholden by mercy. All justice will not preserve the King, nor all mercy will
not preserve the King, there must be a mixture both of justice and mercy to
preserve the King, and to uphold his Throne; and to show that mercy is more
requisite then justice, the word Mercy is doubled in the Text. Justice without
mercy turns into rigor, and so becomes hateful: Mercy without justice turns
into fond pity, and so becomes contemptible. Look as the Rod of Aaron and King
John thought to strengthen himself by gathering a great deal of money together,
but neglecting the exercise of mercy and justice, clemency and lenity, he lost
his peoples affections, and so after many endless turmoyls, he came to an
unhappy end.
he Pot of Manna were by Gods own Command laid up in the same Ark; so must
mercy and justice be preserved entire in he bosom of the same Magistrate: mercy
and justice, mildness and righteousness, leni^y and fidelity are a safer and a
stronger Guard to Princes and people then rich Mines, Munitions of Rocks,
mighty Armies, powerful Navies, or any warlike Preparations. It is very
observable, that Christ is called but once the Lion of the Tribe of Judah in
the Book of the Revelation, and that is in Chap. 5. verse. 5. But he is called a
Lamb no less then nine and twenty times in that Book; and what is this, but to
show us the transcendent mercy, clemency, lenity, mildness, and sweetness that
is in Jesus Christ; and to show that he is infinitely more inclined to the
exercise of mercy then he is to the exercise of justice. It is true,
Magistrates should be Lions in the execution of justice, and it is as true that
^hey should be Lambs in the exercise of mercy and clemency, mildness and
sweetness; and the more ready and inclinable they are to the exercise of mercy,
where m^rcy is to be showed, the more like to Christ the Lamb they are* God is
slow to anger, he abounds in pity, though he be great in power. Seneca has
long Psalm. 68. 18. Psalm. 103. 13, 14. Hosea 11. 8. Vide Aug. de civit. Dei, l.
5. cap. 26. Orosius lib. 7. cap. 34.
since observed, that the Custom of anointing Kings was to show that Kings
above all other men, should be men of the greatest sweetness and mildness,
their anointing being a sign of that Kingly sweetness and mildness that should
be in them. Theodosius the Emperor, by his loveliness and clemency, gained
many Kingdoms. The Goths (after the death of their own King) beholding his
temperance, patience, and justice mixed with mercy and clemency, gave themselves
up to his Government. When Cicero would claw Caesar, he tells him, that his
Valor and Victories were common with the rest of his Soldiers, but his
clemency and goodness were wholly his own. Neroes Speech has great praise, who
in the beginning of his Reign, when he was to subscribe to the death of any
condemned person, would say, U^inam nescirem literas, I wish I did not know how
to write. I know there are a thousand thousand cases wherein severity is to be
used: But yet I must say, that it is much safer ^o account for mercy then for
cruelty; it is best that the sword of justice should be always furbisht with the
oil of mercy. My Lord, in the management of your Government you have been so
assisted and helped from on high, that stoutness and mildness, justice and
mercy, justice and clemency has like a silver thread run through all your
Mayoralty, and by this means you have very signally served the Interest of the
Crown, the Interest of the City, the Interest of the Nation, and that which is
more then all the rest, the Interest of your own Soul. Rigor breeds rebellion.
Rehoboam by his severity, by his cruelty lost ten Tribes in one day, 1 Kings
12. 16.

My Lord, your prudence, justice, and moderation, your burning zeal against the
horrid, hideous, heady vices of this day, your punishing of Oaths, Drunkenness,
and the false Balance, your singular Sobriety and Temperance in the midst of
all your high Entertainments, your Fidelity and Activity, your eminent
Self-denial A self-seeking Magistrate is one of the worst of Plagues and
Judgments that can befall a people; he is a Gangrene in the head, which brings
both a more speedy and a more certain ruin, then if it were in some inferior
and less noble part of the body.
in respect of your Perquisites, your unwearied Endeavors to see London raised
out of its Ruins, and to see the Top-stone laid, your great readiness and
willingness to spend and be spent for the public Good: these are the things
that have made your Name as a precious Ointment, and that have erected for you
a noble living Monument in the breasts and hearts of all sober serious
Christians: these are the things that have made you the Darling of the people.
Let all succeeding Lord Mayors but manage their own Persons, Families, and
Government as you have done by divine assistance, and without a peradventure
they will have a proportionable interest in the hearts and affections of the
people. For, my Lord, it is not barely the having of a Sword of Justice, a Sword
of Power, but the well management of that Sword that makes most for the
interest both of Prince and People, and that gives the Magistrate a standing
interest in the hearts and affections of the people. My Lord, the generality of
people never concern themselves about the particular persuasions of this or
that Magistrate in the matters of Religion, their eyes are upon their Examples,
and upon the management of their Trust and Power for public Good; and they
that do them most good, shall be sure to have most of their hearts and voices,
l^^ their private opinions in the matters of Religion be what they will.

My Lord, I have not so learned Christ, as to give flattering Titles to men;
the little that I have written, I have written in Job 32. 22.
the plainness and singleness of my heart, and for your Lordships comfort and
encouragement in all well doing, and to provoke all others that shall succeed
in your Chair, to write after that fair Copy that you have set them, which will
be their Honor, London's Happiness, and Englands Interest. Plutarch said of
Demosthenes, that he was excellent at praising the worthy Acts of his
Ancestors, but not so at imitating them. The Lord grant that this may never be
made good of any that shall succeed your Lordship. Carus the Emperors Motto
was, Bonus Dux, bonus Comes, A good Leader makes a good Follower. The complaint
is ancient in Seneca, that commonly men live not ad rationem, but Seneca de
vita beata, cap. 1.
ad similitudinem. Praecepta docent, exempla movent, Precepts may instruct, but
Examples do persuade. Stories speak of some that could not sleep when they
thought of the Trophies of other Worthies that went before them: the highest
Examples are very quickening and provoking. O that by all that shall succeed
your Lordship in the Chair, we may yet behold our City rising more and more out
of its Ashes, in greater splendor and glory then ever yet our eyes have seen
it, that all sober Citizens may have eminent cause to call them the Repairers
of the Breaches, Isa. 58. 12. Chap. 61. 4. Amos 9. 14. Ezekiel. 36. 33, 34, 35,
36, 38. Dan. 9. 25.
and Restorers of our City to dwell in. Concerning Jerusalem burned and laid
waste by the Assyrians, Daniel foretold that the streets and the walls thereof
should be rebuilded, even in troublesome times. Though the Assyrians have laid
our Jerusalem waste, yet even to a wonder, how have the Buildings been carried
on this last year?

My Lord, the following Treatise which I humbly dedicate to your Lordship, has
been drawn up some years: the Reasons why it has been buried so long in
oblivion, are not here to be inserted; the Discourse is sober and of great
importance to all that have been burnt up, and to all whose Houses have escaped
the furious Flames. Whilst the remembrance of London's Flames are kept alive in
the thoughts and hearts of men, this Treatise will be of use in the world. My
Lord, I do not dedicate this Tractate to your Lordship, as if it stood in need
of your Honors Patronage; I judge it to be of Age both to plead for it self,
and to defend it self against all Gainsayers. Veritas vincit, veritas stat in
aperto campo. Zeno, Socrates, Anaxarchus, My Lord, some sacrifice their labors
to great Maecenas's, that they may be atoned to shield them from potent
Antagonists; but these Sermons which here I present to your Honors perusal,
being only the blessed Truths of God, I hope they need no arm but his to defend
them.
etc. sealed the lean and barren truths of Philosophy with the expense of their
dearest blood, as you may see in the Heathen Martyrologie. O how much more
should we be ready to seal all divine Truths with our dearest blood, when God
shall call us forth to such a Service! My Lord, I humbly lay this Treatise at
your Lordships foot, to testify that Love and Honor that I have in my heart
for you (both upon the account of that intrinsecal Worth that is in you, and
upon the account of the many good things and great things that have been done
by you) and publicly to testify my acknowledgment of your Lordships
undeserved Favors toward me. My Lord, of right this Treatise should have been
in your hands several months since, and in that it was not, it is wholly from
others, and not from me. If your Lordship please but to favor the Author so
far as to read it once over for his sake, he doubts not but that your Lordship
will oftener read it over for your own Souls sake, and for Eternities sake, and
for London's sake also. My Lord, by reason of my being remote from the City
several weeks, I have had the advantage but of reading and correcting two or
three sheets; and therefore must beg your Lordships pardon as to all the
neglects and escapes of the Press. A second Impression may set all right and
straight.

My Lord, that to your dying day you may be famous in your Generation, and that
your precious and immortal Soul may be richly adorned with all saving Gifts and
Graces, and that you may daily enjoy a clear, close, high, and standing
Communion with God, and that you may be filled with all the fruits of
Righteousness and Holiness, and that your Soul may be bound up in the bundle of
Life, and crowned with the highest Glory in that other World, in the free full,
constant, and uninterrupted Enjoyment of that God who is the Heaven of Heaven,
and the Glory of Glory, is, and (by divine Assistance) shall be the earnest
prayers of him who is,

Your Honors in all humble and due Observance, Thomas Brooks.

The Fiery Jesuits Temper and Behavior.
I Fain would be informed by you what ails
These Foxes to wear Firebrarnds in their tails.
What? did you teach these Cubs the World to burn,
Or to embottle London in its Vrn?
Are Hugonots as rank Philistines grown
(With you) as dwelt in Gath or Askelon?
Bold Wretches! must your Fire thus antedate
The General Doom, and give the World its Fate?
Must Hells Edict (to blend this Globe with Fire)
Be done at your grave Nods, when you require?
THE TABLE.
A. Of strange Apparel. OF the Vanity of strange Apparel, Page 56, 57. The
first Part of the Book.
Of Atheism. Gross Atheism, practical Atheism brings desolating Judgments upon
a people, page 67. to page 70. The first Part of the Book. In a strict and
proper sense there was never such a Creature in the world as an Atheist, page
71, 72, 73, 74. The first Part of the Book. There are the seeds of Atheism in
the best and holiest of the sons of men, page 74, 75. The first Part of the
Book.

B. Of the Balance of Deceit. Such as use the Balance of deceit, such run
counter-cross to eight things, page 89. to 92. The first Part of the Book.
Of the Blood of the Just. Shedding the blood of the just brings the judgment
of Fire, and lays all desolate, page 154, 155, 156, 157. The first Part of the
Book. There are nine things that speak out the preciousness of the blood of the
just, page 157. to 168. The first Part of the Book.
Of Bribery. Bribery brings desolating and destroying judgments both upon
persons and places, page 87, 88, 89. The first Part of the Book.

C. Of a City that has Foundations. Burnt Citizens should make sure a City
that has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God, page 227, 228. The first
Part of the Application. Heaven is a City that is built upon a fivefold
foundation, page 228, 229. The first Part of the Application. The resemblance
betwixt Heaven and a City holds in nine particulars, page 229, 230, 231. The
first Part of the Application.

D. Of the Devil. Four Reasons why the imprisonment of the Saints is attributed
to the Devil, page 147, 148, 149. The first Part of the Application. Quest.
What are the Duties that are incumbent upon them that have been burnt up? Answ.
First, to see the hand of the Lord in this late dreadful Fire; page 131, 132,
133. The first Part of the Application. Secondly, To justify the Lord in all
that he has done, page 133, 134, 135. The first Part of the Application.
Thirdly, In patience to possess their own Souls, page 166, 167, 168. The first
Part of the Application. Fourthly, To set up the Lord in a more eminent degree
then ever as the great Object of their fear, page 168, 169, 170. The first Part
of the Application. Fifthly, To be content with their present condition, page
170, 171, 172, 173. The first Part of the Application. Sixthly, To lie low, to
keep humble under this dreadful judgment of fire, under the mighty hand of God,
page 173, 174* 175, 176. The first Part of the Application. Seventhly, To
encourage themselves in the Lord their God, page 176, 177. The first Part of
the Application. Eighthly, To keep in their hearts a constant remembrance of
the late dreadful Conflagration; eight Arguments to encourage to this, page
181, 182, 183. The first Part of the Application. Ninthly, To see the vanity,
mutability, and uncertainty of all worldly comforts and enjoyments, and
accordingly to set loose from them, page 184, 185, 186, 187. The first Part of
the Application. Tenthly, To be very importunate with God to take away those
sins that have laid our City desolate, page 217, 218, 219, 220. The first Part
of the Application. The eleventh Duty, is to prepare and fit for greater
troubles and trials, page 220, 221, 222. The first Part of the Application. The
twelfth Duty, is to secure the everlasting welfare of their precious and
immortal Souls, page 222, 223, 224. The first Part of the Application. The
thirteenth Duty, is to get a God for their portion, page 224, 225, 226. The
first Part of the Application. The fourteenth Duty, is to make God their
habitation, to make God their dewlling place, page 226, 227. The first Part of
the Application. The fifteenth Duty, is to make sure an abiding City, a City
that has foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God, p. 227. to page 232. The
first Part of the Application. The sixteenth Duty, is for the burnt Citizens to
sanctify the Sabbath, and to keep it holy all their days page 232. to 263. The
first Part of the Application. Quest. What are the Duties that are incumbent
upon those Habitations are yet standing as Monuments of divine Wisdom, Power,
and Grace? Answ. These eight as follow. First, To take heed of those sins which
bring the fiery Rod, page 263, 264. The first Part of the Application.
Secondly, Not to think those greater sinners then your selves, whose
Habitations have been laid in Ashes, page 264, 265. The first Part of the
Application. Thirdly, To be much in blessing of God, page 265. Fourthly, To
take heed of security; do not say the bitterness of death is past, page 265,
266. Fifthly, To show much love, pity, and compassion to those who are burnt up
and turned out of all, page 266, 267. Sixthly, To lift up a prayer for all
those who are fallen under the heavy judgment of fire, page 267, 268.
Seventhly, Seriously to consider that some men's escaping of very great
judgments is not properly a preservation, but a reservation to some greater
destruction, page 268, 269, 270. Eighthly, Not to rejoice or glory in your
Neighbors ruins, page 270, 271.

E. Eternal. Every thing that is conducible to the torments of the damned is
eternal: this is proved five ways, page 105, 106.
F. Of Fire. How the word Fire is used in Scripture, page 10, 11, 12. The first
Part of the Book. First, Consider the intemperate heat before the Fire, page 5,
6, The first Part of the Application. Secondly, Consider the suddenness and
unexpectedness of the page 7. to page 12. Thirdly, Consider the force,
violence, vehemence, and irresistableness page 12, 13, 14. Fourthly, Consider
the swiftness of it, it flew upon the wings of page 14, 15, 16, 17. Fifthly,
Consider the extensiveness of the Fire, page 22, 23. Sixthly, Consider the
impartiality of the Fire, page 23, 24. Seventhly, Consider the greatness of it,
page 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 Eighthly, Consider the terribleness of it, page 28, 29,
30, 31, Ninthly, Consider the time when the Fire first began, page 32, 33, 34,
35, 36. The first Part of the Application. Tenthly, Consider the Fire, the
burning of London is a National judgment, page 36, 37, 38. That the Fire of
London was not so great nor so dreadful a fire as that of Sodom and Gomorrah,
is proved by five Arguments, page 88, 89, 90, 91. Of the fire of Hell, page
102, 103, 104, 105, 106. Four Arguments to prove that it is very probable that
there is material Fire in Hell, page 106, 107, 108. Object. If it be material
Fire, then it may be quenched, etc. Five Answers to this Objection, page 108,
109, 110, 111. Six differences between our common Fire and Hellfire, page 112.
to 125. Object. How will it stand with the unspotted Holiness, Justice, and
Righteousness of God to punish a temporary offense with eternal punishments,
with eternal fire? etc. This Objection is answered seven ways, page 125. to
131.
F. Of Fornication. Fornication is a sin that brings the Judgment of Fire page
128. to 132. The first Part of the Book. Several Reasons to prove that this sin
of Fornication cannot groundedly be charged upon any of the precious Servants
of the Lord that did truly fear him in the City of London, p. 132. to 137.
These Expressions of giving themselves over to Fornication and going after
strange flesh, implies six things, page 134, 135, 136, 137.

G. Of God. His God notes three things, page 176. The first Part of the
Application. There are three things in God to encourage Christians under all
their fiery trials, page 178, 179.
Of the Gospel. The slighting of the Gospel brings desolating judgments, page
100. to 104. The first Part of the Book. Six sorts of slighters of the Gospel,
page 104. to 108. Saints no slighters of the Gospel of Grace, and of the Graces
of the Saints, proved by seven Arguments, page 108. to 112. God by fiery trials
designs the reviving, quickening, and recovering of the decayed Graces of his
people, page 41, 42, 43. God by fiery trials designs a further exercise of his
Childrens Graces, page 43, 44, 45, 46. God by fiery trials designs the growth
of his peoples Graces, page 46, 47, 48, 49. God by fiery trials designs the
trial of his peoples Graces, and the discovery of their sincerity and integrity
to the world, page 49, 50, 51, 52, 53. Many Christians Graces in London were
withering before the fiery Dispensation, page 61, 62.

H. Of Heaven. Heaven is a City that is built upon a fivefold foundation, page
228, 229. The first Part of the Application. The resemblance betwixt Heaven and
a City holds in nine respects, page 229, 230, 231.
Hand. See the Hand of the Lord in this late fiery Dispensation. Ten Arguments
to work you to this, page 1. to 38. Of Holiness. In these days of the Gospel,
all Holiness of places is taken away, page 141. to 146.
I. Of Intemperance. Intemperance brings desolating judgments, page 75, 76, 77,
78. The first Part of the Book. Six things Intemperance robs men of, page 78.
to 84.
Of Judgments. In eight respects great judgments are like to fire, 7, 8, 9. The
ends of God in inflicting the late judgment of Fire in respect of the wicked,
are seven, page 12 to 31. The ends of God in inflicting the late judgment of
Fire in respect of the Righteous, are at large discovered, page 31 to 53. The
Sword is a worse judgment then that of Fire, page 91, 92. The first Part of the
Application. Famine is a more dreadful judgment then that of Fire. page 92, 93,
94, 95. Dreadful Earth quakes are a more terrible judgment then that of Fire,
page 95, 96, 97, 98. That judgment that befell Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, a more
terrible judgment then that which befell the burnt Citizens, page 98, 99. That
judgment that came upon Sodom and Gomorrah was a worse judgment then that was
inflicted upon the burnt Citizens, page 99. Eight Arguments to encourage the
burnt Citizens to commemorate the late judgment of Fire, page 182, 183, 184.
There are seven sorts of men that have cause to fear worser judgments then any
yet have been inflicted on them, page 222

L. Lamentation. Lament and mourn that London is laid in Ashes, page 38, 39,
40. Ten Considerations to work you to lament over London's ashes, page 40. to
57.
Of a Little. The righteous man's little is better then the multitude of Riches
that many wicked men enjoy: this blessed truth is made good by an induction of
eleven particulars, page 197. to 212. Five ways showing how a righteous man
improves his little, page 203, 204.
Of London. The burning of London was ushered in by sad Prodigies an^ dreadful
forerunners, page 40, 41, 42. London was an ancient City, a City of great
Antiquity, page 42, 43. London was an honorable City, a renowned City, page
43, 44 45. London was the Bulwark, the strong Hold of the Nation, page 45, 46,
47, 48. London was a Fountain, a Sanctuary, a City of Refuge to the poor,
afflicted, and impoverished people of God, page 48, 49. London was a City
compact, a City advantagiously situated for Trade and Commerce, page 49, 50.
Englands worst Enemies rejoice and triumph in London's Ashes, page 50. London
was once the City of our solemn Solemnities, page 50, 51, 52. Hubert confessed
the fact of firing the first house in London, page 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57.
Of Losses. Seven great losses an inordinate love to the world will expose a
man to* page 59, 60, 61. The first Part of the Book. Eight ways whereby the
burnt Citizens may know whether in this world God will make up their losses by
the late Fire or no, page 76, 77, 78, 79, 80. The first Part of the
Application. There are ten choice Jewels that a Christian can never lose in
this world, page 156, 157, 158, 159.
Of Luke-warmness. There was much Luke-warmness among many Professors in
London, page 57, 58.
Of Lying. A trade or course of Lying brings the judgment of Fire, page 112,
113. The first Part of the Book. The Schoolmen reduce all sorts of Lies to
three, page 113, 114, 115, 116. The greatness of the sin of Lying expressed in
four particulars, page 116. to 123. Eight Arguments to prove that this trade,
this course of Lying cannot by any clear evidence be charged upon those that
truly feared the Lord, whose Habitations were once within the Walls of London,
page 123. to 128.

M. Of Mercy. It was a very great mercy to six sorts of men that they had their
lives for a prey when London was in flames, page 60 to 70.
O. Objections: Object. I would say the Lord is righteous, but by this fiery
Dispensation I am turned out of house and home. Answ. Four ways, page 135 to
148. Object. I would justify the Lord, but I have lost my all as to this
world. Seven Answers you have from page 150 to 159. Object. I would justify
the Lord, though I am turned out of all, but this is that which troubles me,
that I have not an Estate to do that good which formerly I have done. Four
Answers you have from page 159, 160, 161. Object. I would justify the Lord,
though he has turned me out of all, but God has punished the righteous with
the wicked; this fiery Rod has fallen heavier upon many Saints then upon many
sinners: How then can I say that the Lord is righteous? Six Answers are given
to this Objection, page 161 to 166.

P. Of Punishment. Quest. How will it stand with the unspotted Holiness,
Justice, and R^ghteousness of God to punish a temporary offense with eternal
punishments? Seven Answers to this Question, page 125 to 131.
Q. Quest. What are those sins that bring the fiery Dispensation upon Cities,
Nations, and Countries? Answ. From page 53 to 168. The first part of the Book.
Quest. What sins were there among the professing people in London that might
bring down the fiery Rod upon them? Answ. Seven, page 55 to 63. Quest. Four
Questions proposed, page 63, 64.
S. Of the Sabbath. Profanation of the Sabbath brings the judgment of Fire,
page 137, 138, 139. Twelve Arguments to prove that God has been very just and
righteous in inflicting the late dreadful judgment of Fire upon those that
profaned his Sabbaths in London, page 139 to 149. Six Arguments to prove that
this abominable sin of profaning the Sabbath cannot with any clear evidence be
charged upon the people of God that did truly fear him within or without the
Walls of London, page 150. Burnt Citizens should sanctify the Sabbath all
their days, page 232. The first Part of the Application. Fourteen ways we
should sanctify the Sabbath, page 233 to 263.
Of the Sins of the professing people of London. There were seven sins among
the professing people in London that ought to work them to justify the Lord,
though he has burnt them up, and turned them out of all, page 55 to 63. The
first Part of the Book. Of the several Sins that bring the fiery Judgment upon
Cities and Co^n^^ies. First, Gross Atheism, practical Atheism brings desolating
judgments, page 67 to 75. Secondly, Intemperance, page 75 to 84. Thirdly, The
sins that were to be found in the Citizens Callings, page 84 to 92. Fourthly,
Desperate incorrigibleness and unreformedness under former wasting and
destroying Judgments, brings the Judgment of Fire upon a people, page 92, 93,
94. Fifthly, Insolent and cruel oppressing of the poor brings desolating
Judgments upon a people, page 95 to 100. Sixthly, Rejecting the Gospel,
contemning the Gospel, and slighting the free and gracious offers of Christ in
the Gospel, brings the fiery Dispensation upon a people, page 100 to 104.
Seventhly, A course of Lying, a trade of Lying brings desolating Judgments upon
Cities and people, page 112 to 128. The eighth sin that brings the Judgment of
Fire, is men's giving themselves over to fornication and going after strange
flesh, page 128 to 133. The ninth sin that brings the Judgment of Fire upon a
people, is profanation of the Sabbath, page 137 to 151. Tenthly, The
profaneness, lewdness, blindness, and wickedness of the Clergy, brings the
Judgment of Fire, page 151, 152, 153. Eleventhly, Sometimes the sins of Princes
and Rulers bring the Judgment of Fire upon persons and places, page 153.
Twelfthly, The abusing, mocking, and despising of the Messengers of the Lord,
brings the fiery Dispensation upon a people, page 153, 154. Thirteenthly,
Shedding of the blood of the just is a crying sin that brings the Judgment of
Fire, and lays all desolate, page 154 to 168.
Of Sin, and of Gods Peoples Sins. By fiery trials God will make a fuller
discovery of his peoples sins, page 34, 35. By fiery trials God designs the
preventing of sin, page 35, 36. By fiery trials God designs the imbittering of
sin to his people, page 36, 37, 38. By fiery trials God designs the mortifying
and purging away of his peoples sins, page 38, 39, 40. 41. Sin in the general
brings the judgment of Fire upon a people, page 64, 65, 66, 67. Twelve
ob^ervable things about sin, page 218, 219. The first Part of the Application.
Thirteen ^upports to bear up their hearts who have either lost all, or much, or
most of what they had in this World. The first support is this, the great God
might have burnt up all, be might not have left one house standing, page 57 to
60. The second support is this, viz. That God has given them their lives for a
prey, page 60 to 70. The third support is this, viz. This has been the Common
Lot, the common Case both of sinners and Saints, page 70, 71. The fourth
support is this, viz. That though they have lost much as they are men, as they
are Citizens, Merchants, Tradesmen, yet they have lost nothing as they are
Christians, as they are Saints, as they are the Called of God, page 71, 72, 73.
The fifth support is this, viz. That the Lord will certainly one way or another
make up all their losses to them, page 74, 75, 76. The sixth support is this,
viz. That by fiery Dispensations the Lord will make way for the new Heavens and
the new Earth, he will make way for the glorious deliverance of his people,
page 80, 81, 82. The seventh support is this, viz. That by fiery Dispensations
God will bring about the ruin and destruction of his and his peoples enemies,
page 82, 83. The eighth support is this, viz. That all shall end well, all
shall work for good, page 83, 84, 85. The ninth support is this, viz. That
there was a great mixture of mercy in that dreadful judgment of Fire that
turned London into a ruinous heap, page 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91. The tenth
support is this, viz. That there are worse judgments then the judgment of Fire,
which God might but has not inflicted upon the Citizens of London; this is made
good five ways, from page 91 to 99. The eleventh support is this, viz. Your
outward condition is not worse then Christ's was, when he was in the world, page
99, 100, 101. The twelfth support is this, viz. That your outward condition in
this world is not worse then theirs was of whom this world was not worthy, page
101. 102. The thirteenth support is, viz. There is a worse fire then that which
has turned London into a ruinous heap, viz. the fire of Hell, which Christ has
freed Believers from, page 102 to 125.

T. Of the Text. The Text opened, page 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The first Part of the
Book. Of Thankfulness. Six Arguments to encourage Christians to thankfulness
and cheerfulness under the late d^solating Judgment of Fire, page 179, 180,
181. The first Part of the Application.
W. Of Divine Warnings, and the danger of slighting them. Ten Arguments to work
men to take l^^d of slighting Divine Warnings, page 23 to 28. The first Part of
the Book.
Of the Wicked. The Wicked are compared to four things in Scripture, page 82,
83. The first Part of the Application.
Of the World, and the Vanity of it, and of a worldly Spirit. The Vanity of the
World discovered, page 184, 185, 186, 187. Ten Arguments to prove that a
worldly spirit still hangs upon the burnt Citizens, page 187 to 193. Ten Maxims
for the burnt Citizens seriously and frequently to dwell upon, as they would
have their affections moderated to the things of this World, page 193 to 216.
How we may lawfully desire the things of the World, expressed in three
Particulars, page 216, 217. There was a great deal of Worldliness among the
professing people of London, page 58, 59. The first Part of the Book. An
inordinate love to the World will expose a man to seven great losses, page 59,
60, 61.




ISAIAH 42. 24, 25. Who gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? did
not I the Lord? he against whom we have sinned; for they would not walk in his
ways, neither were they obedient to his Law.

Therefore he has poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of
battle; and it has set him on fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned
him, yet he laid it not to heart.


THE Lord in this Chapter, by the Prophet Esaias, does foretell heavy things
against the people, and by the way marks the Lords dealings; he ever gives
warnings before he sends any plagues; he lightens before he thunders, that the
people might not say, they did not hear of it, and that the wicked might be the
more inexcusable, and that the godly might make an Ark to save themselves in.
These words contain in them five ^^veral things. 1. The Author of this
Destruction or Judgment. 2 The Causes of it. 3. The Judgment it self. 4. W^^
they were on whom this Judgment was inflicted. 5. The Effect of it. Now by
Divine permission I will open these word^ in order to you.

For the first, the Author of it. Now this is laid down by Who gave Jacob to
the spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? there is the Question: Did not I the Lord?
there* the Answer. God is the Author of all the Plagues and Judgments that
befall a Nation.

Secondly, The Causes why the Lord did this to a people Deuteronomy. ^. 5. 7. 8. Deuteronomy.
32. 10, 11, 12.
had owned for his portion, and that he had formerly kept as the Apple of his
Eye, and carried as upon Eagles wings. Now the causes are set down, first more
generally in these words, Because they have sinned against the Lord. Secondly,
more particularly in these words. For they would not walk in his ways, neither
were they obedient to his Law.

The third thing observable in the words, is the dreadful verse. 25.

Therefore he has poured upon him the fury of his anger;] not only his anger,
but the fury of his anger, to show the greatness of it, the extremity of it.
Mark, he does not say, that God did drop down his anger, but he poured down hi^
anger and indignation. This Phrase [he poured out] is an allusion to the clouds
pouring down of water violently all at once, in an instant, as they do many
times in the Levant Seas, in Egypt, at the Indies, and in several other parts
of the G^n. 6. 11.
world; as they did in the Deluge, when the windows of Heaven were broke open.
Now by this similitude, the Lord shows the dreadfulness, the grievousness, the
suddenness, and the vehemence of the Judgments that were fallen upon them.

And the strength of Battle.] The Lord appears in Arms against them in the
greatness and fierceness of his wrath, he sent in a very powerful Enemy upon
them, that with fire and sword overran them and their Country, and destroyed
them on every side, as you may see by comparing the 2 Kings 23. 33. ult. with
the 24. and 25. Chapters following.

And has set him on fire round about] That is (say some) all the Countries,
Cities, and Towns round about Jerusalem were set on fire.

Yet be knew not.] Though God had burnt them up on every hand, yet they took no
notice of it, they regarded it not, they were not at all affected with the
fiery Dispensations of Diod orus Siculus writes, that in Aethiopia there is
such a sottish insensible people, that if you cut them with a drawn sword, or
slay their wives and children before their faces, they are not at all affected
with it, nor moved at it. Such brutes were these Jews.
God. O the dullness, the insensibleness, the sottishness of the Jews under the
most awakning and amazing Judgments of God! (And it burned him.) This some
apply to the City of Jerusalem it self: God did not only fire the Cities and
Towns round about Jerusalem, but he also set Jerusalem it self into a flame.
Jerusalem which was beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole Earth, the
Paradise and Wonder of the world, is turned into ashes. (Yet be laid it not to
heart) or upon his heart, as the Original runs. O the monstrous stupidity,
insensibleness, and blockishness of this people! Though God had brought them
low, though their Crown was fallen from their head, though their glori^us City
was turned into ashes, and though they were almost destroyed by many smarting
miseries and dreadful calamities; yet they were not affected with the
stupendous Judgments of God, they were not awakned by all the flames that God
had kindled about their ears, they did not lay the Judgments of God to heart,
nor they would not lay the Judgments of God upon their hearts.

The fourth thing observable in the words i^, the persons, Jacob and Israel;
Who gave Jacob for a Isa. 58. 2. Zach. 7. 5. Exodus 19. 5.
spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? They were a praying people, a professing
people, a fasting people, a peculiar people, a privileged people, and yet for
their sins they became a destroyed people, a consumed people, a ruined people.

The fifth thing observable in the words is, the little Effect the By Ti^us
Vespasian their land became astage of blood and of all kind of barbarisms, and
now their so renowned City, their Temple, and Sanctum Sanctorum so famed all
the world over, was turned into ashes, and laid level to the ground. Buxtorf.
Synag. Judaica, cap. 5. etc. 36.
with the Judgments of God, they regarded them not, they laid them not to
heart. And as stupid and senseless were they when Titus Vespasi^n had laid
their City desolate by fire and sword, and sold thirty of them for one piece of
silver, as Josephus and other Historians tell us. O Sirs, since their
crucifying of the Lord of Glory, they have never laid their finger upon the
right sore, to this very day they will not acknowledge their sin in crucifying of
the Lord of Glory. They confess they have sinned more then ever, and therefore
it is that God has more sorely afflicted them then ever; but their cruelty to
Christ, their crucifying of Christ, which ushered in the total ruin of their
City and Country, they cannot be brought to acknowledge to this very day,
though the Lord has burnt them up on every hand, and has scattered them as
dung all over the earth to this very day. A Learned Writer tells us, that they
call Christ Bar-chozab, the Son of a Lie, a Bastard, and his Gospel Aven
Gilaion, the Volume of Lies, or the Volume of Iniquity, and us Christians
Goii^n, that is, Gentiles, Edomites; when they salute a Christian, they call
him Shed, that is, Devil. They hate all Christians, but none so much as those
that are converted from Judaism to Christianity, and all this after so great a
burning and desolation that the Lord has made in the midst of them. It Is true,
the length of those heavy Judgments under which they groan to this very day,
has often puzzled the Intellectuals of their Rabbis, and has many times put
them to a stand, and sometimes to break out into a kind of confession, That
surely their Judgments could not last so long, but for crucifying of one that
was more then a man. There was one Rabbi Samuel, who six hundred years since,
writ a Tract in form of an Epistle to Rabbi Isaac, Master of the Synagogue of
the Jews, wherein he does excellently discuss the cause of heir long captivity
and extreme misery. And after that he had proved it was inflicted for some
grievous sin, he shows that sin to be the same which Amos speaks of. For
three transgressions Amos 2 6.
of Israel, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because
they sold the righteous for silver. The selling of Joseph he makes the first
sin, the worshipping of the Calf in Horeb the second sin, the abusing and
killing of Gods Prophets the third sin, and the selling of Jesus Christ the
fourth sin. For the first they served four hundred years in Egypt; for the
second, they wandered forty years in the wilderness; for the third, they were
Captives seventy years ^n Babylon; and for the fourth, they are held in pitiful
Captivity, even till this day. It Is certain, that the body of that people are
under woeful blindness and hardness to this very day. And thus much for the
opening of the words.

The 25. verse is the Scripture that I do intend to speak something to, as the
Lord shall assist. Now the Proposition which I only intend to insist upon, is
this. Viz.

That God is the Author or Efficient cause of all the great

Now that God is the Author or Efficient cause of all the great Calamities and
dreadful Judgments that are inflicted upon Cities and Countries, will evidently
appear to every man's understanding, that will but take the pains to read over
the 26. Chapter of Leviticus, and the 28. Chapter of Deuteronomy, with that 14.
of Ezekiel, from verse. 13. to verse. 22.

That God is the Author or Efficient cause of this dreadful Judgment of Fire
that is at any time inflicted upon Cities and Countries, will sufficiently
appear in these following Scriptures, Amos 3. 6. Shall a Trumpet be blown in
the City, and the people not be afraid? shall there be evil in the City, and
the Lord has not done it? This is to be understood of the evil of punishment,
and not of the evil of sin. Amos 4. 11. I have overthrown some of you as God
overthr^w Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the
burnings, yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. Here (I) is
emphatical and exclusive, as if he should say, I, and I alone. Amos 1. 14. But
I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah. (that is, in the Metropolis or
chief City of the Ammonites) and it shall devour the Palaces thereof. Rabbah
their head-City, was a cruel, bloody, covetous, and ambitious City, verse. 13.
And therefore, rather than it should escape divine vengeance, God will kindle a
fire in the wall of it, and burn it with his own hands. Ezekiel. 20. 47. And say
to the forest of the South, (that is to Jerusalem, that did lie South-wards
from Chaldea) hear the Word of the Lord. Thus says the You will find this
Scripture fully opened in the following Discourse.
Lord God, Behold, I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every
green tree in thee, and every dry tree, the flaming flames shall not be
quenched, and all fuel from the South to the North shall be burnt therein,
verse 48. And all flesh shall see that I the Lord have kindled it, it shall not
be quenched. Men shall see that 'twas God that kindled the fire, and not man,
and therefore 'twas beyond man's skill or power to quench it, or to over-master
it. Jer. 7. 20. Therefore, thus says the Lord God, Behold, mine anger and my
fury shall be poured out upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon
the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground, and it shall burn,
and shall not be quenched. The Point being thus proved for the further opening
of it, premise with me these things.

1. First, That great afflictions, dreadful Judgments, are Psalm. 66. 12. We
went through fire and water. Jer. 4. 4. Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and
take away the fore-skins of your heart, ye men of Judah, and Inhabitants of
Jerusalem; lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn, that none can quench
it, because of the evil of your doings. Jer. 21. 12. O house of David, thus
says the Lord, execute Judgment in the morning, and deliver him that is
spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go out like fire, and
burn, that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings. Lam. 2. 3,
4. He has cut off in his anger all the horn of Israel, he has drawn back his
right hand from before the enemy, and burned against Jacob like a flaming fire
which devoureth round about, he has bent his bow like an enemy, he stood with
his right hand as an adversary, and slew all that was pleasant to the eye in
the Tabernacle of the Daughter of Zion, he poured out his fury like fire. Ezekiel.
15. 7. And I will set my face against them, they shall go out from one fire,
and another fire shall devour them, and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when
I set my face against them. Ezekiel. 22. 20, 21, 22. As they gather Silver and
Brass, and Iron and Lead, and Tin into the midst of the furnace to blow the
fire upon it, to melt it; so will I gather you in mine anger and in my fury,
and I will leave you there, and melt you: yea, I will gather you, and blow upon
you in the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst thereof: As
silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be melted in the
midst thereof, and ye shall know that I the Lord have poured out my fury upon
you. Thus you see that great afflictions, great Judgments are likened unto fire.

But in what respects are great Afflictions, great Judgments

In these seven respects they are like unto fire.

First, Fire is very dreadful and terrible to men's thoughts, Sodom, and the
fire of London to all that were near it, or spectators of it! It Is observable,
that some are set out in the blessed Scriptures as Monuments of most terrible
and dreadful Vengeance, whom the Kings of Babylon roasted in the fire; Jer. 29.
21, 22.
of them, it is said, shall be taken up a curse; when any imprecated sore
vengeance from the Lord upon any one, it is said, The Lord make thee like Ahab
and Zedekiah, whom the Kings of Babylon roasted in the fire. It Is very dreadful
and terrible for a man to have the least member of his body frying in the fire;
but how terrible and dreadful must it be for a man's whole body to be roasted in
the fire! so are the Judgments of the Lord very terrible and dreadful to the
children of men. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I Psalm. 119. 120.
am afraid of thy Judgments. Hab. 3. 16. When I heard, my belly trembled, my
lips quivered at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in
my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble. But,

Secondly, Fire is very painful and tormenting (in which Isa. 26. 17, 18.
they put a Land into sore travel; next to the pangs of Conscience, and the
pangs of Hell, there are none to those pangs that are bred and fed by terrible
Judgments. But,

Thirdly, Fire is of a discovering nature, it enlightens men's Rev. 15. 4. Ezekiel.
21. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
understandings sometimes to know the Lord. Hence it is, that after Judgments
threatened, God does so often tell them, that they shall know the Lord Sometimes
God by his Judgments enlightens men's minds to see such an evil in sin, that
they never saw before, and to see such a vanity, mutability, imporency, and
uncertainty in the Creature, that they never saw before; and to see such a need
of free grace, of ^ich mercy, and of infinite favor and goodness, that they
never saw before; and to see such Majesty and terribleness Psalm. 66. 3. 5.
in God, which they never saw before. Job 37. 22. With God is terrible Majesty.
But,

Fourthly, Fire is probatory and refining, and so are the Isa. 1. 25. Mal. 3.
1, 2, 3. Acts 26. 28, 29.
and hollow; whether men are real Christians, or nominal Christians; whether
they are throughout Christians, or almost Christians; whether their graces are
true or counterfeit, and whether they have much, or but a litt^e grace. Isa.
31. 9. The Lords fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem. Zacha. 13. 9.
And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as
silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried. 1 Pet. 4. 12. Beloved,
think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is to try you. Stars
shine brightest in the darkest night; Torches are the better for beating;
Grapes come not to the proof, till they come to the press; Spices smell
sweetest, when pounded; young Trees root the faster for shaking; Vines are the
better for bleeding; Gold looks the brighter for scouring; and Juniper smells
sweetest in the fire: The Application is easy. But,

Fifthly, Fire is of a consuming and devouring nature (as Psalm. 18. 8. There
went out a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his Isa. 66. 15, 16.
Psalm. 21 9. Jer. 17. 4. Ezekiel. 38. 19, 20.
nouth devoured. Jer. 15. 14. A fire is kindled in my anger, which shall burn
upon you. Ezekiel. 22. 31. Therefore have I poured out my indignation upon them, I
have consumed them with the fire of my wrath. Natural fire is a great devourer,
but mystical fire, the fire of divine wrath, is infinitely a greater devourer:
men may stand before a natural fire, but no man has ever bin able to stand
before the devouring fire of divine wrath. The anger and wrath of God against
wicked men is exceeding hot, it is a burning, fiery, flaming wrath, against
which they are never able to stand, Isa. 27. 4. Who would set the briars and
thorns against me in battle, I would go through them, I would burn them
together. Briars and thorns are as well able to stand before a devouring fire,
as wicked men are able to stand before the smoking wrath of that God which is
a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29.

Sixthly, Fire breaks out suddenly and unexpectedly, in Sodom and Gomorrah,
Nadab and Math. 24. 37, 38, 39. Genesis 19.
Abihu, Corah, Dathon, and Abiram. 1 These. 5. 3. For when they shall say, peace
and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travel upon a woman
with child, and they shall not escape. Security is a certain forerunner of
desolation and destruction. The Apostle by the similitude he uses, shows that
the destruction of the wicked is, 1. certain, 2. sudden, 3. inevitable. But,

Seventhly, Fire is impartial, it makes no difference between

Eighthly and lastly, Fire is violent and irresistible; we London, as ever any
people have had since the Lord Jesus was on earth: So are the Judgments of God
violent and irresistible, witness the raging Pestilence and the bloody Sword,
that in 1665. and 1666. has sent many score thousands to their long homes. And
thus you see how that Metaphorically or Typically great and sore Judgments do
resemble fire. But,

Secondly, Premi^e this with me; fire is sometimes attributed Heb. 12. 29. Our
God is a consuming fire; sometimes fire is attributed to Christ, Mal. 3. 2. But
who ray abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appears? for
he is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap. And sometimes fire is
attributed to the Holy Ghost, Mat. 3. 11. I indeed baptize you with water unto
repentance, but he that comes after me, is mightier then I, whose shoes I am
not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire,
that is, with that fiery Holy Ghost, that Spirit of Judgment and of burning
wherewith the filth of the Daughter of Zion is washed away, Isa. 4. 4. But,

Thirdly, Premise this with me; the word Fire in Scripture Isa. 9. 18. For
wickedness burns as the fire, it shall devour the briars and thorns, and
shall kindle in the thickest of the forest, and they shall moont up like the
lifting up of smoke: So the burning lust of uncleanness, Romans 1. 27. They
burned in lust one toward another: So 1 Cor. 7. 9. Its better to marry then to
burn. And so Sodom was first in a flame of burning lusts before it was burnt
with fire from Heaven: But this is not the fire that is here meant in the
Proposition that we are upon. But,

Fourthly, Premise this with me; fire is sometimes taken for the blessed
Angels, Psalm. 104* 4. Who makes his Angels Heb. 1. 7.
the Angels are called Seraphims, which signifies burning or flaming ones, and
they are set forth by this name, to note Isa. 6. 2.
their irresistible power; for as there is no withstanding of the furious
flames, so there is no withstanding of these burning or flaming ones. Jerome,
Musculus, and several others are of opinion, that the Angel that destroyed of
Sennacheribs Host 2 Kings 19. 35.
a hundred and fourscore and five thousand in one night, that he did it by
fire, burning their bodies, their garments being untoucht. But the fire in the
Proposition cannot be understood of the blessed Angels, for several reasons not
here to be alleged. But,

Fifthly, Premise this with me; fire in Scripture is sometimes Isa. 26. 11, 12.
Chap. 29. 6, 7.
Thou shall be visited of the Lord with a flame of devouring fire; but the
Nations that fight against the Altar, shall be a dream. Now fire in this sense
is not to be excluded out of the Proposition. But,

Sixthly, Premise this with me; fire sometimes notes the Exodus 3. 2. you read
how the Lord appeared unto Moses in a flame of fire out of the midst of a Bush;
and he looked, and behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not
consumed: here was a representation of the Churches affliction that was then in
Egypt, a house of bondage, Deuteronomy. 4. 20.
in the midst of a fiery furnace: But now the Lord was in the bush, while the
bush (the dry bush, or the Bramble-bush, as the Hebrew word signifies) was in a
flaming fire. In Seneh.
that Deuteronomy. 33. 16. you read of the good will of him that dwelt in the bush,
God was there in a way of merciful protection and preservation; they were in
the fire, but the Lord was with them in the fire, in all their fiery trials God
did bear them company. But,

Seventhly, Premise this with me; in the blessed Scriptures Sodom and Gomorrah,
Genesis 19. 24. Also fire Numb. 16. 35.
came down from Heaven on them that offered incense in the conspiracy of Korah.
And so fire came down from Heaven 2 Kings 1. 10, 11, 12. 2 Chronicles. 7. 1. 2 Kings
18. 38.
on the two Captains and their Fifties. Secondly, we read of fire that came
down from Heaven as a sign and token of Gods favor. And so fire came down from
Heaven on the Sacrifice of Solomon, and on the Sacrifice of Eliah. God in those
times did delight to show his special love and favor to his precious servants
by fire from Heaven: But in the Proposition we are to understand not supernal,
but material fire. But,

Eighthly and lastly, Premise this with me; fire is sometimes taken literally
for that material fire that consumes, Houses, See 2 Chronicles. 36. 19. 2 Kings 19.
18. Chap. 21. 6. Psalm. 74. 7. Deuteronomy. 13. 16.
Towns, Cities, and the most stately Structures, Jer. 21. 10. For I have set my
face against this City for evil, and not for good, says the Lord, it shall be
given into the hand of the King of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire, 2 Chronicles. 35. 13. And they roasted the Passover with fire, Nehem. 1. 3. And they
said unto me, the remnant that are left of the Captivity there in the Province,
are in great affliction and reproach, the Wall of Jerusalem also is broken
down, and the Gates thereof are burnt with fire, Chap. 2. 2, 3. Wherefore the
King said unto me, why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? this
is nothing but sorrow of heart: then I was very sore afraid, and said unto the
King, Let the King live for ever, why should not my countenance be sad, when
the City, the place of my fathers sepulchers lies waste, and the gates thereof
are consumed with fire? Now this material fire is the fire that is meant in the
Proposition. O Sirs! God is as much the Author or Efficient cause of this
Judgment of fire, as he is the Author or Efficient cause of Sword, Famine, and
Pestilence. This I have in part proved already; but shall more abundantly make
it good in that which follows.

But you will say, Sir, we know very well that God is the Author or Efficient
cause of this dreadful Judgment of Fire, as well as he is the Author or
Efficient cause of any other Judgment that we have either felt or feared: But
we earnestly desire to know what the ends of God should be in inflicting this
sore and heavy Judgment of Fire upon his ^oor people, and in turning their
glorious City into ashes. This we are sure of, that whoever kindled the fire,
God did blow the coal, and therefore we shall not now consider what there was
of man's treachery concurring with Gods severity in that dreadful Calam^^y by
Fire; but rather inquire after the grounds, reasons, or ends that God aims at
by that fiery Dispensation that has lately past upon us.

Now here give me leave to say, that so far as the late Fire was a heavy
Judgment of God upon the City, yea, upon the whole Nation, the ends of God
in-inflicting that Judgment, are doubtless such as respect both sinners and
Saints, the righteous and the wicked, the profane and the holy, the good and
the bad. Now such as respect the wicked and ungodly, I take to be these that
follow.

First, That he may evidence his Sovereignty, and that they Psalm. 14. 1. Psalm.
10. 4, 5. Psalm. 50. 21. Eccle. 8. 11. Psalm. 24. 1. Dan. 6. 25, 26, 27. Isa. 45.
9. Psalm. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. Hos. 2. 8, 9.
startles and awakens the Atheist, and makes him unsay what he had said in his
heart. When God appears in flames of fire, devouring and destroying all before
him, then the proudest and the stoutest Atheists in the world will confess,
that there i^ a God; yea, then they will bow and tremble under a sense of the
Sovereignty of God. The Sovereignty of God is that golden Scepter in his hand,
which he will make all bow to, either by his Word or by his Works, by his
Mercies or by his Judgments. This Scepter must be kissed and submitted to, or
else fire and sword, desolation and destruction will certainly follow. Jer. 18.
2, 3, 4. 6. Arise, and go down to the potters house, and there will I cause
thee to hear my word. Then I went down to the potters house, and behold, he
wrought a work on the wheels. And the vessel that he made of clay was marred in
the hand of the potter, so he made it again another vessel that seemed good to
the potter to make it. O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as the potter?
says the Lord. Behold, as the clay is in the potters hand, so are ye in my
hand, O house of Israel. The Jews were so stupid and sottish, that verbal
teaching without signs would not work upon them, and therefore the Lord sent
Jeremiah to the potters house, that he might see by what the potter did, that
though he had made them a People, a Nation, a Church, a State; yet he could as
easily unmake them and mar them, as the potter marred the vessel that he had
made. God would have this people to know, that he had as much power over them,
and all they had, as the potter had power over the clay that he works upon; and
that he had as much both might and right also to dispose of them at his
pleasure, as the potter had over his clay to dispose of it as he judged meet.
Nay, Beloved, the potter has not such an God has jus ad omnia, jus in omnibus,
a right to all things, a right in all things.
absolute power over his pots and clay, as the Lord has over the Sons of men,
to make them, and break them at his pleasure; and that partly, because that the
clay is none of his creature; and partly, because without God give him strength
he has no power to make or break one vessel. God by the Prophet would have the
Jews to know that 'twas merely by his good pleasure and grace, that they came
to be so glorious and flourishing a Nation as they were at this time; yea, and
further to know, that they were not so great, and rich, and flourishing, and
settled, and built, but that he could as easily break them and mar them, as the
potter could the Isa. 64. 8.
vessel that was under his hand. Ah, Sirs, God, by that dreadful fire that has
destroyed our houses, and burnt up our substance, and banished us from our
habitations, and levelled our stately Monuments of Antiquity and Glory even
with the ground, has given us a very high evidence of his Sovereignty both over
our persons and all our concernments in this world. Ah, London! London! were
there none within nor without thy Walls that did deny the Sovereignty of God,
that did belie the Sovereignty of God, that did slight the Sovereignty of God,
that did make head against the Sovereignty of God? Were there none within nor
without thy Walls that did say, We are Lords, and we will come no more unto
thee? That did say, Is not this great Babylon (is Jer. 2. 31. Dan. 4. 30. Lam.
4. 12.
not this great London) that we have built? That did say, the Kings of the
Earth, and all the Inhabitants of the World would not have believed, that the
adversary and the enemy (the flaming and consuming fire) should have entered
into the gates of Jerusalem (into the Gates of London.) That Exodus 5. 2.
did say, Who is the Lord, that we should obey his voice? That did advance a
worldly Sovereignty above and against the Sovereignty of God and Christ? Ah,
London! London! if there were any such within or without thy Walls, then never
wonder, that God has in a flaming and consuming fire, proclaimed his
Sovereignty over thee, and that he has given such Atheists to know from woeful
experience, that both themselves and all their concernments are in the hands of
the Lord, as the clay is in the hands of the potter; and that the sorest
Judgments that any City can fall under, are but the Isa. 5. 16.
demonstrations of his Sovereign Prerogative. Psalm. 9. 16. The Lord is known by
the Judgments which he executes; the Power, Justice, and Sovereignty of God
shines most gloriously in the execution of his Judgments upon the world.

Secondly, God inflicts great and sore Judgments upon the Consult these
Scriptures, Exodus 15. 14, 15, 16. Josh. 2. 10, 11. Rev. 15. 4.
appears as a consuming fire, he expects that the Nation should tremble, and
that the Inhabitants should fear before him. 1 Samuel 16. 4. And Samuel did that
which the Lord spoke, and came to Bethlehem, and the Elders of the Town
trembled at his coming, and said, come thou peaceable? Shall the Elders of
Bethlehem tremble for fear that Samuel came to denounce some grievous Judgment
against them? and shall not we tremble when God has executed his terrible
Judgments 1 Kings 21. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 27, 28, 29.
upon us? Shall Ahab tremble and humble himself, and fast and lie in sackcloth,
when Judgments are but threatened? and shall not we tremble and fear before the
great God, who has actually inflicted upon us his three great Judgments,
Pestilence, Sword, and Fire? Shall the Ninevites, both Princes, Jonah 3. 3, 4.
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Nobles, and people tremble and humble themselves in sackcloth and ashes, when
God does but threaten to overthrow their great, their rich, their populous
City? and shall not we tremble and lie low before the Lord, when we see great
London, rich and populous London laid in ashes before our eyes? When the hand
of the Lord was stretched out Exodus 15. 15, 16. See 2 Kings 6. 30. and Chap. 7.
6, 7. 15. Jer. 4. 7, 8, 9.
against the Egyptians, the Dukes of Edom were amazed, and the mighty men of
Moab trembled. Ah, how severely has the hand of the Lord been stretched out
against London and all her Inhabitants! and therefore what cause have we to be
amazed, and to tremble before that God who has appeared in flames of fire
against us! Lam. 2. 3, 4. He has cut off in his fierce anger all the horn of
Israel, he has drawn back his right hand before the enemy, and he burned
against Jacob like a flaming fire, which devoureth round about. He bent his bow
like an enemy, and poured out his fury like fire. God burnt down their City,
their Temple, their Gates, their Princely Habitations, their glorious
Structures in the fierceness of his anger, and in the greatness of his wrath O,
Sirs, when God falls upon burning work, when he pours out his fury like fire,
when like a flaming fire he devours all our pleasant things, and lays all our
glory in dust and ashes, we may safely conclude, that his anger is fierce, and
that his wrath is great against us; and therefore what eminent cause have we to
fear and tremble before him! God is a great and dreadful God. Dan. 9. 4. A
mighty God and terrible. Deuteronomy. 7. 21. A great and terrible God. Nehem. 1. 5. He
is so in himself, and he has been so in his fiery Dispensations toward us,
that the world by such remarkable severities, may be kept in awe of him.
Generally fear does more in the We are worthy (says Chrysostom) of Hell, if
for no other cause, yet for fearing Hell and the evil of punishment more then
Christ. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in Epist. ad Romans
world then love. As there is little sincerity, so there is but little
ingenuity in the world; and that is the reason why many very rarely think of
God, but when they are afraid of him. Many times Judgments work where Mercies
do not win. That famous Thomas Waldo of Lions, the Father of the Waldenses,
seeing among many met together to be merry, one suddenly fall down dead in the
street; it struck so to his heart, that he went home a penitent: it wrought to
a severe and pious reformation of his life, and he lived and dyed a precious
man. Though Pharaoh was not a pin the better for all the heavy Judgments that
God inflicted upon him; yet Jethro taking notice of those dreadful Plagues and
Judgments that fell upon Pharaoh and upon his people, and likewise upon the
Amalekites, was thereby converted and became a Proselyte; as Rabbi Solomon
notes upon that 19. of Prove. 25. The world is so untractable, that frowns will
do more with them then smiles. That God may keep wicked men in awe and in
subjection to him, he sees it very needful to bring common, and general, and
over-spreading Judgments upon them. Rev. 15. 4. Who shall not fear thee, O
Lord, and glorify thy Name? for thou only art holy; for all Nations shall come
and worship before thee; for thy Judgments are made manifest* O, Sirs, when the
Judgments of the Lord come to be made manifest, then it highly concerns all
ranks and sorts of men to fear the Lord, and to glorify his Name. How
manifest, how visible has the raging Pestilence and the bloody Sword, and the
devouring Flames of London been in the midst of us! and, O that our fear, and
dread, and awe of God were as manifest and as visible as his Judgments have
been and still are! for his hand to this very hour is stretched out against us,
Isa. 9. 12. But,

Thirdly, God inflicts great and sore Judgments upon the Sea Jer. 14. 15, 16.
Lam. 4. 11. Jer. 4. 15. to verse 19.
he has been provoked. Deuteronomy. 32. 19. And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred
them, because of the provoking of his sons and of his daughters. Verse. 21. They
have provoked me to anger with their vanities, and I will provoke them to anger
with a foolish Nation. Verse. 22. For a fire is kindled in my anger, and shall
burn unto the lowest Hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and
set on fire the foundations of the mountains. Verse. 24. They shall be burnt
with hunger, and devoured with burning heat (or with burning coals) and with
bitter destruction. There is a knowledge of God by his Works as well as by his
Word, and by his Judgments as well as by his mercies. In his dreadful Judgments
every one may run and read his Power, his Justice, his Anger, his Severity, and
his Indignation against sin and sinners: It Is irrevocable sins that bring
irrevocable Judgments upon sinners; whilst men hold on in committing great
iniquities, God will hold on in inflicting answerable severities. When God
cannot prevail with men to desist from sinning, men shall not prevail with God
to desist from destroying of them, their habitations, and all their pleasant
things. Jer. 2. 15. The young Lions roared upon him, and yelled, and they made
his Land waste; his Cities are burnt without Inhabitant. Verse. 17. Have thou
not procured this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God,
when he led thee by the way? When Nicephorus Phocas had built a mighty strong
Wall about his Palace for his own security, in the night time he heard a voice
crying out unto him, (...), etc. O Emperor, though thou buildest the wall as
high as the clouds; yet if sin be within, it will overthrow all. Sin, like
those Traitors in the Trojan Horse, will do Cities and Countries more hurt in
one night, then ten thousand open enemies could do in ten years. Cities and
Countries might flourish, and continue as the days of Heaven, and be as the Sun
before the Almighty, if his wrath be not provoked by their profaneness and
wickedness: So that it is not any divine Aspect of the Heavens, nor any
malignant Conjunction of the Stars and Planets, but the loose manners, the
ungracious lives, and the enormous sins of men that lay Cities and Countries
desolate Jer. 13. 22. And if thou say in thine heart, wherefore come these
things upon me? wherefore has the Lord sent plague, sword, famine, and fire to
devour, and destroy, and to lay all in ashes? The Answer is, For the greatness
of thine iniquity. God will in flames of fire discover his anger and
indignation against sin and sinners. The Heathen Herodotus.
Historian observes in the ruin of Troy, that the sparkles and ashes of burnt
Troy served for a lasting monument of Gods great anger and displeasure against
great sinners. The burning of Troy served to teach men, that God punishes
great sinners with great plagues: and certainly Londons being laid in ashes, is
a high evidence that God knows how to be angry with sinners, and how to punish
sin with the sorest of Judgments. The Gods of the Gentiles were senseless
stocks and stones, not able to apprehend, much less to revenge any injury done
unto them. Well therefore might the Philosopher be bold with Hercules to put
him to his thirteenth labor, in seething of his dinner; and Martial with
Priapus, in threatening him to throw him into the fire, if he looked not well to
his Trees. A child may play at the hole of a dead Asp, and a filly woman may
strike a dead Lion; but who dare play with a living Serpent? who dare take a
roaring Lion by the beard? O that Ch^istians then would take heed how they
provoke the living God, for he is a consuming fire, and with a word of his
mouth, yea, with the breath of his mouth, he is able to throw down, and to burn
up the whole frame of Nature, and to destroy all Creatures from the face of the
Earth. Some Heathen Philosophers thought anger an unseemly Attribute to ascribe
to God. And some Heretics conceived the God of the New Testament void of all
anger. They imagined two Gods; the God of the Old Testament was in their
account Deus justus, a Deity severe and revengeful: But the God of the New
Testament was Deus bonus, the good God, a God made up all of mercy, they would
have no anger in him: but Christians do know, that God proclaims this Attribute
among his Titles of Honor. Nehem. 1. 2. God is jealous, and the Lord
revengeth, and is furious, he reserveth wrath for his enemies. It Is the
highway to Atheism and Profaneness, to fancy to our selves a God made up all
of mercy, to think that God cannot tell how to be angry and wroth with the sons
of men. Surely they that have seen London in flames, or believe that it is now
laid in ashes, they will believe that God knows how to be angry, and how to fix
the tokens of his wrath upon us. But,

Fourthly, God inflicts great and sore Judgments upon the sons of men, and upon
Cities and Countries, that they Isa. 26. 9. Psalm. 94. 12. Prove. 3. 12, 13.
Chap. 6. 23.
his scourges should be our Schoolmasters, his chastisements should be our
advertisements: And to note this, the Hebrews and the Greeks both express
chastising and teaching by one and the same word ((...) Masar, (...) Paideia)
because Job 36. 8, 9, 10. and chap. 33. 19, 20.
the latter is the true end of the former, according to that in the Proverb,
Smart makes wit, and vexation gives understanding. Whence Luther fitly calls
affliction, Theologiam Christianorum, Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. 2 Chronicles. 7. 13, 14.
Amos 4. 6. to verse 12. Isa. 9. 13. Jer. 5. 3. Jer. 6. 29, 30. Ezekiel. 23. 25,
26, 27.
The Christian man's Divinity. Jer. 6. 8. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest
my soul depart from thee; lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.
Zeph. 3. 6, 7. I have cut off the nations, their towers are desolate, I made
their streets waste, that none passed by: their cities are destroyed, so that
there is no man, that there is no inhabitant. I said, Surely thou will fear me:
thou will receive instruction, so their dwellings should not be cut off.
However I punished them; but they rose early, and corrupted all their doings.
By all the desolations that God had made before their eyes, he designed their
instruction and reformation. From those words, Judge. 3. 20. I have a message
from God unto thee, O King, (said Ehud) Lo, his Poniard was Gods message: from
whence one well observes, That not only the vocal admonitions, but the real
Judgments of God are his Errands and instructions to the world. God delights to
win men to himself by favors and mercies; but it is rare that God this way
makes a conquest upon them. Jer. 22. 21. I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity
Deuteronomy. 32. 14, 15, 16, 17. Jer. 5. 7, 8, 9, 10. Psalm. 73. 1. 10.
(says God) but thou said, I will not hear: and therefore it is that he
delivers them over into the hands of severe Judgments, as into the hands of so
many cursed Schoolmasters (as Basil speaks) that so they may learn obedience by
the things ^hey suffer, as the Apostle speaks. It is said of Gideon, he took
Judge. 8. 16.
briars and thorns, and with them he taught the men of Succoth. Ah poor London!
how has God taught thee with briars and thorns, with Sword, Pestilence, and
Fire, and all because thou would not be taught by prosperity and mercy, to do
justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with Mich. 6. 8. ^am. 3 32 33. Isa.
28. 21. Schola crucis. schola laci^.
^y God. God delights in the Reformation of a Nation; but he does not delight
in the desolation of any Nation. Gods greatest severity, is to prevent utter
ruin and misery. If God will but make Londons destruction, Englands
instruction, it may save the Land from a total desolation. Ah London! London! I
would willingly hope, that this fiery Rod that has been upon thy back, has been
only to awaken thee, and to instruct thee, and to refine thee, and to reform
thee, that after this sore desolation, God may delight to build thee, and
beautify thee, and make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations.
But, Isa. 60. 15.


Fifthly, God inflicts sore and great Judgments upon the sons of men, that he
may try them, and make a more full discovery of themselves to themselves.
Wicked men will never believe that their lusts are so strong, and that their
hearts are so base, as indeed they are. 2 Kings 8. 12, 13. And Hazael said, Why
weepeth my Lord? and he answered, Because I know the evil that thou will do
unto the Children of Israel; their strong holds will thou set on fire, and
their young men will thou slay with the sword, and wilt dash their children,
and rip up their women with child. And Hazael said, But what, is thy servant a
dog, that he should do this great thing? And Elishu answered, The Lord has
showed me that thou shall be King over Syria. Hazael could not imagine that he
should be as fierce, cruel, murderous, and merciless as a dog, that will tear
all in pieces that he can come at. It could never enter into his thoughts, that
ever he should do such cruel, barbarous, horrid, and inhumane acts, as the
Prophet spoke of; but he did no^ know the depth of his own corruption, nor the
desperateness, nor deceitfu^ness of his own heart. Isa. Jer. 17. 9.
8. 21. And they shall pass through it hardly bestead and hungry: and it shall
come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fr^t themselves, and
curse their King, and their God, and look upward. When Judgments are upon them,
then their wickedness appears rampant. They shall curse their own King for not
defending, protecting, or relieving of them; they shall look upon him as the
cause of all their wants, sorrows, and sufferings: and as men overwhelmed with
misery, and full of indignation, they shall fall a cursing of him. And they
shall curse their God, as well as their King, that is, say some, the true God,
who deservedly brought these plagues upon them. Their God, that is, say others,
their Melchom to whom they had sacrificed, and in whom they see now that they
vainly trusted. So those desperate wretches under the Beast, Rev. 16. 8, 9. And
the fourth Angel poured out his vial upon the Plutarch observes that it is the
quality of Tigers to grow mad, and tear themselves in pieces, if they hearbut
Drums or Tabers to sound about them, l^b. de superstitione.
Sun, and power was given unto him to scorch men with fire. And the men were
scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the Name of God which has power over
these plagues: and they rep^nted not, to give him glory. Verse. 10. And the
fifth Angel poured out his vial upon the scent of the Beast; and his Kingdom
was full of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed
the God of Heaven, because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of
their deeds. The top of the Judgment that is, and shall be upon the wicked, is
this, that under the sorest and heaviest Judgments that shall come This will be
the case of all the worshippers of the Beast one day. Deuteronomy. 8. 2. 15, 16.
upon them, they shall not repent, nor give glory to God; they shall blaspheme
the Name of God, and they shall blaspheme the God of Heaven: and they shall be
scorched with great heat; and they shall gnaw their tongues for pain; but they
shall not repent of their deeds, nor give glory to that hand that smites them.
The fierce and fiery Dispensations of God upon the followers and worshippers of
the Beast, shall draw out their sins; but they shall never reform their lives,
nor better their souls. God kept the Jews forty years in the Wilderness, and
exercised them with many sore and smart afflictions, that he might prove them,
and make a more full discovery of themselves to themselves: and did not the
heavy trials that they met with in their wilderness condition, make a very
great discovery of that pride, that unbelief, that hypocrisy, that impatience,
that discontent, that self-love, that murmuring, etc. that was wrapped up close
in all their souls? O Sirs! since God has turned our renowned City into ashes,
what discoveries has he made of that pride, that unbelief, that worldliness,
that earthliness, that self-love, that inordinate affection to relations, and
to the good things of the world, that discontent, that disquietness, that
faint-heartedness, that has been closely wrapped up in the spirits of many
thousands whose habitations are now laid in ashes! We try metals by fire and by
knocking; and God has tried many thousands this day by his fiery Dispensations
and knocking Judgments that have been in the midst of us. I believe there are
many thousands, who have been deep sufferers by the late dreadful Fire, who
never did think that there had been so much sin, and so little grace; so much
of the Creature, and so little of God; so much earth, and so little of Heaven
in their hearts, as they now find by woeful experience: and how many wretched
sinners are there, who have more blasphemed God, and dishonored Christ, and
provoked divine Justice, and abused their best mercies, and debased and
be-beasted themselves since the late Fire, then they have done in many years
before? But,

Sixthly, God inflicts great and sore Judgments upon Heb. 12. 29.
tremble before him, who is a consuming fire. The flaming Rod of correction
that is laid upon one City, should be a Rod of instruction to all other Cities.
Jer. 22. 6, 7, 8, 9. I will make thee a wilderness; and cities which are not
inhabited, and many nations shall pass by this city, and they shall say every
man to his neighbor, Wherefore has the Lord done this unto this great City?
Then shall they answer, Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord
their God, and worshipped other gods, and served them. God punishes one City,
that all others Cities may take warning. There is no Judgment of God, be it
Sword, Pestilence, Famine, or Fire upon any People, City, Nation, or Country,
but what is speaking and Mich. 6. 9.
teaching to all others, had they but eyes to see, ears to hear, and hearts to
understand. Thus Tyrus shall be devoured with fire, says the Prophet; Ashkelon
shall see it and fear; Zach. 9. 4, 5.
Gaza and Ekron shall be very sorrowful. When Ashkelon, Gaza, and Ekron shall
see the destruction of Tire by fire, it shall make them afraid of the like
Judgment: they shall be a little more concerned then some were at the Siege of
Rhodes, and then others were at the Ruin and Desolation of Troy by fire.
London's sufferings should warn others to take heed of London's sins. London's
Conflagration should warn others to take heed of London's abominations; it
should warn others to stand and wonder at the patience, Romans 2. 4, 5.
long-suffering, gentleness, and goodness of God toward them who have deserved
as hard things from the hand of God, as London have felt in 1665. and 1666. It
should warn others to search their hearts, and try their ways, and break off
their sins, and turn to the Lord, lest his anger should break forth in flames
of fire against them, and none should be able to deliver them. It should warn
others to Lam. 3. 40.
fear and tremble before that Power, Justice, Severity, and Sovereignty that
shine in Gods fiery Dispensations toward us. Ezekiel. 30. 7, 8, 9. And they shall
be desolate in the midst Exodus 15. 14, 15, 16. Isa. 13. 6, 7, 8.
^f the countries that are desolate, and her Cities (meaning Egypt) shall be in
the midst of the Cities that are wasted. And they shall know that I am the
Lord, when I have set a fire in Egypt. In that day shall messengers go forth
from me in ships, to make the careless Aethiopians afraid, and great pain shall
come upon them, as in the day of Egypt, for lo, it comes. God by his secret
Instinct and Providence would so order the matter, as that the news of the
Chaldeans inrode into Egypt (laying all their Cities and Towns waste by fire
and sword) should be carried over into Aethiopia; and hereupon the secure
Aethiopians should fear and tremble, and be in pain as a woman is that is in
travel; or as the Egyptians were, when they were destroyed at the Red Sea; or
as they were, when the Lord smote their firstborn throughout the Land of
Egypt. Now shall the Aethiopians, the poor blind Heathens fear and tremble, and
be in pain, when they hear that Egypt is laid waste by fire and sword? and
shall not Christians all the world over fear and tremble, and be in pain, when
they shall hear that London is laid waste, that London is destroyed by fire?
What though Papists and Atheists have warmed themselves at the flames of
London, saying, Aha, so would we have it; yet let all that have the Name of God
upon them, fear and tremble, and take warning, and learn righteousness by his
righteous Judgments upon desolate London. Isa. 26. 8, 9.
London's murdering-piece should be Englands warning-piece to awaken them, and
to work them to bethink themselves, and to turn to him, who is able by a
flaming fire quickly to turn them out of all. The Jews have a saying, That if
war be begun in another Country, yet they should fast and mourn because the war
is begun, and because they do not know how soon God may bring it to their
doors. O Sirs! London is burnt, and it highly concerns you to fast and mourn,
and pray, and to take the Alarm; for you do not know how soon a fire may be
kindled in your own habitations. Now God has made the (once famous) City of
London a flaming Beacon before your eyes, he expects and looks that you should
all fear before him. Secure your interest in him, walk humbly with him, and no
more provoke the eyes of his jealousy and glory. The design of Heaven by this
late dreadful Fire, is not to be confined to those particular persons upon whom
it has fallen heaviest; but it is to awaken all, and warn all. When a Beacon is
fired, it gives warning as much to the whole Country, as to him who sets it on
fire; or as it does to him on whose ground the Beacon stands. We can neither
upon the foot of Reason or Religion, conclude them to be the greatest sinners,
who have been the greatest sufferer^; for many times we find, that the greatest
Saints have been the greatest sufferers both from God and men. Job Job. 1. 1,
2, 3, 4.
was a non-such in his day for holiness, uprightness, and the fear of the Lord,
and yet by the wind and fire from Heaven on the one hand, and by the Sabeans
and Chaldeans on the other hand, he is stripped of all his children and of a fair
estate in one day: so that in the morning it might have been said, Who so rich
as Job? and in the evening, Who so poor as Job? Job was poor even to a Proverb.
Look as wicked men are very incompetent Judges of divine favors and mercies,
so they are very incompetent Judges of divine trials and severities; and
whatever they may think or say, I dare conclude, that they who have drank
deepest of this Cup of sorrows (of this Cup of desolation and fire in London)
are not greater sinners then all others in England, who yet have not tasted of
this bitter Cup. But more of this when I come to the Application of the Point.
O Sirs! I beg upon the knee of my soul, that you will not slight this dreadful
warning of God, that he has given to the whole Nation in turning London into
ashes: To that purpose seriously consider. First, Divine warnings slighted and
neglected, will certainly bring down the greater wrath and vengeance upon you,
Levit. 26. 16, 17, 18. 21, 23, 24. 27, 28. Amos 4. 7. 8, 9, 10, 11. Jer. 25. 4.
to the 12. verse. Isa. 22. 12, 13, 14.
as you may clearly see by comparing the Scriptures in the Margin together.
Secondly, Slighting of Judgments is the greatest Judgment that can befall a
people; it speaks out much Pride, Atheism, Hardness, Blindness, and desperate
Security, and Contempt of the great God. To be given up to slight divine
warnings, is a spiritual Judgment, and therefore must of all Judgments be the
greatest Judgment to be given up to Sword, Famine, Fire, Pestilence, burning
Agues, and Fevers, is nothing so great a Judgment as to be given up to slight
divine warnings; for in the one you are but passive, but in the other you are
active. Thirdly, Heathens Jonah 3.
have trembled, and mended, and reformed at divine warnings; and therefore for
you to slight them, is to act below the Heathens, yea, it is to do worse then
the Heathens, who will certainly one day rise up in Judgment against all such
who have been slighters of the dreadful warnings of Heaven. Fourthly, Slighting
of divine warnings, lays men Prove. 1. 24. to verse. 32.
open to such anger and wrath, as all the Angels in Heaven are not able to
express, nor all the men on earth able to conceive. Fifthly, Slighting and
neglecting of divine warnings, speaks out the greatest dis-ingenuity,
stoutness, and stubbornness that is imaginable. The ingenuous child easily
takes warning, and to an ingenuous Christian every divine warning is as the
handwriting upon the wall. Sixthly, Slighting of divine warnings, provokes God
many t^mes to Dan. 5. 5.
give up men to be their own Executioners, their own destroyers. Saul had many
warnings, but he slighted and neglected 1 Samuel 31. 4. Joh. 6. 70, 71. Mat. 26.
21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Mat. 27. 5.
them all; and at last God leaves him to fall on his own sword. Christ cast
Hellfire often into Judas his face. Thou have a Devil; and woe to that man by
whom the Son of Man shall be betrayed; it had been good for that man that he
had never been born: But Judas slights all these warnings, and betrays his Lord
and Master, and then goes forth and hangs himse^f. It was a strange conceit of
the Cerinthians that honored Judas the Traitor as some divine Irenaeus. Aug.
de Haeresi.
and super-humane power, and called his Treason a blessed piece of Service, and
that he knowing how much the death of Christ would profit mankind, did
therefore betray him to death to save the race of mankind, and to do a thing
pleasing to God. Judas withstood all divine warnings Some report of Judas, that
he slew his father, married his mother, and betrayed his Master.
from within and without, and you know how the Tragedy ended; he dyed a
miserable death, he perished by his own hands, which were the most infamous
hands in all the world: he went and hanged himself. And as Luke has it, he
fell headlong and burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.
In every passage of his death we may take notice of divine Justice, and
accordingly take heed of slighting divine warnings. It was but just that he
should hang in the air, who for his sin was hated both of Heaven and Earth, and
that he should fall down headlong, who was fallen from such a height of
honor, as he was fallen from; and that the halter should strangle that throat,
through which the voice of Treason had sounded; and that his bowels should be
lost, who had lost the bowels of all pity, piety, and compassion; and that his
Ghost should have his passage out of his midst (He burst asunder in the midst,
says the Text) and not out of his lips, because with a kiss of his lips he had
betrayed our Lord Jesus. But seventhly, By slighting divine warnings, you will
arm both visible and 2 Kings 6. 8, 9, 10, 11. 16. 17. Exodus 14. Judge. 5. 19,
20. Isa. 37. 7, 8, 9. 36.
invisible Creatures against you. Pharaoh slights divine warnings, and God arms
the winds against him to his destruction Sisera slights divine warnings, and
the Stars in their Course fought against Sisera. Sennacherib slights divine
warnings, and an Angel of the Lord destroyed a hundred fourscore and five
thousand of his Army in one night. Eighthly, By slighting of divine warnings,
you will tempt Satan to tempt your souls: he that dares slight divine warnings,
will stick at nothing that Satan shall tempt him to; yea, he does to the utmost
what lies in him to provoke Satan to follow him with the blackest and sorest
temptations. Ninthly, He that slights divine warnings, dams up all the springs
of mercy, Psalm. 81. 11. to the end. Jer. 7. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. 34.
Isa. 13. 14, 15, 16.
and turns the streams of loving kindness and favor another way. Tenthly and
lastly, Slighting of divine warnings, will be the Sword that will wound you,
and the Serpent that will sting you, (...) the Worm that will be still gnawing
upon you; especially, 1. When your consciences are awakned. 2. When you shall
lie upon a dying bed. 3. When you shall stand before a Judgment Seat. Fourthly
and lastly, When you shall awake with everlasting flames about your ears. Upon
all these considerations, take heed of slighting the warnings of God that you
are under this day. But,

Seventhly and lastly, God inflicts great and sore J^d^ments upon Persons,
Cities, and Countries, to put the world in mind of the General Judgment. Who
can think upon the Conflagration of our late glorious City, and not call to
mind the great and terrible day of the Lord? Psalm. 50. 3 Our God shall come,
and shall not keep silence; a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be
very tempestuous round about him. As God gave his Law in fi^e, so when he comes
to Judgment, in fire he will require it, to show himself a Judge and Revenger
of it, and to bring the world to a strict account for Eccle. 12. 13, 14. Exodus
20. 18. Heb. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21.
their breaking of it. In the promulgation of the Law a flaming fire was only
on Mount Sinai; but when Christ shall come to execute vengeance on the
transgressors of it, a^l the world shall become a Bonfire. In the promulgation
of the Law there was fire, smoke, thunder, and an earthquake; but when Christ
shall come in flaming fire to revenge the breaches of it, the Heavens shall be
dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with servent heat, so that not only a
few Cities and Kingdoms, but all this lower World shall be of a flame; and
therefore if any of the wicked should be so weak as to think to secure
themselves by creeping behind the Lord, they will but deceive themselves; for
the fire shall not only devour before him, but it shall also devour round about
him. When an unquenchable fire shall be kindled above the sinner, and below the
sinner, and round about the sinner, Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17. Jer. 5. 14.
how is it possible that he should escape, though he should cry ^ut to the
Rocks and the Mountains to fall upon him, and to cover him from the wrath of
the Lamb? Isa. 66. 15, 16. For behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with
his chari^ts like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke
with flames of fire. For by fire (...) by his sword will the Lord plead with
all flesh: and the slai^ (...) the Lord shall be many. There is nothing more
fearful or formidable either to man or beast then fire. Now when God comes to
execute his Judgments, and to take vengeance on the wicked in this life (as
some curry the words) or in the other life (as others curry the words) he will
come in the most terrible and dreadful manner imaginable, he will come with
fire, and he will render his rebuke with flames of fire, or with fiery flames,
as some say; or with flaming fire, as others say. 2 These. 1. 7, 8. And to you
who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Beloved,
that Christ will come to Judgment in flaming fire, is no Politic invention
found out to fright men from their pleasures; nor no Engine of State devised to
keep men tame and quiet under the Civil powers; nor no Plot of the Minister to
make men melancholy, or to hurry them into a blind obedience; but it is the
const^nt voice of God in the blessed Scriptures, 2 Pet. 3. 10-12. But the day
of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the heavens shall
pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat,
the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. Looking for
and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on
fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. Pareus
is of opinion, that that Pareus in Rev. 16. 18.
fire that shall set all the world in a flame, at last will be kindled and
cherished by lightning from Heaven. The Earth being smitten with lightning from
Heaven, shall be shaken and torn into ten thousand pieces, and by fire utterly
consumed; now the Earth shall quake, the Sea roar, the Air ring, and the World
burn. Now you shall look no way, but you shall see fire; you shall see fire
above you, and fire below you, and fire round about you. Christ^ first coming
was at Luke 2. 8. to verse. 15. Psalm. 71. 6.
tended with a general peace, and with Carols of Angels: he came as rain upon
the mown grass, silently, sweetly into the world; then a babe cried in the
manger, but now Judahs Lion will roar and thunder in the Heavens: Then he came
riding on an Asses Colt, but now on the Clouds: Then he was attended with
twelve poor despised Apostles, but now he shall be waited on with many score
millions of Angels. At his first coming he freely offered grace, and mercy, and
2 These. 1. 7.
pardon to sinners; but now he will come in flames of fire to execute wrath and
v^ngeance upon sinners, and 'twill be no small honor to Christ, nor no small
c^mfort to the Saints, nor no small torment to the wicked for Christ to comes
in flames of fire when he comes to Judgment. Saul Acts 22. 8.
was astonished when he heard Jesus of Nazareth but calling unto him out of
Heaven. Herod was affrighted when he thought that John Baptist was risen again.
The Philistines Mark 6. 16. 1 Samuel 21. 9. Numb. 7. 10.
were afraid when they saw David's Sword. The Israelites were startled when they
saw Aarons Rod: And Juda was ashamed when he saw Thamars signet and staff: and
Belshazzar Dan. 5. 5.
was amazed when he saw the handwriting upon the Wall. The Carthaginians were
troubled when they saw Scipio's Sepulcher: and the Saxons were terrified when
they Hollingsheds Chron.
saw Cadwallon's Image. Oh how terrified, amazed, and confounded will wicked
men be when they shall see that Christ whom they have rejected, betrayed,
crucified, scorned, opposed, and persecuted, come in flames of fire to pass an
eternal Doom upon them! I have read a story of two Soldiers, Holcot. in lib.
Sap.
that coming to the Valley of Jehosaphat in Judea, and one saying to the other,
Here in this place shall be the general Judgment, wherefore I will now take up
my place where I will then fit; and so lifting up a stone, he sat down upon
it, as taking possession before hand: but being sat, and ^ooking up to Heaven,
such a quaking and trembling fell upon him, that falling to the earth, he
remembered the day of Judgment with horror and amazement ever after. The case
of this Soldier will be the case of every wicked man, when Christ shall appear
in flames of fire to pass an eternal Sentence of Condemnation upon all the
Goats that shall be found on the left hand. It is strange in this so serious a
business Mat. 25. 41. to verse. 46.
of the day of Judgment, and of Christ's appearing in flaming fire, which so
nearly concerns the sons of men, how men's wits will busy themselves in many
nice inquiries (ye may meet with many such questions in the Schoolmen) as, 1.
How long is it to the day of Judgment? 2. In what place of the world shall the
Judgment-day be held? 3. What kind of fire shall then be burning? 4. Whether
Christ shall come with a Cross carried before him? As if Malefactors in the
Gaol should fall a reasoning and debating what weather it would be at the day
of Assizes? or of the Judges habit and retinue, and never bethink themselves
how to answer their Indictment, that they may escape condemnation. London's
flames should put us in mind of Christ's coming in flames of fire; and the
burning of London should put us in mind of the burning of the world, when
Christ shall come to judge the sons of men according to their works; and the
terror and dread of that fire, and men's endeavors to escape it, should put us
upon all those holy ways and means whereby we may escape the fury of those
dreadful flames that shall never be quenched: And the Houses and Estates that
were consumed by the devouring fire in London-streets, should put us upon
securing a house not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2. Prove. 8. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 4.
Mat. 6. 19, 20, 21.
but one eternal in the Heavens, and upon securing durable riches, and an
inheritance that fades not away, and upon laying up for our selves treasures
in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust, nor thieves (and let me add, nor
flames) can break through, corrupt, or steal, or burn. The more general any
Judgment is, the more it should put us in mind of the General day of Judgment.
Now the burning of London was a general Jud^ment, a Judgment that reaches from
one end of the Land to another (as I shall more fully evidence before I close
up this Discourse) and therefore it should remind us of the universal
Conflagration of the whole World, and the works thereof. And thus you see the
ends that God has (in respect of the wicked) in inflicting great and sore
Judgments upon Persons, Cities, and Countrie^.

But pray, Sir, what are those ^igh and holy ends, in respect

First, To bring about those specia^ favors and mercies Pharaoh, and upon his
people, and upon his Country, God brought about the freedom and liberty of his
people to worship him according to his own prescriptions. The great difference
and contest between God and Pharaoh was, who should have their wills; God would
have his people to worship him according to his own mind; but Pharaoh Exodus 5.
1, 2. Exodus 7. 16. Exodus 8. 8. 20. 25. 27. 29. Exodus 9. 1. 13. Exodus 10. 3. 7.
8. 11. 24. Exodus 12. 31. Jer. 11. 4. Dan. 9. 12.
was resolved to venture his all before they should have their freedom and
liberty to serve their God. Upon this God follows him with plague upon plague,
and never leaves spending of his plagues upon him, till he had overthrown him,
and through his ruin brought about the freedom and liberty of his poor people.
The Babylonians were cruel enemies to Gods poor Israel, and kept them in
bondage, yea, in a fiery furnace seventy years: At last God stirs up the spirit
of Cyrus for his Churches sake, and he by fi^e and sword lays Babylon waste,
and takes them Captive, who had held his people in a long Captivity. Now he by
breaking the Babylonians in pieces like a potters vessel, brought about (as as
instrument in the hand of God) the freedom and liberty of Gods poor people, as
you may see by comparing that 45. of Isa. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. with that 1.
Chapter of Ezra. God stirs up the spirit of Cyrus to put forth a Proclamation
^^r Liberty for the Jews to go to their own Land, and to (...) the House of the
Lord God of Israel; and then he gra^^^^^ly stirs up the spirits of the people
wisely and soberty to i^^^ove Turn to Obadiah and read from verse. 11. to the
end of the Chapter.
^he liberty he had proclaimed. Jer. 49. 1. Concer^^^^ the Ammonites, thus
says the Lord, Has Israel no sons? has he no heir? why then does their King
inherit Gad, and (...) people dwell in his Cities? When the ten Tribes were
carried away captive, the Ammonites who dwelt near the Tribe of Gad, intruded
into it, and the Cities of it; but mark what God says in verse 2. Therefore
behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will cause (...) ^^arm of war to
be heard in Rabbah of the Ammonites (that was their chief City) and it shall be
a desolate heap, and her daughters (that is lesser Towns) shall be burnt with
fire, then shall Israel be heir unto them that were his heirs, says the Lord.
God by fire and sword Here was Lex talionis observed; they that invaded the
inheritance of others, had their own invaded by them.
would lay desolate the chief City of the Ammonites, and her Towns and Villages
that did belong to her: and by these dreadful Dispensations he would make way
for his people, not only to possess their own Land, but the Ammonites Land
also. I will leave the prudent Reader to make the Application We have been
under greater and dreadfuller Judgments then ever this poor Nation has groaned
under in former times; and who can tell but that the Lord by these amazing
Judgments may bring about greater and better mercies and blessings then any yet
we do enjoy? The Rabins say of Civil Liberty, that if the Heavens were
Parchment, the Sea Ink, and every pile of Grass a Pen, the praises of it could
not be comprised nor expressed: May we not say more of a holy Liberty? Liberty
to serve and worship the Lord according to his own prescriptions and directions
laid down in his blessed Word (by which all worship and worshippers must be
tried at last) is a pearl of price that none can sufficiently value. Justinus
the second Emperors Motto was, Libertas res inaestimabilis, Liberty is
unvaluable. The Lord give his people holy, wise, prudent, sober, humble, and
understanding hearts, that they may know both how to prize and how to improve
those liberties and mercies that he has handed to them through terrible
Dispensations. But,

Secondly, God inflicts great Trials and sore Judgments Psalm. 30. 5, 6, 7, 8,
9. Math. 25. 5. 2 Samuel 2. 7. 15. and Chap. 24, 15, 16, 17. 2 Kings 14. 25.
Math. 12. 40. Jonah 1. 1, 2, 3.
them. What deep security had seized upon David, so that God was forced to make
use of the bloody Sword and of the sweeping Pestilence to awaken him? Jonah was
a Prophet, he was a Servant of the Lord, he was a Type of Christ, he was a good
man; his name Jonah signifies a Dove, though he had but little of the Dove in
him, being as passionate a man of an honest man, as you have lightly heard of,
says Luther. Now Jonah having contracted guilt upon his conscience by acting
quite contrary to Gods royal Call, what a desperate, senseless stupidity and
security had seized upon him! what a spiritual lethargy was poor Jonah in! not
much unlike that of the Smith Dog, whom neither the hammers above him, nor the
sparks of fire falling round about him can awake. Jonah was not in a slumber,
but in a sound, heavy, deep, and dead sleep; and what a wonder, what a prodigy
was here, that in all this stir, and tumult, and danger, the winds whi^^ling
and roaring, the Sea working, raging, swelling, frothing, foaming, and boiling
like a pot, the waves mounting up to Heaven, and sinking down again to Hell (as
the Psalmist speaks) the ship tumbling and tossing like a Tennis-ball, the
Mariners as stout fellows as they were, surprised with fear, and running up and
down like men at their wits end, like men that could not look pale death in the
face with blood in their cheeks, that yet Jonah should sleep, and be as secure
in that dreadful danger, as if he had been in his own house sleeping on a bed
of down! Oh the desperate security that may seize upon the best of Saints! but
this security God will cure in his Jonas's by some smart Trial, or by some
heavy Judgment or other. The Lethargy is best cured by a burning Ague. Absolon
2 Samuel 14. 30.
sends once or twice to Joab to come and speak with him: but when he saw that
Joab would not come, he commands his cornfieldsd to be set on fire, and this
awakens him, and fetches him with a witness: So God by fiery afflictions, and
by burning up our comforts round about us, awakens us, and brings us to himself
with a witness. When Iron grows rusty, we put it into the fire to purify it;
and so when the people of God grow rusty and secure, then the Lord brings them
under fiery trials to awaken them, and to purify them. If Nero was so angry
with Vespasian, because he slept at his Music; how much more may the Lord be
angry with all such as sleep and are secure under the most amazing and awakning
Judgments? But my hope and prayer is, that the Lord has, and will more and more
graciously and effectually awaken all the wise slumbring Virgins upon whom this
fiery. Dispensation has past. And therefore,

Thirdly, In respect of his peoples sins, God has several special ends that he
aims at by all the fiery Trials and smart

First, God by these means designs a further and a fuller discovery of their
sins. In standing waters you cannot see Deuteronomy. 8. 2.
when once the water is drawn away, then it appears. In times of prosperity
there is a great deal of mud, a great deal of Atheism, unbelief, discontent,
murmuring, impatience, passion, pride, etc. that lies at the bottom of men's
hearts undiscovered. Oh but when God shall once empty them of their Estates,
and burn up all their outward comforts, and set them with Job upon the dunghill,
then the mud appears, then a whole army of lusts discover themselves, as we see
in many this day, whom you shall rarely find without tears in their eyes, sighs
in their hearts, and complaints in their mouths. Severe Providence are pills
made purposely to clear the eyesight. 1 Kings 17. 18. And she said unto
Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me
to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son? If God had not taken away
her son, her sin had not been brought to remembrance. O Sirs! if God by this
late dreadful Fire had not taken away your houses, your goods, your estates,
your trades, many of your sins had not been brought to your remembrance, though
now you have lost most or all. You may say with the Psalmist, My Psalm. 51. 3.
Turn to the Scriptures, Genesis 42. 21. Jon. 4. 8, 9. Jer. 9. 7. ult.
sins are ever before me: my pride is ever before me, my unbelief is ever
before me, my frowardness is ever before me, my murmuring is ever before me, my
discontent is ever before me, and my impatience is ever before me, etc. Good
men never come to know how bad they are, till they come to be exercised with
severe Providence and smart Trials It was the speech of a Holy man in a great
sickness, In thi^ disease I have learned how great God is, and what the evil of
sin is; I never knew to purpose what God was before, nor what sin was before.
Afflictions are a Christians Glass, in which they may run and read the
greatness of God, and the vileness of sin. But,

Secondly, By severe Providence and fiery Trials, God designs the preventing
of sin. Paul was one of the holiest men on earth, called by some an earthly
Angel, and yet he needed a thorn in the flesh to prevent pride. 2 Cor. 12. 7.
And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the
revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan
to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure. Paul was in very great
danger of being exalted above measure, witness the doubling of those words in
one verse, Lest I should be exalted, Lest I should be exalted. Prudent
Physicians sometimes give Physic to prevent diseases; and so does the
Physician of Souls, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the Margin
together. The Job 33. 19-17. Chap. 34. 31, 32. Job 40. 4, 5. Hos. 2. 6, 7.
burnt child dreads the fire. Sin is but a bitter sweet, it is an evil worse
then Hell it self. Salt brine preserves from putrefaction, and salt Marshes
keep the sheep from rotting; and so sharp Trials, severe Providence preserve
the Saints from spiritual putrefying, and from spiritual rotting. The Rabbis,
to keep their Scholars from sin, were wont to tell them, that sin made Gods
head ache; and Saints under fiery trials do find by experience, that sin makes
not only their heads, but also their hearts ache; and by this means God
preserves his people from many sins, which otherwise they would certainly fall
into. Beloved, God by his fiery Dispensations has destroyed many, or most of
your outward comforts; but little do you know the horrible sins that by this
means the Lord has preserved you from. A full Estate lays men most open to the
greatest sins, the worst of shares, and the deadliest temptations. The best of
men have fallen foulest under their highest worldly enjoyments, witness David,
Solomon, Hezekiah, etc. Under your outward fullness, how low was your communion
with God? how languishing were your Graces? how lean were your Souls? and how
was your spring of inward Comforts dried up? How little had God of your
thoughts, your hearts, your time, your strength? O Sirs! how bad would you have
been by this time, if God had not removed those things that were but fuel to
your lusts, and quench-coals to your grace? Well, often think of this; it is a
greater mercy to be preserved from sin, yea from the least sin, then it is to
enjoy the whole world. But,

Thirdly, By severe Providence, and by fiery Trials, them, then they will cry
out, Ah, what a bitter thing is sin! that puts God upon burning work; then they
will speak that language to their own Souls, that the Prophet once spoke to the
Jews, Jer. 2. 15. They made his land waste: his cities are burnt with fire.
Verse. 17. Have thou not procured these things to thy self? Verse. 19. Thine own
wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee: know
therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken
the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of Hosts.
So Chap. 4. 18. Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee:
this is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reaches unto thy
heart Yea, now they will say, that sin is bitternesses in the abstract, and in
the plural number also, according to that of the Prophet Hosea, Hos. 12. 14.
Ephraim provoked him to anger most bitterly, or with bitternesses, as the
Hebrew has it. Relations and friends may tell us, that sin is a bitter thing,
and conscience may tell us, that sin is a bitter thing, and good books may tell
us, that sin is a bitter thing, and men under terrors and horrors of spirit
may tell us, that sin is a bitter thing, and the fore and heavy Judgments of
God upon others may tell us, that sin is a bitter thing, and the Spirit by his
secret whispers may tell us, that sin is a bitter thing, and Ministers may tell
us, that sin is a bitter thing; they may tell you, that it is bitter to God, it
being the only thing in all the world that he has revealed his wrath from
Heaven against, and that is contrary to the Nature of God, the Law of God, the
Being of God, the Glory of God, and the grand Designs of God. They may tell
you, that it is bitter to Christ, witness his crying out in the bitterness of
his Soul, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and witness the sorrows
and heaviness of his Soul, and his sweating clods of blood. When he hung upon
the Cross, they gave him gall and vinegar to drink; but no gall was so bitter
to him as your sins. They may tell you, that sin is bitter to the Spirit of
God; Genesis 6. 3. Ephesians. 4. 29.
for nothing grieves him, and provokes him, and vexes him but sin. They may
tell you, that sin is bitter to the good Angels: every sin that you commit is
as a dagger at their hearts: there is nothing in all the world so bitter to
them, as to see their Lord and Master daily, yea hourly crucified by sinners
fins. They may tell you, that sin is bitter to the evil Angels, it being the
only thing for which they were banished the Court of Heaven, and turned down to
the lowest Hell, where they are kept in chains of darkness to the Judgment Jude
6.
of the great day. They may tell you, that sin is bitter to the worst of men,
witness Adams hiding of himself, and Genesis 3. 10. Math. 27. Genesis 4. 13. Romans 8.
20, 21, 22.
Judas his hanging of himself, and Cains crying out, My burden is greater then
I am able to bear. They may tell you, that it is bitter to the Creatures, who
groan under their burdens, and who long to be delivered from that bondage that
the sin of man has subjected them to; and yet for all this, we will not
feelingly, affectionately, experimentally say, that sin is bitter, till God
comes and burns us up. Lam. 4. 11. And gives us gall and wormwood to drink.
Chap. 3. 19, 20. Remembering mine affliction, and my misery, the wormwood and
the gall. My soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me. O Sirs!
how bitter should sin be to you, who have seen London all in flames? Certainly
God by burning up your sweet, pleasant, and delightful things, would teach you
to taste a greater bitterness in sin then ever. O happy Fire, that shall render
God and Christ, and Heaven, and Promises, and Ordinances more sweet, and sin
more bitter to poor sinners Souls! Doubtless one of Gods great designs by this
late Judgment of Fire, is to imbitter sin to all sorts of men. When Judgments
imbitter our sins to us, then they work kindly, powerfully, effectually, and
then we may conclude, that there was a hand of love in those Judgments, and
then we shall justify the Lord, and say with the Church, Lam. 1. 18. The Lord
is righteous; for I have rebelled against him: or as the Hebrew runs, Because I
have imbittered him, he is righteous in all the sore judgments that he has
inflicted upon me; for I have imbittered him against me by my most bitter sins.
But,

Fourthly, By severe Providence and fiery Trials, God Isa. 1. 25. And I will
turn my hand upon thee (to wit to correct or chastise thee) and purely purge
away thy dross (or drosses) Dan. 11. 35. Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3. Gods fire is in Zion,
and his furnace in Jerusalem. Isa. 31. 9.
and take away all thy tin (or tins in the plural number.) Some by dross
understand gross iniquity; and by tin, glittering hypocrisy. For as tin is
very like unto silver, so is hypocrisy very like unto piety. Others by dross
understand persons that are openly profane; and by tin such as are inwardly
unsound. The words are a Metaphor taken from them that try metals in the fire,
purging from precious silver all dros^ and tin. The Jews who were once silver,
were now turned into dross and tin; but God by fiery trials would burn up their
dross and tin, their enormities and wickednesses, and make them as shining
Christians in grace and holiness, as ever they were. So Isa. 27. 9. By this
therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged: and this is all the fruit, to
take away his sin. God by the Babylonish Captivity would as by fire purge away
the iniquity of Jacob; and to show the certainty of it, he instanceth in their
darling-sin, viz. Idolatry: when he makes all the stones of the Altar as
chalk-stones, that are beaten in sunder, the Groves and the Images shall not
stand up. Idolatry was the great sin for which God sent them into Captivity.
Now how they were purged from this sin after their return out of Captivity,
appears by their History: take one instance for all. Pilate being by Tiberius
to be Josephus, page 617. The Jews hated and feared Idolatry as much as the
burnt child dread^ the fire.
Governor over the Jews, caused in the nightime the Statue of Caesar to be
brought into Jerusalem covered, which thing within three days after caused a
great tumult among the Jews; for they who beheld it, were astonished and moved,
as though now the Law of their Country were profaned: For they hold it not
lawful for any Picture or Image to be brought into the City. At their
lamentation who were in the City, there was gathered together a great multitude
out of the fields adjoining, and they went presently to Pilate, then at
Caesarea, beseeching him earnestly, that the Images might be taken away out of
Jerusalem, and that the Laws of their Country might remain inviolated. When
Pilate denied their Suit, they prostrated themselves before his house, and
there remained lying upon their faces for sive days and nights never moving.
Afterward Pila^e sitting in his Tribunal-seat, was very careful to call all
the Jews together before him, as though there he would have given them an
Answer; when upon the sudden a Company of armed Soldiers (for so it was
provided) compassed the Jews about with a triple rank: the Jews were hereat
amazed, seeing that which they expected not; then Pilate told them, that except
they would receive the Images of Caesar, he would kill them all: and to that
end made a sign to the Soldiers to draw their Swords. The Jews, as though they
had agreed thereto, fell all down at once, and offered their necks to the
stroke of the Sword, crying out, that they would rather lose their lives, then
suffer their Religion to be profaned. Then Pilate admiring the constancy of
the people in their Religion, presently commanded the Statues to be taken out
of the City of Jerusalem. All the hurt the fire did the three Children (or Dan.
3. 23, 24.
rather Champions) was to burn off their cords. Our lusts are cords of vanity,
but by fiery trials God will burn them up. Zecha. 13. 9. And I will bring the
third part through the fire, and will refine them, as silver is refined, and
will try them as gold is tried. The best of men are but men at the best, they
have much corruption and dross in them, and they need ^efining; and therefore
God by fiery trials will refine them, ^ut not as dross or chaff which are burnt
up in the fire, but ^s silver and gold which are purified in the fire: he will
so ^efine them, as that they shall leave their dregs and dross behind them.
Look what the fire is to the gold, the file to the Iron, the fan to the wheat,
the soap to the clothes, the salt to the flesh, that shall fiery trials be to
the Saints: But what shall be the fruit of their refining? Answ. They shall
call on my Name, and I will hear them. I will say, it is my people, and they
shall say, the Lord is my God. By fiery trials God will purge out our dross,
and make virtue shine. All the fiery trials that befall the Saints, shall be as
a potion to carry away ill humors, and as cold frosts to destroy the vermin,
and as a tempestuous Sea to purge the wine from its lees, and as the North wind
that dries up the vapors, that purges the blood, and that quickens the
spirits, and as a sharp Corrosive to eat out the dead flesh. The great thing
that should be most in every burnt Citizens eye, and heart, and prayers, and
desires, is, that the Fire of London may be so sanctified, as to issue in the
burning up of their lusts, and in the purging away of the filth of the Daughter
of Zion, Isa. 4. 4. Jerome reports of Plato, how he left that famous City of
Hieronym. contra Jovinian. lib. 2.
Athens, and chose to live in a little ancient Village almost overturned with
tempests and earthquakes, that being often minded therein of his approaching
desolation, he might get more power over his strong lusts, and learn to live a
more virtuous life then ever he had lived before. O Sirs! if God by this fiery
Dispensation shall make you more victorious over your strong lusts, and help
you to live more virtuous lives, you will have cause to bless him all your
days, though he has turned you out of house and home, and burnt up all your
comforts round about you. But,

Fourthly, By severe Providence and fiery Trials, God

First, He designs the reviving, quickening, and recovering Rev. 2. 4. Jam. 1.
2-12. 2 Cor. 12. 10.
fallen asleep, and quicken up those hopes that were languishing, and put life
and spirits into those joys and comforts that were withering and dying. God
under fiery trials lets his poor children see how that by their spiritual
decays he has been dishonored, his Spirit grieved, Religion shamed, the mouths
of the wicked opened, weak Saints staggered, strong Saints troubled, Conscience
wounded, and their Souls and Graces impaired; and by these discoveries he
engages them to the use of all those holy and heavenly helps, whereby their
decayed graces may be revived and recovered. Many creatures that have been
frozen, and even dead with cold, have been revived and recovered by being
brought to the fire. God by fiery trials will unfreeze the frozen graces of his
people, and put new life and spirits into them. As the Air is sometimes clear,
and sometimes cloudy; and as the Sea is sometimes ebbing, and sometimes
flowing; and as the tree* of the field are sometimes flowering, green, and
growing, and sometimes naked, withered, and as it were even dead: So it is
sometimes with the graces of the Saints; but the Lord by one fiery trial or
another will revive, and recover, and raise their graces again. Epiphanius
makes mention of those that Lib. de Anchorat.
travel by the Deserts of Syria, where are nothing but miserable Marshes and
Sands, destitute of all Commodities, nothing to be had for love or money. Now
if it so happen, that their fire go out by the way, then they light it again at
the heat of the Sun, by the means of a Burning-glass: and thus if the fire of
zeal, if the sparks of divine grace, by the prevalency of some strong
corruption, or by the violence of some dreadful temptation, should be put out,
or dye as to its lively operations; by a Burning-glass, or by one fiery
Dispensation or another, God will inflame the zeal, and enliven the dying
graces of his poor people. I know the saving graces of the Spirit, viz. such as
Faith, Love, Hope, etc. cannot 1 John 3. 9. 11. Romans 29. 13. Heb. 8. 1 Pet. 1.
5. Joh 10. 28, 29, 30, 31.
be finally and totally extinguished in the Souls, when they are once wrought
there by the Spirit; yet their luster, their radiancy, their activity, their
shine and flame may be clouded and covered, whilst the season of temptation
lasts; as living coals may be so covered with ashes, that neith^r light, nor
smoke, nor heat may appear; and yet when the embers, the ashes are stirred to
the bottom, then live coals appear, and by a little blowing, a flame breaks
forth. There are several cases wherein grace in a Christians breast may seem to
be hid, cold, dead, and covered over; as sap in the winter is hid in the roots
of trees, or as flowers and fruits are hid in the seeds, or roots in the earth,
or as sparks of fire are hid in the ashes, or as bits of gold are hid in a dust
heap, or as pearls may be hid in the mire. I, but God by one severe providence
or another, by one fiery trial or another, will blow that heavenly grace, that
divine fire into a perfect flame: he will cause their hid graces to revive as
the Corn, and grow as the Vine, and blossom as the Lilly, and smell as the Wine
of Lebanon, Hos. 14 5, 6, 7. O Sirs! how many Christians were there amongst us,
who were much decayed and withered in their graces, in their duties, in there
converses, in their comforts, in their spiritual enjoyments, in their As a man
may take infection, or get some inward bruise, or spring a vein, and yet not
know of it.
communions with God, and with one another; and yet were not sensible of their
decays, nor humbled under their decays, nor industrious to recover themselves
out of their withering and dying condition? and therefore no wonder, if the
Lord to recover them and raise them, has brought fiery trials upon them. But,

Secondly, God by severe Providence and by fiery Trials, Job 15. 3. 2 Chronicles.
20. 12, 13. Jam. 1. 4. Chap. 5. 11. Hab. 2. 3, 4. Mich. 7. 7, 8, 9. Rev. 13.
10. compared with Chap. 14. 12.
Margin. There is little difference (as to the comfort and sweet of grace)
between grace out of exercise, and no grace at all. A man that has millions,
but has no heart to use what he has, wherein is he better (as to the comfort
and sweetness of his life) then a man that has but a few mites in the world?
Eccle. 6. 1, 2-4. Mark 40. How is it that you have no faith (says Christ to
his Disciples) when they were in a dreadful storm, and in danger of drowning,
and so stood in most need of their faith? yet they had then their faith to
seek, they had faith in the habit, but not in the exercise, and therefore
Christ looks upon their faith as no faith: How is it that you have no faith?
what is the sheath without the knife? the scabbard without the sword? the
Musket without the match? the Cannon without the bullet? the Granado without
powder? no more are all your graces when not in exercise. The strongest
Creature the Lion, and the subtlest Creature the Serpent, if they are dormant,
are as easily surprised and destroyed as the weakest worm: So the strongest
Saints, if grace be not in exercise, are as easily surprised and captivated by
Sin, Satan, and the World, as the weakest Saints are. O Sirs! if Christians
will not stir up the grace of God that is in them, if they will not look to the
daily exercise of grace, God by some severe providence or other, by some fiery
Dispensation or other, will stir up their graces for them. Ah Jonah 1. 6. ult.
sluggish, slumbering Christians, who are careless as to the exercise of your
graces, how sadly, how sorely do you provoke the Lord to let Satan loose to
tempt you, and corruptions grow strong to weary you, and the world grow cross
to vex you, and friends turn enemies to plague you, and the Lam. 1. 16.
spirit withdraw to discomfit you, and fiery trials to break in to awaken you!
And all this to bring you to live in a daily exercise of grace. God was fain to
be a Moth, a Worm, a ^yon, yea, a young Lion to Ephraim and Judah, before he
Hos. 5. 12. 14.
could bring them up to an exercise of grace; but when he was all this to them,
then they fall roundly upon a lively ex^rcise of grace. Hos. 6. 1, 2, 3. Come,
let us return unto the Lord; for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has
smitten, and he will bind us up. After two days he will revive us, in the ^hird
day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. Then shall we know if
we follow on to know the Lord: his going forth is prepared as the morning, and
he shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter and former rain unto the
earth. Here you see ^h^ir faith, their repentance, their love, their hope, all
in e^ercise. When a Soldiers courage, metal, and gallantry lies as it were
hid, his Captain will put him upon such ha^d^hips, h^zards, and dangers, as
shall rouse up his courage, metal, and gallantry. If a Scholar has excellent
acquired parts and abilities, and will not use them nor improve them, his
Master will put him upon such Tasks, as shall draw out all his parts and
abilities to the height: So when the Lord has laid into the souls of his people
a stock of grace, and they grow idle and careless, and will not improve that
stock for his glory, and their own good, he will then exercise them with such
severe providence and fiery trials, as shall put them to a full improvement of
that blessed stock of grace that he has entrusted them with. The fire that came
from Heaven was to be kept continually burning, that it might never go Levit.
6. 13.
out. God loves to see the graces of his Children in continual exercise:
Neglect of our graces is the ground of their decrease and decay. Wells are the
sweeter for drawing, an^ grace is the stronger for acting; we get nothing by
dead and useless habits. Talents hid in a napkin gather rust; the noblest
faculties are imbased, when not improved in exercis^. 2 Timothy 1. 6. Stir up the
gift of God which is in thee. It Is an Allusion to the fire in the Temple, which
was always to be kept burning. All the praise that God has from us in this
life, is from the actings of grace. 'Twas Abraham's acting of faith that set the
Crown of Glory upon the Lords Head. O Sirs! look narrowly to it, that you fail
not in the activity and lively vigo^ of your graces: Look to it, that your
graces be still acted, exercised, and blown up, that so they may be still
flaming and shining: the more you exercise grace, the more you strengthen it,
the more you increase it. Repeated The more a man plays upon an Instrument, the
more dextrous he grows. Math. 25. 27. Prove. 10 4.
acts strengthen habits; it is so in sin, and it is so in grace also. The more the
little child goes, the more strong it grows by going. Money is not increased by
lying in a Chest, but by trading. The more any member is used, the stronger
it is. As the right hand is most used, so it is commonly strongest. The diligent
hand ^akes rich. A little stock well husbanded, will daily increase; when a
greater stock neglected, shall decay, and come to nothing. The exercise of
grace will best testify both the truth and the life of your graces. Grace is
never more evident then when it is in exercise. When I see a man rise, and walk,
and work, and exercise his arms, I know he is a real man, a living man. The
more the fire is blown up, the sooner it is seen to be fire. There are many
precious Christians who are full of fears and doubts, that they have no love to
God, no says in God, no hope of Glory, etc. but the best way under Heaven to
put an end to these fears and doubts, is to be fervent in exerting act^ of
love, of faith, of hope, etc. The non-exercise of grace cast Adam out of
Paradise; it shut Moses, and Aaron out o^ Numb. 20. 12.
Caanan; it brought Jacob into fourteen years hard service and bondage; for had
he exercised faith, hope, patience, etc. ^s he should have done, he would never
have got the blessing by indirect means as he did; it provoked the Lord to
strike Luke 1. 18, 19, 20. Heb. 3. 17, 18.
Zacharias dumb; it shut thousands of the Jews out of the Land of Caanan. I
dare not be so harsh, so rash, and so uncharitab^e as to think, that none of
those that died in the Wilderness had the habits of faith, the seeds of grace
in their souls; but 'twas their non-acting of faith that kept them out of the
holy Land, as it did Moses and Aaron, according to what I hinted but now.
Beloved, by these instances, among many others that might be produced, you see
that God has dealt very smartly and severely with his choicest Servants for
their not exercising of their graces as they ought to have done. And though I
dare not (upon many accounts) say that for the Saints not exercising and
improving their graces, God has turned London into a heap of Ashes; Austin
write upon that day wherein he showed no acts of grace, diem perdidi, I have
lost a day. Oh how many days have we lost then for which God might justly visit
us!
yet I dare say, that this neglect of theirs may be one thing that added fuel
to that Fire. Well, Sirs, you had not long since many outward comforts to live
upon, but the Lord has now burnt them up, that so he might lead you forth to
live in a daily exercise of grace upon himself, upon his power, upon his
all sufficiency, his goodness, his faithfulness, his fullness, his graciousness,
his unchangeableness, his promises. And if this fiery Dispensation shall be so
sanctified to us, as to work us to a further activity of grace, and to a
further growth and increase of grace, we shall be happy Citizens, though we are
burnt Citizens. But,

Thirdly, By severe Providence and by fiery Trials, God designs the growth of
his people in grace. Usually the graces of the Saints thrive best when they are
under a smarting Romans 5. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6.
to make them send forth the greater aromatical savor. Fiery trials are like
the Tezel, which though it be sharp and scratching, it is to make the cloth
more pure and fine. God would not rub so hard, were it not to fetch out the
dirt and spots that be in his people. The Jews were always best when they were
in their lowest condition. Well-waters arising from deep Springs, are hotter in
the Winter then they are in the Summer* Stars shine brightest in the darkest
nights; and so do the graces of the Saints shine brightest in the darkest
nights of affliction and tribulation. God will sometimes more carry on the
growth of grace by a Cross then by an Ordinance; yea, the Lord will first or
last, more or less, turn all fiery trials into Ordinances for the helping on
the growth of Heb. 12. 10. Jam. 1. 3, 4. 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7.
grace in his peoples souls. Look as in the lopping of a tree, there seems to
be a kind of diminution and destruction; yet the end and issue of it is better
growth: And as the weakening of the body by Physic, seems to tend to death; yet
it produces better health, and more strength: And as the ball by falling
downward, rises upward; and as water in pipes descends, that it may ascend: So
the Saints spiritual growth in grace is carried on by such divine methods, and
in such ways as might seem to deaden grace, and weaken it rather then any ways
to augment and increase it. We know that winter is as necessary to bring on
harvest, as the spring: and so fiery trials are as necessary to bring on the
harvest of grace, as the spring of mercy is. Though fiery trials are grievous;
yet they shall make us more gracious. Though for the present we cannot see but
that such and such severe providence and fiery trials, as the loss of house,
estate, trade, friends, will redound much to our prejudice and damage; yet in
the issue we shall find, that God will turn Heb. 12. 11.
them to the internal and eternal advantage of our precious Genesis 42. 36. But
yet as old as Jacob was, he lived to see all those things work for his good,
which he concluded were against him Judge. 14. 14. Phil. 1. 19.
souls. We may in a pang of passion say as Jacob, Joseph is no^, and Simeon is
not. All these are against me, children are not, honors are not, riches are
not, habitations are not, credit is not. All these are against us; but in the
close we shall find that promise made good in power upon us, Romans 8. 28. We
know that all things shall work together for good to them that love God, to
them that are called according to his purpose. O Sirs! all the power of Heaven
stands engaged to ma^e good this promise to you: And if you would but live in
the daily actings of faith upon this blessed promise, you would then be able to
bear up bravely under all the troubles and trials, crosses and losses that you
meet with in this world; and you would then experience the truth of Samsons
Riddle, Out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong sweetness. What Paul
said of his fiery trials, viz. I know that this shall turn to my salvation;
that may you safely say of all your fiery trials, We know that they shall work
for our good, we know that they shall turn to our salvation: Though wicked
instruments might design our destruction; yet the wise God that sits at the
Helm, will turn all into our Salvation. Those severe Providence which for the
present may seem very prejudicial, in the issue shall prove very beneficial.
Joseph's Brethren threw him into a pit, after wards they sell him, then he is
falsely accused, and as unjustly cast into prison, Psalm. 105. 17, 18. Genesis 50.
20. Chap. 41. 40.
and laid in cold Iron: Yet all this issued in his good; his abasement made way
for his advancement; for his thirteen years imprisonment he reigned fourscore
years like a King. David you know had seven years banishment, yet it ended in a
glorious Reign of forty years continuance. Job lost all that ever he had in one
day, he was a man under great calamity, he was a spectacle of the highest
misery, he abounded only in boils and sores, and rags; but all this issued in
the trial of his grace, in the discovery of his grace, and in the improvement
of his grace, and in the close God did compensate his very great losses, by
giving him twice as much as ever he Job 42. 10.
had before. Dear friends, that by all severe Providence and fiery Trials, God
will turn your spark of grace into a flame, your mites into millions, and your
drops into Seas, is, and shall be the hearty desire of my Soul. O Sirs! if
Christ be even ravished with one of his Spouses eyes, and Gant. 4. 9.
with one chain of her neck, with the least grains and drams of true grace; how
will he be taken with abundance of grace? how will he be ravished with the
flourishing estate of your Souls in grace? Well, remember this, the more under
all your fiery trials grace is increased, the more God is honored, Religion
adorned, the mouths of the wicked stopped, the hands and hearts of weak Saints
strengthened and encouraged, the smarting Rod sweetened, and threatened Judgments
prevented. O that those two Prophesies might be made good in power upon all the
burnt Citizens of London! That 32. Isa. 15. Until the Spirit be poured upon us
from on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field. And that 35. Isa. 1, 2.
The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them: and the desert
shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose. It shall blossom abundantly, and
rejoice even with joy and singing; the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it,
the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the Lord, and
the excellency of our God. Thrice happy will the Pliny speaks of a golden Vine
which never withers, but is always flourishing. O that this might be the
mercy of all those Christians who have been burnt up!
burnt Citizens of London be, if under all their crosses and Iosses they grow
into a more deep acquaintance with God, the world, and their own hearts; with
God and his holiness, with the world and its vanity, mutability, impotency, and
uncertainty; and with their own hearts, and the deceitfulness, vileness,
baseness, and wretchedness of them. If under fiery Dispensations we grow more
holy then ever, and more humble then ever, and more heavenly then ever, and
more meek and lowly then ever, and more tender and compassionate then ever, and
more faithful and fruitful then ever, and more patient and contented then ever,
then we may be confident that the grand design of God in bringing all that evil
that he has brought upon us, was his glory and our own internal and eternal
good, and accordingly we may rejoice in the Lord, though we have nothing else
to rejoice in, Hab. 3. 17, 18. But,

4. Fourthly and lastly, By severe Providence and by fiery Deuteronomy. 8. 2. And
thou shall remember all the way which the 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7. Rev. 3. 18.
Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and
to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou would keep his
Commandments or no. God knew them well enough before, without any experimental
trial of them; but that he might the better make a discovery of themselves to
themselves and to others, he led them up and down in the Wilderness forty
years. Psalm. 66. 10, 11, 12. For thou, O God, have proved us, thou have tried
us as silver is tried; thou have brought us into the net; thou have laid
affliction upon our loins; thou have caused men to ride over our heads: we went
through fire and through water. God proves his people, not thereby to better
his own knowledge of them, but to bring them to a better knowledge both of
their own vices and graces. It is not known what Corn will yield till it come
to the flail, nor what Grapes will yield till they come to the press. Grace is
hid in Nature as sweet water in Rose-leaves; but fiery trials will fetch it
out. Fire and water are merciless Elements, and they note variety of sharpest
trials. Now through these ^od led his people, that so he might discover to them
and others both the strength of their graces, and the strength of their sins.
God many times exercises his dearest Children with fiery trials, that he may
discover the sincerity and integrity of his people to the world. The profane
Atheistical world are apt very boldly and confidently to conclude, that the
people of God are a pack of Hypocrites and Dissemblers, and that they serve God
for a Livery, for loaves, and not for love; and that they are Mercenary Joh. 6.
26.
in all they do, having more in their eye, the hedge that he has made about
them, and the gold and silver that he has bestowed upon them, then the honor
and glory of the great God. Just as the Devil objected against Job. Now God Job
1. 9.
to convince these men, these men, these monsters, of the integrity and
sincerity of his people, he breaks down the hedge that he had made about them,
and turns the wheel upon them, and breaks them with breach upon breach; he
stripes them of all, and turns them out of house and home, as he did Job; and
Job 20. 21.
yet this people, with Job, will still worship the Lord, and bless a taking
God, as well as a giving God: They will still keep close to the Lord and his
ways, whatever God does with them or against them. Psalm. 44. 17, 18, 19. All
this is come upon us ('it is a terrible All, as you may see from the 9. to the
17. verse) yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy
Covenant; our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from
thy way, though thou have sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered
us with the shadow of death. In spite of all the wrath and rage of Antiochus
Epiphanes, that cruel and bloody Persecutor of the Saints, these Servants of
the Lord show their sincerity by their constancy in keeping close to the Lord
and his ways in the face of the greatest opposition and hottest persecution
that they met withal. When the Emperor sent to Basil to subscribe Hist.
Tripart. lib. 7. cap. 36.
to the Arrian Heresy, the Messenger at first gave him good language, and
promised him great preferment, if he would turn Arrian; to which Basil replied,
Alas, these speeches are fit to catch little children withal that look after
such things; but we that are nourished and taught by the holy Scriptures, are
readier to suffer a thousand deaths, then to suffer one syllable or tittle of
the Scripture to be altered. The same Basil affirms, that many of the Heathens
seeing the Heroic zeal, courage, and constancy of the primitive Christians in
the face of all oppositions and persecutions, turned Christians. Justin Martyr
confesses, that the constancy of the Christians in their sufferings, was the
chief motive tha^ converted him to Christianity: for I my self (says he) wa^
once a Platonist, and did gladly hear the Christians reviled; but when I saw
they feared not death, nor any of those miseries which most frighten all other
men, I began to consider with my self, that it was impossible for such men to
be lovers of pleasures more then lovers of piety, and that made me first think
of turning Christian. Now by these means and methods, God convinces the blind
world of the integrity and sincerity of his people. When they see that those
whom they have severely judged for Hypocrites, shall own the Lord and his
ways, and cleave to the Lord and his ways, and continue to follow the Lord and
his ways, and hold on in a high honoring of the Lord and his ways, when their
hedge is broken down, and God has stripped them as naked as in the day wherein
they were born; O now they begin to Dan. 3. 26. Acts 16. 17.
change their note, and to conclude, surely these are the Servants of the most
high God; these are no Hypocrites nor Dissemblers, but true Nathanaels in whom
there is no guile. Joh. 1. 47.
How have the people of God in London been judged Hypocrites, Dissemblers,
Deceivers, Factious, and what not? Now God by burning up their substance, and
by turning them out of house and home, and destroying all their pleasant
things, does certainly design to give those that have so deeply censured them,
a proof of their integrity and sincerity, by letting them see, that all the
changes that have past upon them, can never work them to change their Master
Christ, nor to change his ways for the ways of sin, nor to change his Worship
for the Worship of the world, nor to change their Religion for the Religion of
Rome. Certainly those that love the Lord, that delight in the Lord, and that
highly prize the Lord for those infinite Perfections, Beauties, Glories, and
Excellencies that are in him, they will own him, and cleave to him, and follow
after him when they have little, as Josh. 24. 15. Math. 19. 27. Rev. 14. 4, 5.
1 Pet. 3. 16 Chap. 2. 12. 15. (...) properly signifies to muzzle, or halter, or
tie up, or to button up their mouths, as we say.
when they had much, yea, when they have nothing of the world, as when they had
all the world; and by so doing, they put a Pad-lock upon the lying lips of
such, they button up the mouths of such who asperse and calumniate them as a
Generation that only serve God upon the account of a worldly interest. There is
nothing that does more amuse, amaze, and astonish wicked men, then to see the
people of God keep close to him and his ways, when they are in a suffering
estate; yea, when they have lost all but their God and their integrity. The
fire trys the gold, as well as the touch stone, and diseases try the skill of
the Physician, and tempests try the skill of the Pilot; and so do fiery trials
try both the truth and the strength of a Christians graces. Paulinus Nolanus,
when his City was taken by the Barbarians, prayed thus to God; Lord, let me not
be troubled at the loss of my Gold, Si^ver, Honor, City, etc. for thou art
all, and much more then all these to me. Here was an Heroic Spirit, here was
grace in strength, yea, in triumph. The spirits of the men of the world usually
sink under their losses. Menippus of Phenicia having lost his goods, strangled
himself. Dinarcus Phiton at a certain loss cut his own throat to save the
charge of a Halter. Another being turned out of his Estate, ran out of his
wits. And another for the death of his Son, threw himself headlong into the
Sea. Augustus Caesar (in whose time Christ was born) was so troubled and
astonished at the relation of a Foyl and Overthrow from Varus, that for certain
months together he let the hair of his beard and head grow still, and wore it
long; yea, and otherwhiles Suetonius.
he would run his head against the doors, crying out, Quintilius Varus, deliver
up my Legions again; Quintilius Varus, deliver up my Legions again. Henry the
II. (who was none of the best of Princes) hearing that his City Mentz was
taken, used this blasphemous speech, I shall never (says he) love God any
more, that suffered a City so dear to me, to be taken from me. Now by all these
instances you may clearly and plainly see the different temper and carriage of
wicked men under their losses, crosses, trials, and sufferings, from the people
of God. When they are under fiery trials, what an evil spirit, what a desperate
spirit, what a sullen spirit, what a proud spirit, what a Satanical spirit,
what a hellish spirit do they discover! they tell all the world, that they are
under the power and dominion of the God of this Phil. 2. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
World. But when the people of God are under fiery trials, they make conscience
of carrying of it so as that they may convince the world, that God is in them
of a truth, and that they are sincere and upright before the Lord, however they
are judged and censured as Hypocrites, Deceivers, Dissemblers, and what not. O
that all that are sufferers by this fiery Dispensation, would make it their
business, their work, their Heaven, so to carry it under their present trials,
as to convince all gainsayers of the sincerity, integrity, and uprightness of
their hearts, both toward the Lord, his people, his ways, his Ordinances, his
interest, and all his concernments in this world. And thus much for the
gracious Ends that God aims at in all those severe Providence and fiery
Trials, that of late he has exercised his people with.

The next thing we are to inquire after, is, those sins for which the Lord
inflicts so heavy a Judgment as this of Fire upon the Sons of men. Now for the
opening of this, give me leave to propose this Question. Viz.

What are those sins that bring the fiery Dispensation, that

First, We need not question but that some of all sorts, renowned City into
Ashes; doubtless Superiors and Inferiors, Ministers and People, Husbands and
Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Rich and Poor, Honorable
and Base, Bond and Free, have all had a hand in the bringing down that Judgment
of Fire that has turned London into a ruinous heap. But,

Secondly, Premise this with me, viz. That it is a greater Mat. 26. 21, 22. And
as they Math. 26. 21, 22.
did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me. And
they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him,
Lord, is it I? It Is better for every man to do his best to ransack and search
his own Soul, and to find out the Achan, the accursed thing in his own bosom
Lam. 3. 40. Joshua 7.
that has brought that dreadful Judgment of Fire upon us, then for men (without
any Scripture-warrant) to fix it upon this party and that, this sort of men and
that. There is no Christian to him that smites upon his own heart, his own
^^east, his own thigh, saying, What have I done? The neglect of this duty the
Prophet long since has complained of. No man repents himself of his wickedness,
saying, Jer. 8. 6.
What have I done? that is, none comparatively: So how rare is it to find a
burnt Citizen repenting himself of his wickedness, and saying, What have I
done? Most men are ready to blame others more then themselves, and to judge
Math. 7. 1, 2, 3, 4.
others rather then themselves to be the persons that have brought down this
Judgment of Fire upon us. 'Twas a good Saying of one of the Ancients: Amat Deus
seipsos judicantes, Augustine.
non judicare; God loves to judge them that judge others rashly, but not those
that judge themselves religiously. But,

Thirdly, Premise this with me; in times of common David did in that 2 Samuel 24.
15. So the Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning even to the time
appointed, and there dyed of the people from Dan even to Beer-sheba seventy
thousand men: but mark the 17. verse, And David spoke unto the Lord, when he
saw the Angel that smote the people, and said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have
done wickedly; but these sheep, what have they done? let thy hand, I pray thee,
be against me and against my fathers house. And thus did good Nebemiah, Nehem.
1. 3 6, 7. And they said unto me, The remnant that are left of the captivity
there in the province, are in great affliction and reproach, the wall of
Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire. Both I
and my fathers house have sinned, we have dealt very corruptly against thee,
and have not kept thy commandments, nor the statutes, nor the judgments which
thou command thy servant Moses. Now certainly it is as much our glory as our
duty to write after these blessed Copies, that these Worthies have set before
us. Alexander had somewhat a wry neck, and his Soldiers thought it an honor
to be like him: How much more should we count it an honor to be like to David
and Nehemiah in such a practice as is honorable to the Lord, and advantageous
to our selves? But what Plutarch said of Demosthenes, That he was excellent at
praising the worthy Acts of his Ancestors, but not so at imitating them, is
applicable to the present case, and to many who have been burnt up in our day.
But,

Fourthly and lastly, Premise this with me; there were London, what the Prophet
Oded to them in that 2 Chronicles. 28. 10. But are there not with you, even with
you, sins against the Lord your God?

But you will say, What sins were there among the professing people in London,
that may and ought to work them to justify the Lord, and to say, that he is
just and righteous, and that he has done them no wrong, though he has burnt
them up, and turned them out of all?

I answer, That there were these seven sins, among others,

First, There was among many Professors of the Gospel in London, too great a
conformity to the fashions of the world; how many professing men in that great
City were dressed up like fantastical Anticks, and women like Bartholomew-babies,
to the dishonor of God, the shame of Religion, the hardening of the wicked, the
grieving of the weak, and the provoking of divine Justice? When Darius changed
the fashion of his Scabbard from the Persian manner into the Mode of the
Greeks, the Chaldean Astrologers prognosticated that the Persian Monarchy
should be translated to them whose fashion he counterfeited. Certainly that
Nation may fear a scourge from that Nation or Nations whose fashions they
follow. Zepha. 1. 8. And it shall come to pass in the day of the Lords
Sacrifice, that I will punish the Princes and the Kings children, and all such
as are clothed with strange apparel. This is a stinging and a flaming check
against all Fashion-mongers, against all such as seem to have consulted with
French, Italian, Persian, and all Outlandish Monsters to advise them of all
their several modes and fashions of vice, and that are so dextrous at following
of them, that they are more complete in them then their pattern^. Certainly, if
ever such Wantons be saved, 'twill be by fire: Strange apparel is part of the
Old man, that must be put off, if ever men or women intend to go to Heaven.
What dreadful things are thundered out against those proud curious Dames of
Jerusalem, by the Prophet Isaiah, who being himself a Courtier, inveighs Isa.
38. 16. ult.
as punctually against the noble vanity of Apparel, as if he had even then
viewed the Ladies Ward-robes? And those vanities of theirs brought desolating
and destroying Judgments upon them. And it shall come to pass, that instead of
sweet Isa. 38. 24, 25, 26.
smell there shall be a stink, and instead of a girdle a rent, and instead of
well-set hair baldness, and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth, and
burning of instead beauty. Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in
the war. And her gates shall lament and mourn, and she being desolate, shall
sit upon the ground. As light and slight as many make of vain Apparel; yet
Cyrian and Augustine draw up this Conclusion, That superfluous Apparel is worse
then Whoredom, because Whoredom only corrupts Chastity, but this corrupts
Nature. Seneca complained, that many in his time were more sollicitous of their
attire then of their good behavior, and that they had rather that the
Commonwealth should be troubled then their Locks and set looks. I have read of
the Grecians, that when they wished a curse upon their enemies, it was this,
That they should please themselves in bad customs. There are many who lift
their heads high, who seem to be under this curse this day. Why does the
Apostle say (says one of the Ancients) Above all things swear not? Is it worse
Austin. Jam. 5. 12.
to swear then to steal, worse to swear then to commit adultery, worse to swear
then to kill a man? No, But the Apostle would fortify us as much as he could
against a postilent custom, to punish the pestilent customs and fashions that
were amongst us. God sent the Pestilence in 1665. and the fiery Judgment in
1666. And the Lord grant that the bloody Sword (in the hands of cruel
Cutthroats that are brutish and skilful to destory) be not sent amongst us
some Ezekiel. 21. 31.
other year to punish the same iniquity. O Sirs! what was more common among
many Professors in London then to be clothed in strange Apparel, A la mode de
France. Mark those that affected the Babylonian Habit, were sent Captives Ezekiel.
23. 15.
to Babylon. They that borrowed the fashions of the Egyptians may get their
boils and botches. Certainly such as fear the Lord should go in no Apparel,
but, First such as they are willing to dye in. Secondly, to appear before the
Ancient of Isa. 26. 8, 9, 10.
days in, when his Judgments are abroad in the earth. Thirdly, to stand before
a Judgment Seat. But,

Secondly, There was among many Professors of the Gospel London much
luke-warmness and coldness in the things of God, the City was full of lukewarm
Laodiceans. The Rev. 3. 16, 17. Math. 24. 12.
love of many to God, to his people, to his ways, and to his instituted
Worship, was cold, very cold, stark cold. God destroyed the old World by water
for the heat of their lusts, and God has destroyed the City of London by fire
for the coldness of their love that dwelt therein. I have read of Anastati^s
the Emperor, how God shot him to death with a Thunderbolt, because of his
luke-warmness and formality. But,

Thirdly, There was a great deal of worldliness and London. O Sirs! the world
is all shadow and vanity, it is filia noctis, like Jonabs Gourd, a man may set
Jonah 4.
under its shadow for a time, but it soon decays and dies. The main reason why
many Professors dote upon the world, is, because they are not acquainted with a
greater glory. Men ate Acorns till they were acquainted with the use of Wheat.
The Lodestone cannot draw the Iron when the Diamond is in presence; and shall
earthly vanities draw the Soul when Christ the Pearl of price is in presence?
Many of the Prosessors of London were great Worshippers of the golden Calf, and
therefore God is just in turning their golden Calf into ashes. The world may
well be resembled to the fruit that undid us all, which was fair to the sight,
smooth in handling, sweet in taste, but deadly in effect and operation. The
world in all its bravery is no better then the Cities which Solomon gave to
Hiram, which he called Cabul, 1 Kings 9. 13.
that is, displeasing or dirty. The whole world is circular, the heart of man
triangular, and we know a Circle cannot fill a Triangle. If the heart of man be
not filled with the three Persons in Trinity, it will be filled with the world,
1 John 5. 7.
the flesh, and the Devil. Riches, like bad servants, never stay long with one
master; what certainty is there in that which one storm at Sea, one treacherous
friend, one false cath, one ball of fire, yea, one spark of fire may strip us
of? O Sirs! if you can gather grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles, then go
on, and dote upon the world still. All the things of this world are vain
things, they are vanity of vanities, Eccle. 1. 2.
all in Heaven count them vain, and all in Hell count them vain: a Jacobus
piece is but as a chip to them, Pearls are but as pebbles in their eyes.
Lazarus was a Preacher, as some conceive, and Dives a Lawyer: sure I am, that
Lazarus in Heaven is now rich enough, and happy enough; and Dives in Hell is
now poor enough, and miserable enough. H^ who makes his world his God while he
is in the world what will he do for a God when he goes out of this world? Well,
Sirs, remember this inordinate love to the world will expose a man to seven
great losses. Viz.

First, To the loss of many precious opportunities of grace. Felix had no
leisure to hear poor Paul, and Martha Acts 24. Luke 10. John 7.
busied about many things, had no time to hear Christ preach, though never man
preached as he preached. Men inordinately in love with the world, have so much to
do on earth, that they have no time to look up to Heaven.

Secondly, To the loss of all heavenly benefit and profi^ Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32, 33.
Math. 13. 22.
gold grows; where the love of the world prevails, there the Ministry of the
Word will not prevail. If the love of the world be too hard for our hearts,
then the Ministry of the Word will work but little upon our hearts.

Thirdly, To the loss of the face and favor of God. God Psalm. 30. 6. Isa. 57.
17.
the world, and still running after the world. The face and favor of God are
Pearls of price that God bestows upon none but such whose conversation is
Heaven, and who have Phil. 3. 20.
the Moon (viz. all things that are changeable as the Moon) Rev. 12. 1, 2.
under their feet. God never loves to lift up the light of his countenance upon
a dunghil-spirited man. God hides his face from none so much and so long, as
from those who are still longing after more and more of the world.

Fourthly, To the loss of Religion, and the true Worship and Service of God, as
you may see by comparing of the Scriptures in the Margin together. Many
Worldings deal 2 Timothy 4. 10. 1 Timothy 6. 10. Jer. 5. 7. Deuteronomy. 32. 15. Hos. 4 7.
Hos. 13. 6.
with Religion as Masons deal with their Ladders, when they have work to do,
and to climb, etc. O then how they hug and embrace the Ladder, and carry it on
their arms and on their shoulders! but then when they have done climbing, they
hang the Ladder on the Wall, or throw it into a corner. O Sirs! there is no
loss to the loss of Religion; a man were better lose his name, his estate, his
limbs, his liberty, his life, his all, then lose his Religion.

Fifthly, To the loss of Communion with God, and Acquaintance Deuteronomy. 8. 10, 11.
Jer. 2. 31. Chap. 22. 21. Psalm. 144. 15.
with God, shall find more pleasure, delight, and content in a desert, in a
den, in a dungeon, and in death, then in the Palace of a Prince. Man's summum
bonum stands in his Communion with God, as Scripture and Experience evidences;
nay, God and I are good company, said famous Doctor Sibs Macedonius the Hermit,
retiring into the Wilderness, that he might with more freedom enjoy God, and
have his Conversation in Heaven; upon a time there came a young Gentleman into
the Wilderness to hunt wild beasts, and seeing he Hermit, he rode to him,
asking him, why he came into that solitary place? he desired he might have
leave to ask him the same question, why he came thither? I came hither to hunt,
said the young Gallant, and so do I, says the Hermit, Deum venor meum, I hunt
after my God: they hunt best who hunt most after Communion with God. Vrbanus
Regius having one days converse with Luther, said, it was Adam. in vit. Regii,
p. 78.
one of the sweetest days that ever he had in all his life; but what was one
days, yea, one years converse with Luther, to one hours converse with God? Now
an inordinate love of the world will eat out all a man's Communion with God. A
man cannot look up to Heaven, and look down upon the Earth at the same time.
But,

Sixthly, To the loss of his precious and immortal Soul Shemei by seeking his
servant, lost his life; and many by Math. 16. 26. 1 Timothy 6. 9.
an eager seeking after this world, lose their precious and immortal Souls.
Many have so much to do ^n Earth, that they have no time to look up to Heaven
to honor their God, to secure their Interest in Christ, or to make sure work
for their Souls. But,

Seventhly, To the loss of the world; for by their inordinate

Fourthly, Many in London were fallen under spiritual decays, Rev. 2. 4. The
Nutmeg tree makes barren all the ground about it; so does the spice of worldly
love make the heart barren of grace. V^sin observes that the sins and
barrenness under the Gospel in the Protestants in King Edwards days, brought in
the Persecution in Queen Mary's days.
love being blown out, God sends a flaming fire in the midst of them. Many
Londoners were fallen into a spiritual Consumption, and to recover them out of
it, God sent a fire amongst them. Many in London were withered in their very
Profession: where was that visible forwardness, that zeal, that diligence in
waiting upon the Lord in his Ordinances, that once was to be found amongst the
Citizens of London? And many Citizens were withered in their Conversations and
Converse one with another. There was not that graciousness, that holiness, that
spiritualness, that heavenliness, that fruitfulness, that examplariness, that
seriousness, and that profitableness sparkling and shining in their
Conversations and Converse one with another, as once was to be found amongst
them. And many were withered in their affections. Ah, what a flame of love,
what a flame of joy, what a flame of desires, what a flame of delight, what a
flame of zeal as to the best things, was once to be found amongst the Citizens
of London! but how were those mighty flames of affection reduced to a few coals
and cinders? and therefore no wonder, if God sent a flaming fire in the midst
of them; and many were withered in their very Duties and Services, how slight,
how formal, how cold, how careless, how remiss, how neglective were many in
their Families, in their Closets, and in their Church-communions, who
heretofore were mighty in praying and wrestling with God, and mighty in
lamenting and mourning over sin, and mighty in their groanings and longings
after the Lord; and who of old would have taken the Kingdom of Heaven by
violence? Math. 11. 12.
There were many in that great City that had lost their spiritual taste, they
could not taste that sweetness in Promises, 2 Samuel 19. 35
in Ordinances, in Sabbaths, and in the Communion of Saints, that once they had
tasted and found. In spiritual things many Citizens could taste no more
sweetness then in the white of an Egg. Many in that great City had lost their
Job 6. 6.
spiritual appetite, they had lost their stomachs, they did not hunger and
thirst after God and Christ, and the Spirit and Grace, and the Light of Gods
Countenance, and pure Ordinances, and the Fellowship of the people of God, as
once they did. Now is there any thing more contrary to the Nature of God, the
Works of God, the Word of God, the Glory of God, then spiritual decays? Oh, the
prayers and the praises that God loses by decayed Christians! Ah, how do
decayed Christians grieve the strong, and stumble the weak, and strengthen the
hands of the wicked, and lay themselves open to divine displeasure! Many in
London did like Mandrobulus in Lucian, who offered to his God the first year
gold, the second year silver, and the third year nothing; and therefore no
wonder, if God sent a fire amongst them. But,

Fifthly, Their non-improvement of the mercies and privileges

Sixthly, Those unnatural heats, fiery contests, violent may well work them to
justify the Lord in his fiery Dispensations toward them: for a Wolf to worry
a Lamb, is usual; but for one Lamb to worry another, is unnatural: Cant. 2. 16.
for Christ's lillies to be among thorns, is common; but for these lillies to
become thorns, and to tear and rend, and fetch blood of one another, is
monstrous and strange. The Contest that was between the Birds, about the Rose
that was found in the way, was fatal to many of them, and issued in the loss of
the Rose at last.

Seventhly and lastly, There were many in London, who Joseph, 1, so kindly, 2.
so Amos 6. 6.
seriously, 3. so affectionately, 4. so readily, 5. so frequently, 6. so
lamentingly, and 7. so constantly to heart as they ought to have done. Upon all
these accounts, how well does it become the Citizens of London to cry out, the
Lord is righteous, the Lord is righteous in all his fiery Dispensations toward
us?

But to prevent mistakes, and that I may lay no heavier a load upon the people
of God, that truly feared him, and that had and have a saving interest in him,
then is meet; and that I may give no advantage to profane persons to father
the burning of the City of London wholly, mainly, or only upon the sins of the
people of God: give me leave therefore to propound these four Queries.

First, Whether all these seven sins last cited, or most of London, and whose
habitations are now burnt up?

Secondly, Whether those of the people of God, upon

Thirdly, Where and how it does appear by the blesed Scriptures, that ever God
sent so great a Judgment of Fire (as was poured out upon London) upon the
account of the ^ins of those that truly feared him; be it those seven that have
been already specified, or any others that can be now clea^ly and justly proved
against them?

Fourthly, Whether there are not some other men's sins,

Now in Answer to this last Query, give me leave to say:

First, That sin in the general brings the dreadful Judgment of Fire upon a
people; marks, personal afflictions, and Job, whose Job 1. John 9.
afflictions were for trial, and not for sin: the same may be said of the man
that was born blind. But general Judgments, such as this fiery Dispensation
was, never comes upon a people, but upon the account of sin. This is evident in
my Text, Isa. 42. 24, 25. God set Jacob and Israel on fire, and burnt them
round about, but 'twas because they would not walk in his ways, neither were
they obedient unto his Law. Jer. 4. 4. Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and
take away the foreskin of your heart, ye men of Judah, and inhabitants of
Jerusalem, lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn, that none can quench
it, because of the evil of your doings. So Psalm. 107. 33, 34. He turns rivers
into a wi^derness, and the water-springs into dry ground, a fruitful land into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. The very Country of
Jury, as Travelers report, which flowed once with milk and honey, is now for
fifteen miles about Jerusalem, like a Desert, without grass, tree, or shrub.
Ah, what ruins ^oth sin bring upon the most renowned Countries and Ci^ies that
have been in the world! such is the destructive nature of sin, that it will
first or last level the richest, the strongest, and the most glorious Cities in
the world. So the Prophet Amos tells us, that it is sin that brings Gods sorest
punishments upon his people, Amos 1. 3. For three transgressions of Damascus
(by which we are to understand the greatness of their iniquities) and for four
(by which we are to understand the multitude of their transgressions) I will
not turn away the punishment thereof: the same is said of Gaza, verse 6. and of
Tyrus, verse 9. and of Edom, verse 11. and of Ammon, verse 13. and of Moab,
Chap. 2. 1. and of Judah, verse 4. and of Israel, verse 6. Now it is very
observable of every one of these, that when God threatens to punish them for
the greatness of their iniquities, and for the multitude of their
transgressions, he does particularly threaten to send a fire among them, to
consume the houses and the Palaces of their Cities; so he does to Damascus,
Amos 1. 4. But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, which shall devour
the Palaces of Ben-hadad: So he does to Gaza, verse 7. But I will send a fire
on the Wall of Gaza, which shall devour the Palaces thereof: So he does to
Tyrus, verse 10. But I will send a fire on the Wall of Tyrus, which shall
devour the Palaces thereof: So he does to Edom, verse 12. But I will send a
fire upon Teman, which shall devour the Palaces of Bozrah: So he does to Ammon,
verse 14. But I will kindle a fire in the Wall of Rabbah, and it shall devour
the Palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of battle, with a tempest in the
day of the whirlwind: So he does to Moab, Chap. 2. verse. 2. But I will send a
fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the Palaces of Kirioth, and Moab shall dye
with tumult, with shouting, and with the sound of a trumpet: So he does to
Judah, verse. 5. But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the
Palaces of Jerusalem. By all these remarkable Instances it is evident, that God
by his fiery Dispensations tells all the world, that the sins of that people
are great and many, upon whom the dreadful Judgment of Fire is inflicted in its
fury, and therefore it is high folly and madness in many men that makes them
impute this heavy Judgment of Fire to any thing rather then to their sins. O
Sirs! it is sin that burns up our habitations, and that turns flames of love
into a consuming fire. And this the Parliament in their Act for the Rebuilding
of the City of London, well observes: the Clause of the Act is this: And that
the said Citizens, and their Successors for all the time to come, may retain
the Memorial of so sad a desolation, and reflect seriously upon their manifold
iniquities, which are the unhappy causes of such Judgments. Be it further
Enacted, That the Second of September (unless the same happen to be Sunday; and
if so, then the next day following) be yearly for ever hereafter observed as a
day of public Fasting and Humiliation within the said City and Liberties
thereof, to implore the mercies of Almighty God upon the said City, to make
devout Prayers and Supplications unto him, to divert the like Calamity for the
time to come. So Sir Edward Turnor Knight, in his Speech to the King upon the
Prorogation of the Parliament, We must (says he) for ever with humility
acknowledge the Justice of God in punishing this whole Nation by the late
dreadful Conflagration of London. We know they were not the greatest sinners on
whom the Tower of Siloam fell, Luke 13. 4.
and doubtless all our sins did contribute to the filling up that measure,
which being full, drew down the wrath of God upon that City. So much the King
in his Proclamation for a General Fast on the Tenth of October observes. The
Words of the Proclamation are these. His Majesty therefore of out a deep and
pious sense of what Himself and all His People now suffer, and with a Religious
care to prevent what may yet be feared, unless it shall please Almighty God to
turn away his anger from us, does hereby Publish and Declare His Royal Will and
Pleasure, That Wednesday being the Tenth of October next ensuing, shall be set
apart, and kept, and observed by all His Majesty's Subjects of England, and
Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, as a day of solemn Fasting and
Humiliation, to implore the mercies of God, that it would please him to pardon
the crying sins of this Nation, those especially which have drawn down this
last and heavy Judgment upon us, and to remove from us all other his Judgments
which our sins have deserved, and which we now either feel or fear. Thus you
see that not only the blessed Scriptures, but also King and Parliament do
roundly conclude, that 'twas for our sins, our manifold iniquities, our crying
sins, that God has sent this heavy Judgment upon us. His Majesty also well
observes, that there are some special crying sins that bring down the fiery
Judgment upon us. Now this Royal Hint leads me by the hand to say:

Secondly, That though sin in the general, lays people under

First, Gross Atheism, practical Atheism, is a sin that Zeph. 1. 12. And it
shall come to pass, at that time that I will Atheism denies God in either, 1.
in opinion, saying, there is no God; or, 2. in affection, wishing there were no
God; or, 3. in conversation, living as if there were no God. Rev. 22. 12.
search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are settled upon their
lees, that say in their heart, the Lord will not do good, neither will he do
evil. What horrid Blasphemy, what gross Atheism is here? How do these Atheists
ungod the great God? How do they deny his Omnipotency and Omnisciency? What a
God of Clouts, what an Idol-god do they make the great God to be, when they
make him to be such a God as will neither do good nor hurt? Epicurius denied
not Gods Essence, but only his Providence; for he granted that there was a God,
though he thought him to be such an one as did neither good nor evil; but
certainly God sits not idle in Heaven, but has a sharp and serious Eye upon all
that is done on the Earth: and this both Saints and sinners shall find by
experience, when in the great day he shall distribute both his rewards and
punishments according to what they have done in the flesh. Atheism is the main
disease of the Soul, not only pestilent to the person in whom it is harbored,
but also to the whole Land where it is practiced and permi^ted. Atheism is worse
then Idolatry; for Idolatry only robs God of his Worship, but Atheism robs God
both of his Attributes and Being, and therefore mark what follows, verse 13.
Therefore their God shall become a booty, and their houses a d^solation, they
shall also build houses, but not inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyard,
but not drink the wine thereof. So Ezekiel. 20. 47, 48, 49. And say to the forest
of the South, Hear the Word of the Lord, thus says the Lord God, Behold, I
will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and
every dry tree, the fl^ming fl^me shall not be quenched, and all faces from the
South to the North shall be burnt therein. And all flesh shall see that I the
Lord have kindled it, it shall not be quenched Then said ^, Ah, Lord God, they
say of me, does he not speak parables. Here was a pack of Atheists that did
mock and scoff at the Prophet and his Parables; they told him, that he ta^kt
like a mad man, and that he spoke of such things that neither himself nor
others understood; for he talked of the South, and of the forest of the South,
and of fire, and of flaming fire, and of green and dry trees, and that all
these things were dark and of obscure to them: they put off all the Prophet
spoke as Allegorical, as Mystical, and as Aenigmatical, and as dark visions,
and as dreams, and imaginations, and divinations of his own brain, and
therefore they needed not much mind what he said. Now mark these Ath^ists, what
do they do? they provoke the Lord to kindle a fire, a universal fire, an
unquenchable fire, an inextinguishable fire in the midst of Jerusalem, which is
here termed a Forest, by reason of its barrenness and unfruitfulness, and the
multitudes that were in it; and because it was fit for nothing but the Ax and
the fire. Athei^m is a sin that has brought the greatest woes, miseries,
destructions, and desolations imaginable upon the most flourishing Kingdoms,
and most glorious Cities in the World. Holy Mr. Greenham was wont to say, that
he feared rather Atheism then Popery would be Englands ruin. O Sirs! were
there none within the Walls of London that said in their hearts with D^vids
Atheistical Psalm. 14. 1.
fool, There is no God? Caligula the Emperor was such a one: and Claudius
thought himself a God, till the loud Thunder affrighted him, and then he hid
himself, and cried, Claudius n^n est D^us, Claudius is not a ^od. Leo the X.
Hilderbrand the Magician, and Alexander the vI. and Ju^w the II. were all most
wretched Atheists, and thought t^a^ whatever was said of Christ, of Heaven, of
Hell, of the day of Judgment, and of the ^mmortality of the Soul, were but
dreams, impostures, toys, and old wives fables. Pope Paul the III. at the time
of his death, said, he should now be resolved of three Q^estions that he had
doubted of all his life.

1. Whether the Soul was immortal or no? 2. Whether there were a Hell or no? 3.
Whether there were a God or no? And another grand Atheist said, I know what I
have here, but I know not what I shall have hereafter. Now were there no such
Atheists within the Walls of London before it was turned in ashes. The Atheist
in Psalm. 10. 11. say, He will never see: and in Psalm. 94. 7. they rise higher,
they say, The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it.
They labor to lay a Law of restraint upon God, and to cast a mist before the
Eye of his Providence: And in Isa. 29. 15. they say, Who sees us? who knows
us? And in Ezekiel. 9. 9. they say, the Lord has forsaken the earth, and the Lord
sees not. These Atheists shut up God in Heaven as a blind and ignorant God,
not knowing, or not regarding what i^ done on the Earth; they imagine him to be
a forgetful God, or a God that sees not. Psalm. 73. 11. they say, How does God
know? and is there knowledge in the most High? Thus they deny Gods Omnisciency,
and Gods Omnipresency, which to do, is to ungod the great God as much as in
them lies.

Now were there no such Atheists within the Walls of London before it was
destroyed by fire? O how did practica^ Atheism abound in London! How many
within thy Walls, O London! did profess they knew God, but in their works did
deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto Titus 1. 16.
every good work reprobate? O Sirs! some there are that live loosely under the
Gospel, that run into all exc^ss of riot, and that in the face of all promises
and threatenings, mercies and Judgments, yea, in the very face of life and
death, of Heaven and Hell: and others there are that sin freely in secret, that
can be drunk and filthy in the dark, when the eye of man is not upon them.
Certainly those men's hearts are very Atheistical, that dare do that in the
sight of God, which they tremble to do before the eyes of men. How many are
there that put the evil day far from them, that flatter themselves in their
sins, that with Agage conclude, surely the bitterness of death is past, and
that Hell and wrath is past, and that they are in a fair way for Heaven, when
every step they take, is toward the bottomless pit? And divine vengeance hangs
over their heads, ready every moment to fall upon them. Are there not many that
seldom pray, and when they do, how cold, how careless, how dull, how dead, how
heartless, how irreverent are they in all their addresses to the great God? Are
there not many such Atheists, that use no prayer, nor Bible, but make Lucian
their Old Testament, and Machiavel their New? Are there not many that grant
there is a God, but then it is such a God as is made up all of mercy, and
thereupon they think, and speak, and do as wickedly as they please? And are
there not some that look upon God as a sin-revenging God, and thereupon wish
that there were no God, or else that they were above him, as Spira did? And are
there not others that have very odd and foolish conceptions of God, as if he
were an old man, sitting in Heaven with royal Robes upon his back, a glorious
Crown upon his head, and a Kingly Scepter in his hand, and as if he had all the
parts and proportion of a man, as the Papists are pleased to picture him? Some
there are that are so drowned in sensual pleasures, that they scarce remember
that they have a God to honor, a Hell to escape, a Heaven to secure, Souls to
save, and an Account to give up. And others there are, who when they find
conscience begin to accuse and terrify them, then with Cain, they Genesis 4. 1 Samuel 18. 6. 10. Job 31. 24. Phil. 3. 19.
go to their building^, or with Saul to their music, or with the Drunkards to
their cups, or with the Gamesters to their sports. Some there are that make
their gold their God, as the Covetous; others make their bellies their God, as
the Drunkard and the Glutton. Some make Honors their Amos 6. Math. 23.
God, as the Ambitious; and others make pleasures their God, as the Voluptuous.
Some make religious Duties their God, as the carnal Gospellers; and others make
their moral virtues their God, as the civil honest man. Now what abundance of
such Atheists were there within and without the Walls of London before the
fiery Judgment past upon it. The Scripture attributes the ruin of the old
world to Genesis 6.
Atheism and Profaneness; and why may not I attribute the ruin and desolation
of London to the same. Practical Atheists are enough to overthrow the most
flourishing Nations, and the most flourishing Cities that are in all the World.

But to prevent all mistakes in a business of so great a concernment, give me
leave to say, That if we speak of Atheists in a strict and proper sense, as
meaning such as have simply and constantly denied all Deity, then I must say,
that there was never any such creature in the world as simply and constantly to
deny that there is a God. It is an inviolable principle, and indelebly stamped
upon man's nature, that there is a God. They that shall deny that there is a
God, must extinguish the very Light of Nature, by which the very Heathen in all
the Ages of the World, have acknowledged a supreme divine Being. Bion of
Boristenesa was a very great Laert.
Atheist all his life time, he denied the Gods, despised their Temples, and
derided their Worship; yet when death The stoutest Atheists that ever lived,
cannot resolutely and constantly believe there is no God; hence Heathens have
condemned some to death that denied there was a God.
came, he would rather have endured the greatest torment, then to have dyed,
and that not so much for fear of a natural death, but for fear of what followed
after, lest God whom he had denied, should give him up into the hand of the
Devil whom he had served; and therefore at the time of his death he put forth
his hand, crying, Salve, Pluto, salve, Welcome, Devil, welcome, foolishly
thinking to pacific the Devil by this flattering salutation. And Tully observes
of Epicurius, that though no man seemed more to contemn both God and death; yet
no man feared more both the one and the other. The Philosophers did with one
consent affirm, That there is a God, and they called him, Nomine Deum, natura
Spiritum, ordine Motorem primum, but knew him not. He that shall deny there is
a God, sins with a very high hand against the light of Nature; for every
Creature, yea, the least Gnat and Fly, and the meanest worm that crawls upon
the ground, will confute and confound that man that disputes whether there be a
God or no. The Name of God is written in such full, fair, and shining
Characters upon the whole Creation, that all men may run and read, that there
is a God. The Notion of a Deity is so strongly and deeply improst upon the
tables of all men's hearts, that to deny a God, is to quench the very Principles
of common Nature; yea, it is formally Deicidium, a killing of God as much as in
the Creature lies. There are none of these Atheists in Hell; for the Devils
believe and tremble. The Greek word (...), James 2. 19.
that is here used, signifies properly the roaring of the Sea, it implies such
an extreme fear, as causes not only trembling, but also a roaring and
screcking out, Mark 6. 49. Acts 16. 29. The Devils believe and acknowledge four
Articles of our Faith, Mat. 8. 29. First, they acknowledge God. 2. Christ. 3.
The day of Judgment. 4. That they shall be tormented then: So that he that does
not believe that there is a God, is more vile then a Devil; to deny there is a
God, is a sort of Atheism that is not to be found in Hell.

On Earth are Atheists many,
In Hell there is not any.
Augustine speaking of Atheists, says, That albeit there be some who think, or
would persuade themselves that there is no God; yet the most vile and desperate
Wretch that ever lived would not say, there was no God. Seneca has a
remarkable speech, Mentiuntur qui dicunt se non sentire Deum ^sse: nam etsi
tibi affirmant interdiu, noctu tamen dubitant: They lie, says he, who say they
perceive not there is a God; for although they affirm it to thee in the
daytime, yet by night they doubt of it. Further (says the same Author) I have
heard of some that have denied that there was a God; yet never knew the man,
but when he was sick he would seek unto God for help: therefore they do but lie
that say, there is no God; they sin against the light of their own consciences,
they who most studiously go about to deny God, yet cannot do it, but some check
of conscience will fly in their faces. Tully would say, That there was never
any Nation under Heaven so barbarous as to deny that there was a God. I have
seen a City without Walls, but never any City but acknowledged a God, Quicquid
vides, and quicquid non vides, Deus est: Whatsoever thou see, and whatsoever
thou see not, is God; that is, all things visible and invisible do express
unto thee a Deity, and lead thee as by the hand to contemplate heavenly,
spiritual, and eternal things. God is known by his effects, though not by his
Essence. The Creation of the World is a glass wherein (says Paul) we may Romans
1.
behold his eternal Power and Godhead, which that divine Poet has well
observed. Du Bart.


The World's a School, where in a general story
God always reads dumb Lectures of his glory.
Austin having gone round all the Creatures, and seeing in Soliloquiis.
them the Characters of the Godhead imprinted, and seriously inquiring of them
for God, not one or two, but all made him this Answer with an audible voice,
Non sum ego, sed per ipsum sum ego quem quaeris in me; I am not he, but by him
I am whom thou seek in me. I have heard (says my Author) Mr. Francis Tailor
on Pro. 6. 7.
of some learned Atheists, met together to discourse of the power of Nature, to
prove there was no God; a poor shepherd present, asked how the rain came then?
they bid him look upon a sti^l, and he might know, that vapors were drawn up
by the Sun, and let fall again, as moisture in a still: he replied, I never yet
could see a still work, unless some man put fire to it. This so wrought on one
in the company, that he gave glory to God, and forsook his Companions. I think
Zeno hit the mark, when he said, to hear and see an Atheist dye, will more
demonstrate that there is a God, then all the Learned can do by all their
Arguments. That Epitaph which was written upon Sennacheribs Tomb, may well
Herodot.
be written upon every Atheist; He that looks upon us, let him believe there is
a God, and learn to fear him. In all the Ages of the World God has given a most
severe testimony against Atheists. That Assyrian that bragged at a Feast, that
he did never offer Sacrifice to a God, was eaten up of Lice. And Lucian a great
Atheist, going to Supper abroad, left his Hounds fast when he went, and as he
returned home, having railed against God and his Word, his dogs fell mad, met
him, and tore him in pieces. I have read of some Heathens, who being at Sea in
a very dangerous storm, where they were like to be cast away, they began every
one apart to examine themselves, what should be the reason of so dreadful a
storm; and after that they had all cast up their acco^nts by querying with
themselves, What have I done, said one, and, What have I done, said another,
that has occasioned this storm? At last it issued thus; they remembered that
they had Diagoras the Atheist on Board, and rather then they would all perish
for that Atheists sake, they took him by the heels, and hurled him overboard,
and then the storm ceased, and the Sea was quie^. It will be hard to name an
Atheist, either in the holy Scripture, or in Ecclesiastical Histories, or in
Heathen Writings, which came not to some fearful end; and therefore no wonder,
if Austin would not be an Atheist for half an hour for the gain of a million of
worlds, because he knew not but God might in that time make an end of him. I
have been the longer upon this Head, because Atheist and Atheism did never so
abound in this Land as it has done these last years. And that you may the
clearer see who they are that have brought that sad Judgment of Fire upon that
once glorious City of London; Ah London, London! 'twas the gross Atheism and
the practical Atheist that was within and without thy Walls, that has turned
thee into a ruinous heap.

Mark, I readily grant, that there is the seeds, relics, stirring, and moving
of Atheism in the best and holiest of the Sons of men: but then, 1. They
disallow of it, and discountenance it. 2. It Is lamented and bewailed by them.
3. They oppose it, and conflict with it. 4. They use all holy and conscientious
means and endeavors to be rid of it. 5. By degrees they get ground against it,
and therefore God never did, nor never will turn Cities or Kingdom^ into
flames, for those seeds and remains of Atheism that are to be found in the best
of Saints: it is that Atheism that is rampant, that raigns in the hearts and
lives of sinners, as a Prince raigns upon his Throne, that brings desolating
and destroying Judgments upon the most flourishing Kingdoms and the most
glorious Cities that are in the World. But,

Secondly, Luxury and Intemperance bring desolating and Joel 1. 5. Awake, ye
drunkards, and weep and howl all ye drinkers of In Ecclesiastical History you
may read of one Drunkard, who being touched with his sin, wept himself blind;
but the Drunkards of our days are more apt to drink themselves blind, then to
weep themselves blind.
wine, because of the new wine; for it is cut off from your mouth. Verse 19. O
Lord, to thee will I cry, for the fire has devoured the pastures of the
wilderness, and the flames have burnt all the trees of the field. Verse 20. The
beasts of the field cry unto thee; for the rivers of the water are dried up,
and the fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness. Luxury is a sin that
brings both famine and fire upon a people; it brought the Chaldeans upon the
Jews, who by fire and sword laid all waste. The Horses of the Caldees destroyed
their Pastures, Vines, Fig Trees, Pomegranates, etc. which grew in many places
of the Land, and their Soldiers set their houses on fire, and so brought all
to ruin. Amos 6. 1. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion. Verse 3. That put far
away the evil day. Verse 4. That lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves
upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of
the midst of the stall. Verse 5. That chant to the sound of the viol, and
invent to themselves instruments of music like David. Verse 6. That drink wine
in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, but they are not
grieved for the affliction of Jos^ph. Verse 7. Therefore now shall they go
captive with the first that go captive, and the banquet of them that stretched
themselves, shall be removed. Verse 8. The Lord God has sworn by himself,
says the Lord God of Hosts, I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his
palaces; therefore will I deliver up the city with all that is therein. Verse
11. For, behold, the Lord commands, and he will smite the great house with
breaches, and the little house with clefts. Luxury is a sin that forfeits all a
man's enjoyments, that turns him out of house and home. Samaria was a very
glorious City, and a very strong City, and a very rich City, and a very
populous City, and a very ancient City, etc. and yet Luxury and Intemperance
turned it into ashes, it brought desolating and destroying Judgments upon it.
The rich Citizens of Samaria were given up to mirth and music, to Luxuries and
excesses, to riotousness and drunkenness, to feasting and carousing, and by
these vanities and debaucheries, they provoked the Lord to command the
Chaldeans to fall on, and to spoil them of their riches, and to lay their
glorious City in ashes: So 'twas Luxury and Intemperance that provoked the Lord
to rain Hell out of Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah; Luxury turned those rich
and populous Genesis 18.
Cities into ruinous heaps. Ah, London! London! the Luxuries and excesses, the
riotousness and drunkenness, the mad feasting and carousing that have been
within and without thy Walls, that have been within thy great Halls, Taverns,
and other great Houses, has turned thee into ashes, and laid thy glory in the
dust. O you burnt Citizens of London! what shameful spewing has been in some
of your Feasts, as if Sardanapolus, Apicius, and Heliogabalus were still alive!
How often have many of you poured into your bodies such intoxicating drinks, as
has many times laid you asleep, stripped you of your reason, took away your
hearts, robbed you of your selves, and laid a beast in your room? Drunkenness
is so base, so vile a sin, that it transforms the Soul, deforms the body,
bereaves the brain, betrays the strength, defiles the affections, and
metamorphoseth the whole man; yea, it unmans the man Cyrus the Persian Xenophon.
Monarch, being demanded of his Grandfather Astyages, why he would drink no
wine, answered, For fear lest they give me poison; for (says he) yesterday
when you celebrated your Nativity, I judged that some body had poisoned all the
wine they drunk, because at the taking away of the Cloth, not one of all those
that were present at the Feast, arose in his right mind. Has it not been thus
with many of you? if it has, lay your hands upon your mouths, and say, the
Lord is righteous, though he has laid your houses in ashes. Anacharses used to
say, that the first cup of wine was for thirst, the second for nourishment, the
third for mirth, and the fourth for madness; but what would he have said, had
he lived within or without the Walls of London these last six years? Ah,
London! London! were there none Isa. 5. 22. Hab. 2. 17.
within nor without thy Walls, that were strong to drink, and that gave their
neighbor drink, and that put the bottle to them to make them drunk, that they
might look on their nakedness? Were there none within nor without thy Walls
that with Marcus Antonius, Darius, Alexander the Great, etc. did boast, and
glory, and pride themselves in their great abilities, to drink down any that
should come into their Company? Were there none within nor without thy Walls, O
London! that cried out, if you take away our liquor, you take away our lives?
Austin brings in the Drunkard, saying, Malle se vitam quam vinum eripi; He had
rather lose his life then his wine. And Ambrose speaks of one Theotimus, who
being told by his Physicians, that much quaffing would make him blind, answered
then, Vale lumen amicum, farewell sweet light, farewell sweet eyes; if ye will
not bear wine, ye are no eyes for me. Were there none within nor without thy
Walls, O London! that did abuse the good Creatures of God so profusely, so
prodiga^ly, so prodigiously, as if they had been sent into the world for no
other end, but thus to abuse themselves, reproach their Maker, and destroy
those choice blessings which God had given for more noble ends, then to be
spewed against the walls for these last six years: a drunken health (like the
conclusion in a Syllogism) must not upon any terms be denied, especially in the
company of such Grandees, whose age, whose place, whose office should have
taught them better things; yea, the custom of high drinking has been these
last six years so great within and without thy Walls, O London! that it is no
wonder, if the Lord for that alone has laid thy glory in the dust; yea, and
that shameful Hab. 2. 16.
spewing is upon all thy glory, considering what shameful spewing have been in
thy Streets, Taverns, Ha^ls, Alehouses, and other great Men's houses, where
Temperance, Righteousness, Justice, and Holiness should have dwelt in glory*
and triumph. Ah, London! how many within and without thy Walls have been
drinking wine in bowls, when they should have been mourning over their sins,
and grieving for the afflictions of Joseph, and sighing over those distressed
Christians, whose drink was nothing but sorrow, and blood, and tears? These are
the men that have kindled a burning upon all thy glory.

O Sirs! that you would for ever remember, that Intemperance, Luxury is a sin,
an enemy that

First, Robs God of his glory, it denies him all service and 1 Cor. 6. 19.


Secondly, It robs both God and man of much precious When Ignatius heard a
clock strike, he would say, I have one hour more to answer for: so precious a
Jewel was time in his eye.
time from him: and certainly there are no worse thieves then Intemperance; for
that robs men of their hearing-times, and their praying-times, and their
reading-times. There is so much precious time spent in the Tavern and in the
Tipling-house, that the intemperate person cannot be at leisure to spend any
time in his Family or in his Closet, etc to save his own or others Souls: but
there will come a time, either in this or the other world, wherein all
intemperate persons will wish that they had spent that precious time in serving
of God, and in saving their own and others Souls, which they have spent in
Luxury and excess, carousing and drinking; but all too late, all too late. Time
is not only the fruit of Gods indulgence, but also the fruit of Christ's
purchase. That Doom passed upon Adam, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou
shall dye the death (or dying, thou shall dye) had been put in execution
immediately, had not Christ interposed immediately between man's sin and Gods
wrath. What can there be of more weight and moment then Eternity? It is the
Heaven of Heaven, and the very Hell of Hell, without which neither would Heaven
be so desirable, nor Hell so formidable. Now this depends upon time. Time is
the Prologue to Eternity; the great weight of Eternity 2 Cor. 6. 2. Isa. 49. 8.
hangs upon the small wire of time: our time, whether it be longer or shorter,
is given us by God to provide for our everlasting condition: we have Souls to
save, a Hell to escape, a Heaven to make sure, our pardon to sue out, our
interest in Christ to make good; and all this must be quickly done, or we
undone, and that for ever. Man's eternal weal or woe depends upon his well or ill
improvement of that inch of time that is allotted to him. Now what a dreadful
account will such give up at last, who have wasted away their precious time in
Luxury and Excess. But,

Thirdly, Luxury, Intemperance, it robs men of their Bonosus, a beastly drunken
Emperor, was called a Tankard, and Tiberius was surnamed Biberius for his
tippling, and Erasmus called Eccius Jeccius for the same cause, and Diotimus of
Athens was called a Tun-dish, and young Cicero a Hogs-head. But,

Fourthly, Luxury, Intemperance, it robs men of their Radulph. Fornerius,
select. lib. 3.
of a Monk at Prague, who having heard at shrift the Confessions of many
Drunkards, wondered at it, and for an experiment he would needs try his brain
with this sin, so accordingly he stole himself drunk. Now after the vexation of
three days sickness, to all that confessed that sin, he enjoined no other
penance but this, Go and be drunk again; intimating thereby, that there was no
punishment, no torment that could be inflicted upon a Drunkard, so great as
that, Go and be drunk again. Besides all other plagues that attend this sin,
drunkenness is a woe to it self. Temperance is the best and noblest Physic, and
they that use it, commonly are most long-lived. But,

Fifthly, Intemperance robs men of their Estates, it robs the Wife many times
of her Dowry, and the Children of the not preventing or keeping of the good
which at the present we enjoy. Solomon hit the mark, when he said, The Prove.
23. 21.
drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty. The full cup makes an empty
purse, and a fat dish makes a lean bag; he that draws thee wine out of the
Pipe, puts thy money into his own pocket; and this Diogenes the Philosopher
well understood, when he asked of the frugal Citizen but a penny, but begged of
the Prodigal a Talent; and being asked the reason of his practice, he answered,
Because of the one he thought he might beg often, but of the other who spent so
fast, he was like to receive but once. Mr. Livins, when he had spent a great
Estate in luxurious living, jesting at his own folly, he said, that he had left
nothing for his Heir more then air and mire* Philip King of Macedon making War
upon the Persians, understood that they were a luxurious people, he presently
withdrew his Army, saying, it was needless to make War upon them, who by their
Luxury would shortly overthrow themselves. But,

Sixthly, Intemperance robs men of everlasting happiness Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.
Luke 16. 19. 'to the 26.
you may see in that great instance of luxurious Dives. The intemperate man's
table proves a snare to his Soul; fullness breeds forgetfulness, wantonness
blockishness and stupidity; and therefore no wonder, if God shuts the gates of
glory against intemperate persons. Look as no Leper might be in Numb. 5. Judge.
12. Chap 7. Deuteronomy. 23.
the Camp of Israel, and as no Gileadite might pass over Jordan, and as no
fearful man might enter into the wars of Midian, and as no bastard might enter
into the Sanctuary: So no luxurious person shall enter into Heaven. Of all
sorts of sinners, the luxurious sinner is most rarely reformed; the Adulterer
may become chaste, the Thief may become an honest man, the Swearer may obtain a
sanctified tongue: But how rare is it to see a luxurious person repent, break
off his sins, close with Christ, and walk to Heaven? Luxurious persons Math.
21. 31, 32. Luke 23. 43.
eat and drink away their Christ; yea, they eat and drink away their Souls,
nay, they eat and drink away their own Salvation. They that serve their own
bellies, serve not the Romans 16. 10.
Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore they shall never reign with him in the other
world. Certainly that man that makes Phil. 3. 19.
his belly his God, shall be for ever separated from God. All Belly-gods shall
at last be found in the belly of Hell: the intemperate person has his Heaven
here, his Hell is to come. Now he has his sweet cups, his merry cups, his
pleasant cups: O, but there is a cup of shame and sorrow, and this shall be
their portion for ever and ever! The intemperate person Psalm. 11. 6.
has been a gulf to devour many mercies, and therefore he shall at last be
cast into a gulf of endless miseries. In a word, Intemperance is another sin, a
breeding sin, it is a sin that is an inlet to all other sins; we may well call
it Gad, for behold, Deuteronomy. 32. 17. 24. Jer. 5. 7, 8, 9.
a Troop comes. O the pride, the oppression, the cruelty, the security, the
uncleanness, the filthiness, the profaneness that comes trooping after
Intemperance! And therefore Aristotle concludes, that double punishments are
due to Drunkards; first for their drunkenness, and then for other sins
committed in and by their drunkenness. Now seeing that Intemperance and Luxury
is so great* a sin, is it any wonder to see divine Justice turn the most
glorious Cities in the world into a ruinous heap, when this sin of Intemperance
is rampant in the midst of them? Ah, London! London! the Intemperance and
Luxury that has been within and without thy Walls, has brought the desolating
Judgment of Fire upon thee, that has laid all thy glory in ashes and Rubbish.
How many great houses where there once within and without thy Walls, that
should have been public Schools of Piety and Virtue, but were turned into mere
Nurseries of Est. 1. 6, 7.
Luxury and Debauchery? How have the ^ules of the Persian Civility been
forgotten in the midst of thee? How many within and without thy Walls did make
their belly their God, their Kitchen their Religion, their Dresser their Altar,
and their Cook their Minister, whose whole felicity did lie in eating and
drinking, whose bodies were as sponges, and whose throats were as open
sepulchers to take in all precious Liquors, and whose bellies were as graves to
bury all Gods Creatures in? And how have many men been forced to unman
themselves, either to please some, or to avoid the anger or wrath of others, or
else to gain the honorable Character of being a high Boy, or of one that was
strong to drink among o^her^, or to drink down others? O the drunken Matches
that have been within and without thy Walls, O London! the Lord has seen them,
and been provoked by them to kindle a fire in the midst of thee. Luxury is a
sin that never goes alone, it has many other great sins a^t^nding and waiting
on it; it is as the Nave in the wheel, which turning about, all the Spokes turn
with it. Idleness, fighting, quarrelling, jewling, whoring, cheating, stealing,
robbing, Prove. 23. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
are the handmaids that wait on Lu^ury; and therefore no wonder, if God has
appeared in flames of fi^e against it. I have been the longer upon this Head,
because Luxury, Intemperance is one of the great Darling-sins of our Age and
day, it is grown to Epidemical, not only in the City, but in the Countries also,
and it is a very God-dishonouring, and a God-provoking, and a Soul-damning, and
a Land-destroying sin: and, O that what I have writ, might be so blessed, as to
put some effectual stop to those notorious public Excesses and Luxuries that
have been, and still are rampant in most Parts of the Land.

But now, Beloved, this sin of Luxury and Intemperance I cannot charge with
clear and full evidence upon the people of the Lord, that did truly fear him,
and sincerely serve him, whose habitations were once within or without the
Walls of London; nay, this I know, that for this very sin among others, their
Souls did often mourn before the Lord in secret. And truly of such Christians
that live and wallow in Luxury and Intemperance, if we compare their lives and
Christ's Laws together, I think we may confidently conclude, Aut haec non est
Lex Christi, aut nos non sumus Christiani, Either this is not Christianity, or
we are not Christians. And thus T^rtullian, Cyprian, Justin Martyr, and others
concluded against the luxurious and intemperate Christians of their times.
Salvian relates Salvianus de Gratia Dei, lib. 4.
how the Heathen did reproach such luxurious Christians, who by their lewd
lives made the Gospel of Christ to be a reproach: Where (said the Heathen) is
that good Law which they do believe? where are those Rules of Godlines^ which
they do learn? They read the holy Gospel, and yet are unclean: they hear the
Apostles Writings, and yet are drunk: they follow Christ, and yet disobey
Christ: they profess a holy Law, and yet do lead impure lives. And Ponormitan
having read the 5, 6, and 7 Chapters of Matthew, and comparing the loose and
luxurious lives of Christians with those Rules of Christ, concluded, that
either that was no Gospel, or the people no Christians. The loose and luxurious
lives of many Christians, was (as Lactantius declares) made by the Heathen, the
reproach of Christ himself (Quomodo bonus magister cujus tam pravos videmus
discipulos?) How can we think the Master to be good, whose Disci^les we see to
be so bad? Epiphanius says, that in his days many shu^'d the society of the
Christians, because of the looseness and luxuriousness of their lives. And
Augustine confesses, that August. de moribus Ecclesiae, cap. 34.
in his time the loose and luxurious lives of many who professed the Christian
Religion, gave a great advantage to the Manichees to reproach the whole Church
of God, and the ways of God. The Manichees were a sort of people who affirmed,
that there were two principles or beginnings of things, viz. a summum bonum,
and a summum malum. A summum bonum, from whence sprang all good; and a summum
malum, from whence issued forth all evil. Now the loose and luxurious lives of
such as had a profession upon them, hardened these in their errors, and caused
them with open mouth greatly to reproach and deeply to censure the sincerest
Saints. And Chrysostom preferred brute beasts before luxurious persons; for
they go from belly to labor, when the luxurious person goes from belly to bed,
or from belly to Cards or Dice; if not, to something that is worse. And
Augustine well observes, that God has not given to man talons and claws to
rent and tear in pieces, as to Bears and Leopards; nor horns to push, as to
Bulls and Unicorns; nor a sting to prick, as to Wasps, and Bees, and Serpents;
nor a bill to strike, as to Eagles and Ostriches; nor a wide mouth to devour,
as to Dogs and Lions, but a little mouth, to show that man should be very
temperate, both in his eating and drinking. How applicable these things are to
the luxurious persons that lived within and without the Walls of London before
it was turned into ashes, I shall leave the wise in heart to judge. But,

Thirdly, Those great and horrid sins that were to be viz. excessive
worldliness, Prove. 28. 20. 22. See Josh. 7. 15. 21. 24. 25.
extortion, deceit, bribery, etc. these brought the sore Judgment of Fire upon
us. When men are so greedy and mad upon the world, that they make haste to be
rich by all sinful devices and cursed practices, no wonder if God burns up
their substance, and turns their persons out of house and home. The coal the
Eagle got from the Altar, the Sacrifice, and carried it to her nest, set all on
fire: So that Estate that men get by sinful ways and unwarrantable courses,
first or last will set all they have on fire. He that resolves to be evil, may
soon be rich, when the spring of conscience is screwed up to the highest pin,
that it is ready to crack, when Religion is locked up in an out-room, and
forbidden upon pain of death to look into the Shop or Warehouse; no wonder
such men thrive and grow great in the world; but all the riches such men store
up, is but fuel for the fire. Hab. 2 9. Woe to him that coveteth an evil
covetousn^ss to his house, that he He (says Chrysostom) that locks up
illgotten riches in his counting house, locks up a Thief in his countenance,
which will carry all away, and if he look not the bette^ to it, his precious
Soul also.
may set his nest on high, that h^ may be delivered from the power of evil.
Verse 11. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, the beam out of the timber
shall answer it. Verse 13. Behold, is it not of the Lord of H^sts that the
people shall labor in the very fire, and the people shall weary themselves for
very vanity. They had got great Estates by an evil covetousness, and God was
resolved that he would make a bon-fire of all their ill gotten goods; and
though they should venture their lives to save their goods, and quench the
flames; yet all should be but labor in vain, according to that word, Jer. 51.
58. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly
broken, and her high gates shall be burnt with fire, and the people shall
labor in vain, and the folk in the fire, and they shall be weary. Though
Babylon was a City of great same, and state, and riches, and deservedly
accounted one of the worlds nine wonders; though the compass of the Walls was
365 furlongs (or 46 miles) according to the number of the days in the year, and
the height 50 cubits, and of so great a breadth, that Carts and Carriages might
meet on the top of them; yea, though it was so great and vast a City, that
Aristotle says, that it ought rather to be called a Country then a City,
adding withal, that when the City was taken, it was three days before the
furthest part of the City could take notice of it. Yet at last (according to
the Word of the Lord) it was set on fire: and though the Inhabitants did weary
and tire out themselves to quench the flames, and to save their stately houses
and ill-gotten riches; yet all was labor in vain, and to no purpose. In the
days of Pliny it was an utter desolation, and in the time of Hierom it was
turned into a Park, in which the King of Persia did use to hunt. So Ezekiel. 28.
18. Thou have defiled thy Sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniquities, by
the iniquity of thy traffic: therefore will I bring forth a fire from the
midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will bring thee to ashes upon the
earth in the sight of all them that behold thee. Verse 19. All they that know
thee among the people shall be astonished at thee, thou shall be a terror, and
never shall thou be any more. Tyru^ among the Sea-bordering Cities, was most
famous and renowned for Merchandise and Trade; for thither resorted the
Merchants of all Countries for Traffic of Palestina, Syria, Egypt, Persia, and
Assyria. They of Tarshis brought thither Iron, Lead, Brass, and Silver. The
Syrians brought thither Carbuncles, Purple, broidered Work, fine Linen, Coral,
and Pearl. The Jews brought thither their Honey, Oil, Treacle, Cassia, and
Calamu^. The Arabians brought thither Lambs, Muttons, and Goats. The Sabeans
brought thither their exquisite Spices and Apothecary-stuff, with Gold and
precious Stones. Now by fraud and deceit they grew exceeding rich and wealthy,
which in the close issued in their total ruin, according to that of the
Prophet, Zacha. 9. 3, 4. And Tyrus did build her self a strong hold, and heaped
up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets. Behold, the
Lord will cast her out, and he will smite her power in the sea, and she shall
be devoured with fire. The Tyri^ns did hold themselves invincible, because of
their si^uation, being round about environed by the Sea; but yet the Prophet
tells them, that though they were compassed about with deep waters, yet they
should be destroyed by fire, which was executed by Alexander the Great, as
Historians testify. It Is not the Curtius, lib. 4. and Diod. Siculus, lib. 17.
strength, nor riches, nor situation, nor trade, nor honor, nor fame, nor
antiquity of a City that can preserve it, when God beforehand has by fire
determined the destruction of it. Tyrus was a City of the greatest
Merchandising, 'twas a Ezekiel. 27. Isa. 23. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
City of mighty Trade, they were set upon heaping up of riches by hook or by
crook: So riches came in, though it ^ere at the door of oppression, violence,
or injustice, all was well. The Traffic of Tyrus was great, and the sins that
attended that Traffic were very great, and for these God sent a devouring fire
amongst them, which destroyed their Palaces and Treasuries, and reduced their
glorious City to ashes. By the iniquity of their Traffic they had built
Palaces and stately Houses, and filled their Shops, and Warehouses, and
Cellars with rich and choice Commodities; but when God brought Nebuchadnezzar
upon them, what the Chaldeans could not destroy by the Sword, they consumed by
fire, turning all their glorious Palaces, and stately Buildings, and costly
Shops and Warehouses into ashes, as Historians testify: So Ninive for
greatness, riches, and antiquity, was one of the noblest Cities in the world,
'twas the Capital and chief City of the Assyrian Empire: and though God upon
their repentance Jonah 3.
and humiliation did spare them for a time; yet afterward she returning to her
old trade of robberies, covetousness, extortions, fraud, deceitful dealings,
etc. God delivered her up as a prey into the hands of many of her enemies, who
wonderfully spoiled and pillaged her; and at last God gave her into the hands
of the Medes, who brought her to a final and irrecoverable desolation,
according to the Prophecy of the Prophet Nahum, Nahum 2. 10. She is empty, and
void, and waste, and the heart melts, and the knees smite together, and much
pain is in all loins, and the faces of them all gather blackness (that is, such
blackness as is on the sides of a pot.) Verse 13 Behold, I am against thee,
says the Lord of Hosts, See also Chap. 3. 12, 13-15.
and I will burn her chariots in the smoke. The like Judgment fell upon Sidon,
and upon that rich and renowned City of Sabel.
Corinth, which through the commodiousness of the Haven, was the most
frequented place in the world for the Intercourse Thucyd.
of Merchants out of Asia and Europe, and great and many were their sins about
their Trade and Traffic; and for these she was finally destroyed, and turned
into cinders and ashes by the Romans.

So Bribery is a sin that brings desolating and destroying Judgments both upon
Persons and Places. Amos 5. 10, 11. For as much therefore as your treading is
upon the poor, and ye take from him burdens of wheat; ye have built houses of
hewn stones, but ye shall not dwell in them; ye have planted pleasant
vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of them; for I know your manifold
transgressions and your mighty sins: they afflict the just, they take a bribe,
and they turn aside the poor in the gate from their right. Bribery is one of
those mighty sins, or one of those bony or big-boned sins, as the Hebrew has
it; for which God threatens to turn them out of house and home. Bribery is a
bony sin, a huge sin, a heinous sin, a monstrous sin, a sin that is capable of
all manner of aggravations; and therefore the Lord punishes it with desolating
Judgments. Job 15. 34. And fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery (or
the receivers of gifts, as both the Hebrew and the Septuagint may be read.)
When wicked men build their houses, their Tabernacles by pilling and polling,
by bribery, cheating, defrauding, or overreaching others, it is a righteous
thing with God to set their houses on fire about their ears. Thus Dioclesian
had his house wholly consumed by Lightning and a flame of fire that fell from
Heaven upon it, as Eusebius tells De vita Constant. lib. 5.
us. Upon such a generation of men as build their houses by bribery, or
oppression, or deceit, etc. God many times makes good that word, Job 18. 15.
Brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation; and that word, Micha. 3. 11,
12. The Heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire,
and the Prophets thereof divine for money. Therefore shall Zion for your sake
be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the
house as the high places of the forest. Bribery and Covetousness had overrun
all sorts of such as were in Power and Authority, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical, and for this Zion must be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem
become heaps, and the Mountain of the House as the high places of the Forest.
By these exquisite terms the total and dismal desolation and destruction of
Zion, Jerusalem, and the Temple, that famous House that was once worthily
reckoned one of the seven Wonders of the World, is set forth unto us. That
Jerusalem, that Gods Jer. 7. 4, 5.
House, and Temple wherein they so much trusted and gloried, should become as a
mountainous Forest and Wilderness, was incredible to them; as the jumbling of
Heaven and Earth together; or the dethroning of God, by taking the Crown from
his Head, and thrusting of him from his Chair of State; and yet all this was
made good according to that dreadful Prophecy of Christ: There shall not be
left one stone Luke 19. 43, 44.
upon another. These are the sad effects of Bribery, Covetousness, etc. So
Prove. 29. 4. The King by judgment establishes the Land; but he that receives
gifts (or bribes) overthrows it.

Ah, London! London! were there none within nor without Prove. 17. 23. Psalm. 26.
10.
thy Walls, that did take a gift out of the bosom, to pervert the ways of
Judgment? were there none whose right hands were full of bribes? were there
none like Samuels 1 Samuel 8. 3.
Sons, who turned aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted Judgment in
the midst of thee? were here no Rulers Hos. 4. 18.
nor others within nor without thy Walls, that did love to say with shame, Give
ye? or that asked for a reward? or Micha. 7. 3.
that with Gehazi, run after rewards? or that were not ready to transgress for
a piece of bread? or that were not like the Prove. 28. 21.
Ho^sleeches daughter, still crying out, give, give? Themistocles Prove. 30. 15.
caused a brand of infamy to be set upon Athmius his children, and all his
posterity after him, because he brought gold from the King of Persia to
corrupt, bribe, and win the Grecians. If all that were within and without the
Walls of London, that received bribes, and run after rewards, had a brand of
infamy set upon them, I am apt to think many of them would be ashamed to walk
the streets, who have once carried it with a very high hand.

Ah, London! London! were there none within nor without Hos. 12. 7. Amos 8. 5.
Deuteronomy. 25. 13.
thy Walls, that had the balance of deceit in their hands, and that loved to
oppress; falsifying the balances by deceit, and that had in their bags diverse
weights, that did sell by one measure, and buy by another, that had wicked
balances, Micha. 6. 11.
and the bag of deceitful weights in their hands, their Houses, their Shops,
their Warehouses? Well, suppose there were many such within and without the
Walls of London, what of that? why, then I would say,

First, Such run counter-cross to divine Commands, Levit. Ye shall do no
unrighteousness in judgment, in met^yard, in weight, or in measure. Just
balances, just weights, a Levit. 19. 13. Mark 10. 19. 1 Cor. 7. 5.
just Ephah, and a just hin shall ye have. Ezekiel. 45. 10. Ye shall have just
balances, and a just Ephah, and a just bath. Deuteronomy. 25. 13, 14, 15. Thou shall
not have in thy bag diverse weights, a great and a small. But thou shall have a
perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shall thou have, that thy
days may be lengthned in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. We have a
common Saying, Weight and measure is Heavens treasure. But,

Secondly, Such persons and such practices are an abomination Deuteronomy. 25. 16. For
all that do such things, and all that do unrighteousness, are an abomination
unto the Lord thy God. Prove. 11. 1. A false balance is abomination to the
Lord. Prove. 20. 10. Diverse weights and diverse measures, both of them are alike
abomination to the Lord, and a false balance is not good. Now mark, the very
weights and measures are an abomination to the Lord, how much more the men that
make use of them? But,

Thirdly, Such act counter-cross to Gods delight, Prove. A just weight is his
delight. Prove. 16. 11. A just weight and balance are the Lords. They are
commanded by the Lord, and commended by the Lord, and they are the delight of
the Lord. But,

Fourthly, Such act counter-cross to his Nature, which Ezekiel. 18. and Chap. 33.
17. 20. 29.
which are full of righteousness, justice, and equity. But,

Fifthly, Such act counter-cross to the very Light and Math. 7. 12.
others deal by them. They are the very botches of the Land, and enemies to all
Civil Society. But,

Sixthly, Such stir up the anger and indignation of God Ezekiel. 22. 13. Behold,
therefore I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain which thou have made,
or at thy covetousness (as some render the Hebrew word) or at thy money gotten
by fraud and force, and overreaching and cheating of others (as others render
it.) God is here said to smite his hands at their dishonest gain, to note the
greatness of his anger, wrath, and indignation against them; and his readiness
and resolvedness to take vengeance on them, by animating, i^stigating,
encouraging, and stirring up the Chaldeans to destroy their persons by the
Sword, and to consume their riches and houses by fire, Chap 21. 17. God has no
hand to smite; but this is spoken after the manner of men, who oftentimes
express the greatness of their wrath and rage by smiting their hands one
against another. God to show the greatness of his spleen and rage (in a holy
sense) against them for their dishonest gain, expresses it by the smiting of
his hands. 1 These. 4. 6. That no man go beyond or defrand his brother in any
matter, because that the Lord is the avenger of all such; first or last
vengeance will reach them, who make it their business, their trade to
ov^r-reach others. But,

Seventhly, Such act counter-cross to the Examples of Moses, Numb. 16. 15 I
have not taken an ass from them, neither have I hurt one of them. Of Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 3, 4, 5. Of Zacharias and Elizabeth, Luke 1. 5, 6. Of Paul, Acts 24
16. yea, to the Examples of all the Apostles (Judas excepted) 2 Cor. 1. 12.
Chap. 7. 2. Receive us, we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we
have defrauded no man. But,

Eighthly and lastly, Such act counter-cross to their own everlasting happiness
and blessedness, 1 Cor. 6. 8, 9. Nay, you do wrong and defraud, and that your
brethren: Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven? Unrighteous persons may hear much of Heaven* and talk much of Heaven,
and set their faces toward Heaven* but they shall never inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven. God himself has locked fast the gate of blessedness against the
unrighteous; and therefore all the world shall never be able to open it. Heaven
would be no Heaven, but a Hell, if the unrighteous should inhabit there. To sum
up all; If such persons run counter-cross to Gods commands, if their persons
and practices are an abomination to the Lord, if they act counter-cross to Gods
delight and to his Nature; yea, to the very Light and Law of Nature, to the
best Examples, and to their own happiness and blessedness, is it any wonder
then to see divine Justice set such men's houses on fire about their ears, and
to see the flames consume such Estates as were got either by fraud or force, by
craft or cruelty, etc.

Now the gaining of the things of this world by hook o^ by crook, or by such
wicked courses and cursed practices tha^ we have been discoursing on, I cannot
charge upon the people of God, that did truly fear him, whose habitations were
o^ce within or without the Walls of London, because such practices would
neither stand with Grace, nor with the Honor of God, nor with the Credit of
Religion, nor with the Law of God, nor with the Law of Nature, nor with the
Peace of a Saints Soul. Besides, it is very observable to me, that those that
have the balances of deceit in their hand, are called Caananites in that 12.
of Hos. 7. He is a merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand, he loves
to oppress, He^ He is Canaan, that is, a mere natural man, that has no common
honesty in him, a money-merchant, one that cares no^ how he comes by it, so he
may have it; one that counts all good fish that comes to his net, though it be
through cunning contrivances or violent practices. But,

Fourthly, Desperate incorrigibleness and unreformedness Isa. 42. 24, 25. Who
Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. Turn to that Jer. 30. 23, 24.
gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord, he
against whom we have sinned? For they would not walk in his ways, neither were
they obedient unto his Law. Therefore he has poured upon him the fury of his
anger, and the strength of battle, and it has set him on fire round about, yet
he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. Levit. 26. 27, 28.
31, 32, 33. And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary
unto me, then will I walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even I, will
chastise you seven times for your sins. And I will make your Cities waste, and
bring your Sanctuaries unto desolations. And I will bring the Land into
desolation, and your enemies which dwell therein, shall be astonished at it.
And I will scatter you among the Hea then, and will draw out a sword after you;
and your Land shall be desolate, and your Cities waste. Isa. 1. 5. 7, 8. Why
should you be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more; the whole head
is sick, and the whole heart faint; your Country is desolate, your Cities are
burnt with fire: your Land-strangers devour it in your presence, and it is
desolate; as over-thrown by strangers. And the daughter of Zion is left as a
cottage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged City.
Amos 4. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all
your Cities, and want of bread in all your places; yet have ye not returned
unto me, says the Lord. And also I have withholden the rain from you, when
there were yet three months to the harvest, and I caused it to rain upon one
City, and caused it not to rain upon another City, one piece was rained upon,
and the piece whereupon it rained not withered. So two or three Cities wandered
unto one City to drink water, but they were not satisfied; yet have ye not
returned unto me, says the Lord. I have smitten you with blasting and mildew,
when your gardens, and your vineyards, and your fig trees, and your olive trees
increased, the palmer-worm devoured them: yet have ye not returned unto me,
says the Lord. I have sent among you the pestilence after the manner of Egypt;
your young men have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your horses,
and I have made the stink of your camps to come up unto your nostils: yet have
ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. I have overthrown some of you, as God
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the
burning: yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. By all these
Scriptures it is most evident, that desperate incorrigibleness and
unreformedness under wasting and destroying Judgments, brings the fiery
Dispensations of God upon a people. Ah, London! London! how long has the Lord
been striving with thee by his Spirit, by his Word, by his Messengers, by his
Mercies, and by lesser Judgments, and yet thou have been incorrigible,
incurable, and irrecoverable under all? God looked that the Agues, Fevers, small
Pox, strange Sicknesses, want of Trade, and Poverty that was coming on like an
armed man upon thee, with all the lesser Fires that have been kindled in the
midst of thee, should have awakned thee to repentance; and yet under all, how
proud, how stout, how hard, how obdurate have thou been? God looked that the
bloody Sword that the Nations round has drawn against thee, should have
humbled thee, and brought thee to his foot; and yet thou have rejected the
remedy of thy recovery. God looked that the raging devouring Pestilence that in
1665. destroyed so many ten thousands of thy Inhabitants, should have
astonished thee, and have been as a Prodigy unto thee, to have affrighted thee
out of thy sins, and to have turned thee to the most High: But yet after so
stupendous and amazing Judgments, thou wast hardened in thy sins, and refusest
to return. By all these diverse kinds of Judgmen^s, how little did God prevail
with thy Magistracy, Ministry, or Commonalty to break off their sins, to
repent, and to abhor themselves in dust and ashes? Has not God spent all his
Rods in vain upon thee? were not all sorts of men generally seven times worse
after those wasting Judgments then they Jer. 24. 2, 3.
were before? and therefore thou have cause to fear that this is that which
has kindled such a devouring Fire in the midst of thee, and that has turned
thy glory into shame, thy Riches, Palaces, and stately Houses into ashes. When
after the raging Pestilence men returned to the City, and to their Estates, and
Trades, etc. they returned also to their old sins, and as many followed the
world more greedily then ever; so many followed their lusts, their sinful
courses more violently then ever: and this has ushered in thy desolation, O
London. The Physician when he finds that the potion which he has given his
Patient will not work, he seconds it with one more violent: and thus does the
Chi^urgion too; if a gentle plaster will not serve, then he applies that which
is more corroding; and to prevent a gangrene, he makes use of his cauterizing
knife, and takes off the joint or member that is so ill affected: So does the
great God; when men are not bettered by lesser Judgments, he sends greater
Judgments upon them. God was first as a moth to Ephraim, Hos. 5. 12. 14.
which consumed him by little and little; but when that would not better him,
and reform him, then the Lord comes as a Lion upon him, and tore him all to
pieces. If the dross of men's sins will not come off, he will throw them into
the melting-pot again and again, he will crush them harder and harder in the
press of his Judgments, and lay on such Irons as shall enter more deep into
their Souls. If he strike, and they grieve not; if he strikes again, and they
tremble not; if he wounds, and they return not, then it is a righteous thing
with God to turn men out of house and home, and to ^urn up their comforts round
about them. Now this has been thy case, O London, and therefore God has laid
thee desolate in the eyes of the Nations.

Now this desperate incorrigibleness and unreformedness under wasting and
destroying Judgments, I cannot groundedl^ fix upon those who did truly fear the
Lord within and without the Walls of London, because they made it their
bu^iness (according to the different measures of grace they had ^eceived) to
mourn under wasting Judgments, and to lament after the Lord under wasting
Judgments, and to be bet^ered and reformed under wasting Judgments, and no^
only ^o understand, but also to obey the voice of the Rod. Their ^arnest
prayers, strong cries, bitter tears, sad sigh^, and heavy groans under wasting
Judgments, may sufficiently evidence that they were not incorrigible under
wasting Judgments. But,

Fifthly, I^solent and cruel oppressing of the Poor, is a sin that brings
desolating and destroying Judgments upon a people. God sent ten wasting
Judgments one after another upon Pharaoh his People and Land, to revenge the
cruel oppression Exodus 3. 9.
of his poor people, Prove. 22. 22, 23. Rob not the poor because he is poor,
neither oppr^ss the afflict^d in the gate. For the Lord will plead their cause.
To rob and oppress the rich is a great sin; but to rob and oppress the poor is
a greater; but to rob and oppress the poor, because he is poor, and wants money
to buy justice, is the top of all inhumanity and impiety: To oppress any one is
a sin; but to oppress the oppressed, is the height of sin. Poverty, and want,
and misery should be motives to pity; but oppressors make them the whet-stones
of their cruelty and severity, and therefore the Lord will plead the cause of
his poor oppressed people against their oppressors without fee or fear; yea, he
will plead their cause with pestilence, blood, and fire. Gog was a great
oppressor of the poor, Ezekiel. 38. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 13, 14. And God pleads
against him with pestilence, blood, and fire. Verse 22 And I will plead against
him with pestilence and with blood, and I will rain upon him, and upon his
bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and
great hailstones, fire and brimstone. Such as oppress a Mich. 2. 1, 2.
man and his house, even a man and his heritage, they take the surest and the
readiest way to bring ruin upon their own houses. Isa. 5. 8. Woe unto them that
join house to house, and field to field, till there be no place, that they may
be placed alone in the midst of the earth. ^ut mark what follows, verse 9. In
mine ears, said the Lord of Hosts, of a truth many houses shall be desolate,
even great and fair, without inhabitants, of a truth many houses shall be
desolate. This is an Emphatical form of swearing, it is as if the Lord had said,
Let me not live, or let me never be owned or accounted a God, or let me never
be looked upon as a God of truth, a God of my word; let me never be believed
nor trusted more for a God, if I do not lay desolate the houses of oppressors,
the great houses of oppressors, the fair houses of oppressors; yea, the
multitude and variety of the houses of oppressors. So Amos 3. 9, 10, 11.
Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the palaces ^n the Land of Egypt, and
say, Assemble your selves upon the mountains of Samaria: and behold the great
tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed (or oppressions) in the midst
thereof. For they know not to do right, says the Lord, who store up violence
and robbery in their palaces. Therefore, thus says the Lord God, an adversary
there shall be, even round about the Land, and he shall bring down thy strength
from thee, and thy palaces shall be spoiled. Now mark the 15. verse, And I will
smite the winter-house, with the summer house, and the houses of ivory shall
perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says the Lord. In their
Palaces, and in their Winter and Summer-houses they stored up all the riches,
preys and spoils that they had got by oppression. But God tells them, that
their Palaces should be spoiled, and that he would smite the Winter-house upon
the Summer House (so the Hebrew runs) God was resolved that he would dash one
house against the other, and lay them all on heaps. Though their Palaces and
houses were never so rich, and strong, and stately, and pompous, and glorious,
and decked, and adorned, and enamelled, and checkered; yet they should all down
together. So Zach. 7. 10, 11. 14. Oppress not the widow nor the fatherless, the
stranger, nor the poor, and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in
your heart. But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and
stopped their ears, that they should not hear. Well now, mark what follows,
verse 14. But I scattered them with a whirlwind among all the nations whom they
knew not: thus the land was desolate after them, that no man passed through, nor
returned; for they laid the pleasant land (or as the Hebrew has it, the second
Land of desire) desolate* Palestine was a very pleasant Land, aLand which
flowed with milk and honey, a Land which was the glory of all Lands; God had
made it as his Paradise, and enriched it with all plenty and pleasure, and
above all with his presence and residence in his City and Temple; but they by
oppressing the poor, the widow, and the fatherless, laid all desolate, Jer. 12.
12. O house of David, thus says the Lord, execute judgment in the morning, and
deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go
out like fire, and burn that none can quench it. Oppression lays a people open
to Gods fury, it provokes the Lord to turn their all into unquenchable flames.
Psalm. 12. 5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy: now
will I arise (says the Lord) I will set him in safety from him that passes at
him. Upon these words, Chrysostom says; Timete quicunque pauperem Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 12.
injuria afficitis: habetis vos potentiam and opes, and judicum benevolentiam;
sed habent illi arma omnium validissima, luctus and ejulatus, quae a coelis
auxilium attrahunt. Haec arma domus effodiunt, fundamenta evertunt, haec
integras nationes submergunt: Fear ye, whosoever ye be, that do wrong the poor,
you have power and wealth, and the favor of the Judges; but they have the
strongest weapons of all, sighings and groanings, which fetch help from Heaven
for them. These weapons dig down houses, throw up foundations, overthrow whole
Nations. Thus you see by all these clear Scriptures, that oppression is a sin
that brings wasting and destroying Judgments upon a people.

Ah, London! London! was there no oppression and cruelty to be found within and
without thy Walls? Eccle. 4. 1. So I returned, and considered all the
oppressions that are done under the Sun, and behold, the tears of such as were
oppressed, and they had no comforter: and on the side of their oppressors there
was power; but they had no comforter. And behold the tears of such as were
oppressed. The original word signifies lachrymam, non lachrymas, a tear, not
tears; as if the oppressed had wept so long, and wept so much, that they could
weep no longer, nor weep no more, having but only one tear left them. Were
there not, O London! many of thy poor oppressed Inhabitants that wept so long,
that they could weep no longer; and that wept so much, that they had but one
tear left? O the cries and tears of the oppressed within and without thy Walls,
did so pierce Gods ears, and so work upon his heart, that at last he comes down
in flames of fire to revenge the oppressed. Were there no rich Citizens that
did wrack their Tenants, and grind the faces of the poor, that took an
advantage from their necessities to beat down the price of their Commodities,
that so they might raise Were there none within nor without thy Walls, O
London! that used his neighbor without wages, and gave him no reward for his
work, that kept back the hire of the labourer, and that were the poor laborers
pursebearers, and Cofferers, whether they would or no, that fleeced the poor to
feather their own nests? Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. Exodus 22. 22, 23. Zeph. 3. 3.
themselves on the poors ruin? Were there no false weights, false wares, false
lights, false measures to be found within and without thy Walls, by which the
poor has been cheated, cozened, and oppressed? O how did the rich work upon the
necessities of the poor, bringing them to such under-prizes, as has undone
both them and their making good that word, Amos 8 4. They swallow up the needy,
and make the poor of the land to fail. O the heavy burdens that have been laid
upon the poor by their Egyptian Taskmasters! what overreaching of the poor,
and what over-rating of the poor have been within and without thy Walls, O
London! Thy poor, O London! did rise early, and go to bed late; they did fare
hard, and lie hard, and work hard; and yet by reason of the cruelty,
oppression, and unmercifulness of many of thy wealthy Citizens, they were
hardly able to make any convenient supplies for themselves and their families.
Oppression turns Princes into roaring Lions, and Judges into evening Wolves:
it is an unnatural sin, it is a sin against the light of Nature. No creatures do
oppress them of their own kind. Look upon the Birds of prey, as upon Eagles,
Vultures, Hawks, and you shall never find them preying upon their own kind.
Look upon the wild Beasts of the Forest, as upon the Lion, the Tiger, the Wolf,
the Bear, etc. and you shall find them favorable to them of their o^n kind;
and yet men unnaturally prey upon one another, like the fish in the Sea, the
great swallowing up the small. It Is a sin against that great and common Rule of
Equity, Math. 7. 12. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto
you, do ye even so to them. Now no man in his wits would have another to wrong
and oppress him in his Estate, Name, or Conscience; and therefore he should not
wrong or oppress others in their Estates, Names, or Consciences: and therefore
no wonder, if God punishes this sin with flames of fire. It Is thy oppressors, O
London! that has turned thy glory into ashes.

Now this insolent oppressing of the poor, is a sin that I cannot make good
against the people of God, that did truly fear him in that great City. It Is a
sin they have often be wailed and lamented before the Lord in their solemn
Addresses to God. Where this sin is rampant, where it rules as a Prince upon
the Throne, it is a clear evidence that the fear of the Lord is not in such men's
hearts, Levit. 25. 17. Ye shall not oppress one another, but thou shall fear
thy God. Now this lies fair in the words, viz. That such as do oppress others,
they do not fear God: and such as do fear God* they will not oppress others.
Amaleck was a great Oppressor of the poor people of God, and the Holy Ghost
has se^ Deuteronomy. 25. 18. Oppressors are persons destitute of the fear of God, and
the want of the fear of the Lord is the spring and fountain of the worst of
sins, and that against which the Lord will come near in Judgment. Mala. 3. 5.
this black brand of infamy upon him, that he feared no^ God. Had Amaleck
feared the Lord, he would have been so far from oppressing the poor people of
God, that he would have comforted them, and succored them, and relieved them
in the midst of their necessities, miseries, and distresses. The Jews
oppressing one another, is attributed to their not fearing of God, Nehem. 5. 9.
Oppression is so crying a sin against the Law of God, the Law of Grace, the Law
of Nature, and the Law of Nations; that certainly it cannot be justly charged
upon such, as have set up God in their hearts as the great Object of their
fear. The word for oppression in the Hebrew is Mispach, which signifies a Scab,
a Wound, a Leprosy. Now oppression is such a scab, a wound, a leprosy, as is
not to be found upon those that have fellowship with the Father and the Son.
Oppressors may boast of their profession, and call themselves Saints or the
people of God; but God accounts them worse then Scythians, witness those
dreadful woes that God has denounced against them in the blessed Scriptures,
Zeph. 3. 1. Woe to the oppressing City, Jer. 22. 13 Woe unto him that builds
his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong: that uses his
neighbors service without wages, and gives him not for his work. Isa. 10.
1-3. Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees. To turn aside the needy from
judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people, that widows
may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless. And what will ye do in
the day of visitation, and in the d^solation which shall come from far, to whom
will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory? Mich. 2* 1, 2. Woe to
them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds: when the morning is
light they practice it, because it is in the power of their hand. And they
covet fields, and take them by violence: and houses, and take them away: so
they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage. Now by all these
dreadful woes it is further evident, that this horrid sin of insolent oppression
cannot be charged upon the Called and Chosen of God; for where do you find in
all the Scriptures the Vessels of Glory under those woes that are denounced
against the ungodly? But,

Sixthly, Rejecting the Gospel, contemning the Gospel, Math. 22. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain King, which made a marriage for
his Son. And he sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the
wedding: and they would not come. Again he sent forth other servants, saying,
tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my
fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: come unto the marriage. But they
made slight of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his
merchandise. And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully,
and slew them. But when the King heard thereof, he was wroth: and sent forth
his armies, and destroyed those mu^derers, and burnt up their City. In this
Parable the Vocation of the Gentiles, and the Rejection of the Jews, is set
for^h. The Calvin, Chrysostom. Isa. 25. 8, 9. Prove 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Isa.
55. 1, 2, 3.
Jews have the honor to be first called to the Marriage Feast; they are
invited by the Prophets, and afterward by the Apostles to partake of Christ
and of all his royal Benefits and Favors which are displayed in the Gospel.
God the Father was very willing and desirous to make up a match between Christ
and the Jews, and between Christ and the Gentiles: and he is here called a
King, to declare his divine Majesty, and to set forth the stateliness and
magnificence of the Feast. Marriage-feasts that are usually made by Kings, are
full of joy, and full of state, full of splendour and glory; who can sum up the
variety of dishes and dainties that then the Guests are feasted with? The
variety of the glorious excellencies, favors, and mercies of Christ that are
discovered and tendered by God in Gospel-offers, in Gospel Ordinances, is the
Wedding-feast to which all sorts of sinners are invited; but here you see they
slight, and scorn, and contemn both Master of the feast, and the matter of the
feast, and all those servants that were sent to invite them to the feast; and
hereupon the King was wroth, and sent forth his armies (the Romans, as most
Interpreters do agree) and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their City.
About forty years after the death of Christ, the Lord to revenge the blood of
his Son, the blood of his servants, and the contempt of his Gospel upon the
Jews, brought his Armies, the Romans, against Jerusalem, who by fire demolished
their Temple and City, and by sword and famine destroyed eleven millions of
men, women, and children; and those that escaped fire, Josephus de bell Judaic.
lib. 7.
sword, and famine, were sold for slaves, and scattered among all the Nations.
Christ and the way of Salvation by him, is the subject matter of the Gospel:
The word (...) that is rendered Gospel, signifies glad Tidings, good News; and
certainly Salvation by Christ is the best news, it is the greatest and the
gladest tidings that ever was brought to sinners ears. What the Psalmist had
long before said of the City of God, Glorious things are spoken of thee, that I
may Psalm. 87. 3.
truly say of the blessed Gospel, Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou
Gospel of God. The Gospel is called the glorious Gospel of the blessed God. The
Gospel is a glorious 1 Timothy 1. 11.
Gospel in respect of the Author of it, and in respect of the Penmen of it,
and in respect of the glorious discoveries that it makes of God, of Christ, of
the S^irit, of Heaven, and in respect of its glorious effect^, in turning of
poor sinners from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto Acts 26.
18.
God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
which are sanctified. Certainly Solomon's natural History, in which he treated
of a^l Trees, from the Cedar to the Hysop, of all Beasts, Fowls, and creeping 1
Kings 4. 33. Some are of opinion that it was burnt by the Chaldees, together
with the Temple: others think that it was abolished by Ezekiah, because the
people idolized it, as they did the Brazen Serpent.
things, was a very rare and incomparable piece in its kind; yet one leaf, yea,
one line of the Gospel is infinitely more worth, and of greater importance to
us, then all that large Volume would have been. For what is the knowledge of
Trees, and Birds, and Beasts, and Worms, and Fishes to the knowledge of God in
Christ, to the knowledge of the great things of Eternity, to the knowledge of a
man's sinful estate by Nature, or to the knowledge of his happy estate by Grace?
doubtless to a Soul that has tasted that the Lord is gracious, there is no
Book to this of the Bible, Acts 19. 19. When the Lord had made it the day of
his glorious Power to their Conviction, Conversion, and Salvation, they burnt
their costly Books of curious Arts. And no wonder; for they had found the power
and the sweet of a better Book, even of Gods Book upon their hearts. Luther
speaking of the Gospel, says, That the shortest line, and the least letter
thereof, is more worth then all Heaven and Earth: he tasted so much of the
sweetness of the Gospel, and saw so much of the glory and excellency of the
Gospel, that he would often say to his friends, that he would not take all the
world for one leaf of the Bible. Rab. Chiia (in the Jerusalem Talmud) says,
that in his account all the world is not of equal value with one word out of
the Law. Israel had three Crowns (as the Talmud observes) 1. of the King, 2. of
the Priest, 3. of the Law; but the Crown of the Law was counted by them the
chiefest of the three: then what is the Crown of the Gospel to all those upon
whom the Gospel is come in power? 1 These. 1. 5, 6, 7.
How divinely did that Poet speak, who said, He could read God in every leaf on
the Tree, and that he found hi^ Name written on every green herb; and shall not
we read God, and Christ, and Grace, and Mercy in every leaf, yea, in every line
of the Gospel? The Bible, says Luther, is the only Luther com. in Genesis cap. 19.
Book, all the books in the world are but waste paper to it: so highly did he
prize it, and so dearly did he love it. Con^empt of the Gospel is a great
indignity cast upon the great God, and a great indignity cast upon Jesus
Christ; for though the Law was delivered by Moses, yet the Gospel was delivered
by Jesus Christ. And if they escaped not who despised Heb. 2. 3. Chap. 10. 28,
29.
him that spoke from earth, of how much sorer punishment are they worthy that
contemn him that speaks from Heaven? If the Book of the Law happen to fall upon
the ground, the Jews custom is presently to proclaim a Fast. O Sirs! what cause
then have we to fast and m^u^n when we see the glorious Gospel of God fallen to
the ground, scorned, despised, contemned, and trampled upon by all sorts of
sinners? Contempt of the Gospel is a sin of the greatest ingratitude. In the
Gospel God offers himself, his Son, his Spirit, Hierom reports of Vzzah, that
his shoulder was shrunk up and wither^d; he carted the Ark when he should have
carried it on his shoulder: therefore that part was branded for it.
his Grace, his Kingdom, and all the Glory of another World. Now for men to
despise and contemn these offers, is the highest ingratitude and unthankfulness
imaginable; and therefore no wonder, if God burn such men up, and turn them out
of house and home: Such justly deserve the worst of Judgments, who despise the
best of mercies. The strongest and the sweetest wine always makes the sharpest
vinegar; the freest, the richest, and the choicest offers of mercy, if slighted
and contemned, turn into the greatest fury and severity. Divine wrath smoaks
and burns against none so fiercely, as it does against those who are despisers
of Gospel-mercies. When gold is offered, men care not how great or how base he
is that offers it: neither is it material by whom the Gospel is brought unto
us, whether it be brought unto us by Isaiah, as some think, a Prophet of the
blood Royal, or by Amos from amongst the Herdmen of Tekoa. Let the hand be more
noble or more mean that brings it, if it be slighted and contemned, provoked
Justice will revenge it. Such as slight the Gospel, and contemn the Gospel,
they sin with a high hand against the remedy, against the means of their
recovery. This is the condemnation, this is that Joh. 3. 19.
desperate sin that hastens Judgments upon Cities and Countries, as Jury, Asia,
Bohemia, and other parts of the world have sadly experienced. He that has eat
poison, and shall despise the means of his recovery, must certainly dye for it.
He who when he has committed Treason against his Prince, shall not only
refuse, but scorn and flight his Princes favor and pardon, and fling it from
him with disdain, is assuredly past all help and hope. Sins against the Gospel
are sins of a greater size, of a louder cry, and of a deeper dye, then sins
against the Law are, and accordingly God suits his Judgments. Where the Gospel
shines in power, it will either mend a people, or mar a people: it will either
better them, or worsen them; it will either fit them for the greatest good, or
it will bring upon them the greatest evils: Where it does not reform, there it
will destroy. And this London has found by woeful experience. Slighting and
contemning of the offers of grace in the Gospel, is a sin that is not
chargeable upon the greatest part of the world, who lies in wickedness, and
who sit in darkness, and in the region and shadow of death; yea, 1 John 5. 19.
Math. 4. 16.
it is a sin that is not chargeable upon the Devils themselves, and therefore
the more severely will God deal with those that are guilty of it. The Gospel
has for above this hundred years shined forth out of the dark and thick clouds
of Popery and Antichristianism which had overspread the Nation. And in no part
of the Land has the Gospel been preached with more clearness, spiritualness,
life, power, and purity then in London. And Oh that I had not cause to say,
that there was no part of the Nation where the Gospel was more undervalued,
slighted, and contemned by many then in London! For,

First, Where the faithful and painful Ministers of the Math. 23. 37. Luke 10.
16.
there none within nor without thy Walls, O London! that did slight, scorn,
reproach, and contemn the Ambassadors of Christ, who were faithful to their
Light, their Lord, their Consciences, and the Souls of their Hearers? But,

Secondly, Where the Ministrations of the Gospel, where there the Gospel is
slighted and contemned; where the offers A man upon whom the Gospel has
wrought savingly, he will, 1. prize all the Ordinances, 2. practice all the
Ordinances, 3. praise the Lord for all the Ordinances. Luke 1. 5, 6. 2 Samuel 19.
35.
of the Gospel are slighted and contemned, there ^e Gospel is slighted and
contemned; where the commands of the Gospel are slighted and contemned, there
the Gospel is slighted and contemned; where the threatenings of the Gospel are
sl^ghted and contemned, there the Gospel is slighted and contemned; where the
promises of the Gospel are slighted and contemned, there the Gospel is slighted
and contemned; and where the comforts of the Gospel are slighted and contemned,
there the Gospel is slighted and contemned. Now were there none within nor
without thy Walls, O London, that did slight and contemn the Ministrations of
the Gospel, the Ordinances of the Gospel? When old Barzillai had lost his taste
and hearing, he cared not for David's Feasts and Music. There were many within
and without the Walls of London that had lost their spiritual taste and
hearing, and so cared not for Gospel-ministrations, for Gospel Ordinances.
There were many, who under a pretense of living above Ordinances, lived below
Ordinances, and made light of Ordinances; yea, who scorned, vilified, and
contemned the precious Ordinances of Christ. Thou art to them as a lovely song,
Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32.
says the Prophet: in the Hebrew it runs thus, Thou art to them as one that
breaks jests. The Solemnity and Majesty of the Word was but as a dry jest unto
them; Ordinances were but as dry jests to many within and without the Walls of
London, and therefore no wonder if God has been in such good earnest with them
who have made but a jest of those precious Ordinances, that are more worth then
Heaven and Earth. Many came to the Ordinances too much like the Egyptian Dog,
which laps a little as he runs by the side of Nilus, but stays not to drink.
But,

Thirdly, Such as are weary of the Gospel, such slight the Israelites more
weary of Manna, then many within and without the Numb. 11. 6. Amos 8. 5.
Walls of London were weary of the plain and powerful preaching of the Gospel.
We were better have a biting Gospel then a toothless Mass, said blessed
Bradford. But were there not some that had rather have a toothless Mass then a
biting Gospel? Were there not many that were willing to let God go, and Gospel
go, and Ordinances go, and all go, so they might be eased of their burdens and
taxes, and greaten their relations, and have peace with all Nations, and enjoy
a sweeping trade, and every one sit under his vine and under his fig tree,
eating the fat, and drinking the sweet, and enjoy liberty to dishonor the
Lord, to gratify their lusts, to damn their own Souls, and to bring others
under their feet, so weary were they of the blessed Gospel?

Fourthly, Such as have but a low and mean opinion of the Gospel, such are
slighters and contemners of the Gospel; such 1 Cor. 1. 23.
and base lust above the light of the Gospel, the power of the Gospel, the
purity and simplicity of the Gospel, the holiness and sweetness of the Gospel,
such are slighters and contemners of the Gospel. Though it be better to present
truth in her native plainness, then to hang her ears with counterfeit Pearls;
yet there were many that set a greater price upon the arts, the parts, the
gifts, the studied notions and Seraphical expressions of their Ministers, then
they did upon the Gospel it self: and what was this but to prefer the Handmaid
before the Mistress, the Servant before his Lord, the flowers about the dish
before the meat that was in the dish, the chaff before the Wheat, and Pebbles
before the richest Pearls? The Gospel is the field, and Christ is the Treasure
that is hid in that field; the Gospel is a Ring of gold, and Christ is the
Pearl in that Ring of gold: and yet how many were there within and without the
Walls of London, that put no considerable price or value upon the Gospel? But,

Fifthly, Such as wilfully disobey the Gospel, and live and These. 1. 7, 8, 9.
And to you who are troubled rest with us when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus. Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power. This is a more terrible Text against all such as are
either ignorant of the Gospel, or that disobey the Gospel, then any is to be
found in all the Old Testament. In the last day Christ will take vengeance in
flaming fire on them that disobey his Gospel, and that walk contrary to the
Rules of his Gospel; and therefore no wonder, if before that day he lays their
habitations desolate by a flaming fire, whose lives give the lie to his
glorious Gospel. These men above all others, expose the Gospel to the derision
and contempt of the basest and vilest men. When some of the Heathens have looked
upon the loose lives of Professors, they have said, Aut hoc non est Evangelium,
aut hi non sunt Christiani, Either this is not the Gospel, in which there is so
much goodness, or these are not Christians, in whom there is none at all. Did
you never hear nor read of one, who eying the loose conversations of
Professors, cried out, Sit anima mea cum Philosophis, Let my Soul be rather
with the honest Philosophers (who were Heathen) then with these wicked lewd men
that are called Christians? Now were there none within nor without the Walls of
London that did wilfully disobey the Gospel, and that walked in ways quite cross
and contrary to the Gospel? surely there were, and therefore at their doors we
may safely lay the burning of London. But,

Sixthly and lastly, Such as slighted, scorned, and contemned Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 11. cap. 8
it was the manner of the Samaritans to repute themselves their nearest
Cousins. When the Jews were in a thriving and flourishing condition, then the
Samaritans could derive their Pedigree from Ephraim and Manasses, the Sons of
Joseph: but when the Jews were in any great affliction, or under persecution,
then they would deny all acquaintance with them, and all relation to them. When
Profession was in fashion, and Religion was in credit, how many were there
within and without the Walls of London, that did pretend to be kin, to be
Cousins to the serious, conscientious, and sincere Professors of the Gospel,
who since the day of their affliction, have not only denied all acquaintance
with them, and renounced all relation to them, but also are turned slighters,
scorners, and contemners of them? if these may not be reckoned among the
slighters, scorners, and contemners of the Gospel, I do not know who may. To
sum up all, I have showed you that slighting, scorning, and contemning of the
Gospel, is a sin of that high nature, that it provokes ^he Lord to lay Cities
desolate. I have showed you the greatness of that sin, and the persons that are
guilty of it; so that now you may point with a finger to those persons that
have laid London in ashes.

But before I close up this Particular, give me leave to say, That this sin of
slighting, scorning, and contemning of the Gospel, I dare not charge upon those
that truly fear the Lord, and that have found the Gospel to be a Gospel of
power upon their own Souls, turning them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan to Jesus Christ. And I 1 These. 1. 5, 6, 7. Acts 26. 18.
shall freely give you my Reasons, that you may be the better satisfied, that
'twas not so much their sins as your own, that has brought down that heavy
Judgment of Fire upon the City, wherein once you and they had your respective
habitations. My Reasons are these.

First, Those that did truly fear the Lord, and that had experienced the power
of the Gospel in a saving way upon Ezekiel. 9. 4. 6.
sin of slighting, scorning, and contemning of the Gospel which many were
guilty of, whose habitations were then some within, and others without the
Walls of London. The Jews have a Law which enjoins them to take up any paper
which they see lying on the ground, and the reason is, lest happily the Name of
God be written in the paper, and ignorantly trodden under foot. Though
Christians ought to be free from such superstitious curiosities; yet they ought
to be very careful, that the least tittle of the Gospel, the least command of
the Gospel be not trod under foot. Now the Saints who once lived within and
without the Walls of London, who through grace have experienced the saving
power of the Gospel upon their own Souls, how have they mourned and lamented to
see that glorious Gospel of Christ trod under foot, which they have layen so
near their hearts! and therefore I cannot fairly charge this sin upon them. But,

Secondly, Slighting, scorning, and contemning of the Heb. 2. 3. Chap. 10. 28,
29.
at present find where it is in Scripture charged upon such as truly fear the
Lord, and that have really experienced the power of the Gospel in a saving way
upon their own Souls; and therefore I cannot fairly charge this sin upon them.

Thirdly, Next to God, the Gospel is the most sweet and Luth^r Psalm. 19. 10,
11. Psalm. 119. 72. 103. 127. Job 23. 12. Austin cries, away with our writings,
that room may be made for the Book of God.
found so much sweetness in it, that it made him say, that h^ would not live in
Paradise if he might without the Word (at cum Verbo etiam in inferno facile est
vivere) but with the Word he could live in Hell it self. Dolphins, they say,
love Music, and so do gracious Souls love the Music of the Gospel. The Gospel
is like the stone Garamantides, that has drops of gold within it self,
enriching all that will embrace it, and conform to it: and this the Saints have
found by experience, and therefore they cannot but delight in it, and draw
sweetness from it. Aglutuidas never relished any dish better then what was
dist^sted by others: So do the Saints relish that Gospel best that others
distaste most; and therefore I cannot charge this sin fairly upon them. But,

Fourthly, There are none that do so highly prize the do who have experienced
the saving power of the Gospel upon their own Souls; such prefer the Gospel
before all their nearest and dearest concernments and enjoyments that they Rev.
12. 11. Rev. 2. 12, 13. Heb. 11. 33, 38. Luther speaking of the Gospel, says,
that the shortest line and the least letter thereof is more then all Heaven and
Earth. Tertul. Apol. cap. 5.
have in this world: As might be made evident from their practice in the
primitive times, and in the Marian days, and in those late years that are now
past over our heads. The Tabernacle was covered over with red (and the purple
Feathers tell us, they take that habit for the same intent) to note, that we
must defend the truth of the Gospel, even to the effusion of blood: and this
they have made good in all the Ages of the World, who have found the saving
power of the Gospel upon their own Souls. Tertullian concludes, that the Gospel
must needs be a precious thing, because Nero hated it; and indeed it was so
precious to the Saints* in his days, that they very willingly and cheerfully
laid down their lives for the Gospel sake. Now the same Spirit rests upon the
Saints in our days, and therefore upon this ground I cannot charge that horrid
sin of slighting, scorning, and contemning of the Gospel upon them. Israel had
three Crowns (as the Talmud observes) 1. of the King, 2. of the Priest, 3. of
the Law; but the Crown of the Law, that was the chief of the three.

Fifthly, Who were so ready and free to countenance the Gospel, and to maintain
the Gospel, and to encourage the Basil, and a Gospel without charge in
Nazianzene; but if it grow costly, it is no commodity for their money. Now this
was the very frame and temper of many thousands in London, who never
experienced the saving work of the Gospel upon their poor Souls: but they were
of another frame and temper of spirit in London, upon whom the Gospel was
fallen in power; and therefore I may not charge upon them this odious sin of
slighting, scorning, and contemning the Gospel. But,

Sixthly, Who were there within or without the Walls of London, that were so
much in a hearty and serious blessing, praising, and admiring of the Lord and
his goodness, for bringing them forth in Gospel Times, as those that had a
saving work of the Gospel upon their own Souls? When Alexander was born, his
Father Philip blessed such Gods as he had, not so much that he had a Son, as
that he had him in Aristotle's days: he was thankful for natural and
moraldiscoveries. The clearest, the choicest, the fullest, and the sweetest
visions and discoveries that we have of God on this side Eternity, we have in
the Gospel, and this they frequently experience, who have found the Gospel
falling in power upon their Souls; and therefore they cannot but always have
Harps in their hands, and Hallelujahs in their mouths Rev. 14. 1, 2. 3, 4.
Chap. 19. 1. to verse. 8.
upon this very account, that they have lived under the warm Sunshine of the
Gospel; and therefore I shall not charge this vile sin of slighting, scorn^ng,
and contemning the Gospel upon them who above all other men were most exercised
in a serious and hearty blessing and praising of God for his glorious Gospel.
Some there were that blessed God for their yearly incomes; and others there were
that blessed God for their prosperous relations and friends: and many there were
that blessed God for their deliverance from various perils and dangers. But those
that had the Gospel working in power upon them, they made it their business and
work above all to bless the Lord for the Gospel; and therefore who dare charge
upon them the contempt of the Gospel? But,

Seventhly and lastly, There were none within nor without London, that have
suffered so many things, and such hard things for the enjoyment of the Gospel
in its power and purity, as they have done who have found the powerful and
saving work of the Gospel upon their own Souls: such have been as signs and
wonders in Israel, in London. Now what folly and vanity would it be to charge
Isa. 8. 18.
them with slighting, scorning, and contemning of the Gospel, who have been the
only sufferers for the Gospel sake. And thus much for the twelfth sin that
brings the fiery Dispensation upon Cities and People.

The sin that brings the fiery Dispensation upon a People, and that provokes
the Lord to lay their Cities desolate, is a course, a trade of lying, Nahum 3.
1. Woe to the bloody City, it is all full of lies. Verse 7. And it shall come to
pass, that al^ they that look upon thee, shall flee from thee, and say Nineveh
is laid waste, who will bemoan her? whence shall I seek comforters for thee?
Verse 13. Behold, thy people in the midst of thee are women: the gates of thy
land shall be set wide open to thine enemies: the fire shall devour thy bars,
that is, thy strong holds; for so the word bars is frequently taken, as you may
see by comparing the ^criptures in the Margin together. Nineveh 1 Samuel 23. 7.
1 Kings 4. 13 2 Chronicles. 8. 5. Chap. 14. 7. Jer. 49. 31. and Chap. 51. 30. Lam.
2. 9. Amos 1. 5.
was a great City, a rich City, a populous city, a trading City; 'twas a City
that was wholly made up of fraud and falsehood; it was all full of lies, or it
was full of all sorts of lies: there was no truth to be found either in her
private contracts, or in her public transactions and capitulations with other
Nations; and therefore the Lord resolves to lay her desolate, and to consume
her with fire. So J^r. 9. 3. And they bend their tongues like their how for
lies. Verse 5. And they will deceive every one his neighbor, and will not
speak the truth: they have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary
themselves to commit iniquity. Verse 9. Shall I not visit for these things?
says the Lord: Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? Verse
10. For the mountains will I take up a weeping and wailing, and for the
habitations of the wilderness a lamentation, because they are burnt up: so that
none can pass through them, neither can men hear the voice of the cattle, both
the fowl of the heavens, and the beasts are fled, they are gone. Verse 11. And
I will make Jerusalem heaps (as London is this day) and a den of dragons, and I
will make the cities of Judah desolate, without an inhabitant. Verse 12. Who is
the wise man that may understand this? and who is he to whom the mouth of the
Lord has spoken, that he may declare it, for what the land perishes, and is
burnt up like a wilderness that none passes through? The Jews had so inured
and accustomed Jer. 13. 23.
their tongues to speak lies, they had got such a haunt, a habit, and custom of
lying, that they could not leave it: And ^his was the procuring cause of that
dreadful and utter devastation that befell their City and Country. Hes. 4. 1, 2,
3. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye children of Israel, for the Lord has a
controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor
mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. By swearing, and lying, and killing,
and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and blood touch^th
blood. Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwells therein
shall languish, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven;
yea, the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away. This people made it their
common practice to lie, they were given up to a course, a trade of lying, which
God here threatens to punish with an extreme and universal desolation. A lie is
a voluntary and wilful telling of an untruth, with a purpose to deceive; so
that three things are required to the nature of a lie. 1. There must be an
untruth and falseness in the thing. 2. This untruth must be known to be so, he
must be conscious to himself that it is false. 3. He must have an intent and
purpose to utter this falsehood with a desire or design to deceive another by
it. Augustine makes eight sorts of Lies; but the Schoolmen reduce all to
three. 1. Is jocosum, the sporting Lie. 2. Is officiosum, the helpful Lie. 3.
Is perniciosum, the pernicious and hurtful Lie.

First, There is mendacium jo^osum, the sporting Lie; and Hosea complains,
Chap. 7. 3. They make the King glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with
their lies. Courtiers frame It is a received opinion in these days, that, Qui
nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere.
fictions, and tell ridiculous stories to delight Princes. Among many Courtiers
loud lies are esteemed ornaments and elegancies of speech; and none are
accounted sosweet and pleasant in their discourse, as those that can tell the
most pleasing lies: but such Mirth-mongers and Mirth-makers may do well to
remember, that such kind of mirth will bring bitterness in the end. If for
every idle word that men shall speak, Math. 12. 36. Phil. 5. 4.
they must give an account in the day of Judgment, then surely much more for
every lying word. And if foolish talking and jesting be condemned, then surely
lying talking, and jesting shall be much more condemned, if not here, yet in
the great day, when all lying Jesters shall hold up their hands at Christ's Bar.
Now were there none within nor without the Walls of London, that were guilty of
merry lies, of sporting lies? But,

Secondly, There is mendacium officiosum, the officious lie, the helpful lie;
and that is when a man lies to help himself Exodus 1. 15. to the 20. Josh. 2. 1.
to verse. 9. 1 Kings 13. 14. to 27.
to prevent some danger they fear, or else to bring about some good they
desire, then they tell an officious lie. Thus the Egyptian Midwives lied, and
thus Rahab lied, and thus the old Prophet lied, who contrary to the command of
God, persuaded the man of God to go back and eat bread with him under the
pretense of a divine Revelation. And thus Genesis 27. 19.
Jacob told his father an officious (threefold) lie, but he hardly ever had a
merry day, a good day after it; for God followed him with variety of troubles,
and his sorrows, like Jobs Messengers, came posting in one after another, even
to his dying day, that both himself and others might see what bitterness is
wrapped up in officious lies. Solon reproving Thespis (the Poet) for lying,
Thespis answered him, that it was not material, seeing it was but in sport;
then Salon beating the ground with his staff, said, If we commend lying in
sport, we shall find it afterward in good earnest. In all our bargains and
dealings, let us make it our wisdom and our work to remember, That we must not
do evil, that good may come; yea, we Romans 3. 8.
must not tell a lie to save all the Souls under Heaven. The Prisciallanists in
Spain (a most pestilentious Sect) taught in Augustines time, That it was lawful
to lie for the helping of a good cause, and for the propagating of the Gospel,
and for the advantage of Religion. But Augustine consuted them, and stoutly
asserts in two Books, That we are not to tell an officious lie, to tell a lie
for no hurt, but for good, though it were to save all the world. Will ye speak
wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? says Job to his Job 13. 7.
friends? A man may as well commit fornication with the Moabites to draw them
to our Religion, or steal from the rich to give to the poor, as lie to do
another man a good turn. Nepos reports of Epaminondas, a noble man of Thebes,
and a famous Warrior, that he would never lie in jest nor in earnest, either
for his own or another gain. This refined Heathen will one day rise in
Judgment against such kind of Christians, who take a great pleasure in
officious lies. Now were there none within nor without the Walls of London,
that delighted themselves in officious lies? But,

Thirdly, (and to come closer to our work) There is mendacium perniciosum, the
pernicious and hurtful Lie; and Genesis 39. 13. to the 20. 2 Kings 5. 22, 23.
this of all lies is the worst. When men will lie out of a design to hurt, to
cheat, to defraud, or to make a prey of those they deal with: this is the
forest of all lies. Now how rampant was this sort of Lying among all sorts of
Citizens before London was in flames? What a common trade of lying did many (I
say not all) drive in their buying and selling? The trade of lying was got into
every Trade, as if there had been no living but by lying? Many Sellers had
their lies to set off their Commodities: it is good, it is very good, it is
special good, it is the best of its kind; when 'twas naught, very naught, yea,
stark naught: of this sort there are none so good in the City, when their
consciences told them, that they had much better in their own Shops; that their
Commodity cost them so much, and that they could not abate, nor would not abate
any thing of that price they had pitched, though it were to their own father or
mother; and yet rather then they would lose a good Customer, they presently
agree at a lower price. And so when poor Workmen came to their Shops, and
offered their Commodities to sell, being forced thereunto for the relief of
themselves and their miserable families, they slighted their Commodities,
telling them, that they had no need of them, and that they had much of those
Commodities upon their hands already, and that they had no way to vend them;
and all to beat down the price, and to make a prey of their pressing necessity;
and all this when they wanted those very Commodities, and had more vend for
them then they knew how to supply. Now as the Seller abounded with his lies, so
the Buyer had his lies too; and all to bring down the price: it is naught, it is
naught, it is very naught, says the Buyer. I will not give you your price, and
yet gives it before he goes out of the Shop or Warehouse. I have bought as
good, yea, better for a lower price then what I offer you (says the Buyer)
when yet he had never bought of that Commodity before. Use me well (says the
Buyer) and you shall have my custom another time, when in his heart he resolves
never to come into the Sellers Shop more. Ah, London! London! it is these Lies
and Liars that have made thee desolate, and that have laid thy glory in the
dust. O Sirs! a man were better be a loser then a liar, a man were better, much
better, to keep his Commodity, then to se^l his Conscience with his Commodity.
We hate the Turks for selling of Christians for Slaves; and what shall we then
think of those Citizens, who by lying sell themselves and their precious Souls
for half a Crown, yea, oftentimes for a Penny? I have read that there was a
time when the Romans did wear Jewels on their shoes: but Liars do worse; for
they trample that matchless Jewel, viz. their precious Souls under feet.
Doubtless the lies that were told in London, and the Liars that lived in
London, did more then a little help on the ruin of London. Now that you may
the better read and understand the Righteousness of God in his highest acts of
severity against Lies and Liars, premise with me briefly these four things.

First, That lying is a very great sin, it is a transgression Levit. 19. 11. Ye
shall not lie one to another. Zacha. 8. 16. Speak ye every man the truth to his
neighbor. Ephesians. 4. 25. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with
his neighbor; for we are members one of another. In the body of man one member
will not lie to another; the hand will not lie, in telling what it touches;
the tongue will not lie, in telling what it tastes; the eye will not lie, in
telling what it sees: but every member is a true witness to another, a true
witness to his neighbor; and so it should be both in the Politic Body, and in
the Mystical Body of Christ, seeing we are members one of another. Every one
should speak the truth with his neighbor: One member in the natural body will
not mock another, nor make a fool of another; and why then should one Christian
by lying mock another, or make a fool of another? Tremellius translates it
thus: Ne fatuum agito, Do not play the fool with him. For certainly he is the
veriest fool, who by lying thinks to make a fool of another, Col. 3. 9. Lie
not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his d^eds.
Gods Commands are not like those that are easily reversed, but they are like
those of the Medes, that cannot be changed. To act or run cross Dan. 6.
to Gods express command (though under pretense of Revelation from God) is as
much as a man's life is worth, as you may see in that sad story, 1 Kings 13.
It Is a dangerou^ thing for a man to neglect one of his commands, who by
Obedientia non discutit Dei mandata, sed facit. Prosper.
another is able to command him into nothing, or into Hell. What God commands
must be put in speedy execution, without denying, or delaying, or disputing the
difficulties that attend it. The great God will not endure to be called to an
account by the poor Creature concerning his Royal Commands; but expects that
with all readiness and cheerfulness Genesis 22.
we should obey what he requires, even when the reason of our obedience is hid
from our eyes; for then grace shines most transparently and gloriously. I have
read of one Johannes Abbas, who being commanded by his Confessor to Cassianus,
l 4. cap. 24.
go some miles every day to water a dry stick, which he accordingly did out of
a pure respect to the command of his Superior, without disputing the reason of
it. Oh, how much more then should we readily obey divine commands, which are
all holy, spiritual, just, and good, considering the Authority, Sovereignty,
and Majesty of the great God, without disputing the reasons of our obedience;
for let a man's reasons, though never so many and weighty, be put into one scale
and Gods absolute command weighed against them in the other, the man may well
write TEKEL, They are weighed in Dan. 5. 27. Psalm. 103. 20.
the balance, and found too light. O Sirs! the Angels that excel in strength
do his Commandments; and shall the Peasant scorn that work in which the Prince
himself is engaged? The Commands of God, both in the Old and New Testament, lie
fair and full against lying: and therefore no wonder, if God revenge the
habitual breach of them in flames of fire. The Holy Ghost in the Hebrew tongue
calls a Lie Aven, which also signifies Iniquity; implying that all lies are
iniquity, and that al^ iniquity is after a sort included in a lie, which does
sufficiently evidence, that lying is no small sin. I might further argue thus,
That which is contrary to God, who is the choicest and the chiefest good; yea,
who is goodness and truth it self, that must needs be the greatest evil: but
lying is contrary to the Nature, Essence, and Being of God, witness the
description that he gives of himself both in the Old and New Testament. And the
Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and
Exodus 34. 6.
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. So Moses in his
Song: He is a God of truth, and without iniquity, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Isa. 65. 16.
just and right is he. So Esaias: He who blesses himself in the earth, shall
bless himself in the God of truth; and he that swears in the earth, shall
swear by the God of truth. So the Psalm. 31. 5. Psalm. 86. 15.
Psalmist: Thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth. Again, Thou, O Lord, art
plenteous in mercy and truth. So in the New Testament: Let God be true, and
every man a liar. Again, They themselves show how ye turned to God from Idols,
to serve the living and true God, Though God can make a Romans 3. 4. Genesis 1.
Chap. 6.
world with a word of his mouth, and mar a world with a word of his mouth; yet
he can neither dye nor lie. Titus 1. 2. In hope of eternal life, which God that
cannot lie, promised before the world began: yea, it is impossible for God to
lie. Heb. 6. 18. That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for
God to lie. Now by all these plain pregnant Texts it is most evident, that lying
is most opposite and contrary to the very Nature, Essence, and Being of God;
and therefore no wonder, if the anger and wrath of God rises high against it.
But,

Secondly, Consider this, that pernicious Lies and Liars are very destructive
to all humane Societies, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths. Lying destroys all
Society, all Commerce, and Converse among the Sons of men. Man (as the
Philosopher observes) is (...), a sociable Creature. Speech is the means
whereby men have society and commerce one with another. Now lying perverts that
order which the God of truth has appointed to be among the Sons of men. It Is
the will and pleasure of God, that the Sons of men conversing together, should
by their words and speeches and discourses impart and communicate their minds,
designs, intentions, and meanings one to another, for the mutual good of one
another, and for the profit and benefit of the whole. Now if there be nothing
in men's words, but lying, deceit, and fraud instead of truth, what can follow
but confusion and desolation? When the language of men was confounded, so that
one could not tell what another spoke, then presently followed the dissolution
of their combination; for the Lord scattered them abroad from thence, upon the
face of all the Earth, and they left off to build the City: when Genesis 11. 7, 8.
one asked brick (says a Rabbin) another brought clay, and R. Sal. The Hebrew
Doctors say, that at this dispersion there were seventy Nations with seventy
sundry languages. Genesis 49. 6. Psalm. 120. 2. Jer. 9. 1. to the 6.
then they fell together by the ears, and one dashed out the others brains; and
by thls means their communion was dissolved, and God brought on them the evil
which they sought to prevent, verse. 4. But surely a lying tongue is a far worse
enemy to Society then an unknown tongue: and much better it is for a man to
have no society at all, then with such as he cannot believe what they say; or
if he do, he shall be sure to be deceived by them. Concerning such, we may well
take up the words of Jacob: O my soul, come not thou into their secret, unto
their assembly; mine honor, be not thou united. And pray with David: Deliver
my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue. Jeremiah did so
loath and abominate the society of Liars, that he had rather live in a
Wilderness, then live among them, or have any thing to do with them. Liars
destroy that Communion and Society that by the Law of God, Nature, and Nations
they ought to preserve and maintain. Lying dissolves that mutual trust that we
should have with one another; for hereby all Contracts, Covenants, and
Intercourse of dealings between man Mendax hoc lucratur, ut cum vera dixerit,
ei non credatur.
and man, which is (as it were) the life of the Kingdom or Commonwealth, are
quite overthrown. When men make no conscience of lying, nor of keeping their
word any further then either fear of loss, or force of Law compels them, all
Civil communion is at an end. There can be no trust where there is no truth,
nor no Commerce with those that cannot be trusted. The Scythians had a Law,
that if any man did (duo peccata contorquere) bind two sins together, a lie and
an oath, he was to lose his head, because this was the way to take away all
faith and truth among men. Had this Law been put in execution in London, I have
reason enough to fear that many Ci^izens would have lost their heads long
before they had lost their houses by the l^te dreadful Fire. Now seeing that
pernicious lying, a course, a trade of lying, is so destructive to humane
Society, why should we wonder to see the Lord appear in flaming fire against
it? But,

Thirdly, Consider, that lying is a sin that is most odiou^ and hateful to God;
yea, a sin that makes men odious and Titus 1. 2. Isa. 65. 16.
truth, and therefore lying cannot but be odious to him. God is said not only
to forbid a lie, but to hate a lie. A lie, it is an ab^mination. Now we
abominate that which is contrary to our natures. Amongst those things that are
an abomination to the Lord, a lying tongue is reckoned, Prove. 6. 16, 17. These
six things does the Lord hate, yea, seven are an abomination to him. A proud
look, a lying tongue, or as the Hebrew runs, a tongue of lying, that is, a
tongue that has learned the trade, and can do it artificially; a tongue that
is accustomed to lying, a tongue that is delighted in lying. So Verse 19. A
false witness that speaks lies, and him that sows discord among brethren.
Among these seven things abominated by God, lying is twice repeated, to note
how great an abomination lying is in the eye and account of God, Prove. 12. 22.
Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord; not only offensive or odious, but
abominable. Liars pervert the end for which God created speech, which was to
give light to the notions of the mind, and therefore the Lord loathes them, and
plagues them in this life with great severity, as you may see in those sad
instances of Gehazi, whose lie was punished 2 Kings 5. 20. to the end. Acts 5.
5. to the 11. Esth. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11.
with a perpetual leprosy upon himself and his posterity; and of Ananias and
Sapphira, who for their lying were punished with present and sudden death; and
of Haman, who slandering Mordecai and the Jews, and by his lies plotting their
ruin, was taken in the same snare that he had laid for them, and both he and
his Sons hanged upon the same Gallows which he had made for innocent Mordecai.
The same Chap. 7. 9. And Chap. 9. 13, 14.
Liar that was feasting with the King one day, was made a feast for Crows the
next day. Dreadful are the threatenings that the great God has given out against
liars, Psalm. 5. 6. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing. Such as lie in
jest, will without repentance go to Hell in earnest. Psalm. 12. 3. The Lord
shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks proud things.
God by one Judgment or another, in one way or another, will cut off all
flattering lying lips, as a rotten member is cut off from the body, or as a
barren tree that is stocked up, that it may cumber the ground no more, Psalm.
120. 2, 3, 4. Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips and from a deceitful
tongue! What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou
false tongue? sharp arrows of the Mighty (God will retaliate sharp for sharp)
with coals of juniper. The coals of Juniper burn hot, and last long (some say,
a month and more) and smell sweet. Now upon these coals will God broil lying
lips, and a deceitful tongue, pleasing himself and others in the execution of
his wrath upon a lying tongue, Prove. 19. 5. A false witness shall not be
unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall not escape. Though men sometimes by
lying may escape the displeasure of men; yet they shall never by lying escape
the wrath and displeasure of God. Wrath is for that man, and that man is for
wrath, who has taught his tongue the trade of lying, Hos. 12. 1. Ephraim daily
increases lies and desolation. Desolation is the fruit and consequent of
lying; sin and punishment are inseparable companions: they who heap up lies,
hasten desolation both upon themselves and the places where they live. Now if
lying be a sin so hateful and odious to God, no wonder, if God appears in
flaming fire against it. But,

Fourthly and lastly, Lying is a sin against the Light and Pomponius Atticus,
Ciceroes great Friend, that he never used lying, neither could he with patience
lend his ear to a Liar. Tennes the Son of Cyrnus (who was worshipped as a God)
was so strict in judgment, that he caused an Ax to be held over the witnesses
head to execute them out of hand, if they were taken with fa^shood or a lie.
Among the Scythians, when their Priests foretold an untruth, they were carried
along upon hurdles full of heath and dry wood drawn by oxen, and manacled hand
and foot, and burnt to death. Aristotle says, by the Arist. Ethic. lib. 4.
cap. 7.
light of natural Reason, that a lie is evil in in self, and cannot be
dispensed withal, it being contrary to the Order of Nature. For (says he) we
have tongues given us to express our minds and meanings one to another by. Now
if our tongues tell more or less then our minds conceive, it is against Nature.
It is said of Epaminondas a Heathen, that he abhorred mendacium jocosum a
jefting lie. Plutarch calls Lying a Tinkerly sin, a sin that is both hateful
and shameful. Euripedes says, that he is unhappy, who rather uses lies,
though seemingly good, then truths when he judges them evil. To think the
truth, says Plato, is honest, but a filthy and dishonest thing to lie. I could
(says my Author) both sigh and smile at the simplicity of some Pagan people in
America, who having told a lie, used to let their tongues blood in expiation
thereof. A good cure for the Squinancy, but no satisfaction for lying. These
Heathens will one day rise in Judgment against such amongst us as make no
conscience of lying. To bring things close; those that lived within and without
the Walls of London, that were given up to a trade, a course of lying, those
persons sinned with a high hand, not only against the Light of Nature, but also
against as clear, as glorious a Gospel Light, as ever shined round a people
since Christ was upon the Earth; and therefore no wonder, if God has laid
their City in ashes. He that s^all seriously dwell upon these four things, viz.
1. That lying is a very great sin. 2. That Lies and Liars are very destructive
to all humane Societies, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths. 3. That Lying is a sin
most hateful and odious to God. 4. That Lying is a sin against the Light and
Law of Nature; he will see cause enough to justify the Lord in that late
dreadful Fire that has thus been amongst us.

But before I close up this Particular, give me leave to say, That this trade,
this course of Lying that brings that sore Judgment of Fire upon Cities and
Countries, I cannot charge with any clear evidence upon those that did truly
fear the Lord, whose habitations were once within or without the Walls of
London, before it was turned into a ruinous heap; and that upon these grounds.

First, Because a trade, a course of Lying is not consistent Psalm. 139. 23, 24.
1 John 3. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
of whoring, of swearing, of cursing, is as inconsistent with a state of Grace,
as a trade, a course of Lying is. I know Jacob lied, and David lied, and Peter
lied; but none of these were ever given up to a trade of lying, to a course of
lying. The best Saints have had their extravagant motions, and have sadly
miscarried as to particular actions: but he Vna actio no^ denominat.
that shall judge of a Christians estate by particular acts, though notorious
bad, will certainly condemn where God ^cquits. We must always distinguish
between some single evil actions and a serious course of evil actions. It is
not this or that particular evil action, but a continued course of evil actions
that denominates a man wicked. As it is not this or that particular good act,
but a continued course of holy actions that denominates a man holy. Every man
is as his course is; if his course be holy, the man is holy; if his course be
wicked, the man is wicked. There is a Maxim in Logic, viz. That no general
Rule can be established upon a particular Instance. And there is another Maxim
in Logic, viz. That no particular Instance can overthrow a general Rule. So
here, look as no man can safely and groundedly conclude from no better premises
then from some few particular actions (though in themselves materially and
substantially good) that this or that man's spiritual estate is good; so on the
other hand, no man ought to conclude because of some particular sinful actions
and extravagant motions, that this or that man's spiritual estate is bad. A
trade of Lying can never stand with a trade of Holiness, a course of Lying can
never stand with a course of Godliness. Though the Needle of the Seamans
Compass may jog this way and that way; yet the bent of the Needle will st^ll be
Northward: So though a Jacob, a David, a Peter may have their particular sinful
joggings this way or that way; yet the bent of their hearts will still be
God-wards, Christ-wards, Heaven-wards, and Holiness-wards. But,

Secondly, Such as did truly fear the Lord within or without London, such did
in their solemn Addresses to the Lord, both together and apart, lament and
bewail that trade, that course of lying that was predominant among many that
day; and therefore I dare not charge the trade, the course of lying upon their
scores. But,

Thirdly, A lie draws its Pedigree from the Devil, and such as make a trade of
lying, such are certainly Satan's Joh. 8. 44. Ye are of your father the devil,
and the 1 Kings 22. 22. Acts 5. 3-10.
lusts of your father ye will do; he was a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a
lie, he speaks of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it. Satan is
the father of all Genesis 3.
sins, as well as the father of lies; but here he is said to be a Liar and the
Father of it, because by lying he first brought sin into the world. Satan began
his Kingdom by a lie, and by lies he still labors to uphold it. He is the
Inventer and Author of all the lies that be in the world. The Devils breasts,
says Luther, are very fruitful with lies. Liars are the Devils children by
imitation; there are none that resemble him so much to the life as Liars do:
they are as like him, as if they were spit out of the very mouth of him. Lying
is a part of the Devils Image. Other sins make men like beasts; but this of
lying makes men like Devils. Leo speaking of Lying, Leo de El^emos. sermon. 4.
says: Totam vim suam in mendacio diabolus collocavit, omniaque deceptionum
genera de hoc venenatissimo artis suae font produxit: The Devil has placed
his whole strength in lying, and from this most poisoned fountain of his craft,
has he brought forth all kinds of deceit. Now upon this account also, I dare
not charge the trade of lying upon such who feared the Lord within or without
the Walls of London. Though many that make a profession of Christ, are no more
like Christ then Michols Image of Goats hair was like David; Joh. 1. 16.
yet all such as are really united to Christ, they are like to Christ, they
bear upon them the Image of Christ, they resemble him to the life. Jesus Christ
is such a fountain, in which whosoever bathes, and of which whosoever drinks, 2
Cor. 3. 18.
they shall be sure to be changed into the same likeness from glory to glory
(that is, from a lower degree of grace, to a higher*degree) even as by the
Spirit of the Lord. Such as truly fear the Lord, have an Image of Righteousness
and Phil. 4. 23, 24.
Holiness stamped upon them, and do more resemble Christ then Satan; and
therefore the trade of lying may not be charged upon them. But,

Fourthly, Have they not chosen rather to suffer, then by Jerome writes of a
brave Woman, that being upon the Rack, bad her Persecutors do their worst; for
she was resolved rather to dye then to lie. Has not much of this spirit been
upon them; and therefore I dare not charge the trade of lying upon them? But,

Fifthly, Such as truly fear the Lord, they hate lying, Psalm. 119 163. I hate
and abhor lying. David hated lying as he hated Hell it self. So Prove. 13. 5. A
righteous man hates lying. Lying is a noisome stinking weed, and therefore a
righteous man abhors to touch it, he hates to come near it, and can by no means
endure the scent of it in others, least of all in himself. Justin Martyr
speaking of the persecuted Justin Martyr Apol. 2. pro Christianis.
Christians, has this memorable Saying (In nostra est potestate, ut quum
inquirimur negemus; sed vivere nolu^us m^ndaciter quicquam loquentes) It is in
our power, when we are sought for and examined, to deny what we are, what we
believe; but we will not live speaking any thing untruly. These blessed Souls
so hated and abhorred lying, that they would rather dye then lie. A lie, says
Plato, is odious not only to the Gods, but also to every wise man. Cleobulus,
another Heathen, affirms, that every wise prudent man hates a lie. Erasmus
had such an Antipathy against lying, that from his youth he would usually
tremble at the fight of a noted Liar. Now upon this account also, I dare not
charge the trade of lying upon their score that truly fear the Lord. But,

Sixthly, Lying is that sad Character and black Brand that the Lord has only
put upon wicked and ungodly men, Psalm. 4. 2. O ye sons of men (ye Grandees who
are potent at Court) how long will ye turn my glory into shame? how long will
ye love vanity and seek after leasing? Psalm. 58. 3. The wicked are estranged
from the womb, they go astray as soon as they be born speaking lies, no sooner
could they do any thing, but they were doing evil, lisping out lies even as
soon as they were born. Isa. 30. 8, 9. Now go, write it before them in a table,
and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come, for ever and ever.
Why, what must he write? mark verse. 9. That this is a rebellious people, lying
children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord. Now upon this
account also, I dare not charge the trade of lying upon them that feared the
Lord in that great City before it was laid in ashes. But,

Seventhly, A trade of lying is inconsistent with the Relation of Children,
Isa. 63. 8. Surely they are my people, children that will not lie, so he was
their Savior. God makes this the Col. 3. 9.
ear-mark of his people, that they are children that will not lie. When the
Heathen Philosopher was asked, in what things men were most like unto God, he
answered, In their speaking of truth. Not lying is one of the choice Characters
by which the Lord does difference and distinguish his own peculiar people from
other men, Zepha. 3. 13. The remnant of Israel shall do no iniquity, nor speak
lies: neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth. In the
primitive times this was a common Saying: Christianus est, non mentietur, He is
a Christian, he will not lie. Rev. 14. 5. And in their mouth was found no
guile: for they are without fault before the Throne of God. Now upon this
account also, I dare not charge the trade of lying upon thos^ gracious Souls
that feared the Lord within or without the Walls of London, before it was
turned into a ruinous heap. But,

Eighthly and lastly, Liars are reckoned amongst the basest Levit. 19. 11. Ye
shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another. Prove. 6. 16,
17, 18, 19. These six things does the Lord hate, yea, seven are an abomination
to him. A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, An
heart that devises wicked imaginations, fee^ that be swift in running to
mischief. A false witness that speaks lies, and him that sows discord among
brethren. So the Apostle Paul setting down a Catalogue of the basest and worst
of sinners, he ranks liars in the rere of them, 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10. Knowing this,
that the law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and
disobedient; for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and profane, for
murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers, for man-slayers. For
whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for men-stealers,
for liars, for perjured persons. So John numbers them amongst the damned crew,
Rev. 21. 8. That shall be sent to hell, and that must perish for ever. Rev. 21.
8. But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars shall have their part
in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.
In this Catalogue of the damned crew, the fearful are placed in the Front, and
the liars in the Rere. See once more how the Holy Ghost couples liars, Rev. 22.
15. For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and murderers, and whoremongers, and
idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie. Thus you see in all these
Scriptures, that liars are numbered up among the rabble of the most desperate
and deplorable Wretches that are in all the world; and therefore upon this
account also, I cannot charge the trade of lying upon them that feared the
Lord, whose habitations were once within or without the Walls of London.

The eighth sin that brings the Judgment of Fire, is men's Jude 7. Even as Sodom
and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, in like manner giving themselves over
to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example,
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. In these words there are these three
things observable.

First, The places punished, and they are Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim.
Egesippus, and Stephanus say, that ten Cities were destroyed, Deuteronomy. 29. 23.
Hos. 11. 8.
and some say, thirteen Cities were destroyed when Sodom was destroyed: but
these things I shall not impose upon you as Articles of Faith. The overthrow of
Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them was total, both in respect of the
Inhabitants, and the places themselves; their sin was universal, and their
punishment was as universal. That pride, idleness, and fullness of bread that is
charged upon them by the Prophet Ezekiel, did usher in those abominable Ezekiel.
16. 49, 50.
wickednesses that laid all waste and desolate.

Secondly, The sins that brought these punishments, viz. The giving themselves
over to fornication, and going after strange flesh: The first is, Giving
themselves over to fornication, Now the word [Fornication] is not to be taken
properly and strictly for that act of uncleanness that is often committed
between persons unmarried; but it is here to be taken for all sorts of carnal
uncleanness. The Heathen thought fornication no vice, and therefore they made
it a common custom, and were wont to pray thus: The Gods increase the number of
the Harlots. The second sin that is charged upon them is, Their going after
strange flesh ((...) another flesh, as the words in the Original run.) The
Apostle in this modest and covert expression, Going after strange flesh, or
other flesh, or another flesh, does hint to us their monstrous and unlawful
lusts that were against the Course, Light, and Law of Nature; they gave
themselves up to such filthiness, as is scarce to be named among men; they went
after other flesh then what Nature or the God of Nature had appointed. The Genesis
2. 21. ult.
great God never appointed that male and male, but only that male and female
should be one flesh; it is impossible that man and man in that execrable act
should make one flesh, as man and woman do. The flesh of a male to a male must
needs be another flesh. The Apostle Paul expresses their filthiness thus. For
even their women did change the natural Romans 1. 26, 27.
use into that which is against nature; and likewise also the men leaving the
natural use of the women, burned in their lust one toward another: men with
men, working that which is unseemly. Chrysostom well observes on these words,
that whereas by Gods Ordinance in lawful copulation by Marriage, two became one
flesh, both Sexes were joined together in one; by Sodomitical uncleanness the
same flesh is divided into two, men with men working uncleanness as with women
of one Sex, making (as it were) two. The Gen^i^es had left the God of Nature,
and therefore the Lord in his just Judgment left them to leave the order of
Nature, and so to cast scorn and comtempt upon the whole humane Nature.

Again, There is another sort of pollution by strange flesh, Levit. 18. 23.
and that is a carnal joining of a man with a beast, which is prohibited:
Neither shall thou lie with any beast. Oh, what a sink of sin is in the nature
of man, the heart of man! And as this pollution is prohibited, so it is punished
with death. And Chap. 20. 15.
if a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death, and ye shall slay
the beast. The Lord, to show the horridness and the hainousness of this beastly
sin, commands that even the poor, harmless, innocent beast (that is neither
capable of sin, nor of provoking or enticing man to sin) must be put to death.
Oh, how great is that pollution that pollutes the very beasts, and that makes
the unclean more unclean, and that does debase the beast below a beast! Now to
this sort of pollution the beastly Sodomites had without doubt given up
themselves.

The third thing observable in the words, is the severity of their punishment,
Suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. We Sodomites burned in their lusts one
toward another, Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and
fire, from the Lord out of heaven. The Lord rained brimstone and fire from the
Lord, (that is) by an elegant Hebraism, from himself; it being usual with the
Hebrews to put the Noun for the Pronoun, as you may see by comparing the
Scriptures in the Margin together. Genesis 1. 27. 1 Samuel 15. 22. 2 Chronicles. 7. 2. 1
Kings 8. 1.
Now this fiery vengeance came not from any inferior cause, but from the
supreme cause, even God himself. This brimstone and material fire that was
rained by the Lord out of Heaven, was not by any ordinary course of Nature, but
by the immediate almighty power of God. Doubtless it was the supernatural and
miraculous work of the Lord, and not from any natural cause, that such showers,
not of water, as when the Old world was drowned; but of material fire and
brimstone, should fall from Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah (to which add Adama
and Zeboim; for all these four Cities were burnt together) God rained, not
sprinkled, yea, he rained not fire only, but fire and brimstone for the
increase of their torment, and that they might have a Hell above ground, a Hell
on this s^de Hell. They had hot fire for their burning lusts, and stinking
brimstone for their stinking brutishness. They burned with vile and unnatural
lusts, and therefore against the course of Nature fire falls down from Heaven,
and devours them, and their stinking abominable ^^lthiness is punished with the
stench of brimstone mingled with fire. Thus God delights to suit men's
punishments to their sins; yea, that temporal fire that God rained out of
Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah, was but a forerunner of their everlasting
punishment in that Lake which burns with Rev. 21. 8.
fire and brimstone for evermore. The temporal punishment of the impenitent
Sodomites, did but make way to their Jude 7.
eternal punishments, as Jude tells us. I readily grant, that the fire of Hell
was typified by that fire which fell from Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah: but I
cannot conceive, that the Apostle Jude in the place last-cited, does intend or
design to prove that the Sodomites were destroyed by Hellfire; for in the
History of Genesis (to which the Apostle alludes) there is no mention at all of
Hellfire or of Eternal fire; and doubtless the example that should warn
sinners to repent of their sins, and to turn to the most High, is to be taken
from the History in Genesis. I cannot at present see how Sodom and Gomorrah can
be set forth as an example to sinners by suffering the punishment of Hellfire,
when the History is wholly silent as to any such fire. Some to mollify the
seeming austerity of that Phrase which Jude u^es, viz. Eternal fire, read the
words thus: Were made an example of eternal fire, suffering vengeance; by which
construction they gather, that the fire which has irreparably destroyed Sodom
and Gomorrah, was a type and figure of that fire of Hell, of that Eternal fire
that is reserved for wicked men, and by which sinners ought to be warned.
Others by eternal fire understand the duration of the effects of the first
temporal punishment, the soil thereabout wearing the marks of divine
displeasure to this very day. Several Authors write, that the Air there is so
infectious, that no creature can live there; Josephus, Tertullian, Augustine,
etc.
and though the Apples and other fruit that grow there seem pleasant unto the
eye; yet if you do but touch them, they presently turn into cinders and ashes.
The stinking Lake of Asphaltes near to Sodom, is left as a perpetual Monument
of Gods Vengeance, killing all fish that swimmeth in it, and fowls that fly
over it. Others by eternal fire understand an utter destruction, according to
that 2 Pet. 2. 6. And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes,
condemned them with an overthrow (that is, utterly destroyed them) making them
an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly. God hangs them up in
Gibbets, as it were, that others might hear and fear, and not dare to do
wickedly as they had done.

What though it be said, that the fire wherewith these Sodomites were destroyed
was eternal; yet there is no necessity to understand it of Hellfire: for even
that very fire which consumed those Cities may be called Eternal, because the
punishment that was inflicted on Sodom and Gomorrah by fire, was a punishment
that should last as long as the world lasted. God resolved those Cities should
never be rebuilt, but remain perpetual desolations in all generations. Now in
this sense the word [Eternal] is often used in the Scripture. Again the fire
and brimstone that fell upon Sodom and Gomorrah, was a type and figure of that
eternal fire or those eternal torments that shall be inflicted upon all
impenitent sinners for ever and ever. The sum of all is this, that the
Sodomites by giving themselves over to fornication, and by going after strange
flesh, did provoke the Lord to rain Hell out of Heaven upon them: they did
provoke the Lord to rain material fire and brimstone both upon their persons
and their habitations. Now give me leave to say, that doubtless the body of the
inhabitants of that famous City which is now laid in ashaes, were as free from
giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, as any in
any part of the Nation; yea, more free then many in some parrs of the Nation:
yea, give me leave to say, that I cannot see how these sins that are charged
upon the Sodomites, can be clearly or groundedly charged upon any of the
precious Servants of the Lord, that did truly fear him in that renowned City:
And my Reasons are these,

First, Because in all their solemn and secret Addresses to the

Secondly, Because men's giving themselves over to fornication, preserves his
Chosen from them. He shall be an Apo^lo to me, that can produce any one
instance in the Old or New Testament of any one person that after real and
through Conversion, did ever give himself over to fornication, and to go after
strange flesh. Aristotle calls beastiality a furpassing wickedness. By the Laws
of those two Emperors, Theodisius and Arcadius, Sodomites were adjudged to the
fire. In the Council of Vienna, the Templers who were found guilty of this sin,
were decreed to be burnt. And among the Romans, it was lawful for him who was
attempted to that abuse to kill him who made the assault. Tertullian brings in
Christianity triumphing over Paganism, because this sin was peculiar to
Heathens, and that Christians never changed the Sex, nor accompanied with any
but their own wives. This and such like (as Tertullian speaks) being not so
much to be called offenses as monsters, and not to be named without holy
detestation by Saints, though they be committed without shame by Sodomites. The
Saxons, who of old inhabited this Land, Boniface.
strangled the Adulteress being taken, and then burnt her body with fire, and
hanged the Adulterer over a flaming fire, burning him by degrees till he dyed.
Opilius Macrinus an Julius Capit^linus.
Emperor caused the body of the Adulterer and the Whore to be joined together,
and so burnt with fire. Aurelianus caused the Adulterers legs to be bound to
the boughs of two trees bent together, and then violently being lifted up
again, his body was torn asunder. And the Julian Law among the Romans punished
Adultery with death, by cutting off the heads of those that were guilty of that
fact. And the Turks stone Adulterers to death. Zaleucus King of the Locrians
ordained, that Adulterers should have their eyes put out; and therefore when
his Son was taken in Adultery, that he might both keep the Law, and be
compassionate to his Son, he put forth one of his own eyes to redeem one of his
Sons. I have read of some Heathens that have punished this sin with a most
shameful death, and the death was this; they would have the Adulterers or
Adulteresses head to be put into the paunch of a beast, where lay all the filth
and uncleaness of it, and there to be stif^ed to death. This was a fit
punishment for so filthy a sin. In old time the Egyptians Diodor.
used to punish Adulte^y on this sort; the man with a thousand jerks with a
reed, and the woman with cutting off her nose: but he who forced a free woman
to his lusts, had his privy members cut off. But,

Thirdly, Such who give themselves over to fornication, overthrow the state of
mankind, while no man knows his

Fourthly, These expressions of giving themselves over to

First, Their making constant provisions for their base lusts. O the time, the
pains, the cost, the charge that such Romans 13. ult.
are at to make provision for their unsatiable lusts!

Secondly, It implies an excessive violent spending of their Sodomitical
uncleanness. Pliny tells of Cornelius Gallus Pliny, lib. 7.
and Q. Elerius, two Roman Knights, that dyed in the very action of filthiness.
Theodebert the eldest Son of Glotharius Pontanus. Fulgos, lib. 6. cap. 12.
dyed amongst his Whores; so did Bertrane Ferrier at Bacelone in Spain; Giachet
Geneve of Saluces, who had both wife and children of his own, being carnally
joined with a young woman, was suddenly smitten with death; his wife and
children wondering why he stayed so long in his Study, when it was time to go to
bed called him, and knocked at his door very hard, but when no answer was made,
they broke open the doors that were locked on the inner side, and found him
lying upon the woman stark dead, and her dead also. Claudus of Asses,
Counselor of the Parliament of Paris (a desperate Persecutor of the
Protestants) whilst he was in the very act of committing filthiness with one of
his waiting Maids, was taken with an Apoplexy, which immediately after made an
end of him. Many other instances might be produced, but let these suffice.

Thirdly, It implies their impudency and shamelesness in Jer. 3. 3. Chap. 6.
15. Isa. 3. 10. Genesis 13. 13.
world; they were not ashamed, neither could they blush: hence it is, that the
men of Sodom are said to be sinners before the Lord; that is, they sinned
openly, publicly, and shamelesly, without any regard to the eye of God at all.
Bring Genesis 19. 5.
them out to us, that we may know them. O faces hatched with impudency! they
shroud not their sins in a mantle of secrecy, but proclaim their filthiness
before all the world, they had out-sinn'd all shame; and therefore they gloried
in their shame: they were so arrogant and impudent in sinning, that they
proclaimed their filthiness upon the housetop. But,

Fourthly, It implies their resolvedness and obstinacy in Genesis 14. 10, 11, 12.
the spoiling and plundering of their Cities, and by taking away of their
victuals (fullness of bread was a part of their sin, and now cleanness of teeth
is made a piece of their punishment in Gods just Judgment) and by Lots
admonition Genesis 19. 11.
and mild opposition. It is observable, that when they were smitten with
blindness, they wearied themselves to find the door. God smote them with
blindness, both of body and mind; and yet they continued groaping to find the
door, being highly resolved upon buggery and beastiality, though they dyed for
it. O the hideous wickedness and prodigious madness of these Sodomites, that
when divine Justice had struck them blind, their hearts should be so
desperately set upon their lusts, as to weary themselves to find the door! But
what will not Satan's bondslaves and firebrarnds of Hell do? Sottish and
besotted sinners will never tremble when Phil. 2. 12.
God strikes. But,

Fifthly, These expressions of giving themselves over to Romans 1. 32.
pleasure, content, and satisfaction that they took in those abominable
practices. They have chosen their own ways, and their souls delight in their
abominations. They had Isa. 66. 3. 2 These. 2. 12. 2 Pet. 2. 13.
pleasure in unrighteousness. Luther tells us of a certain Grandee in his
Country, that was so besotted with the sin of Whoredom, that he was not ashamed
to say, that if he might ever live here, and be carried from one Whore-house to
another, there to satisfy his lusts, he would never desire any other Heaven.
This filthy Grandee did afterward breathe out his wretched Soul betwixt two
notorious Harlots. All the pleasure and Heaven that these filthy Sodomites look
after, was to satisfy their brutish lusts. Hark, Scholar (said the Harlot to
Apulcius) it is but a bitter-sweet that you are so sond of; and this the
Sodomites found true at the long run, when God showred down fire and brimstone
upon them. But,

Sixthly and lastly, These words of giving themselves over to fornication, and
going after strange flesh, implies their Genesis 6.
with a Flood, then the Sodomites were secure when God Genesis 19. 14.
rained fire and btimstone out of Heaven upon them. Mercury could not kill
Argus till he had cast him into a sleep, and with an enchanted Rod closed his
eyes: No more could the Devil have hurt these Sodomites, if he had not first
lulled them asleep in the bed of security. Carnal security opens the door for
all impiety to enter into the Soul. Pompey, when he had in vain assaulted a
City, and could not take it by force, devised this Stratagem in way of
agreement, he told them he would leave the Siege, and make Peace with them,
upon condition that they would let in a few weak, sick, and wounded Soldiers
among them to be cured. They let in the Soldiers, and when the City was
secure, the Soldiers let in Pompeys Army. A carnal settled security will let in
a whole Army of lusts into the Soul; and this was the Sodomites case. To sum up
all, those expressions in Jude, verse. 7. of giving themselves over to
fornication, and going after strange flesh, do imply or take in these six
things last mentioned, which things will not stand with the truth of Grace or
state of Grace; and therefore those sins that are specified by Jude cannot be
charged with any clear, fair, or full evidence upon the people of God, who did
truly fear him within or without the Walls of London. But should this Treatise
fall into any of their hands, who have given themselves over to fornication, or
to go after strange flesh, then I would say, that it very highly concerns all
such persons to lay their hands upon their loins, and to say, we are the very
men, the sinners, the monsters that have turned a rich and populous City into a
ruinous heap. But,

The ninth sin that brings the sore Judgment of Fire upon a Jer. 7. ult. But if
you will not hearken unto me, to hallow the Sabbath Day, and not bear a burden,
even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath Day, then will I
kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of
Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched. In this memorable Scripture you may
observe. 1. A specification of the Judgment that God will punish Prophaners of
his Sabbath with, and that is fire. 2. The specification of the object that
this fire shall fall upon, viz. a City, not a Town, a Village, or any other
mean place, but a City, a stately City, a populous City, a trading City, a
secure City. 3. Here is the specification of the City, viz. not Isa. 52. 1.
Psalm. 48. 1-8. Psalm. 87. 3. Jer. 22. 8.
every City neither, but Jerusalem, the City of Cities, the best of Cities, the
beloved City, the joyous City, the glorious City, the renowned City, the
crowned City, the Metropolitan City, the City of God, the wonder of the World,
the joy of the whole Earth; yet God th^eatens to destroy this Jerusalem with
fire and flames for profaning of his Sabbath. But did God only threaten
Jerusalem? No, for he executed his threatenings upon it, as you may see in that
So 2 Chronicles. 36. 17, 18, 19. Psalm. 74 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
2 Kings 25. 8, 9, 10. And in the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month
(which is the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylen) came
Nebuzar-adan captain of the guard, a servant of the King of Babylon to
Jerusalem. And ^e Those Chaldeans that set Jerusalem on fire, came from literal
Babylon, and whether those Chaldeans that first set London inflames, came not
from mystical Babylon, I shall not here enquire nor dispute.
burnt the house of the Lord, and the Kings house, and all the houses of
Jerusalem, and every great man's house burnt he with fire. And all the army of
the Chaldees that were with the captain of the guard, brake down the walls of
Jerusalem round about. The same you have Jer. 52. 12, 13, 14. The Jews were
great prophaners of the Sabbath. Nehem. 13. 15, 16, 17, 18. In those days saw I
in Judah some treading winepresses on the sabbath; and bringing in sheaves, and
lading asses, as also wine, grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens, which
they brought into Jerusalem on the sabbath day: and I testified against them in
the day wherein they sold victual^. There dwelt men of Tire also therein, which
brought fish, and all manner of ware, and sold on the sabbath unto the children
of Judah, and in Jerusalem. Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said
unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day?
Did not your fathers thus? and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and
upon this city? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by prophaneing the sabbath.
Now this is observable, that as they had profaned the Sabbath, so Nebuzaradon
set their Temple on fire, and their Noble men's houses on fire, and all the
considerable men's houses in Jerusalem on fire on their Sabbath day I know
Jeremy says, it was on the tenth day, Jer. 52. 13. which several of the
Learned thus reconcile, viz. That on the seventh day, which was their Sabbath,
Nebuzaradon kindled a fire in their habitations, and burnt them all quite down
on the tenth. Now Calvin upon the Text gives these Reasons of Gods severity
against them for profaning his Sabbath. First, because it was an easy Precept
to cease from labor one day in seven; and therefore they that would not herein
obey, were worthy of all severity, as Adam for eating the forbidden fruit. 2.
Because the Sabbath was a sign of Exodus 31. 13. 17.
Gods people by him peculiarly chosen; and therefore not to rest now, was a
gross neglect of upholding the memorial of the greatest Privilege that ever
was bestowed upon mortal men. 3. Because the Lord would by their keeping of a
rest now from servile works, draw them to a rest from the servile works of sin,
as he rested from the works of Creation. To which others add a fourth, viz.
That it might always be remembered, that the whole World was created by God,
that we might acknowledge his infinite Power and Wisdom herein appearing. And
others add a fifth, viz. Because by keeping the Sabbath Day (it being the day
wherein all religious Duties were done) all the exercises of Religion is meant,
which if it had been purely upheld, both Princes, Nobles, Priests, and People
should have flourished for ever, and never have known what 'twas to have their
houses set on fire about their ears. Now is not famous London the sad
Counterpane of desolate Jerusal^m? a sore and unquenchable Fire has turned
Englands Metropolis into ashes and rubbish. But,

That the Lord may appear most just and righteous in inflicting this dreadful
Judgment of Fire upon those that profaned his Sabbaths in London, consider
seriously with me these twelve things.

First, That God has fenced this Command more strongly

First, It is marked with a Memento above all other Commands, Exodus 20. 8.
Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy, and that partly, because we are so
desperately apt and prone to forget it; and partly, because none can keep it
holy when it comes, that do not remember it before it comes; and partly,
because this is one of the greatest (if not absolutely the greatest) of all the
Commandments: it is sometimes put for all the Ten; it is the Synopsis of them
all: and partly, because Philo Judaeus says, that the fourth Commandment is a
famous Precept, and profitable to excite men to all kind of virtue and piety.
the observation of all the Commandments depends chiefly upon the observation
of this fourth. None walk so much after the Spirit on other days, as they who
are most in the Spirit on the Lords day. There are none that walk so close with
God all the six days, as those that keep closest to God on the seventh day. In
the due observation of this Command, obedience to all the rest is comprised;
and partly, because this Command has least light of Nature to direct us to the
observation of it; and partly, because the forgetting of this Duty, and
profaning of this Day, is one of the greatest sins that a people can be guilty
of: it is a violation of all the Decalogue at once: it is a sin against all the
concernments and Commandments of God at once. But,

Secondly, It is delivered both negatively and affirmatively,

Thirdly, It has more Reasons to enforce it, then any other Precept, viz. its
equity, Gods bounty, his own Pattern,

Fourthly, It is put in the Close of the first, and beginning

Fifthly, It is very considerable also, that this Command is more frequently
repeated, then others of the Commands Exodus 20. 31. Exodus 14. 34. Exodus 24. 35.
Levit. 19 3. Levit. 28. 30. God would have Israel know in these Scriptures last
cited, that their busiest times, as earing and harvest; yea, and the very
building of the Tabernacle must give way to this Precept.

Secondly, Consider that God is highly pleased and delighted Jer. 17 24, 25.
Now in this promise he shows, that the flourishing estate both of Church and
State, depends greatly upon the sanctification of this day. Two things are
observable in this promise. First, the duty unto which the promise is made, and
that is in verse. 24. 2. Observe the reward that is promised, and that is
twofold. 1. The first concerns the Commonwealth and Civil State, verse. 25. as
if he should say, I will maintain the honor and dignity, the wealth and
strength, the peace and safety of this Nation. The second blessing that is
promised, concerns the Church and state of Religion, verse 26. As if he should
say, my solemn Assemblies shall be duly frequented, and I will continue my own
Worship in the purity, liberty, and power of it. But,

Thirdly, Consider that all public Judgments and common Calamities that ever
befell the people of God, are imputed by the Holy Ghost to no sin more then to
the profanation Prophaners of the Sabbath were to be put to death, they were
to be cut off. Exodus 31. 14, 15. This Scripture includes not only death
inflicted by the Magistrate, according to that Numb. 35. 36. but also the
immediate stroke of God when that was neglected. If you turn to that Ezekiel. 20.
13. 21. you shall find that God threatens Sabbath-prophanation with his
consuming fire. Now what City, Gates, Palaces, stately Structures, strong Holds
can stand before divine fury?
of the Sabbath, 2 Chronicles. 36. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. turn to it: So N^h^m 13. 15,
16-18. Ezekiel. 22. 26.-31 Her Priests have violated my law, and have profaned my
holy things: they have put no difference between the holy and prothane, neither
have they showed difference between the unclean and the clean, and have hid
their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am profaned among ^h^m. Therefore have I
poured out my indignation upon them, I have consumed them with the fire of my
wrath: their own w^y have I recompensed upon their own heads, says the Lord
God. Levit. 26. 31, 32, 33. And I will make your Cities waste, and bring your
Sanctuaries unto desolation, and will not smell the savor of your sweet
od^u^s. And I will bring the land into d^solation, and your enemies which dwell
therein shall be astonished at it. And I will scatter you among the Heathen,
and will draw out a sword after you: and your land shall be desolate, and your
cities waste. I but what i^ the reason, why God brings those two terrible
Judgments of Fire and Sword upon them? The resolution of this Question you have
in verse. 34. 35. Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths as long as it lies
desolate, and ye be in your enemies land, even then shall the land rest and
enjoy her sab baths. As long as it lies desolate it shall rest, because it did
not rest in your sabbaths when ye dwelt upon it. The land did not rest in your
sabbaths, says the Lord, when ye dwelt upon it. But when it is eased from the
wicked weight of such Inhabitants, which brought upon it heavy curses, and
toyled, and tired it out with continual tillage, it shall then rest, and be at
quie^. According to the Law of God the Land should have rested every seventh
year, Levit. 25. 3. But they got out the very heart of the land to sp^nd on
their lusts: but says God, I will ease the land of such inhabitants, and then
it shall in a Lam. 1. 7.
manner take its recreation, then it shall rest, and take its own pleasure.
Where there is not a resting from sin, there Sabbaths are not truly kept.
Profaning the Sabbath brings most desolating and destroying Judgments upon a
professing people. The first blow given to the German Churches was on the
Sabbath Day. For on that day Prague was lost; the Sabbaths were woefully
profaned amongst them: their Nobility thought it was for their not trimming
and beautifying of their Churches; but better and wiser men concluded, it was
for their profaning of the Lords day. Some are of opinion, that the Flood
began on the Lords day, from that Genesis 7. they being grown notorious prophaners
of the Sabbath. The Council of Matiscon in France attributed the irruption of
the Goths and Vandals to their profanation of the Sabbath. But,

Fourthly, Consider there are singular blessings which the Ezekiel. 20. 12.
Moreover also I gave them my sabbaths to be a sign between me and them, that
they may know that I am the Lord that sanctify them. The singular blessings
that the right sanctifying of the Sabbath will bring upon us, are, 1.
Spiritual; they that conscientiously sanctify the Sabbath, they shall see and
know the work of God, the work of Grace upon their own Souls. There are many
precious Christians that have a work of God, a work of Grace upon their own
Souls, who would give ten thousand worlds (were there so many in their hands to
give) to see that work, to know that work. Oh, but now they that sanctify the
Sabbath, they shall both see and know the work of God upon their own Souls. And
they shall find ^he Lord carrying on the work of Grace and Holiness in their
Souls; they shall find the Lord destroying their sins, and filling their hearts
with joy, and with a blessed assurance of his favor and love, Isa. 56. 6, 7.
Also the sons of the stranger that join themselves to the Lord to serve him,
and to love the Name of the Lord, to be his servants. Every one that keeps
the sabbath from polluting it, and takes hold on my Covenant. Even them will I
bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their
burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon my Altar; for mine
house shall be called an house of prayer for all people. So Isa. 58. 13, 14. If
thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy
day, and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and
shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor
speaking thine own words: then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord. Now in
the second place, the other blessings that the right sanctifying of the Sabbath
will invest us with, are temporal blessings; for so they follow in the
Scripture last cited. And I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the
earth, here is honor, and esteem, and safety; and feed thee with the heritage
of Jacob thy father. Now the Land of Canaan was the Inheritance Genesis 28. 13.
And Chap. 48. 4.
which God promised to Jacob. Hereby is noted that comfortable provision that
God would make for them that sanctified his Sabbaths: Such as make the Sabbath
their delight, they shall never want protection nor provision, God will be a
Wall of fire about them, and a Canaan to them. But,

Fifthly, Consider that our Lord Jesus, who is the Lord Math. 12. 8. Deuteronomy. 18.
18, 19.
hear, did alter it from the seventh day to the first day of the week, which we
now keep: For the holy Evangelists note, that our Lord came into the midst of
the Assembly on the two first days of the two weeks immediately following his
Resurrection, and then blessed the Church, breathing on them the Holy Ghost,
Joh. 20. 19-26. Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week,
when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear of the
Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and says unto them, Peace be unto
you. And after eight days, again his disciples were within, and Thomas with
them, then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said,
Peace ^e unto you. Look as Christ was forty days instructing Moses in Sinai,
what he should teach, and how he should govern the Church under the Law: so he
continued forty days teaching his Disciples what they shoult preach, and how
they should govern the Church under the Gospel, Acts 1. 2, 3. Until the day in
which he was taken up, after that he through the Holy Ghost had given
commandments unto the Apostles whom he had chosen. To whom also he showed
himself alive after his Passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them
forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God. And it
is not to be doubted, but that within those forty days he likewise ordained, on
what day they should likewise keep the Sabbath; and it is observable, that on
this first day of the week, he sent down from Heaven the Holy Ghost upon his
Apostles, Acts 2. 1-4. And when the day of the Pentecost was fully come, they
were all with one accord in one place. And they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the spirit gave them
utterance. So that on that day they first began, and ever after continued the
public exercise of their Ministry. Christ who was Lord of the Sabbath, Mark 2.
28. had a sovereign right to change and alter it to what day he pleased. But,

Sixthly, Consider that according to the Lords mind and Cor. 16. 1, 2. Now
concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches
^^ Galatia. Even so do ye upon the first day of the week, let every one of you
lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there be no gathering when
I come. In which words you may observe these five things.

First, That the Apostles ordained this day to be kept holy,

Secondly, That the day is named the first day of the

Thirdly, Every first day of the week, which shows its

Fourthly, That it was ordained in the Churches of Galatia, Corinth, and he
settled one uniform in all the Churches of the Saints, therefore it was
universal, 1 Cor. 14. 33. For God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace,
as in all Churches of the Saints.

Fifthly, That there should be collections for the poor on that day, after the
other Ordinances were ended. Now why Cor. 11. 23. For I have received of the
Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night
in which he was betrayed, took bread. 1 Cor. 14. 37. If any man think himself
to be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write
unto you, are the Commandments of the Lord. Now mark, he wrote to them, and
ordained among them to keep their Sabbath on the first day of the week;
therefore to keep the Sabbath on that day, is the very Commandment of the Lord.
But,

Seventhly, Consider, the Apostles on that day ordinarily Joh. 20. 19-26. Acts
20, 7. And upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to
break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow, and
continued his speech until midnight, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 11. 23. But,

Eighthly, Consider, such things as are named the Lords in As the Word of the
Lord, 1 Timothy 6. 3. The Cup of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 27. The Supper of the Lord,
1 Cor. 11. 20. And so the Lords Day, Rev. 1. 10. I was in the Spirit on the
Lords day. Now why does John call it the Lords day? but because it was a day
known to be generally kept holy, to the honor of the Lord Jesus (who rose from
death to life upon that day) throughout all the Churches which the Apostles had
planted, which St. John calls the Lords day, that he might the better stir up
Christians to a thankful remembrance of their Redemption by Christ's
Resurrection from the dead. But,

Ninthly, Consider, that a right sanctifying of the Sabbath Ezekiel. 20. When the
primitive Christians had this question put to them, Servasti Dominicum? Have
thou kept the Lords day? answered Christianus sum, omittere non possum, I am a
Christian, I cannot but keep it.
20. And hallow my sabbaths, and they shall be a sign between me and you, that
ye may know that I am the Lord your God. So Exodus 31. 13. Speak thou also unto
the Children of Israel, saying, Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a
sign between me and you, throughout your generations, that ye may know that I
am the Lord that does sanctify you. Look as Circumcision and the Passover
were signs that the Jews were in Covenan^ with God; so likewise was the
Sabbath, Ezekiel. 31. 13. and because it was a sign of the Covenant between God
and them. Verse. 16. (Wherefore the Children of Israel shall keep the sabbath,
to observe the sabbath throughout their generations for a perpetual Covenant.)
God tells them, that they must observe it for a perpetual Covenant: and hence
it was, that when they violated the Sabbath, God accounted it the violation of
the Covenant between him and them. The sanctifying of the Sabbath in the
primitive times, was the main Character by which sincere Christians were
differenced from others; they judged of men's sanctity by their sanctifying of
the Sabbath* And indeed as there cannot be a greater argument or evidence of a
profane heart then the profaning the Sabbath: so there cannot be a greater
argument or evidence of a gracious heart then a right sanctifying of the
Sabbath. But,

Tenthly, Consider, a right sanctifying of the Sabbath will 10.
be a most sure and certain pledge, pawn, and earnest of our keeping of an
everlasting Sabbath with God in Heaven, Heb. 4. 9. There remains therefore a
rest to the people of God, Gr. a sabbatism, an eternal rest, a sabbath that
has no evening Now mark, if this Sabbath be a sign and pledge of Heaven, then
we must keep it till we come there. For if we lose the pledge of a benefit, we
lose the evidence of that benefit whereof it is a pledge. A man that is in the
Spirit on the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. he is in Heaven on the Lords day: there
cannot be a more lively resemblance of Heaven on this side Heaven, then the
sanctifying of the Sabbath in a heavenly manner. What is Heaven, but an eternal
Sabbath? And what is a temporal Sabbath, but a short Heaven, a little Heaven on
this side Heaven? Our delighting to sanctifi^ Gods Sabbath on Earth, gives full
assurance to our faith grounded upon Gods infallible promise, that we shall
enter into Gods eternal Rest in Heaven; for so runs the promise, Isa. 58. ult.
Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride
upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy
father; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. The former part of the verse
relates to earthly blessings: but these words, I will feed thee with the
heritage of Jacob thy father, that is, with a heavenly inheritance; for what is
the heritage of Jacob, but Canaan in the Type, and Heaven it self in the
Antitype? But should I thus sanctify the Sabbath, should I be sure of going to
Heaven? yes, for so it roundly follows in the next words; The mouth of the Lord
has spoken it. But,

Eleventhly, Consider, that of all days God has put the Exodus 12. 42. is here
applicable. It is a night to be much observed to the Lord, for bringing them
out from the Land of Egypt, this is that night of the Lord to be observed of
all the Children of Israel in their generation. Those that are newborn, are
commonly newborn on this day; and therefore it is a day to be much observed to
the Lord. Those that are converted, are ordinarily converted on this day; and
therefore it is that day of the Lord that ought to be observed by all the
converted Israel of God. Those that are edified, are commonly most edified on
this day. O the sweet communion! O the choice converse! O the singular
discoveries! O the blessed manifestations! O the excellent enjoyments that
Christ vouchsafes to his people on this day! O the discoveries of Grace! O the
exercise of Grace! O the increase of Grace, the progress in Grace! O the
comforts of Grace that God vouchsafes to his Chosen on this day! Experience
shows that the right sanctifying of the Sabbath, is a powerful means under
Christ to sanctify us, and to increase our faith, and raise our hope, and
inflame our love, and to kindle our zeal, and to enlarge our desires, and to
melt our hearts, and to weaken our sins. But,

Twelfthly and lastly, Consider this, that a right sanctifying Rev. 2. 10.
makes against the strictest observers of that day; and witness his constant
prompting and spurring such on to the profanation of the Sabbath, whose
examples are most dangerous, and encouraging to wicked men, as Magistrates,
Ministers, Parents, and Masters, etc. and witness his strong endeavors,
constant attempts, crafty devices, and deep policies that he has made use of in
all the Ages of the World, to keep people off from a religious observation of
the Sabbath; yea, and to make them more wicked on that day, then on any other
day of the week: May I not say then on all other days of the week? I have been
the longer upon this ninth Particular, partly because of the weightiness of it,
and partly to encourage the Reader to a more close and strict observation of
the Sabbath, and partly to justify those that are conscientious observers of
it, and partly to justify the Lord in turning London into ashes for the
horrible profanation of his day.

The Sabbath Day is the Queen of days, say the Jews. The The Sabbath Day
differs as much from the rest of the days, as the wax does to which a Kings
Great Seal is put, from ordinary wax.
Sabbath Day among the other days, is as the Virgin Mary among Women, says
Austin. Look what the Phoenix is among the Birds, the Lion among the Beasts, the
Whale among the Fishes, the Fire among the Elements, the Lilly among the
Thorns, the Sun among the Stars, that is the Sabbath Day to all other days; and
therefore no wonder, if God burn such out of their habitations, who have been
prophaners of his day. Ah London! London! were there none within nor without
thy Walls that made light of this Institution of God, and that did offer
violence to the Queen of days by their looseness and profaneness, by their
sitting at their doors, by their walking in Moor-fields, by their sportings and
wrestlings there, and by their haunting of Alehouses and Whore-houses, their
tossing of Pots and Pipes, when they should have been setting up God, and
Christ, and Religion in their Families, and mourning in their Closets for the
sins of times, and for the afflictions of poor Joseph? How did the wrath and
rage of King Ahasuerus smoke against Haman, Esth. 7. 8, 9, 10.
when he apprehended that he would have put a force upon the Queen? And why
then should we wonder to see the wrath of the Lord break forth in smoke and
flames against such a generation, that put a force upon his day, that profaned
his day, the Queen of days? Ah Sirs! you have greatly profaned and abused the
day of the Lord; and therefore why should any marvel, that the Lord has greatly
debased you, and laid your glory in dust and ashes? In these late years, how
has profaneness, like a flood, broke in upon us on the Lords day? and
therefore it highly concerns all the prophaners of the day of the Lord, to lay
their hands upon their hearts, and to say, the Lord is righteous, the Lord is
righteous, though he has laid our habitations desolate. Who is so great a
stranger in our English Israel, as not to know that God was more dishonored on
the Sabbath Day (within and without the Walls of London) then he was in all the
other six days of the week? and therefore let us not think it strange, that
such a fire was kindled on that day, as has reduced all to ashes. What Antic
habits did men and women put on, on this day? what frothy, empty, airy
discourses and intemperance was to be found at many men's Tables this day? How
were Alehouses, Stews, and Moor-fields filled with debauched sinners this day?
No wonder then, if London be laid desolate. Now this abominable sin of open
profaning the Sabbaths of the Lord, I cannot with any clear evidence charge
upon the people of God, that did truly fear him within or without the Walls of
London. For first, they did lament and mo^rn over the horrid profanation of
that day. Secondly, I want eyes (at present) to see how it will stand either
with the truth of Grace, or state of Grace, for such as are real Saints to live
in the open profanation of Gods Sabbaths. Thirdly, because an ordinary
profaning of the Lords Sabbaths, is as great an Argument of a profane heart,
as any that can be found in the whole Book of God. Fourthly, because
Sabbath Days are the Saints Market-days, Prove. 10. 5. Prove. 17. 16. Isa. 25. 6.
Math. 5. 47.
the Saints harvest-days, the Saints summer-days, the Saints seed-days, and the
Saints feasting-days; and therefore they will not be such fools as to sleep
away those days, much less will they presume to profane those days, or to toy
and trifle away those days of Grace. Fifthly, what singular thing do they more
then others, if they are not strict observers and conscientious sanctifiers of
the Lords day. ^ixthly and lastly, of all the days that pass over a Christians
head in this world, there are none that God will take such a strict and exact
account of, as of Sabbath Days; and therefore it highly concerns all people to
be strict observers and serious sanctifiers of that day. Now upon all these
accounts, I cannot charge such throughout Saints as lived within or without the
Walls of London, with that horrid profanation of the Sabbath as brought the
late fiery Dispensation upon us, and that turned a glorious City into a ruinous
heap. Whatever there was of the hand of man in that dreadful Conflagration, I
shall not now attempt to divine, but without a peradventure, it was
Sabbath-guilt which threw the first Ball that turned London into flames and
ashes. When fire and smoking was on Mount Sinai, God was there; but when
London was in Exodus 19. 18.
flames and smoke, Sabbath-guilt was there. Doubtless all the power of Rome and
Hell should never have put London into flames, had not Londons guilt kindled
the first coal. But,

We come now to the Use and Application of this important Point.

Tenthly, The profaneness, lewdness, blindness, and 10.
wickedness of the Clergy, of them in the Ministry, brings the Judgment of
Fire, and provokes the Lord to lay all waste before him, Zeph. 3. 4-6. Her
Prophets are light and treacherous persons, her Priests have polluted the
Sanctuary, they have done violence to the law, I have cut off the nations,
their towers are desolate, I have made their street w^ste, that none passes
by, their cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, that there is none
inhabitant. Their Prophets and Priests were rash, heady, and unstable persons,
they were light, faithl^ss men (or men of faithlesness, as the Hebrew runs)
They were neither faithful to God, nor faithful to their own Souls, nor
faithful to others Souls; they invented and feigned Prophesies of their own,
and then boldly maintained them, and imposed them upon their Hearers: they were
profane and light in their carriages, they fitted their Doctrines to all
fancies, humors, parties, and times; they betrayed their trust, they betrayed
the lives of men into the hand of divine Justice, and the Souls of men into the
hands of Satan; they polluted the Sanctuary, they polluted the Holy things of
God, by managing of his Worship and Service in a profane carnal way, and with
a light, slight, perfidious spirit, and by perverting the true sense of the Law
in their ordinary teaching of the people. They did violence to the Law, or they
contemned, removed, or cast away the Law, as the Ori^inal run^: the Hebrew word
here used, signifies also to ravish. Their Prophets and Psalm. 50. 17.
Priests did ravish the Law of God by corrupting the Law, and by putting false
glosses upon it, and by turn^ng of it into such shapes and senses as would best
suit the times, and please the humors of the people. Now for these
abominations of their Prophets and Priests, God denounces a dreadful Woe against
the City of Jerusalem in verse. 1. Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the
oppressing city, Lam. 4. 11-13. The Lord has accomplished his fury, he has
poured out his fierce ^nger, and has kindled a fire in Zion, and it has
devoured ^he foundation thereof. For the sins of her Prophets and the iniquity
of her Priests, that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her. God
sent a consuming flame into Jerusalem, which did not only burn the tops of
their houses, but also the foundations themselves, leaving no mark whereby they
might know where their houses stood, nor any hopes of building them up again.
But why did God kindle such a devouring fire in Jerusalem, which was one of the
World wonders, and a City that was not only strong in situation and building,
and deemed impregnable, but a City that was Gods own Seat, the Palace of his
Royal residence; yea, a City that the Lord had for many years, to the
admiration of all the world, pow^rfully and wonderfully protected against all
those furious ^ssaults that were made upon her by her most potent and mighty
Adversaries? Answ. For the sins of her Prophets, and the iniquities of her
Priests, as God himself testifies, who can neither dye nor lie. You may see
this further confirmed, if you please but seriously to ponder upon these
Scriptures, Mich. 2. 11. Isa. 30. 10, 11. Jer. 5. ult. Hos. 4. 9. Isa. 9. 16.
Lam. 2 14. Ezekiel. 3. 18.
Ezekiel. 22. 25, 26. 31. Jer. 23. 11. 14, 15. 39, 40. Look as the body Natural,
so the body Politic cannot be long in a good constitution, whose more noble
and essential parts are in a consumption. The enormities of Ministers have the
strongest influence upon the souls and lives of men, to make them miserable in
both worlds. Their falls will be the fall and ruin of many; for people are
more prone to live by Examples then by Precepts, and to mind more what the
Minister does, then what he says: Praecepta docent, exempla movent, Precepts
may instruct, but Examples do persuade. The Complaint is ancient in Seneca,
That commonly men Seneca de vita beata, cap. 1.
live, not ad rationem, but ad similitudinem. The people commonly make the
Examples of their Ministers the Rules of their Actions; and their Examples pass
as current among them, as their Princes Coin. The Common People are like
tempered Wax, easily receiving impressions from the Seals of their Ministers
vices. They make no bones of it to sin by prescription, and to damn themselves
by following the lewd Examples of their Ministers. The Vulgar unadvisedly take
up crimes on trust, and perish by following of bad Examples. I will leave the
serious Reader to make such Application as in prudence and conscience he judges
meet. But,

Eleventhly, Sometimes the sins of Princes and Rulers bring Jer. It is a
strange saying in Lipsius, viz. That the names of all good Princes may easily
be engraven or written in a small Ring. Lips. de Constantia, lib. 2. cap. 25.
38. 17, 18, 23. Then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, Thus says the Lord the God
of Hosts, the God of Israel, if thou will assuredly go forth unto the King of
Babylons Princes, then thy soul shall live, and this city shall not be burnt
with fire, and thou shall live and thine house. But if thou will not go forth
to the King of Babylons Princes, then shall this city be given into the hands
of the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shall not escape
out of their hand, but shall be taken by the hand of the King of Babylon, and
thou shall cause this city to be burnt with fire: O^ as the Hebrew runs, Thou
shall burn this city with fire, that is, thou by thy obstinacy wilt be the
means to procure the burning of this City, which by a rendition of thy self,
thou might have saved. So Jer. 34. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11. compared with Chap. 37.
5. to verse. 22. Judges and Magistrates are the Physicians of the State (says
B. Lake in his Sermon on Ezra) and sins are the diseases of it; what skills it,
whether a Gangrene begins at the head or the heel, seeing both ways it will
kill, except this be the difference, that the head being nearer the heart, a
Gangrene in the head will kill sooner then that which is in the heel: Even so
will the sins of great Ones overthrow a State sooner then those of the meanest
sort, 2 Samuel 24. 9. to verse. 18. But,

Twelfthly, The abusing, mocking, and despising of the Turn to these two
pregnant Texts, and ponder seriously upon them; for they speak close in the
case.
upon a People, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 Math. 23. 34. 37, 38. Behold
your house is left unto you desolate. Here is used the present for the future,
to note the certainty of the desolation of their City and Temple, and their own
utter ruins: and about forty years after the Romans came and burnt their City
and Temple, and laid all waste before them. They had turned the Prophets of the
Lord out of all, and therefore the Lord resolves to turn them out of all. O
Sirs! will you please seriously to consider these six things. First, that all
faithful, painful, conscientious Ministers or Messengers of the Lord, are great
Instruments in the hand of the Lord for stopping or steming the tide of all
profaneness and wickedness in a Land, which bring all desolating Isa. 58. 1.
and destroying Judgments upon Cities and Countries. 2. For converting Souls to
God, for turning poor sinners from Acts 26. 15, 16, 17, 18. Dan. 12. 3.
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to Jesus Christ. 3. For
promoting of Religion, Holiness, and Godliness in men's hearts, houses, and
lives, which is the only way under Heaven to render Cities, Countries, and
Kingdoms safe, happy, and prosperous. 4. For the weakening of the Kingdom of
Satan and Antichrist, the weakening of whose Kingdom is the glory, safety, and
security of the Land. 5. For the turning away of wrath, either felt or feared.
6. For the bringing down of the greatest, weightiest, and noblest of James 5.
16, 17, 18.
temporal favors and blessings upon Cities and Countries, as might be proved
from scores of Scripture. And therefore The first on the 24. of August, and the
other on the 2. of September.
never marvel, if God revenges the abuses done to them in flames of fire. It
was on a Sabbath that the public liberty of the painful, faithful Ministers of
London was terminated and came to an end, and it was on a Sabbath that London
was burnt.

Thirteenthly, Shedding of the blood of the Just, is a crying Ezekiel. 35. 4, 5.
7. I will lay thy cities waste, and thou See Ezekiel. 21. 28. 31, 32. And Chap.
25. 3, 4, 5.
shall be desolate, and thou shall know that I am the Lord. Because thou have
had a perpetual hatred (or hatred of old) and have shed the blood of the
children of Israel by the force of the sword in the time of their calamity, in
the time that their iniquity had an end. Thus will I make mount Seir most
desolate, and cut off from it him that passes out, and him that returns.
Verse. 10. Because thou have said these two nations and these two countries
shall be mine, and we will possessit, whereas the Lord was there. Verse. 11.
Therefore as I live, says the Lord God, I will even do according ^o thine
anger, and according to thine envy which thou have used out of thy hatred
against them: and I will make my self known among them when I have judged thee.
Verse. 12. And thou shall know that I am the Lord, and that I have heard all thy
blasphemies which thou have spoken against the mountains of Israel, saying,
They are laid desolate, they are given us to consume (or devour.) Verse. 13.
Thus with your mouth you have boasted against me, and have multiplied your
words against me, I have heard them. Verse. 14. Thus says the Lord God, when
the whole earth rejoices I will make thee desolate. Verse. 15. As thou did
rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so
will I do unto thee, Thou shall be desolate, O mount Seir, and all Idumea, even
all of it, and they shall know that I am the Lord. The Edomites were deadly
enemies to the Israelites, their hatred was old and strong, and active against
them; and they took hold on all occasions wherein they might express their rage
and cruelty against them, both in words and works. And therefore Psalm. 137. 7.
when the Babylonians took Jerusalem, they cried, Raze it, Raze it, even to the
foundation thereof. When the Babylonians entered Jerusalem, many of the Jews
fled to the Edomites for succor, they being their brethren; but instead of
sheltring them, they cruelly destroyed them, and greatly insulted over them,
and were glad of all opportunities wherein they might vent all their rage and
malice against them, that so they might the better ingratiate themselves with
the Babylonians. Now for these cruel practices and barbarous severities of
theirs toward the poor, afflicted, and distressed Israel of God, God is
resolved to bring utter desolation upon them. Verse. 3. Thus says the Lord God,
Behold, O mount Seir, I am against thee, and I will stretch out my hand against
thee, and I will make thee most desolate: Or as the Hebrew is, Shemamah
Vmeshammah, desolation and desolation. Now this doubling of the Hebrew word
shows the certainty of their desolation, the speediness of their desolation,
and the greatness and throughness of their desolation, Jer. 26. 14, 15. See
verse. 8, 9. 11.
As for me, behold, I am in your hand, do with me as seems good and meet unto
you. But know ye for certain, that if you put me to death, ye shall surely
bring innocent blood upon your selves, and upon this city, and upon the
inhabitants thereof. That was good counsel, which Tertullian gave Scapula a
Pagan Persecutor. God will surely make Inquisition for our blood, therefore
(says he) if thou will not spare us, yet spare thy self; if not thy self, yet
spare thy Country, which must be responsible when God comes to visit for blood.
So Lam. 4. 11. 12, 13. The Lord has accomplished his fury, he has poured out
his fierce anger, and has kindled a fire in Zion, and it has devoured the
foundations thereof. The Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the
world would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy should have
entered into the gates of Jerusalem. For the sins of her Prophets, and the
iniquities of her Priests, that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of
her. The Prophets and the Priests enraged the people against them, and engaged
the Civil Power against the just and the innocent, to the shedding of their
blood. But this innocent blood could not be purged away but by fire. To shed
the blood of the Just is a most crying sin, and that for which God has turned
the most glorious Cities in the World into ashes. Jerome upon the Text says,
that the Prophets and Priests shed the blood of the Just in the midst of
Jerusalem, by drawing them into error, which is to the destruction of the
Soul. But Calvin upon the Text well observes this cannot stand, because just
men are not so destroyed; but the wicked only that take no heed to their false
teaching. Therefore (says he) the true Prophets of God are meant by the just,
for whom they had Prisons, Dungeons, and Stocks to put them into; and sometimes
stoning, or otherwise, tumults, which they stirred up among the people, whereby
their blood was shed.

Rome has much of the blood of the Saints upon her skirts, and for this very
sin she shall be utterly burnt with fire, as you may see at large, if you will
please to read the 18. Chapter Rev. 16. 6. Rev. 17. 6. Rev. 19 2. Rev. 18. 24.
of the Revelations at your leisure. Though Rome was a Cage of unclean Birds,
and full of all manner of abominations; yet the sin that shall at last burn her
to ash^s, is the blood of the Saints: mark, though the people of God are in
Babylon, and may partake of her Plagues, and fall under the fiery Dispensation
with her; it is not the sins of the Saints but the sins of Babylon that bring
the Judgment of Fire upon Babylon. Mark, the people of God may live in a City
that may be burnt to ashes, and yet their sins may not be the procuring causes
of that Judgment. Lot lived in Sodom, and Genesis 19.
had his failings and infirmities as well as other Saints; but it was not his
sins that brought the Judgment of Fire upon that City, but the sins of the
Citizens, as the Scripture assures us.

But you may say, Pray, Sir, why is God so severe as to turn stately Cities,
rich and populous Cities, great and glorious Cities into a ruinous heap, for
shedding the blood of the Just? Answ. Because next to the blood of Christ, the
blood of the Just is the most precious blood in all the world. Mark, there are
these nine things that speak out the preciousness of the blood of the Just.

First, Clear and plain Scriptures speak out the blood of He shall redeem their
soul from deceit Psalm. 73. 32, 33. Psalm. 72. 14.
and violence, and precious shall their blood be in his sight. And so Psalm.
116. 15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. But,

Secondly, The cry of their blood reaches as high as Heaven, Genesis 4 10, 11.
Crying is ascribed to blood by a figurative speech.
The blood of one Abel had so many tongues as drops, and every drop a voice to
cry for vengeance, and the cry of his blood did strongly engage the Justice of
God to punish it. Rev. 16. 6. Give them blood to drink, for they are worthy.
But,

Thirdly, Gods cursing their blessings, who have shed the Genesis 4. 10, 11. And
now art thou cursed from the earth, which has opened her mouth to receive thy
brothers blood from thy hand. Now this is added by the way. 1. To aggravate the
sin of Cain. 2. To show the fitness of the punishment: it is as if he had said,
the earth did, as it were, in compassion receive into her bosom that blood
which thou did cruelly and wickedly shed; and therefore out of the earth
(which has sucked in by the pores thereof thy brothers blood) shall spring a
curse that shall plague thee for shedding that blood. The earth which was
created for thy blessing and service, shall execute this curse against thee in
vengeance, not yielding thee the fruits which otherwise it would have done. As
is expressed in verse. 12. When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth
yield unto thee her strength. (Heb. It shall not go on to give thee its
ability.) This was a second curse, whereby the earth became worse for Cains sin
then it was for Adams Now if this curse were not general; yet doubtless it was
a particular curse upon Cains portion: so that wheresoever, or whenever he
should till the earth as a Hu^bandman, the earth by its barrenness should
upbraid him as a Murderer. But,

Fourthly, Gods pouring out of the blood of the wicked Isa. 43. 4, 5.
blood. At the Red Sea God made way, not only through the Sea, but also through
the blood of the Egyptians Exodus 14.
to preserve the blood and lives of his poor people. God, to ^reserve the lives
and blood of his people, destroys a hundred four-score and five thousand of
Zenacheribs Army by the Isa. 37. 36.
hand of his Angel in one night. And you know in Esthers Esth. 9.
time, how God made way for the preservation of the lives and blood of his
people through the blood of Haman his Sons, and the rest of their enemies that
hated them. I might give you twenty other Scriptures to the same purpose, but
enough is as good as a Feast. But,

Fifthly, The strict Inquisition that God has made after the blood of the Just
in all Ages of the World, argues the preciousness Psalm. 9. 12. When he makes
inquisition for blood, he remembers them, he forgets not the cry of the
humble. Did not Pharaoh, Ahab, Jezabel, Haman, Herod, Amalek, Moab, Ammon,
Zenacherib, etc. find by woeful experience, that God did make a strict
Inquisition after the blood of the Just. And so did those men of violence, who
shed the blood of the Just in the primitive times, etc. But,

Sixthly, The speedy and dreadful Vengeance of God upon Psalm. 55. 23. But thou,
O God, shall bring them down into the pit of destruction, bloody and deceitful
men shall not live out half their days, Psalm. 94. 21-23. They gather themselves
together (Heb. Run by troops as thieves do) against the soul of the righteous,
and condemn the innocent blood: he shall bring upon them their own iniquity,
and shall cut them off in their own wickedness; yea, the Lord our God shall cut
them off. Richard the III. and Q. Mary were cruel Princes, and shed the blood
of the Just, and they had the shortest Reign of any since the Conquest.

Charles the IX. was a great shedder of the blood of the History of France,
page 791. to page 798.
Just, he had a deep hand in the Massacre of the Protestants in Paris, and in
other Parts of his Kingdom, he glutted himself with the blood of the Just, and
gloried greatly in their ruins. In his latter days he was surprised with a
great debility and tormenting pains in his body, after a great effusion Page
808, 809.
of blood which issued out by all the passages of his body, he breathed forth
his wretched Soul. Oh the horrid butcheries that were committed and commanded
by this bloody Prince his Reign, throughout his whole Realm! but at last divine
Vengeance overtook him, and he dyed wallowing in his own blood, etc.

The Duke of Guise, next to the King, had the greatest Page 793, 794.
hand in the Massacre of the Protestants, he was a most barbarous Prince, and
at last he falls by barbarous hands; for he being called by Revoll Secretary to
Henry the III to come to the King into his Cabinet, as he lifted up the
Tapestry Page 867.
with one hand to enter, he was charged with Swords, Daggers, and Partisans,
and so dyed by the hands of Murderers. He that had murdered many thousands of
the Protestants, was at last murdered by men of his own Religion.

Henry the III. King of France, was a most cruel Enemy to French History, page
879, 880.
the Protestants, and he was by James Clemmont a Monk, stabbed in the same
Chamber, and on the same day wherein he had helped to contrive the French
Massacre. Doubtless God will one day reckon with France for all that Protestan^
blood that they have shed.

Maximinus was a great Persecutor of the people of God, he set forth a
Proclamation engraven in Brass for the utter History of the Council of Trent,
page 417.
abolishing of Christ and his Religion; he was at last eaten up of Lice. The
same Judgment befell Philip King of Spain, who swore he had rather have no
Subjects then Lutheran Subjects; and when he had narrowly escaped drowning in a
shipwreck, he said, he was delivered of God to rout off Lutheranism, which he
presently began to do, but God soon cut him off.

Thomas Blavar, one of the Privy Counselors of the King of Scots, was a sore
Persecutor of the people of God in that Theatrum Historicum.
Land; when he lay on his dying-bed he fell into despair, and cried out, that
he was damned, he was damned: and when the Monks came about him to comfort him,
he cried out upon them, saying, That their Masses and other trash would do him
no good; for he never believed them, but all that he did was for love of money,
and not of Religion, not respecting or believing that there was either a God or
a Devil, a Hell or a Heaven; and therefore he was damned, there was no remedy
but he must go to Hell, and in this case without a sign of repentance he dyed.

A Popish Magistrate having condemned a poor Protestant to death, before his
execution he caused his tongue to be cut out, because he should not confess the
truth: but the Lord did retaliate it upon him; for the next child he had, was
born without a tongue.

Cardinal Crescentius was a most desperate Persecutor of the people of God, he
was the Popes Ambassador to the Anno 1552.
Council of Trent, and being one night busy in writing to his Master the Pope,
a huge black Dog with great flaming eyes, and long ears dangling down to the
ground, appeared to him in his Chamber, and went under the Table where he sat:
Upon which the Cardinal was amazed; but as as soon as he had recovered himself,
he called his Servants to put out the black Dog that was come into his Chamber:
but they looked round about his Chambers, and the next Chambers, but could find
no black Dog: upon which the Cardinal fell presently sick with a strong
conceit, which never left him till his death, still crying out, Drive away the
black Dog, drive away the black Dog, which seemed to him to be climbing up his
Bed; and in that humor he dyed.

After the Martyrdom of Gregory the Bishop of Spoleta, Flacchus Phil. Lonicer.
the Governor who was the Author thereof, was struck with an Angel, and
vomited up his entrails at his mouth, and dyed.

Mammea Agrippitus when he was fifteen years old, because Cent. 3. cap. 12.
he would not sacrifice to their Idols, was apprehended at Preneste, and whipped
with Scourges, and hanged up by the heels, and at last slain with the Sword; in
the midst of whose torments the Governor of the City fell down dead from the
Tribunal-seat.

Gensericus King of the Vandals (an Arrian) was a most Sigeb. in Chron.
cruel Persecutor of the Orthodox Christians, he was possessed of the Devil,
and dyed a most miserable death in the year 477.

Herod the Great, who caused the Babes of Bethlehem to be Eusebius. Hist.
slain, hoping thereby to have destroyed Christ, shortly after was plagued by
God with an incurable disease, having a slow and slack fire continually
tormenting of his inward parts, he had a vehement and greedy ^^ fire to eat,
and yet nothing would satisfy him; his inward bowels rotted, his breath was
short and stinking, some of his members rotted, and in all his members he had
so violent a cramp, that nature was not able to bear it, and so growing mad
with pain, he dyed miserably.

Herod Antipas, who beheaded John Baptist, not long after Eusebius. Hist.
falling into disgrace with the Roman Emperor, with his incestuous Herodias the
Suggester of that murder, they were banished, and fell into such misery and
penury, that they ended their wretched lives with much shame and misery.

Herod Agrippa was a great Persecutor of the Saints; he was Acts 12. Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 7.
eaten up of worms in the third year of his Reign, as Jos^phus observes. He
went to Caesarea to keep certain Plays in the Honor of Caesar; the Gown he was
in (as the same Author relates) was a Gown of Silver wonderfully wrought, and
the beams of the Sun reflecting upon it, made so it glister, that it dazzled the
eyes of the Beholders; and when he had made an end of his starched Oration in
this his Bravery, his Flatterers Acts 12. 21, 22, 23.
extolled him as a God, crying out, It Is the voice of a God, and not of a man:
Whereupon he was presently smitten by the Angel of the Lord, and so dyed with
worms that eat up his Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 13.
entrails; the blow the Angel gave him was an inward blow, and not so visible
to others; and his torments more and more increasing upon him, the people put
on sackcloth, and made supplication for him, but all in vain; for his pains
and torments growing stronger and stronger every day upon him, they separated
his wretched soul from his loathsome body within the compass of five days.
Eusebius. Hist.


Cai^phas the high Priest, who gathered the Council, and suborned false Witness
against the Lord Christ, was shortly after put out of his Office; and one
Jonathan substituted in Eusebius. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 7.
his room, whereupon he killed himself.

Not long after Pontius Pilate had condemned our Lord Christ, he lost his
Deputiship, and Caesar's favor; and being fallen into disgrace with the Roman
Emperor, and banished by him, he fell into such misery, that he hanged himself.

Oh the dreadful Judgments that were inflicted upon the chief Actors in the Ten
Persecutions! Shall I give you a brief account of what befell them?

Nero that Monster of men, who raised the first bloody Persecution (to pick a
quarrel with the Christians) he set the City of Rome on fire, and then charged
it upon them; under which pretense he exposes them to the fury of the people,
who cruelly tormented them, as if they had been common burners and destroyers
of Cities, and the deadly enemies of mankind; yea, Nero himself caused them to
be apprehended and clad in wild beasts skins, and torn in pieces with Dogs,
others were crucified, some he made Bonfires of to light him in his
night-sports: To be short, such horrid cruelty he used toward them, as caused
many of their enemies to pity them. But God found out this wretched Persecutor
at last; for being adjudged by the Senate an enemy to mankind, he was condemned
to be whipped to death, for the prevention whereof he cut his own throat.

Domitian the Author of the second Persecution against the Christians, having
drawn a Catalogue of such as he was to kill, in which was the name of his own
Wife and other friends: upon which he was by the consent of his Wife slain by
his own Houshold-servants with Daggers in his Privy-Chamber; his body was
buried without Honor, his Memory cursed to posterity, and his Arms and Ensigns
were thrown down and defaced.

Trajan raised the third Persecution against the Church; he was continually
vexed with Seditions, and the vengeance of God followed him close. For first,
he fell into a Palsy, then lost the use of his senses; afterward he fell into
a Dropsy, and dyed in great anguish.

Adrian being vexed with great and perpetual Commotions in his life, dyed with
much anxiety.

Maximinus being declared an Enemy by the Senate, was killed in his own Tent.

Decius by the Goths (in their first Invasion of the Empire) with his whole
Army was cut off.

Valerianus was overcome by the Persians, and made use of by Sapor, as a
Stirrup for his foot, when he went to take Horse.

Julian in his height of contempt against Christ, was deadly wounded in Battle
against the Persians, and throwing his blood in the Air, dyed with that
desperate expression in his mouth, Vicisti tandem Galilaee.

Valentius being a great Favourer of the Arrians, and a great Persecutor of the
Orthodox (the Arrians exceeding the Eusebius. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 8. The Christians
compared his destruction in the water to Pharaoh's drowning in the Red Sea.
Heathens in cruelty) was in Battle against the Goths in Thracia wounded, and
being carried to a house that was near, it was set on fire by the Enemy, in
which he miserably perished.

Maxentius and his chief Officers being put to flight on the other side of the
River Tyber by Constantine, was necessitated to return by a Bridge whereupon he
had made devices in a secret way to have drowned Constantine, by which he and
those that were with him were drowned in the River: upon which occasion the
Christians took occasion to sing that word, Psalm. 9. 16. The Lord is known by
the judgments which he exceuteth, the wicked is snared in the work of his own
hand: And that word, Psalm. 7. 15. He made a pit and dug it, and he himself
is fallen into it.

Dioclesian being sent for by Constantine upon suspicion, chose rather to
poison himself then to see him.

Maximianus Herculeus endeavoring again to recover his Authority, was
discovered in his design by his Daughter Constantines Wife: whereupon he was
pursued and besieged by Constantine, and was either killed, or during the Siege
hanged himself, as is diversely reported by several Writers.

Maximinus Jovius through intemperance becoming corpulent, was smitten with
boils in the secret parts, out of which issued abundance of vermin; his
Physicians were either suffocated by the odious smell of his loathsome disease,
or else they were killed by him, because they could not cure him. One of his
Physicians told him, that it was Gods Judgment on him for persecuting the
Christians, which no man could cure. At last he sell under such conv^^tions, as
forced him to confess, that the wrongs and injuries that he had done to the
people of God, were the cause of that plague; and therefore being struck with
terror and horror, gave out Edicts, that the Persecution should cease; and that
Churches should be builded; and that in their Meetings prayers should be put up
for him, as formerly used to be: which Edict is to be found in Eusebius. The
other Tyrant in the East (to wit Maximinus who Eusebius. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 29.
was called Caesar) had been industrious to invent cruel tortures for the
Christians, especially to pull out their eyes: but at last he was defeated, and
in a base habit made to hide himself, and afterward he was pursued by such a
sickness which made both his eyes to drop out of his head, by which Judgment he
was necessitated to confess, that the God of the Christians was the only true
God, and that he had been mistaken concerning the gods whom he chose to
worship; which words Eusebius. de vita Constantini, lib. 2. cap. 52.
were uttered by him when he was even expiring, as Eusebius testifies. By all
these dreadful Instances, you may run and read that heavy Vengeance that has
been inflicted upon those who have shed the blood of the Just.

Foelix Earl of Wartenburge was a great Persecutor of the Saints, and did swear
that ere he dyed, he would ride up to the Spurs in the blood of the Lutherans:
but the very same night wherein he had thus sworn and vowed, he was choked
with his own blood.

The Judgments of God were so famous and frequent upon those that did shed the
blood of the Saints in Bohemia, that it was used as a Proverb among the
Adversaries themselves, That if any man be weary of his life, let him but
attempt against the Picardines (so they called the Christians) and he should
not live a year to an end.

Sir Thomas Moor, once Lord Chancellor of England, was a sworn Enemy to the
Gospel, and persecuted the Saints with fire and faggot; and among all his
praises he reckons, this is the chiefest: That he had been a Persecutor of the
Lutherans, i. e. the Saints: but what became of him? he was first accused of
Treason, and then condemned, and at last beheaded.

Judge Morgan was a great Persecutor of the people of God; but shortly after he
had passed the Sentence of Condemnation upon that virtuous Lady, the Lady Jane
Gray, he fell mad, and in his mad raving fits, he would continually cry out,
Take away the Lady Jone, take away the Lady Jane from me: and in that horror he
ended his wretched life.

Drahomiza, after the death of her Husband, usurped the Government of Bohemia,
and was a cruel Persecutor of the people of God; but by a righteous hand of God
it so fell out, that on that very place where the Ministers bones lay unburied,
the earth opened of it self, and swallowed her up alive with her Chariot, and
those that were in it: which place is now to be seen before the Cast'e of
Prague. There is no end of Instances of a later date. But,

Seventhly, The strange, miraculous, and wonderful preservation of the lives
and blood of the Just, speaks out their Hesiod speaks of thirty thousand
Demigods that were keepers of men; but what are so many thousand Gods to that
one God that neither slumbers nor sleeps, but day and night keeps his people as
the apple of his eye, Zeph. 5. 8. As his Jews, Mal. 3. 17. that keeps them in
his Pavilion, as a Prince his Favorite, Psalm. 31. 20.
blood to be precious blood. Who can sum up the many Miracles of divine Love,
Power, Wisdom, and Care, etc. that God manifested in the preservation of Joseph
in the Prison, Jeremiah in the Dungeon, Daniel in the Den, and the three
Children in the fiery Furnace, and not say, surely the blood of the Saints is
very precious in the eyes of the Lord? I have read of a certain Witch that sent
her Spirits to kill Ambrose; but they returned her this Answer, That God had
hedged him in as he did Job, and therefore they could not touch him, they could
not hurt him. Another came with a drawn Sword to his Bedside to have killed
him, but he could not stir his hand, till repenting, he was by the prayer of
Ambrose restored to the use of his hand again. For Luther (says my Author) a
poor Friar to stand it out against the Pope and all the Power of Rome, was a
great miracle, and that he should prevail against all that Power, was a
greater, and that after all, he should dye in his bed, was the greatest of all.
There are many thousand Instances more of the like nature, but enough is as
good as a Feast.

Eighthly, The spiritual Judgments that God has given such up to, who have
shed the blood of the Just, speaks out Vaivod that had betrayed Zegeden a godly
man, professed to Zegedine; that he was so haunted with Apparitions Cicero.
and the Furies of his own Conscience, that he could not rest day nor night.
Dionysius a cruel Tyrant, a bitter Enemy Conscience is Gods Preacher in the
bosom. Conscience is mill testes, a thousand witnesses for or against a man.
Conscience has a good memory.
to all good men and good things, was so troubled with fear and horror of
conscience, that not daring to trust his best friends with a Rasor, he used to
sindge his beard with burning coals. A sleepy conscience, when awakned, is like
a sleepy Lion, when he awakes he roars and tears his prey. It is like
Prometheus Vultur, it lies ever gnawing. Sin brings a stain and a sting. Horror
of conscience meets a man in the dark, and makes him leap in the night, and
makes him quake in his sleep, and makes him start in every corner, and makes
him think every bush is a man, every man a Devil, and every Devil a Messenger
to fetch him quick to Hell. By this Theodorick saw the face of a man in the
mouth of a fish. N^ssus heard the noise of murder in the voice of birds.
Saundes ran distracted over the Irish Mountains. This made Cain wander, Saul
stab himself, Judas hang himself, Arius empty his bowels at the stool, Latomus
cry desperately, he was damned, he was damned, and Julian confess, that he was
conquered. It makes man, the Lord of all, to be Slave to all. Lord, what is
man? Certainly it is better with Evagrius to lie secure on a bed of straw, then
to have a turbulent conscience on a bed of Down, having Curtains embossed with
Gold and Pearl. But,

Ninthly and lastly, The shedding of the blood of the Just, Gal. 5. 21. Rev.
21. 8. Rev. 22. 15. 1 John 3. 15. Math. 22. 7.
of the highest Heaven, and cast them down to the lowest Hell, as you may see
by comparing the Scriptures in the Margin together; and therefore certainly
the blood of the Just is most precious blood. Now seeing that the blood of the
Just is such precious blood, who will wonder, if God sets such Cities, and
Towns, and Countries into a flame about their ears, upon whose skirts the blood
of the Just is to be found? Josephus speaking of the desolation of Jerusalem,
says, Because they have sinned against the Lord God of their Fathers in
shedding the blood of just men and innocents that were within thee, even in the
Temple of the Lord, therefore are our sorrowful sighings multiplied, and our
weepin^s daily increased 'Twas the blood of the just, the blood of the
innocents that turned Jerusalem into ashes.

I have read of one Rabbi Samuel, who six hundred years since writ a Tract in
form of an Epistle to Rabbi Isaac Master of the Synagogue of the Jews, wherein
he does excellently discuss the cause of their long Captivity and extreme
misery, and after that he had proved, that it was inflicted for some grievous
sin, he shows that sin to be the same which Amos speaks of. For three
transgressions of Israel, and for four I will not turn away the punishment
thereof, because they sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of
shoes. The selling of Joseph he makes the first sin, the worshipping of the
Calf in Horeb the second sin, the abusing of Gods Prophets the third sin, and
the selling of Jesus Christ the fourth sin. For the first, they served four
hundred years in Egypt; for the second, they wandered forty years in the
Wilderness; for the third, they were Captives seventy years in Babylon; and for
the fourth, they are held in pitiful Captivity even till this day.

When Phocas, that bloody Cutthroat, sought to secure himself by building high
Walls, he heard a voice from Heaven telling him, That though he built his
Bulwarks never so high; yet sin within (blood within) would soon undermine all.
Shedding the blood of the Just, is a sin that has undermined the strongest
Bulwarks, and that has blown up, and burnt up the most glorious Cities that
have been in the World. And who can tell but that the blood of the Just that
was shed in the Marian days, might now come up into Speeds Chronicle in Queen
Mary.
remembrance before the Lord? For in four years of her Reign there were
consumed in the heat of those flames two hundred seventy seven persons, viz.
Five Bishops, one and twenty Ministers, eight Gentlemen, eighty four
Artificers, one hundred Husbandmen, Servants, and Laborers, six and twenty
Wives, twenty Widows, nine Virgins, two Boys, and two Infants. I say, who can
tell but that the blood of these precious Servants of the Lord has cried aloud
in the ears of the Lord for vengeance against that once glorious, but now
desolate City? Men of brutish spirits, and that are skilful to destroy, make no
more of shedding the blood of the Just, then they do of shedding the blood of a
Swine; but yet this hideous sin makes so great a noise in the ears of the Lord
of Hosts, that many times he tells the World by his fiery Dispensations, that
it cannot be purged away but by fire. And thus much for the sins that bring the
fiery Judgment: our way now to the Application is plain.

THE FIRST PART OF THE Application.
1. To see the Hand of the Lord in it. Ten Considerations to work to this.

2. To mourn under the sense of so great a Judgment.

WE come now to the Use and Application of this important Point. The
Explication of a Doctrine, is but the drawing of the Bow: the Application is
the hitting of the Mark, the white, etc.

Is it so, that God is the Author or Efficient cause of all the great
calamities and dreadful Judgments that are inflicted upon Cities and
Countries; and in particular of that of Fire: then,

First, Let us see the hand of the Lord in this late dreadful terrible
Judgments that befall Persons, Cities and Kingdoms. Ruth. 1. 13. 21. Psalm 39.
9. 1 Samuel 3. 18.
Whosoever or whatsoever be the Rod, its his hand that gives the stroke. The
power of bringing Judgments upon Cities God challenges to himself, Amos 3. 6.
Sha^^ there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Whatever the
Judgment be that falls upon a City, God is the Author of it; he acts in it,
and orders it according to his own good pleasure. There is no Judgment that
casually falls upon any person, City or Country: Every Judgment is inflicted
by a Divine Power and Providence. The Chalde^ns could never have burnt
Jerusalem, if the Lord had not granted The Soldiers Firebrand by which was
fired the famous Temple of Jerusalem, was commissionated by a Divine Command.
them a commission. Hence says the Prophet, Evil came down from the Lord, unto
the gate of Jerusalem, Mich. 1. 12. 'Twas a sore evil, that Jerusalem (which
was one of the worlds wonders) should be destroyed by fire; but this evil was
determined at the Counsel-board in Heaven. Jerusalem was burnt by a Commission
signed in Heaven, both when the Chaldeans under Nebuchadnezzar, and when the
Romans under Titus Vespasian laid it in Ashes. All sorts of Judgments are more
at the beck of God, and under the command Matthew. 8. 5. 11. Whatever Miscreants
made the Fireballs, yet God did blow the fire, and so turned London into a
Ruinous heap. Certainly there was much of Gods hand, whatever there was of men's
heads in this fatal Fire.
of God, than Servants are under the commands of their Masters, or Soldiers
under the commands of their General, or Children under the command of their
Parents. Whatever Judgment God commands to destroy a Person, a City, or
Country, that Judgment shall certainly and effectually accomplish the command
of God, in spite of all that creatures can do. God as he is our Creator,
Preserver, and Sovereign Lord, has an absolute power both over our persons,
lives, estates and habitations: and when we have transgressed his righteous
Laws, he may do with us, and all we have as he pleases: he may turn us out of
house and home, and burn up all our comforts round about us, and yet do us no
wrong. Those things which seem accidental and casual unto us, are ordered by
the wise Council, Power and Providence of God. Instruments can no more stir
till God gives them a commission, than the Axe or the Knife can cut of it self*
without an hand. Job eyed God in the fire that fell from Heaven, and in all the
fiery trials that befell him. And therefore, as one observes, he does not say,
the Lord gave, Austi^e.
and the Devil took away; nor the Lord gave, and the Chaldeans and Sabeans took
away; but the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, and blessed be the name
of the Lord. Job 1. 20, 21.
Certainly without the cognizance and concurrence of a Wise, Omniscient and
Omnipotent God, no creatures can move; nor without his foresight and
permission, no event can befall any Person, City, or Country. Acts 17. 28. For
in him we live, move and have our being. No man can put forth a natural action
without him. Whatever the means or instruments of our misery be, the hand is
Gods, and this the Saints in all the Ages of the world have confessed. It becomes
us Levit. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. 11. 25, 26.
in every Judgment, to see the hand of the Lord, and to look through visible
means to an invisible God: for though the Lord may, and many times does make
use of Satan and his instruments to scourge his dearest children, yet it is but
one hand; and many instruments that he smites us with. God makes use of what
second causes he pleases for the execution of his pleasure. And many times he
makes the worst Isa. 10. 5. to 20.
of men the Rod of his indignation to chastise his people with. Witne^s
Pharaoh, Ahab, Haman, Herod, and the Assyrian Kings, with scores of other
instances that the Scripture affords. And all Histories abound in nothing more
than in Instances of this nature, as all know that have read any thing of
History. The Conclave of Rome, and the Conclave of Hell can do nothing without
a commission from Heaven. They cannot make a Louse, nor burn a House, nor drown
Exodus 8. 18. Jer. 21. 10. Matthew. 8. 32. Chap. 10. 30. Luke 21. 18.
a Pigg, without a commission under the Broad Seal of Heaven. A Sparrow lights
not upon the ground, nor a hair falls not from our heads, no nor a bristle from
a Sow's back, (says Tertullian) but by a Divine Providence. All created
creatures both in that upper, and in this lower world depend upon God for their
being, motion, and several activities. Now in that God did not exert his Power,
neither to prevent, nor check those furious flames, which he knew without his
interposure, would lay all in ashes; it is evident that it was his Divine
pleasure, that London should be turned into a ruinous heap. Gods not hindering
the desolation of London was a tacit commissioning of the flames to burn down
all that stood in their way. That such are under a high mistake, that ascribe
the burning of London, so to second causes, as that they will allow no more
Judgment of God in it, than that which accompanies common casualty, I shall
sufficiently evidence, before I have finished this first Use. But I hope the
prudent Reader will make it his business to see the signal hand of God in this
late fiery dispensation, and to remember, that the Scribe is more properly said
to write, than the Pen; and he that makes and keeps the Clock, is more
properly said to make it go and strike, than the Wheels and Poizes that hang
upon it; and every Workman to effect his work, rather than the tools which he
uses as instruments. So the Lord of Hosts who is the Chief Agent and Mover in
all things, and in all actions, may more fitly and properly be said, to effect
and bring to pass all Judgments, yea, all things that are done in the earth,
than any inferior or subordinate causes; seeing they are but his tools and
instruments which he rules and guides according to his own Will, Power and
Providence. At this some of the more civilized Heathen has long since
hammered, viz. That the same power dispenses both comforts and crosses, when
they painted Fortune in two forms, with two faces of contrary colors, the
foremost white, the hindermost black, to signify that both good and evil came
from the Goddess Fortune. When 'twas told Prince Henry, that delitiae generis
humani, that darling of mankind, That the sins of the people caused that
affliction that was upon him: O no, said he, I have sins enough of mine own to
cause that. So should we all confess, that though God take occasion by another
man's sin, or by another man's hand to fire my house; Yet the cause is just that
it should be so, and that I my self have deserved it, whatsoever the occasion,
or the instrument be. God had matter enough against the seventy thousand that
died of the Plague, though David's sin were the occasion, yet the meritorious
cause was in them. Certainly there is no man that has been a sufferer by this
late dreadful Fire, but upon an easy search into his own heart and life, he
may find matter enough to silence himself, and to satisfy himself that though
God has turned him out of his habitation, and burnt up all his comforts round
about him, yet he has done him no wrong. Surely in the burning of the City of
London, there was more of the extraordinary hand of God, than there was of the
hand of Papist or Atheist. God if he had pleased, could have prevented brutish
and skilful men to destroy Ezekiel. 21. 31.
and burn, by discovering of their hellish plots before they had taken effect,
as he did Ahitophels, 2 Samuel 17. 10. to the 24. and as he did Tobiahs and
Sanballats, Neh. 4. 7. to v. 16. And as he did the Jews who took counsel to
kill Paul, Acts 9. 23, 24, 25. Acts 23. 12. to 25. And as he did that of the
Gun-Powder-Treason. And God could have directed and spirited men to the use of
the means, and then have given such a blessing to the means, as should have
been effectual to the quenching of it when it was first kindled, but he would
not, which is a clear evidence, that he had given from Heaven a commission to
the Fire to burn with that force and violence as it did, till all was laid in
ashes.

Now that you may the better see and acknowledge the hand of the Lord in the
late dreadful Fire that has been amongst us. Consider seriously with me these
ten following particulars.

First, Consider the intemperate heat, the drought of the Nah. 1. 10. Jo^l 2.
5. By this parching season every man's house was prepared for fuel.
was as stubble, fully dry, prepared and fitted for the burning flames. Before
God would strike fire, he made our houses like tinder: When fuel is wet and
green, what puffing and blowing must there be to kindle a fire, and to make it
burn? but when fuel is light and dry, it is so conceptive of fire, that even
the very smell of fire puts it into a flame. And this was poor London's case;
for every man's house had lain long a Sunning under the scorching beams of the
Sun, and much brightness of weather, which made every thing so dry and
combustible, that sparks and flakes of fire were sufficient to set men's houses
all in a flame about their ears. Now this finger of God we are neither to
overlook, nor yet deny; it is our wisdom, as well as our work, Exodus 8. 19.
to see not only the finger, but the hand of the Lord in every circumstance
that relates to that fore Judgment of fire, that we are still sighing under.
It Is God that withholds seasonable showers, and that causes it to rain upon
one City, Amos 4. 7.
and not upon another. The Earth cannot open her bowels, and yield seed to the
Sower, and bread to the Eater, if not 1 King. 17. 1, 2. Job 38. 31. Doubtless
there was much wrath in his, that the Water-house which served much of the City
with water, should be burnt down in a few hours after the fire first began. To
want a proper ^emedy when we are under a growing misery, is no small calamity.
It Is sad with the people that have nothing to quench the furious flames, but
their own tears and blood. To be stripped of water when God strikes a people with
that tremendous Judgment of Fire, is wrath to the utmost.
watered from above: nor the Heaven cannot drop down fatness upon the Earth, if
God close it up, and withhold the seasonable showers. This the very Heathens
acknowledged in their fictions of Jupiter and Juno. God only can make the
Heavens as Brass, and the Earth as Iron, and restrai^^ ^he Celestial
influences. Can man bind the sweet influences of Pleiades? or loose the bonds
of Orion? Can any but God forbid the Clouds to drop fatness? Surely no.
Beloved, drought and scantness of water, upon a Land, a City, etc. is a
Judgment of God. It Is no small misery to have the streams dried up, when the
fire is at our doors, Jer. 50. 38. A drought is upon her waters, and they shall
be dried up: for it is the Land of Graven Images, and they are mad upon their
Idols, Jer. 51. 35, 36. The violence done to me and to my flesh, be upon
Babylon, shall the inhabitant of Zion say; and my blood upon the inhabitants of
Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say. Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold I will
plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee; and I will dry up her Sea, and
make her Springs dry. Now mark what follows, ver. 37. And Babylon shall become
heaps, a dwelling place for Dragons, an astonishment, and an hissing without an
inhabitant. When God comes to plead the cause of Zion, against Babylon; not by
words, but by deeds, by blows, by terrible Judgments. When he comes to burn
up the inhabitants of Babylon, and to turn them out of house and home; he first
dryes up her Sea, and makes her Springs dry, Haggai 1 11. And I called for a
drought upon the Land, and upon the Mountains, and upon the Corn, and upon the
new Wine, and upon the Oil, and upon that which the ground brings forth, and
upon Men, and upon Cattle, and upon all the labor of the hands. It Is God that
brings droughts and rain, and that opens and stops (the Clouds) the bottles of
Heaven at his pleasure, Jer. 14. 2, 3, 4. Judah mourns, and the gates thereof
languish, they are black unto the ground, and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up.
And their Nobles have sent their little ones to the waters, they came to the
pits, and found no water, they returned with their vessels empty; they were
ashamed and confounded, they covered their heads. They muffled up their heads
and faces, as a token of great grief and sorrow as close mourners do with us.
Because the ground is chapt, for there was no rain in the earth, the Plowmen
were ashamed, they covered their heads. There are many calamities that are
brought upon us by humane means that are also avoidable by humane helps; but
drought and want of water, ^specially when a devouring fire is kindled in the
midst of a people, is no small judgment of Heaven upon that people, to want
water when the house is all in flames is a high evidence of Divine displeasure.
We had no rain a long time before the fire, and the Springs were low, and the
Waterworks at the Bridge-foot which carried water into that part of the City
that was first in flames were burnt dow^ the first day of the fire. And was
there not wrath from Heaven in this: Surely yes. Look as it is a choice mercy to
have God at hand, and the creatures at hand when w^ most need them: So it is a
fore Judgment, to have God at a distance, and the creatures remote, when they
should be o^ most service and use unto us. Certainly Gods arming of the Element
of fire against us, and his denying at the same time water unto us, cannot but
be a signal of his great indignation against us. And therefore it highly
concerns us, to see the hand of the Lord in that late lamentable fire that has
been amongst us. But,

Secondly, Consider the suddenness and unexpectedness of this Judgment. Who
among all the burnt Citizens, did London laid in ashes in four days time? Gods
Judgments many times seize upon men's persons, houses and estates, as the
Soldiers did Archimedes, whilst he was busy in drawing lines in the dust.
Isa. 64. 3. When thou did terrible things which we looked not for. When the
Citizens saw London in flames, they might truly have said, This is a terrible
thing which we looked not for: we were minding our business, our Shops, our
trades, our profits, our pleasures, our delights; we were studying, and
plotting, and contriveing how to make our selves and our children great and
rich, and high and honorable in the earth; and it never entered into our
thoughts, that the destruction of London by fire, was so near at hand, as now
we have found it to be, Isa. 47. 7, 8, 9, 11. Thou said I shall be a Lady for
ever: so that thou Babylon bore it self bold upon the seventy years provision
laid up before hand, to stand out a Siege, and upon its strength and riches,
but for all this 'twas taken by Cyrus.
did not lay these things to thy heart: (what things, we the Judgments of
God that were threatened) neither did remember the latter end of it. Therefore
hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, that dwell carelessly; that
say in thine heart, I am, and none else besides me. I shall not sit as a
widow, neither shall I know the loss of children. But these two things shall
come to thee in a moment, in one day; the loss of Children and Widowhood, they
shall come upon thee in their perfection. Evil shall come upon thee, and thou
shals not know from whence it rises; and mischief shall fall upon thee, thou
shall not be able to put it off: and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly,
which thou shall not know. Was not London the Lady City of our Land? Did the
inhabitants of London lay those Judgments of God to heart that they either
felt or feared? Did London remember her latter end? Were not most of the
inhabitants of London given to sinful pleasures and delights? Did they not live
carelessly and securely? Were they ever so secure and inapprehensive of their
danger, than at this very time when the flames broke forth in the midst of
them? They had newly escaped the most sweeping Plague, that ever was in the
City and Suburbs: but instead of finding out the plague of their hearts, and
mourning over the Plague of their 1 King. 8. 37, 38. Isa. 9. 13, 14, 15. Jer.
8. 6.
hearts, and repenting of the evil of their doings, and teturning to the Most
High, they returned to their fins and their Trades together; from both which
for a time the Plague had frighted them; concluding in themselves, that surely
the bitterness of death was past. They thought that the worst was past, and
that after so dreadful a storm they 1 Samuel 15. 32.
should have a blessed calm; and dreamed of nothing but peace, and quiet, and
safety, and Trade; striving with all their might to make up those losses, that
they had sustained by the Pestilence. They having escaped the Grave, when so
many score thousands were carried to their long homes, were very secure; they
never thought, that the City, which had been so lately infected by a contagious
Plague, was so near In the Month of September. the Plague was at the highest,
and in the same Month the flames of London were at highest. Doubtless there is
some mystery in this sad Providence, London was Judgement-proof, Plague-proof
in September. 65. and therefore God set London in flames in September 66.
being buried in its own ruins: they never imagined, that the whole City
should be put in flames, to purge that Air that their sins had infected. And
therefore no wonder if desolation came upon them suddenly, in a moment, in one
day. No marvail that so great a Fire was kindled in the very heart of the City,
and they not see the hand that kindled it, nor have no hands nor hearts to
quench it. Judgments are never so near, as when men are most secure, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 3. The old world was very secure until the very day that Noah entered into
the Ark. Luke 17. 27. They did eat, they drank they married wives, they were
given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and the flood
came and destroyed them all. Luther observes, that it was in the Spring that
the flood came, when every thing was in its prime and pride, and noing less
looked for than a flood: They neither believed, nor regarded Noah's preaching,
nor his preparations for his own and his childrens security; but merrily passed
without intermission, from eating to drinking, and from drinking to marriage
till the very day that the flood came and swept them all away. Their
destruction was foretold them to a day, but they were drowned in security, and
would take no notice of Noah's predictions, nor their own peril. They had made
their guts their God; they had buried their wits in their guts, and their
brains in their bellies: and so were neither awakened, nor bettered by any
thing, that either N^ah said or did; and so they perished suddenly and
unexpectedly. So Sod^m was very secure, till the very day that fire and
brimstone was rained from Heaven about their ears, ver. 28, 29. Likewise also
as it was in the days of Lot, They did eat, they drank, Genesis 19. 23. 24.
they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded: But the same day that Lot
went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from Heaven and destroyed them
all. Lot was no sooner taken out of Sodom, but Sodom was as soon taken out of
the world: their fair sunshine morning had a foul dismal evening: they had a
hansel of Hell on this side Hell; they past through fire and brimstone here, to
an eternal fire in Hell, as Jude speaks. So Jude 7.
the Jews were deadly secure before the first and latter destruction both of
their City and Country by sword and fire. Compare these together. Amos 6. 3.
Lam. 4. 11, 12. Ezekiel. 12. 22, 27, 28. Hab. 1. 7. Luke 2. 19, 41, 42, 43, 44.
All the world could not persuade them, that their Temple and City should be
laid in Ashes, till the Chaldeans at one time, and the Romans at another, had
set both their City and Temple in a flame before their eyes. Now mark sudden
and unexpected Judgments do always carry a great deal of the anger and
severity of God in them, Deuteronomy. 7. 4. So will the anger of the Lord be kindled
against you, and destroy thee suddenly. God being greatly angry with Jerusalem,
Isa. 29. 1, 2, 3, 4. He tells her, that her Judgment should be at an instant,
suddenly, ver. 5. Psalm. 64. 7. But God shall shoot at them with an arrow,
suddenly shall they be wounded. Hab. 2. 7. Shall they not rise up suddenly that
shall bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee, and thou shall be for booties
unto them? Prove. 6. 14, 15. Frowardness is in his heart, be devises mischief
continually, he sows discord. Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly;
suddenly shall he be broken without remedy. Here is a dismal doom; not bruised,
but broken; yea, suddenly broken, when they least dream or dread the danger.
And this without remedy, there shall be no possibility of piecing them up
again, or putting them into a better condition, Chap. 24. 22. Their calamity
shall rise suddenly; when they think that they have made all cock-sure, then
ruin and desolation lies at their door. Certainly there are no judgments so
dreadful and amazing, as those which come most suddenly and unexpectedly upon
the sons of men: for these cut off all hope; they hinder the exercise of
reason; they cloud men's minds; they distress men's spirits; they mar men's
councils, and they weaken men's courage; and they daunt men's hearts so, that
they can neither be serviceable to themselves, nor their friends, not the
public; all this was evidently seen upon the body of the Citizens, when London
was in flames. The more eminent cause have we to take notice of the hand of the
Lord, in that late fiery dispensation that has past upon us. The year 1666.
according to the computation of several sober, wise, learned men, should have
been the Christians Jubilee: many men's expectations were high, that Rome that
year should be laid in ashes; but it never entered into any of our hearts or
thoughts, that this very year London should be laid in ashes. O unexpected
blow! Berlin in Germany who in the Pulpit Scultet. A^^a^.
charged the Apostle Paul with a lie, was suddenly smitten with an Apoplexy,
while the words were yet in his mouth, and f^ll down dead in the place. The
Parson of Chrondal in Kent, having got a Pardon from Cardinal Pool) as the
Popes Substitute in that work) the next Lords Day in his own Parish presses all
his people to do the l^ke, with this Argument, that he was now so free from all
his sins, that he could die presently; and God presently so struck him in the
Pulpit that he died and never spoke more. As Bibulus a Roman General was riding
in triumph in all his glory, a Tyle fell from the house in the Street and
knocked out his brains. Otho the Emperor slew himself with his own hands, but
slept so soundly the night before, that the Grooms of his Chamber heard him
snort. And Plutarch reports the like of Cato. Lepidus and Aufidius stumbled
at the very threshold of the Senate and died: the blow came in a cloud from
Heaven Sophocles died suddenly by excessive joy: and Homer by immoderate grief.
Mr. Perkins speaks of one, who when it thundered, scoffingly said, it was
nothing but Tom Tumbril a hooping his Tubs, and presently he was struck dead
with a Thunderbolt. Olympus the Arrian Heretic bathing himself, Theater of
Gods Judgments: lib. 1. ap. 9. p. 64.
uttered sad words against the blessed Trinity, but suddenly a threefold
Thunderbolt struck him dead in the same place. Attilus King of the Huns,
proudly gave out, that the Stars fell before him, and the earth trembled at his
presence, and how he would be the scourge of all Nations; but soon after he
died by a flux of blood breaking out of his mouth, which choked him on his
wedding day. King Henry the Second of France upon the Marriage of his Sister
with the King of Spain, was so puffed up, that he called him self by a new
Title, Tres-heur^use Roy, The thrice happy King. But (to confute him) in
solemnizing that Marriage, he was slain at Tilt, by the Captain of his Guard
(though against his will, but not without Gods determinate counsel) in the very
beginning of his supposed happiness. Now every one that is a man either of
reason or Religion, will certainly say, that in these sudden Judgments that
befell these persons, there was the angry and displeased hand of God to be
seen. O how much more then should we see the angry and displeased hand of the
Lord, in that sudden dreadful fire, that has turned our once renowned City into
a ruinous heap. Jer. 8. 15.
In this year 1666. many thought that there had been many great and glorious
things in the womb of Providence, that would have been now brought forth, but
they were mistaken: for unexpectedly London is laid in ashes. But,

Thirdly, Consider the force, violence, vehemence and Many Authors speak much
of the Greek Fire (some of which burnt the Saracens Fleet) to be of such force,
that the Ancients accounted, no other means would extinguish it but Vinegar.
And certainly several fir^s that have been enkindled by Romish Jesuits have not
been less turious.
weak endeavors that were used. This Fire broke forth with that violence, and
raged with that fury, and appeared in that dreadfulness, and spread it self
with that dismalness, and continued for so long a time with that
irresistibleness, that discouraged hearts and weak hands with their Buckets,
Engines, Ladders, Hooks, opening of Pipes, and sweeping of Channels, could give
no check to it. This fire broke in upon the Inhabitants like an Arm of the Sea,
and roared and raged, like a Bear robbed of her Whelps, until it had laid our
glory in ashes. When the fire was here and there a little allayed or beaten
down, or put to a stand, how soon did it recover its force and violence, and
make the more furious onsets; burning down Water-houses, Engines, Churches, and
the most strong, pleasant and stately houses, nothing being able to stand
before its rage. How soon did the flames mount up to the tops of the highest
houses, and as soon descend down to the bottom of the lowest Vaults and
Cellars? Stone walls and Brickwalls, and those noble and strong Pieces of
Architecture were all but fuel to those furious flames.
How did they march along Jehu-like on both sides of the Streets, with such a
roaring, dreadful and astonishing noise, as never was heard in the City of
London before? Londons sins were now so great, and Gods wrath was now so hot,
that there was no quenching of the furious flames. The Decree for the burning
of London was now gone forth, and none could reverse it. The time of Londons
fall was now come. The fire had now received its commission under the Broad
Seal of Heaven, to burn down the City, and to turn it into a ruinous heap; and
therefore it defied and contemned all remedies, and scorned to be suppressed by
human^ attempts. Who ever kindled this fire, God blew the coal; and therefore
no arts, counsels, or endeavors of men were able to quench it. If God
commission the Sword to walk abroad, and to glut it self with blood, who can
command it into the Scabbard again? No art, power or policy can cause that
Sword to lie still, that God has drawn in the Nations round us, until it has
accomplished the ends for which he has drawn it. As to our present case, when I
weigh things in the balance of right reason, I cannot but be of opinion, that
had Magistrates and People vigorously and conscienciously discharged their
duties, much of London (by the blessing of God upon their endeavors) that is
now ruined, might happily have been preserved. When in a storm the Ship and all
the vast treasure that is in it, is in danger to be lost, it is sad to see every
Officer and Mariner to mind more, and endeavor more the preservation of their
Chests, Cabins and particular interests, than the preservation of the Ship, and
the vast treasure that is in it. Now this was just our case: Cicero Lib. 1. Ep.
15. ad Atticum.
in his time laughed at the folly of those men, who conceited that their
Fish Ponds and places of pleasure, should be safe when the Commonwealth was
lost. And we may well mourn over the folly and vanity of those men, who were so
amazed, confounded, distracted, besotted and infatuated (if not worse) as not
to improve all heads, hands, hearts, councils and offers, that were made for
the preservation of the City. This is, and this must be for a lamentation, that
in the midst of public dangers, all ranks and sorts of men should take more
care for the preservation of their trifling Fardels; (for so is any particular
man's estate, though never so great, when compared with the riches of a Rich,
Trading, Populous City) than they do for the preservation of the public good.
That there might have been rational and probable anticipations of those
dreadful conflagrating progresses, I suppose all sober men will grant: that
these were either hid from some men's eyes, and seen by others, and not
improved, was Londons woe. When London was almost destroyed, then some began to
blow up some houses for the preservation of that little that was left, and God
blessed their endeavors; but had some had encouragement, who long before were
ready for that work, and who offered themselves in the case, '^is v^ry prob^ble
that a great part of London might have been preserved. But what shall I say,
Divine Justice dos as eminently sparkle and shine in the shutting of men's eyes,
and in the stopping of men's ears, and in the hardening men's hearts, against the
visible and probable means of their outward preservation, as in any one thing.
This we must seriously consider, and then lay our hands upon our mouths, and be
silent before the Lord. The force and violence of this fire was so great, that
many that removed their goods once, twice, thrice, yea, and some oftener, yet
lost all at last. The fire followed them so close from place to place, that
some saved but little, and others lost all. Now how well dos it become us, in
the rage and fury of the flames, to see the hand of the Lord, and to bow before
him, as this fire being like Time, which devours all before it. Jerusalem was
the glory and beauty of the whole Earth; and the Temple was one of the worlds
wonders: but when Titus Vespasian's Soldiers had set it on Jos^phus.
fire, it burnt with that rage and fury, that all the industry and skill that
ever could be used, imagined, or thought on, could not quench it, though Titus
would gladly have preserved it, as a matchless monument. They threw both water
and the blood of the slain into it, but it burnt with that violence, that
nothing could extinguish it. King Herod for eight years together, before the
ruin of it, had employed ten thousand men at work to beautify it; but when
once 'twas on fire, it burnt with that fierceness, that there was no preserving
of it, the D^cree of Heaven been gone out against it, etc. But,

Fourthly, Consider the swiftness of it. It flew upon the wings of the wind,
that it might the sooner come to its journies end: It ran along like the fire
and hail in Egypt, destroying and consuming all before it. The Apostle James
Psalm 18. 10. Exodus 9. 23, 24. James 3. 6. 2. The winds are the Fan of Nature
to cool and purge the A^r. But at this time God brought the winds out of his
Treasury, to scatter the flames of his indignation, that so London might become
a desolation.
speaks of fierce winds. The wind was so boistrous, that it scattered and
carried the fire, the flames sometimes one way, sometimes another, in despite
of all the restraints, resistances and limits, that the amazed Citizens could
have set to it. I shall not trouble you with the various notions of
Philosophers concerning the wind, partly because they will do no service in the
present case; and partly because our work is to look higher than all natural
causes. All that either is or can be said of the Wind, I suppose may be thus
summed up that it is a creature that may be 1. Felt: 2. Heard: and Little
understood. Very wonderful is the rice of the Winds; when it is so calm and
still upon the Seas, that scarce a breath of air is perceivable, upon a sudden
the wind is here and there, and every where, Eccles. 1. 6. The wind goes
toward the South, and turns about unto the North, it whirleth about
continually, and the wind returns again according to his circuits, Psalm. 135.
7. He brings the wind out of his treasuries. But what those treasuries are,
and where they are, no man on earth can certainly tell us. The Wind is one of
the great wonders of the Lord, in which, and by which the Lords Name is
wonderfully magnified, Psalm. 107. 24, 25. They that go down to the Sea, see the
works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. What wonders? He commands and
raises the stormy wind; although some thing may bek nown of this creature in
the natural causes of it; yet it is a wonder John 3. 8.
above all, that we can know of it. What the Wind is, and from whence it comes,
and whither it goes none can tell.

God is the great Generalissimo and Sovereign Commander Mat. 8. 27. Number. 11.
31. Isa. 27. 8. Number. 11. 13. Genesis 8. Exodus 1. 10. Chap. 13.
of the Winds, so that a blast of wind cannot pass without his leave, license
and cognizance, Jonah 1. 4. But the Lord sent a great wind into the Sea, and
there was a mighty Tempest in the Sea. The winds are Gods Posts; they are
sometimes messengers of mercy, and sometimes messengers of wrath. Psalm. 147.
18. He causes his wind to blow. The winds are at Gods command, to come and go,
and go and come at his pleasure. When there is nothing but a sweet, smooth and
silver calm on the Seas, if God dos but give forth a word of command, how soon
are they thrown into Hills and Mountains, and how dreadfully do the waves dash
and clash one against another? Psalm. 148. 8. Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapors,
stormy Wind fulfilling his word. Sometimes the word that God has to fulfill, is
a saving word, and sometimes it is a destroying word, a drowning word, a sinking
word. Now according to the word that God has to fulfill, so do the winds
always blow. The Lord has the winds at command, to be his Executioners and
administrators; either of destruction or preservation. What are stormy winds at
Sea or a Shore, but the utterings of Gods voice in wrath and judgment.
Sometimes God is said to fly upon the wings of Psalm. 18. 10. 2 Samuel 22. 11.
Psalm. 104. 3.
the wind: and sometimes he is said to ride upon the wings of the wind: and
sometimes he is said to walk upon the wings of the wind. Now these things are
spoken after the manner of men, to show that the winds are continually acted
and governed by a Divine Power. God flies upon the wings of the tempestuous
winds speedily to execute the vengeance Exodus 15. 10. Exodus 14. 21.
written: and he rides and walks upon the wings of the more s^^t, easy and
gentle gales of the wind, that he may make good the mercies promised. No
creatures in Heaven or on Earth, has the winds at command, but God solely and
properly. Every wind that blows, has a commission under the Great Seal of
Heaven to bare it out in all it dos. If the winds should be examined,
questioned and required, to give in a full and exact account, of the many
thousand Mariners that they have drowned, and of the many thousand Ships that
they have spoiled and destroyed, and of the many ten thousand houses that they
have blown down at some times, and of the many score thousand houses, that
(when the fire has been kindled) they have helped to consume and reduce to ashes
at other times, they would show you the hand and seal of Heaven for all they
have done. The Sovereignty and greatness of God does eminently shine and
sparkle in this, that the winds are originally in his hand. He gathers the
wind in his f^st. God keeps the Prove. 30. 4.
royalty of all the creatures in his own hand. The winds are greater or
lesser, of a longer or shorter continuance, according to the will and pleasure
of the great God; and not according to the workings of second causes. The more
civilized Heathens had this notion amongst them, That the winds were under the
Dominion of one Supreme Power; and therefore dividing the world among sundry
Gods, they gave the honor of the Winds to Ae^lus, whom they ignor^ntly suppose,
had a power to lock them fast, or to let them loose at his pleasure. These poor
besotted Heathens thought, that their feigned God Ae^lus had power to govern
and bridle the winds, and to turn them this way and that way, as a man governs
the Char^ot in which he rid^th. And many ignorant Atheistical wretches when the
winds are boisterous and violent, they are ready to say, that there is
conjuring abroad, and that the D^vil is at work; but they must know, that the
Devil has not power of himself, to raise one blast of wind, no nor so much wind
as will stir a sea there. I know that the Devil is the Prince of the power of
Ephesians. 2 2.
the air, and that when God will give him leave to play R^x for ends best known
to himself, he can then raise such storms and tempests, both at Sea and a
Shore, as shall dash the stoutest Ships in pieces, and remove Mountains, and
mak^ the most glorious Cities in the world a ruinous heap, he can easily and
quickly raze the foundations of the fairest, the Job 1. 19.
richest, the strongest, and the renownest, and the oldest buildings in the
world, if God will but permit him* But without Divine permission, no Angel in
Heaven, no Devil in Hell, nor no Witch on Earth, can raise or continue the
winds one moment. Satan's power over the wind is only a derivative power, a
permissive power; but the Lords power over the wind, is a supreme power, an
absolute power, an independent power. Now O what eminent cause have we to see
the hand of the Lord in that boisterous wind that continued four days and
nights, and that carried the fire to all points of the Compass, to all parts of
the City, (if I may so speak) till our glorious City was laid in Ashes! Oh how
great were the sins of that people! Oh how great was the anger of that God, who
united two of the most dreadfullest elements Fire and Wind, to destroy our
City, and lay our glory in the dust! When the Romans put fire to the Walls of
Jerusalem, at first the North W^nd blew it furiously upon the Jos^phus Aniq. l.
7. c. 28.
Romans themselves; but suddenly the wind changing and blowing from the South,
(as it were by Gods Providence, says my Author) it turned the fire again upon
the wall, and so all was consumed and turned into ashes. And this Eleaz^r in
his Oration to his companions, takes special notice of, where he says, Neither
has our Castle by nature inexpugnable, Page 75 8.
any thing profited us to our preservation; but we having store of victuals and
armor, and all other necessaries, have lost all hope of safety; God himself
op^nly taking it from us. For the fire that once was carried against our
enemies, did not of it self return against us, and unto the wall we built.
Suppose the Romans, or some set on by the Conclave of Rome, did at first ^et
our City on fire, by casting their firebrarnds (for by that means Jerusalem was
set on fire) or fire balls here and there; yet how highly dos it concern us,
when we consider the furious wind that helped on the fury of the fire, to lay
our hands upon our loins, and to say, the Lord is righteous; and that our
present ruin, is but the product of incensed Justice, etc.

When the Lord has any service for the wind to do, it is presently upon the
march, to run and dispatch his errands, whether of indignation or of mercy. If
the Lord General of Heaven and Earth, the great, the supreme Commander of the
winds, will have them to destroy a people, and to help on the destruction of
their houses, when the flames are kindled; or to break and dash in pieces their
Ships at Sea, it shall soon be accomplished, 2 Chronicles. 20 37. Because thou have
joined thy self with Ahaziah, the Lord has broken thy works, and the Ships
were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish. B^^st^ro^s winds at Sea
or a shore, are the arrows of God sh^t out of the bended bow of his
displeasure; they are one of the lower tier of his indignation, that is fired
upon the ^^ildren of men, Nahum. 1. 3. The Lord has his way in the whirle
wind, and in the storm, and in the clouds are the dust of ^is feet. The great
Spanish Armado that came to invade our Land in 88. were broken and scattered by
the winds: So that their dice games were frastrated, and they sent into the
bottom of the Sea, if not into a worse bottom. And when Charles the V. had
besieged Algier (that Pen of Thieves) both by Sea and by Val. Max. Christiae.
page 132.
Land, and had almost taken it, by two terrible Tempests, the greatest part of
his great Fleet were destroyed, as they did lie in the Harbor at Anchor.
Ships, Houses, Trees, Steeples, Rocks, Mountains, Monuments cannot stand before
a tempest^ous wind. 1 Kings 19. 11. A great strong wind rent the Mountains, and
brake in pieces the rocks. What more strong than Rocks and Mountains? and yet
they were too weak to stand before the strength of a tempestious wind. Oh the
terrible execution that God does many times by the winds both at Sea and
ashore. Psalm. 18. 7. The earth shook and trembled, the foundations of the Hills
moved and were shaken, because he was wroth. ver. 8. There went up a smoke out
of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it,
ver. 10. He rode upon a Cherub, and did fly, yea, he did fly upon the wings
of the wind. ver. 12. His thick Clouds passed hailstones and coals of fire.
verse 13. The Lord also thundered in the Heavens, and the highest gave his
voice; hail stones and coals of fire, etc. The fire in London carried the noise
of a whirlwind in it: and that made it so formidable and terrible to all that
beheld it, especially those that looked upon it as a fruit of Gods displeasure.
The wind was commissionated by God to join issue with the raging fire, to lay
the City desolate. I think the like dreadful instance cannot be given in any age
of the world. We cannot say of the wind that blew when London was in flames,
that God was not in the wind; as it is said in that, 1 Kings 19. 11. For
assuredly, if ever God was in any wind, he was remarkably in this wind, witness
the dismals effects of it amongst us to this very day. Had God been pleased to
have hindered the conjunction of these two Elements, much of London might have
be^n standing, which now lies buried in its own ruins. I grant that it is
probable enough, that those that did so long before prophecy and predict the
barning of London, before it was laid in ashes, were the prime contrivers and
furtherers of the firing of it: but yet when they had kindled the fire, that
God by the bellows of Heaven, should so blow upon it, as to make it spread, and
turn like the flaming Sword in Paradise Genesis 3. ult.
every way; till by its force and fury, it had destroyed above two third parts
in the midst of the City: as the phrase ^s, Ezekiel. 5. 2. This is, and this must
be for a sore lamentation. God wbo holds the winds in his fist, who is the true
Ae^lus, Psalm 13. 5. Mark 4. 39.
could either have locked them up in his treasures, or have commanded them to be
still; or else have turned them to have been a d^fence to the City. God who
holds the bottles of Heaven in his hand, could easily have unstopt them; Genesis
7. 11.
he could with a word of his mouth have opened the windows of Heaven, and have
poured down such an abundance of rain upon the City, as would quickly have
quenched the violence of the flames, and so have made the conquest of the fire
more easy. But the Lord was angry, and the Decree was gone out, that London
should be burnt, and who could prevent it?

To close up this particular, consider much of the Wisdom, Power and Justice of
God shines in the variety of the motions of the wind. Eccles. 1. 6. The wind
goes toward the South, and turns about unto the North, it whirleth about
continually, and the wind returns again according to his circuits. The wind
has its various circuits appointed by God: when the wind blows Southward,
Northward, Westward, or Eastward, it blows according to the Orders that are
issued out from the Court of Heaven. Sometimes the wind begins to blow at one
point of the Compass, and in a short time whirles about to every point of the
Compass, till it comes again to the same point where it blew at the first; yet
in all this they observe their circuits, and run their compass, according to
the Divine appointment. As the Sun, so the winds have their courses ordered out
by the wise Providence of God. Divine Wisdom much sparkles and shines in the
circuits of the winds; which the Lord brings out of his treasure, and makes
them serviceable, sometimes to one part of the world, and at other times to
other parts of the world. Exodus 14. 24. Jonah 1. 4* Chap. 4. 8.
It Is the great God that appoints where the winds shall blow, and when the
winds shall blow, and how long the winds shall blow: and with what force and
violence the winds shall blow. The winds in some parts of the world, have a
very regular and uniform motion in some months of the year, blowing constantly
out of one quarter, and in others out of another. In some places of the world
(where I have been) the motions of the wind are steady and constant, which
Mariners call their Trade-wind. Now by these stated or settled winds, Divine
Providence dos very greatly serve the interest of the children of men. But now
in other parts of the world, the winds are as cha^geable as men's minds: The
Laws that God lays ^p^n the winds in most parts of the world, are not like the
Laws of the Medes and Persians, which alter not. One day God lays Dan. 6. 8.
a Law upon the winds to blow full East, the next day to blow full West, the
third to blow full South, the fourth to blow full North: yea, in several parts
of the world, I have known the winds to change their motions several times in a
day. Now in all these various motions of the winds, the Providence of God is at
work for the good of mankind. That there is a dreadful storm in one place, and
at the same time a sweet calm in another; that a tem^^^tuous storm should
destroy and dash in pieces one fleet, and that at the same instant, and in one
and the same Sea, a prosperous gale should blow another fleet into a safe
harbor: That some at Sea should have a stiff gale of wind, and others within
sight of them should lie becalmed: That some Ships should come into harbor top
and top gallant, and that others should sink down at the same harbors mouth,
before they should be able to get in; is all from the Decree of God, and that
Law that he has laid upon the winds. That terrible temp^stuous wind that
affrighted the Disciples, and that put them not only to their wits end, but
also to their faiths end, was allayed by a word of Christ's mouth, Matthew. 8. 26.
He arose and rebuked the winds and the Sea, and there was a great calm. O Sirs,
when London was in flames, and when the winds were high, and went their
circuits, roaring and making a most hideous noise, how easy a thing had it
been with Jesus, by a word of his mouth, to have allayed them? but ^e was more
angry with us, than he was with his D^^ciples, who were in danger of drowning;
or else he would as cer^ainly have saved our City from burning by rebuking the
winds and the flames, as he did his Disciples from drowning, by rebuking the
winds and the Seas. I have been the longer upon this fourth particular, that
you may the more easily run and read the anger of the Lord in those furious
flam^s, and in that violent wind that has laid our City desolate. It Is true
Astrol^gers ascribe the motions of the winds to special Planets: The E^st wind
they ascribe to the Sun, the West wind to the Moon, the South wind to Mars, and
the N^rth wind to Jupiter, but those that are wise in heart, by what I have
said concerning the winds; may safely and and groundedly conclude, that God
alone has the S^pream power of the winds in his own hand: and that he alone
orders, directs, and commands all the motions of the winds. And therefore let
us look to that terrible hand of the Lord that was lifted up in that fierce
wind, that did so exceedingly contribute to the turning of our City into a
ruinous heap. B^t,

Fifthly, C^^^ider the extensiveness of it. How did this Within the Walls of
the City, there were eighty one Parishes consumed. For every hour the fire
lasted, there was a whole Parish consumed.
^ill it had gained so great a force, as that it despised all men's attempts? It
quickly spread it self from the East to the West, to the destruction of houses
of State, of Trade, of Public Magistracy, besides Mines of Charity; it spread
it self with that violence, that it soon crumbled into ashes our most stately
Habitations, Halls, Chapels, Churches, and famous Monuments. Those Magnificent
Structures of the City that formerly had put stops, and given ch^cks to the
furious fl^m^s, falls now like stubble before the violence of a spreading fire.
This fire like an Arm of the Sea, or like a Land-flood broke in suddenly upon
us; and soon spread it self all manner of ways amongst us: it ran from place
to place like the fire and ha^l in Egypt; now 'twas in this Street, and anon
in that: Now this Steeple is on fire, and then that: Exodus 9. 13
Now this place of Judicature is laid in ashes, and then that: Now this Hall is
in flames, and then that: Now this Parish is burnt down to the ground, and then
that: Now this Ward is turned into a ruinous heap, and then that: Now this
Quarter of the City is level wi^h the ground, and then that: Now this Gate of
the City is demolished and consumed and then that. The adversary has spread
out his band upon Iam. 1. 10.
all her pleasant things, says the Prophet lamentingly; and and we may say
sighingly, the fire has spread out its hand upon all our pleasant things, upon
all our pleasant Houses Shops, Trades, Gardens, Walks, Temples, etc. The Plague
the year before, did so rage and spread, that it emptied many thousand houses
of persons; and now this dreadful fire has so spread it self, that it has not
left houses enough for many thousands of persons to dwell in, there being more
than 13000. houses destroyed by the furious flames. Sin is of a spreading
nature, and accordingly it had spread it self over all parts of the City; and
therefore the Lord (who delights to suit his Judgments to men's sins) sent a
spreading fire in the midst of us. The merciless flames spreading themselves
every way, in four days time laid the main of our (once glorious) City in
ashes: a Judgment so rem^^kable and past president; that he that will not see
the hand of the Lord in it, may well be reckoned amongst the worst of Athe^sts.
But,

Sixthly, Consider the impartiality of it. It spared neither Behold the Lord
makes the earth empty, and makes it waste, and turns it upside down, and
scatters abroad the inhabitants thereof. And it shall be as with the people,
so with the Priest: (or with the Prince, for the Hebrew word signifies both) as
with the servant, so with his Master, as with the maid so with the Mistress, as
with the buyer so with the seller, as with the lender so with the borrower, as
with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him. In the day of the
Lords wrath that was lately upon us, all orders, ranks and degrees of men
suffered alike, and were abased alike: the furious flames made no difference,
they put no distinction between the Russet Coat and the Scarlet Gown, the
Leathern Jacket and the Gold Chain, the Merchant and the Tradesman, the
Landlord and the Tenant, the Giver and the Receiver.

There is no difference, Fire has made,
Equal the Scepter and the Spade.
Ezekiel. 20. 47. Behold I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall dev^ur every
green Tree in thee, and every dry Tree: the flaming fl^me shall not be
quenched, and all faces from the South to the North, shall be burnt therein. (I
have in the former part of this Treatise given some light into these words) The
fire, the flames in the Text, takes hold of all sorts of people, rich and poor,
Lord and Lad, high and low, great and small strong and weak, wise and foolish,
learned and ignorant, Commanders and Soldiers, Rulers and ruled. So did the
late lamentable fire in London take hold of all sorts and degrees of men, as
the Citizens have found by sad experience. The fire like the Duke of Parma's
Sword, knew no difference 'twi^^ Robes and Rags, 'twixt Prince and Peasant,
Eccles. 9. 1, 2.
'twixt honorable and vile, 'twixt the righteous and the wicked, the clean and
the unclean, 'twixt him that sacrificed and him that sacrificed not, 'twixt him
that swears, and him that seareth an oath. The Judgment was universal; the
blow reached us all: the flames brake into every man's house; such a dreadful,
impartial, universal fire, eyes never saw before, nor ears never heard of
before, nor tongues never discoursed of before, nor Pens never writ of before.
Beloved, you know, that it is our duty to take serious notice of the hand of the
Lord in the least Judgment, and in every particular Judgment: Oh how much
more then dos it highly concern us, to take serious notice of the hand of the
Lord that has been lifted up against us, in that late dreadful, impartial,
universal fire, that has burnt us all out of our habitations, and laid our City
desolate. But,

Seventhly, Consider the greatness of it, the destructiveness might have been
said the day before the fire, who so rich as London was the Lady-City where the
Riches of many Nations were laid up. I would rather be bound to weep over
London, than be bound to sum up the losses of London by this dreadful fire.
these? and the very next day it might have been said of the same persons, who
so poor as these? as poor as Job; yea, poor to a Proverb, Jer. 21. 13, 14.
Behold I am against thee, O inhabitant of the valley, and rock of the plain,
says the Lord; which say, who shall come down against us? or who shall enter
into our habitations? But I will punish you according to the fruit of your
doings, says the Lord. And I will kindle a fire in the forest thereof, and it
shall devour all things round about it. Some by the Forest, understand the
fair and sumptuous buildings in Jerusalem, that were built with wood that was
hewn out of the Forest of Libanon, and stood as thick as Trees in the
Forest. Others by the Forest, understand the whole City of Jerusalem with the
Country round about it, that was as full of people, as a Forest is full of
Trees. Others by Forest understand the house of the Lord, and the Kings house,
and the houses of the great Princes, which were built with excellent matter
from the Wood of Lebanon. Jerusalem was 2 Samuel 5. 6.
so strongly d^fended by nature, that they thought themselves invincible, as
once the Jebusites did: they were so confident of the strength of their City,
that they scorned the proudest and the strongest enemies about them. But sin
had brought them low in the eye of God, so that he could see nothing eminent or
excellent among them; and therefore the Lord resolves by the Chaldees, to fire
their magnificent buildings in which they gloried, and to turn their strong and
stately City into a ruinous heap. Though Jerusalem Psalm 125. 2.
stood in a Vale, and was environed with Mountains, yet the upper part of it,
stood high as it were upon a rocky rising hill. Now the Citizens of Jerusalem
trusted very much in the situation of their City: they did not fear their
being besieged, straightened, conquered or fired: and therefore they say, Who
shall come down against us? Who shall enter into our habitation? Where is the
enemy that has courage or confidence enough to assault our City, or to enter
into our habitations? but God tells them that they were as barren of good
fruit, as the Trees of the Forest were barren of good fruit; and therefore he
was resolved by the hand of the Chaldeans to hew them down, and to fire their
most stately Structures, and to turn their glorious City (in which they greatly
trusted and gloried) into a ruinous heap. All which accordingly was done (not
long after) by Nebuzaradan and his Army; as you may see in Jer. 52. 12, 13, 14,
15. How often has the Citizens of London been alarmed with the cry of fire;
which has been as often extinguished before they could well know where it was,
and how it began? but all former fires were but small fires, but Bon-fires to
this dreadful fire that has been lately amongst us.

In the twentieth year of the Reign of William the first, so Sir Richard Bakers
Chronicle, p. 31. 47.
great a fire happened in London, that from the West-gate to the Eastgate, it
consumed houses and Churches all the way. This was the most grievous fire that
ever happened in that City, says my Author. And in the Reign of King Henry the
first, a long tract of buildings, from West-cheap in London to Aldgate, was
consumed with fire. And in King Stephens Reign there was a fire that began at
London Stone, and consumed all unto Aldgate. These have been the most
remarkable fires in London. But what were any of these, or all these, to that
late dreadful fire that has been amongst us? London in those former times was
but a little City, and had Eccles. 9. 14.
but a few men in it in comparison of what it was now. London was then but as a
great Banqueting House, to what it was now: Nor the consumption of London by
fire then, was Can. 2. 4.
nothing proportionable to the consumption of it by fire now. For this late
lamentable devouring fire has laid waste the greatest part of the City of
London within the walls by far, and some part of the Suburbs also. More than
fourscore Parishes, and all the Houses, Churches, Chapels, Hospitals, and
other the great and magnificent buildings of Pious or Public use, which were
within that circuit, are now brought into ashes, and become one ruinous heap.
This furious raging fire burnt many stately Monuments to powder; it melted the
Bells in the Steeples; it much weakened and shattered the strongest Vaults under
ground. O what Age or Nation has ever seen or felt such a dreadful visitation
as this has been. Nebuzaradan General to the King of Babylon, first sets the
Temple of Jerusalem on fire, and then the Jos. A^t. p. 255. A. M. 3356.
Kings Royal Palace on fire, and then by fire he levells all the houses of the
great men; yea, and all the houses of Jerusalem are by fire turned into a
ruinous heap, according to Jer. 52. 12, 13, 14.
what the Lord had before foretold by his Prophet Jeremiah. Now this was a
lamentable fire. Some hundred years after the Roman Soldiers sacked the City,
and set it on fire, and Jos. A^t. p. 741. A. M. 4034.
laid it desolate with their Temple, and all their stately buildings and
glorious monuments. Three or four Towers and the Wall that was on the West side
they left standing as monuments of the Romans valor, who had surpized a City
so Jos. A^t. p. 745.
strongly fortified. All the rest of the City they so plained, that they who
had not seen it before, would not believe that it had ever been inhabited. Thus
was Jerusalem one of the worlds wonders, and a City famous amongst all Nations,
Luke 19. 41, 42, 43, 44. Tacit. A^. 15.
made desolate by fire, according to the prediction of Christ, some years
before. There was a great fire in Rome in Nero's time, it spread it self with
that speed, and burnt with that violence, till of fourteen Regions in Rome,
there were but four left entire. I know there are some, who would make the
world believe, that this fire began casually, (as many now would persuade us,
that the late fire in London did) but I rather join issue with them, who
conclude that Nero set Rome on fire, and when he had done, he laid it upon A^no
64.
the Christians, and thereupon grounded his Persecution: as all know, that have
read the History of those times. Anno 80. Rome was set on fire by fire from
Heaven (say some) it burned three days and nights, and consumed the Capitol,
with many other stately Buildings and glorious Monuments; it burnt with that
irresistible fury, that the Historian concludes, that it was more than an
ordinary fire. And in the time of Commodius the Emperor, there happened such a
dreadful fire in Rome, as consumed the Temple of Peace, and all the most
stately Houses, Princely Palaces, glorious Structures and rare Monuments that
were in the City.

In the Reign of Achmat the eighth Emperor of the Turks, Knol^'s General
History of the Turks. page 1275.
about the beginning of November, a great fire arose at Constantinople, wherein
almost five hundred Shops of Wares, with many other fair Buildings were
destroyed by fire; so that the harm that was then done by fire, was esteemed to
amount to above two Millions of Gold. But alas, what was this fire and loss to
the fire of London, and the loss of the Citizens in our day!

In Constantinople in A. D. 465. in the beginning of September, there brake
forth such a fire by the water side, as raged with that dread, force and fury,
and violence four days and nights together, that it burnt down the greatest
part of the City, the strongest and the stateliest houses, being but as dried
stubble before it. It bid defiance to all means of resistance; it went on
triumphing and scorning all humane helps, till it had turned that great and
populous City (once counted by some the wonder of the world) into a ruinous
heap. This of all fires comes nearest to the late fire of London: but what is
the burning of a thousand Romes, and a thousand Constantinoples, or the burning
of ten thousand Barbarous Cities, to the burning of one London? Where God was
as greatly known, and as dearly loved, and as highly prized, and as purely
served, as he was in any one place under the whole Heavens! O Sirs, it is our
duty and our high concernment, to see the hand of the Lord, and to acknowledge
the hand of the Lord in the least fires: how much more then does it become us,
to see the hand of the Lord lifted up in that late dreadful fire that has laid
our City desolate. But,

Eighthly, Consider how all sorts, ranks and degrees of Cain's curse, most men
were unmanned and amazed? and therefore no wonder if the furious flames received
no check. In former fires, when Deuteronomy. 28. 65. 1 Samuel 13. 7. 14, 15. Acts 1: 12:
Why stand ye gazing? O the feebleness, the frigh^s, the tremblings, the
distractions that was then in every house, in every heart When a Ship is
sinking, it is sad to see every man run to his Cabin, when every one should be
at the Pump, or a stopping of Leaks.
Magistrates and People had resolved hearts and active hands, how easily, how
quickly were those fires quenched? But now our Rulers minds were darkened and
confused, their Judgments infatuated, their souls dispirited, and their ears
stopped, so that their Authority did only accent their misery: and this filled
many Citizens hearts with fear, terror, amazement and discontent; these things
being done, the City quickly was undone. Had the care and d^ligence both of
Magistrates and People, been more for the securing of the public go^d, than
'twas for securing their own private interest, much of London by a good hand of
Providence upon their endeavors, might have been standing, that is now turned
into a ruinous heap. Troy was lost by the sloth and carelessness of her
inhabitants; and may I not say, that much of London was lost, by the sloth and
carelessness of some, and by the fears, frights, and amazement of others; and by
others endeavoring more to secure their own Packs and Patrimonies, than the
safety of the whole. When London was in flames, men's courage did flag, and
their spirits did fail; the strong helpers stood helpless: Some stood loking
on, others stood weeping and shaking their heads, and wringing their hands; and
others walked up and down the Streets like so many Ghosts, Psalm. 76. 5. The
stout hearted are spoiled (or as the Hebrew runs, the stout hearted have
yielded themselves up for a prey: which the Rabbis thus expound, They are
spoiled of their understandings and infatuated) and none of the men of might
have found their hands: (or as some read the words, none of the men of riches,
that is, rich men, have found their hands) or as others carry the words, God
took away their courage, and their wonted strength failed them. So when London
was in flames, how were high and low, rich and poor, honorable and base,
spoiled of their understanding, and infatuated? The Lord took away all wisdom,
courage, counsel and strength from them: So Judges 20. 40. But when the flam^s
began to arise out of the City with a pillar of smoke, the Benjamites looked
behind them, and behold the flame of their City ascended up to Heaven: and when
the men of Israel ^urned again, the men of Benjamin were amazed, for they saw
that evil was come upon them. These Benjamites were the very picture of o^r
Citizens; for when they saw the flame began to arise out of the City with a
Pillar of smoke, when they saw the flame of the City ascend up to Heaven, O how
amazed and consounded were they! All wisdom, courage and council was taken
away, both from Magistrate and People; and none of them could find either
heads, hands, or hearts to prevent Job 34. 19, 20, 24.
Londons desolation. In Psalm. 76. v. ult. God is said, to cut off the Spirits
of Princes: (or as the Hebrew runs, He shall slip off the Spirits of Princes,
as men slip off a bunch of Grapes, or a Flower b^tween their fingers, easily,
suddenly, unexpectedly, as he did by Senacheribs Princes) Princes usually are
men 1 Kings 19 36.
of the greatest spirits; and yet sometimes God dos dispirit them; he slips off
their spirits, as men do a flower which soon withers in their hand. How soon
did God slip off the Spirit of that great, proud, debauched Monarch Belshazzar,
Dan. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
who when he was in the midst of his Cups, bravery and jollity (with all his
great Princes, Lords, Ladies and Concubines about him) saw a hand writing upon
the wall, which did so amaze him and terrify him, that his countenance was
changed and his thoughts troubled, and the joints of his loins loosed, and his
knees dashed one against another. But you may say, What was the reason that so
great a Prince should be so greatly astonished. An. The Text tells you, he saw
a hand: What hand? we the hand of a man: what could one hand of a man (says
One) terrify and startle so great a Monarch? Drexellius's School of Patience,
p. 150, 151, 152.
Had he seen the Paws of a Lion, or the Paws of a Bear, or the Paws of a
Dragon, there had been some cause of terror. But what need such a Puissant
Prince fear the hand of a man so much, at whose command and beck, an hundred
Troops of Armed Horse would presently fly to his assistance? What terrible
Weapons could that one hand wield or manage? none but a Pen with which it
wrote. But will any man, much less a King, be afraid of a writing Pen? Had he
beheld the three Darts of Joab, or the fiery flaming Sword 2 Samuel 18. 14. Genesis
3. 24.
of the Cher^b, brandished directly against him, he had then had some argument
of astonishment: But one Hand, one Pen, one piece of Writing which he
understood not; this was that which daunted him. Many Citizens were as much
amazed, astonished, terrified and startled when they saw London in flames, as
Belshazzar was, when he saw the handwriting upon the wall. Ahab trembled like a
shaken leaf, and so did his Grand son Manasseh, he that faced the Heavens, Isa.
7. 1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 33. 11, 12.
and that dared God in the day of his Prosperity, when troubles came thick, and
his fears rise high, he hides his hea^ among the bushes. Such a fear and
trembling was upon many Citizens when London was in flames. Though Tu^liw
Hostilius (the third King of the Romans) had a great warlike Spirit, as
Lactantius notes, yet he carried in his bosom tw^ new Gods, Pavorem and
Pallorem, fear and paleness, which h^ could not possibly shake off. Oh the fear
that was in Citizens hearts, and the paleness that was upon Citizens cheeks
when London was in flames! Now excessive fear fills the heart with all
confusion, they strip a man of his reason and understanding; Till London was
laid in Ashes that effectual means of preservation, viz. The blowing up of
houses was either greatly hid, or sad^y gainsaid. When the Disease had killed
the Pa^ients, than the Physicians agreed upon a Remedy. When the Ladder was
turned, than the Pardon came.
they weaken his hands, and they do so suddenly and totally dispirit and unman
a man, that he is not able to encounter with those visible dangers that
threaten his utter ruin: and this the poor Citizens sound by woeful experience
when London was in flames. At the sight of this fire, how were the Citizens
hearts melted, their hands feeble, their spirits faint, and their knees weak!
Oh the horror, the terror, the amazement, the confusion, that had now seized up
on the spirits of all sorts of Citizens! How were the thoughts of men now
distracted, their countenances changed, and their hearts overwhelmed? O the sad
looks, the pale cheeks, the weeping eyes, the smiting of breasts, and the
wringing of hands that were now to be seen in every Street, and in every
corner! What an universal consternation did my eyes behold upon the minds of
all men in that day of the Lords wrath! there is no expressing of the sighs,
the tears, the fears, the frights and the amazement of the Citizens; who were
now compassed about with flames of fire! O the cries, the tumults, the hurries,
and the hindrances of one another, that was now in every Street, every one
striving with his Pack at his back, to secure what he could from the rage and
fury of the flames. Now one cries out, five pound for a Cart, another cries
out, ten pound for a Dray; in one Street one cries out, twenty pound for a
Cart, and another in the next Street cries out, thirty pound for a Cart; here
one cries out forty pound for a Cart, and there another cries out, fifty pound
for a Cart. Many rich men that had time enough to have removed their goods,
their wares, their commodities, flattered themselves, that the fire would not
reach their habitations, they thought they should be safe and secure; but when
the flames broke in upon them, O then any money for a Cart, a Coach, a Dray, to
save some of their Richest and Choicest goods! Oh what fear were many Parents
now in, that their Children would either be now trod down in the press, or lost
in the crowd, or be destroyed by the flames! And what fear were many Husbands
now in, concerning their Wives, who were either weak or sick, or aged, or newly
delivered! Words are too weak to express that distraction that all men were
under, when the fire went on raging and devouring all before it. And this was
an evident token to me, that the hand of the Lord was eminent in the fire, and
that the Decree was gone forth, that Dear London must now fall. But,

Ninthly, Consider the time that the fire began. It began Lords Day (being the
second of September) about one or two of the clock in the morning. Our fears
fell upon us on the Lords Day, on that day that should have been a day Rev. 1.
10. Isa. 58. 13, 14.
of joy and delight unto us. On this day our singing was turned into sighing,
our rejoicing into mourning, and all our praisings into tremblings. O the
fears, the frights, the distresses that men were now under! O the amazed
spirits, the bedewed checks, the faint hearts, the feeble knees, the weak
hands, and the dejected countenances that were now to be seen every where! O
Sirs, the time when this fatal fire first began, was very ominous, it being at
a time when most Citizens were but newly fallen into a dead sleep, being
wearied out in their several employments: Several days before, but especially
on Saturday (or the last day of the week) that being with very many the most
bufiest day in all the week. And of all mornings, most Citizens did usually lie
longest in Bed Sabbath Day mornings. Such as used to rise early every morning
in the week to gain the meat that Psalm. 127. 1, 2 John 6. 27.
perishes, to make sure and to treasure up for themselves and theirs the
things of this world. Such commonly mad^ most bold with the Lords Day, and
would frequently be in their beds, when they should have been either
instructing of their families, or at prayers in their Closets, or else a
waiting upon the Lord in his public Ordinances. Fire in the night is terrible
to all, but mostly to such whose spirits and bodies were tired out in the
preceding day. Wasting and destroying Judgments are sad any day, but saddest
when they fall on the Lords Day. For how do they disturb, distress and distract
the thoughts, the minds, the hearts and the spirits of men? So that they can
neither wait on God, nor wrestle with God, nor act for God, nor receive from
God, in any of the duties or services of his day. And this the poor Citizens
found by sad experience, when London was in flames about their ears. Certainly
the anger and wrath of God was very high, and very hot, when he made his day of
rest to be a day of labor and disquiet. When his people should have been a
meeting, hearing, reading, praising, praying. For the Lord now to scatter them,
and to deliver them, their substance and habitations as a prey to the devouring
fire; what dos this speak our, but high displeasure? That the fire of Gods
wrath, should begin on the day of his rest and solemn Worship, is and must be
for a lamentation. In several of those Churches where some might not preach,
there God himself preached to the Parishioners in flames of fire. And such who
loved darkness rather than light, John 3. 19. Exodus 19. 16, 17, 18.
because their deeds were evil, might now see their Churches all in a flaming
fire. What a terrifying and an amazing Sermon, did God preach to his people of
old in Mount Sinai, when the Mount burned with fire? And so what terrifying and
amazing Sermons did God preach to the Citizens on his own day, when their
Temples and their habitations were all in flames. Instead of holy rest, what
hurries were there in every street, yea, in the spirits of men? Now instead of
taking up of Buckets, men in every Street take up arms, fearing a worse thing
than fire. The Jealousies and Rumors that fire balls were thrown into several
houses and Churches (by such that had no English tongues but outlandish hands,
to make the furious flames flame more furiously) were so great that many were
at a stand, and others even at their wits end. Now relations, friends and
neighbors hastened one another out of their houses, as the Angels hastened Lot
out of Sodom. Genesis 19. 15, 16, 17.
Such were the fears, and frights, and sad apprehensions that had generally
seized upon the Citizens. Not many Sabbaths before (when men should have been
instructing of their families) what bonfires, what ringing of Bells, and what
joy and rejoicing was there in our Streets, for burning the Dutch Ships in
their Harbor (where many English and others, were highly concerned as well as
the Dutch) little did they think, who were pleasing and warming themselves at
those lesser fires, that the great God would in so short a time after, kindle
so great a fire in the midst of their Streets, as should melt their Bells, lay
their habitations in ashes, and make their Streets desolate: So that those that
were so jolly before, might well take up that sad lamentation of weeping
Jeremiah. The Lord has swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and has not
pitied: he has thrown down in his Lam. 2. 2, 3.
wrath, the strong holds of the daughter of J^dah: he has brought them down to
the ground. He burned against Jacob like a flaming fire which devoureth round
about. May we not soberly guess* that there were as many strict observers and
sanctifiers of the Lords Day, who did turn away their feet from doing their
Isa. 58. 13.
pleasure on Gods holy day, and that did call the Sabbath a delight, the holy
of the Lord, and honorable within the Walls of London, as in a great part of
the Nation besides. Now for the Lord of the Sa^bath, to kindle such a devouring
fire in such a City, and that on his own day! O what extraordinary wrath and
displeasure dos this speak out! When God by his Royal Law, had bound the hands
of his people from doing their own works; for him now to fall upon his strange
work, and by a flaming consuming fire to turn a populous City, a pious City, an
honorable City, and an Ancient City into a ruinous heap, what indignation to
this indignation! O Sirs, it highly concerns us, to take notice of the
Judgments of the Lord that fall upon us on any day, but especially those that
fall upon us on his own day; because they carry with them more than a tincture
of Gods deep d^spl^asure.

In the Council of Paris, every one laboring to perswad^ unto a more religious
keeping of the Sabbath Day. When Council. Paris. lio. 1. cap. 50.
they had justly complained, that as many other things, so also the obs^rvation
of the Sabbath was greatly decayed, through the abuse of Chr^stian l^b^rty, in
that men too much followed the delig^^s of the world, and their own worldly
pleasures, both wicked and dangerous. They further add, For many of us have
been eye witnesses, many have intelligence of it, b^ the relation of others,
that some men upon this day, being about their husbandry, have been stricken
with Thunder; some have been maimed and made lame; some have had their bodies
(even bones and all) burnt in a moment with visible fire, and have consumed to
ashes; and many other Judgments of God have been, and are daily inflicted upon
Sabbath Breakers.

Stratford upon Sluon was twice on the same day twelve month (being the Lords
Day) almost consumed with fire The Theater of Gods Judgments. page 419, 420.
chiefly for profaning the Lords Day, and contemning his word in the mouth of
his faithful Minister. Feverton in Devons^ire (whose remembrance makes my heart
bleed, says my Author) was oftentimes admonished by her godly Preachers, that
God would bring some heavy Judgment on the Town, for their horrible
profanation of the Lords Day, occasioned ch^efly by their Market on the day
following: Not long after his death, on the third of April 1598. God in less
than half an hour consumed, with a sudden and fearful fire, the whole Town,
except only the Church, the Courthouse, and the Almshouses, or a few poor
peoples dwellings; where a man might have seen four hundred dwelling houses all
at o^^e on ^ire, and above fifty persons consumed with the flames. And on the
fifth of August 1612. (fourt^en years since the former fire) the whole Town was
again fired and consumed, except some thirty houses of poor people, with the
School-house and Almshouses. Now certainly they must be much left of God,
hardened in sin, and blinded by Satan, who do not, nor will not see the dreadful
hand of God, that is lifted up in his fiery dispensations upon his own day. But,

Tenthly, and lastly, Consider, That the burning of London 10.
is a National Judgment. God in smiting of London, has smitten England round:
the stroke of God upon London, was When one member in the natural body suffers,
all the members of the body suffer: it is so in the Politic body, etc. Look as
all Rivers run into the Sea, and all the lines of the circumference meet in the
center: so did the interests of the most eminent persons in the whole Nation
meet in London, etc. Now London is laid in ashes, we may write Ichabod upon
poor England. By the flames that have been kindled in London, God has spit
fire into the face of England.
an universal stroke. The sore strokes of God, which have lately fallen upon
the head City (London) are doubtless designed by Heaven, for the punishment of
the whole body. In the sufferings of London, the whole Land suffers. For what
City, County, or Town in England was there, that was not one way or other,
refreshed and advantaged, if not enriched, with the silver streams of London
that overflowed the Land, as the River Nilus does the Land of Egypt. Doubtless
there are but few in the Land, but are more or less concerned in the burning of
London. There are many thousands that are highly concerned in their own
particulars; there are many thousands concerned upon the account of their
inward friends and acquaintance: and who can number up the many score thousands
employed in the Manufacture of the Land, whose whole dependence (under God) was
upon London. What Lamentation, mourning and woe is there in all places of the
Land, for the burning of London, especially among poor Tradesmen, Innkeepers,
and others, whose livelihoods depended upon the safety and prosperity of
London. Certainly he is no English man, but one who writes a Roman hand, and
carries about him a Romish heart, who feels not, who trembles not under this
universal blow. Many years labor will not make up the Citizens losses to them.
Yea, what below the Riches of the Indies will effectually make up every man's
losses to him? He shall be an Apollo to me, that can justly sum up the full
value of all that have been destroyed by those furious flames, that has turned
the best (if not the richest) City in the world, into a ruinous heap. Now their
loss is a loss to the whole Nation; and this the Nation already feels, and may
yet feel more and more, if God in mercy dos not prevent the things that we have
cause to fear. It Is true London is the back that is smitten: but what corner is
there in all the Land, that has not more or less, one way or another,
contributed to the burning of London. Not only those that lived in Jerusalem,
but also those that came up to Jerusalem, and that Traded with Jerusalem, they
even they did by their sins contribute to Jerusalems ruin. They are under a
high mistake, that think it was only the sins of the City which brought this
sore desolation upon her: doubtless as far as the Judgment extends and
reaches, so far the sins extend and reach, which have provoked the Lord, to
make poor London such an astonishing example of his justice. How are the
eff^cts of Londons ruin already felt and sighed under, all the Nation over.
The blood and spirits which this whole Nation, has already lost by this late
lamentable fire, will not be easily nor suddenly recovered. The burning of
London, is the Herald of God to the whole Nation, calling it to repentance and
reformation; for the very same sins that have laid London in ashes, are rampant
in all parts of the Nation; as you may easily perceive, if you please but to
compare that Catalogue that in this Book I put into your hands, with those sins
that are most reigning and raging in all places of the Land: by which you may
also see, that they were not the greatest sinners in England, upon whom the
fire of London fell; no more than they were the greatest sinners in Jerusalem,
upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell. That the burning Luke 13. 4, 5.
of London is a National Judgment, is evident enough to every man that has but
half an eye. But if any should doubt of it, or dispute it, the Kings
Proclamation for a General Fast on that account, puts it beyond all dispute.
The words of the Proclamation that are proper to my purpose, are these, A
Visitation so dreadful (speaking of the burning of London) that scarce any Age
or Nation has ever seen or felt the like; wherein although the afflicting hand
of God fell more immediately upon the inhabitants of this City, and the parts
adjacent; yet all men ought to look upon it, as a Judgment upon the whole
Nation, and to humble themselves accordingly. O Sirs, you are to see, and
observe, and acknowledge the hand of the Lord in every personal Judgment, and
in every Domest^cal Judgment: O how much more then, in every National
Judgment that is infl^ct^d upon us! And thus I have done with those ten
Considerations, that should not only provoke us, but also prevail with us, to
see and acknowledge the hand of the Lord, in that late dreadful fire that has
laid ^ur City desolate.

The second Use is a Use of Lamentation and mourning. London laid in ashes?
Then let us all lament and mourn, that L^nd^n is laid desolate. Shall Christ
weep over Jerusalem, Luke 19. 41, 42, 43, 44.
when 'twas standing in all its glory (knowing that it would not be long before
it was laid even with the ground) and shall not we weep over London, whose
glory is now laid in the d^st? Who can look upon London, as the An^ient and
Noble Metropolis of England, and not lament and mourn, to see it laid in ashes?
It might have been said not long since, Psalm. 98. 12, 13. London the Crown of
England, ha^h ^ost its Jewel of Wealth and Beauty.
Walk about Sion, (walk about London) and go round about ^er, t^ll the Towers
thereof, mark ye well her Bulwarks, consid^r her P^laces: look upon her stately
Houses, Halls and Hospitals, take notice of her Shops, and fair Warehouses, and
Royal Exchange, etc. and lo, the glory of all ^hese things, is now buried in a
common ruin! O the incredible change, that a devouring fire has made in four
days time within thy Walls, O London! So that now we may lamentingly (Alas
poor London) Is this the joyous City, whose antiquity is of ancient days? Is
this the crowning City, Isa. 23. 7, 8
whose Merchants were Princes, and whose Traffickers were the honorable of the
Earth? Who can but weep, to see how the Lord has made a City an heap, and a
ruin of a defenced City, and a Palace to be no City? Who can look upon Chap.
25. 2.
naked Steeples, and useless Chimneys, and pitiful fragments of ragged walls?
Who can behold stately Structures, and noble Halls, and fair Houses, and see
them all laid in ashes, or turned into a heap of Rubbish, without paying some
tears, as due to the sadness of so dreadful a spectacle? Who can with dry eyes
hear London thus speaking out of its r^ines, Is it nothing to you, all ye that
pass by? Behold and see, if there Lam. 1. 12.
be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord
has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger. Who can look upon the Lord as
making London empty, as Isa. 24 1. Sr. Edw. Turner in his Speech to the King o
Friday the 18. day of January, has these words, They fi^d (meaning the
Parliamen^) your Majesty engaged in a sharp and costly War, opposed by Mighty
Princes and States, that are in conjunction against us: they s^e with sorrow
the greatest part of your Metropolitan City buried in ashes.
laying it waste, as turning it upside done, and as scattering abroad the
inhabitants thereof, and not mourn. Beloved under desolating Judgments, God
dos expect and look that his people should lament and mourn, Jer. 4. 7, 8. The
Lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his
way; he is gone forth from his place to make thy Land desolate, and thy City
shall be laid waste, without an inhabitant. For this gird you with Sackcloth,
lament and howl: for the fierce anger of the Lord is not turned back from us.
Under wasting Judgments, God expects, not only inward, but also outward
expressions and demonstrations of sorrow and grief. Shall our enemies rejoice
over the Ruins of London, and shall not we mourn over the Ruins of London!
Shall they that are afar off lament over Londons desolation, and shall not we
lament over Londons desolation, who are every day a walking up and down in
Londons Ruins and Rubbish! O S^rs, as ever you would see Londons breaches
repaired, her Trading recovered, her beauty restored, her riches augmented, her
glory advanced, and her inhabitants rejoiced, make conscience of mourning over
Londons Ruins. After Jerusalem was destroyed by the Romans, many of the Jews
obtained leave of the Roman Emperors, once a year (viz. on the tenth of August,
which was the day whereon their City was taken) to enter into Jerusalem, and
bewail the destruction of their City, Temple and People, bargaining with the
Soldiers who waited on them, to give Josephus.
so much for so long abiding there, and if they exceeded the time they
conditioned for, they were to stretch their purses to a higher rate: which
occasioned Hierom to say, That they who bought Christ's blood, were then glad to
buy their own tears. O Sirs, what cause have we, once a year, yea, often in a
year, to bewail the desolation of London! The Statue of Apollo, is said to shed
tears, for the afflictions of the Grecians, though he could not help them.
Though we could no^ prevent the burning of London, yet let us weep over the
Ruins of London. The Leprosy of the Citizens sins, had so fretted into
Londons Walls; that there was no cleansing of them, but by the furious flames
of a consuming fire. In the Law you know, that when the old fretting Plague of
Leprosy, was Lev. 14. 35. ^o v. 46.
so got into the house, and spread in the Walls, that no scraping within or
without, could cleanse it away, then the house was to be pulled down: this
seems to be Londons case. God by former Judgments, labored to scrape away the
Leprosy of sin out of London, but that deadly leprosy was so got into men's
hearts and houses, that there was no getting of it out, but by pulling them
down. This is, and this must be for a lamentation. Now the better to work you,
to lament and mourn over the ruins of London, consider with me these ten
following particulars.

First, Who can look upon the burning of London, as ushered Red Horse Rev. 6.
4, 8.
amongst us, viz. a cruel bloody War; and then he sends his Pale Horse amongst
us, viz. a noisome sweeping Pestilence. O the garments that were rolled in
blood! O the scores of thousands, that were by the hand of the destroying Angel
sent to their long-homes, to their eternal homes! Now in the rear of these
Judgments, follows such a devouring fire, as has not been known in any Ages
past. Not long before Vespasian came against Jerusalem, there happened diverse
Prodigies: 1. There Jos^phus page 738, 739.
was a Comet in form of a Fiery Sword, which for a year together did hang over
the City. 2. There was seen a Star on the Temple so bright, as if a man had so
many drawn Swords in his hands. 3. At the same time that this Star appeared,
which was the Solemn Passover, that whole night the Temple was light, and
clear as midday, and continued so seven days together. 4. At the same time
also, they brought a Heifer for a Sacrifice, which when she was knocked down,
she calved a Lamb. 5. The inner Gate of the Temple on the cast side, being of
Massive Brass, that was never opened nor shut, but twenty men had enough to do
about it, this Gate was seen at the first hour of the night, to open of its own
accord, and they could not shut it, till a great number joined their strength
together. 6. There was discerned on the Sanctum Sanctorum, a whole night long
the face of a man very terrible. 7. A^ the same time, before the Sunset, there
were seen in the Air, Iron Chariots, all over the Country, and an Army in
battle array, passing along the clouds, and begirting the City. 8. Upon the
Feast Day called Pentecost, at night the Priests going into the Inner Temple,
to offer their wonted Sacrifice, at first they felt the place to move and
tremble, and afterward they heard a man walking in the Temple, and saying with
a great and wonderful terrible voice, Come let us go away out of this Temple,
let us depart hence. But Ninthly and lastly, that which was most wonderful of
all, was this, that there was one Jesus the Son of Ananus, a Countryman, of
the common people, who four years before the Wars began, when the City
flourished in peace and riches, coming to the celebration of the Feast to
Jerusalem, which we call the Feast of Tabernacles; suddenly began to cry out
thus, A voice from the East, a voice from the West, a voice from the four winds
of the Heavens, a voice against Jerusalem, a voice against the Temple, a voice
against the Bridegroom, a voice against the Bride, and a voice against the
whole people: and thus crying day and night, he went about all the Streets of
the City. The Nobility scourged him, yet still he cried, woe, woe unto Jerusalem:
he did never curse any one, though every day he was beaten by one or other:
neither did he thank any one that offered him meat. All that he spoke to any
man, was this heavy prophecy, Woe woe unto Jerusalem. He never went to any
Citizens, neither was he seen to speak to any one, but still as it were,
studying of some speech, he cried Woe, woe unto Jerusalem. Thus for four years
space, say some, for seven years and five months, says Josephus, his voice
never waxed hoarse, nor weary, till in the time of the Siege, beholding what he
foretold them, as he was walking upon the Walls, crying Woe to Jerusalem, woe to
the Temple, woe to all the People, he added, and woe to my self; and as soon as
the words were out of his mouth, a stone came out of an Engine from the Camp,
that dashed out his brains. These Prodigies were fore runners of Jerusalems
desolation? What Comets, what Blazing Stars, what sheets of fire have been
seen fly over London, and what flames of fire have been seen over the City, a
little before it was laid in ashes, I shall not now insist upon. Certainly when
a consuming fire, shall be ushered in by other dreadful Judgments and amazing
Prodigies, it highly concerns us to set down and mourn. But,

Secondly, Who can look upon London as an Ancient City, as a City of great
Antiquity, and not mourn over the ruins Isa. 23. 7. Jer. 5. 15.
two thousand seven hundred and seventy odd years. It Is recorded by some, that
the foundation of London was laid in the year of the world 2862. London by some
Antiquaries, is called Troynovant, as having been first founded by the Trojans.
London is thought by some, to be Antienter than Rome. That London was a very
ancient City, might several ways be made good; but what should I spend time to
prove that, which every one is ready to grant. Josephus Jos^ph p. 745.
speaking of Jerusalem, says, That David the King of the Jews having driven
out the Caneans, gave it unto his people to be inhabited, and after four
hundred threescore and four years and three months, it was destroyed by the
Babylonians. And from King David who was the first Jew that reigned there,
until the time that Titus destroyed it, were a thousand one hundred seventy
and nine years, and from the time that it was first erected, until it was by
him destroyed, were two thousand one hundred and seventy seven years; yet
neither the Antiquity, nor riches, nor the fame thereof, now spread all over
the world, nor the glory of Religion did any thing profit or hinder it from
being destroyed. So it was, neither the Antiquity, nor the Riches, nor the
Fame, nor the Greatness, nor the Beauty, nor the Glory, nor the Religion, that
was there professed, that could prevent Londons being turned into a Chaos in four
days tim. London that had been climbing up to its Meridian of worldly
greatness and glory above two thousand years, how is she made desolate in a few
days; and of a glorious City become a ruinous heap? Physicians make the
threescore and third year of a man's life, a dangerous climacterical year to the
Body Natural; and Statists make the five hundredth year of a City, or Kingdom,
as dangerous to the Body Politic, beyond which (say they) Cities and Kingdoms
cannot stand. But Jerusalem, and London, and many other Cities, have stood much
longer, and yet in the end have been laid desolate. Now what true Englishman
can look upon Londons Antiquity, and not mourn to see so ancient a City turned
into a ruinous heap. But,

Thirdly, What true Englishman did ever look upon London, London laid in
ashes? London was one of the wonders of the world: London was the Queen City,
the crowning City of the Land, a City as Isa. 23. 8. It Is an Italia^ Proverb,
He who has not seen Venice will not believe and he who has not lived ^ometime
there, does not understand what a City it is. I shall leave the Application to
the prudent Reader.
famous as most Cities, for worldly grandeur and glory: yea, a City, more
famous and glorious, than any City under Heaven, for Gospel light, and for the
power of Religion, and real holiness, Psalm. 76. 1, 2. In Judah is God known,
his name is great in Israel: In Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling
place in Zion. In London was God known, his name was great in London; and in
London also was his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place. And as God was known in
Judah, not only by his word, but also by his glorious works; so God was known
in London, not only by his word, but also by his glorious works. And as God was
known in Judah, first by the multitude of his mercies, but afterward by the
severity of his Judgments; so God was known in London, first by the multitude
of his mercies, but afterward by the severity of his Judgments: witness the
sweeping Pestilence, and the devouring fire, that he sent amongst us. And as
God was known in Judah, first by lesser Judgments, and then by greater; for he
first lasht them with Rods, and then with Scourges, and at last with Scorpions,
so God was first known in London by lesser Judgments, witness the Violent
Agues, strange Feavours, Small Pox, and small fires that broke forth in several
places of the City and Suburbs; but these having no kind, no effectual
operation upon us; God at last made himself known in the midst of us, by such a
Pestilence, and by such a Fire, that the like was never known in that City
before. We were once the objects of his noble favors, but we made our selves
at last, the subjects of his fury. And as the Philosopher tells us, corruption
optimi, est p^ssima: or as we find, that the sweetest Wines, become the tartest
Vinegar; so Gods heavenly favors and indulgencies being long abused, they at
last turned into storms of Wrath and Vengeance. What English man did look upon
Psalm. 101. 8. Isa. 60. 14. Psalm. 48. 1. 8, etc. Neh. 11. 1. Isa. 18. 52. Dan.
1. 9. 24
London, as the City of the great God, as a holy City, as that City wherein God
was as gloriously made known, and wherein Christ was as much exalted, and
Religion was as highly prized, as in any part of the world beside; and not
mourn over it, now it is laid desolate. 'Twas long since said of Athens and
Sparta, that they were the eyes of Greece. Was not London the eyes of England?
And who then can but weep, to see those eyes put out? Great and populous
Cities, are Look what the face is to the body, that London was to England, the
beauty and glory of it.
as it were, the eyes of the Earth; and when these eyes are lost, who can but
sit down and sigh and mourn! London, was the joyous City of our Solemnities, it
was the Royal Chamber of the King of Kings, it was the Mart of Nations, it was
the lofty City, it was the top gallant of all our glory. Now who can but shed
tears, to see this City laid even to the ground; to see this City, sit like a
desolate Widow in the dust. Such a sight made Jeremiah to lament: Lament. 1. 1.
How does the City sit solitary (speaking of Jerusalems ruin) that was full of
people? How is she become as a widow? She that was great among the Nations, and
Princes among the Provinces? How is she become tributary? Let profane,
ignorant, superstitious, and Popish desamers of London say, Jer. 9. 1, 2, 3.
Ezekiel. 9. 4. 6.
what they please, yet doubtless God had more of his mourning ones, and of his
marked ones in that City, than he had in a great part of the Nation beside.
There was a time, when London was a faithful City, a City of righteousness, a
City of Renown, a City of Praise, a City of Joy; yea, the Paradise of the
world, in respect of the power and purity of Gospel Ordinances, and that
glorious light shined in the midst of her. Who can remember those days of old,
and not mourn to see such a City buried in its own Ruins! Under the whole
Heavens there were not so many thousands to be found, that truly feared the
Lord, in so narrow a compass of ground, as was to be found in London? and yet
l^ London is laid in the dust, and the Nations round gaze and wonder at her
desolation! Who can but hang down hi^ head, and weep in secret for these
things. But,

Fourthly, who did look upon London as the Bullwark, a Walk about Sion, and
tell the Towers thereof, mark ye well her Bullwarks, confider her Palaces, that
ye may tell it to the generation following. Sion had her Bullwarks, her Towers,
her Palaces; but at last the Chaldeans at one ^er. 52. 12, 13. Luke 19. 41, 45.
time, and the Romans at another, laid them all waste. So London had her
Bullwarks, her Towers, her Palaces, but they are now laid desolate, and many
fear, and others say by malcontent Villains, and mischievous Foreigners of a
Romish faith. London was once terrible, as an Army with Cant. 6. 10.
Banners. How terrible were the Israelites, enc^mped and bannered in the
Wilderness unto the Moabites, Canaanites, etc. Exodus 15, 14, 15, 16.
So was London more than once terrible to all those Moabites, Canaanites, that
have had thoughts to swallow her up, and to divide the prey among themselves.
How terrible were the Hussites in Bohemia, to the Germans, when all Germa^y
were up in arms against them, and worsted by them. London has been as terrible
to those that have been cozen-Germans to the Germans. London was once a
Battel-ax, and Battel-bow in the hand of the Almighty, which he has wielded
Jer. 51. 20, Zech. 9. 10. and Chap. 10. 4. Ezekiel. 21. 31.
against her proudest, strongest and subtillest enemies. Was not London the
Head City, the Royal Chamber, the glory of England, the Magazine of Trade and
Wealth, the City that had the Strength and Treasure of the Nation in it. Were
there not many thousands in London, that were men of fair estates, of exemplary
piety, of tried valor, of great prudence, and of unspotted Reputation? and
therefore why should it seem impossible, that the fire in London, should be The
French were then drawn down to the Sea side, and great were the fears of many
upon that account. Remember the Gunpowder Plot.
the effect of desperate designs and complotments from abroad, seconded and
encouraged by malcontents at home. London was the great Bullwark of the
Reformed Religion, against all the Batteries of Popery, Atheism and
Profaneness; and therefore why should any English man wonder, if these
uncircumcised ones, should have their heads and their hands, and their hearts
engaged in the burning of London. Such whose very Principles, leads them by the
hand, to blow up Kings, Princes, Parliaments, and Reformed Religion, to make
way for their own Religion, or for the good old Religion, as some are pleased
to call it: such will never scruple to turn such Cities, such Bulwarks into a
ruinous heap, that either stands in their way, or that might probably hinder
their game. In all the Ages of the world, wicked Dan. 11. 24, 39
men have designed the ruin and laying waste of Christians Bulwarks and
Strongholds, in order to the rooting out of the very name of Christians, as
all know that have read any thing of Scripture or History, and therefore why
should any men think it strange, if that Spirit should still be at work. Was
ever England in such eminent danger of being made a prey to foreign power, or
of being rid, by men of a foreign Religion, and whose Principles in Civil
Policy are very dangerous both to Prince and People, as it has been since the
firing of London, or since that Bullwark has been Genesis 31. 24, 29. Chap. 33. 1,
4. 2 Kings 19. 27, 28, 32.
turned into a ruinous heap? Had not the great God who laid a Law of Restraint
upon churlish Laban, and upon bloody Esau (and his four hundred bloody
cutthroats) and upon proud blasphemous Senacherib, laid also a Law of
restraint upon ill-minded men, what mischief might they not then have done,
when many were amazed and astonished, and many did hang down their heads, and
fold their hands, crying alas, alas, London is fallen! and when many had sorrow
in their hearts, paleness upon their cheeks, and trembling in all their joints!
yea, when the flames of London were as Dan. 5. 5, 6.
terrible to most, as the handwriting upon the wall, was to Belshazzar! How
mightily the burning of London would have retarded the supplies, of men, money
and necessaries which would have been needful to have made opposition, against
an invading enemy, had we been put to it, I shall not here stand to dispute.
Whilst London was standing, it could raise an Army, and pay it when it had
done. London was the Sword and sinews of War; but when London was laid in
ashes, the Citizens were like Sampson when his hair was cut Judge. 16. 18, 19,
20. Gen 34 25.
off, and like the Sechemites, when they were sore. Beloved, the People of God
have formerly made the firing of their strong holds, matter of bitter
Lamentation; as you may see in 2 Kings 8. 11, 12. And he settled his countenance
steadfastly, until he was ashamed: (till Hazael blushed to see the Prophet look
so earnestly upon him) and the man of God wept, and Hazael said, why weepeth my
Lord? and he answered, because I know the evil that thou will do unto the
children of Israel; their strong holds will thou set on fire (well and what
will he do, when their strong holds are in flames, or turned into a ruinous
heap? why this you may see in the following words) and their young men will thou slay with the sword, and wilt das^ their children, and rip up their women
with child. Other Kings of Syria had born an immortal hatred against the
children of Israel, and the Prophet knew by Revelation from Heaven, that he
should be King over Syria, and that he had as cruel and as bloody a mind
against Gods Israel, as any of the former Kings of Syria had. Now to evidence
this, the Prophet instances in those particular excessive acts of cruelty, that
he should practice upon the children of Israel. Their strong holds will thou
set on fire. Hazael would not think it enough to enter into their strong Towns,
and Cities, and Forts, and Castles, and other strong holds, and spoil, and
plunder them of their Treasure and Goods, but he would burn all down to the
ground; that so he might daunt them, and weaken them, and render them the more
incapable of making any resistance against him. But now mark what follows,
burning work; Their young men will thou slay with the sword. Such as make no
conscience of burning Isreal's strong holds, such will never scruple the slaying
of Isreal's young men with the sword. When their strong holds were set on fire,
Hazael would give them no quarter for their lives: such as had escaped the
furious flames, should be sure to fall by the bloody sword. And wilt dash their
children: Their poor innocent harmless children that never thought amiss, nor
never spoke amiss of Hazael, these must have their brains dashed out against the
stones. Men that are set upon burning Psalm. 137. 9.
work, are men of no bowels, of no compassion. And rip up their women with
child: He would destroy the very Infants in the womb, that so he might cause to
cease, the very name of Israel. Such Hazaels as are resolute by fire to lay our
Cities and strong Bullwarks desolate; such will be ready enough to practice the
most barbarous cruelties imaginable upon our persons and relations, when a fit
opportunity shall present. When Israel was weary, and saint, and Deuteronomy. 25. 17
18, 19.
feeble, then Amalek fell upon them. It was infinite mercy, that the Amalekites
of our day, did not fall upon the amazed and astonished Citizens, when they
were seeble, and faint, and weary, and tired out with hard labor, and want of
rest. O Sirs, shall the Prophet Elisha weep, foreseeing that Haz^el would set
Isreal's strong holds on fire; and shall not we weep, to see London, our strong
hold, our noblest Bullwark, turned into a ruinous heap? So L^m. 2. 2, 5. The
Lord has swallowed up all the habitation of Jacob, and has not pitied: he
has thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the daughter of Judah: he
has brought them d^wn to the ground. The Lord was an enemy; he has swallowed
up Israel, he has swallowed up all her Palaces: he has destroyed his strong
holds, and has increased in the daughter of Judah mournings and lamentation.
These two words, mourning and lamentation, are joined together, to note the
great and eminent lamentation of the Daughter of Judah, upon the sight and
sense of Gods destroying, razing and levelling to the ground, (by the hand of
the Chaldeans, etc.) all the Strong holds and Fortresses, that were built for
the defense of the Israelites. Now shall the Daughter of Judah greatly lament,
to see her strong holds laid desolate, and shall not we at all lament, to see
London, to see our Strong holds, turned into a ruinous heap. But,

Fifthly, Who did ever look upon London as a fountain, as a Sanctuary, and as a
City of refuge, to the poor, afflicted, distressed and impoverished people of
God; that is not now free to weep, to see such a City laid in ashes? Who can
number up the distressed strangers, that have been there courteously E^od. 22.
12. 2 Samuel 16. 14.
entertained, and civilly treated? Who can number up the many thousand
families, that have been preserved, rel^eved, revived, and refreshed with the
silver streams, that has issued from that fountain London, and not mourn, to
see it laid desolate, Psalm. 46. 4. There is a River, the streams whereof Isa.
8. 6.
shall make glad the City of God: It is an allusion to the River Siloe, which
ran sweetly, softly, quietly, pleasantly, constantly, to the refreshing of all
that were in need. London was a River, a Fountain, whose silver Streams ran
sweetly, quietly, pleasantly, constantly, to the refreshing of many thousand
needy ones in the Land. Now who can but weep to see such a Fountain, such a
River, not only stopped, but dried up by a devouring fire? But,

Sixthly, Who did ever look upon London, as a City compact, Isa. 23. 3. Ezekiel.
27. 1. Rev. 8. 11.
yea, as the great Mart-Town of the Nation; that has not a heart to weep over
it, now it lies in ashes? London was the M^rt of the Nations Trade, and the
Magazine of the Nations wealth. London was that great Storehouse, in which was
laid up, very much of the Riches and Glory of the Land. London was the very
heart of England; it was as useful every way to Englands security and felicity,
as the heart is useful in the natural body: and therefore no wonder if such as
envy at Englands Greatness, Grandeur, and Glory, have made London (Englands
Mart-Town) to bear the marks of their displeasure. Who is so great a stranger
in our English Israel, as not to know how rarely well London was situated as
to Trade, and as not to know, how London was surrounded with plentiful store of
all Creature comforts. If London had not been so nobly situated and
surrounded, its desolation had not been so great a Judgment; nor it may be the
designs of men so deeply laid, as to its ruin. They that did look upon England
as rich, could not but look on London, as the Exchequer of it. But,

Seventhly, Who are they that have looked upon London, as Isa. 27. 3. 4. Psalm.
1^^. 4, 5.
of years been very strangely and wonderfully preserved, by the admirable
wisdom, constant care, and Almighty power of God; notwithstanding all the
wrath, rage, malice, plots and designs of wicked men, to lay it waste, and to
turn it into a ruinous heap; and not have a heart to weep over its desolation?
The great preservations, the singular salvations, that God has wrought for
London, many hundred years together, renders the desolation of London, the more
terrible. And accordingly, it concerns all that are well affected, to weep over
its ashes. But,

Eighthly, Who can look upon the ashes of London, as Englands worst enemies,
both abroad, Obad. 10 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
and at home, do daily triumph and rejoice; and not weep over Londons
desolation? Shall the vilest of men glory, that Englands glory is laid in the
dust; and shall not we lament, when our Crown is fallen from our head? The more
wicked Lam. 5. 16.
men rejoice in our misery, the greater obligation lies upon us, to lie low and
mourn at the foot of God. London, like Job, lies on its dunghill. London, like
the Jews, lies Job 2. 8.
in its ashes, Esther 4. 3. And therefore it highly concerns all Londoners, to
put on sackcloth and ashes. But,

Ninthly, Surely such as have looked upon London, as the Look upon Zion the City
of our solemnities; or meetings. Zion is here called a City, because it stood
in the midst of the City. The City of Jerusalem was very large, and Zion stood
in the midst of it; and it is called a City of Solemnities, because the people
flocked thither, to hear the Law, to renew their Covenant with God, to call
upon his name, and to offer Sacrifices. O Sirs, was not London the City of our
Solemnities? the City where we solemnly met to wait upon the Lord, in the
beauty 1 Chronicles. 16. 29. Psalm. 29. 2.
of Holiness? the City, where we offered prayers and praises? the City, where
we worshipped the Lord in Spirit and in truth? the City, wherein God, and
Christ, and the great things of eternity were revealed to us? the City, wherein
many thousands were converted and edified; walking in the fear of the Lord, and
in the comforts of the Holy Ghost? the Acts 9. 31.
City, where we had the clearest, the choicest, and the highest enjoyments of
God, that ever we had in all our days? the City, wherein we have sat down,
under Christ's shadow with great delight; his fruit has been sweet unto our
taste? the Cant. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6.
City, in which Christ has brought us to his banqueting house, and ^is banner
over us, has been love? the City, in which Christ has Staid us with flaggons,
and comforted us with Apples? the City, in which Christ's left hand has been
under our heads, and his right hand has embraced us? The City, wherein the
Lord of Hosts. has made unto his people a feast of fat things, a Isa. 25. 6.
feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees
well refined. London, the City of our Solemnities, is now laid desolate: and
therefore for this, why should not we be disconsolate, and mourn in secret
before the Lord? This frame of Spirit, has been upon the people of God of old,
Zeph. 3. 18. I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assembly, who
are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a burden. By Solemn Assemblies, are
meant, their several conventions at those set times, which God had appointed
them; viz. on the weekly Sabbath, the new Moons, Deuteronomy. 16.
the stated Feasts and Fasts, which they were bound to observe. Now for the
want, the lack, the loss of those Solemn Assemblies; such as did truly fear the
Lord, were solemnly sorrowful. Of all losses, spiritual losses are most sadly
resented by gracious souls. When they had lost their houses, their estates,
their Trades, their relations, their liberties, and were led captive to
Babylon, which was an Iron Furnace, a second Egypt to them; then the loss of
their Solemn Assemblies, made deeper impressions upon their hearts, than all
their outward losses did. The Jews were famous Artists; they stand upon record
for their skill, especially in Poetry, Mathematics and Music: but when their
City was burnt, and their Land laid desolate, and their Solemn Assemblies
broken in pieces, then they could sing none of the Songs of Psalm 137. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5.
Zion; then they were more for mourning, than for music; for sighing, than for
singing; for lamenting, than for laughing. Nothing goes so near gracious
hearts, as the loss of their Solemn Assemblies, as the loss of holy Ordinances;
health, and wealth, and friends, and Trade, are but mere Ichahods, to the
Saints Solemn Assemblies, and to pure 1 Samuel 4 17, 18.
Ordinances. When the Ark was taken, Eli could live no longer: but whether his
heart, or his neck, was first broken upon that sad tidings, is not easy to
determine. When Nehemiah understood, that the walls of Jerusalem were broken
down, and that the Gates thereof were burnt with fire, 2 Kings 25. 8, 9, 10.
and that the whole City was laid desolate by Nebuz^radan, and his Chaldean
Army; he sits down, and weeps, and mourns, and fasts, and prays; he did so lay
the burning of the City of their Solemnities to heart, that all the smiles of
King Artaxerxes, could not raise him, nor rejoice Neh. 1. 3, 4. Chap. 2. Jer.
52. 12, 13, 14.
him. It was on the tenth day of the fifth month, that Jerusalem was burnt
with fire; and upon that account, the Jews fasted upon every tenth day of the
fifth month. Now shall the Jews solemnly fast and mourn on the tenth day of
the fifth month, (during their Captivity) because their Zech. 7. 3.
City, and Temple, and Solemn Assemblies; were on that day buried in ashes; and
turned into a ruinous heap; and and shall not we fast and mourn, to see the
City of our Solemnities, buried in its own ruins. But,

Tenthly and lastly, That Incendiary, that mischievous Hubert, confessed the
fact, of firing the first house in Pudding Lane, (though he would not confess
who set him at work) and accordingly was executed at Tyburn for it. There were
some Ministers, and several other sober prudent Citizens, who did converse
again and again with Hubert, and are ready to attest, that he was far from
being mad; and that he was, not only very rational, but also very cunning and
subtle, and so the fitter instrument for the Conclave of Rome, or some subtle
Jesuit to make use of, to bring about our common woe. It was never known, that
Rome or Hell, did ever make use of mad men or fools, to bring about their
Divilish Plots.
Now who can look upon the dreadful consequences (the burning of a renowned
City) that followed upon the firing of the first house; and not mourn over
Londons desolations? Hubert did confess to several persons of note and repute,
that he was a Catholic; and did further declare, that he believed confession
to a Priest, was necessary to his salvation. And being advised (by a Chaplain
to a person of Honor) to call upon God he repeated his Ave Mary, which he
confessed, was his usual prayer. Father Harvey confessed him, and instructed him,
and we need not doubt, but that he absolved him also, according to the custom
of the Romish Church. Hubert died in the profession of the Romish faith,
stoutly asserting, that he was no Hugonite. I know that men of the Romish
Religion, and such who are one in Spirit with them; would make the world
believe, that this Hubert (who by order of Law, was executed upon the account
of his own public and private confessions) was mad, distracted, and what not.
But what mad men, do these make the Judge and Jury to be? for who but mad men,
would condemn (to such a shameful death) a mad man, for confessing himself
guilty of such a heinous and horrid fact, which he had never committed?
Doubtless both Judge and Jury, were men of more wisdom, Justice and conscience,
than to hang a mad man upon his own bare confession* The German Luc. Hist. p.
613. p. 519, 520.
Histories tell us, what encouragement men of a Romish faith have had from
Rome, to make way for their Religion throughout Germany, by fire and sword: and
when some of those Incendiaries have been taken in setting houses on fire, they
have confessed, that there have been many more in combination with them, who by
all the ways they could, were to consume Silefia, and other parts with
firings. When the Spanish Armado came against this Nation, in 1588. with Hisp.
F. 184, 185.
an Invincible Navy (as they counted it) they h^d two thousand eight hundred
forty three Great Ordnance, twenty eight thousand eight hundred and forty
Mariners, Soldiers, and Slaves rowing in Galleys, with innumerable Fireballs
and Granado's; in order to the making of England desolate by Fire and Sword.
Did not F. Parsons, Doleman, and Holt the Speeds Hist. p. 1178. Luc. Hist. p.
298, 299.
Jesuit, draw other Incendiaries into a combination, to fire the Royal Navy
with wildfire, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign; for which they were stretched at
Tyburn? A. D. 1595. on that very day, when King James was crowned, when the
generality Luc. Hist. p. 509, 510, 511.
of the people were intent upon that noble spectacle, five were suborned by the
Jesuits, to set London on fire in several places; but were frustrated, as ^s
evident upon Record. Mr. Waddesworth did depose* both in writing, and viva
voce, at the Lords Bar, that one Henry alias Francis Smith, Compl. Hist. p.
443, 449. Roy. Favou^. p. 54, 55. Romans Mr. P^^ce. 31.
alias Lloyd, alias Rivers, alias Simons, before the beginning of the Scotch
Wars, did tell him in Norfolk (where he met him) That the Popish Religion was
not to be brought in here, by disputing, or Books of Controversy; but with an
Army, and with fire and sword. Pope Martin the fifth sent Cardinal Julian (who
was name sake, and near of kin to Julian the Apostate) with an Army of
fourscore thousand, to root out Hussites (or Protestants) in B^hemia, where
they burnt up their Towns; and at the same time, Albertus his Assistant, burnt
up five hundred of their Villages. It was Philip the Second of Spain, who said,
That he had rather lose all his Provinces, Thuanus.
than seem to grant, or favor any thing, which might be pr^judicial to the
Catholic Religion. It was Cardinal Granveilanus, who was wont to say, That be
would reduce the Catholic Religion Gasper.
in all ^^aces, though one hundred thousand men were to be burned in an hour.
It was the Spanish Ministers of State, who Anno 1580.
declared openly, in the Pacification of Colen, That the Protestants would be
very well served, if they were stripped of all their goods, and forced to go
seek new Countries, like Jews and Egyptians, who wander up and down, like
Rogues and Vagabonds. The Meter. Hist. de reb. Belg. l. 15.
Duke of Alba (a bloody Papist) sitting at his Table, said, That he had taken
diligent pains, in rooting out the tares of Heresies, having delivered eighteen
thousand men in the space of six years only, to the hands of the Hangman. From
the beginning of the Jesuits, to 1580. (being the space of thirty The fact of
Faux was horrid and sanguinary; and you know who set him on work.
years) there were almost nine hundred thousand Protestants put to death, in
France, Spain, Italy, Germany, England, and other parts of Christendom. Men of
that Religion, that burnt the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, are men of such
bloody, desperate Principles, that they will stick at nothing, that may be a
means, to advance the Romish Religion. Some men besides the Romans, have
practiced most prodigious things, and all to raise themselves a name in the
world. Serustus at Geneva, gave all his goods to the poor, and his body to be
Anno 1555. Calvin.
burnt; and all for a name, for a little glory among men. The Temple of the
great Goddess Diana (which was one of the worlds wonders) was set on fire when
Alexander was born, by Herostratus a base fellow; and this he did, That he
might be talked of when he was dead. So Judas and Sadoc, Josephus A^t. l. 18. c.
1. p. 463
with their seditious Sect, burnt down the Temple of Jerusalem, and all the
beautiful Buildings in the City. And at another time, when the Romans had set
the Temple on fire, Titus by entreaties and threatenings, did all he could, to
persuade the Soldiers, to extinguish the fire, but could not prevail with
them. They seeing the Gates of the inward Lib. 7. de Bello Jud. ca. 10. p. 737.
Temple, to be Gates of Gold, thought that the Temple was full of money; and
that they might have a rich booty; and therefore regarded not their Generals
commands. Titus did all he could to quench the Flames; but a certain Soldier,
fired the Posts about the doors of the inward Temple, and presently the flame
appearing within, Titus and and his Captains departed; and so every one stood
looking upon it, and no man sought to extinguish it. Thus the Temple was burnt
by the hand of a single Soldier, against Titus his mind. One man that is of a
cruel Spirit, and of cruel Principles, may do a world of mischief. Take that
instance of Nero, who maliciously raised the first Persecution Pareus on the
Revelatio^, page 110.
against the Christians; pretending, that they were Incendiaries, and Authors
of the burning of Rome: whereas he himself, had most wickedly done it: But this
barbarous act of his, was fathered upon the Christians; and accordingly they
suffered severely for it. Another Author says, Nero succeeded Caligula in the
Government, and in no less fierceness The Treasury of Ancient and Modern times
page 321, 322.
and cruelty, because he was a man in whom (if possible it might be) all the
other cru^lties were ^nclosed, and all else that could (by men) be imagined,
for without any regard of sanctified things, or persons (of like quality)
private or public, he caused the City of Rome, to be set on fire, with express
prohibition, not to quench it, or any man to make safety of his own goods: So
the fire continued seven days and seven nights, burning the City; and he being
on a high Tower, some small distance off, clapped his hands, and joyed, to
behold this dismal spectacle, so far exceeding all humanity. The wisest Prince
that ever swayed a Scepter, has told us, That one sinner destroys much good.
Eccles. 9. 18.
Who can sum up the mischief, that a few ill-minded men may do in a little
time? The same Devil, the same lusts, the same wrath, the same rage, the same
revenge, the same ends, the same motives, that have put others upon burning
work informer times, may probably have put some, upon the same work in our
time. Burning work is so odious and abominable, so destructive, hateful and
hurtful a thing in the eyes of all true English men, who have any sense of
honor or conscience, that I shall never wonder, to see such who have either
had a head, or a hand, or a heart in it, of Arts and Crafts, to bury for ever
the remembrance of it. Was not London the glory of England? Was not London
Englands Treasury, and the Protestants Sanctuary? Was not London as terrible to
her enemies abroad, as she was joyous to her friends at home? Has not London
been as dreadful to her foreign foes, as the handwriting upon the Wall, was
to Belshazzar? Was not London the great Mountain, that her Dan. 5. 5, 6.
enemies feared would be most prejudicial to their pernicious designs? Was not
London, that great Rock, against which, Zech. 4. 7.
many have dashed themselves in pieces? Was not London, as Briars and Thorns, as
Goads and Gulfs, and two-edged The French, the Dutch, the Dane, the Spaniard,
etc. have at times experienced, what Londons Treasure and force, have been able
to do, etc.
Swords, to all her enemies more remote, and nearer home? Had the French
invaded us, when London was in flames (as many feared they would) or had such
risen up at that time, in the bowels of the Nation, whose very Principles lead
them by fire and sword, to make way for their Religion; what doleful days had
we seen, and to what a low ebb might the Protestant Interest have then be
brought? What greater encouragement could be given, to French, Dutch, Dane, and
all of the old Religion (as they call it) to make desperate attempts upon us,
than the laying of the City desolate by fire? but it is the glory of Divine
Power, to daunt and overruled all hearts and counsels; and to turn that to his
Psalm. 76. 5. 10. Genesis 31. 24, 29. Chap. 33 3, 4.
peoples greatest good, which their enemies design to be their utter ruin. We
know Papists are no changelings: their cruel, bloody, fiery Spirits and
Principles, are still the same: Both King and Parliament have taken notice, how
vigilant The w^ful desolations that the Popish Party made by fire and sword,
amongst the Protestants in Ireland, is written with the Pen of a Diamond.
and active they have been of late, by what has been discovered, confessed,
proved, printed, etc. Is it not more than probable, that some influenced from
Rome, have kindled and promoted that dreadful fire, that has laid our City
desolate? The Statue of Apollo, is said, to shed tears for the afflictions of
the Grecians, though he could not help them. Though none of us could prevent
the desolation of London; yet let us all be so ingenious, as to weep over the
ashes of London. Who can look upon Londons glory, as now sacrificed to the
flames, and made a burnt-offering, to appease the wrath and fury (as many say)
of a Popist Conclave, and not mourn?

Sir, We readily grant, that it is our duty, to lament and mourn over the ruins
and desolations of London; yea, same of us have so lamented and mourned over
Londons dust and ashes, that we have almost reduced our selves to dust and
ashes: and therefore what Cordials, what Comforts, what Supports can you band
out to us, that may help to ch^er up our spirits, and to bear up our hearts, so
as that we may not utterly faint, and sink neither under the sight of Londons
Ruins: nor yet under a deep sense of our many great and sore losses. Now that
I may be a little serviceable and useful to you in the present case; give me
leave to offer to your most serious consideration, these following particulars
by way of support.

First, Consider for your Support and comfort, that the Luke 19. 41. 44.
that the whole is not consumed. Though most of the City within the Walls, be
destroyed; yet it is Grace upon the Throne, that the Suburbs are standing. Had
not God spared some houses in the City, and the main of the Suburbs, where
would thousands have had a livelihood? How would any Trade have been
maintained? yea, how would the lives of many thousands have been preserved?
It Is true, the fire was very dreadful, but God might have made it more
dreadful; ^e might have laid every house level; he might have consumed all the
goods and wealth, that was there treasured up; and he might have refused, to
have plucked one man, as a brand out of the fire. He might have suffered London,
to Zech. 3. 2.
have been as totally destroyed, as Jerusalem was, Mat. 24. 1, 2. And Jesus
went out, and departed from the Temple, and his Discip^es Mat. 24. 1, 2.
came to him, to show him the buildings of the Temple. And Jesus said unto
them, see ye not all these things? Verily, I say unto you there shall not be
left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown d^wn. In these
words, Christ does fore^ell the utter destruction, and devastation of
Jerusalem, which came to pass by Titus and the R^man Army: wasting all with
fire and sword, and evening with the ground, that Magnificent Temple and City,
which was the glory of the Sea Joseph. l. 7. c. 9, 10, 18. d. B^l. Jud.
world. Though Titus by a strict Edict, at first storming of the City, forbad
the defacing of the Temple, yet the Soldiers burnt it, and the City. The
Temple was burnt (say some) August: 10. when it had stood five hundred eighty
nine years; and the City was burnt, September 8. in the year of our Lord
seventy one.

But why d^d Christ's Disciples show him the buildings of the

To move him to mercy, and to moderate the severity of Herod had been at a
wonderful charge, in building Matthew 23. 38.
and beautifying the Temple. Josephus tells us, that for Joseph. lib. 15.
Antiq. cap. 14.
eight whole years together, he kept ten thousand men at work about it: and
that for magnificence and stateliness, it ^xceeded Solomon's Temple. The
D^sciples might very well wonder at these stately buildings, at these goodly,
stately fair Stones, which were (as Josephus writes) fifteen cubits long,
twelve high, and eight broad. Now the Disciples ^ondly thought, that Christ,
upon the full sight of these ^tately glorious buildings, (which to see laid
waste, was pity) might have been so workt upon, as to reverse his former
sentence, of laying all desolate. But here they were mistaken; for his thoughts
was not as their thoughts. Others think, that the Disciples showed Christ the
stately buildings of the Temple, that upon a serious consideration of the
streng^h, pomp, stateliness, greatness and magnificence of the buildings, he
might be the more careful to preserve them from destruction. Others think, that
the Disciples showed him these strong and stately buildings, to insinuate
secretly thereby, how difficult, yea, impossible, it was for them to be
destroyed; especially considering the strength of the City also. And hence our
Savior seems to answer, See ye not all these things: Verily, I say unto you,
there shall not be left here one stone upon another that shall not be thrown
down, etc.

But when was this prediction fulfilled, That not one stone should be left upon
another, which should not be thrown d^wn? etc.

This was fulfilled, forty years after Christ's Ascension, by Vespasian the
Emperor, and his Son Titus; as Eusebius and Josephus do declare. Yea, this
Prophecy was not only accomplished, in the destruction of the old Temple, but
then also, when in Ju^i^n the Apostates time, the Jews (to spite the
Christians) were by him encouraged, to build the Temple at his charge; and they
attempting it accordingly, were hindered from Heaven, by a mighty Earthquake,
which cast down that in the night, which was built in the day: and besides, a
fire from Heaven, that consumed the work and work-mens instruments; which
Cyrillus Bishop of Jerusalem, Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 17.
then seeing, applied unto that event, this predict on of our Savior, There
shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down. Ah
London, London, this might have been thy doom, that there should not have been
one house standing, neither within, nor without thy walls; yea, this might have
been thy doom, that there should not have been one stone left upon another,
that should not have been thrown down. In that it is otherwise with thee, thou
have cause, O London, to cry Grace, Grace, to him that sits upon the Throne,
and is blessed for ever, etc.

Carthage was a Noble City, Mistress of Africa, and Paragon to Rome. She made
her part good against Rome for many years, but at length, by means of her own
inward civil jarrs, she was utterly destroyed by them. For the inhabitants
Oros. E^trop.
being not able to stand any longer in their own defense, were constrained to
yield themselves to the mercy of their enemies: the Women, to the number of
five and twenty thousand, marching first forth; and after them, the men in
number thirty thousand following, all which poor Captives, were sold for
bondslaves, a few only of the principal excepted: and then fire was put to the
City, which burnt seventeen days without ceasing; even till it was clean
consumed. This might have been thy doom, O London, but God in the midst of
Judgment has remembered mercy.

Athens was once the most famous flourishing City of Greece, for her fair
buildings, large Precincts, and multitude of inhabitants; but especially for
her Philosophy, by means whereof, recourse was made from all parts to her, as
the fountain and wellspring of Arts, and the School and University of the
whole world. Whose Policy and manner of Government, was so much esteemed by the
Romans, that they drew from thence their Laws: but now she lies dead and buried
in the ashes of forgetfulness, not carrying any of her former proportion or
appearance. If this had been thy doom, O London, we must all have set to our
seals, that the Lord had been Righteous: but blessed be the Lord, London is
not, and I hope never shall (let Rome and Hell do their worst) be buried in the
ashes of forgetfulness, etc. But,

The second Support, to bear up the hearts, and to cheer viz. that God has
given them their lives for a prey. O Sirs, what a mercy is it, that though the
fire has reached your houses, your shops, your goods, your commodities, your
warehouses, your treasure; that yet it has not reached your lives, nor the lives
of your relations or friends? though your habitations are consumed, and your
The Philosopher says, that a Fly is more excellent than the Heavens: because
the Fly has life, which the Heavens have not.
losses have been great, yet that in the midst of so many deaths and dangers by
the flames, and by the press of the people and notwithstanding all the
confusions, that was in all parts of the City, you should have your lives for a
prey, and be snatched as so many firebrarnds out of the burning. O how should
this miraculous Providence of God, be owned and admired by you! The Devil hit
the mark, when he said, Skin for skin; yea, all that a man has, will he give
for his life, Job 2. 4. Men's estates in those times, did lie mostly in Cattle.
Now says Satan, Job is a very great life lover, he is Proximus quisque sibi:
Every man is nearest to himself.
fond of life, and afraid of death; and therefore he will give skin upon skin,
to save his life: he will give many skins, abundance of skins; yea, all his
skins, to save his life: he will give his Cattels skins, and his Servants
skins, and his Sons skins, to save himself in a whole skin. By this Proverbial
Speech, Skin for skin, etc. Satan intimates, that Job cared not for the loss of
his Cattle, nor for the loss of his servants, nor for the loss of his children,
so he might secure his own life. Job set a higher price upon his own life, than
he did upon all other lives: let others sink or swim, so he might escape, all
was well. Natural life is a precious Jewel; a man will cast all overboard,
when he is in danger of drowning, to save his life. A man will hold up his
arms, to save his head; or suffer the loss of a limb, to save his life. Men
will bleed, sweat, vomit, purge, part with an estate; yea, with some of their
limbs, to preserve their lives. As he who cried out, Give me any deformity, any
torment, any misery, so you spare my life. Wherefore does a living man complain
(or murmur) a man for the punishment of his sin, Lam. 3. 39. O what a simple,
senseless, brutish, blockish thing is it, for a man, a mortal man, a sinful
man, a man on this side the grave, on this side Hell, to complain, or murmur
against a holy and righteous God! He that is alive on this side everlasting
burnings, Isa. 33. 14.
on this side a devouring fire; has no just cause to complain, what ever his
losses, crosses, or sufferings are. He that has deserved a hanging, if he
escape with a whipping, has no cause to complain, or murmur. Men that have
deserv^d a damning, if they escape, with the loss of house, goods, estates,
etc. they have no cause to complain, or murmur. Mark at this time Jerusalem was
burnt, City and Temple, was laid in ashes, the Citizens were turned out of
house and home, and stripped of all their comforts and contentments. They that
did feed delicately, were desolate in the Streets: they that Lam. 4. 5.
were brought up in Scarlet, embraced dunghills. They were scattered among the
Heathen, who did mock at their Sabbaths, and Chap. 1.
who trod their mighty men under foot; yea, they sought their bread with the
peril of their lives. And yet says the Prophet, Why Chap 5. 9.
does the living man complain? Though City, and Temple, and Goods, and Estates,
were all consumed in the flames, yet some had their lives for a pr^y. And upon
that very account, they ought not to complain. God might have ^urn^d them into
ashes; as he had turned their houses into ^shes: and it was mere Grace, that he
did not: which the Church wisely and ingeniously observes, when she says, It
is of the Lords mercy that (we) are not consumed. She does Chap. 3. ^2.
not say, it is of the Lords mercy, that our houses are not consumed: but it is
of the Lords mercy that (we) are not consumed: nor she do^ not say, it is of the
Lords mercy that our goods are not consumed; but it is of the Lords mercy that
(we) are not consum*d* The Church saw mercy, much mercy, tender mercy, yea,
bowels of mercy, (as the word there imports) that a remnant had their lives
given them, when their City and Substance was turned into ashes. O Sirs, others
have lost their goods, and their lives together, and it is miraculous mercy,
that you ha^'t, when men's wits were puzzel'd, their hearts discouraged, and
their industry tir^d out. When the wind was at the highest, and the fire at the
hottest, and the hopes of most at the lowest: that then you should be as brands
plucked out of the fire, was glorious mercy, etc.

In the Reign of Achm^t the eighth Emperor of the Turks, Knolles his General
History of the Turks, p. 1244.
a great fire arose in the City of Constantinople, wherein many, both men and
women perished, with above five hundred Shops and Warehouses full of rich
Merchandise, most of which belonged unto the Jews, of whom, almost two hundred
are said to be burnt. These lost their goods and their lives together, but so
have not you: the greater oblig^tion lies upon you, both to think well of God,
and to speak well of God, and to lay out your lives to the uttermost for God.

Certain Tartars at Constantinople in their insolency, set fire upon a certain
Jews house; whereof arose such a terrible Knolles page 1266.
fire, as b^rnt not only many houses; but a great many of the Jews themselves.
Here lives and estates went together. Though Outlandish hands have set our
City, our houses on fire, yet God has pr^served our lives in the midst of the
flames: and this is a mercy more worth, than all we have lost, etc.

There was a stately Palace in Jerusalem, that Sol^mon had built, which joined
near to the Temple: this Palace Josephus.
the Jews abundantly anointed all over with Brimstone and Pitch, so that when
the Romans pursued the Jews unto this Palace, they entered the Palace after the
Jews, who went ou^ again another way, and shut up the Palace, and set fire on
the Gates, which they had before anointed with Brimstone and Pitch; and
straight way, the side walls of the house, and the whole building, began to be
on a light fire: so that the Romans had no way to escape, because the fire
compassed the house on every side. The Jews also stood round about the Palace,
with their drawn Swords, to cut off any that should attempt to escape the
flames. Now there was two and twenty thousand of the Romans destroyed in this
fire. Titus hearing the lamentable cry of the Romans, that were compassed about
in flames of fire, made speed with all his Army, to come and rescue them; but
the fire burnt so vehemently, that he could save none of them. Upon which,
Titus and his Army wept bitterly. O Sirs, when London was in flames, if men of
a Romish faith, had compassed the City round about with their drawn Swords,
that none should have escaped the furious flames, how dreadful would such a
day have been. Whether such a thing was intended, or designed, and by any
strange Providence prevented: we shall know in the fittest season.

Numantium a City in Spain, being besieged by the Romans, and after it had born
the brunt of War along time, and made many desperate Sallies upon their
enemies, and were almost consumed with famine; rather than they would bow their
necks to the Roman yoke, they barred their Gates, and set all on fire, and so
burned themselves in the flames of their City, that so they might leave the
enemy, nothing but ashes for his prey and triumph. Here City and Citizens, are
destroyed together; and it is infinite mercy, that this was not the fate, the
doom of the Citizens of London. They and their City, might have fallen
together: but God was good, and a very present help in time of trouble. O Sirs,
if not only your houses, Psalm 46.
your shops, your goods, your wares, but also your persons, had been enclosed
with flames, and no possibility of escape; how dreadful would the fire have
been then! O what tongue can express, or heart conceive, the sighs, the groans,
the cries, the tears, the gashful looks, the horrible shrieks, the dreadful
amazement, and the matchless astonishment, that would have been upon all sorts,
and ranks of people, that had been compassed round about with flames, and could
see no door of deliverance open to them! O what a mercy is it, that we are yet
alive; though we are stripped of many comforts and contentments, which formerly
we have enjoyed! Now here give me leave, to open my self a little, in these
following particulars.

First, What a mercy was this, to all unregenerate and Austin says, that he
would not be a wicked man one half hour, for all the world; because he might
die in that half hour, and then he was undone for ever.
prey, when London was in flames? Had God by the flames, or any other accident,
put an end to their natural days, they might at this time, have been a Rolling
up and down in unquenchable flames. Sinners, Sinners, the greatest weights,
hang upon the smallest Wyars. Eternity, Eternity, depends upon your improvement
of that time, that life, and those seasons, and opportunities of Grace, that
yet you do enjoy. That Rabbi hit it, who said, Nemo est cui non sit hora su^:
Every man has his hour. He who overslips that season, may never meet with the
like again all his days. O Sirs, to have a little more time to believe, to
repent, to secure your interest i^ Christ, a changed nature, a sanctified frame
of heart: a pardon in the bosom, is a mercy more worth, than ten thousand
worlds. To have a little more time, to make your calling and election sure, and
to get the New Name, and 2 Pet 1. 10. Rev. 2. 17. Heb. 11. 10. Chap. 12. 28. 1
Pet. 1. 4. 2 Cor. 5. 1. 2 Timothy 4. 8. Rev. 2. 10. James 1. 1^. 1 Pet. 5. 4.
White Stone, that none knows, but those that are the favorites of Heaven. To
have time, to make sure a City that has foundations; a Kindgom, that shakes
not; Riches that corrupt not; an inheritance, that ^adeth not away; a house not
made with hands, but one eternal in the heavens. To have time, to make sure to
your selves a Crown of Righteousness, a Crown of Life, a Crown of Glory, a
Crown of immortality, are mercies b^yond all the expressions, and above all the
valuations of the Sons of men. The Poets paint Time with wings, to show the
volubility and swiftness of it. Sumptus pretiocissimus tempus: time is of
precious Sophocles, Phocilides.
cost, says Theophrastus. Know time, lose not a minute, says Pittacus. Aelian
gives this testimony of the Lacedaemonians, That they were hugely covetous of
their time, spending it all about necessary things, and suffering no Citizen,
either to be idle, or play. Titus Vespasian having spent a day, without doing
Suetonius.
any man any good, as he sat at Supper, he uttered this memorable and praise
worthy Apothegme, Amici diem perdidi, My friends I have lost a day. O Sirs,
will not these poor Heathens rise in J^dgement against all those, that trifle,
and fool, and sin away their precious time. Take heed of crying cras, cras, to
morrow, to morrow. O play not the Courtier with your precious souls; the
Courtier does all things late; he rises late, and dines late, and supps late,
and goes to bed late, and repents late. Remember that Manna must be gathered in
the morning: The Orient Pearl is generated of the morning dew. There is nothing
puts a more serious frame into a man's Spirit, than to know the worth of his
time. It Is very dangerous putting off that to another day, which must be done
to day, or else undone to morrow. Nunc aut nunquam, Now or Never, was the
saying of old, If not done now, it may never be done, and then undone for ever.
Eternity depends on this moment of time. What Beroaldus speak^ of a Fool, who
cried out, Oh Repentance, R^pentance, where a^t thou, where art thou Repentance?
would not many a man give for a day, when it is a day too late. Whilst many
blind Sodomites have been groping, to find a door of hope, God has rained Hell
out of Heaven upon them. The seasons of Grace are not under your locks and
keys. Many thousand poor sinners have lost their seasons, and their souls
together. Judas repented, and Esau mourned, but neither timely nor truly, and
therefore they perished to all eternity. The damned in Hell may weep their eyes
out of their heads, but they can never weep sin out of their souls; nor their
souls out of Hell, etc.

O that the flames of London might be so sanctified to every poor sinner, who
have had their lives for a prey, in that doleful day, that they may no longer
neglect those precious seasons, and opportunities of Grace, that yet are
continued to them; lest God should swear in his wrath, that they should never
Heb. 2. 3. Heb. 3. 18.
enter into his rest. O Sirs, yet you have a world of gracious opportunities,
and O that God would give you that heavenly wisdom, that you may never neglect
one gracious opportunity, though it were to gain a whole world. God by giving
you your lives in the midst of those furious and amazing flames, has given you
time and opportunity, to secure the internal and the eternal welfare of your
precious and immortal souls: which is a mercy that can never b^ sufficiently
prized or improved. But,

Secondly, What a mercy was this, to poor doubting staggering London was in
flames. For by this means, they have gained time to pray down their doubts, and
to argue down their doubts, and to wrestle and weep down their doubts, etc.
Christ ascended to Heaven in a cloud, and the Angel ascended Acts 1. 9, 10.
Judge. 14. 20.
to Heaven in the flame of the Altar. It Is ten to one, out this had been the
case of many doubting, trembling Christians, had they dyed when London was in
flames. I know it is good getting to Heaven any way, though it be in a
whirlewind of affliction, or in a fiery Chariot of temptation, or in the flames
of Persecution, or in a cloud of fears, doubts and darkness: but yet that man
is more happy, that gets to Heaven in a quiet calm of inward peace, and The
whole Scripture (says Luther) does principally aim at this thing, that we
should not doubt but that we should hope, that we should trust, and that we
should believe, that God is a merciful, a bountiful, a gracious and patient God
to his people.
in the fair Sunshine of joy and assurance. It Is a good thing for a man to get
into a safe Harbor, though it be in a Winter night, and through many Storms
and tempests, hazards, dangers, and deaths, with the loss of Masts, Cables and
Anchors: but yet he is more happy, that gets into a safe Harbor in a clear,
calm, fair Sun-shiny day, top and top-gallant, and with Colors flying, and
Trumpets sounding. The prudent Reader knows how to apply it. O that al poor
doubting Christians would seriously lay this to heart viz. That for them to
have time, to have their judgments and understandings enlightened, their doubts
resolved, their objections answered, their consciences settled, and their souls
assured, that all is well, and shall be for ever well between God and them, is
a mercy, more worth than all the world. But,

Thirdly, What a mercy was this, to poor languishing, declining and decaying
Christians, that they have had their London was in flames. There were a great
many in London, who were fallen from their first love, and whose Sun was set in
a cloud. There were many whose Graces were languishing, whose comforts were
declining, Rev. 2. 4.
whose souls were withered, and whose communion with God was greatly impaired.
Many within and without the Walls of London, had a Worm knawing at the root of
their Graces; they had lost their spiritual relish of God, of Christ of
Ordinances, as dying men lose their relish. Dying men can relish nothing they
sip, or eat, or drink: they had lost the^^ spiritual strength, and they knew it
not, as Sampson had lost h^s natural strength and knew it not. O what an Image
of dea^^ Judge. 16. 20.
was upon their highest professions. Now for these men to liv^, for these men
to have time to get their Graces repaired, their comforts revived, their
spiritual strength restored, their soul^ fatned, and their communion with God
raised, O what a matchless, what an incomparable mercy is this! But,

Fourthly, What a mercy was this, to poor clouded, deserted and benighted
Christians, that they have had their lives for a prey, when London was in
flames! Beloved, it is sa^ comfort a man's soul, stands afar off. Some think,
that the Lam. 1. 16. Psalm. 39. 13.
face of God was clouded, when David thus prayed, O spare me, that I may
recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more. And some think Hezekiahs's
Sun was set in a cloud, Isa. 38. 1, 2, 3. See more of th^s, in my Mute
Christian, under the smarting Rod page 279. 304. Judge. 16. 18, 19, 20, 21.
and God had drawn a Curtain between Hezekiah and himself: when being under the
sentence of death, He turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto the
Lord, and said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before
thee in truth, and with a perfect heart; and have done that which was good in
thy sight: and Hezekiah wept sore: or with great weeping, as the Hebrew runs.
It is with clouded and deserted Christians, as it was with Sampson, when his
locks were cut off, his strength was gone: and therefore though he thought to
go out, and do wonders, as he had formerly done, yet by sad experience, he
found himself to be but as another man. So when God dos but withdraw, the best
of Saints have their locks cut; their strength (which lies not in their hair,
but in their head Christ Jesus) is gone, and they Phil. 1. 22, 23.
are but like other men: They think, they speak, they act, they walk, like
other men. Christians under real disertions, commonly fall under sore
temptations, great indispositions, barrenness, flatness, dullness and deadness
of Spirit. And is this a fit season, for such to die in? Christians under a
cloud usually have their joys eclipsed, their comforts damped, their evidences
for Heaven blotted, their communion with God impaired, and their title to
Heaven is by themselves (in such a day) much questioned. And is this a case for
them to die in? O clouded and deserted Christians, who have had your lives for
a prey, in the midst of Londons flames! and ever since those flames, what a
great, what a glorious obligation, has the blessed God put upon you, to labor
to recover your selves from under all clouds and desertions, and to spend your
days in a serious and deep admiration of that free, that rich, that infinite,
and that Sovereign Grace that spared you, and that was active for you, in that
day when you were compassed about with flames of fire on every hand. But,

Fifthly, What a mercy was this, to poor solicited tempted London was in
flames? For by this means, they have gained See my Mute Christian page 260. to
p. 279. Our whole life is nothing but a temptation, says A^stin.
time to strengthen themselves against all Satan's temptations. The ^aily B^l^s
that were given in, to pray for poor tempted Christ^ans, did s^fficiently
evidence, how active Satan was to distr^ss and perplex poor Christians with all
sorts of hideous and blasphemous temptations. Were there not many tempted to
distrust the power of God, the goodness of God, the faithfulness of God? Were
there not many tempted to deny God, to blaspheme God, and to turn their backs
upon God? Were there not many tempted to slight the Scriptures, to deny the
Scriptures, and to prefer their own fancies, notions and delufions above the
Scriptures. Were there not many tempted to have low thoughts of Ordinances, and
then to leave Ordinances, and then to vilify Ordinances, and all under a
pr^tence of living above Ordinances? Were there not many tempted, to presume
upon the mercies of God; and others tempted to despair of the Grace of God?
Were there not many tempted to destroy themselves, and others tempted to
destroy their relations? Were there not many tempted to draw others to sin, and
to uphold others in sin, and to encourage others in sin, and to be partners
with others in sin? Were there not many tempted, to have hard thoughts of
Christ, and others to have low thoughts of Christ, and others to have no
thoughts of Christ. Now for these poor tempted souls, to have their lives for a
prey, and to have precious seasons and opportunities, to recover themselves out
of the snares of the Devil, and to arm themselves against all his fiery daris,
is a comprehensive mercy, a big-bellied mercy; a mercy that has many thousand
mercies in the womb of it. But,

Sixthly and lastly, What a mercy was this, to all slumbering, Matthew. 25.
blurred their evidences for Heaven? and who instead of running their Christian
race, were either at a stand, or else did but Heb. 12. 1.
halt in the way to Heaven, that they have had their lives for a prey, when
London was in flames, and that they have had time to clear up their evidences
for Heaven, and to quicken Psalm. 119. 32.
up their hearts, to run the ways of Gods commands. Surely, had all the world
been a lump of Gold, and in their hands, to have been disposed of; they would
have given it, for a little time, to have brightned their evidences, to have
got out of their sinful slumber, and to have set all reckonings even between
God and their poor souls. And let thus much suffice for this second support.

The third Support to bear up the hearts, and to cheer viz. that this has been
the common lot, the common case, both of Saints and sinners. God has dealt no
more severely with you, than he has with many others. Have The commonness of
our sufferings, does somewhat mitigate the sharpness of our sufferings, etc.
you lost much? so have many others. Have you lost half? so have many others.
Have you lost all? so have many others. Have you lost your Trade? so have many
others. Have you lost yoour goods? so have many others. Have you lost your
credits? so have many others. Have you lost many friends, who before the fire
were very helpful to you and yours? so have many others. Have you lost more
than your all? so have many others. This very Cordial, the Apostle hands out to
the suffering Saints in his time, 1 Cor. 10. 13. There has no temptation taken
you, but such as is comm^n to man. (by temptation, he means affliction; as the
word is used, Jam. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 6.) that is, there has no affliction
befallen you, but that which is incident, either to men as men, or to Saints as
Saints: or thus, there has no affliction befallen you, but such as is common
to man; that is, there is no affliction that has befallen you, but such as men
may very well bear without murmuring or buckling under it. So 1 Pet. 5. 9.
Knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished (or finished) in your
brethren, that are in the world: or in your brotherhood, that is in the world.
Afflictions are the common lot of the Saints; and who shrugs, repines,
complains, murmurs, or faints, under a common John 16. ult. Acts 14. 22.
lot, its at the Sun because it scorches. etc. There are none of the
brotherhood, but first or last, they shall know what the fiery trial, what the
fiery furnace means. Jerome writing to a sick friend, has this expression, I
account it a part of unhappiness, not to know adversity. I judge you to be the
more miserable, because you have not been miserable: it being the common lot of
the people of God, to be exercised with adversity and misery. I think he hit it
who said, Impunitas securitatis B^rnard.
matter, virtutum noverca, religionis virus, tinea Sanctitatis: i. e. freedom
from punishment is the Mother of security, the Stepmother of Virtue, the
poison of Religion, the Moth of holiness. Nihil est infoelicius eo, cui nil
unquam contigit Seneca.
adversi. There is nothing more unhappy, than he who never felt adversity, said
the refined Heathen; and shall not Grace rise as high as nature. The calamity
has been common, therefore wipe your eyes, and don't say, there is no Lam. 1.
12.
sorrow to my sorrow: no loss to my loss: no ruin to my ruin. Under common
calamities, men should neither groan nor grumble. Look, as no man may conclude,
upon the Eccles. 9. 1, 2.
account of common mercies, that he is really beloved of God; so no man may
conclude, upon the account of common calamities, that he is really hated of
God. And therefore bear up sweetly, bear up cheerfully, under your present
trials. In the common calamity of the Plague, the destroying Angel perceiving
the blood of sprinkling upon the posts of your doors, and upon the doors of
your hearts, Exodus 1^. 7. 13.
past you by; and said unto you Live. But by the common calamity of the Fire,
the Lord has turned you out of house and home, and burnt up your substance
before your eyes. Now do but lay your hands seriously upon your hearts, and
tell me, whether you have not more cause to admire at the mercy of God toward
you in 65. than you have cause to complain of the severities of God toward you
in 66.

The fourth Support to bear up the hearts, and to cheer up viz. That though
they have lost much, as they are men, as they are Citizens, Merchants,
Tradesmen; yet they have lost nothing, as they are Christians, as they are
Saints, as they are the called and chosen of God. Though they have lost their
goods, yet they have not lost their God. Though they Rev. 17. 14.
have lost their Shops and Chests, yet they have not lost their Christ. Though
they have lost their outward comforts, yet they have not lost the comforts of
the Holy Ghost. Though Joh. 14. 16. 26. 2 Cor. 5. 1.
they have lost their houses made with hands, yet they have not lost their
house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Though they have lost their
earthly inheri^ance, 1 Pet. 1. 4.
yet they have not lost their heavenly inheritance. Thoug^ they have lost their
temporal portions, yet they have not lost Psalm. 73. 25.
their eternal portions. Though they have lost their open Public Trade* yet
they have not lost their Secret Trade, Matthew. 6. 6.
their private Trade to Heaven. I readily grant, that your stately houses; and
your well furnished Shops, are turned into ashes; and that your credit is gone,
and your trading gone, and your money gone, and you utterly undone (as to this
Gen 18. 25.
world) and yet in all this, God has done you no hurt; he has done you no
wrong: and though this at first sight, may seem to be a great Paradox, a very
strange Assertion; yet I shall thus evidence it to be an unquestionable truth.
The happiness of man in this life consists 1. In his Union with God: 2. In his
Communion with God: 3. In his Conformity to God: and Fourthly and lastly, in
his spiritual fruition and enjoyment of God. Now none of those losses, crosses,
and afflictive dispensations that have past upon you, have, or can make any
breach upon your happiness, or upon any one of those four things of which your
happiness is made up. The top of man's happiness in Heaven, lies in his near
un^on with God, and in the beatifical vision of God, and in his full communion
with God, and in his exact and perfect conformity to God, and in his
everlasting fruition and enjoyment of God. Now the more of these things any
Christian enjoyes in this world, the more of Heaven he enjoyes on this side
Heaven, the more happiness he has on this happiness; and therefore I would
willingly know, how it is possible for any outward troubles or trya^s, to make
a breach upon a Christians happiness. Doub^less Job was as happy Job 2.
when he sat upon the Dunghill without a ragg on his back, or a penny in his
purse, as he was when he sat Chief, and Jo^. 29. 25.
dwelt as a King in the Army. If God be the most perfect Being, then to enjoy
him and resemble him, is our greatest perfection. If God be the best of Beings,
then our communion with him, and fruition of him, must be our greatest glory
and highest felicity. Let what will befall our outward Omne bonum, in summo
bono.
man, as long as our union and communion with God holds good, as long as our
precious and immortal souls are in a safe and flourishing condition; as long as
the Springs of Grace, of holiness, of comfort, of assurance, rises in our
souls, we are happy, and no outward miseries can make us miserable. There is,
says one, Bona Throni, and there is Bona Scabelli, Augustine.
there is goods of the Throne, as God, Christ, the Spirit, Grace, the favor of
God, pardon of sin, peace of conscience, etc. And there is goods of the
footstool, as food, raiment, house, honors, riches, trade, credit, and all
bodily conveniences and accommodations. Now it was not in the power of the
flames, to burn up the goods of the Throne; they still remain safe and secure
to you: all that the flames could reach too, was only the goods of the
footstool, the lumber of this world. And therefore what cause have you to bear
up cheerfully, quietly, sweetly and contentedly, under all your crosses and
losses, trials and troubles. They which adorn Cl^mens Alexandrinus. Gr^gory the
Great.
themselves with Gold (says one) and think themselves bettered thereby, are
worse than Gold, and no Lords of it, as all should be. He is poor (says
Another) whose soul is void of Grace, not whose coffers are empty of money. By
these short hints, you may clearly see, that the people of God are never the
worse, for all their losses; they are as happy now they are houseless,
monyless, breadless, friendless, tradeless, as ever they were, when they were
most surrounded with all the comforts of this life. Woe, woe, would be to the
people of God, if their happiness should hang upon the comforts of this world,
which like a Ball are tossed from man to man; a Ball of fire, a storm at Sea, a
false Oath, a subtle enemy, a treacherous friend, may easily deprive a man of
all his earthly blessings at a clap. Now who so miserable as that man whose
blessedness lies in earthly blessings. But,

The Fifth Support to bear up the hearts of the people viz. That the Lord will
certainly one way or another make up all their losses to them. Sometimes God
makes up his peoples outward losses, by giving them more of himself, more of
his Son, more of his Spirit, more of his favor, more of his John 16.
Grace, as he did by the Disciples of Christ. When God takes away your carnals,
and gives you more spirituals; your temporals, and gives you more eternals;
your outward losses are made up to you. Now this was the very case of those
believing Hebrews, who were turned out of house and home; and who were driven
to live in holes and caves, and dens of the earth, and who had lost all their
goods; (not Heb. 11.
having a Bed to lie on, or a Stool to sit on, nor a dish to drink in, and who
had lost all their Apparel, not having a ragg to hang on their backs, and
therefore clothed themselves in Sheepskins and Goat Skins.) They took
joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves, that they had in
Ver. 3, 4.
Heaven a better and an enduring substance. When under outward When God takes
away Christians estates in this world, Manet altera Coelo, he looks for a
better in Heaven.
losses, God shall seal to his people a Bill of Exchange of better and greater
things, than any they have lost; their losses then are made up to them. If a
man should loose several baggs of Counters, and have a Bill of Exchange sealed
to him for the receiving of so many baggs of Gold; would not his loss be
abundantly made up to him? When God takes away our earthly treasures, and seals
up in our hearts a Bill of Exchange, to receive all again with interest upon
interest in eternal treasures, then certainly our losses are abundantly made up
to us. If men should take away your old clothes, and give you new; your Rags,
and give you Robes; your Chaff, and give you Wheat, your Water, and give you
Wine; your Tinn, and give you Silver; your Brass, and give you Gold; your
Pibble, and give you Pearls, your Cottages, and give you Royal Palaces;
certainly you would have no cause to complain; you would have no cause to cry
out undone, undone. If God takes away your houses, your goods, your Trades,
your honors, and gives you more of himself, and more Grace, and more Assurance
of Glory, he dos you no injury. It is an excellent change, to get eternals for
temporals. If God takes away your earthly riches, and makes you more rich in
Grace, in spiritual comforts, in holy experiences, in divine employments, then
you are no lose^s, but great gainers. What are all the necessary comforts of
this life, to union and communion with God, to interest in Christ, to pardon of
sin, to peace of conscience, and to that loving kindness, that is better than
life, or better (Chaiim) Psalm. 63* 3.
than lives, as the Hebrew runs. If you put many lives together, there is more
excellency and glory in the least discovery of divine love, than in them all.
Many a man has been weary of his life; but never was any man yet weary of the
love and favor of God. The least drop of Grace, the least Cant. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6,
7.
smile from Heaven, the least cast of Christ's countenance, the least kiss of
his mouth, the least embrace of his arm, the least hint of his favor, is more
worth than ten thousand worlds. That Christian cant be poor, that is rich in
Grace; nor that Christian cannot be miserable, that has God for his Rev. 2. 8,
9. Lam. 3. 24. John 14. 1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. 11. 37, 38. Rev. 2. 17. John 4. 30* 31.
portion. That Christian cannot be unhappy, who has a mansion prepared for him
in Heaven; though he has not a cottage to hide his head in, in this world: nor
that Christian has no cause to complain of want of food for his body, whose
soul is feasted with Manna, with the dainties of Heaven, with those rarities,
that are better than Angels food. He that has but rags to cover his
nakedness, if his soul be clothed with the garments of salvation, and covered
with Isa. 61. 10.
the Robe of Christ's Righteousness, he has no reason to complain. When Stilpo
the Philosopher, had his Wife, and Children, and Country, all burnt up before
him, and was asked by Demetrius, what loss he had sustained: answered, That he
had lost nothing; for he counted that only his own, which none could take from
him; to wit, his virtues. Shall blind Nature do more than Grace? Shall the
Heathen put the Christian to a blush?

Again, Sometimes God makes up his peoples outward losses, by giving in greater
outward mercies, than those were that he took from them; as you may see, by
comparing the first Chapter of Job, and the last Chapter of Job together; Job
had all doubled to him. I have read of Dionysius, how he Plu^arch.
took away from one of his Nobles, almost his whole estate, and seeing him as
cheerful and contented as ever, he gave him all that he had taken from him
again, and as much more. God many times takes away a little, that he may give
more: and sometimes he takes away all, to show his Sovereignty; and then he
gives them all back again with interest upon interest, to show his great
liberality and noble bounty. That is a lovely loss, that is made up with so
great gain.

But Sir, How shall we know (or probably conjecture) whether Now that I may
give you a little light to the Question, give me leave to put a few Questions
to such, who have been sufferers by the late fiery dispensation.

First, Did you make conscience of improving your estates Deuteronomy. 32. 15, 16.
Hos. 4. 7. James 4. 3.
childrens good; it is ten to one, but that the Lord, even in this world, will
make up your losses to you. But if you mis-improved your estates, and turned
your mercies into encouragements to sin, then you have more cause to fear, that
the Lord may farther blast you; than you have to hope, that God will make up
your losses to you. But,

Secondly, Did you daily and seriously labor, to enjoy Prove. 3. 33. Mal. 2. 2.
^ut,

Thirdly, Did your hearts commonly, ordinarily, habitually, Abraham under all
his worldly enjoyments, was but dust and ashes; and Genesis 13. 17. Chap. 32. 10.
Jacob under his, was l^ss than the least of all mercies. And so David under
all Gods royal favors his heart ly^s low, Psalm. 22. 6. But I am a worm and no
man. David in the Arabic Tongue, signifies a Worm, to which he seems to
allude. The word in the Hebrew for Worm, is Tolagnath, which signifies such a
very little Worm, that a man can very hardly see it or perceive it. T^ough
David was high in the world, yet he was little, yea, very little in his own
eyes. Was it commonly, mostly thus with you, when your comforts comp^ssed you
round about? If so, then it is very probable, that the Lord in this world will
make up all your losses to you. But if your blood did commonly rise with your
outward goods, and if your hearts did usually so swell under your worldly
enjoyments, as to say with Pharaoh, Who is the Lord Exodus 5. 2.
that I should obey his voice? or to say with Nebuchadn^zz^r, Who is that God
that can deliver you out of my hands? or to Dan. 3. 15.
say with those proud Atheists, Who is Lord over us? or to Psalm 12. 4. Jer. 2.
3.
say with those proud Monsters, We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee,
etc. then you have great cause to fear that God, that has yet some further
controversy with you: and (except you repent) will rather strip you of what
you enjoy, than multiply further favors or blessings upon you. But,

Fourthly, Since God has burnt up your worldly goods, Isa. 9. 2. Chap. 4. 4.
which alone can burn up your sins, your dross. Since London has been laid in
ashes, have you made it your great business, to treat, and trade with God,
about the destruction of those sins, that have laid all desolate? If so, then
you have cause to hope, that God will turn your captivity, and make up all your
losses to you, Job 42. 10. But,

Fifthly, Since God has turned you out of all, are you turned and closer to
himself? though you have been prodigals, yet have you in the light of L^ndons
fl^mes, seen and Luke 15.
found your way to your Fathers house? th^n God will make up all your losses to
you. When Judgments are so sanctified, as to bring a people nearer to himself,
then God will drop down mercies upon them, Hos. 2. 18. ult. But,

Sixthly, Has the fire of London been as a pillar of fire, to Canaan ward,
Heaven-wards? Has God by burning Exodus 13. 21, 22.
up the good things of this world, caused you to set your hearts and affections
more than ever upon the great things of another world? If so, then it is a
hundred to ten, but that the Lord will make up all your losses to you. But,

Seventhly, Are your hearts under this fiery dispensation, Phil. 4. 12, 13, 14.
Gods finding, at Gods allowance? Can you now be contented, to be rich or poor,
to have much or little, to be high or low, to be something or nothing, to have
all again, or to have nothing but necessaries again? Are you now willing, that
God shall choose for you? Can you sit down satisfied with Gods allowance,
though it be far short of what once you had? Content is the Deputy of outward
felicity, and supplies the place where its absent. A contented frame of heart,
as to all outward occurrences, is like Ballast to a Ship, which will help it to
sail boldly and safely in all waters. When a man's mind is conformable to his
means, all is well. One brings in God rebuking a discontented Christian thus,
What is thy faith? Have I promised thee these things? What were thou made a
Christian, that thou should flourish here in Augustine upon Psa^m 12.
this world? It Is an excellent expression, that Bellarmine has in his
Catechism, Suppose (says he) a King having many children of several ages,
should apparel them in Cloth of Gold: now he that is sixteen years old has
more Gold in his Robe, than the Child that is but five or six years old; yet
the child would rather have his own garment than his elder Brothers, because
it is fitter for him. Surely the fittest estate, is the best estate for us.
Look, as a great Shoe fits not a little foot, nor a great Sail a little Ship,
nor a great Ring a little Finger: so a great estate is not always the fittest
for us. He that has most, wants something: and he that has least, wants
nothing if he wants not a contented Spirit. O Sirs, let not Heathens put you to
a blush.

He that can be content to be at Gods finding, as a Guest at a Epi^t^^^s
E^chi^id. c. 21.
Table; that takes what is carved for him, and no more; h^ needs not fawn upon
any man, much less violate his conscience for the great things of the world.
When a man's heart is brought down to his condition, he is then
temptation-proof. When one told the Philosopher, that if he would but please
Dionysius, he need not feed upon green herbs; the Ph^losopher replied, If thou
were but content to feed upon green herbs, thou need not flatter
Dionysius. A man that can be contented with a little, will keep his ground in
an hour of Temptation.

Diogenes the Cynick, housed in his Tub, and making ever with his victuals and
the day together, being invited t^ a great Feast, could say, I had rather lick
Salt at Athens, tha^ feast with Craterus. Diogenes had more content with his
Tub. to shelter him from the injuries of the weather, and with his wooden dish,
to eat and drink in, than Alexander had with the conquest of half the world;
and the fruition of all the hono^s, pomp^, treasures and pleasures of Asia.

The way to true riches (says Plato) is not to increase our heaps but to
diminish the covetousness of our hearts.

And says Seneca, Cui cum paupertate been convenit, pauper non est. A
contented man cannot be a poor man.

I have read of another Philosopher, who seeing a Prince going by, with the
greatest pomp and state imaginable; he said to some about him, See how many
things I have no need of.

And says another, It were well for the world, if there were no Gold in it.
But since its the fountain whence all things flow; its to be desired, but only
as a pass, to travel to our journeys end without begging.

When Croesus King of Lydia, asked Solon (one of the seven wise men of Greece)
who in the whole world was more happy than he? Solon answered, Tellus; who
though he was a poor man, yet he was a good man, and content with that which he
had.

So Cato could say, (as Aulus Gel^ius reports of him) I have neither House, nor
Plate, nor Garments of price, in my hands; what I have, I can use: if not, I
can want it. Some blame me, because I want many things; and I blame them,
because they cannot want. Now shall Nature do more than Grace? Shall the poor
blinded Heathen, outstrip the knowing Christian? O Sirs, he that can lose his
will in the will of God, as to the things of this world; he that is willing to
be at Gods allowance; he that has had much, but can now be satisfied with a
little; he that can be contented to be at Gods finding; he is of all men the
most likely man to have all his losses made up to him. But,

Eighthly and lastly, Are your hearts more drawn out, to

The sixth Support to bear up the hearts of the people of viz. That by fiery
dispensations, the Lord will make way for the new Heavens and the new Earth: he
will make way for the glorious deliverance of his people, Isa. 66. 15. 16. 22.
For behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with his Chariots like Isa. 9. 5,
6. Psalm 66. 12.
^ whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of
fire. For by fire, and by his sword, (or by his sword of fire) will the Lord
plead with all flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many. For as the new
heavens, and the new earth which I will make, shall remain before me, says the
Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain. The great and the glorious
things that God will do for his people in the last days, are set for^h by new
he^vens and new earth; and Isa. 65. 17. Jo^l 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 30, 31, 32.
Zeph. 3. 8, 9.
these God will bring in by fi^ry di^pensations. The glorious dstat^ of the
universal Church of J^ws and Gentiles on earth, is no lower an estate, than
that o^ a new he^v^n and a new earth. Now th^s blessed Church State is ushe^^d
into the world by fi^ry Judgments. By fi^ry dispensations God 2 Pet. 3. 10,
11, 12, 13.
will put an end to the glory of t^^s old w^rld, and bring in the new. Look as
G^d by a wa^^ry D^luge made way for one new world. so by a fiery D^luge* in the
last of the last Genesis 9. ^ee our new Anotationists o^ Isa. 65. Isa. 17. o^
Chap. 66. 15, 16, 22. and on Rev. 21. 1.
days, he will make way for another new world, wherein shall dwell
righteousness, as Peter speaks. All men ^n common speech, call a new great
change, a new world. By fiery dispensations God will bring great changes upon
the world, and make way for his Sons reign, in a more glorious manner than ever
he has yet reigned in the world. Rev. 18 Chap. 19. Chap. 20. and Chap. 21. The
sum of that I have in short ^o offer to your consideration out of these
Chapters is this. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen. How much she has
glorified her self, so much sorrow and torment shall be given her. Her plagues
come in one day, death and mourning and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt
with fire. Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for
God has avenged you on her. And after these things, I heard a great voice of
much people, etc. Saying, Alleluiah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and
power unto the Lord our God; for tru^ and right^ous are thy judgments, for he
has judged the great Whore that has corrupted the earth, and has avenged the
blood of his Saints. And again they said Alleluiah. And the four and twenty
Elders said Amen Alleluiah. And I heard as it were the voice of a great
multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty
thunderings, saying, Alleluiah; for the Lord God omnipotent reigns. And the
Beast and the false Prophet were cast into the lake of fire: And the rest were
slain with the sword. But the Saints reigned with Christ a thousand years, in
the new Heavens, and new Earth, to whom the Kings of the earth, and Nations of
the world bring their honor. God by his fiery dispensation upon Babylon, makes
way for Christ's Reign, and the Saints Reign in the New Heavens and new Earth.
But,

The seventh Support to bear up the hearts of the people viz. That by fiery
dispensations God will bring about the ruin and destruction Psalm 50. 3
of his and his peoples enemies. Psalm. 97. 3. A fire goes before him, and
burns up his enemies round about. Heb. 3. 5. Before him went the Pestilence,
and burning coals went forth at his feet. Ver. 7. I saw the tents of Cushan in
affliction: and the curtains of the Land of Midian did tremble. Ver. 12. Thou
did march through the Land in indignation, thou did thresh the Heathen in
anger. Ver. 13. Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people; even for
salvation with thine anointed, thou woundest the head out of the house of the
wicked, by discovering the foundation even to the neck. S^lah. Jer. 50. 31, 32.
Behold, I am against thee, O thou most proud, says the Lord God of Hosts: for
thy day is come, the time that I will visit thee. And the most proud shall
stumble and fall; and none shall raise him up: and I will kindle a fire in his
Cities; and it shall devour all round about him. There is nothing more fearful
or formidable, either to man or beast, than fire: and therefore by fiery
dispensations God will take vengeance on the wicked. This will be the more
evident, if you please but to consider, to what the wicked are compared in
Scripture.

First, They are compared to stubble and chafe which the Therefore as the fire
devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes the chaff: so their root shall
be as rottenness, and their blessom shall go up as dust. Nah. 1. 10 For while
they be folden together as thorns, and while they are drunken as drunkards,
they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry. Mark that word fully dry, and so
as it were prepared and fitted for the flames.

Secondly, The wicked are compared to thorns: and how easily does the flaming
fire consume them? Isa. 27. 4. Fury is not in me: Who would set the briars and
thorns against me in Battle? I would go through them, I would burn them
together. Isa. 33. 12. And the people shall be as the burnings of lime; as
thorns cut up shall they be burnt in the fire. Mark, it is not said as thorns
standing and rooted in the earth, and growing with their moisture about them;
but as thorns cut up, as dead and dry thorns which are easily kindl^d and
consumed, etc.

Thirdly, The wicked are compered to the melting of Micah 1. 4. Psalm. 8. 2.

Fourthly and lastly. The sudden and certain ruin of the But the wicked shall
perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat of Lambs (which of all
fat is the most easiest melted before the fire,) they shall consume, into smoke
shall they consume away. The fat of Lambs in the Lev. 3. 15, 16, 17.
Sacrifices was wholly to be burnt and consumed: Thus you see by the several
things to which wicked men are compared, that God by fiery calamities will
bring ruin and d^st^^ction upon his and his peoples enemies. Such as have
burnt the people of God out of house and home, may in this world have burning
for burning. God loves to retaliate Judge. 1.
Londons flam^s, may one day lay their hands upon their loin^, when they shall
find Divine Justice appearing in flames of fire against them. But,

The eighth support to bear up the hearts of the people viz. That Consult these
Scriptures, Isa 1. 25. Chap. 27, 3, 9, 10, 11. Zech. 13. 9. Heb. 12. 10. Hosea
2. 6. Acts 14. 22. John 16. ult. Jer. 29. 11.
all shall end well, all shall work for good. God by this fiery dispensation,
will do his people a great deal of good. God cast Judah into an Iron furnace,
into a fiery furnace, but it was for their good, Jer. 24. 5. Like these good
figs, so will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah, whom I
have sent out of this place, into the Land of the Chaldeans for their good.
Psalm 119. 71. It is good for me, that I have been afflicted. Though
afflictions are naturally evil, yet they are morally good; for by the wise,
sanct^fying, over ruling Providence of God, they shall either cure the Saints
of their spiritual evils, or preserve them from spiritual evils. Though the
Elements are of contrary qualities, yet Divine Power and Wisdom has so
tempered them, that they all work in an harmonious manner, for the good of the
Universe. So though sore affl^ctions, though fiery trials seem to work quite
cross and contrary to the Saints Prayers and d^sires, yet they shall be so
ordered and tempered by a skilful and omnipotent hand, as that they shall all
issue in the Saints good. At the long-run by all sorts of fiery trials, the
Saints shall have their sins more weakened, their Graces more improved, and
their experiences more multiplied, their evidences for Heaven more cleared,
their communion with God more raised, and their hearts and lives more amended.
God by fiery trials will keep off from his people more trials: God loves by the
Cross to secure his people from the curse: and certainly it is no bad exchange,
to have a cross instead of a curse. God lead the Israelites about and about in
the Wilderness forty years together, but it was to Deuteronomy. 8. 2. 16.
humble them, and prove them, and do them good in their latter end. God lead
them through fire and water, that is, Psalm. 66. 12.
through variety of sore and sharp afflictions, but all was in order to his
bringing them forth into a wealthy place. God stripped Job to his Shift, but it
was in order to his clotheing Compare the first and last Chapter of Job
together.
of him in Scarlet: he brought him low, but it was in order to his raising him
higher than ever: he set him upon a Dunghill, that he might the better fit him
to fit upon a Throne. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Genesis
42. 36.
Benjamin away: all these things are against me, says old Jacob; but yet as
old as he was, he lived to see all working for his good, before he went to his
long home. Under all fiery dispensations, God will make good that Golden
Promise, Romans 8. 28. And we know that all things work together for good, to
them that love God. Mark, the Apostle does not say, we suppose, or we hope, or
we conjectur^, but we know. I know, and you know, and all the Saints know by
daily experience, that all their sufferings and afflictions work together for
their good: the Apostle does not say de futuro, they shall work, but de
praesenti, they do work. All second causes work together with the first cause
for their good who loves God, and who are called according to his purpose. The
Greek word (...), work together, is a Physical expression. Look as several
poisonful ingredients put together, being well tempered and mixed by the skill
and care of the prudent Apothecary, makes a Sovereign Medicine, and work
together for the good of the Patient. So all the afflictions and sufferings
that befall the Saints, they shall be so wisely, so divi^ely tempered, ordered
and sanctified by a hand of Heaven, as that they shall really, and signally
work for their good. Those Genesis 50. 20.
dreadful Providence which seem to be most prejudicial to us, shall in the
issue prove most beneficial to us. Look as vessels of Gold are made by fire, so
by fiery dispensations, God will make his people Vessels of Gold, 2 Timothy 2. 20,
21.
vessels of Honor. Commonly the most afflicted Christians, are the most golden
Christians, Zechary 13. 9 And I will bring the third part through the fire, and
will refine them as silver is refined; and will try them as gold is tried: they
shall call on my name, and I will hear them: I will say it is my people, and
they shall say, the Lord is my God. The fire of London was rather Physic, than
Poison; there was more of a Paternal chastisement, than there was of an
extirpating vengeance in it: and therefore certainly it shall work well, it
shall issue well.

The ninth Support to bear up the hearts of the people of viz. That there was a
great mixture of mercy in that dreadful Judgment of fire that has turned
London into a ruinous heap. At the final destruction of Jerusalem there was not
one stone left upon Luke 19. 41. 45.
another. This might have been thy case O London, had not mercy triumphed over
Justice, and over all the plots and designs of men. Though many thousand houses
are destroyed, yet to the praise of free grace, many thousand houses in the
City and Suburbs have been preserved from the rage and violence of the flames.
What a mercy was that, that Z^ar should be standing, when Sodom was laid in
ash^s? Genesis 19.
And what a mercy was this, that your houses should be standing, when so many
thousand houses have been laid desolate? Is more than a third part of the Ci^y
destroyed by fire? W^y the whole City might have been destroyed by fire, and
all the Suburbs round about it. But in the midst of wrath, God has remembered
mercy: in the midst of great seve^ity Psalm 136. 23.
God has exercised great clemency. Had the fire come on with that rage, fury
and triumph, as to have laid both City and Sub^rbs level; we must have said
with the Church, The Lord is ^ighteous. Had the three Children their Songs Lam.
1. 18.
in the midst of the fiery Furnace? and why should not they have their Songs of
praise, whose hous^s by a miraculous Providen^e were preserved in the mi^st o^
Londons flames. O Sirs, what a mixture of mercy was there in this fiery
calamity that all your lives should be spared, and that many of your houses
should be preserved, and that much of your goods, your wares, your commod^ties,
should be snatched as so many firebrarnds out of the fire. If ever there were an
obligation put upon a people, to cry Grace, Grace, Grace, the Lord has put one
upon you, w^o h^ve b^^n sh^^^rs in that mixture of mercy, that God has ex^ended
to ^he many thousand sufferers by L^ndons flames. Had this J^dgement of fire
been infl^cted, when the raging P^stilence sw^pt away some thousands every
Week, and when he City was even left naked as to her inhab^tants, and when the
whole Nation Josh. 2. 9, 10, 11.
was under a drea^ful ^^ar, ^re^bling an^ d^smayedness of spirit, might there
not have been far greater desolations both of houses, goods and lives, in the
midst of us? Had God con^ended with London by Pes^ilence and fire at once, who
would ^^ve lodged your persons in their beds, or your goods in heir Barns? Had
these two dreadful Judgments met, Londoners would have met with but few
frien^s in the world. Well, when I look upon Londons sins and deserts on the
on^ hand, and upon the principles, old hatred, plots, designs, rage and wrath
of some malicious persons, on the other Ezekiel. 25. 15.
hand, instead of wondering, that so much of the City and Suburbs is destroyed;
I rather wonder, that any one house Tacitus writing of Rome, says S^quitu^
clades, om^ibus quid ^bi p^r viol^^^iam ig^ium accidera^ gravior atque a^^oior.
A^^al. lib. 15. p. ^91. It was rich mercy, that it was not so wi^h London.
in the City or Suburbs is preserved. Whilst London was in flames, and all men
under a high distraction, and all t^ings in a sad confusion, a secret, subtle,
designing, powerful enemy might have risen up in the midst of you, that might
have spoiled your goods, rav^shed your wives, defloured your daughters; and
after all this have sheathed their swords in all your bowels: and in that it
fell not out thus, what cause have Lond^ners to bow for ever before preventing
and restraining Grace. Since the creation of the world, God has never been so
severe in the execution of his most dreadful Judgments, as not to remember
mercy in the midst of wrath. When he drowned the old world (who before were
drowned in lusts and pleasures) he extended mercy to Noah and his family. When
he rained Hell out of Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah, turning those rich and
pleasant Genesis 19.
Cities into ruinous heaps, he gave Lot and his Daughters their lives for a
prey. And when by fire and sword, he had made Jerusalem a dreadful spectacle of
his wrath and vengeance, Isa. 6. 11, 12, 13. Jer. 5. 10. 18.
yet then a remnant did escape. This truth we Citizens have experienced, or
else we and our all, before this day had been destroyed. Every Citizen should
have this Motto written in characters of Gold on his forehead, It is of Lam.
3. 22.
the Lords mercies that we are not consumed. God might have made London like
Sodom and Gomorrah; but in the day of his anger some beams of his favor darted
forth upon your London. By which means, the hopes of some are so far revived,
as to expect, that London yet may be rebuilt and blessed. That's a dreadful word,
When he begins he will make an end: 1 Samuel 3. 12. Jer. 4. 4. Chap. 21. 12.
and the fire of his wrath shall burn, and none shall quench it: These
eradicating Judgments had certainly fallen upon London, had not the Lord in
the midst of his fury remembered mercy. If the Lord had not been on our side may
London now Psalm 124. 1, 2, 3.
say, if the Lord had not been on our side when the fire rose up against us,
then the fire had swallowed us up quick, when its rage was kindled against us.
Doubtless God nenever mingled a cup of wrath with more mercy than this.

T^ough the fire of London was a very great and dreadful fire, yet it was not
so great, nor so dreadful a fire, as that of S^dom and Gomorrah was: for that
fire of Sodom and Gom^rrah,

First, It was a miraculous fire; a fire that was besides, beyond Then They
sinned aga^n^t the light and course of nature; and therefore they were
destroy^d against the course of nature, by fire from Heaven.
the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone, and fire from the Lord out
of Heaven. Fire mingled with brimstone has been found, 1. Most obnoxious to
the ey^s. 2. Most loathsome to the smell. And 3. Most fierce in burning He hit
the mark, who speaking of fire and brim^^one, s^id Fa^illime incenditur,
pertinacissime fervet, etc. D^ffi^^l^ime extinguitur. It is easily kindled
violently fuell^d, and hardly ex^inguished. Brimstone and all that vast
q^antity of sulphurous fiery matter, by which those rich and pop^lous Ci^ies
were ^urned into ruinous heaps, were never produced by natur^l causes, nor
after a natural manner, (no culina^y fire being so speedy in its consumptions)
but immed^ately by Gods own miraculous power and allmighty aim But the fire
that has laid London in ashes, was no such miraculous or extraordinary fire,
but such a fire which Divine Providence permitted, and suffered to be kindl^d
and carr^ed on, by such means, instruments, and concurring circumstances, as
has buried our glory under heaps of ashes. But,

Secondly, The fire that fell upon Sodom ^^d Gom^rrah, Sodom and Gomorrah, but
all the Cities of the Plain (except Zoar which was to be a S^nctuary to Lot)
but the fire of London has not destroy^d the whole City of London. Many hundred
(may I no^ say thousands) houses are yet standing, as monuments of Divine
Power, Wisdom and goodness: and the greatest part of the Suburbs are yet
preserved; and all the rest of the Cities of England are yet compassed about
with loving kindn^ss and mercy; and I hope will be reserved (by a gracious
Providence) as shelters, as Sanctuaries, and as hiding places to poor Englands
distressed inhabitants. But,

Thirdly, The fire that fell upon Sodom and Gomorrah did sum not only places,
but persons; not only houses, but inhabitants; but in the midst of Londons
flames, God was a Zech. 2. 5.
wall of fire about the Citizens, in that day of his fiery indignation, he was
very tender of the lives of his people. Though the Lumber was burnt, yet God
took care of his Treasure, of his Jewels; to wit, the lives of his people. But
having spoken before more largely of this particular; let this touch now
suffice.

Fourthly, Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed by fire suddenly For the
punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people, is greater than the
punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment, and no
hands The Judgemen^s of God upon the Jews, were so great, that they exceeded
all credit amongst their neighbor Nations.
stayed on her. Sodom and Gomorrah sust^ined no long siege from foreign
forces, neither were they kept long in sorrows and sufferings, in pains and
misery, but they were quickly and suddenly, and instantly dispatched out of
this world into another world. Men had no hand in the destroying of Sodom, no
mortal instrument did cooperate in that work. God by his own immediate power,
overthrew them in a moment. Sodom was very strangely, suddenly, and
unexpectedly, turned upside down, as in a moment, by Gods own hand, without the
help of armed Soldiers: Whereas the Chaldeans Armies continued for a long time
in the Land of Judah, and in Jerusalem, vexing and ^laguing the poor people of
God. Now in this respect, the punishment of the Jews, was a greater punishment,
than the punishment of Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment. But that fire
that has turned London into a heap of ashes, was such a fire, that was carried
on gradually, and that last^d four days. God giving the Citizens time to mourn
over their sins, to repent to lay hold on everlasting strength, and to m^ke
peace with God. But,

Fifthly and lastly, Sodoms and Gomorrahs Judgment, is Eternal fire; which
expression, as it refers to the Jude 7.
places themselves, do import, that they were irrecoverabl^ destroyed by fire;
so as that they shall lie eternally waste. Those monstrous sinners of Sodom,
had turned the glory of God into shame; and therefore God will turn them both
into a Hell here, and a Hell hereafter. God will punish unusual sinners with
unusual Judgments. The punishment by this fire is lasting, yea, everlasting:
it is a standing monument Deuteronomy. 29. 23
of Gods high displeasure. We never read, that ever God repented himself of the
overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah; those Cities are under a perpetual
destruction; and so shall continue to the end of the world, if we will give
credit to Authors of great credit and reputation. It well Strabo, Solinus,
Tacitus, Plinius, Jos^phus, etc.
becomes the wisest and best of Christians, seriously to consider, how God
sets forth the destruction of his Churches enemies, Isa. 34. 8, 9, 10, 11.
For it is the day of the Lords Vengeance, and the year of recompenses; for the
controversy of Zion. And the streams thereof shall be turned into Pitch, and
the dust thereof into Brimstone; and the Land thereof shall become burning
Pitch. It shall not be quenched night nor day: the smoke thereof shall go up
for ever: from generation to generation it shall lie waste, none shall pass
through it for ever and ever. But the Cormorant and the Bittern shall p^ss^ss
it; the Owl also and the Raven shall dwell in it; and he shall stretch out
upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of emptin^ss. In these words, you
have a rhetorical description, of that extreme devastation that God will bring
upon the enemies of the Church, in way of allusion to the destruction of Sodom
and Gomo^rah. But I hope L^ndons doom is not such; for God has given to
thousands of her inhabitants a Spirit of Grace and Supplication: Zech. 12. 10.
which is a clear evidence, that at the long run, they shall certainly carry
the day with God. I have faith enough to believe, that God will give Londons
mourners, beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of
praise, for the spirit of heaviness. And that London may yet be called Isa. 61.
3.
a City of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he may be glorified. I
hope that God will one day say to London, Arise, shine, for the light is come,
and the glory of the Lord is Isa. 60. 1, 2.
risen upon thee, the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen
upon thee. By what has been said, it is evident enough, that there has been a
great mixture of mercy in that fiery dispensation, that has past upon London.
And therefore why should not this consideration bear up the hearts of the
people of God, from fainting and sinking under their present calamity and
misery. But,

The tenth Support to bear up the hearts of the people of 10.
God, under the late fiery dispensation, is this, viz; That there are worse
Judgments, than the Judgment of fire, which God might, but has not infl^cted
upon you. Let me evidence the truth of this in these five particulars.

First, The bloody Sword is a more dreadful Judgment, Skin for skin (or Job 2.
4.
skin upon skin) and all that a man has, will he give for his life. God might
have brought upon England, I, and upon London too, the Sword of a foreign
enemy, as he did upon Jerusalem and the Land of Judea. In that one only City of
Jerusalem, during the time or the siege by Vespasians Armies, which Joseph^s de
Bello. Jud.
were made up of Romans, Syrians and Arabians, there died and were killed, a
thousand thousand. At this time there were slain in all Judea, in several
places, to the number of twelve hundred and forty thousand Jews. The whole City
of Jerusalem flowed with blood, insomuch that many parts of the City that were
set on fire, were quenched by the blood of them that were slain. In seventeen
years time the Carthaginian War only in Italy, Spain and Sicily, consumed and
wasted, fifteen hundred thousand men. The Civil Wars between Pompey and Caesar,
swallowed down three hundred thousand men. Caius Caesar did confess it, and
gloried in it, that eleven hundred ninety and two thousand men were killed by
him in Wars. Pompey the great writ upon Minerva's Temple, that he had
scattered, chased and killed twenty hundred eighty and three thousand men. Q.
Fabius killed an hundred and ten thousand of the Gauls. C. Marius put to the
sword two hundred thousand of the Cimbrians. Aetius in that memorable battle of
Catalonia, slew an hundred sixty and two thousand Hunnes. Who can number up the
many thousands, that have fallen by the bloody sword in Europe, from the year
1620 to this year 1667. Ah London, Lond^n, thy Streets mig^t have flowed with
the blood of the ^^am; as once the Str^ets of Jerusalem, Paris, and others have
done. Whilst the fire was a devouring thy stately ^ouses and Palaces, a
Foreign Sword might have been a destroying thine inhabitants. Whilst the
furious flames were ^ consuming thy goods, thy wares, thy substance, thy
riches, a close and secret enemy, spirited, counseled, and animated from Rome
and H^ll, might have risen up in the midst of the^; that might have mingled
together the blood of Husbands and Wives, and the blood of Parents and
Children, and the blood of Masters and Servants, and the blood of rich and
poor, and the blood of the honorable with the blood of the vile. Now had this
been thy doom, O London (which many feared, and others expected) what a
dreadful day would that have been! It Is better to see our houses on fire, then
to see our Streets running down with the blood of the slain. But,

Secondly, God might have inflicted the Judgment of famine London; which is a
more dreadful Judgment, Genesis 45. 46. Joel 1. 2. Chap. 2. 3. Jer. 24. 10. Ezekiel.
6. 11. 2 Samuel 21. 1.
than that of fire. How sad would that day have been, O London, if thou had
been so sorely put to it, as to have taken up that sad lamentation of weeping
Jeremiah, Mine eyes do fail with tears: my bowels are trou^led, my liver is
poured upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people:
because the children and the sucklings swoon in the streets. They say to Lam.
2. 11, 12.
their Mothers, where is corn and wine, when they swooned as the wounded in the
streets of the City. When their soul was poured into their Mothers bosom.
Arise, cry out in the night: in the Verse 19.
beginning of the watches pour out thine heart like water before the face of
the Lord: lift up thy hands toward him, for the life of thy young children,
that faint for hunger, in the top of every street. Shall the woman eat her
fruit, and children of a span Verse 20.
long. The tongue of the suckling child cleaves to the roof of his mouth for
thirst: the young children ask bread, and no man Chap. 4. 4, 5.
breaks it unto them. They that did feed delicately, are desolate in the
streets: they that were brought up in skarlet embrace dunghils. Her Nazarites
were purer than snow, they were whiter Verse 7.
than milk, they were more ruddy in the body than ^ubies: their polishing was
of Sa^hir. Their visage is blacker than a coal: Verse 8.
they are not known in the streets; their skin cleaves to their bones: it is
withered, it is become like a stick. They that be slain with the sword, are
better than they that be slain with Vers^ 9.
hunger: for th^se pine away, stricken through for want of the fruits of the
field. The hands of the pitiful women have sodden Verse 10.
their own children, they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of
my people. We have drunken our water for mon^y, Chap. 5 4 Verse 6.
our wood is sold unto us. We have given the hand to the Egyptians and
Assyrians to be satisfied with bread. We gat our bread with the peril of our
lives, because of the sword of the Verse 9.
Wilderness. Our skin was black like an Oven, because of the terrible Verse 10.
L^b. 6. c 16. d^ Bello Juda^co.
famine. So great was the famine in Jerusalem, that a Bushel of Wheat was sold
for a talent, which is six hundred Crowns, and the dung and raking of the Ci^y
Sinks was held good commons: and such pinching necessities were they under,
that they acted against all pi^ty, honesty, humanity, etc. Women did eat their
children of a span long: yea, the hands of pitiful women did boil their own
children; and men eat one other: yea, many did eat the flesh of their own arms,
according to what the Lord had long before threatened, Isa. 9. 19, 20. Through
the wrath of the Lord of Hosts, is the Land darkened: and the people shall be as
the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his brother. And he shall snatch on
the right hand, and be hungry; and he shall eat on the left hand, and they
shall not be satisfied: they shall eat every man the flesh off his own arm. In
the Reign of William the first, there was so S^. Ric^a^d Bak^^s Chronocle. p.
26.
great a D^ar^h and famine, especially in Northumberland, that men were glad to
eat Horses, Dogs, Cats and Rats, and what else is most abhorrent to nature. In
Honorius's Reign, there was such a scarcity of all manner of provision in Rome,
that men were even afraid of one another; and the common voice that was heard
in the K^rk, was, Pone pretium humanae carni: Set a price on man's flesh. In
Italy when it was wasted by the Goths, under Justinian, the famine was so
great, that in Picene only, fifty thousand persons died with hunger: and not
only man's flesh was made meat of, but the very excrements of men also. In the
Reign of Hubid King of Spain, there was no rain for six and twenty years
together, so that the drought was so great, that all the Fountains and Riv^rs,
except Iber and Be^is were dried up; so that the earth gaped in several places,
that whole fields were parted; and that many who had thought to have fled into
other parts, were hindered, and could no^ get passage over these fearful
openings of the earth. Hereby Spain, especially those places nearest the
Mediterranean Sea, being stripped naked of all Herbs* and the glory of Trees
being d^y^d up (ex^ept a f^w T^ees which were preserved upon the banks of the
River Betis) men and Beasts being consumed with thirst and famine, was ^urned
by this J^dgement, into a mis^rable solitude and Wilderness. The Royal line of
the Kings, was by this means All these things do the Histories of Spain report.
extinct: and the poorer sort of men, whose means were ^hort, and provision
small, went into other places, as they could conveniently, and with all sp^ed,
not being able to stand or stay out this six and twenty years misery. In the
Th^cyd.
Pel^ponn^s^an War, at Potidea, men eat one another. When Vtica was besieged by
Amilcar the Father of H^nnibal, men Pol^b.
at one another, the famine was so great amongst them. At Antioch in Syria,
many of the Christians (in the Holy War) Turk. Hist. Fol. 18.
through famine, devoured the dead bodies of the late slain enemies. At the
siege of Scodra, Horses were dainty meat; yea, they were glad to eat Dogs,
Cats, Rats, and the skins of beasts sod. A little Mouse, and Puddings made of
Dogs Ibid. 4^6.
guts, was sold at so great a price, as exceeds all credit. When H^nnibal
besieged Cassilinum, the famine was so great, that Val. Max. l 7 ^ap. 6. Turk
Hist.
a Mouse was sold for two hundred groats, that is, for three pound eighteen
shillings and eight pence. That was a sore famine in Samaria, when an Asses
head was sold for 2 Kings 6. 25.
eighty pieces of silver; that is, say some, for four or five pound: Others say
ten; for a shekel of silver was with the Jews, as much as two shillings six
pence with us: by this account, an Asses head was sold for ten pound sterling.
In Edward the Seconds time, Anno 1316. There was so great a famine, that
horses, dogs, yea, men and children were stolen for food, and the Thieves newly
brought into the Parch. Pilgrim. p. 289. Sp^ed. 6. 4*
Gaols, were ^orn in pieces, and eaten presently, half alive by such as had
been longer there. In War, Oppression, Cap^ivity, and many other calamities,
much of the hand of man is to be seen, but Famine is a deep, evident and
app^ren^ Judgment, which God himself brings upon the sons of men, by his own
high hand. Many, or most of those calamities that are brought upon us by humane
means, are avoidable by humane helps: but famine is that comprehensive
Judg^ment, that the highest power on earth cannot help against. If the Lord do
not help thee, whence shall I help thee? 2 Kings 6 27
out of the barn fl^or, or out of the Wine Press? said the King of Israel in
the famine of Samaria. Ah London, London, if the Lord had inflicted upon thy
inhabitan^s this sore Judgment of f^mine, making the Heavens as Iron, and the
Earth as Brass. Lev. 26. 19. Hab. 3. 17. Deuteronomy. 28. 23.
If the Lord had cut off all thy delightful and necessary provisions, and thy
Cit^zens had been forced to eat one another, or every one to eat the flesh of
his own arms, and the fruit of his own body; how dismal would thy condition
have been. Certainly such as have been swept away by the raging Pestilence
ashore, and such as have been slain by the bloody sword at Sea, might very well
be counted happy in comparison of those who should live and die under that
lingering Judgment of a famine. Doubtless famine is a sorer Judgment, than
either Sword, Fire, or Pestilence. There be many deaths in a Dearth. Famine is
the top of all humane calamities: as B^sil terms it: extreme hunger has made
Mothers Murderers, and so turned the Sanctuary of life into the Shambles of
death.

Thirdly, God might have overturned London and her inhabitants Isa. 13 1^.
Psal^. ^8. 7.
Cities and Towns in former times. Under Tiberius the Emperor, thirteen Cities
of Asia fell down with an Earthquake: and six under Trajan; and twelve under
Constantine. In Campania, Ferraria in Italy 1569. in the space of forty hours,
by reason of an Earthquake, many Palaces, Fardenti^s.
Temples and houses were overthrown, with the loss of many a man, the loss
amounting to forty hundred thousand p^unds. In the year 1171. there was such a
mighty Earthquake, that the City Tripolis, and a great part of Damascus in
Antiochia, and Hul^ipre, the chief City in the Kingdom of Loradin, and other
Cities of the Sarac^n^, either per^sh^d utterly, or were wonder^ul^y defac^d.
In the year 1509. in ^he mon^^h of September, the^e was so great an Earthquake
at Bodi^.
Constantinople, tha^ there were th^rt^^^ thousand men destroyed by it, and
(...) City m^s^r^bly shattered and ^u^ned by it. In the (...) ^f Hen^y the
first, the earth moved with so great a (...) many ^uildings were shaken down;
Sr. (...) Bakers Chr^noc^e p. 47.
and M^lm^sbu^^ (...)* that the house wherein he sat, was lifeed up wi^^ a
(...), and at in third time settled again in the p^^p^r pla^e. Also in diverse
places it yi^l^ed forth a hid^o^^ no i^, and cast ^^rth fl^mes* In L^mbardy
there was ^n Earthquake that continued forty days, and removed a Town ^^to the
place where it stood, a great way off. In Ho^eden.
the elev^n^^ year of the Reign of King Henry the second, on the six and
twenti^th d^y of January, was so great an Earthquake, Sr. Richa^d Ba^^rs
Chron^cle, p. 65.
in Ely, N^rfolk, and Suffolk, that it overthrew them that stood upon their
feet, and made the Bells to ring in the Steepl^s. In the four and twentieth
year of his Reign, in the Territory of Derlington, in the Bishopwrick of
Durham, the earth lifted up her self in the manner of an high Tower, and so
rem^i^ed unmovable from morning till evening, and then fell with so horrible a
noise, that it frighted the inhabitants there^bouts, and the earth swallowing
it up, made there a deep pit, which is seen at this day: for a testimony
wh^reof, Leyland says, he saw the Pits there, commonly cal^ed See the Relation
in Print.
Hell-Keitles. In the year 1666. the C^ty of Raguz^ was overthrown by a most
dreadful Earthquake, and all the inhabitants (which were many thousands) except
a few hundred were destroyed, and buried in the ruins of that City. At B^rn,
Anno 1584. near unto which City a certain Hill, carried violently b^yond and
over other Hills, is reported by Polanus (who lived in those parts) to have
covered a whole Polan. Syntag. ^41.
Village that had ninety families in it, one half house only excepted, wherein
the Master of the Family, with his Wife and Children, were earnestly calling
upon God. Oh the terror of the Lord! and Oh the power of servent prayer. At
Pleures in Rhetia, Anno 1618. Aug. 25. the whole Town was overcovered Alst.
Chronol.
with a Mountain, which with its most swift motion, oppressed fif^een hundred.
In the days of Vzziah King Amos 1. 1.
of Judah, there was such a terrible Earthquake, that the people with fear and
horror fl^d from it. Z^ch. 14. 5. Yea, ye shall flee liko as ye fl^d from
before the Earthquake in the days of Uzziah King of Judah. The J^wish Doctors
affirm, that this amazing Earthquake fell out, just at that instant time, when
Vzziah offered Incense, and was therefore smitten with a Leprosy: but this is
but their conjecture. However this dreadful Earthquake was an horrible sign and
presage of Gods wrath to that sinful people. Josephus tells us, that by Antiq.
l. 9. c. 11.
it, half a great hill was removed out of its place, and c^ried four furlongs
another way; so that the Highway was obstructed, and the Kings Gardens utterly
marred. The L. 15. c. 7.
same Author further tells us, that at that time, that Caesar and Anthony made
trial of their Titles in the Actian War, (and in the seventh year of the Reign
of King Herod) there happened such an Earthquake in the Country of Judaea,
that never the like was seen in any other place: so that diverse Beasts were
slain thereby, and that ten thousand men were overwhelmed and destroyed in the
ruins of their houses. The same Author says, that in the midst of the Action
War Josephus lib. 1. c. 14. de Bello Judaico.
about the beginning of the Spring time, there happened so great an Earthquake,
as slew an infinite multitude of Beasts, and thirty thousand people: yet the
Army had no harm, for it lay in the open Field. Upon the report of this
dreadful Earthquake, and the effects of it, the Arabians were so highly
encouraged, that they entered into Judea, supposing that there were no men left
alive to resist them, and that they should certainly conquer the Country: and
before their coming, they slew the Ambassadors of the Jews that were sent unto
them. Ah London, London, if the Lord had by some terrible Earthquake utterly
overthrown thee, and buried all thy inhabitants under thy ruins (as he has
dealt by many Cities and Citizens, both in former, and in these latter times)
how dreadful would thy case then have been, ov^r what now it is. Certainly such
Earthquakes as over whelm both Cities and Citizens, are far greater Judgments,
than such a fire, or fires, that only consumes men's houses, but never hu^ts
their persons. God might have inflicted this sore Judgment upon thee, O
London, but he has not; therefore it concerns thee to be still a crying Grace,
Grace. But,

Fourthly, God might have inflicted that Judgment, both Korah, Dathan and
Abiram, and all that appertained to them, Numb. 16. 31, 32, 33, 34. And it came
to pass, as he had made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground
clave assunder, that was under Such Virgins that had been defloured, the
Heathen bu^ied a^ive, accounting that the sorest of all punishments.
them: And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses,
and all the men that appertained unto Korah, and all their goods. They and all
that appertained to them, went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed
upon them: and they perished from among the Congregation. And all Israel that
were round about them, fled at the cry of them: for they said, lest the earth
swallow us up also. Whilst Moses spoke these words (says Josephus) and
intermixed them with tears, the earth trembled, and shaking began to remove
(after such a manner, as when by the violence of the wind a great Josephus
Antiq. l. 4. c. 3.
billow of the Sea floateth and is tossed hither and thither) hereat all the
people were am^zed, but after that a horrible and shattering noise was made
about their Tents, and the earth opened and swallowed up both them and all that
which they esteemed dear, which was after a manner so exterminate, as nothing
remained of theirs to be beheld. Whereupon in a moment the earth closed again;
and the vast gaping* was fast shut; so as there appeared not any sign of that
which had happened. Thus perished they all, leaving behind them an example of
Gods Power and Judgments. And this accident was the more miserable, in that
there were ^o one, no not of their kinsfolks or allies that had compassion of
them: so that all the people whatsoever, forgetting those things which were
past, did allow Gods Justice with joyful acclamations, esteeming them unworthy
to be b^moaned, but to be held as the pl^gue and perverters of the people. O
what a dreadful Judgment was this, for persons to be buried alive; for houses,
and inhabitants, and all their goods, to be swallowed up in a moment. What
tongue can express, or heart conceive, the terror and astonishment that sell
upon Korah, Dathan and Abiram, when the earth (which God had made firm, and
established by a perpetual Decree to stand fast under men's feet, was weary of
bearing them, and therefore) opened her mouth and swallowed them, and a^l their
concernments up. Ah London, London, If the earth had opened her mouth, and
swallowed up all thy houses and inhabitants, with all thy goods and riches in a
moment? Would not this have been ten thousand thousand times a greater
Judgment, than that fiery dispensation that has past upon thee? But,

Fifthly and lastly, God might have rained Hell out of Sodom and Gom^rrah: and
Genesis 19.
this would have been a sorer Judgment, than what he has inflicted upon you.
If God by raining fire and brimstone from Heaven, had consumed your persons,
houses, rich^s and relations, would not this have be^n the height of
Judgment, and infinitely more terrible and dreadful to you, than that fiery
dispensation, that has consumed part of your estates, and turned your houses
into ashes? Now by these five things, it is most evident, That there are worse
Judgment, than the Judgment of fire, which God in Justice might have
infl^cted upon you. But free-mercy has so interposed, that God has not stirred
up all his wrath; and though he has severely punished you, yet it is less than
your iniquities have deserved, Ezra 9. 13. and therefore let this consideration
support and bear up your hearts under all your pr^sent sorrows and sufferings.
But,

Elevently, Though your houses are burnt, and your habtations mean in this
world. Witness h^s own relation when he was upon the earth: The Foxes have
holes, and the Birds of the air Ma^th. 8 20.
have nests, (or resting places where they go to rest, as under a Tent, like as
the Greek word properly imports,) But the Son of man has not where to lay his
head. He does not say, Kings have Palaces, but I have none: nor he dos not say,
that rich men have Houses, and Lands and Lordships to entertain their
followers, but I have none: But, the Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air
have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head. Christ was
willing to undeceive the Scribe, and to show him his mistake: thou think O
Scribe, by following of me, to get riches, and honor, and preferment, and to be
some body in the world, but thou art highly mistaken: for I have neither Silver
nor Gold, Lands nor Lordships; no not so much as a house to put my head in.
When I was torn, I was born in a Stable and laid in a M^nger: and now Luke 2.
17. Chap. 8. 3. Ma^th. 17. 27.
I live upon others, and am maintained by others: I am not rich enough, to pay
my Tr^bute, and therefore do'nt deceive thy self. The great Architect of the
world had not a house to put his head in, but emptied himself of all, and
became poor, to make us rich, not in goo^s, but in Grace; not in Phil. 2. 7 2
Cor. 8. 9 Christi Paupertas meum est pat^imo^iam. Ambros
worldly wealth, but in the treasures of another world. He that was heir of
both worlds, had not a house of his own, to put his head in. Christ lived poor,
and died poor. As he was born in another man's house, so he was buried in
another man's Tomb. Austin observes, when Christ died, he made no Will, he had
no Crown Lands, only his Coat was left, and that the Soldiers parted amongst
themselves. Are you houseless, are you penyless, are you poor and low, and mean
in this world? So was Christ. Remember the servant is not greater than his
Lord. It Is good seriously to John 13. 16.
ponder upon that saying of Christ; The Disciple is not above his Master, nor
the servant above his Lord: It is enough for Matthew. 10. 24, 25.
the Disciple, that he be as his Master; and the Servant as his Lord. If Joab
the Lord General be in Tents, it is a shame for V^iah to take his ease at home
in a soft bed. It is unseemly 2 Kings 11. 11.
to see the Head all begored with blood, and crowned with Thorns, and the
members to be decked with Roses and Jewels, and to smell of rich Odors, Spices
and Perfumes. Art thou in a worse condition, than Chrisl was in this world? Oh
no, no. Why then do thou murmur and complain? Why do thou say, there is no
sorrow to thy sorrow, nor no suffering to thy suffering? O Sirs, it is honor
enough, for the Disciples of Christ, to fare as Christ fared in this world. Why
should the Servant be in a better condition than his Lord? Is not that S^rvant
happy enough, that is equal with his Lord? Did the burnt Citizens but seriously
and frequently meditate and ponder upon the poverty and low estate of Christ
whilst he was in this world: their hearts would be more calm and quie^ under
all their crosses and losses, than now they are. But,

Twelfthly, Though your houses are burnt, and your habitations etc. yet your
outward condition in this world, is not worse than theirs was, of whom this
world was not worthy, Lam. 5 2. Our inh^ritance is turned to strangers, our
houses to Aliens. Psalm 107. 4, 5. They wandered in the Wilderness, in a
solitary way, they found no City to dwell in, hungry and thirsty their souls
fainted in them. 1 Cor. 4. 11. Even unto this present hour, we both hunger and
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place.
Heb 11. 37, 38. They wandered about in sheep skins and goat skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented. They wandered in deserts, and in mountains,
and in dens, and in caves of the earth. Some of the learned, by their wandering
up and down in Sheep skins and Goat skins, do understand their disguising of
themselves, for their better security. One well observes from the words, That
they did Chrysostom.
not only wander, and were removed from their own habitation, but that they
were not quiet, even in the Woods, Deserts, Mountains, Dens and Caves of the
earth, but were hunted by their Persecutors, from Desert to Desert, and from
Mountain to Mountain, and from Den to Den, and from one Cave to another.

But hereupon some might be ready to object and reply,

These were the very worst of the worst of men. Surely, these Oh no, They were
such (says the Holy Ghost) of whom the world was not worthy. The Heathenish
world, the poor, bl^nd, ignorant, Atheistical world, the profane,
superstitious, Idolat^ous, oppressing and persecu^ing world, was ^ot worthy of
them: that is, they were not wo^^hy, 1. Of their presence and company. 2. They
were not worthy of their prayers and tears. 3 They were not worthy of their
counsel and advice. 4. They were not worthy of their gracious lives and
examples. In this Scripture, you may plainly see, that their wandering up and
down in Desar^s, and on the Mountains, and in Dens, and in the Caves of the
earth, is reckoned up amongst those great and dreadful things, that the Saints
suffered in that woeful day. Those precious souls that dwelt in Caves and D^ns,
and wandered up and down in Sheep skins and Goat skins, might have rustled in
their Silks, Sattins, and Velvets; they might (Nebuchadn^zzar like) have
vaunted themselves on their stately Turrets and Palaces, if they would have
wounded their consciences, and have turned their backs upon Christ and
Religion. Now if the burnt up Citizens of London, would but seriously lay to
heart, the sad dispensations of God toward his choicest worthies, then their
hearts would neither faint, nor sink under their present losses, crosses and
sufferings. But,

Thirteenthly and lastly, There is a worse fire, than that London into a
ruinous heap, viz the fire of Hell, which Christ has freed believers from.
There is unquenchable fire, Matthew. 3. 12. He will burn up the chaff^ Luke 3.
17. Matthew. 18. 8.
with unquenchable fire. There is everlasting burnings, Isa. 33. 14. The
sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites: Who
among us shall dwell with the devouring fire: Who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings. Wicked men, who are now the only burning Jolly fellows of
the time, shall one day go from burning to Some devout Personages caused th^s
Scripture to be writ in letters of Gold upon their Chimney pieces. B. of Betty
in France in his Draught of Eternity. Gen 4. 17. Amos 6. 5. Job. 21. 12. Dan. 5
23. Amos 6. 4.
burning: from burning in sin, to burning in Hell: from burning in flames of
lusts, to burning in flames of torment, except there be sound repentance on
their sides, and pardoning Grace on Gods. O Sirs, in this devouring fire in
these everlasting burnings, Cain shall find no Cities to build, nor his
posteri^y shall have no instruments of Music to inven^ there; none shall take
up the Timbrel, or Harp, or rejoice at the sound of the Organ. There Belshazzar
cannot drink Wine in Bowls, nor eat the Lambs out of the flock, nor the Calves
out of the midst of the Stall. In everlasting burnings, there will be no merry
company, to pass time away; nor no Dice, to cast care away: nor no Cellars of
Wine, wherein to drown the sinners grief. There is everlasting fire, Matthew. 25.
41. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. This terrible
sentence breaths out nothing but fire and brimstone, terror and horror, dread
and woe. The last words that ever Christ will speak in this world, will be the
most tormenting and amazing, the most killing and damning, the most stinging
and wounding; Depart from me: there i^ rejection: Pack, begone, get you out of
my fight, let me never see your faces more. It was a heavy doom that was past
upon Nebuchadnezzar, that he Dan. 4. 25.
should be driven from the so^i^ty of men, and in an extremity of a sottish
melancholy, spend his time amongst the Beasts of the fi^ld: but that was
nothing to this soul killing word, depart from me. It was nothing to men's being
cast out of the presence of Christ for ever. The remembrance Ber^ard. in Psalm.
91.
of which, made one to pray thus, O Lord deliver me at the great day from that
killing word Depart. And what says another,

This word Depart, the Goats with horror hears. Sphynx.

But this word Come, the Sheep to joy appears.
Basil says, That an alienation and utter separation from God, Basil. Asc.
Etic. c. 2. Chrysostom. in Mal. Hom. 24.
is more grievous than the pains of Hell. Chrysostom says, That the torments
of a thousand Hells, if there were so many, comes far short of this one, to
wit, to be turned out of Gods pres^nce with a Non nov^ vos, I know you not.
What a grief were it, here to be banished from the Kings Court with A^solom, or
to be turned out of doors, with Hagar and Ismael, or to be cast out of Gods
presence with cursed Cain. But what is all this, to a man's being
excommunicated, and cast out of the presence of God, of Christ, of the Angels,
and out of the general Assembly of the Saints, and Congreg^tion of the first
born: to be Heb. 12. 22, 23.
secluded from the presence of God, is of all miseries the greatest. The
serious thoughts of this, m^de one say, Many do abhor Hell, but I esteem the
fall from that glory, to be a greater punishment than Hell it self; it is better
to endure ten thousand Thunderclaps, than be deprived of the beatifical
vision. Certainly the tears of Hell are not sufficient, to bewail the loss of
Heaven. If those precious souls wept because they Acts 20. 38.
should see Paul's face no more; how deplorable is the eternal deprivation of
the beatifical vision. Depart from me, is the first and worst of that dreadful
sentence, which Christ shall pass upon sinners at last. Every syllable sounds
horror and terror, grief and sorrow, amazement and astonishment to all whom it
does concern.

Ye cursed: there is the malediction. But Lord if we must Cursings now are
wicked men's Hymns: but in He^l they shall be their woes. Rev. 16. 9. 11, 21.
depart, let us depart blessed. No, depart ye cursed: you have cursed others,
and now you shall be cursed your selves; you shall be cursed in your bodies, and
cursed in your souls; you shall be cursed of God, and cursed of Christ, and cursed
of Angels, and cursed of Saints, and cursed of Devils, and cursed of your
companions. Yea, you shall now curse your very selves, your very souls, that
ever you have despised the Gospel, refused the offers of Grace, scorned Christ,
and neglected the means of your salvation. Oh sinners, sinners, all your
curses, all your maledictions, shall at last recoyle upon your own souls. Now
thou cursest every man, and thing, that stands in the way of thy lusts, and
that crosses thy designs; but at last all the Curses of Heaven and Hell, shall
meet in their full power and force upon thee. Surely that man is cursed with a
witness, that is cursed by Christ himself.

But Lord, if we must depart, and depart cursed; Oh let Of this fire you had
need of some Devil, or accursed wretch to descant, says One.
us go into some good place: No, Depart ye into everlasting fire. There is the
vengeance and continuance of it. You shall go into fire, into everlasting fire,
that shall neither consume it self, nor consume you. Eternity of extremity, is
the Hell of Hell. The fire in Hell is like that stone in Arcadia, which being
once kindled, could never be quenched. If all the fires that ever were in the
world were contracted into one fire, how terrible would it be? Yet such a fire
would be but as painted fire upon the Wall, to the fire of Hell. If it be so
sad a spectacle, to behold a malefactors flesh consumed by piece-meales in a
lingering fire; Ah, how sad, how dreadful would it be, to experience, what it
is to lie in unquenchable fire, not for a day, a month, or a year, or a
hundred, or a thousand years, but for ever and ever. If it were, says One, but
for a thousand years, I could bear it: but Cyril.
seeing it is for eternity, this amazeth and affrighteth me. I am afraid of
Hell, says Another, because the Worm there Is^dor. clar. Orat. 12.
never dies, and the fire never goes out. For to be tormented without end, this
is that which goes beyond all the bounds of desperation. Grievous is the
torment of the Dionys. in 18. Apoca^yps. Fol. 301.
damned, for the bitterness of the punishments, but it is more grievous, for
the diversity of the punishments, but most grievous for the eternity of the
punishments.

To lie in everlasting torments, to roar for ever for disquietness of heart; to
rage for ever for madness of soul, to weep and grieve, and gnash the teeth for
ever, is a misery Matthew 25. ult.
beyond all expression. Bellarmine out of Barocius tells of De art moriendi.
a learned man, who after his death appeared to his friend, complaining that he
was adjudged to Hell torments, (which (says he) were they to last but a
thousand thousand years, I should think it tolerable: but alas, they are
eternal. And it is called eternal fire, Jude 7. I have read of a Prison among
the Persians, which was deep, and wide, and dark, and out of which the
Prisoners could never get; and therefore it was called by them Lethe,
Forgetfulness: this Prison was a Paradise to Hell. Mark, every thing that is
conducible to the torments of the damned is eternal. 1. God that damns them is
eternal, Isa. 33. 14. Romans 16. 26. 2. The fire that torments them, is eternal,
Isa. 30. 33. Cap. 66. 24. Jude 7. 3. The Prison and Chains that holds them, are
eternal, Jude 6, 7, 13. 2 Pet. 2. 17. 4. The Worm that 1 Pet. 3. 19. L^cian
says, that it was the common opinion among them, that the wi^ked were held in
chains by Pluto (so they call the Prince of Devils) in chain^, which cannot be
loosed.
gnaws them is eternal, Mark 9. 44. Melancthon calls it a Hellish fury. 5. The
sentence that shall be passed upon them, shall be eternal, Matthew. 25. 41, 42.
The fire of Hell is called a Burning Lake, R^v. 20. 15. Whosoever was not found
written in the book of life, was cast into the lake of fire. You shall know,
that fire is the most tormenting Element. Oh the most dreadful impressions,
that it makes upon the flesh. The Schoolmen distingish thus of fire; they say,
there is ignis ardoris, foetoris, and terroris, fire of heat, of stench, and of
terror: of heat, as in Mount Aetna; of stench, as in Mount Heda; of terror and
fear: as ignis fulguris, the fire of lightning in America: All these fires they
say are in Hell. But to let the Schoolmen pass. It is disputed among many of
the learned, Whether there be material fire in Hell or no. That it is very
probable, that there is material fire in Hell, or that which is full as
terrible, or more terrible, may I suppose, be thus evidenced.

First, The fire of Hell is frequently mentioned in the blessed Scripture. Who
shall say to his Brother, thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire. At the
day of Judgment the tares are Matthew. 5. 22. Chap. 13. 40.
burnt in the fire. Into this fire offending members are cast, Matthew. 18. 18,
19. To this everlasting fire the Goats are adjudged, Matthew. 25. 41. In this
fire, those that worship the Beast are tormented, Rev. 14. 10. And the
Sodomites at this very day, suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, Jude 7. Into
this fire shall all barren and unfruitful Christians be cast. Matthew. 3. 10. And
now also the Ax is laid unto the root of the trees, therefore every tree which
brings forth not good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Negative
goodness will never secure a man either from the Ax, or from the fire. Yea,
every man and woman under Heaven, that keeps off from Christ, and that lives
and dies out of Christ, and that are never entered into a marriage union with
Christ: they shall all be cast into this fire, John 15. 6. If a man abide not
in me, he is cast forth as a branch that is withered, and men gather them, and
cast them into the fire, and they are burned. Thus you see, how the Scripture
runs. Now you know, that 'tist safest for us, to adhere to the very letter of
the Scripture, unless evident and necessary occasion draw us from a literal
interpretation of it. But,

Secondly, To this fire is ascribed Sulphur, flames, wood, For Tophet is
ordained of old (that i^ Hell, those 2 King. 23. 18.
terrible allusions to Tophet, to the shrieks and yellings of those children
that were sacrificed there, are but dark representations of the pain and
miseries of the damned) yea, for the King it is prepared (If Princes be wicked,
it is neither their Power nor their Policy, their dignity or worldly glory, that
can secure them from Tophet.) he has made it deep and large: the pile thereof
is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone, does
kindle it. Now he shall be an Apollo to me, that can show me, where the Lord in
his Word gives such properties to immaterial fire, that are here given in the
Text. But yet remember this, that that God that makes the damned live without
food, is able to maintain this fire without wood. But,

Thirdly, Fire is the most furious of all Elements; and Water does only kill,
but fire does vex, terrify and torment in killing. Act. and Mon.
shall be punished and tormented in Hell. Now what can be more grievous and
vexatious, more afflicting and tormenting to the bodies of men, than material
fire. Bilney the Martyr could not endure to hold his finger in the flame of a
Candle for a little while, for a quarter of an hour, though he tried to do it
before he burnt at the stake. O then how will the bodies of men endure to dwell
in unquenchable fire, to dwell in everlasting burnings. The Brick-kilns of
Egypt, the Furnace of Babel are but as the glowing sparkle, or as the blaze of
a Brush-faggot, to this tormenting Tophet, that has been prepared of old, to
punish the bodies of sinners with. But,

Fourthly, Several of the Fathers and Schools, generally agree, material fire:
but yet they say, that this material fire shall wonderfully Zaach. Austia,
Peter Lumbard. Tho. Aqu. Gregory, etc.
exceed ours, both in degree of heat, and fierceness of burning. Our Elementary
or Culinary fire is no more to be compared with the fire of Hell, than fire
painted upon the Wall, is to be compared with fire burning in our Chimneys. Si
igne damnabit reprobos, quare non in igne cruciabit damnatos, says one of the
Ancients, If he will judge the reprobates in fire, why not condemn them to fire.

But if it be material fire, then it may be quenched: besides we

First, Don't we find, that the Bush burned and was not consumed? Exodus 3. 2, 3.
yet when the Israelites were in their wilderness condition; their clothes did
not wax old, Deuteronomy. 8. 4. Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy
foot swell these forty years. Neh. 9. 41. Yea, forty years did thou sustain
them in the Wilderness, so that they lacked nothing; their clothes waxed not
old, and their feet swelled not. Their clothes were never the worse for
wearing. God by his Allmighty Power kept their clothes from waxing old: and so
God by his Allmighty Power can keep the fire of Hell unquenchable. But,

Secondly, Such as thus object, draw things to the scantling

Thirdly, We see in this life, that bodily tortures work upon as to make it the
instrument of his dreadful wrath and vengeance, to plague, punish, scorch and
burn the souls of damned sinners. Bodies and souls are copartners in the same
sins, and therefore God may make them copartners in the same punishments.
Every creature is such, as the great God will have it to be, and commands it to
be; and therefore if the Lord shall lay a command upon the fire of Hell to
reach, and burn the souls of damned sinners; it shall certainly do it. God is
the God of Nature, as well as the God of Grace: and therefore I cannot see, how
the fire of Hell can be said, how to act against its own nature, when it do;
but act according to the will and command of the God of Nature. I readily
grant, that if you consider infernal fire in it self, or in its own nature, and
so it cannot have any power on such a spiritual substance as the soul of man
is; but if you consider infernal fire, as an instrument in an Allmighty hand,
and so it can act upon such spiritual Beings, as Devils and damned souls are,
and make the same dreadful and Vide August. ^. 21. c. 10. de Civitate D^i.
painful impressions upon them, as it would do upon corporeal Beings. Though
Spirits have nothing material in their nature, which that infernal fire should
work upon, yet such is the Almighty Power of God, that he can make Spirits most
sensible of those fiery tortures and torments which he has declared and
appointed for them to undergo. Let them tell us (says One) how it is possible,
that the soul Dr. Jackson.
of man, which is an immortal substance, should be truly wedded to the body, or
material substance: and I shall as easily answer them, that it is as possible,
for the same soul, to be as easily wrought upon by a material fire. It is much
disputed and controverted among the Schoolmen, how the Devils can be tormented
with corporeal fire, seeing they are Spirits, and (as I suppose) it is well
concluded of them thus. First, That in Hell there is corporeal fire; as appears
thus: First, Because the Scripture affirms it, Matthew. 3. 10 Matthew. 5. 22.
Matthew. 25. 41. Secondly, Because the bodies sinning against God, are to be
vexed and tormented with corporeal pains. Secondly, They conclude, that the
Devils are tormented in that fire; Because Christ says so, Mat. 25. 41. Depart
from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Thirdly, It being demanded, how the Devils are tormented in that fire?
they answer, they are tormented, not only First, With the sight of it: or
Secondly, With an imaginary apprehension thereof. But Thirdly, As an instrument
ordained of God for that very end. And Fourthly, Vt locus locatum continens,
etc. cogens. Hell is a fiery Tho. Suppl^m. 70. 3. corp.
Region, or a Region of fire: and therefore the Devils being contained and
included therein must needs be tormented thereby. Cum Dives ab igne patiatur,
quis neget, animas ignibus puniri. None must question this truth (says my
Author) that souls and spirits are punished by fire, seeing our G^^g. Dial 4.
cap. 28, 29.
Savior himself tells us, that Dives (who was in Hell but in soul) was
tormented in the flames, Luke 16. 24. But,

Fourthly, It is not safe to leave the plain letter of the Scripture viz. That
there is no other Hell, but what is within us; I shall not now stand to
determine. I know Calvin, and some others, are for the Allegory; and they give
this for a Reason, that there is mention made of Wood, and of a Worm, as well
as fire. Now these are Allegorical; and therefore the fire is Allegorical also.
But by their favor, we find in the Scripture, that those things which are
spoken together, are not always taken in the same nature and manner. As for
example, Deuteronomy. 32. 15, 18, 30, 31. 2 Samuel 22. 47. 1 Cor. 10. 4.
Christ is called, the Rock of our salvation. Now the Rock is Allegorical, Is
our salvation, therefore Allegorical. So likewise Luke 22. 30. Ye shall eat and
drink (says our Savior) at my Table in my Kingdom: Eating and drinking is
Allegorical; is therefore the Kingdom Allegorical too? Allegories are not to be
admitted, but where the Scripture it self does warrant them: and commonly where
an Allegory is propounded, there it is also expounded. As in Galat. 4. 24.
Which things are an Allegory; for these are the two Testaments. Many men have
been too wanton with Allegories. Origin, Ambrose, Hierom and several others of
the Ancients, have been blamed for it by learned men. But,

Fifthly and lastly, I cannot tell but that the fire by which Gouge puts this
Question, Is it a material fire, wherewith the damned in Dr. Gouge on Heb. 10.
27. Sect. 98.
Hell are tormented? and gives this answer, viz. This is too curious a point to
resolve to the full; but yet this answer may safely be returned, It is no
wasting or consuming fire, but a torturing: and so far corporal, as it
tormenteth the body: and so far incorporeal, as it tormenteth the soul.
Socrates speaking of Hell, says, I was never there my self, neither have I
ever spoke with any that came from thence. Suppose, says One, there be no fire
in Hell, yet I assure thee this, that thou shall be scorched with fire: the
fire of Gods Mr. Boulton.
wrath shall torment thee more, than bodily fire can do: and therefore it will
be your wisdom, not so much to question this or that about Hell fire, as to
make it your work, your business, not to come there. He gave good counsel, who
Bernard.
said, Let us go down to Hell while we are alive, that we may not go to Hell
when we are dead. And so did he, who speaking of Hell said, Ne quaeramus ubi
sit, sed quomodo illam Chrysostom.
fugiamus. Let us not seek where it is, but how we shall avoid it. The same
Author gives this further counsel; viz. That at all Banquets, Feasts, and
Public Meetings, men should talk of Hellish pains and torments, that so their
hearts may be overawed, and they provoked to avoid them, and secure themselves
against them. Doubtless the serious thoughts of hellish pain while men live, is
one blessed way to keep them from those torments, when they come to die.
Another gives this pious counsel, Let us earnestly importune the Lord, that
this knowledge, whether the fire of Hell be material or not, be never
manifested to us by experience. It Is infinitely better, to endeavor the
avoiding Hell fire, than curiously to dispute about it. Look, as there is
nothing more grievous than Hell: So there is nothing more profitable than the
fear of it.

But what difference is there between our common fire and Hell

I answer, a mighty difference, a vast difference. Take it

First, They differ in their heat: no heart can conceive, nor Rev. 14. 10.
Chap. 21. 8. The fire in a Lantskip is but ignis pictus a painted fire, and the
fire of Purgatory is but ignis fictus, feigned fire. Now what are these to Hell
fire?
which burns with fire and brimstone for ever and ever, shall the wicked of the
earth be cast. Infernal fire far exceeds ours (that are on our Hearths, and in
our Chimneyes) in degree of heat and fierceness of burning. Our fire has not
that terrible power to scorch, burn, torment, as the fire of Hell has. Our
fire (as Polycarpus and others say) compared to Hell fire, is but like painted
fire upon the Wall. Now you know, a painted fire upon the Wall will not hurt
you, nor burn, nor affright you, not torment you, but the fire of Hell will
beyond all your conception and expression, hurt, burn, affright and torment
you. The fire of Hell for degrees of heat, and fierceness of burning, must
wonderfully surpass our most furious fires, because it is purposely created by
God to torment the creature, whereas our ordinary fire was created by God, only
for the comfort of the creature. The greatest and the hottest fires that ever
were on earth, are Alsted.
but Ice in comparison of the fire of Hell.

Secondly, There are unexpressible torments in Hell, as (though of shorter
continuance) than the united torments B^llarm. de Parg. l. 2. c. 14 B^ll^rm. de
Ae^^r. Faeli. Sa^^^. l. 1. c. 11.
that the earth can invent, though of longer duration. If the Popes Kitchen be
so warm, how hot is the Devils Furnace? A Poetical Fiction is but a Meiosis,
when brought to show the nature of these real torments: the lashes of Furies,
are but petty scourgings, when compared to the stripes of a wounded conscience:
Tytius his Vulture, though feeding on his Liver, is but a Flea-biting to that
Worm, whick gnaweth their hearts and dies not. Ixion his Wheel is a place of
rest, if compared with those Billows of Wrath, and tha^ Wheel of Justice, which
is in H^ll brought over the ungodly: the task of Danaus his Daughter, is but a
sport, compared to the tortures of those, whose souls are filled with
bitterness, and within whom are the arrows of the Al^ighry, the poison whereof
does drink up their spirits. Hell is called a Furnace of fire, which speaks
intolerable heat: a Matthew. 13. 42. Luke 16. 28. Matthew. 5. 25. and 5. 22.
place of torment, which speaks a total privation of ease. A Prison, which
speaks restraint. Gehenna (from the valley of Hinnom, where the unnatural
Parents did sacrifice the fruit o^ their bodies, for the sin of their souls, to
their merciless Idols) the which word, by a neighbor Nation, is retained to
signify a Rock, than the torture of which, what more exquisite? It is called a
Lake of Fire and Brimstone, than the torment of the former, what more acute?
than the smell of the latter, what more noisome? But,

Secondly, Our fire is made by the hand of man, and For Tophet is ordained of
old: yea, for the King it is prepared, he has made it deep and large: the pile
thereof is A River of Brimstone is never consumed by burning.
fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord, like a stream of Brimstone,
does kindle it: and therefore the breath of all the Reprobates in Hell shall
never be able to blow it out. Our fire is blown by an aerie breath, but the
infernal fire is blown by the angry breath of the great God, which burns far
hotter, than ten thousand, thousand Rivers of Brimstone. The breath of Gods
mouth, shall be both Bellows and fuel to the infernal fire: and therefore Oh
how terrible and torturing, how fierce and raging will that fire be. If but
three drops of Brimstone should fall upon any part of the flesh of a man, it
would fill him so full of torment, that he would not be able to forbear roaring
out, for pain and anguish. Oh how dreadful and painful will it be then, for
damned sinners to swimm up and down in a Lake or River of Fire and Brimstone
for ever and ever. There is no proportion between the heat of our breath, and
the fire that it blows. O then what a dreadful, what an amazing, what an
astonishing fire must that needs be, which is blown by a breath dissolved into
brimstone. Gods wrath and indignation shall be an everlasting supply to Hells
conflagration. Ah Sinners, how fearful, how formidable, how unconceivable will
this infernal fire prove! Surely, there is no misery, no torment to that of
lying in a torrent of burning Brimstone for ever and ever. Mark this infernal
fire is a fire prepared by God himself, to punish and torment all impenitent
persons and reprobate rebels: who scorned to submit to the Scepter of Christ.
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared Matthew. 25. 41.
for the Devil and his Angels. The wisdom of God has been much exercised in
preparing and devising the most tormenting temper for that formidable fire, in
which the Devil and his Angels shall be punished for ever and ever. Not as if
it were not prepared also for wicked and ungodly men: but it is said to be
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; because it was firstly and chiefly
prepared for them. All impenitent sinners, shall have the Devil and his Angels
for their constant companions: and therefore they shall be sure to shear with
them in the extremity and inevitableness of their torments. But,

Thirdly, Our fire when it burns, it shines, it casts a light. light as well
as heat in it, and that's our comfort. It has light to show it self to us, and
to our selves, and it has light to show others to us, and us to others, etc.
Some men can work, as well as talk by the light of the fire. Our fires have
their beams and rays, as well as the Sun: but the fire of Hell burns, but it
dos not shine, it gives no light at all Infernal fire has no light, or
brightness attending of it; Mat^h. 25. 30. Chap. 8. 12.
and therefore Christ calls it utter darkness, or outer darkness, that is,
darkness beyond a darkness. I have read of a young man who was very loose and
vain in his life, and was very D^e^^^lius. Basil speaking of Hell fire, says,
Vim comburendi retinet, illamina^di amisit. It retains the pro^erty of burning:
it has lost the property of shining.
fearful of being in the dark, who after falling sick, and could not sleep,
cried out, O^ if this darkness be so terrible, what is eternal darkness! H^ll
would not be so uncomfortable a Prison, if it were not so dark a Prison. Light
is a blessing that shall never shine into that infernal prison. In Jude, v. 6.
you read of chains of darkness. It would be a little ease, a little comfort to
the damned in Hell, if they might have but light and liberty, to walk up and
down the infernal coasts, but this is too high a favor for them to enjoy; and
therefore they shall be chained and staked down in chains of darkness, and in
blackness of darkness; that so they may fully undergo the scorchings and
burnings of Divine wrath and fury for ever and ever. In Verse 13. you thus
read, To whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. The words are an
Hebraism, and signify exceeding great darkness. Hell is a very dark and dismal
Region, and extreme are the miseries, horrors and torments which are there. The
Poets described the darkness of Hell by the Cimmerian darkness. There was a
Territory in Italy betwixt Baiae and Cumae where the Cimmerii inhabit, which
was so environed with Hills, and overshadowed with such hanging Promontories,
that the Sun never comes at it. The darkness Exodus 10. 21. The words are
figu^ative, importing extraordinary bl^ck darkness.
of Egypt, was such* a strong and horrid thick darkness, that it was palpable
it might be felt. Even darkness which may be felt. The darkness that is here
threatened, is called darkness that may be f^lt; either by way of an Hyperbole,
to signify what an exceeding great darkness i^ should be: or else because the
Air should be so thickne^ with gross mists, and thick foggy vapors, that it
might be felt; or else because this extraordinary darkness should be caused by
a withdrawment of the light of the celestial bodies, or by drawing a thick
curtain of very black clouds betwixt men's eyes and them. Yet this horrid
darkness was nothing to the darkness of Hell; the darkness of Egypt was but as
an over casting for three days, Exodus 10. 22, 23. And there was a thick
darkness in all the Land of Egypt three days. They saw not one another,
neither rose any from his place three days. For three days they were deprived
not only of the natural lights and lamps of Heaven, but of all artificial light
also. It Is possible that the vapors might be so thick and moist as to put out
their Candles, and all other lights that were kindled by them. It Is probable,
that they had neither light from Sun, Moon, or Stars above, nor yet from fire
or candle below: so that they were as blind men, that could not see at all, and
as lame men, that could not move from their places: and so they sat still as
under the arrest of this darkness, because they could not see what to do, nor
whither to go. God would teach them the worth of light, by the want of it. Some
think, that by that dreadful Judgment of thick darkness, they were filled with
that terror and horror, that they durst not so much as move from the places
where they were sat down. But after these three days of darkness were over,
the Egyptians enjoyed the glorious light of the Sun again. O but sinners are in
Hell, when they are in chains of darkness, when they are in blackness of
darkness, they shall never see light more. Hell is a house without light.
Gregory and all other Authors that I have cast my eye upon, agree in this, that
though our fire has light as well as heat; yet the infernal fire has only
heat to burn sinners: It has no light to refresh sinners; and this will be no
small addition to their torment. A Philosopher being asked, Whether it were not
a pleasant thing to behold the Sun? answered, that that was a blind man's
question. Surely life without light, is but a lifeless life. But,

Fourthly, Our fire burns and consumes only the body, it soul; but infernal
fire burns and torments both body and soul. Now the soul of pain, is the pain
of the soul, Matthew. 10. 28. And fear not them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to dest^oy b^th body
and soul in H^ll. If the Glutton in the historical Parable, Luke 16. 24.
who ^ad but one half of himself in Hell, viz. his soul, cried out, that he was
horribly to^m^n^ed in that flame. What tongue can express, or heart conceive,
how great the damneds torments shall be in Hell, when their bodies and souls in
the great day shall be reunited for ^orture. Beloved, it is a just and
righteous thing with God, that such bodies and souls that have sinned
(impenitently) together, should be tormented everlastingly together. To this
purpose, the Hebrew Doctors have a very pretty Parable, viz. That a man planted
an Orchard, and going from home, Pet. Mart.
was careful to leave such Watchmen, as might both keep it from strangers, and
not deceive him themselves: therefore he appointed one blind, but strong of his
limbs, and the other seeing, but a Cripple. These two in their Masters absence
conspired together, and the blind took the lame on his shoulders, and so
gathered the fruit, their Master returning, and finding out this subtilty,
punished them both together. Now so shall it be with those two sinful
companions, the 2 Cor. 5. 10. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10.
soul and the body in the great day of our Lord. With Simeon and Levi they have
been brethren in iniquity, and so shall be in eternal misery. As body and soul
have been one in sinning, so they shall be one in suffering. (only remember
this, that as the soul has been chief in sin, so it shall be chief in
suffering) But O Sirs, if a consumable body, b^ not able to endure burning
flames for a day; how will an unconsumable soul and body, be able to endure the
scorching flames of Hell for ever. But,

Fifthly, Our fire wastes and consumes whatsoever is the fire of Hell for
ever. They shall seek for death, but they Rev. 9. 6.
shall not find it. They shall desire to die, and death shall fly from them.
They shall cry to the Mountains to fall upon Rev. 6. 16, 17.
them, and to crush them to nothing. They shall desire that the fire that burns
them, would consume them to nothing: That the Worm that feeds on them, would
gnaw them to Ma^k 9. 44, 46, 48.
nothing: that the Devils which torment them, would tear them to nothing. They
shall cry to God who first made Genesis 1. 26.
them out of nothing, to reduce them to that first nothing from whence they
cam^: But he that made them, will not have mercy on them; he that f^rmed them,
will not show them so much Isa. 27. 11.
favor. Semper comburentur, nunqu^m consumentur; they shall alway^s be burned,
but never consumed. Ah how well Aug. This fire is poena inconsumpta. Jerome.
would it be with the damned, if in the fire of Hell they might be consumed to
ashes. But this is their misery, they shall be ever dying, and yet never dye:
their bodies shall be always a burning, but never a consuming. It Is dreadful
to be perpetual fuel to the flames of Hell. What misery to this? For infernal
fire, to be st^ll a preying upon damned sinners, and yet never making an end of
them. The two hundred and fifty men that usurped the Priests Office, were Numb.
16. 35.
consumed by that fire that came out armed from the Lord against them. And the
fire that Elijah, by an extraordinary 2 Kings 1. 10. 12.
spirit of prayer, brought down from heaven upon the two Captains, and their
fifties consumed them. The fierce and furious fl^mes of hell, shall burn, but
never annihilate the bodies of the damned. In hell there is no c^ssation of
fire burning, nor of matter burned. Neither flames nor smoke Hell torments
punish, but not finish the bodies of men. Prosper.
shall consume or choke the impenitent; both the infernal fire, and the burning
of the bodies of Reprobates in tha^ fire, shall be preserved by the miraculous
power and providence of God. The soul through pain and corruption will lose its
beat vivere, its happy being; but it will not lose its essentialiter vivere,
its essential life or being. But,

Sixthly and lastly, Our fire may be quenched and extinguished. the Suns b^ams,
and often they die and go out of themselves. Our fire is maintained with wood,
and put out with water: but the fire of hell never goes out, it can never be
quenched. It is an everlasting fire, an eternal fire, an Jerome was out when he
said, I^fe^num nihil esse, nisi conscie^tiae horror^m. And (...) was ou^, who
held, that the^e are no other Hell furies, than the stings of conscience.
unquenchable fire. In Mark 9. from v. 43. to v. 49. this fire is no less than
five times said to be unquenchable; as i^ the Lord could never speak enough of
it. Beloved, the Holy Ghost is never guilty of idle repeti^ions: but by these
frequent repetitions the Holy Ghost would teach men to lo^k about them, and to
look upon it as a real thing, and as a serious thing, and not sport themselves
with unquenchable flames; nor go to Hell in a dream. Certainly the fire into
which the damned shall be cast, shall be without all intermission of time or
pun^shment. No tear^, nor blood, nor time, can extinguish the fire of hell.
Could every damned sinner weep a whole Ocean, yet all those Oceans together,
would never extinguish one spark of inf^rnal fire. The damned are in
everlasting chains of darkness; they are under the vengeance of eternal fire:
they are in blackness of darkness for Jude 7. 6.
ever. The smoke of their torment ascend^d for ever and ever, and they shall
have no rest day nor night. The damned in hell Rev. 14. 11. O that word Never,
said a poor despairing creature on his deathbed, breaks my heart. They are
lying Histories that ^ell us, that Trajan was delivered out of Hell, by the
prayers of Gregory; and Falconella, by the prayers of Teclaes.
would fain die, but they cannot; Mors sine mor^e, they shall be always dying,
yet never dead; they shall be always a consuming, yet never consumed. The
smoke of their Furnace asc^nds for ever and ever. Aeternis puni^ntur poenis.
They shall be everlastingly punished, says Mollerus on Psalm. 9. 17. And
Musculus on the same Text says, Animi impiorum cruciatibus d^bitis apud
inferos punientur. The souls of the ^ngodly shall be punished in hell with
deserved torments. Vbi per mi lia millia annorum cruciandi, nec in seculo
seculorum liberandi, says August. Myriades of years shall not determine or put
a period to their sufferings. Plato could say, that who ever are not expiated,
but profane; shall go into hell to be tormented for their wickedness, with the
greatest, the most bitter and terrible punishments, for ever in that prison of
hell. And Trismegistus could say, That souls going out of the body defiled,
were tossed to and fro with eternal punishments. Yea, the very Turks speaking of
the house of perdition, do affirm, That they who have turned Gods Grace
Alcoran. Mahom. c. 14. p. 160. etc. 20. p. 198.
into wantonness, shall abide eternally in the fire of hell, and there be
eternally tormented. A certain Religious man going to visit Olympius, who lived
cloistered up in a Monastery near Jordan: and finding him cloistered up in a
dark Cell, which he thought uninhabitable, by reason of heat, and swarms of
Gnats and Flies; and asking him, how he could endure to live in such a place:
he answered, All this is but a light matter, that I may escape eternal
torments: ^ can endure the stinging of Gnats, that I might not endure the
stinging of conscience, and the gnawing of that Worm that never dies: this heat
thou think^st gri^vous. I can easily endure, when I think of the eternal fire
of Hell: these sufferings are but short, but the sufferings of h^ll are
eternal. Certainly infernal fire is neither tolerable nor terminable. The
extremity and eternity of hellish torments, is set forth by the Worm that never
dies. Christ at the close of his Sermon makes a threefold repetition of this
Worm, Mark 9. 44. Where their Worm dies not. And again, ver. 46. Where their
Worm dies not. And again ver. 40. Where their Worm dies not, and their fire
goes not out. Certainly those punishments are beyond all conception and
expression, which our Lord Jesus does so often inculcate within so small a pace.

In Hell there is nothing heard, but yells and cries: A Pentelogia dolor inferni.

In Hell the Fire never slacks, nor Worm never dies.
But where this Hell is placed (my Muse) stop there.
Lord show me what it is, but never where.
To Worm and Fire, to torments there
No term he gave, they cannot wear. Prudentius the Poet.

If after so many millions of years, as there be drops in the Ocean, there
might be a deliverance out of hell; This would yield a little case, a little
comfort to the damned: O but this word Eternity, Eternity, Eternity, this word
Everlasting, Everlasting, Everlasting, will even break the hearts of the damned
in ten thousand pieces. There is scarce any pain or torment here on earth, but
there is ever some hope of ease, mitigation, or intermission, there is some
hope of relief or delivery, but in hell the torments there, are all easeless,
remediless and endless. Here if one fall into the fire, he may like a brand be
pulled out of it, and saved; but out of that fiery Lake, there is no
redemption. That Majesty that the sinner has offended and provoked, is an
infinite Majesty. Now there must be some proportion betwixt the sinners sin,
and his punishment and torment. Now the sinner being a finite creature, he is
not capable of bearing the weight of that punishment or torment that is
intensively infinite, because it would be his abolishing or annihilating; and
therefore he must bear the weight of that punishment or torment that is
extensively infinite; namely, duratione infinita, infinite in the continuance
and endurance. What is wanting in torment, must be made up in time. Everlasting
Fire and everlasting punishment in the New Testament, Matthew. 25. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7,
8, 9, 10, etc. Vide August. l. 21. c. 23. etc. 24. de civitate Dei.
is directly opposed to eternal life; to that blessed state of the righteous
which will never have an end. And therefore according to the Rules and Maxims
of right reason, does necessarily import a punishment of the same duration,
that the reward is. Now the Reward of the Saints in that other world, is
granted on all hands to be everlasting, to be eternal; and therefore the
punishment of the damned, cannot be but everlasting and eternal too. The Rewards
of the Elect shall never be ended; therefore the punishment of the damned shall
never be ended: because as the mercy of God is infinite toward the elect, so
the Justice of God is infinite toward the Reprobate in hell: The Reprobate
shall have punishment Drexel.
without pity, misery without mercy, sorrow without succor, crying without
compassion, mischief without measure, and torment without end. All men in
misery comfort themselves with hope of an end: The Prisoner, with hope of a
Jail-deliver: the Mariner, with the hope of his arrival in a safe harbor:
the Soldier, with hope of victory: the Prentice, with hope of liberty; the
Gally-slave, with the hope of ransom: only the impenitent sinner has no hope
in hell. He shall have end, without end; death without death: night without
day: mourning without mirth: sorrow, without solace: and bondage, without
liberty. The damned shall live as long in hell, as God himself There is not a
Christian which does not believe the fire of he^l to be everlasting Dr. Jackson
on the Creed, l. 11. c. 23.
shall live in heaven: their imprisonment in that Land of darkness, in that
bottomless pit, is not an imprisonment during the Kings pleasure; but an
imprisonment during the everlasting displeasure of the King of Kings. Suppose
(say some) that the whole world were turned to a Mountain of Sand, and that a
little Wren should come every thousandth year, and carry away from that heap
one grain of sand, what an infinite number of years (not to be numbered by all
finite beings) would be spent and expired, before this supposed Mountain could
be fetched away. Now if a man should lie in everlasting burnings so long a time,
and then have an end of his woe; it would administer some ease, refreshment and
comfort to him. But when that immortal Bird shall have carried away this
(supposed) Mountain a thousand If the fire of Hell were terminable, it might
then be tolerable: but being endless, it must needs be easeless and ^emediless.
We may well say of it, as one does, O killing life, Oh immortal death! Bellar.
de art moriendi, l. 2. c. 3.
times over and over: alas, alas, man shall be as far from the end of his
anguish and torment, as ever he was. He shall be no nearer coming out of hell,
than he was the very first moment that he entered into hell. Suppose (say
others) that a man were to endure the torments of hell, as many years and no
more, as there be sands on the Seashore, drops of water in the Sea, Stars in
heaven, leaves on the trees, piles of grass on the ground, hairs on his head,
yea, upon the heads of all the sons of Adam, that ever were, or are, or shall
be in the world, from the beginning of it to the end of it: yet he would
comfort himself with this poor thought, Well, there will come a day, when my
misery and torment shall certainly have an end. But woe and alas, this word
Never, Never, Never, will fill the hearts of the damned with the greatest
horror and terror, wrath and rage, amazement and astonishment. Suppose, say
others, that the torments of hell were to end, after a little Bird should have
emptied the Sea, and only carry out her Bill full once in a thousand years.
Suppose, say others, that the whole world, from the lowest earth to the highest
heavens, were filled with grains of sand, and once in a thousand years, an
Angel should come and fetch away one grain, and so continue till the whole heap
were spent. Suppose, say others, if one of the damned in hell should weep after
this manner, viz That he should only let fall one tear in a hundred years; and
these should be kept together, till such time as they should equ^l the drops of
water in the Sea: how many millions of ages would pass, before they could make
up one River, much more a whole; and when that were done, should he w^ep again
after the same manner, till he had filled, second, a third, a fourth Sea, if
then there should be an end of their miseries, there would be some hope, some
comfort that they would end at last: but that shall never, never, never end.
This is that which si^ks them under the most tormenting terrors and horrors.

Drexel^ius makes this Observation from the words of our Savior, John 15. 6.
If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and it is withered, and
men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. Where he
observes, that the words do not run in the Future Tense, he shall be cast
forth, and shall be cast into the fire, and burned: but all in the Present
Tense, he is cast forth, is withered; men cast them into the fire, and they are
burned. This (says he) is the state and condition of the damned, They are
burned: that is, they are always burning: When a thousand years are past, as
it was at first, so it is still, they are burned: after a thousand thousand
years more, as it was before, so it is still, they are burned: If after
millions of years, the question was asked, What is now their state and
condition, what do they? What suffer they? how does it fare with them? there
can be no other answer returned, bu^ they are burned: continually, and
eternally burning. Socinians say, There will come a time, when the fallen
Angels, and the wickedst men, shall be freed from infernal torments. And
Augustine speaks of some such merciful men in Aug. l. 21. c. 17. etc. 18. c. 19
c. 20. c. 21. c. 22. de Civitate D^i.
his time. And Origin held and taught, that not only impenitent Christians, but
even Pagans and Devils after the term of a thousand years, should be released
out of Hell, and become as bright Angels in heaven, as they were before. But
these dangerous fancies, and ungrounded opinions fall flat before (the clear
evidence of) those sad and serious truths, that I have now tendered to your
consideration. And thus I have showed you the difference between our Fire and
H^ll fire.

Now O ye Citizens of London, who truly fear the Lord, and who are united to
Christ by faith, know for your everlasting comfort and support, that Christ has
secured you from infernal Fire, from everlasting Fire, from unquenchable Fire,
from eternal Fire, and from the Worm that never dies: as you may see clearly
and fully, by comparing the Scriptures in John 3. 17. 18, 36. Luke 1. 68, 69,
70, 71, 74. Romans 6. ult. Chap. 8. 1. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. 37. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22,
23. Chap. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57, 58. 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult. Rev. 20. 5, 6.
the Margent together. Christ by his blood has quenched the violence of
infernal flames, so that they shall never scorch you, nor burn you, hurt you,
nor harm you. Nebuchadnezzars Fiery Furnace, was a Type of Hell (say some) Now
look as the three Children (or rather Champions) had not one hair of their
heads sindged in that Fiery Furnace, so Hell Fire shall never singe one hair of
your heads. Your interest in Christ, is a noble and sufficient security to you
against the flames of Hell. Pliny says, that nothing in the world, will so
soon quench fire, as Salt and Blood: and therefore in many Countries where they
can get plenty of blood, they will use salt and b^ood, rather than Water, to
quench the Fire. If you cast water on the Fire, the Fire will quickly work it
out; but if you cast blood upon it, it will damp it in a moment. O Sirs,
Christ's blood has so quenched the flames of Hell, that they shall never be able
to scorch or burn those souls that are interested in him. The effusion of
Christ's blood is so rich and available (says my Author) Leo de Pas. Sermon. 12.
c. 4.
that if the whole multitude of captive sinners would believe in their
Redeemer, not one should be detained in the Tyrants Chains. All those spots
that a Christian finds in his own heart, shall first or last, be washed out in
the blood of the Lamb. 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses
us from all our sins. Now such as are washed and cleansed from their sins in
the blood of Jesus, such shall never experimentally know, what everlasting
burnings, or a devouring Fire means. Such as are washed in Christ's blood, needs
no purifying by Hells flames. Pliny says of Polium, that it is a preservative
against Serpents. S^re I am, that the blood of Christ is an effectual
preservative against all infernal Serpents and infernal torments.

You believing Citizens, who have set up God as the object N^ro ha^l a Shirt
made o^ a Salamanders ^kin, so that i^ he did walk through the fire in it, it
would keep him from burning. O Sirs, Christ is the true Sa^amanders skin, that
will certainly keep every gracious soul from burning in everlasting flames.
of your fear, and whose hearts are enflamed with love to Christ; know for your
everlasting refreshment, that Christ has freed you, and secured you from
everlasting Fire, from unquenchable Fire, from eternal Fire; and therefore bear
up sweetly, bear up cheerfully under that Fiery dispensation that has past upon
you. What is the burning of your houses, and substance, to the burning of
bodies and souls in Hell? What was the Fire of London, to infernal Fire? What
is a Fire of four or five days continuance, to that everlasting Fire, to that
unquenchable Fire, to that eternal Fire that you have deserved; and that
Free Grace has preserved you from. A frequent and serious consideration o^
Hell Fire, (as I have opened it unto you) and of your happy deliverance from
it, may very well bear and cheer up your hearts under all your greatest
sufferings by that dreadful Fire, that has turned beloved London into a ruinous
heap.

Sir, You have been a discoursing about hellish torments; but for the further
clearing up of the truth, we desire your serious Answer to this sad Question,
viz.

How will it stand with the unspotted Holiness, Justice and

I judge it very necessary, to say something to this important

First, Gods Will is the Rule of Righteousness, and therefore 1 Timothy 1. 15.
Genesis 18. 25.
the whole world. And shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? But,

S^condly, I answer, There is a Principle in man to sin Poenae singulorum
inaequales intention, Aqain.
poenae omnium aequales duratione. If the sinner should live ever, ^e would
dishonor God ever, and crucify the Lord of Glory ever, and grieve the Spirit
of Grace ever, and transgress a righteous Law ever; and therefore it is just
with God to punish such sinners for ever. If the sinner might live eternally,
^t si p^ccato^ ^ aeternum vi^^^^t in aeter^^m p^ccaret.
he would sin eternally, if he might live still, he would sin still. Though the
sinner loses his life, yet he dos not lose his will to sin. Sinners sin as much
as they can, and as long as they can; and did not the grave put a stop to their
lusts, (...) si v^li^ (...).
their hearts would never put a stop to their lusts. The sinner sins in his
eternity, and God punishes in his eternity. The sinner never loses his will to
sin; his will to sin is everlasting; and therefore it is but just with God, that
his punishment should be everlasting. A will to sin is sin in Gods account. God
looks more at the will, than at the deed; and therefore that being lasting, the
punishment must be so. The mind and intention of the sinner, is to sin
everlastingly, eternally: if the sinner should live always, he would sin
always; and therefore as one says, Quia men's in hac vita Gregory.
nunquam voluit carere peccato, justum est, and nunquam caret supplicio.
Because the mind of man in this life, would never be without sin, it is just
that it should never be without punishment in the life to come. Many of the men
of the old world lived eight or nine hundred years, and yet faith and
repentance was hid from their eyes: that patience, forbearance, long-suffering,
gentleness and goodness, which should 1 Pet. 3. 20.
have lead them to aspeedy repentance, to a serious repentance, to a thorough
repentance, to that repentance that was never to be repented of; was only made
use of to patronize their lewdness and wickedness. This is certain wicked men
left to themselves, will never be weary of their Peccant i^ aeter^o s^o, ergo
p^^i^^t^r in aeter^o Dei. August^ne. The sinner always sinned in his eternity,
therefore he shall always be punished in Gods eternity.
sins, nor never repent of their sins, and therefore God will never be weary of
plaguing them, nor never repent of punishing them. The sinner never leaves his
sin, till sin first leaves him: did not death put a stop to his sin, he would
never cease from sin. This may be illustrated by a similitude thus, A company
of Gamesters resolve to play all night, and accordingly they sit down to Chess,
Tables, or some other Game, their Candle accidentally, or unexpectedly goes
out, or is put out, or burnt out, their Candle being out, they are forced to
give over their Game, and go to bed in the dark; but had the Candle lasted all
night, they would have played all night. This is every sinners case, in regard
of sin, did not death put out the candle of life, the sinner would sin still.
Should the sinner live for ever, he would sin for ever; and therefore it is a
righteous thing with God, to punish him for ever in hellish torments. Every
impenitent sinner would sin to the days of eternity, if he might but live to
the days of eternity, Psalm. 74. 10. O God how long shall the adversary
reproach? Shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever. For ever and evermore;
or for ever and yet: (for so the Hebrew loves to exaggerate) as if the sinner,
the blasphemer, would set a term of duration longer than eternity to sin in.
The Psalmist implicitly says, Lord, if thou do but let them alone for ever,
they will certainly blaspheme thy name for ever and ever. I have read of the
Crocodile, that he knows no Maximum quod sic, he is always growing bigger and
bigger, and never comes to a certain pitch of Monstrosity so long as he lives.
Quam diu vivit crescit. Every habituated sinner would (if he were let alone) be
such a Monster, perpetually growing worser and worser. But,

Thirdly, I answer, That God against whom they have against an infinite
Majesty, and accordingly their Sin is (...) De^m (...) against an infi^ite
Majesty.
punishment must be infinite. Now because it cannot be infinite, in r^gard of
the degree, men being but finite creatures, and so no cap^ble of infinite
torments at one time: therefore their punishment must be infinite in the length
and continuance of it. What is wanting in torment, m^st be made up in time.
Every sin is of an infinite nature, because of the infinite dignity of the
person against whom it is committed; and therefore it deserves an infinite
pun^shment; which because it cannot be infinite secundum intentionem, in the
intention and greatness of it: It r^maineth that it should be infinite,
secundum durationem, in r^spect of the d^ration and V^de August. l. 21. c. 11.
de C^v^tate De.
^ontinuance of the same. Mark, all punishments o^g^t to be levied according to
the dignity of him, against whom the offense is committed. Words against common
persons, bear but common actions; words against Noble men, are scandala
magnatum, great sca^dals; but words against Princes, are Treason. So the
dignity o^ the person against whom sin is committed, dos exceedingly aggravate
the sin. To strike an inferior man, is matter of Arrest, but to strike a King,
is matter of death. Now what an infinite distance and disproportion, is there
between the Lord of Hosts and such poor crawling Worms as we are, he being
holiness, and we sinfulness; he fullness, and we emptiness; he omnipotency, and
we impotency; he Majesty, and we vanity; he (instar omnium) all in all, and we
nothing at all. Now to sin against such an infinite glorious Majesty, deserves
infinite punishment. But,

Fourthly, I answer, Though the act of sin be transient, A^ long as the guilt
of sin remains, punishments and torments will remain.
of pain. The guilt and stain of sin, of its own nature, and unpardoned,
endures eternally upon the soul; and therefore what can follow, but eternal
torments. The lasting continuance of sin, is remarkably deseribed by the
Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 17. 1. The sin of Judah is written with a Pen of Iron,
and with the point of a Diamond; it is graven upon the table of their hearts.
Not only written, but engraven that no hand can deface it. Slight not the
commission of any sin, it perishes not with the acting. The least vanity has a
perpetuity, nay, an eternity of guilt upon it. Sin leaving a blot in the soul,
brings the matter of Hell fire, is eternally punished, because there is still
matter for that everlasting fire to work upon. But,

Fifthly, I answer, Though death put an end to men's lives,

Sixthly, I answer, It is no injustice in God, to punish temporal Austin well
observes, are not to be measured temporis longitudine, Aug. de C^v^t. D^^, l.
1. c. 11.
by the length of time wherein they were done: but iniquitatis magnitudine, by
the foulness of the crime: and if so, then God is just in binding the sinner in
everlasting chains. We must remember, that God is a great and a glorious God,
and that he is an omniscient and an omnipotent God, and that he is a mighty,
yea, an almighty God, and that he is a ^oly and a just God, and that he is (out
of Christ) an incomprehensible, incommunicable, and very terrible God, and that
he is an infinite, eternal, and independent God. And Heb. 12. 29. 30.
we must remember, that man is a shadow, a bubble, a vapor, a dream, a base,
vile, sinful, worthless Worm. Now these things being considered, must we not
confess, that eternity it self, is too short a space, for God to revenge
himself on sinners in. But,

Seventhly and lastly, I answer, Such sinners have but what Deuteronomy. 11. 26, 27.
Chap. 30 15. Heb. 2. 2, 3. Chap. 10. 28, 29. John 3. 14, 15, 16, 17, 36. Chap.
1. 11.
and misery, eternal life, and eternal death; so that if they eternally
miscarry, they have none to blame but themselves, for choosing Hell rather than
Heaven, misery rather than glory, and eternal death, rather than eternal life.
Ah how treely, how fully, how frequently, how graciously, how gloriously, has
Christ been offered in the Gospel to poor sinners, and yet they would not
choose him, they would not close with him, they would not embrace him, nor
accept of him, nor enter into a marriage Covenant with him, nor resign
themselves up to him, nor part with their lusts to enjoy him: They would not
come to Christ, that they might have John 5. 40. Mat^h. 22. 2, 3, 4, 5. 2 Cor.
4. 3, 4.
life; they slighted infinite mercy, and despised the riches of Grace, and
trod under foot the blood of the everlasting Covenant, and scorned the offers
of eternal salvation; and therefore it is but just, that they should lie down in
everlasting sorrows. How can that sinner be saved, that still refuses
salvation? How can mercy save him, that will not be saved by mercy? yea, how
can Christ save such a man, that will not be saved by him? All the world cannot
save that man from going to Hell, who is peremptorily resolved, that he will
not go to Heaven. Sinners have boldly and daily refused eternal life, eternal
mercy, eternal glory; and therefore it is but just, that they should endure
eternal misery. And let thus much suffice for answer to the Objection.

But Sir, pray what are those duties that are incumbent upon I answer, They are
these that follow.

First, See the hand of the Lord in this late dreadful fire, acknowledge Lev.
26. 41. Mich. 7. 9.
and Piety, to acknowledge the Lord to be the Author of all personal or
National sufferings that b^fall us, Jer. 9. 12. Who is the wise man that may
understand this? for what the Land perishes, and is burnt up like a Wilderness
that none passes through. It is very great wi^dom to know from whom all our
afflictions come; and for what all our affl^ctions come upon us. God looks that
we should observe his hand in all our sufferings. Hear the rod, and who has
appointed it. God challenges all sorts of afflictions, as his own special
Administration, Mich. 6 9. See this Text fully opened in my first Epistle to my
Treatise on ^loset Prayer.
Amos 3. 6. Is there any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? I
form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil, I the Lord
do all th^se things, Isa. 45. 7. God takes it very hainously, and looks upon it
as a very great indignity that is put upon his Power, Providence and Justice,
when men will neither see nor acknowledge his hand in those sore afflictions
and sad sufferings, that he brings upon them: Of such the Prophet Isaiah
complains, Chap. 26. 11. Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see.
The hand, the power of the Lord was so remarkable and conspicuous in the
Judgments that were inflicted upon them, as might very well wring an
acknowledgement out of them, that it was the Lord that had stirred his wrath
and indignation against them: and yet they wilfully and desperately shut their
eyes against all the severities of God, and would not behold that dreadful hand
of his that was stretched out against them. O Sirs, God looks upon himself as
reproached and slandered, by such who will not see his hand in the amazing
Judgments that he inflicts upon them, Jer. 5. 12. They have belied the Lord,
and said it is not he: or as the Hebrew runs, he is not. Such was the Atheism
of the Jews, that they slighted divine warnings, and despised all those
dreadful threatenings (of the Sword, Famine and Fire) which should have lead
them to repentance, and so tacitly said, the Lord is not God: such who either
say, that God is not omniscient, or that he is not omnipotent, or that he is
not so just, as to execute the Judgments that he has threatened. Such belie the
Lord, such deny him to be God. Many feel the rod, that cannot hear it; and many
experience the smart of the rod, that don't see the hand that holds the rod;
and this is sad. How can the natural man without faiths prospective, look so
high, as to see the hand of the Lord in wasting and destroying Judgments. By
common experience we find, that natural men are mightily apt to father the evil
of all their sufferings upon secondary causes: sometimes they cry out, this is
from a distemper in nature, and at other times they cry out, this is from a bad
Air: Sometimes they cry out of the malice, Plots, envy and rage of men; and at
other times they cry out of Stars, Chance and Fortune, and so fix upon any
thing, rather than the hand of God. But now a gracious Christian under all his
sufferings, he overlooks all secondary causes, and fixes his eye upon the hand
of God. You know what Joseph said to his unnatural Brethren, who fold him Genesis
45. 7.
for a slave; Non vos, sed Deus; 'Twas not you, but God that sent me into
Egypt. Job met with many sore losses and sad crosses, but under them all, he
over-lookt all instruments, all secondary causes; he over-looks the Sabeans,
and the Chaldeans, and Satan, and fixes his eye upon the hand of God: The Lord
has given, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be Job 1. 21.
the name of the Lord. Judas, and Annas, and Caiaphas, and Pilate, and Herod,
and the bloody Soldiers, had all a deep hand in the sufferings of Christ, but
yet he over-looks them all, and fixes his eye upon his fathers hand. The cup
which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it. This cup was John 18. 11.
the cup of his sufferings. Now in all his sad sufferings h^ had still an eye
to his Fathers hand. Let us in all our sufferings write after this Copy that
Christ has set before us But of this I have spoken very largely already; and
therefore let this touch suffice here.

Secondly, Labor to justify the Lord in all that he has Jerusalem was laid
desolate, and the Wall thereof broken down, and the Gates thereof were burnt
with fire; Nehemiah justifies the Lord, Chap. 9. 33. Howbeit, thou art just in
all that is brought upon us, for thou N^h^m. 1. 4. So Ma^^^c^us the Emperor
justified God, when he saw his Wife and Children butchered before his eyes by
the Tray^or Phocas, and knew that h^mself should soon after be stewed in his
own Broth; cried out, Just art thou O Lord, and just are all thy Judgments.
have done right, but we have done wickedly. The same Spirit was upon Jeremiah,
Lam. 1. 1, 4, 8. How does the City sit solitary, that was full of people? H^w
is she become as a Widow? She that was great among the Nations, and Princ^ss
among the Provinces? How is she become tributary? The ways of Zion do mourn,
because none come to the solemn feasts: all her Gates are desolate; her Priests
sigh, her Virgins are afflicted, and she is in bitterness. The Lord is
righteous, for I have rebelled against his commandment. The same Spirit was
upon David, Psalm. 119. 75. I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are right, and
that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me. So Psalm 145. 17. The Lord is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. This Maxim we must live
and dye by, though we don't always see the reason of his proceedings. It Is
granted on all hands, that voluntas Dei est summa, perfectissima, and
infallibilis Regula divinae justitiae, and Deus sibi ipsi lex est. The will of
God is the chiefest, the most perfect and infallible Rule of Divine Justice;
and that God is a Judge to himself. Shall Genesis 18. 25.
not the Judge of all the earth do right? In this Negative question, is
emphatically employed, an Affirmative Position: which is, that God above all
others, must and will do right; because from his Judgment there is no appeal.
Abraham considering the Nature and Justice of God, was confidently assured,
that God could not do otherwise but right. Has God turned you out of house and
home, and marred all your pleasant things, and stripped you naked as the day
wherein you were born: yes. Why if he has, he has done you no wrong: he can
do you no wrong: he is a Law to himself: and his righteous Will is the Rule of
all Justice. God can as soon cease to be, as he can cease to do that which is
just and right. So Psa. 97. 2. Clouds and darkness are round about him;
Righteousn^ss and Judgment are the habitation of his throne. Clouds and
dar^n^ss, notes the terribleness of Gods administrations: though God be very
terrible in his administrations, yet righteousness and judg^ment are the
habitation of his Throne. It has been a day of Gods wrath in London, a day of
trouble and distress, a day of wasting and desolation, a day of darkness and
gloominess, a day of clouds Zeph. 1. 15.
and thick darkness, as it was once in Jerusalem: yet righteousness and
judgment are the habitation of his Throne: or as it may be translated, are the
foundation of his Throne. Gods Seat of Judgment, is always founded in
righteousness. So Daniel 9. 12. And he has confirmed his words which he spoke
against us, and against our Judges that judged us, by bringing upon us a great
evil: for under the whole heaven has not been done, as has been done upon
Jerusalem. Ver. 14. The Lord our God is righteous in all his works which he
does; for we obeyed not his voice. God is only righteous, he is perfectly
righteous, he is exemplarily righteous, he is everlastingly righteous, he is
infinitely righteous, and no unrighteousness dwells in him. There are four
things that God cannot do: Psalm. 92. 15. Job 36. 23.
1. He cannot lie. 2. He cannot die. 3. He ca'nt deny himself: Nor 4. He cannot
look upon iniquity, and not loath it: he cannot behold iniquity and approve of
it, or delight in it. God has a Soverainty over all your persons and
concernments in this world; and therefore he may do with you, and all that is
yours as he pleases: upon this account you ought to say, The Lord is
righteous, though he has laid your habitations desolate, and burnt up your
houses before your eyes. Its true, God has dealt severely with London; but he
might have dealt more severely with it: he might have burnt up Lam. 3. 22.
every house; and he might have consumed every inhabitant in Londons flames. He
might have made good that sad word upon them, They shall go from one fire, and
another fire shall Ezekiel. 15. 7.
devour them. The Cit^zens of London may say with good Ezra, God has punished
us less than our iniquities deserve: and therefore it highly concerns them to
say, The Lord is righteous. All that God does is good: you know what H^zekiah
said, 2 Kings 20. 19. Good is the word of the Lord. This was a hard word, a sad
word, that all his treasure should be carried unto Babylon, and his Sons also,
and made Servants there: and yet he says, Good is the word of the Lord. What
ever God does is good. God in that he is good, (says One) Lu^her in Psalm 120.
can give nothing, do nothing, but that which is good; others do frequently, he
cannot possibly. Upon this account also it concerns us to say, The Lord is
righteous, though our See more of this in my Mute Chr^stia^.
City be laid desolate. It Is better to be under a fiery Rod, than to be
wallowing in the mire of sin. It Is better that London should be laid desolate,
than that God should say, England farewell. That's a Christian worth Gold, who
can seriously, heartily and habitually say, The Lord is righteous, though all
our pleasant things are laid desolate.

I would say, the Lord is righteous; but by this fiery dispensation Now in
answer to this Objection, give me leave to enquire,

First, Whether your house was dedicated to the Lord by Deuteronomy. 20. 5.
service of sin, Satan, or the world, no wonder if the Lord has turned it into
a heap. But,

Secondly, Give me leave to enquire, Whether you had set See Psalm. 101.
Did you in good earnest resolve with Joshua, That you and your house would
serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 15. If not, no wonder, if the Lord has laid your
habitations desolate. But,

Thirdly, Give me leave to enquire, Whether you did labor Col. 4. 15. Salute
the Brethren, which are in L^odicea, and Nymphas, and the Church which is in
his house: that is, says Dr. Hammond, which meets together in his house. 1
Cor. 16. 19. The Churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla See Dr.
Hammo^d on this Scripture. V^d. B^sh. Dav Cotto^. Beza. Scult^^us, Ambros. etc.
salute you much in the Lord, with the Church that is in their house. Philemon
v. 2. And to our beloved Apphia, and Archippus our fellow Soldier, and to the
Church in thy house. Philemons house was a public meeting house, where the
faithful had their Assemblies; and so continued for many years after, as
Theodoret and others witnesses. Some understand this last Scripture, of the
Church which kept their Assemblies in Philemons house. Others understand it of
his household, which was as a little Church in his house. Romans 16. 5. Likewise
greet the Church that is in their house. Chrysostom by the Church in their
house, understands their Christian Family; who says he, were so godly, as to
make their whole house the Church. Origin interprets it, of the faithful and
ready Ministry of these servants of the Lord, in entertaining of the Saints in
their house. 3. Theophylact thinks it to be called the Church in their house,
because the faithful were entertained there. 4. But beside this, it seems
that their house was a place for the Saints to Assemble in: there the
Congregation used to come together. Martyr. 5. The last thing in their praise,
was that they had a Church in their house: either, for that their family, for
their godly order observed in it, seemed to be a Church, or else for the
faithful gathered together in their house, to celebrate their Assemblies; for
they might not have in most places the free use of their Christian Religion,
through the malice of the Jews on the one hand, and the rage of the Gentiles
on the other hand. Consult Acts 13. and 14. Wilson. In this great City of Rome
there were diverse Assemblies of Believers, which were held in some private men's
houses, where they might meet safest; the state then, and some hundred years
after, not permitting them any public Temples or Auditories to meet in: as our
English Annotators observe upon the place. In each particular family last
cited, there was a Church of Christ. Now have you burnt Citizens, made it your
business, to erect a Church of Christ in your particular families; if so, well
it is with you, though you have lost all. If not, do'nt wonder that God has
laid your houses desolate. Adam had a Church in his house: so had Abraham, and
Jacob, and Joshuah, and David, and Cornelius; well governed Families, may in
some sense be well reputed Churches. The house of George Prince of Anhalt, for
the good orders therein observed, is said to have been, Eccl^sia, Academia,
Curia. Ah London, London, it may be, there might have been more houses standing
within thy Walls, than now there is, if every particular house had been as a
particular Church to Christ. As for such houses where there were no exercises
of Religion; as for such houses where idleness, cheating, lying, cursing,
swearing, slandering, gameing, drunkenness, uncleanness and riotousness were
rampant; They were rather the Devils Chapel, than Christ's Church; and
therefore it was just with God to lay such habitations desolate. But,

Fourthly, Give me leave to enquire, whether you were 2 Timothy 2. 20. Number. 12. 7.
Josh. 1. 2.
Church; and his Church is his house: Heb. 3. 5, 6. And Moses verily was
faithful in all his house, as a servant: But Christ as a Son, over his own
house; whose house are we. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ye also as lively stones are built up a
spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. So 1 Timothy 3. 15. That thou may know how
thou ought to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church of
the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth. Prove. 9. 1. Wisdom has
builded her house, she has hewn out her seven pillars. Wisdom, (...)
chakmoth, the Hebrew word is Plural, wisdoms: Wisdoms has built her a house.
By Wisdoms, some understand the Trinity of persons, but most Col. 2. 3.
conclude, that by wisdoms is meant our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. The word is Plural for honor sake. As
Princes write, we command: the Lord Jesus Christ is said to be Wisdoms in the
Plural number, to note, that he is the sovereign and supreme wisdom, and that
he is instead of all wisdoms, and comprehends all wisdoms in himself: all the
world being ^ools in comparison of him. Wisdoms has built her a house. 1. Some
take this house to be the Humane nature of Christ; but that was not then built.
2. Others understand it of the work of Grace in man's soul: but this Gal. 5. 22,
23.
the Spirit commonly works in this house, by the Ministry of the word. 3.
Others by this house, understand Heaven, that upper house, that house of State,
in which Christ says there are many Mansions; but this cannot, because the
house in the Text, is such a house, to which Wisdom does immediately invite,
and call all her guests. But 4. and lastly, Others by house, understand the
Church of Christ on earth, for the Church Militant, is a house built up of many
lively stones: 1 Pet. 2. 5.
and with these I close. Now by these Scriptures, it is very plain, that Gods
house is his Church, and his Church his house. Now if you were enemies to Gods
house, if you hated his house, and designed and endeavored to pull down his
house; no wonder that the Lord has laid your Mat. 23. 37, 38. Zech. 12. 2, 3,
6, 9.
houses desolate. Such who cry out concerning his house, raze it, raze it, even
to the foundation thereof, Psalm. 137. 7. may one day want a house to live in.

It is observable, that in private houses, Christ his Apostles and particular
Churches, and Primitive Christians frequently used to meet (when the times were
dangerous, (Joh. 20. 19. Then the same day at evening, being the first day of
the week, Luke 24. 33.
when the doors were shut, where the Disciples were assembled for fear of the
Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and says unto them; Peace be unto
you. Verse 26. And after eight days, again his Disciples were within, and
Thomas with them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the
midst, and said, Peace be unto you. This was the usual manner of salutation
among the Jews, whereby they w^sh^d one another all happiness and prosperity.
The doors of the room where they were together were shut, for the more secrecy
and security, to avoid danger from the Jews, says D^ Hammond on the words,
Acts 1. 13, 14. And when they were come in, they went See the Dutch Annotations.
up into an upper room, where abode both Peter, and James, and John, and
Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, and Matthew, James the Son of Alpheus,
and Simon Z^lotes, and Judas the brother of James. These all continued with one
accord in prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary the Mother of
Jesus, and with his brethren, Acts 20. 7. And upon the first day of the week,
when the Disciples came together t^ break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready
to depart on the morrow, and continued his speech until midnight. Verse 8. And
See the Dutch Annotations and Diodation on Acts 20. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
here were many lights (Gr. many Lamps) in the upper chamber whither they were
gathered together. Verse 9. And there sat in a window a certain young man
named Eutychus being fallen into a deep sleep: and as Paul was long preaching,
he sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up
dead. Verse 10. And Paul went down and fell on him, and embracing him said,
trouble not your selves, for his life is in him. Verse 11. When he therefore
was come up again, and had broken bread, and eaten, and talked along while,
even till break of day; so he departed, Verse 12. And they brought the young
man alive, and were not a little comforted. Acts 5. 42. And daily in the
Temple, and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ,
Acts 12. 12. And when he had considered the Sea Dr. Hammond on the words, and
the English Annotations.
things, he came to the house of Mary the Mother of John, whose surname was
Mark, where many were gathered together praying. (or where many thronged to
pray, as it runs in the Original) Acts 20. 20. And how I kept back nothing that
was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have taught you publicly,
and from house to house. Acts 28. 30, 31. And Paul Vide Dr. Hammond of Acts 28.
30, 31.
dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all that came in
unto him: Preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concern
the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no man forbidding him. Luke 10. 38,
39. Now it came to pass, as they went, that he entered into a certain Village,
and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house. And she had a
sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus feet, and heard his word. Beloved
by these Scriptures, ^is most evident and clear, that our Lord Jesus Christ,
and his Disciples and Apostles, and those Christians that lived in their times,
did frequently meet in private houses, and there performed acts of public
Worship, viz. such as preaching, hearing, praying, breaking of bread, etc. How
the primitive Christians in those hot times of persecution, met in the nights,
and in woods, and houses, and obscure places, they best understand, who have
r^ad the writings of Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Austin,
Eusebius, Justin Martyr, Pliny, etc. But this to some being an unpleasing
Theme, I shall not enlarge my self upon it. Only remember this, that there was
never yet any Town, City, o^ Country, Kingdom, or Commonwealth, that did ever
fare the worse for an holy praying people. Frequent and fervent prayer, be it
in public or in private, in a Synagogue or in an upper Room, never did, Jam.
5. 17, 18.
nor never will bring misery or mischief upon those places, where such
exercises are kept up. Such Conventicles of good fellowship (as some call them)
where there is nothing but swearing and cursing and carousing and gaming, and
all manner of filthiness and profaneness, are the only Conventicles that bring
desolating Judgments upon Princes, People and Nations, as is most evident
throughout the Scriptures. Take two texts for all: 1 Samuel 12. 25. But if ye
shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your Kings. When
Several hundred Scriptures might be produced, to make good the Assertion.
Remember what one Achan did, and what one Manasseh did, 2 Kings 21. 11, 12.
Eccles. 9. 18. One sinner destroys much good. O then what a world of good,
will a Rabble of sinners destroy!
Princes and people continue to do wickedly together, then they shall be
consumed together. Zeph. 1. 12. I will search Jerusalem with candles, and
punish the men that are settled on their lees; that say in their heart, the
Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil. Verse 13. Therefore their goods
shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation. Verse 17. And I will bring
distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they sinned
against the Lord; and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh
as the dung. Verse 18 Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to
deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath; but the whole Land shall be
devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance
of all them that dwell in the Land. Now if any of you whose houses are laid
desolate, have had your spirits imbittered and engaged against the poor people
of God, for practicing as Christ and his Apostles did; Then lay your hands upon
your mouths, and say, the Lord is righteous, though he has turned us out of
house and home, and laid all our pleasant things d^solate. Certainly all that
legal and ceremonial holiness of places which we read of in the Old Testament
did quite vanish and expire with the Types, when Christ who is the substance
(at which all those shadows pointed) came into the world. I have neither faith
to believe nor any reason to see, that there is in any separated or consecrated
places for Divine Worship, any such legal or ceremonial kind of holiness, which
renders Duties performed there, more acceptable M^r^. ^n Rad. (...) pag^.
unto God, than if performed by the same persons and in the like manne^ in any
other places. Doubtless Christ by his coming in the flesh, has removed all
distinction of places through legal holiness: this is clear by the Speech of
our Savior to the Samaritan woman, concerning the abolishing of all
distinction of places for Worship through a ceremonial holiness, John 4. 21.
Jesus says unto her, woman believe me, the hour comes when ye shall neither
in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father. The public Worship
of God was now to be restrained to no place, as formerly it was to the Temple
at Jerusalem. That is to no place for its ceremonial holiness, which may render
the parts of Divine Worship more acceptable to God, than if performed
elsewhere. Because those Types which sanctified the places form^rly, were now
to be taken away, when Christ the substance was come. And the body of the
Ceremonial Worship, being now to expire, and the partition wall taken down,
that the Gentiles might be admitted to worship God in spirit and in truth. It
could not possibly be, for these Reasons, That the true Worship of God should
be tied and fixed to any one such Temple as was at Jerusalem any more. The
Temple at Jerusalem was a mean of Gods Worship, and part of their Ceremonial
Service, and a Type of Christ; but our Temples (says my Author) are not a part
Wee^nes 1. Vol. Chr^st^an Synagogue. p. 110.
of the Worship of God, nor Types of the body of Christ. Neither are we bound
when we pray, to set our faces toward them. They are called places of prayer
only; because the Saints me^t there: and if the Saints meeting were not in
them, they were but like other common places. The Temple of Jerusalem
sanctified the meetings of the Saints; but the meeting of the Saints,
sanctifies our Temples. Herod's Temple at Jerusalem was so set on fire by Titus
his Soldiers, that it could not be quenched by the industry of man; and at the
same time Apol^o's T^mple at Delphi was utterly overthrown by Earthquakes, and
Thunderbolts, and neither of them could ever since be repaired. The
concurrence of which two Miracles (says mine Author) evidently shows, Godw.
A^tiq. H^b.
that the time was then come, when God would put an end both to Jewish
Cer^monies, and H^athenish Idolatry; that the King^om of his Son might be the
better established. The time of Christ's death and passion was the very time
that God in his eternal counsel, had set for the abrogation of the Ceremonial
Law, and all ceremonial holiness of places. As soon as ever Christ had said, It
is finished, and had given up John 19. 30.
^he ghost, immediately the Vail of the Temple was rent from the top to the
bottom: and from that very hour there Matthew. 27. 51.
was no more holiness in the Temple, than in any other place. By the death of
Christ all religious differences of places is taken away: So that no one place
is holier than another. Before the coming of Christ, the whole Land of Canaan
(because it was a Type of the Church of Christ, and of the Kingdom of Heaven)
was esteemed by Gods people, a better and holier place, than any other in the
world. And upon that ground among others, Jacob and Joseph were so Genesis 47. 29,
31. Chap. 49. 29.
desirous to be buried there. And in the Land of Canaan, some places are said
to have been more holy than others, viz. Such as wherein God did manifest
himself in a special and sensible manner. So the place where Christ appeared to
Moses in the fiery Bush, is called Holy Ground: and so was that wherein he
appeared to Joshua. And the Mount Exodus 3 5. Josh. 5. 15. 1 Pet. 1. 18.
whereon Christ was transfigured, is called by Peter the Holy Mount. But these
places were no longer accounted holy, than during the time of this special
presence of the Lord in them. So Jerusalem was called the Holy City: yea, at
the very moment Matthew. 4. 5. Chap. 27. 53.
of Christ's death, it is called the Holy City; because it was a City set apart
by God for a holy use, a City where he was daily worshipped; a City that he had
chosen to put his name upon. Though Jerusalem was a very wicked City, yea the
wickedst City in all the world (counting the means they enjoyed) yet it is
called the Holy City: and so doubtless in respect of separation and dedication,
it was h^lier than any other City or place in the world besides. So the Temple
in Jerusalem is nine times called the Holy Temple; Psalm. 5. 7. 11. 4. 65. 4.
79. 1. 138 2. Jonah 2. 4, 7. Mich. 1. 2. Hab. 2. 20.
because it was a more holy place, than any other place in Jerusalem. Now mark,
though all the parts of the Temple were holy; yet some places in it were holier
than other some. This may be made evident three ways. First, There was a place
where the people stood separated from the Priests, Luke 1. 10. And this was so
holy a place, that Christ would not suffer any to carry any vessel through it.
Ma^k 16. 11. And Secondly, There was a place where the Priests executed their
Ministry, which was holier than that that the people stood in, and is therefore
called the Holy Place, Lev. 16. 30. And Thirdly, There was a place which the
High Priest might only enter into, and that but once a year, an^ that is called
the Holy of Holies, the holiest place of all, Heb. 9. 3. But now since the
death of Christ, there is no place in the world, that is holier than other. The
prayer of faith is as powerful and as prevalent with God in one place, as in
another Paul describes the faithful to be such, as call upon 1 Cor. 1. 2. 1 Timothy 2. 8. Matthew. 18. 20.
God in every place. And I will says he, that men pray every where. And where
two or three (says Christ) are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them. That every place should be free for the people of God to worship
the Lord in, was foretold by the Prophets, as a singular priv^l^dge, that
should come to the Church in the days of the Gospel, Zeph. 2. 11, And men
shall worship him, every one from his place; even all the Isles of the Heathen.
That is, all Count^^ys* though not encompassed with the Sea; for the Jews
^a^l^d ^ll L^^ds Islands, whither they could not come, but by Wa^^r. M^n should
worship, not only at Jerusalem, as o^^^, but in all pl^ces: They should lift up
pure hands and hearts, without wrath or doubting, both in Church and 1 Timothy 2.
8.
Chamber: any place whatsoever shall be a sufficient Oratory, so that God be
worshipped in Spirit, and in truth, Mal. 1. 11. For from the rising of the Sun,
even to the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles,
and in every place (not in Judaea only) incense shall be offered unto my name,
(Here the Prophet frames his words to the capacity of the people, and by the
Altar and Sacrifices, he means the spiritual service of God, which should be
under the Gospel, when an end shall be put to all these Legal Ceremonies by
Christ's only Sacrifice) and a pure offering: for my name shall be great among
the Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts. The poor bl^nd b^sotted Jews thought,
that God was so ty^d to them; that if they did not worship him at Jerusalem, he
would have no service nor worship in the world. But God t^lls them, that they
were under a very high mistake, for he would take care of his own name and
glory For from the rising of the Sun, even to the going down of the same, my
name shall be great (that is, the knowledge of it, and of the right worship of
it) among the Gentiles (this is an excellent Prophecy of the cutting off the
Gentiles) and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name. My Worship,
says God, shall not be confined to Judae^, or Jerusalem, See Isa. 66. 19, 20.
Chap. 60. 8. and Chap. 19. 19.
or the Temple, but in every place I will have a people that shall worship me,
and that shall be still offering of prayers and praises, and thanksgivings to
me. Christ by his death has taken away all difference of places: And indeed it
was but necessary, that when the body was come, the shadow should cease. Yea,
since Christ's death, all difference of persons is taken away: For in every
Nation under heaven, such Act. 10. 34, 35. Gal. 3. 28.
as fear God and work righteousness, are accepted of him. There is neither Jew
nor Greek, there is neither bend nor free: there is neither male nor female,
for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And therefore all difference of places must
needs also be taken away, for this difference of places was as a partition wall
between the Jews and the Gentiles. Now mark, since the Ephesians. 2. 14, 15.
destruction of the Temple and City of Jerusalem, the Lord has not sanctified,
any other place in the world, or consecrated it to a more holy use than the
rest, and it is only Gods institution and word, that can make any thing, or any
1 Timothy 4 4 5.
place holy. Nothing can make any place or any thing else holy, but the
Ordinance and institution of God. It is Judaisme, it is a denying of Christ to
be come in the flesh, to hold or affirm, that one place is holier than another.
I know the Papists put more holiness in some plac^s than they do in others: for
they hold that it is more advantagio^s (...) the dead, to be buried in the
Churchyard, than out of it. And in the Church, more than in the Churchyard;
and in Chancel, more than in the Church; and n^ar the high Al^ar, more than in
any other place of the C^ancel: and all out of a superstitious conceit, that
these places are consecrated and hallowed, that they are holier then other
places are. But Christians that live under a bright shining Gospel understand
the folly and vanity of these men's spirits, principles and practices. Such as
are wise in heart, know that since Christ by his death has taken away all
religious difference of places: England is as holy as Canaan, and London as
Jerusalem, and our houses as the Temple. Ne. 12 27, 28. Psalm. 30. Title, A
Psalm and So^g at the D^dication of the house of David. While the Ark brought
the Plague, every one was glad to be rid of it; but when it brought a blessing
to Obed-Edom, they looked upon it as worthy of entertainment. Many will own a
blessing*Ark a prosperous truth: but he is an Ob^d-Edom indeed, that will own a
persecuted, tossed, banished Ark.


Under the Law they were wont to dedicate their houses, and consecrate them to
God, before they dwelt in them: Deuteronomy. 20. 5. And the Officers shall speak unto
the people, saying, what man is there that has built a new house, and has not
dedicated it? (by Prayers, Hymns, and other holy solemnities) let him go and
return to his house, lest he dye in the battle, and another man dedicate it.
Now thou^h this were done in those times, with sundry ceremonies which are now
abolished; yet the equity of the duty still remains. And doubtless the best way
for a man to bring down a blessing upon himself and his house, is to dedicate
himself and his house to God, 2 Samuel 6. 11. And the Ark of the Lord continued
in the house of Obed-Edom the Hittite three months: and the Lord blessed
Obed-Edom and all his household. Vers^ 12. And it was told King David, saying,
the Lord has hlessed the h^use of Obed-edom, and all that pertains to him,
because of the Ark of God. In this Scripture you see, that when men do any
thing, to the advancement of Religion, or to the furtherance of Gods Worship
and Service; he takes it kindly at their hands. The meanest service that is
done to Christ or his Church, has a Patent of eternity. Again, in this
Scripture you may run and read a real retribution and remuneration. God dos not
put off Obed-Edom with a fine Feather, or with empty favors, or Court
compliments, but he really blesses him and all his household. Obed-Edom had been
at some cost and charge, in giving entertainment to Gods Ark; but God defrayes
all the charges, and pays him abundantly for his kind entertainment, with
interest upon interest. No man ever gave the Gospel a nights lodging, that has
been a loser by it. God will pay all such with use and principal, who do any
thing to the furtherance of his worship and service. Hiram shall have Corn and
Oil, for affording materials to the building of the Temple. Cyrus shall prosper
and be victorious, for breaking off the yokes that were about his peoples
necks, and restoring of them to their Christian liberty. Egypt fared the
beeter, for entertaining the Pa^riarchs; God stored that Country with great
plenty and variety of outward blessings; because his Church was to sojourn
there. God blessed Obed-Edoms person and possession and family for the Arks
sake: the blessings that was upon Obed-Edom, was like the precious Ointment
that was shed upon Aarons head, and that ran down to the lowest skirts of his
garments. Every servant in Obed-Edoms family, tasted of Gods noble bounty; and
fared the better, for the Arks sake. Let men and Devils do their worst, God
will certainly bless their dwellings, who give entertainment Among all the
Lacedaemonians you could not have seen one drunken man among them, unless it
was their slaves. The Mahumetans forbid any of their Sect to drink Wine, under
pain of death. Their Mussulmans and Dar^isels affirmi^g, that there lurks a
Devil under every Grape.
to his Ark, to his people that desire to worship him in spirit and in truth.

O Sirs, this is, and this must be for a lamentation, that there are so many
Alehouses, and Gaming houses, and Whore*houses, that are usually stuffed with
vain persons, yea, with the very worst of the worst of men, both on the Lords
Day, and on other days. Certainly these houses are the very Suburbs and
Seminaries of Hell. Vbi fuisti? Where have thou been? apud inferos, in Hell,
said Erasmus merrily: comparing Tipling-houses to Hell. Doubtless they are the
Nurseries of all sin, and the Synagogue of Devils incarnate. In the
abovementioned houses, how ^otoriously is the name of God blasphemed, and how
shamefully are the precious fruits of the earth abused? and how many hundred
families are there impoverished? and how many thousand children and servants
are there empoysoned? and how is all manner of wickedness and lewdness there
encouraged and increased? But when, O when shall the Sword of the Magistrate be
turned against these Conventicles of Hell. Certainly the horrid wickednesses
that are daily committed in such houses, if not prevented (by a faithful,
zealous, and constant execution of the Laws in force) will arm divine venge^nce
against the Land. Magistrates should not bear the Sword of Justice in vain: For
they are Minist^rs of God to revenge and execute wrath upon them that do evil.
By their office they are bound to be a terror to evil doers, and encouragers of
them that do well; and O that all in Power and Authority, would for ever
resolve against being Satan's Drudges. Rev. 2. 10. Fear none of these things
which thou The Devil in Diocl^sia^, say some: the Devil in Trajan, say others.
For he reigned next after this Book was written, and was very cruel against the
Christians, delivering them over to prisons and death, and all to drive them
through fear from the profession of Christ.
shall suffer: behold, the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye
may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto
death, and I will give thee a crown of life. The Devil by his Imps and
instruments, whom he acts and agitates, the Devil by engaging the Civil and the
Military power of the world against the people of God, should so far prevail,
as to clap them up in prison. The Prison in this Text, notes (by a Synecdoche)
the adjuncts and consequences; as namely, torments, punishments, and all sorts
of Martyrdom. This one punishment, imprisonment (says Brightman) does contain
prescribings, confiscation of goods, banishments, slaughters, fires, rackings,
or whatsoever exquisite torment beside, as the story teaches. The Heathen
Emperors, with those wicked Governors, Officers and Soldiers that were under
them, were the great instruments in Satan's hand, to practice the greatest
cruelties upon the Saints in those days. Some they cast into Prisons; some
they banished; multitudes they slew with the Sword: some of the precious
servants of Christ, they beat with stripes to death, others they branded in
their foreheads: Others were tortured and racked. Yea, and many holy women in
that day had their breasts cut off: and others of them had their breasts burnt
with a hot Iron: and sometimes with Eggs roasted as hot as could be. These with
many other torments the people of God were exercised with, as all know, that
have read the lamentable stories of those sad times.

But you may s^y, Why then is the imprisonment of the Saints so ascribed to the
Devil, as if it were immediately acted by him. Behold, the Devil shall cast
some of you into prison.

1. To show what influence the Devil has in the acting of wicked men, so that
in effect their deed is his deed; they

2. It is to show us, that the Author, Original and fountain from whence all
the persecutions of the Saints do flow, is the Devil, who was a murder and a
liar from the beginning. John 8. 44.


3. It is to aggrevate the horribleness of this sin of persecution, as being a
main piece of the Devils business, what ever the instruments are.

4. It is to comfort and encourage the people of God to pa^ience and constancy
in all their sufferings for Christ, seeing that it is the Devil that is their
grand enemy, and that makes (in his instruments) the highest opposition against
them. A gracious man in the midst of all oppositions (as Chrysostoms said of
Peter) is as a man made all of fire walking in stubble, he overcom^^ and
consumes all oppositions; all difficulties are but whet-stones to his
fortitude. When Christians meet with great opposers and great oppositions, they
should say as that noble Soldier Paedarelus (in Erasmus) did to him that told
him of a numerous and mighty Army which was coming against him. (Tanto plus
gloriae reforemus quoniam eo plures superabimus) The number of opposers makes
the Christians conquest the more illustrious. It is very observable, that in
Dioclesians time, (under whom was the last and worst of the ten persecutions)
When Christian Ruffia.
Religion was more desperately opposed than ever, yet then it prospered and
prevailed more than ever. So that Dioclesian himself observing, that the more
he sought to blot out the name of Christ, the more legible it became: and the
more he labored to block up the way of Christ, the more passible As they said
once of the Graecia^s in the Epigramm whom they thought invu^nerable, We sh^ot
at them, but they fail not down, we wound them, but do'nt kill them. See Exodus
1. 10, 11, 12, 13. Acts 8. and Acts 14.
it became. And what ever of Christ he thought to root out, it rooted the
deeper, and rose the higher: thereupon he resolved to engage no further, but
retired to a private life. All the oppositions that the D^vil and his
instruments had raised against the Saints in all the ages of the world, has
not diminished, but increased their number. For the first three hundred years
after Christ there was a most terible perfecution. Historians tell us, that by
seven and twenty several sorts of deaths they tormented the poor people of God.
In these hot times of persecution, many millions of Christians were destroyed.
And yet this was so far from diminishing of their number, that it increased
their number: for the more they were oppressed and perfecuted, the more they
were increased. And therefore some have well observed, that though Julian used
all means imaginable to suppress them, yet he could never do it. He shut up all
their Schools, that they might not have learning; and yet never did learning
more flourish than then. He devised all manner of cruel torments, to terrify
the Christians, and to draw them from their holy faith: and yet he saw, that
they increased and multiplied so fast, that he thought it his b^st course at
last to give over his persecuting of the Saints, not out of love, but out of
envy, because that through his persecution they increased. This was represented
unto Daniel Dan. 2. 34, 35.
in a vision, Dan. 2. The Kingdom of Christ is set forth there by a little
stone cut out of the Mountain without hands (without art or industry; without
Engines, and humane helps) The stone was a growing stone, and although in all
the ages of the world, there have been many hammers at work to break this stone
in pieces; yet they have not, nor shall not prevail, but the little stone shall
grow more and more, till it becomes a great Mountain, and fills the whole earth.

And let this suffice for Answer to the first Objection.

I would justify the Lord, I would say he is righteous, though To this I
answer.

First, D^dst thou gain thy estate by just, or unjust ways

Secondly, Did you improve your estates for the glory of Cor. 1. 15. 2 Cor. 9.
6. Eccles. 11. 1. Gal. 6. 7, 8. Isa. 32. 20. Isa. 55. 10. Prove. 11. 18. Rev.
22. 12. But,

Thirdly, What Trade did you drive Christ-wards and Heaven-wards, and
Holiness-wards? If you did drive either The Stars which have least circuit, are
nearest the Pole, and men that are least perplexed with business, are commonly
nearest to God.
no Trade heaven-wards, or but a slender or inconstant Trade heaven-wards, and
holiness-wards, never wonder that God by a fiery dispensation, has spoiled your
Civil Trade. Doubtless there were many Citizens who did drive a close secret
sinful Trade, who had their by*wayes and back-doors; some to uncleanness,
others to merry meetings, and others to secret Gaming. Now if thou were one of
them that did drive a secret Trade of sin; never murmur because thy house is
burnt, and thy Trade destroyed, but rather repent of thy secret Trade of sin;
and wonder that thy body is not in the grave, and that thy soul is not a
burning in everlasting flames. Many there were in London, who had so great a
Trade, so full a Trade, so constant a Trade, that they had no time to mind the
everlasting concernments of their precious souls, and the great things of
Eternity. They had so much to There were many who sacrificed their pr^ci^us
^^me ^^ther to (...) the M^ni^t^r of sleep, or to Bacc^us the G^d of Wine, or
to (...) ^he Goddes^ (...) B^auty: (...) i^ all ^ere due to the B^d, the
Tavern, and the ^rothel-house. Numb. 22. 32. 2 Pet 1. 10.
do on Earth, that they had no time to look up to Heaven; as once the Dake of
Alva told the King of France. Sr. Thomas More says, there is a Devil called
neg^tiu^, business, th^^ carries more souls to Hell, then all the D^v^^s in
Hell beside. Many Citizens had so many Irons in the fire, and were cumbred
about with so many things, that the^ wholly neglected the one thing necessary:
and therefore it was but just with God, to visit them with a fiery Rod. Look,
as much earth puts out the fire; so much worldly b^siness puts out the fire of
heavenly affections. Look, as the earth swallowed up Korah, Dathan, and Abiram;
so much worldly business swallows up so much precious time, that many men have
no leisure to secure their interest in Christ: to make their calling and
election sure: to lay up treasure in Heaven; to provide for eternity: and if
this have been any of your cases who are now burnt up, it highly concerns you
to justify the Lord, and to say he is righteous, though he has burnt up your
habitat^ons, and destroy^d your Trade. It Is sad when a crowd of worldly
business, shall crowd God and Christ, and Duty out of doo^s. Many Citizens did
drive so great a Public Trade in their Shops, that their private Trade to
Heaven was quite laid by. Such who were so busy about their Farm and their
Merchandise, that they had See Luke 14. 16. 22.
no leisure to attend their souls concernments, had their City set on fire
about their ears, Matthew. 22. 5. But they made light of it (that is, of all the
free, rich and noble off^rs of Grace and mercy that God had made to them) and
went their ways, one to his farm, another to his Merchandise, Ver. 7. But when
the King heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his Armies (that is,
the Romans) and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their City. It is
observable, that the Exodus 20. 9. Vid^ Exodus 29. 38, 39. Numb. 28. 3. Deuteronomy. 6.
6, 7, 8.
Jews who were commanded six days to labor, were also commanded to offer
Morning and Evening Sacrifice daily. They had their Morning Sacrifice when they
entered upon their work; and they had their Evening Sacrifice when they ended
their work. Their particular callings did not steal away their hearts from
their general callings. The Jews divided the day into three parts, the first ad
Tephilla, orationem, W^emse Mor. Law. p. 223.
to prayer: the second ad Torah, legem, for the reading of the Law; the third
ad Malacha, opus, for the works of their lawful callings. Although they were
days appointed for work; yet they gave God his part, they gave God a share of
them every day. God who is the Lord of all time, has reserved to himself a
part of our time every day. And therefore men's particular callings ought to
give way to their general calling. But alas, before London was in flames, many
men's (Oh that I could not say most men's) particular callings swallowed up their
general calling. The noise is such in a Mill, as hinders all intercourse between
man and man: So many of the burnt Citizens, had such a multitude of worldly
businesses lying upon their hands, and that made such a noise, as that all
intercourse between God and them was hindered. Seneca one of the most refined
Heathens could say, I do not give, but only lend my self to my business. I am
afraid this Heathen will one day rise in Judgment against those burnt
Citizens, who have not lended themselves to their business, but wholly given up
themselves to their business, as if they had no God to honor, no souls to
save, no Hell to escape, nor no Heaven to make sure. But,

Fourthly, Job lost all, and recovered all again: he lost a David Compare the
first and last Chapters of Job together.
l^st all, and recovered all again. 1 Samuel 30. 18. And David recovered all that
the Amalakites had carried away, and David rescued his two wives. Ver. 19. And
there was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great, neither Sons nor
Daughters, neither spoil, nor any thing that they had taken to them. David
recovered all. Here the end was better than the beginning; but the contrary
befell the Amalekites, who a little before had framed Comoedies out of poor
Ziklags Tragoedies. In the beginning of the Chapter you may see, that David had
lost all that ever he had in the world. All the spoil that he Verse 1, 2, 3, 4,
5.
had taken from others, were gone, his Corn gone, his Cattle gone, his Wives
gone, and his City burnt with fire, and turned into a ruinous heap, so that he
had not a house, a habitation in all the world to put his head in: he had
nothing left him, but a poor, grieved, madded and enraged Army. The people
sp^ke of stoning of him: but what Verse 6.
was the event now? why David recovers all again. O Sirs, when a Christian is
in greatest distress, when he has Remember that of Zeno, who said, he never
sailed better, than when he suffered shipwreck.
lost all, when he is not worth one penny in all the world; yet then he has a
God to go to at last. David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. A
Christians case is never so desperate, but he hat still a God to go to. When a
Christian has lost all, the best way to recover all again, is to encourage
himself in the Lord his God. God sometimes strip^ his people of outward
mercies, and then restores to them again those very mercies that he had stripped
them off I have read a story of a poor man that God served f^ithfully, and yet
was oppressed cruelly; having all his goods taken from him by an exacting
Knight, whereupon in a melancholy humor, he persuaded himself, that God was
dead, who had formerly been so faithful to him, and now (as he thought) had
left him: It so fell out, that an old man met him, and desired him to deliver a
Letter into the hands of his oppressor: upon the receipt and perusal of which,
the Knight was so convinced, that immediately he confessed his fault, and
restored the poor man his goods; which made the poor man say, Now I see, that
God may seem to sleep, but can never dye. If God has taken away all: yet
remember, that God has a thousand thousand ways to make up all thy losses to
thee, which thou know not of; therefore do'nt murmur, don't fret, do'nt
faint, nor do'nt limit the Holy One of Israel. If thou made no improvement of
thy house, thy estate, thy Trade, then it is thy wisdom and thy work, rather to
be displeased with thy self for thy non improvement of mercies, than to be
discontented at that hand of Heaven, that has deprived thee of thy mercies.
Remember Oh ye burnt Citizens of London, that you are not the first that have
lost your all. Besides the instances already cited, you must remember what they
suffered in the tenth and eleventh Chapters of the Hebrews; and you must
remember that in the Ten Persecutions many thousands of the people of God were
stripped of their all: and so were very many also in the Marian days, who shrugs
or complains of a common Lot? It was grace upon the Throne, that thou enjoyedst
thy house, thy estate, thy Trade so long, and therefore it concerns thee to be
rather thankful, that thy mercies were continued so long unto thee, than to
murmur because thou art now stripped of all. But,

Fifthly, When all is gone, yet mercy may be near, and Hagars Bottle was empty,
the Well Genesis 21. 19.
of Water was near, though she saw it not. Mercies many times are never nearer
to us, than when with Hagar we sit down and weep, because our bottle is empty,
because our streams of mercy are dried up. The Well was there before, but she
saw it not, till her eyes were ^pened. Though mercy be near, though it be even
at the door, yet till the great God shall irradiate both the Organ and the
object, we can neither see our mercies, nor suck the breasts of mercy. Christ
the spring of mercy, the fountain of mercy, was near the Disciples, yea, he
talked with the Disciples, and yet they Luke 24. 15.
knew him not. Look, as dangers are nearest to wicked men when they see them
not, when they fear them not: As Haman Esther 6.
was nearest the Gallows, when he thought himself the only man that the King
would honor. And so when Sis^ra dreamed of a Kingdom, Jael was near with her
Hammer Judges 4.
and her Nail, ready to fasten him to the ground. And so when Agag said, Surely
the bitterness of death is past; Samuel 1 Samuel 15 32, 33.
stood ready with his drawn Sword to cut him in pieces in Gilgal before the
Lord. So when Pharaoh said, They are entangled Exodus 14. 3 Cha. 15. 9. 10.
in the Land, the Wilderness has shut them in; I will pursue, I will overtake,
I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw my
Sword, my hand shall destroy them. But presently God blows with his Wind and
the Sea covered them, and they sank as Lead in the mighty Waters. Soon after
Sennacherib had sent a Blasphemous Le^ter to King Hez^kiah, The Angel of the
Lord went forth, and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore
and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold Isaiah 37.
they were all dead corpse: and within five and fifty days after Sennacherib
himself was butchered by his own Sons. No Tobit. 1. 21.
sooner had the people, as profane Sycophants applauded Herod, and given him
the honor due to God; but he was smitten by the Angel of the Lord, or eaten up
of Worms, or with Vetmin: with Lice, as his Grandfather Herod had Act. 12. ^2,
23.
been before him. Roff^nsis had a Cardin^ls Hat sent him; but his head was cut
off before it came: the Ax was nearer his head, than his Hat. The Heathen
H^storian could not but observe, that as soon as Alexander the Great, h^d
summoned a Parliament before him of the world, he was summoned himself by
death, to appear before God in the other world. Now as you see by these
instances, that dangers are nearest the wicked, when they see them not, when
they fear them not; So mercies are very near to the people of God, when they
see them not, when they expect them not. The Israelites found it so in Asa his
time; and in Jebasaphats time; Psalm. 126. 2, 3. 2 Chronicles. 14. Chap. 20. Exodus
15. 2 Kings 19. Esther 6. 8. 1 Kings 17. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
and in Pharaohs time, and in Hezekiahs time; and in Esthers time; and in the
time of the Judges, as is evident throughout the Book of Judges. When there was
but a handful of Meal in the Barrel, and a little Oil in the Cruze, supply was
at hand. Her Barrel and Cruze had no bottom, who out of a little gave a little.
In all the Ages of the world, God has made that word good, Isa. 41. 17. When
the poor and needy seek water, and there is none; and their tongue saileth for
thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them.
Verse 18. I will open Rivers in high places, and Fountains in the midst of the
Valleys: I will make the Wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs
of water. Chrysostom observes, That it is very delightful to the Mother to have
her breasts drawn. Oh how much more then is it delightful to God, to have his
breasts of mercy drawn! O Sirs, look as many times the Mothers breasts are
drawn, and near the Child, though the Child sees them not: so Gods breasts of
mercy are many times drawn, and near his people, and yet they see them not.
Geographers wri^e, that the City of Syracuse in Sicily, is so curiously
situated, that the Sun is never out of sight. Certainly the mercies of God are
never out of sight, though sometimes the people of God are so clouded and
benighted, that they cannot see their mercies, though they are near them; yea,
though they stand before them. But,

Sixthly, I answer, That God many times by taking away David an Psa 71. 20, 21.
Absalom, and gave him a Solomon: he took from him a scoffing Michal, and gave
him a prudent Abagail. He took Genesis 24. 67.
away from Isaac his Mother Sarah, and made up his loss by giving of him
Rebeckah to wife. He took away much from Job, but laid twice as much in the
room, of all the mercies that he had stripped him off. The Lord many times takes
away small mercies, to make room for greater mercies; and many times takes away
great mercies, to make room for greater mercies, yea, the greatest of mercies.
But,

Seventhly and lastly, Though thou have lost all thy outward

1. Thou shall never totally or finally lose thy God: Hosea 2. 19, 20.

2. Thou shall never lose thy interest in Christ. Whatever thy outward losses
are, yet thy interest in Christ still holds good. Romans 8. 33. ult.

3. Thou shall never lose the Spirit of Grace, John 14. 16. And I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever.

4. Thou shall never lose the seed of Grace, the habits of Grace, 1 John 3. 9.
Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, (that is, does not give himself
over to a voluntary serving 1 Cor. 1. 8. Luke 22. 32.
of sin: he dos not make a Trade of sin: he sins not totally, finally,
maliciously, habitually, studiously, resolutely, wilfully, delightfully,
deadly, (...), he dos not make it his work to sin, he cannot follow his lusts,
as a workman follows his Trade) for his seed remains in him. The seed of
God, the seed of Grace is an abiding seed.

5. Thou shall never lose the forgiveness of thy sins (though thou may lose
the sense and assurance of thy forgiveness.) Jer. 31. 34. For I will forgive
their iniquity, and remember their sin no more, Mich. 7. 19.

6. Thou shall never lose thy interest in the Covenant of Grace, Psalm. 89. 30.
35. Jer. 31. 31. 38. Is^. 54. 10. Once in Covenant, and for ever in Covenant.

7. Thou shall never lose thy union with Christ, John 15 1. 6. In John 17.
Christ prayed, that we might be one, as he and his Father are one; not
essentially, nor personally, but spiritually, so as no other creature is united
to God. There can be no Divorce between Christ and the believing soul. Christ
hates putting away. Sin may for a time seemingly separate Mal. 2. 16.
between Christ and the believer; but it can never finally separate between
Christ and the Believer. Look, as it is impossible for the Leaven that is in
the Dough, to be separated from the Dough after it is once mixed; for it
turns Luther.
the nature of the Dough into it self; so it is impossible for the Saints ever
to be separated from Christ; for Christ is in the Saints, as nearly, and as
really, as the Leaven is in the very Dough. Christ and believers are so
incorporated, as if Christ and they were one lump. Our nature is now joined to
God by the indissolvable tie of the Hypostatical Union in the second Person:
and we in our persons, are joined to God, by the Mystical indissolvable bond of
the Spirit, the third Person. Our union with the Lord is so near, and so
glorious, that it makes us one Spirit with him. In this blessed union, the
Saints are not only joined to the Graces and 1 Cor. 6. 17.
benefits which flow from Christ, but to the Person of Christ, Romans 8. 32. 1
Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23.
to Christ himself, who is first given for us, and to us; and then with him, we
receive all other spiritual blessings and savours.

8. Thou shall never lose thy inward peace, either totally or finally. It Is
true, by sin, and Satan, and the world, and divine withdrawings, thy peace may
be somewhat interrupted, but it shall never be finally lost. The greatest
storms Psalm 30. 5. Mal. 4. 2. Isa. 9. 6. (...) Shalom: Under this Word, the
Jews comprehend all Peace, Prosperity, and happy Success.
in this life that beats upon a believer, will in time blow over, and the Sun
of Righteousness, the Prince of Peace will shine as gloriously upon him as
ever, John 14. 27. Peace I leave with you, (its bonum haereditamentum, a good
inheritance) my peace I give unto you: not as the world gives, give I unto
you. My peace I give unto you; that is, that peace with God, and peace with
conscience, that I have purchased with my blood, I give unto you. Men may wish
me peace, but it is only Christ that can give me peace. The peace that Christ
gives, is bottomed upon his blood; upon h^s imputed righteousness; upon his
Intercession, and upon a Covenant of Peace; and therefore it must needs be a
lasting peace, an abiding peace. When a Tyrant thus threatened a Christian, I
will take away thy house: the Christian replied, Thou can not take away my
peace. When the Tyrant threatened to break up his School, the Christian
answered, I shall still keep whole my peace. When the Tyrant threatened to
confiscate all his goods, the Christian answered, yet there is no praemunire
against my peace. When the Tyrant threatened to banish him out of his own
Country, the Christian replied, yet I shall carry my peace with me.

9. Thou shall never lose thy Title to Heaven, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little
flock; ((...), here are two Diminutives in the Original: the word translated
Flock, signifies a Little Flock; but that the exceeding littleness of it might
appear, Christ adds another word: so that the words in the fountain run thus,
Fear not little little flock. And indeed in all the Ages of the world, the
flock of Christ have been but little in their own eyes, and little in the
worlds eyes, and little in their enemies eyes, and but little in comparison of
that world of Wolves that has still surrounded them) for it is your Fathers
good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. You need neither fear the loss of
earthly things, or the want of earthly things; for you have a kind, a tender, a
loving Father, whose pleasure it is, to give you the Kingdom, that is, the
Heavenly Kingdom, that is prepared and referved for you.

10. and lastly, Thou shall never lose thy Crown of Life, Rev. 2. 10. James 1.
12. 1 Pet. 5. 4. 1 Cor. 9. 25.
thy crown of Glory, thy incorruptible crown, thy crown of righteousness. 2 Timothy 4. 8. Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but
unto all them also that love his appearance. A Crown is the top of Royalty.
Here it notes that everlasting glory that is l^id up for the Saints. Now this
Crown is called a Crown of Righteousness; partly, because it is purchased by the
righteousness of Christ; and partly, because he is righteous that has promised
it; and partly, because it is a just and righteous thing with God, to crown
them with glory at last, who have for his honor been crowned with shame and
reproach in this world; and partly, because they come to this Crown, in the use
of righteous ways and means. And this Crown is said to be laid up, to note our
sure and certain enjoyment of it, as the Greek word (...), dos import. And let
thus much suffice for Answer to this second Objection.

I would justify the Lord, I would say he is righteous, though my house be
burnt up, and I am turned out of all; but this troubles me, I have not an
estate to do that good that formerly I have done. I was once full, but the Lord
has made me empty: I was once Naomi; i. e. beautiful: but now God has made me
Ruth 1. 20, 21.
Marah; i. e. bitter; the Lord has testified against me, and the Almighty has
affl^cted me, and consumed me on every hand. I have fed the poor, I have
clothed the naked, I have received them that were in bonds: The blessing of him
that was ready to perish Job 29. 13.
came upon me; but now, I can do little or nothing for others; and this
troubles me. I answer, Thy condition is no lower, than was the condition Silver
and Gold have we none. Acts 3. 6. Salvian says, that Christ is Mendicorum
maximus, the ^reatest Beggar in the world, as one that shareth in all hi^
Saints necessities. Both Christ and his followers when they were in this world,
they were maintained by others. They had no Lands nor Lordships, but lived upon
others costs. But of this before; therefore let this touch suffice here. But,

Secondly, God many times in this life, repairs his peoples charity with
interest upon interest. Their scattering Matthew. 19, 27, 28, 29, 30. 2 Cor. 9.
6. to 14* Heb. 6. 10.
is their increasing: their spending is their lending: their layings out, are
but layings up for themselves, Prove. 11. 24. There is that scatters, and yet
increases. Verse 25. The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that waters,
shall be watered also himself. It is fabled of Midas, that what ever he
touched, he turned it into Gold. This is most true of Charity; what ever the
hand of Charity touches, it turns it into Matthew. 10. 42.
Gold (be it but a cup of cold water) nay into Heaven it self. I have read of
one, who having given somewhat to a poor man, and considering with himself,
whether he had not injured himself, by giving beyond his ability; presently
corrected himself with those thoughts, that he had lent it to one, that would
pay well again; and within an hour after, he had it restored above sevenfold,
in a way which he never thought of. However God may carry it toward his people
in this world, yet he will be sure to repay their charity in that other world.
It is storied of one Evagrius (in Cedrenus) a rich man who lying upon his
deathbed, and being importuned by Sinesius the Bishop, to give something to
charitable uses, he yielded at last to give three hundred pounds; but first
took Bond of the Bishop, that it should be paid him in another world
(according to the promise of our Savior with a hundred fold advantage) and the
very next night after his departure, he appeared to the Bishop, delivering the
Bond cancelled, and fully discharged; thereby acknowledging, that what was
promised was made good. It is probable, that the relation is fabulous. But this
is certain, viz. That one days being in Heaven, will make us a sufficient
recompense for whatsoever we have given, or do give, or shall give in this
world. But,

Thirdly, If the constant frame and disposition of your For if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to
that he has not. God prefers a willing mind, before a worthy work. God
measures all his people, not by their works, but by their wills. When the will
is strongly inclined and biased to works of charity, so that a man would fain
be a giving to the poor, and a supplying the wants and necessities of the
needy; but cannot for want of an estate; in this case God accepts of the will
for the deed. David had a purpose and a will to build God a house, and God took
it so kindly at his hands, that he dispatches 2 Chronicles 6. 8
an Ambassador to him, to tell him, how highly he resented his purpose and
good will, to build him a house The Widows will was in her two mites which she
cast into Gods Treasury; and therefore Christ sets a more honorable Mark ^2.
41, 42, 43. 44.
value upon them, than he dos upon all the vast sums that others cast in. Many
Princes and Que^ns, Lords and Ladies are forgotten, when this poor Widow, who
had a will to be nobly charitable, has her name written in letters of Gold, and
her charity put upon record for all eternity. The King of Persia did lovingly
accept of the poor man's handful of water, because his good will was in it, and
put it into a Golden Vessel, and gave the poor man the Vessel of Gold. And do
you think, that the King of Kings will be outdone by the King of Persia?
Surely no. But,

Fourthly, and lastly, As there are more ways to the Wood

I would justify the Lord, I would say he is righteous, though my house be
burnt up, and I am turned out of all; but God has punished the righteous with
the wicked (if not more than the wicked) this fiery Rod has fallen heavier upon
many Saints, than upon many sinners, etc. How then can I justify God? How then
c^n I say, that the Lord is righteous? etc. In all the Ages of the world, Gods
dearest children have Abraham and his Family were by Famine driven into Egypt
Genesis 1. 12. Genesis 26.
as well as others. And Isaac and his Family, were by Famine driven into the
Philistines Country, as well as others. And Jacob and his Family, by Famine
were driven into Egypt Genesis 42. 2 Samuel 21. 1. 1 Kings 18 2. Matthew. 5. 4, 5.
as well as others. And in David's time, there was a Famine for three years: And
in Elijahs time there was a sore Famine in Samaria. The difference that God
puts between his own and others, are not seen in the administration of these
outward things. All things come alike to all: there is Eccles. 9. 2.
one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to the good and to the clean,
and to the unclean; to him that sacrifices, and Communia esse voluit, etc.
commoda prophanis, etc. Incommoda suis. Tertul.
to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner, and he that
swears, as he that fears an Oath? The privileges of the Saints lie in
temporals, but in spirituals and eternals; else Religion would not be a matter
of faith, but sense: and men would serve God, not for himself, but for the gay
and gallant things of this world. But,

Secondly, There are as many Mysteries in Providence, as Gods way is in the
Sea, his paths are in the great waters, and his footsteps are not known. His
judgments are unsearchable, and Psalm 77. 19. Romans 11. 33. Psalm 97. 2. Psalm
36. 6.
his ways are past finding out. And yet when clouds and darkness are round
about him; righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his Throne. When
his Judgments are a great deep; yet then his righteousness is like the great
Mountains. There are many Mysteries in nature, and many mysteries of State
which we are ignorant of; and why then should we wonder, that there are many
mysteries in Providence, that we do not understand. Let a man but s^riously
consider, how many p^ssible deaths lurk in his own bowels, and the innumerable
Hosts of external dangers, which beleaguers him on every side; how many
invisible Arrows fly about his ears continually; and yet how few have hit him,
I have read of a Father and h^s Son, who being shipwrackt at Sea, the Son
sailed to shore upon the back of his dead Father. What a strange mysterious
Providence was this! Pl^^. Not. H^st. lib. 2. cap. 51.
and that none hitherto have mortally wounded him; and it will doubtless so far
affect his heart, as to work him to conclude, that great, and many, and
mysterious, are the Providence that daily attend upon him. Vives reports of a
Jew, that having gone over a deep River on a narrow planck in a dark night, and
coming the next day, to see what danger he had escaped, fell down dead with
astonishment. Should God many times but open to us, the misteriousness of his
Providence, they would be matter of matter of amazement and astonishment to
us. I have read, that Marcia a Roman Princess being great with child, had the
Babe in her killed with lightning, she her self escaping the danger. What a
mysterious Providence was this? Gods Providence toward his Servants, is as a
wheel in the midst of a wheel; whose motion, Ezekiel. 1. 16.
and work, and end in working, is not discerned by a common eye. The actings of
Divine Providence are many times so dark, intricate and mysterious, that it
will pose men of the most raised parts, and of the choicest experiences, and of
the greatest Graces, to be able to discern the ways of God in them. There are
many mysteries in the works of God, as well as in the word of God. But,

Thirdly, Sometimes Gods own people sin with others, Moses and Aaron sinned
with others, and therefore they were shut out of Canaan, and their Carcasses
fell in the Wilderness as well as Numb. 20.
others. Psalm. 106. 35. They were mingled among the Heathen, and learned their
works. Verse 40. Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his
people, insomuch, that he abhorred his inheritance. Jer. 9. 25, 26. Behold the
days come, says the Lord, that I will punish all them which are circumcised,
with the uncircumcised. Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the children of Ammon,
and Moab, and all that are in the utmost corners, that dwell in the Wilderness:
for all these Nations are uncircumcised, Vid. Romans 2. 28, 29.
and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart. Such as were
outwardly, but not inwardly circumcised, should be sure to be punished in the
day of Gods wrath, with those who were neither inwardly nor outwardly
circum^ised. When the good and the bad join in common provocations, Ezekiel. 9. 6.
Rev. 18. 4. 1 Pet. 4 17.
no wonder if they suffer in common desolations. Though gross impieties, like
Pitch or Gunpowder enrages ^he fire: yet the sins, the infi^mities of Gods
people, add to the flame. Not only Man^ss^s his bloodshed, but also good
H^z^kiahs pride and vanity of spirit, boasting and glorying in his w^rldly
riches, brought on the Babylonish Captivity 2 Chronicles 32.
upon the J^ws. But,

Four^hly, The people of God many times suffer in common 2. Sam. 24. 10. 10 18.
body that is punished. The sins of a City, a Society, a Company, o^ a Nation,
may involve all the memb^rs in the same Judgment. Though Lot was not guilty of
the sins of Genesis 14. 12 16. Common ca^amities make no discrimination between
persons and persons, or houses and houses. All com^on Judgments work according
to their commission, and according to their nature, without dist^nguishing the
righteous from the wicked.
Sodom; yet Lot was carried away in the Captivity of Sodom, as co-habiting with
them. And so though many of the precious Servants of the Lord in London, were
not guilty of those gross impieties, that their neighbors were guilty of; yet
co-habiting either with them, or near them, they were burnt up and destroyed
with them. Achans Family were not guilty of Achans Sacrilege, and yet Achans
Family were destroyed for Achans Sacrilege. The burning of London was a
National Judgment; and this National Judgment, was the product of National
sins, as I have formerly proved. Now mark, though the people of God may be
personally innocent, yet because they are members of a nocent body, they are
liable to undergo the temporal smart of National Judgments. Doubtless a whole
City may be laid desolate for the wickedness of one man, or of a few men, that
dwells in it, Eccles. 9. 18. One sinner destroys much good. But,

Fifthly, When good men who cannot be justly charged with Zech. 13. 9. Eccl. 8.
12, 13.
both into the fire together, but the dross is consumed, and the metal
refined. The stalk and the ear of corn, fall upon the threshing floor, under
one and the same Flayl; but the one is shattered in pieces, the other is
preserved. From one and the same Olive, and from under one and the same Press,
is crushed out both Oil and d^egs, but the one is tunn'd up for use, the other
thrown out as unserviceable. The sam^ Judgments that befall the wicked, may
befall the righteous, but not upon the same account. The righteous are cast
into the Furnance for trial; but the wicked for their ruin. The righteous are
signally sanctified by fiery dispensations, Jer. 24. 1, 2, 3, 5.
but the wicked are signally worsened by the same dispensations. The very self
same Judgment that is as a Lodestone to draw the righteous toward Heaven,
will be as a Millstone to sink the wicked down to Hell. The Pillar of fire
that went before Israel, had a light side and a dark side; Exodus 14. 20.
the light side was toward Gods people, and the dark side was toward the
Egyptians. The flames of London will prove such a Pillar both to the righteous
and the wicked, That will certainly be made good upon the righteous and the
wicked, whose habitations have been destroyed by Londons flames: that the Greek
Epigramm speaks of the Silver Ax the Ensign of Justice.

That Sword that cuts the bad in Twain,
The good does wound and heal again.
Those dreadful Judgments that have been the Ax of Gods revenging Justice, to
wound and break the wicked in pieces, shall be righteous men's cures, and their
Golden restoratives. But,

Sixthly and lastly, God sometimes wraps up his own people Ezekiel. 18. 25. 29.
Chap. 33. 20.
were not just and equal. God to stop the mouth of iniquity, the mouth of
blasphemy, has made his own people as desolate as others by that fiery
calamity that has past upon them. Such men that have been eye witnesses of Gods
impartial dealing with his own people in those days when London was in flames,
must say, that God is neither partial nor fond. And let thus much suffice, by
way of Answer to this Objection.

The third Duty that lies upon those that have been burnt Luke 21. 19.
quietly to acquiesce in what the Lord has done. O Sirs, hold your peace, and
bridle your passions, and quietly submit to the stroke of Divine Justice. When
Aarons Sons were devoured by fire, Aaron held his peace. And will not Lev. 10.
2, 3. The Hebrew word Damam, ^ignifies sience, or stil^ess: it signifies a
staying of the heart, a quieting of the mind. Aarons mind was quiet and still:
all his unruly affections and passions, were stilled and allayed. Oleaste:
observes, that Joshuah in speaking to the Sun Stand still in Gibeon, uses the
same word (...) that is here used. Joshua 12. 10. So that this Phrase, Aa^on
h^ld his peace, imports thus much, That Aa^o^ stood still, or stayed from
further vexing, or troubling, or disquieting of himself; though at first his
heart was in a strange violent motion, yet he recovers himself, and stands
still before the Lord.
you hold your peace, now your houses are devoured by fire? What were your
houses to Aarons Sons? All the houses in ^he world, are not so near and dear to
a man as his children are. In this story concerning Aaron and his Sons, there
are many things remarkable. As,

1. That he had lost two of his Sons, yea, two of his eldest Sons together at a
clap.

2. These two were the most honorable of the Sons of Aaron: as we may see,
Exodus 24. 1. in that they only with their Father and the seventy Elders are
appointed to come up to the Lord.

3. They were cut off by a sudden and unexpected death, when neither themselves
nor their Father, thought their ruin had been so near. What misery to that of
being suddenly surprised by a doleful death?

4. They were cut off by a way which might seem to testify Gods hot
displeasure against them: for they were devoured by fire from God. They sinned
by fire, and they perished by fire. Look, as fire came from the Lord before in
mercy; so now fire is s^nt from the Lord in Judgment. Certainly the manner of
their death, pointed out the sin for which they were smitten. Now what Father
had not rather lose all his children at once, by an ordinary stroke of death,
than to see one of them destroyed by Gods immediate hand in such a terrible
manner.

5. They were thus smitten by the Lord on the very first day of their entering
upon that high honor of their Priestly Function; and when their hearts were
doubtless full of joy, now to be suddenly thunderstruck in such a Sunshine
day of mercy, as this seemed to be, must needs add weight to their calamity and
misery.

6. They were cut off with such great severity for a very small offense, if
reason may be permitted to sit as Judge in the case. They were made monuments
of divine vengeance only for taking fire to burn the Incense, from one place,
when they should have taken it from another. And this they did (say some) not
purposely, but through mistake, and at such a time, when they had much work
lying upon their hands, and were but newly entered upon their new employment.
Now notwithstanding all this Aaron held his peace. It may be, at first, when he
saw his Sons devoured by fire, his heart began to wrangle, and his passions
began to work: but when he considered the righteousness of God on the one hand,
and the glory that God would get to himself on the other hand; he presently
checks himself, and lays his hand upon his mouth, and stands still and silent
before the Lord. Though it be not easy in great afflictions with Aaron, to
hold our peace; yet it is very advantageous: which the Heathens seemed to
intimate, in placing the Image of Angeronia, with the mouth bound upon the
Altar of Volupia, to show, that they do prudently and patiently bear, and
conceal their troubles, sorrows and anxieties, they shall attain to comfort at
last. What the Apostle says of the distressed Hebrews, after the spoiling of
their goods, Ye have need Heb. 10. 34, 36.
of patience: the same I may say to you, who have lost your house^, your Shops,
your Trades, your all: you have need yea, you have great need of patience.
Though thy mercies are few, and thy miseries are many; though thy mercies are
small, and thy miseries are great; yet look that thy spirit be quiet, and that
thou do sweetly acquiesce in the will of God. Now God has laid his fiery Rod
upon your Psalm 39. 9. See my M^l^ Ch^ist^a^, under the smarting rod, where the
excellency of pati^nce and the evil of impatience, is largely set forth.
backs, it will be your greatest wisdom to lay your hands upon your mouths, and
to say with David, I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. To
be patient and silent under the sharpest Providence, and the sorest
Judgments, is as much a Christians glory, as it is his duty. The patient
Christian feels the want of nothing. Patience will give contentment in the
midst of want. No loss, no cros^, no affl^ction will fit heavy upon a patient
soul. Dionysius says, that this benefit he had by the study of Philosophy,
viz. That he bore with patience all those alterations and changes that he met
with in his outward condition. Now shall Nature do more than Grace? Shall the
study of Phi^osophy, do more than the study of Christ, Scripture, and a man's
own heart? But,

The fourth Duty that lies upon those who have been Let us have grace whereby
we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear. Verse 29. For our
God is a consuming fire. Here are two Arguments to work the Saints to set up
God as the great object of their fear. The first is drawn from the terribleness
of Gods Majesty, He is a consuming fire. The second is drawn from the relation
which is between God and his people, Our God. What a strange Title is this of
the great God, that we meet with in this place? and yet this it one of the
Titles of God, expressing his nature, and in which he glories, that he is
called a consuming fire. Th^se words God is a consuming fire, are not to be
taken properly, but metaphorically. Fire we know, is a very terrible and
dreadful creature: and so may very well serve, to set forth to us the
terribleness and dreadfulness of God. Now God is here said to be a consuming or
devouring fire. The word in the Original, (...), is doubly compounded, and so
the signification is augmented and increased, to note to us the exceeding
terribleness of the fire that is here meant. When God would set forth himself
to be most terrible and dreadful to the sons of men, he dos it by this
resemblance of fire, which of all things is most terrible and intolcrable,
Deuteronomy. 4. 24. For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire; even a jealous God. The
Hebrew word (...) that is here rendered consuming, does properly signify
devouring or eating; it comes from (...), which signifies to devour and eat;
and by a Metaphor it signifies to consume or destroy. God is a devouring fire,
a eating fire, and sinners, and all they have, is but bread and meat for divine
wrath to feed upon, Deuteronomy. 9. 3. See Psalm 50 3. Isa. 33. 14. Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
Understand therefore this day, that the Lord thy God is he, which goes before
thee as a consuming fire: he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down
before thy face: so shall thou drive them out, and d^stroy them quickly, as the
Lord has said unto thee. What more violent, what more irresistible, what more
terrible, than fire? O how much therefore dos it concern us, to set up that
God, as the great object of our fear, who has armed and commanded this
dreadful creature the fire, to destroy us in many, or in most of our outward
concernments as to this world! Jer. 10. 11. At his wrath the earth shall shall
tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to abide his indignation. Job 13.
11. Shall not his Excellency make you afraid, and his dread fall upon you?
Psalm. 119. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments. Hab. 3. 5. Before him went the Pestilence, and burning coals went
forth at his feet. Verse 16. When I heard my belly trembled, my lips quivered
at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and trembled in my self, that I
might rest in the day of trouble. Ah London, London, it highly concerns thee to
tremble and quiver, and stand in awe of that great and glorious God who has
sent so many thousands to their long homes by a sweeping Pestilence, and who
has by a dreadful fire turned thy ancient Monuments, and thy stately buildings
into a ruinous heap. That Christian is more worth than the Gold of Ophir, who
fears more the hand that has laid on the fiery Rod, than the Rod it self. That
prudent and faithful Counsel which the Proph^t Isaiah gives, should always lie
warm upon every burnt Citizens heart, Is^. 8. 13. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts
himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. But,

The fifth Duty that lies upon those who have been burnt The Poets bring in the
feigned Gods, each one con^^nt with his (...) Office (...) Estate: (...),
Mi^e^va with Scienc^s, (...) with E^^onence, (...) with ^^ve, Ju^iter ^ith
H^aven, and Pl^^o with Hell.
a man's mind is brought down to his means, all is well. Contentation of mind
under all the turns and changes of this life, makes a Believer Master, both of
the little and great world of unruly desir^s within himself, and of temptations
in the world without. Contentment ^n a man's present condition, will yield him a
little Heaven in the midst of all the great Hells that he meets with in this
world. Contentation is a hidden treasure, that the Believer will carry with him
to the third Heaven; where an exceeding weight of glory and conten^ation, with
full satisfaction to his desi^es, will be added to that little stock of
contentment that he has obtained in this world. Contentation in every
condition, is no other but the House of God, and the gate of Heaven (as Jacob
once speaks of that gracious manifestation of God, Genesis 28) God dwells in a
contented heart, and a contented heart dwells in God. Contentment is that
Porch, wherein the Believer waits for an entrance into an house not made with
hands, but one eternal in the Heaven. 2 Cor. 5. 1.
O labor much with God, that your hearts may be brought fully under the power
of these divine commands. 1 Timothy 6. 8. Having food and raiment, let us be
therewith content. Heb. 13. 5. Let your conversation be without covetousness,
(or without the love of Silver, as the Gr^ek word si^nifies) and be content
with such things as you h^ve. Cont^nsi praesentibus. So Beza and others, be
content with things pre^ent. The believing Hebrews had been plund^^ed ^f ^ll
they had in this world (when the Apostle g^ve forth this Royal command* H^b.
10. 34.) and yet the Apostle requires them ^o be content. It Is as much the duty
of a Christian, ^o be ^ontent when he has nothing, as when all the world sm^les
upon him. Christians are Soldiers, Strangers, Travelers, Pilgrims, and
therefore it concerns them to make shift with little things, yea, with any
thing in this world. The Isra^lites had no gay clothes, nor no new clothes in
their wilderness condition; but God made their old clothes, to be all clothe^
to them: and that was enough. Jacob did not indent with God for Junkets or
Ornaments, but for food and raiment Genesis 28. 20. If God will give me bread to
eat and raiment to put on, then shall the Lord be my God. Nature is content
with a little, Grace with less: though nothing will satisfy those men's hearts,
whose lusts are their Lords. We shall never want a penny in our Purses to bear
our charges till we get to Heaven: and therefore let us be content with our
present portion in this world. Phil. 4. 11, 12. I have learned in whatsoever
estate I am therewith to be content. I know how to be abased: and I know how to
abound: every where, and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to
he hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. In these words you have first the
vicissitude of Paul's outward condition: at one time he abounds, at another he
is abased: at one time he is full, and at another time he suffers need. 2. You
have the sweet and gracious composure of his spirit, and this is expressed in
two singular acts. The first is his contentation of mind in all conditions. I
have learned in whatsoever estate I am therewith to be content. The second is
his prudent and pertinent comportment with his present condition; I know both
how to be abased, and how to abound. 3. You have the way how he attained this
contentation of mind in all condititions; I have learned (says he) I am
instructed: this lesson of contentment, he did not learn, at the feet of Dr.
Gamaliel, but in the School of Jesus Christ. Contentment in every condition, is
too high a lesson, for any eff^ctually to teach, but Jesus Christ. O Sirs, in
the grave it is all one, who has had all, and who has had none. What folly is
it, to lay up goods for many years, when we cannot lay up one day for the
enjoyment of our goods? Christ (who never mis-called any) calls him fool, who
had much of the world under his hands, but nothing of God, or H^aven in his
heart. Z^pirus the Persian was contented to sustain the cutting off his Nose,
and Ears, and Lips, to further the enterprise of his Lord Darius against proud
Babylon. So Christians should be contented to be any thing, to do any thing, or
to suffer any thing, to further or promote the glory of God in this world. All
this whole world is not proportionable to the precious soul. All the riches of
the Indies cannot pacify conscience, nor secure eternity, nor prevent death,
nor bring you off in the day of Judgment: and therefore be contented with a
little. All the good things of this world, are but cold comforts: they cannot
stretch to eternity: they will not go with us into another world; and therefore
why should the want of such things, either trouble our thoughts, or break our
hearts. The whole world is but a Paradis^ for fools: it is a beautiful, but
deceitful Harlot: it is a dr^amed sweetness, and a very Ocean of Gall. There is
nothing to be found in it, that has not mutability and uncertainty, vanity and
vexation stamped upon it. And therefore he cannot be happy, that enjoyes it; nor
he miserable, that wants it. And why then should not he be contented, that has
but but a little of it? The greatest outward happiness, is but honied poison:
and therefore don't shrug nor faint, because thou have but little of the world.
All thy crosses and losses shall be so tempered by a hand of Heaven, as that
they shall become wholesome Medicines; they shall be steps to thy future glory;
they are thy only Hell, thy Heaven is to come. And therefore be contented in
the midst of all thy sorrows and su^^erings. Remember that many times they who
have most of the world in their hands, have It Is only an infinite good, and
infinite God, that can fill and satisfy the soul of man. Plato could say, The
mind is not satisfied nor quieted, ^ill it return thither from whence it came.
least of God, of Christ, of the Spirit, of Grace, of Heaven in their hearts.
And remember that a man were better to have much of God with a little of the
world, than to have much of the world, with a little of God. God alone is a
thousand thousand felicities, and a world of happiness, the only life and
light. Algerius the Martyr, being swallowed up in a sweet fruition of God,
found more light in his Dungeon, than was without in all the world. O Sirs if
upon casting up of your accounts for another world, you find that Heaven is
your home, the world your footstool, the Angels your Attendants, your Creator,
your Father, your Judge, your Brother, the Holy Spirit your comforter; if you
find that God is ever with you, ever before you, ev^r within you, ever round
about you, and ever a making of provision, more or less for you, why should you
not be contented with your present condition, with your present proportion, be
it more, or be it less? But,

The sixth Duty that lies upon those who have been Zicklag was burnt by the
Amalekites, David and the people lifted up their voices and wept until they had
no 1 Samuel 30. 1, 2, 3, 4.
power to weep. They wept their utmost: they wept themselves even blind. They
did not Stoically slight that fiery Rod, but prudently laid it to heart. Tears
are called the blood of the soul. Now a shower of tears, a shower of blood they
poured out to quench those flames that the Amalakites had kindled. When they
saw their City laid desolate by fire, their sorrow was so great, that they were
over-burthened with the weight of it: And therefore they sought ease, in
venting their sorrow in a shower of tears. And so when Nehemiah understood,
that the wall of Jerusalem was Neh. 1. 3, 4.
broken down, and the gates thereof were burnt with fire, he sat down and
wept, and mourned certain daye^. Some Authors report, that the Jews to this day
come yearly to Nazia^ze^. ad Hieron. etc.
the place where Jerusalem, the City of their fathers stood (which was by Titus
and Adrian destroyed by fire and sword) and upon the day of the destruction of
it weep over it. Oh how well dos it become all burnt Citizens to Deuteronomy. 8. 16.
Lev. 26. 40, 41, 42. Luke 14. 11. Dan. 5. 22. Augustine says that the first,
second and third Virtue of a Christian, is humility. If I were asked (says he)
what is the readiest way to attain true happiness, I would answer, the first,
the second, the third thing is, humility, humility, humility: As often as I was
asked, I would say humility. Humility does not only entitle to happiness, but
to the highest degree of happiness, Matthew. 18. 4.
stand and weep over the ashes of London, and greatly to abase themselves under
that mighty hand of God that has been lifted up against them, 1 Pet. 5. 6.
Humble your selves under the mighty band of God, that he may exalt you in due
time. Ah London, London, how has the mighty hand of the Lord been lifted up
against the^? how has he by flames of ^ire la^d all thy glory in the dust? The
Lord by ^ire, Swo^d (...) P^stile^c^, has greatly humbled th^e: And O w^e^
shall it onc^ be, that ^^ou wilt b^ humble under ^^e mighty hand of God! It Is
one t^i^g to be hum^led by J^^gements; it is another thing to be humb^e under
Judg^m^^ts There have been many Nat^o^s, Citi^s, a^^ particular p^rso^s, who
have been greatly humbled by amazing and a^^o^^s^ing Judgments; who yet n^v^r
had so much grace as to lie humble under thos^ Judg^m^^ts. When Gods hand is
lifted up very high, he expects that our hearts should fall very low. To be
poor and proud, is to be dou^ly mis^rable. If men's spirits are high, when their
estates are low; the next blow will be more dreadful. God has laid our
habitations in dust and ash^s, and he expects that we should even humble our
selves in dust and ashes. The only way to avoid Cannon*shot, is to fall down
flat on the ground: The Application is easy. Humility exalts: he that is
most humble, shall be most honorable. Moses in his Wilderness-condition was
the meekest man on earth, and God made him the most honourablest; calling him
up unto himself in the Mount, and making of him the Leader of his people
Israel. Gide^n was very little in his own eyes, The least in his Fathers house
in his own apprehension; and God exalted him, making him the deliverer of his
Israel. He that is little in his own account, is always high in Gods esteem.
When one asked the Philopher, What God was a doing? he answered, That his whole
work was to lift up the humble, and cast down the proud. Those brave creatures
the Lion and the Eagle were not offered in Sacrifice unto God, but the poor
Lamb and Dove was offered in Sacrifice: to note to us, that God regards not
your brave high, lofty spirits, and that he is all for such that are of a
Dove-like, and a Lamb-like spirit. They say if dust be sprinkled upon the wings
of Bees, their noises, humming, and risings will quickly cease. The Lord in the
late fiery dispensation, has sprinkl^d dust and ashes upon us all. And Oh that
our proud noises, hummings and risings of heart might cease from before the
Lord, who is risen out of his holy place. Ah London, London, thou have been
proud of thy Trade, and proud of thy Strength, and proud of thy Riches, and
proud of thy stately Buildings and Edifices, b^t God has now laid all thy glory
in dust and ashes. And therefore it highly concerns thee to humble thy self
under the mighty hand of God. God has ab^sed the^, and therefore make it thy
work to b^ base in thine own eyes. When N^hemiah understood that the Chald^ans
There is nothing more more evident ^n History, than this, viz. That those
d^eadful fires that have been ki^d^ed amongst the Christian, have been still
kind^ed by Idolatrous hands.
(who were a generation of Idolaters) had made Jerusalem desol^te by Fire, he
greatly humbl^d himself under the mighty hand of God. He looked through all
act^ve causes to the efficient cause; and accordingly he abased himself before
the Lord: as you may see Neh. 1. 3, 4. And they said unto me, the remnant that
are left of the Captivity there in the Province, are in great ^^fl^ction and
reproach: the Wall of Jerus^lem also is broken down, and the Gates thereof are
burnt with fire. And it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I sat
down and wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted and prayed before the God
of Heaven. When Nehemiah ^eard, that the Wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and
that the gates thereof were b^rnt with fire, his grief was so great, that he
could not stand under it: and therefore he sits down and weeps. Who is there
that is a man, that is an Englishman, that is a C^ri^^^an, that is a
Protestant, that can behol^ the Ru^nes of Lond^n, and not (at least the frame
of his Spirit) sit down and wee^ ov^r those R^in^s? The way of ways ^o be
truly, yea, ^ighly ^x^lted, is to be thoroughly humbled. The h^g^est Heavens
and the lowest hearts, do both alike please Isaiah 57. 15.
the most high God. God will certainly make it his work to ex^lt them, who make
it their great work to abase themselves. Such who are low in their ow^ eyes,
and can be be content to be low in the eyes of others, such are most high and
^ono^rable in the eye of God, in the esteem and account ^f God. The lowly
Christian is always the mo^^ lovely C^ristian. Now God has laid your City
low, you^ all low* he ex^ects, that your hearts should lie low under his mighty
hand. All the world cannot long keep up thos^ men, who do'nt labor to keep
down their hearts under Judgments inflicted, or Judgments feared. Remember
the sad Catastrophe of Herod the great, of Agrippa the great, of Pompey the
great, and of Alexander the great. If your spirits remain great under great
Judgments, it is an evident sign, that more reigning Judgments lie at your
doors. But,

The seventh D^ty that lies upon those who have been Job when he had lost his
all: The Lord gave, and the Lo^d has Job 1. 21.
taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord. One brings in holy Job standing
by the ruined house, under whose Walls his ten Children lay dead and buried,
and lifting up his D^e^ellius in his Gynnasiun Patient^ae.
heart and hands toward Heaven, saying, Naked came I out of my Mothers womb,
and naked shall I return thither; the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away:
Blessed be the name of the Lord. Ecce spectaculum (says he) dignum ad quod
respiciat intentus operi suo Deus. Behold a spectacle, a spectacle worthy of
God himself, were he never so intent upon his work in Heaven, yet worthy of his
cognizance! When Ziklag was burnt with fire, and David plundered by the
Amalekites, and his Wives carried captive, yet then he encouraged 1 Samuel 30. 1,
2, 3, 6.
himself in the Lord his God. His God, notes 1. His nearness and dearness to
God. Saints are very near and dear to God. Psalm. 148. 14. Ephesians. 2. 13.
2. His God, notes his Relation to God. God is the Saints Father. 3. His God,
notes his right to God. Whole God 2 Cor. 6. 18.
is the believers. All he has, and all he can do is the believers. From these
and such other like considerations, David encouraged himself in the Lord his
God, when all was gone, and so should we. So the believing Hebrews took
joyfully the Heb. 10. 34.
spoiling of their goods (whether by fire, or plundering, or otherwise is not
said) knowing in themselves, that they had in Heaven a better and more enduring
substance. And to this duty James exhorts, James 1. 2. Count it all joy my
brethren when you fall into diverse temptations, (or tribulations, or
afflictions.) A Christian in his choicest deliberation ought to count it all
joy when he falls into diverse tribulations. The words are emphatical, the
Apostle does not say, be patient or quiet when you fall into diverse temptations
or afflictions, but be joyful. Nor the Apostle does not say, be joyful with a
little joy; but be joyful with exceeding great joy. All joy The words are an
Hebraism.
is full joy; all joy is perfect joy. And this becomes the Saints when they
fall, or are begirt round not with some, but with diverse; that is, with any
kind of affliction or tribulation. An omnipotent God will certainly turn his
peoples misery into felicity. And therefore it concerns them to be divinely
merry in the midst of their greatest misery. Oh that all burnt Citizens would
seriously consider of these three things.

1. That this fiery Rod has been a Rod in a Fathers hand.

2. That this fiery Rod shall sooner or later be like Aarons Rod, a blooming
Rod. Choice fruit will one day grow upon this burnt Tree London. No man can
tell what good God may do England by that fiery Rod that he has laid upon
London.

3. That this fiery Rod that has been laid upon London, has not been laid on 1.
According to the greatness of Gods anger. Nor 2. According to the greatness of
his power. Nor. 3. According to the strictness of his justice. Nor 4. According
to the d^merits of our sins. Nor 5. According to the expectations of men of a
Romish faith; who it is to be feared, Acts 1. 19.
did hope to see every house laid desolate, and London made an Aceldama, a
Field of Blood. Nor 6. Accordingly to the extensiveness of many of your fears:
for many of you have feared worse things than yet you feel. Now upon all these
considerations how highly dos it concern the people of God, to be thankful and
cheerful; yea, and to encourage themselves in the Lord under that fiery
dispensation that has lately past upon them.

But what is there considerable in God to encourage the soul under heavy
crosses, and great l^sses, and fiery trials.

First, There is his gracious, his special and pecular presence. Though I walk
through the valley of the shadow Dan. 3. 24, 25.
of death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff
they comfort me. Psalm. 91. 15. He shall call upon me and I will answer him: I
will be with him in trouble. Oh the precious presence of God with a man's
spirit, will sweeten every fiery dispensation, and take off much of the
bitterness and terribleness of it. In the gracious presence of God with our
spirits, lies, 1. Our greatest Happiness. 2. Our greatest Honor. 3. Our
greatest profit and advantage. 4. Our greatest joy and delight. 5. Our greatest
safety and security. The Bush which was a Type of the Church, consumed not all
the while it burned with fire, because God was in the midst of it. The gracious
presence of God with a man's spirit, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18.
will make heavy affl^ctions light, and long afflictions short, and bitter
afflictions sweet. Gods gracious presence makes every burden light. He that has
the presence of God with Psalm. 55. 22.
his spirit, can bear a burden without a burden. What burden Deuteronomy. 33. 27, 29.
can sink that man that has everlasting Arms under him, and over him, and
round about him. But,

Secondly, There is wisdom in God to encourage them Jer. 24. 5. Romans 8. 28.
and order all judgments, afflictions, crosses and losses, as to make them
work kindly and sweetly for their good. Whilst God is near us, wisdom and
counsel is at hand. God is that wise and skilful Physician, that can turn
Poison into Cordials, Diseases into Remedies, Crosses into Crowns, and the
greatest losses into the greatest gains. What can hurt us, whilst an infinite
wise God stands by us. But,

Thirdly, There is strength, power and omnipotency in Prove. 18. 10. Psalm. 46.
1, 2. Isa. 26. 4. Psalm. 3. 17.
him, nor nothing too hard for him: he is able easily and speedily to bring to
pass all contrivances. You read of many who have been mighty, but you read but
of one Almighty, Rev. 4. 8. Holy; holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, Chap. 11. 17.
We give thee thanks, Lord God Almighty, Chap. 15. 3. Great and mavelous are
thy works, Lord God Almighty, Chap. 16. 7. And I heard another out of the Altar
say, etc. Even so. Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.
Under all your fiery trials, an Almighty God can do mighty things for you. And
therefore it concerns you to encourage your selves in him, even when you are
stripped of all.

O Christians, it highly concerns you to be^r all your losses cheerfully and
thankfully. In every thing give thanks (says the 1 These. 5. 18.
Apostle) for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.
Chrysostom speaks excellently; This says he, is the very Ch^ysost. To^. 5.
Ho^^l. 68.
will of God, to give thanks always: this argues a soul rightly instructed.
Have thou suffered any evil? if thou will, it is no evil. Give thanks to God,
and then thou have turned the evil into good. Say thou as Job said, when he had
lost all; The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the
name of the Lord. What evil have thou suffered? What is it a disease? This is
no strange thing to us, seeing our bodies are mortal and naturally born to
suffer. What do thou want money? this may be gotten here, and lost here.
Whatsoever evils or losses therefore do oppress thee, give thou thanks, and
thou ha^^ changed the nature of them. Job then did more deeply wound the Devil,
when being stripped out of all, he gave thanks to God, than if he had distributed
all to the poor and needy. For it is much more to be stripped of all, and yet to
bear it patiently, generously and thankfully, than for a rich man to give Alms,
as it here happened to righteous Job. But has fire suddenly taken hold upon
thy house, destroyed thy house, and consumed thy whole substance? Remember the
sufferings of Job. Give thanks to God, who could, though he did not, have
hindered that mischance: and thou shall be sure to receive as equal a reward,
as if thou had put all into the bosom of the indigent. This he repeateth
over again, and says, thy reward being thankful, is equal to his, who gave all
he had to the poor. To wind up your hearts to thankfulness and cheerfulness
under this late desolating Judgment. Consider 1. God might have taken away
all. It Is good to bless When a Gentleman in Atheis had his Plate taken away by
Ahashue^us, as he was at dinner, he smiled upon his friends, saying I thank God
that his Highness has left me any thing.
him for what he has left. 2. He has taken away more from others, than he has
taken away from you, ergo be thankful. 3. You are unworthy of the least mercy,
you deserve to be stripped of every mercy; and therefore be thankful, for any
thing that is left. God has a Sovereign right over all you have, and might have
stripped you as naked as the day wherein you were born. 4. God has left you
better, and greater merci^s, than any those were, that he has stripped you off:
viz. your lives, your limbs, your friends, your Relations, yea and the means of
Grace, which is better than all, and more than all other mercies: ergo be
thankful. 5. The Lord has given those choice things to you, as shall never be
taken from you: viz. himself, his Son, his Spirit, which shall abide with you
for ever; his Grace which is an abiding seed, and his peace which none can give
to you, nor take from you; John 16. 1 John 3. 9.
ergo be thankful though God has laid all your pleasant things desolate. 6.
Thankfulness under crosses and losses, speak out much integrity and ingenuity
of Spirit. Hypocrites and profane persons are more apt to blaspheme, than to
bless a taking God: ergo be thankful. The Ancients say, Ingratum dixeris omnia
dixeris, say a man is unthankful, and say he is any thing. Ingratitude is a
Monster in nature (say some) a Solecism in Manners, a Paradox in Grace, damming
up the course of donations divine and humane. If there be any sin in the world
against the Holy Ghost, (said Queen Elizabeth in a Letter to Henry the fourth
of France) it is ingratitude. The Laws of Persia, Macedonia and Athens,
condemned the ungrateful to death: and unthankfulness may well be styled the
Epitome of Vices. Ingratitude was so hateful to the Egyptians, that they used
to make Eunuchs of ungrateful persons, that no posterity of theirs might
remain. Well Sirs, remember this, the best way to get much, is to be thankful
for a little. God loves to sow much where he reaps much. Thankfulness for one
mercy, makes way for another mercy; as many thousand Christians have
experienced. The Lords Impost for all his blessings is our thankfulness: if we
neglect to pay this Impost, the commodity is forfeit, and so will take it back.
Our returns must be according to our receipts. Good men should be like the
Bells, that ring as pleasantly at a Funeral, as at a Wedding. They should be as
thankful when it goes ill with them, as when it goes well with them. Cicero
complained of old, that it was a hard thing to find a thankful man. Oh how hard
a thing is it to find burnt Citizens really, cordially, frequently and
practically thankful, that they are alive, that they are out of the grave, out
of Hell, and that yet they have bread to eat and clothes to wear, though their
habitations are laid in ashes, and all their pleasant things destroyed. But,

The eighth Duty that lies upon those who have been Isa. 26. 8, 9. Psalm. 119.
30. 120.
Sodom, is mentioned thirteen times in the blessed Scripture, and all to work
us to mind it, and to abhor those sins that laid that City desolate. The Lord
looks that his people should keep up fresh in their memories such Judgments
that have been long before executed, Jer. 7. 12. Go to my place which was in
Shilo, where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it for the
wickedness of my people. The Ark 1 Samuel 4. 10, 11.
of old stood at Shilo, but after it was taken and carried away by the
Philistines, it was never brought back, and from that time Shilo lay ever after
desolate. And this the Lord would have engraven upon their memories, and upon
their hearts. Though stony hearts are bad, yet Iron memories are good. Luke 17.
32. Remember Lots wife. Consider her sin and her punishment; that so fearing
the one, you may learn to take heed of the other. 2 Pet. 2. 6. And turning the
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow,
making them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly. There is
much in those words, That after should live ungodly: Why has God turned those
rich and populous Cities into ashes, and set them up as burning Beacon^, but to
warn all the world, that they live not ungodly; and to work them to keep alive
in their memories the desolating Judgments of God. The Rabbis say, that the
Jews at this day, when they are to boild an house, they are to leave one part
of it unfinished and lying Rude, in remembrance that Jerusalem and the Temple,
are at present desolate. Oh let the remembrance of Londons desolation by fire
be for ever kept up in all your hearts. To this purpose consider,

1. That the burning of London, is a very great Judgment (as I have formerly
proved) now great Judgments, like great mercies, should be always kept up
fresh in our memories.

2. The burning of London is a National Judgment, (as I have formerly proved)
now National Judgments should be always fresh in our memories.

3. It Is a Judgment that c^rries much of the wrath and anger of the Lord in
it, Amos 3. 6. Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be
afraid? Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? V. 8. The
Lion has roared, who will not fear? The Lord God has spoken, who can but
prophecy? Now the more anger and wrath we read in any Judgment, the more
highly it concerns us, to remember that Judgment.

4. A serious commemoration of Gods Judgments, is a thing that is highly
pleasing to the Lord. God delights as much in the glory of his Justice, as he
dos in the glory of his Mercy or Grace. Now when we commemorate his Judgments,
we glorify his Justice that has inflicted them.

5. Severe Judgments contribute much to the enlightening Hos. 5. 14, 15. Chap.
6. 1, 2, 3. Jer. 24. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Chap. 22. 8, 9.
of men's understandings, and to the awakening of their consciences, and the
reforming of their lives, and to work men to judge them, and justify the Lord.
And therefore it highly concerns you, to keep up the Remembrance of Londons
Desolation by fire, always fresh and flourishing in your souls.

6. Smart Judgments are teaching things. All Gods Rods have a voice. Hear ye
the Rod, and him that has appointed Mich. 6. 9.
it. Look as Gideon taught the men of Succoth by Thorns and Briars. So God by
piercing Judgments, teaches both sinners and Saints, to take heed of despising
his patience and long-suffering, and to cease from doing evil, and to learn to
do well. And to fear and fly from all such sinful courses o^ Isa. 1. 16, 17.
practices, that bring destructive judgments upon the mos^ glorious Cities in
the world. And upon this account, how deeply dos it concern us, to have always
the late fiery dispensation in our thoughts, and upon our hearts.

7. All Gods Judgments are his Messengers; they are all at his command. The
Centurion had not such a Sovereign power over his servants, as the great God
has over all sorts Ezekiel. 14. 13, 15, 17, 19. Ma^th. 21. 8. Isa. 7. 18, 19.
of Judgments. If the Lord do but hiss for the Fly of Egypt, and the Be of
Assyria, they shall come and do their office. Now all Gods messengers, as well
as his mercies, should still be kept in our eye. But,

8. and lastly, Consider a serious commemoration of the Judgments of God, will
difference and distinguish you from all profane persons, and unsound
Professors. Psalm. 10. 5. Thy judgments are far above out of his sight. Thy
Judgments, that is, the plagues and punishments that thou layest upon the
ungodly are high above his sight; that is, he fears them not, he thinks not of
them, he minds them not, he dos not seriously consider of them, he is not
kindly or deeply affected with them: he regards them no more than a tale that
is told, or than Foreign Wars, wherein he is not concerned. Others carry the
words thus, He c^steth thy Judgments out of his sight; he will not so much as
once mind them; they are too high for him to set them before him; they are
hidden before him: they are above the reach of his understanding and
apprehension: both mercies and judgments have much of God in them. They speak,
and speak aloud, but wicked men can neither see, nor hear, nor understand the
voice of God either in the one or in the other. I have read of such a
Pestilential disease once at Athens, as took away the memories of those who
were infected with it; so that they forgot even their own names. One
Pestilential disease or another usually so seizes upon wicked men, that they
easily and usually forget the Judgments of God. If God set in with these eight
Arguments, they will contribute more to the enabling of you to keep the late
f^ery dispensations of God fresh in your memories, than all the Pillars of
Brass or Stone in the world. Yet I am far from questioning the lawfulness of
erecting a Pillar of Brass or Stone to commemorate the late dreadful fire,
according to an Act of Parl^ament, that is now before us. But, Page 108.


The ninth Duty that lies upon those who have been 1 Timothy 6. 17. 1 John 2. 17.
Heb. 11. 25.
set loose from them, and to get their affections weaned from them. Behold in
four days time, a glorious City is turned into a ruinous heap: and a little
world of wealth is laid in ashes, and many hundreds of families almost reduced
to begga^y. And are not these loud Sermons of the vanity, mutability and
uncertainty of all earthly things. That's good advice Solomon gives, Prove. 23.
4, 5. Labor not to be rich. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not?
for riches certainly make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward
He says not, they take wing, but they make them, and not the wings of a Hawk,
to fly away, and to come again to a man's Fist, but the wings of an Eagle to fly
quite away.
heaven. All certainty that is in riches, is that they are uncertain. Riches,
like bad servants, never stay long with one Master. Did not the Citizens of
London see their riches flying away from them upon the wings of the fire, and
of the wind, when their own and their neighbors habitations were all in
flames. O Sirs, what certainty can there be in those things, which Balls of
Fire, Storms at Sea, false Oaths, or treacherous friends, may in a few days,
yea, in a day, an hour, deprive us off. God can soon clap a pair of wings upon
all a man has in this world. And therefore he acts safest and wisest, who sits
most loose from the things of the world. Riches are not for ever: and the Crown
does not Prove. 27. 4.
endure to every generation. This Adonibezek, Belshazzar, and many other great
Princes have found by experience, as Scripture and Histories do sufficiently
testify. In all the Ages of the world the Testimony of Solomon holds good,
Eccles. 1. 2. Vanity of vanity, says the Preacher; vanity of vanities, all is
vanity. The things of this world are not only vain, but vanity in the abstract.
They are excessive vanity; vanity of vanities: yea, they are a heap of vanity;
vanity All in Heaven write vanity of vanities upon all sublunaries; and all in
Hell write vanity of vanities upall sublunaries and why should not all on earth
write vanity of vanities upon all subluminaries. 1 Kings 9. 13. Genesis 3.
of vanities. And this the burnt Citizens have found by sad experience, the
world is all shadow and vanity: its like Jonah's Gourd, a man may sit under its
shadow for a while; but it soon withers, decays and dies. He that shall bu^
weigh man's pains with his pay, his miseries with his mercies; his sorrows with
his joys, his crosses with his comforts, his wants with his enjoyments, etc.
may well cry out, Oh the vanity and u^certainty of all these earthly things.
Though the world in all its bravery is no better than the Cities which Solom^n
gave to Hir^m, which he called Cabul, that is, displeasing or dirty. All the
great, the gay, the glorious things of the world, may fitly be resembled to the
fruit that undid us all, which was fair to the sight, smooth in handling, sweet
in taste, but deadly in operation. A man may be happy that is not wealthy,
witness Lazarus, and Heb. 11.
those worthies of whom this world was not worthy. But how hard a thing is it
for a man to be happy, that is wealthy, Matthew. 19. 24. It is easier for a Camel
(or Cabel-rop^, as some render it) to go through the eye of a needle, than for
a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God. There are several expositions upon
these words.

First, Some say, that there was a little gate in Jerusalem called the
Needles-eye, which was so low and little, that it

Secondly, Others interpret it of a Cabel-rope or Cord:

Thirdly, Others say, these words are a proverbial Speech, Talmud had a
Proverb, Are ye of Pambeditha, who can cause an Elephant to go through a
Needles eye? Those of Pambeditha were great Braggers, they would boast to
others, that they could do very great things, and very strange things. Hence
came that Proverb amongst them, It is easier to cause an Elephant to go
thorough a Needles eye, than to do thus or thus. Now our Savior uses the word
Camel, because he was better known to them. It was usual (say others) with the
Jews to say, when difficult matters were promised, Have thou been at
Pam^editha, where Camels go through the eyes of Needles? But,

Fourthly and lastly, the plain and simple meaning of this viz. That it is as
impossible for such a rich man to be saved (that trusts in his riches, and
that sets a higher price upon his riches, than upon Christ; and that will
rather part with Christ, than part with his riches; and that will rather go to
Hell rich, than to Heaven poor) as it is for a Camel to go thorough the eye of
a N^edle. The Proverbial Speech (say others) notes the difficulty of rich men's
being saved. Hab. 2. 6. Woe to him that ladeth himself with thick Clay. Thick
Clay will sooner break a man's back, than satisfy his heart. And O what a folly
and madness is it, for a man to be still a loading of himself with the Clay of
this world. In Genesis 13. 2. it is said that Abraham was very rich in Cattle, in
Silver, and in Gold: the word i^ (...) gravis fuit; he was very heavy, to show,
that riches, that Gold and Silv^r, (which is the great God of the world, the
Paradise, the all in all, the great Diana that all the world magnifies and
worships) are but heavy burdens, and rather a hinderance, than a help to Heaven
and happiness. Though the rich man in the Gospel fared, and lived like a
Gentleman, a Gallant, a Knight, a Lord; yet when he dyed, he went to Hell.
Though Mammon, as Aretius and Luke 16.
many others observe, is a Syriack word, and signifies riches: yet Irenaeus
derives Mammon of Mum, that signifies a Spot, and Hon that signifies riches; to
show that riches have their spots: and yet O how in love are men with these
spots, how Isaiah 5. 8.
laborious, how industrious are men to add spots to spots, b^gs to bags, houses
to houses, and lands to lands, and Lordships to Lordships, as if there were no
Hell to escaps, nor no Heaven to make sure.

O Sirs, the voice of God in that fiery dispensation that has lately past upon
us, seems to be this, O ye Citizens of London, whose habitations and glory I
have laid in dust and ashes, set loose from this world, and set your affections
upon Col. 3. 1. Heb. 11. 13. J^r. 50. 6. Mich. 2. 10.
things above: L^ve in this world as Pilg^ims and Strangers. Remember this is
not your resting place: never be inordinate in your love to the world, nor in
your delight in the world, nor in your p^rsuit of the world any more. Never
spend so many thoughts upon the w^rld, nor never send forth so many wishes
after the world, nor never spend so much precious time to gain the world as you
have formerly done. Take off your thoughts, take off your hearts, take off your
hands from all these uncertain things. Remember it will not be long before you
must all go to your long home, and a little of the world will serve to bear
your charges till you get to Heaven. Remember I have burnt up your City; I have
poured contempt upon your City; I have stained the pride and glory of your
City; that so seeing you have here Heb. 13. 14.
no continuing City, you may seek one to come. Remember I have destroyed your
houses, that so you may make sure a house not made with hands, but one eternal
in the Heavens. 2 Cor. 5. 1.
I have taken away your uncertain Riches, that so you may make sure more
durable Riches. I have spoiled many of your Prove. 8. 18. Phil. 3. 20.
brave full Trades, that so you might drive a more brave full Trade toward
Heaven. Oh that I had no just grounds to be jealous, that many who have been
great losers by the fire, are now more mad upon the world, and more eagerly
carried after the world, than ever they have been; as if the great design of
God in setting them on fire round about, was only to enlarge their desires more
after the world, and more effectually to engage them to moil and toil as in the
fire, to lay up treasure for another fire to consume. Before I close up this
particular, let me offer a few things to your consideration.

First, Are there none of the burnt Citizens, who seek the Matthew. 6. 33. John
6. 27.
the world, and then for Christ: first for the meat that perishes, and then
for the meat which endures unto everlasting life. The old Poets note was,
first for money, and then for Christ. But,

Secondly, Are there none of the burnt Citizens, whose 1 Timothy 6 9. Jer. 17. 11.
great things of eternity. Are there none of the burnt Citizens, that are
peremptorily resolved to gain the world what ever it costs them. The Gnostics
were a sort of Professors, that made no use of their Religion, but to their
secular advantages, and therefore when the world and their Religion stood in
competition, they made no scruple, no bones of renouncing their profession, to
enjoy the world. Oh the deadness, the barrenness, the listlesness, the
heartlesness to any thing that is divine and heavenly, that dos always attend
such Christians who are resolved to be rich, or great, or some body in the
world, what ever comes on it! O the time, the thoughts, the strength, the
spirits that these men spend upon the world, whilst their souls lie a bleeding,
and eternity is posting on upon them. Men that are highly and fully resolved to
be rich by hook or by crook, will certainly forget God, undervalue Christ,
grieve the Spirit, despise S^bbaths, sl^ght Ordinances, and negl^ct such
gracious opportunities as might make them happy for ever. Rich Felix had no
leisure to hear poor Paul, though the hearing of a Sermon might have saved Act.
24. 24. ult.
hit soul. But,

Thirdly, Are there none of the burnt Citizens, who spend Pythagoras says,
that time is Anima Coel^, the soul of Heaven. And we may say, it is a Pearl of
price that cost Christ his blood.
most of their time about the things of the world, and who ordinarily put off
Christ and their souls with the least, and last, and worst of their time. The
world shall freely have many hours, when Christ can hardly get one. Are there
none who will have their eating times, and their drinking times, and their
sleeping times, and their buying times, and their selling times, and their
feasting times, and their sporting times, yea, and their sinning times, who yet
can spare no time to hear, or read, or pray, or mourn, or repent, or reform, or
to set up Christ in their families, or to wait upon him in their closets. Are
there not many who will have time for every thing, but to honor the Lord, and
to secure their interest in Christ, and to make themselves happy for ever.

Look, as Pharaohs lean Kine eat up the fat, so many now are fallen into such a
crowd of worldly business, as eats up all that precious time which should be
spent in holy and heavenly exercises.

Fourthly, Are there none of the burnt Citizens, who daily Gergesins preferred
their Swine Matthew. 8. 28. ult.
before a Savior; they had rather lose Christ, than lose their Hoggs. They had
rather that the Devil should still poss^ss their souls, than that he should
drown their Piggs: They preferred their Swine before their salvation; and
presented a wretched Petition for their own damnation. For they besought him
(who had all love, and life, and light, and grace and glory, and fullness in
himself) that he would depart out of Col. 1. 19. Chap. 2. 3.
their coasts. Though there be no misery, no plague, no curse, no wrath, no
Hell to Christ's departure from a people. Yet Hos. 9. 12. The Reubinites
preferred the Country that was commodious for the feeding of their Cattle
(though it were far from the Temple, far from the Means of Grace) before their
interest in the Land of Canaan.
men that are mad upon the world, will desire this. Bernard had rather be in
his Chimney corner with Christ, than in Heaven without him: At so high a rate
he valued Christ. There was a good man who once cried out, I had rather have
one Christ, than a thousand worlds. Another mourn ed, because he could not
prize Christ enough. But how few burnt Citizens are of these men's minds? It was
a sweet prayer of one; Make thy Son dear, very dear, exceeding dear, only dear
and precious to me, or not at all. But do all burnt Citizens lift up such a
prayer. I suppose you have either read or heard of that rich and wretched
Cardinal, who professed, that he would not leave his part in Paris, for a part in
Paradise. But,

Fifthly, Are there no burnt Citizens, who follow the world so close, that they
gain no good by the word: like Ezekiels hearers, and like the stony ground.
Some Writers Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32, 33. Matthew. 13. 22.
say, that nothing will grow where Gold grows. Certainly where an inordinate
love of the world grows, there nothing will grow that is good. A heart filled
either with the love of the world, or with the profits of the world, or with
the pleasures of the world, or with the honors of the world, or with the cares
of the world, or with the business of the world, is a heart incapacitated to
receive any divine couns^l or comfort from the word. The Poets tells us of
Licaons being turned into a Wol^: but when a worldling is wrought upon by the
word, there is a Wolf turned into a man; yea, an incarna^e Devil turned into a
glorious Saint. Therefore the Holy Ghost speaking of Z^cheus (whose soul was
set upon the world) brings him in with an Ecce, behold, Luke 19. 2.
as if it were a wonder of wonders, that ever such a worldling should be
subdued by Grace, and brought in to Christ. But,

Sixthly, Are there no burnt Citizens that are very angry Balaam was so intent
and mad upon the world, that he d^sperately puts on upon the drawn Numb. 22.
21. to 35.
Sword of the Angel. Are there no burnt Citizens, who are so intent and mad
upon the world, that they will put warmly on for the world, though the Lord
draws, and conscience draws, and the Scriptures draw their Swords upon them.
But,

Seventhly, Are there no burnt Citizens, who are grown Matthew. 11. 12. As a
Castle or Town, is taken by Storm.
so eagerly and earnestly set upon making a prey or a prize of the great things
of that upper world; that they were highly and fully resolved to make sure of
them, whatever pains or perils they run thorough. Aristotle observes, that Dogs
cannot hunt where the smell of sweet flowers is, because the sweet scent
diverteth the smell. Ah how has the scent of the sweet flowers of this world,
hindered many a forward Professor from hunting after God, and Christ, and the
great things of eternity. The Arabic Proverb says, That the world is a
carcass, and they that bunt after it are Dogs. Ah how many are there, who once
set their f^ces toward heaven, who now hunt more after earth than Heaven; who
hunt more after Terrestial than Celestial things: who hunt more after
nothingnesses and emptinesses, than they do after those fulnesses and
swetnesses that be in God, in Christ, in the Covenant, in Heaven, and in those
paths that lead to happiness. When one desired to know what kind of man Basil
was, there was presented to him in a dream (says the History) a Pillar of fire
with this Motto, Talis est Basilius, Basil is such a one, all on a light fire
for God. Before London was in fl^mes, there were some, who for a time were all
on a light fire for God, who now are grown either cold, or lukewarm, like the
lukewarm Laodiceans, Rev. 3. 14, 19. But,

Eighthly, Are there no burnt Citiz^ns, whose hearts are 2 Cor. 7. 10.
grieved, d^j^cted and overwhelmed upon the account of their late losses: and
what dos this speak out, but an inordinate love of these earthly things. When
Jonahs Gourd Jon. 4. 6. ult.
withered, Jonah was much enraged and dejected. It Is said of Adam, that he
turned his face toward the Garden of Eden, and from his heart lamented his
fall. Ah how many are there in this day, who turning their faces toward their
late lost mercies, their lost Shops, Trades, Houses, Riches, do so bitterly and
excessively lament and mourn, Jer. 31. 15.
that with Rachel they refuse to be comforted: and with Jacob, they will go
down into the Grave mourning. Heraclitus Genesis 37. 35.
the Philosopher was always weeping: but such a frame of Spirit is no honor
to God, nor no ornament to Religion. One cries out How shall I live, now I have
lost my Trade; another cries out, What shall I do when I am old: another cries
out, What shall I and my six Children do when you are dead: another cries out,
I have but a handful of Meal in the Barrel, and a little Oil in the Cruise, and
when that is spent, I must lie down and dye. 1 King^ 17. 12. etc.
1. There is a holy sadness which arises from the sense of our sins, and our
Saviors suff^rings: this is commendable. 2. There is a natural sadness, which
sometimes rises from sickness, weakness and indisposition of body: this is to
be pitied and cured. 3. There is a sinful sadness, which usually is very
furious, and has no ears, and is rather cured by Miracle than precept: this
usually flows from the loss of such near and dear comforts, upon which men have
in ordinately set their hearts, and in the enjoyment of which, they have
promised themselves no small felicity. Oh that such sad souls would seriously
r^memb^r, that there is nothing beyond remedy, but the tears of the damned. A
man who may (notwithstanding all his losses and crosses) be found walking in
the way to Paradise should never place himself in the condition of a
little-Hell. And he that may or can hope for that great-all, ought not to be
excessively sad for any losses or crosses that he meets with in this world. But,

Ninthly, Are there no burnt Citizens, who to gain the Numb. 22. 15. to 23.
Josh. 7. 20, 21, 22. Jude 11.
soon conquered as tempted, vanquished as assaulted by the world, that man is
doubtless in love with the world; yea, bewitched by the world The Champions
could not wring an Apple out of Milo's hand by strong hand, but a fair Maid by
fair means got it presently. The easy conquests that the temptations of the
world, make upon many men, is a fair and a full evidence, that their hearts are
greatly endeared to it. Luther was a man weaned from the world; and therefore
when honors, preferments and riches were offered to him, he despised them. So
when Basil was tempted with money and preferment, he answered, The fashion of
this world passes away, as the waters of a River that runs by a City, or as
Basil in 40. Martyrs. In Queen Mary's time, when some offered a certain Martyr
money, he refused it, saying I am going to a Country, where money will bear no
price.
a fair picture drawn upon the Ice that melts away with it. (Pecuniam da quae
permaneat, etc.) Give money (said he) that may last for ever, and glory that
may eternally flourish. I have read of a mortified Christian, who being tempted
with of fers of money, to desert his Religion, gave this excellent answer, Let
not any think that he will embrace other men's goods to forsake Christ, who has
forsaken his own proper goods to follow Christ. It was an excellent answer of
one of the Martyrs, when he was offered riches and honors if he would recant,
Do but offer me somewhat that is better than my Lord Jesus Christ, and you
shall see what I will say to you. Thus you see that men that are crucified to
this world, don't only resist, but also triumph over all the glittering
temptations of a tempting and enticing world. And O that such a spirit might
rest upon all those whose habitations are laid desolate. But,

Tenthly and lastly, Are there no burnt C^t^zens, who go

O Sirs, to moderate your affections to the things of this world, and to put a
stop to your too eager pursuit after earthly things, seriously and frequently
dwell upon th^se te^ Maxims.

First, That the shortest, surest and safest way to be rich, is Eccles. 5. 12.
could say, He that is content wants nothing; and he that wants content,
enjoyes nothing.

One might have riches yet be very poor,
One might have little, yet have all and more.
S^condly, He who is contented with a little, will never Much Treasure stops
not a Misers mouth, says the Proverb.
will never be satisfied with hundreds; and he who is not content with a few
hundreds, will never be satisfied with many thousands. Eccles. 5. 10. He that
loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver; nor be that loves abundance
with increase. Money of it self cannot satisfy any desire of Nature. If a man
be hungry, it cannot feed him; if naked, it cannot clothe him; if cold, it
cannot warm him; if sick, it cannot recover him. A circle cannot fill a
triangle, no more can the whole world fill the heart of man. A man may as soon
fill a Chest with Grace, as an heart with wealth. The soul of man may be busied
about earthly things, but it can never be filled, nor satisfied with earthly
things. Air shall as soon fill the body, as money shall satisfy the mind.
There is many a worldling, who has enough of the world to sink him, who will
never have enough of the world to satisfy him. The more an hydropical man
drinks, the more he thirsts. So the more money is increased, the more the
love of money is increased; and the more the love of money is increased, the
more the soul is unsatisfied. It Is only an infinite God, and an infinite good,
that can fill and satisfy the Genesis 15. 1.
precious and immortal soul of man. Look as nothing fits the ear but sounds,
and as nothing fits the smell but odours, so nothing fits the soul but God.
Nothing below the great God can fit and fill animmortal soul. Nothing can
content the soul of man but the fruition of God. God never rested till he
Nature has taught all men to seek after a summum bo^um.
made man; and man can never rest, till he enjoyes his God. Every man has a
soul within him of a vast capacity, and nothing can fill it to the brim, but he
that's fullness it self. Should we knock at every creatures door for happiness,
they would all answer us round, that it is not in them. The man in Plutarch
that heard the Philosophers wrangle about summum bonum; one placing of it in
this, and another in that, went to the Market and bought up all that was good,
hopeing among all he should not miss of happiness; and yet he mist of it. The
soul of man is of so glorious a make, that nothing below him that made it, can
satisfy it. The sum of all that the creatures amount to according to Solomon's
reckoning, is vanity and vexation of Spirit. Vanity and vexation is the very
quintescence of the creature, and all that can possibly be extracted out of it.
Now if vanity can satisfy, or if vexation can give content; if you can gather
Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles, than go on and dote upon the world
still; and be always enamoured with a shadow of perishing beauty. Oramuzes the
Enchanter boasted, that in his Egg all the happiness in the world was included,
but being broken, there was nothing in it but wind and emptiness. But,

Thirdly, It Is infinitely better to have much of God, of 2 Cor. 6. 10.
of the world in our hands, and but a little of God and Christ in our hearts.
It Is infinitely better to be rich toward G^d and poor toward the world, than
to be poor toward God, and to be rich toward the world. There are some very
Eccles. 5. 12. Prove. 11. 24.
rich, who yet are very poor; there are others who are very poor, and yet are
very rich. It Is infinitely better to be poor men and rich Christians, than to
be rich men, and poor Christians. But,

Fourthly, The best and surest way under Heaven to gain Give therefore thy
servant an understanding heart, to judge thy people, that I may discern between
good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a people? Ver. 10. And
the Speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing. Ver. 11. And
God said unto him, because thou have asked this thing, and have not asked for
thy self long life: neither have asked riches for thy self, nor have asked the
life of thine enemies, but have asked for thy self understanding to discern
judgment. ver. 12. Behold, I have done according to thy words: Lo, I have
given thee a wise and an understanding heart, so that there was none like thee
before thee; neither after thee, shall any arise like unto thee. v. 13. And I
have also given thee that which thou have not asked, both riches and honors:
so that there shall not be any among the Kings like unto thee, all thy days.
This is more generally and fully expressed in 2 Chronicles. 1. 12. Wisdom and
knowledge is granted unto thee; and I will give thee riches, and wealth, and
honor, such as none of the Kings have had before thee, neither shall there any
after thee have the like. Solomon desired wisdom of the Lord, and the Lord
granted him his desire, and cast in riches, and wealth, and honor as an
over*plus, which he did not so much as once desire. God will not be wanting to
them in Temporals, who in their desires and prayers, are most carried out after
spirituals. Matthew. 6. 33. First seek the The shorter cut to riches, is by their
contempt: it is great riches not to desire riches, and he has most, that
covers least; says Socrates and Seneca.
Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall he added to
you, or over-added. He who before all, and above all other things seeks Grace
and Glory, shall have the things of this world cast in as an overplus, as a
handful to the sack of grain; or as inch of measure to an Ell of Cloth; or as
paper and pack-thred is given into the bargain, 1 Timothy 4 8. Godliness is
profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come. There is Earth as well as Heaven: Bread as well as
Grace; and Raiment as well as Righteousness; and the lower springs as well as
^e upper springs to be sound in the precious promises. Abraham, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
and Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph, and Job, and Nehemiah, and Mordicai, and
David, and Hezekiah, and Josiah, and Jehosaphat, and Daniel, and the three
Children, (or rather Champions) made it their business to be holy, to walk with
God, to maintain communion with God, and to exalt and glorify God: and you
know how the Lord heaped up the good things, and the great things of this world
upon them. I verily believe, if men were more holy, they would be more
outwardly happy; if they did but more seriously and earnestly press after the
great things of that upper world, the Lord would more abundantly cast in the
things of this lower world upon them. But when men are immoderately carried out
in seeking after the great things of this world; it is just with God to blast
their endeavors, and to curse their mercies to them, Jer. 45. 5. Mal. 2. 2.
But,

Fifthly, It Is better to get a little of the world, than to get much of the
world; it is better to get a little of the Solomon's Dinner of Genesis 22. Prove. 3.
33. Chap. 15. 17. Dan. 1.
green Herbs, Daniels Pulse, Barley Loaves, and a few Fishes, and John's rough
Garment blessed, are better and greater mercies, than Dives his Riches, Purple
Robes, and dainty fare cursed. But,

Sixthly, The greatest outward gain cannot counter-vail Psalm. 30. 6, 7.
cast of Gods countenance, or an hours communion with him, etc. Suppose a man
could heap up S^lver as the dust, Job 22. 24. Chap. 27. 16. Matthew. 4.
and Gold as the streams of the Brook, that he could gain as much as the Devil
promised Christ, viz. all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, yet
all these could not make up the least spiritual loss. He that shall exchange
the least spiritual favor for the greatest outward good, shall but with
Glaucus and Diomedes exchange Gold for Copper; he shall with the Cock in the
Fable, part with a Pearl for a B^rley Corn. Chrysostom compares such to
workers in Mines, who for a little wages, do always hazard, and sometimes lose
their lives. Menot a French Preacher compares them to a Hunts-man, that
spoileth a Horse worth many pounds, in pursuit of a Hare not worth so many
pence. Pare^^ compares them to a man that with much ado wins Venice, and as
soon as it is won, is hanged up at the Gates of the City. When such a one shall
at last compute what he has gained and what he has lost, he will certainly
conclude that he has but a miserable bargain of it. But,

The seventh Maxim is this, viz. A little that a righteous Psalm 37. 16.
righteous man's mite, is better than the wicked man's millions. A little, that
is a competent and mean portion, though yet but very little: one little piece
of Gold is more worth, than a bagg of Counters: one little Box of Pearls, is
more worth, than many loads of P^bbles. And so a little that a righteous man
has, is better than the abundance of the wicked: Is better than the riches of
many wicked. Hamon which is the word here used, is from Hamah which signifies
multitude of riches, or great plenty, or store of riches: from this Hebrew word
Hamon, Riches are called Mammon. The Luke 16. 9, 11, 13.
little that the righteous man has, is better than the multitude or store of
riches that the wicked have. Out of these words, you may observe these
following particulars.

1. Here is the righteous man's portion, and the wicked man's portion as to this
world; the righteous man has but little, the wicked has much.

2. The righteous man has but little, but the wicked has riches.

3. The righteous man's little is a better portion than the riches of the wicked.

4. The righteous man's little is better than the multitude of riches that the
wicked have.

5. The righteous man's little is better than the multitude of riches that many
wicked men enjoy. Now for their sakes who have been burnt up, and have but
little of the world left them, I shall make good this blessed truth by an
induction of these eleven particulars.

First, The righteous man has a better tenure ^o this little, Heb. 1. 2.
equal right in the first Adam to all the good things of this world; but in his
fall, we lost our original right to the good things of this world. But now the
righteous man by the second Adam has recovered his right to all he enjoyes. Rom
8. 32. How shall he not with him a so freely give us all things? 1 Cor. 3. 21.
All things are yours. v. 22. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world,
or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours. But how
come they to be interested in this large Char^er? the Apostle answers it in
ver. 23. Ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. All comes to us by Jesus Christ.
All the Corn in Egypt came through Joseph's Genesis 41.
hands. So all we have, be it little or much, we have i^ through Christ's hands
upon the account of our marriage union with Christ. We may say as Hamar and
Sechem said to their people, Shall not all their Cattle, and substance, and
Genesis 34. 23.
every beast of the field be ours? So being married to Christ, and become one
with him, all comes to be ours, through him who is the heir of all. By virtue
of our marriage union with Christ, our title to the creatures is not only
restored, but strengthened. That little we have, is entailed upon us by Christ,
in a more firm and b^tter way than ever. In the first Adam our Tenure was
lower, and meaner, and baser, and uncertainer, than now it is: for our Title,
our Tenure by Christ is more honorable, and stronger, and sweeter, and
lastinger, than ever it was before. For now we hold all we have in Capite,
Christ is our head, and husband, and by him we hold all we have. But now wicked
men by the fall of Adam have lost their Original Patent and Charter which once
they had to show for the things of this life. By Adams fall they have forfeited
Gods primitive donation of all right in the creatures, every wicked man in the
world has forfeited his right to the creatures in Adam, and lies under that
forfeiture. But to the glory of divine patience be it spoken, God has not sued
out his forfeiture, God has not brought a Writ of ejection against him; and by
this means he comes to be lawfully possessed of those earthly blessings he dos
enjoy. As a Fellon though he has forfeited his life and estate to the Kings
Justice, and is still subject to ejection at the Kings pleasure, yet while the
King forbears him, his possession is good and lawful, and no man may disturb
him. Wicked men are lawful owners and possessors of the good things God has
given them, Numb. 22. 30. Am not I thine Ass? Whence you may observe.

1. That the silliest and simplest being wronged, may justly speak in their own
defense.

2. That they who have done many good Offices and fail in one, are often not
only unrewarded for former services, but punished for that one offense.

3. That when the creatures formerly officious to serve us, start from their
former obedience, man ought to reflect upon his own sin, as the sole cause
thereof.

4. That the worst men have good title to their own Consult these Scriptures.
Deuteronomy. 32. 8. Acts 17. 26. Luke 3. 14.
goods. For though Balaam was a Sorcerer, yet the Ass confesses twice, that he
was his Ass. Luke 12. 33. Sell and give, are words of propriety. And God has
set the eighth Commandment as a hedge, as a fence to every man's possession.
Dan. 4. 17. This matter is by the Decree of the Watchers; and the demand by the
word of the Holy Ones, to the intent that the living may know, that the Most
High rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and
sets up over it the basest of men. He that gave Canaan to Jacob, gave
Mount-Seir to Esau, and did not Jacob Genesis 23. 3. 4, 5, 9. Genesis 42. 3, 5.
buy a burying place of the Sons of H^^h, and did he not buy Corn of the
Egyptians? by all which, they did acknowledge, that those wicked men and
Idolaters had a lawful Title to those temporal blessings that they did enjoy.
Now mark, God as he is the God of Nature, by common Providence allo^s to wicked
men their lawful possessions: and this is the best Tenure they hold by. O b^t
now that little that a child of God has, ^he holds it by a more glor^ous
tenure, and honorable Title; and therefore his m^te is b^^ter than a wicked
man's millions. But,

Secondly, That little a righteous man has, he has 2 Pet. 1. 4.
a little mercy reached out to a man through the Covenant, and as a fruit of the
promise, is more worth, than a world of blessings, that flow in upon a man
merely by a gen^r^l Providence. There are no mercies so sweet, so sure, so
firm, so lasting, as those that flow in upon us through the Covenant of Grace.
O this sweetens every drop, and sip, and crust, and crum of mercy that a godly
man enjoyes. All the paths Psalm 25. 10.
of the Lord are mercy and truth, to such as keep his Covenant. This is a sweet
promise, a precious promise, a soul satisfying promise, a promise more worth
than all the riches of the Indies. Mark, all the paths of the Lord to his
people, are not only mercy, but they are mercy and truth; that Consult these
Scriptures, Josh. 23. 14, 15. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
is, they are sure mercies that str^am in upon them through the Covenant. Well
Sirs* you must remember this, viz. That the least mercy, the least blessing
flowing in upon us through the promise, is more worth than a thousand blessings
that flow in upon us from a general Providence: the least blessing flowing in
upon us through the Cov^n^nt, is better than ten thousand Talents, that are the
mere products of a general Providence. For,

First, Such as enjoy all they have, only from a general Providence, Psalm 145.
15, 16.
pring that feeds the Birds of the Air, and the beasts of the Field. The same
common bounty of God that feeds and clothes the wicked, feeds the Birds and
Beasts that perish. But,

Secondly, There is no certainty of the continuance of such Isa. 33. 16.
But now the mercies that flow in upon the Saints through the Covenant of
Grace, they shall be sure to us, so long as the Chap. 55. 3.
continuance of them may be for our good and Gods glory. Now the least mercies
held by Covenant, are infinitely better than the greatest riches in the world
that only drop up on us out of the hand of a common Providence.

Thirdly, The Righteous man has his little from the special Psalm. 146. 8.
Prove. 15. 17.
him from that very same love which moved the Lord to bestow Christ upon him.
All the righteous man's little is from the good will of him that dwelt in the
Bush: his little comes Deuteronomy. 33. 16.
from a reconciled God, as well as a bountiful God: from a tender Father, as
well as a merciful Creator. A Dinner of Dan. 1. 12.
green Herbs, Daniels Pulse, Barley Loaves, a few Fishes, yea, Lazarus his
scraps, crusts and rags, and John's Garment of Camels hair, from reconciled
love, is infinitely better than all the riches and dainties of the wicked,
which are all mixed and mingled with crosses and curses. All the mercies and
Prove. 3. 33. Mal. 2. 2. Psalm. 78. 30, 31.
abundance that wicked men have, is in wrath, and from wrath: there is wrath in
every cup they drink in, and in every dish they eat in, and in every bed they
lie on, and in every stool they sit on. But the little the righteous man has,
flows from the sweetest springs of divine love: so that they may well say as
Gideon did. The gleanings of the Grapes Judges 8. 2.
of Ephraim, is it not better than the Vintage of Abiezer. The very gleanings
of the righteous are better than the greatest Vintages of the wicked. The
abundance of the wicked still flows in upon them from the bitter streams of
Divine Wrath. A little water flowing from a sweet spring, is much better, than
a great deal that flows from the salt Sea. The loving kindness of God dos
raise the least estate above the greatest estate in the world: yea, it raises
it above life it self (or lives Chajim) which is the best of all temporal Psalm
63. 3.
blessings. Ten pound given by a King out of favor and respect, is a better
gift, than a thousand given in wrath and displeasure. But,

Fourthly, The little that the righteous man has is blessed Deuteronomy. 28. 8, 9.
Psalm 3. 8. Genesis 22. 17. Chap. 26. 12. Prove. 10. 22. Deuteronomy. 28. 16, 17, 18, 19,
20. Prove. 3. 33. Mal. 2. 2.
Scriptures in the Margent together. A little blessed unto a man, is better than
all the world cursed. Now all the blessings and mercies that the wicked do
enjoy, though they are matetially blessings, yet they are formally curses: as
all the crosses that befalls a righteous man, though they are materially
crosses, yet they are formally blessings. The habitations, relations, honors,
riches, etc. of the wicked are all crust unto them. There is poison in every
cup the wicked man drinks, and snares in every dish he puts his fingers in, the
Plague in all the clothes he wears, and a curse upon the house in which he
dwells. Zech. 5. 3, 4. Then he said unto me, this is the curse that goes forth
over the face of the whole earth: for every one that steals, shall be cut off
as on this side, according to it, and every one that swears, shall be cut
off, as on that side, according to it. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of
Hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the Thief, and into the house of
him that swears falsely by my Name; and it shall remain in the midst of his
house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof.
So Job 24. 18. Their portion is cursed in the earth. A fat purse and a fat
heart, a whole estate and a whole heart, a fat body and a lean soul. Psalm. 106.
15. He sent leanness into their souls. All the blessings of the wicked have
their but. As the Cup in Benjamins Sack, which proved a snare to him, rather
than a mercy. O the curses and vexations that attend all the blessings of the
wicked! It may be said of the little that a righteous man has, as it was once
said of Jacobs Garment, It is like a field which the Lord has blessed. He
blesses the habitations of the just. Esau had Prove. 3. 33.
a fair estate left him, and Jacob a less, yet Jacobs was a better estate than
Esau's, because his little was blessed to him, when Esau's much was cursed to him.
One little draught of clear wat^r, is better than a Sea of brackish salt water.
The application is easy. But,

Fifthly, A little improved and well husbanded, is better improved, is much
better than a great Farm, that is either not improved, or ill improved. A
little money, a little stock in a Shop well improved, is better than a great
deal of money, a great stock, that is either not improved, or ill improved. Now
here give me leave to show you briefly how a godly man improves his little.
Take me thus.

First, A godly man improves his little to the stirring up of Psalm 103. 1, 2,
3. Psalm 116. 12, 13.
blessing of God for a little. Every drop the Dove drinks, he lifts up his head
to Heaven. Every Bird in his kind (says Ambrose) does chirp forth thankfulness
to his Maker. So the righteous man will bless God much for a little; yea, he
will bless God very much for a very little. But,

Secondly, A righteous man improves his little to the humbling 2 Samuel 7. 18.
much below the least of mercies, Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy of the least of
all the mercies which thou have showed unto thy servant. A righteous man
labors to have his heart lie low under the sense of the least sin, and under
the smart of the least rod, and under the sight of the least mercy. But,

Thirdly, A righteous man improves his little to the arming Genesis 39. 7, 8, 9,
10.
mercies are many times great arguments to keep a gracious soul from sin. But,

Fourthly, A righteous man improves his little to the relief 2 Cor. 8. 1, 2, 3,
4. Heb. 6. 10.
and whose pinching necessities call for supplies. A poor man begging at a
Christians door who was very poor, he spoke to his Wife to give him something;
she answered, that she had but threepence in the house: says he, give him
that, for if we never sow, we shall never reap. There was another Christian,
who having given a little of his little to a man, began to think whether he had
injured himself; but presently he corrected himself with these thoughts, that
he had lent ^^ one, that would pay all again with advantage with interest upon
interest: within an hour after he had it restored above sevenfold, in a way
which he never thought of The Italian form of begging is, Do good for your
selves. But,

Fifthly, A righteous man improves his little to the stirring viz. spiritual
and eternal favors. O says the righteous man, if there be so much sweetness
in a few drops, and sips, and small draughts, and crusts, and scraps? Psalm. 16.
ult. Joh. 4. 10, 11. 14. Chap. 6. 4. Rev. 19. 8.
What is in those everlasting springs of pleasure and delight, that be at Gods
right hand? If there be so much pleasantness in a piece of bread, and so much
warmth in a course Suit of clothes, what sweetness is there in the waters of
life? and what pleasantness is there in that bread of life that came down from
Heaven? and what warmth is there in that fine Linen that is the righteousness
of the Saints? etc. A righteous man looks upon his least temporals, to be a
strong engagement upon him, to seek after eternals. But now Matthew: 25.
wicked men are so far from improving their much, their riches, their great
riches, that they either hide their Talents, as that evil servant did his; or
else they prove Jaylors to their mercies; and make them servants to their
lusts, as pride, drunkenness, uncleanness, etc. Compare these Scriptures
together, Job 21. 1.-10. Amos 6. 1.-7. Psalm 73. Hos. 4. 7. Jer. 2. 31. Chap.
5. 7, 8, 9. Deuteronomy. 32. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. James 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. But,

Sixthly, The few mercies, the least mercies that the righteous Son remember
Psalm 17. 14. Luke 16. 25.
that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things. But now that little
that a godly man has, he has it as a pledge of Heaven, and as an earnest of
eternal favors and mercies. The little mercies the Saints enjoy, are doors of
hope, to let in greater and better mercies: those mercies a righteous man has,
are but in-lets to further mercies. When R^^^el had a Son, she called his name
Joseph, saying, the Lord shall add to me another Son. Every mercy that a
righteous man enjoyes Genesis 30. 24.
may well be called Joseph, because it is a certain pledge of some further and
greater mercy that is to be added to those the righteous man already enjoyes.
But,

Seventhly, The righteous man enjoyes his little with a Noah like quiet and
still Phil. 4. 12, 13.
in the midst of all the hurries, distractions, combustions and confusions that
be in the world. Though the righteous Prove. 10. 22. Chap. 15. 16, 17.
man has but from hand to mouth, yet seeing that God feeds him from Heaven as
it were with Manna, he is quiet and cheerful: but now wicked men have abundance
of vexation with their worldly abundance: as you see in Haman, Esther 5. 9, 11,
12. 13. Then went Haman forth that day joyfully and with a glad heart. But when
Haman saw Mordicai in the If I had an enemy, says Lat^mer, to whom I might
lawfully wish evil, I would chiefly wish him great store of riches; for then he
should never enjoy quiet.
Kings gate, that he stood not up nor moved for him, he was full of indignation
against Mordicai. And Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and the
multitude of his children, and all the things wherein the King had promoted
him, and how he had advanced him above the Princes and servants of the King.
Haman said moreover, yea, Esther the Queen did let no man come in with the King
unto the Banquet that she had prepared, but my self; and to morrow am I invited
unto her also with the King. Yet all this avails me nothing, so long as I see
Mordicai the Jew sitting at the Kings gate. It is seldom seen, that God allows
unto the greatest darlings of the world a perfect contentment. Something they
must have to complain of, that shall give an unsavory verdure to their
sweetest morsels, and make their felicity miserable. It was not simply
Mordicais sitting at the Kings gate, but Mordicais refusing to stand up, or to
move either Hat, head, or hand, or to bow any part of his body, that dampt all
Hamans joy, and that filled him with rage and vexation of spirit. The want of
little things, viz. a knee, a hat, will exceedingly vex and discompose an
ambitious spirit. So Ahab, though a King, yet when he was sick for Naboths
Vineyard, his heart did more afflict and vex it self with greedy longing for
that bit of 1 Kings 21. 4.
^arth, than the vast and spacious compass of a Kingdom could counter-comfort.
And so Alexander the Great in the midst of all his glory, he was exceedingly
vexed and discontented, because he could not make Ivy to grow in his Garden in
^h^raulus a ^oor man, was wearied out with care in keeping those great ^i^hes
which Cyrus had bestowed upon him.
Babylon. Contentment is a flower that dos not grow in Natures Garden. All the
Honors, riches, pleasures, profits and preferments of this world, cannot yield a
man one days contentment, they are all surrounded with briars and thorns. you
look upon my Crown and my Purple Robes said that great King Cyrus, but did you
but know how they were lined with Thorns you would never stoop to take them up.
Charles the Fifth Emperor of Germany, whom of all men the world judged most
happy, cried out at last with grief and detestation to all his honors,
pleasures, trophies, riches, Abite hinc, abite long: Get you hence; let me
hear no m^re of you. Who can sum up the many grievances, fears, jealousies,
disgraces, interruptions, temptations and Oh how sweet is it, to want ^hese
bitter-sweets.
vexations that men meet with in their very pursuit after the things of this
world. Riches are compared to thorns: and indeed all the comforts the wicked
enjoy, they have more or less of the thorn in them. And indeed riches may well
be called thorns; because they pierce both head and heart: the one with care of
getting, and the other with grief in parting with them. The world and all the
glory thereof, is like a beautiful Harlot: a Paradise to the eye, but a
Purgatory to the soul. A wicked man under all his enjoyments,

1. Enjoyes not the peace of his conscience upon any just or solid grounds.

2. He enjoyes not the peace of contentment upon any sober or righteous
grounds. But now a righteous man with his little, enjoyes both peace of
conscience, and peace of contentment; and this makes every better sweet, and
every little sweet to be exceeding sweet. A dish of green Herbs with peace of
conscience, and peace of contentment, is a noble feast, a continual feast to a
gracious soul. But,

Eighthly, the righteous man sees God, and acknowledges Job. 1. 21. Genesis 27.
28. Chap. 33. 10, 11.
see God in the least affliction, in the least judgment, will never be truly
humbled; so he that cannot see God in the least mercy, will never be truly
thankful, nor cheerful in every crust, crum, drop and ^ip of mercy that a
righteous man enjoyes, he sees much of the love of his God, and the care of his
God, and the wisdom of his God, and the power of his God, and the faithfulness
of his God, and the goodness of his God, in making the least provision for him.
I have read of the Jews, how that when they read the little Book of Esther,
they let fall the Book on the ground, and they give this reason for that
Ceremony, because the name of God is not to b^ found in all that History. So a
righteous man is ready to le^ that mercy drop out of his hand, out of his mouth
wherein he cannot read his God, and see his God, and taste his God, and enjoy
his God. But now wicked m^n may say, as Elisha did in another case:

Here is the mantle of Elijah, but where is the God of Elijah? 2 Kings 2. 4.
Here is abundance of riches, and honors, and dignities, etc. but where is the
God of all these comforts?

But alas, they mind not God, they see not God, they acknowledge not God in all
they have, in all they enjoy: as you may see, by comparing the Scriptures in
the Margent together. Hos. 2. 5, 8, 9. Isa. 1. 3, 4. Jer. 2. 6. Esther 5. 10,
11, 12. Luke 12. 19.
Wicked men are like the Horse and the Mule, that drinks of the brook, but
never think of the spring. They are like to the Swine that eats up the Mast,
but never looks to the Tree from whence the Mast falls. They are like such
barren ground, that swallows up the seed, but returns nothing to the sower. A
dunghill spirited fellow in our days being by a neighbor excited to bless God
for a rich crop of Corn he had standing on his ground; Atheistically replied,
Thank God! Nay rather thank my Dung-Cart! I have read of a great Cardinal, who
writing down in his Diary, what such a Lord did for him, and how far such a
Prince favored him, and what encouragement he had from such a King; and how
such a Pope preferred him, but not one word of God in all. One reading of it,
took his Pen and wrote underneath, here God did nothing. But,

Ninthly, The little the righteous man has, is enough: Psalm. 23. 1, 2. Phil.
4. 12, 13. 1 Timothy 6. 6.
bear his charges till he gets to Heaven. Genesis 33. 11. I have enough, says
Jacob to Esau. Genesis 45. 28. And Israel said, it is enough; Joseph my Son is yet
alive. Though the righteous man has but little, yet he has enough for his
place and calling in which God has placed him, and enough for his charge,
whether it be great or small, he has enough to satisfy Prove. 30. 8.
nature, enough to preserve natural life. Hagar is but for food If thou live
according to nature, thou will never be ^oor, if according to opinion, ^hou
wilt never be rich.
convenient, convenient for his life, not for his lusts; he prays for enough
to satisfy necessity, convenience, not concupiscence: he begs for Bread, not
for Quails: he begs that nature may be sustained, not pampered. Though it be
true, that nothing will satisfy a wicked man's lusts; yet it is as true, that a
little will satisfy nature, and less will satisfy Grace. Jacob vows, that the
Lord should be his God, if he would but give him bread to eat, and raiment to
put on. This was the first holy Vow that ever we read of; Hence Jacob is called
the Father of Vows. He begs not Genesis 28. 20, 21.
dainties to seed him, nor Silks, nor Sattins to clothe him; but bread to feed
him, though never so course, and clothes to cover him, though never so mean.
Job is only for necessary food. A little will satisfy a temperate Christian.
Luther made many a meal of Bread and a Red Herring; and Job 23. 12. He is rich
enough, that lacks not bread, and high enough in dignity, that is not forced
to serve. Jerome. John 6. 9. to the 15. 1 Kings 17. 12. v. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Junius made many a meal of Bread and an Egg. Nature laps only, like those
three hundred Soldiers, Judges 7. 6. When Christ fed the people graciously,
miraculously, he fed them not with Manchets and Quails, or Phesants, etc. but
with Barley Loaves and Fishes, a frugal, temperate, sober diet. If the handful
of meal in the Barrel, and the Oil in the Cruize fail not, and if the brook
and the running water fail not, Elijah can be well enough contented. But now
wicked men never have enough, they are never satisfied. They are like those
four things that Solomon speaks of, that are never satisfied, viz. The Grave,
the barren Womb, the Prove. 30. 15, 16. Psalm. 17. 14.
earth and the fire. That is an observable passage of the Psalmist, Thou
fillest their bellies with thy hid treasures. To a worldly wicked man all these
outward things are but a b^lly-full: and how soon is the belly emptied, after
it is once filled. Though many rich men have riches enough to sink them, yet
they have never enough to satisfy them. Like him that wished for a thousand
Sheep in his flock, and when he had them, he wished for other Cattle without
number. When Alexander had all the Crowns and Scepters of the Princes of the
world piled up at his Gates, he wishes for another world to conq^er. The eye is
not satisfied with seeing, nor Eccles. 1. 8.
the ear with hearing. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with
silver; nor he that loves abundance with increase. Chap. 5. 10.
There is enough and enough in silver, in abundance of silver to vex and fret
the soul of man, but not to satisfy the soul of man. God himself is the only
center of centers, and as the soul can never rest, till it return to him (as
the Dove Genesis 8. 9. The poor Heathen could say, I desire neither more nor less
than enough. For I may as well dye of a surfeit, as of hunger.
to the Ark) so it can never be filled, stilled, or satisfied, but in the
enjoyment of him. All the beauty of the world, is but deformity; all the
brightness of the world, is but blackness; all the light of the world, is but
bitterness: and therefore it is impossible for all the bravery and glory of this
world, to give absolute satisfaction to the soul of man. Solomon the wisest
Prince that ever sat upon a Throne, after his most diligent, curious, critical
and impartial search into all the creatures, give this as the summa totalis,
and product of his enquiries, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. And how then
can any of these things, yea, all these things heaped up together, satisfy the
soul of man. H^b. 2. 5. He enlarges his desire as Hell, and is as death, and
cannot be satisfied, but gathers unto him all Nations, and heapeth unto him
all people. This is spoken of the King of Babylon, who though he had gathered
to him all Nations and people; yea, and all their vast Treasures also, Isa. 10.
13. I have robbed their treasures. ver. 14. And my hand has found as a nest,
the riches of his people: and as one gathers Eggs that are left, have I
gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the
mouth, or peeped. And yet for all this, was his desire enlarged as Hell, and
could not be satisfied. The desires of worldlings are boundless and endless,
and there is no satisfying of them. It Is not all the Gold of Ophir, or Peru,
nor all the Pearls or Mines of India: it is not Joseph's Chains, nor David's
Crowns, nor Hamans Honors, nor Daniels Dignities, nor Dives his riches, that
can satisfy an immortal soul.

Tenthly, The little that the righteous man has, is more Job. 5. 20, 21, 22.
is better than their millions. Psalm. 34. 9, 10. O fear the Lord, ye his
Saints: for there is no want to them that fear him. The young Lions do lack,
and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing.
Such as are separated from the worlds lusts, can live with a little. Such as
set up God as the object of their fear, have no cause to fear the want of any
thing. When David was a captive amongst the Philistines, he wanted nothing. Paul
had nothing, and yet 2 Cor. 6. 10.
possessed all things. A godly man may want many good things that he thinks to
be good for him, but he shall never Heb. 13 5, 6. Prove. 10. 3
want any good thing that the Lord knows to be good for him. We do not esteem
of Tenure for life, as we do of freehold, because life is a most uncertain
thing. Ten pound a year for ever, is better than a hundred in hand. All the
promises are Gods Bonds, and a Christian may put them in suit when he will, and
hold God to his word; and that not only for his spiritual and eternal life; but
also for his natural life, his temporal life; but so cannot the wicked. The
temporal Prove. 10. 3. Psalm 37. 34, 35, 36. Jer. 17. 11. Job 20. 20. ult.
estate of the wicked is seldom long-lived, as you may see, by comparing the
Scriptures in the Margent together. Alexander the Great Conqueror of the world,
caused to be painted on a Table a Sword in the compass of a Wheel, showing
thereby, that what he had gotten by the Sword was subject to be turned about
the wheel of Providence. There is no more hold to be had of riches, honors, or
preferments, than Saul had of Samuels lap. They do but like the Rainbow show
themselves in all their dainty colors, and then van^sh away. There are so many
sins, and so many crosses, and so many curses that usually attend the riches of
the wicked, that it is very rare to see their estates long-lived. Hence their
great estates are compared to the Chafe, which a puff of wind disperseth; to
the Grass which the scorching Sun quickly withers: to the tops of Corn, which
are soon Job 24. 24.
cut off; and to the unripe Grape, Job 15. 33. He shall shake off his unripe
Grape as the Vine, and shall cast off his flower as the Olive. Every days
experience confirms us in this truth. But,

Eleventhly and lastly, The little that the righteous man Matthew. 25.
that his children have done for others, but he will never bring them to an
account, for what he has done for them. Christ in this great day will,

1. Remember all the individual offices of love and friendship that has been
showed to any of his members.

2. He will mention many good things which his children did, which they
themselv^s never minded. Verse 37.


3 The least and lowest acts of love and pity that have been showed to Christ's
suffering servants, shall be interpreted Verse 40.
as a special kindness showed to himself.

4. The recompense that Christ will give to his people in Verse 44, 46.
that day shall be exceeding great. Here is no calling of them to the book or
to the bar for the merci^s that they were entrusted with. But O the sad, the
great accounts, that the wicked have to give up for all their Lands and
Lordships, for all their Honors, Offices, Dignities and Riches. To whom Luke
12. 48.
much is given, much shall be required. Christ in the great day will reckon
with all the Grandees of the world for every thousand, for every hundred, for
every pound, yea, for every penny that he has entrusted them with. All Princes,
Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17. Luke 16. 2. Eccles. 12. 14.
Nobles and people that are not interested in the Lord Jesus, shall be brought
to the book, to the bar in the great day, to give an account of all they have
received and done in the flesh. But Christ's darlings shall then be the only
welcome guess. Matthew. 25. 34. Then shall the King say to them on his right
hand, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from
the foundation of the world. Before the world was founded, the Saints were
crowned in Gods eternal counsel. Here is no mention made of the book or the
Some of the more refined Heathen have had some kind of dread and fear in their
spirits upon the consideration of a day of account, as the writings of Plato
and Tully, etc. do sufficiently evidence.
bar, but of a Kingdom, a Crown, a Diadem. Now by these eleven Arguments it is
most evident, that the little that the righteous man has, is better than the
riches of the wicked; the righteous man's mite, is better than the wicked man's
millions. But,

The eighth Maxim that I shall lay down, to put a stop to viz. That the life of
man consists not in the enjoyment of these earthly things, which he is so apt
inordinately to affect, Luke 12. 15. And he said unto them, take heed, and
beware of covetousness. For a man's life consists not in the abundance of the
things which he poss^sseth. Whether we consider man's life, in the length and
continuance of it, or in the comfort of it: It consists not in riches; for no
man lives a day longer or merrier for his riches. Though possessions are useful
to sustain life, yet no man is able to prolong his life, or to make it any
thing more happy or comfortable to him, by possessing more than he needs or
uses. It Is not the Golden Crown that can cure the headache, nor the Velvet
Slipper that can case a man of the Gout, nor the Purple Robe that can fray away
a burning Fever. Mark, the life of man is so far from consisting in the
enjoyment of these earthly things, that Jer. 17. 11
many times they hasten a man to his long home. Many a man's Coffer has hastened
him to his Coffin; and as many a man has lost his finger for his Rings sake, so
many a man has lost his life for his Purses sake. In all the Ages of the world
many a man has deeply suffered for his means. Naboth lost his life 1 Kings 21.
Pluta^ch in vita Syllae.
for his Vineyards sake. Quintus Aurelius in the days of Sylla lost his life
by reason of his Lands. Many a man's means Jos^^hus When Zeli^u^ Emperor of
Constantinople, had taken Ae^ypt, he found a great deal of Treasure there; and
the Soldiers asking of him, what they should do with the Citizens of Egypt
having found a great treasure among them: O says the Emperor, Hang them all
up, for they are too rich to be made slaves.
has hanged him. Many a man has deeply suffered for his means sake. The Romans
ripped up the bellies and bowels of the Jews to search for Gold. The Americans
had been more safe, had they had less Gold. They thought Gold was the Spaniards
God. But how the Spaniards played the Devil to get their Gold, I shall not at
this time take pleasure to relate. Now if our temporal life consists not in any
of these earthly things, then certainly our spiritual life consists not in any
of these earthly things. For what Religious duty is there that a b^liever cannot
do, though he has neither money in his Bagg, nor dainties on his Table. And as
our spiritual life consists not in any of these earthly things, so our eternal
life consists not in any of these earthly things: for as all the treasures of
this world cannot bring a soul to Heaven, so they cannot keep a soul from
dropping down to Hell.

This worlds wealth that men so much desire,
May well be likened to a burning fire,
Whereof a little can do little harm:
But profit much our bodies well to warm:
But take too much, and surely thou shall burn.
So too much wealth to too much woe dos turn.
But,

The ninth Maxim that I shall lay down to put a stop to viz. That there is no
rest to be found in any earthly enjoyments. Rest is the center at which all
intellectual natures, as well as natural bodies aim at. A man that is
inordinately in love with the world, can never be at rest. The Drunkard
sometimes rests from his cups, and the unclean person from his filthiness, and
the swearer from his Oaths, and the Idolater from his Idols, but the worldling
is never at rest: his head and heart are still a plodding and a plotting how to
get, and how to keep the things of this world. Eccles. 5. 12. The sleep of the
laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much; but the abundance of the
rich will not suffer him to sl^ep. These three Vultures, care of getting, fear
of He that is ^ich in conscience (says Austin) sleeps more sound^y, than he
that is richly clothed in Purple Luke 12. 20.
keeping, and grief of losing, feed day and night upon the heart of a rich and
wretched worldling, so that his sleep departs from him. Sometimes his abundance
lies like a lump of Lead heavy upon his heart, so that he cannot rest.
Sometimes his conscience dos so lash, and lance, and g^u^e him for what he has
got by indirect ways and means, that he cannot sleep. Sometimes God himself
will not suffer him to sleep: Sometimes God shows him the handwriting upon
Dan. 5. 5, 6.
the wall: sometimes he terrifies him with dreams: and sometimes he throws
hand-fulls of Hell fire in his face, as once he did into Judas's, and this
hinders his rest. Sometimes Matthew. 26. 24.
by their excessive eating and drinking, their gluttony, their delicious fare,
they overcharge nature, which causes ind^gestion and malignant vapors,
whereby sleep is wholly removed, or else much disturbed. Earthly riches
August^ne.
are an evil Master, a treacherous Servant, Fathers of flattery, Sons of grief,
a cause of fear to those that have them, and a cause of sorrow to those that
want them: and therefore what rest is there to be found in the enjoyment of
them. The Prior in Melancthon, rolled his hands up and down in a Had a man as
much hono^ and dignity, profit and pleasure as himself could wish, or the ^orld
afford, yet within twenty four hours he would be weary of all, and must go to
sleep.
Basin full of Angels, thinking to have charmed his Gout, but this could give
him no case, no rest. Latimer in a Sermon before King Edward the sixth, tells a
story of a rich man, who when he lay upon his sick bed, one came to him, and
told him, that he was a dead man, that he was no man for this world: as soon as
ever the sick man heard these words (says Latimer) he cried out, must I die?
Send for a Physician, Wounds, side, heart, must I die? Wounds, side, heart,
must I dye? and thus he continued crying out, Wounds, side, heart, must I dye?
Must I dye and leave these riches behind me? All the riches that he had heaped
together, could give him no rest nor quiet, when the King of terrors knocked at
his doors. All the good things of this world have more or less of the Thorn in
them. And therefore what rest can they give? Achans Golden wedge proved a wedge
to cleave him, and his garment a garment to shroud him. In Spain they lived
happily, until fire made some Mountains vomit Gold: but what miserable discords
have followed ever since. It is only Heaven that is above all Winds, and Storms
and Tempests: neither has God cast man out of one Paradise, for him to think
to find out another Paradise in this world. But,

The tenth and last Maxim that I shall lay down, to put 10.
a stop to your too eager pursuit after the things of this world, is this, viz.
That it is a very high point of Christian wisdom and prudence, always to look
upon the good things, and the great things of this world, as a man will
certainly look upon them, when he comes to die. O with what a disdainful eye,
with what a contemptible eye, with what a scornful eye, and with what a weaned
heart and cold affections do men look upon all the pomp, state, bravery and
glory of the world, when their soul sits upon their trembling lips, and there
is but a short step between them and eternity. He that looks upon the world,
whilst he has it under his hand, as he will assuredly look upon it, when he is
to take his leave of it: he will

1. Never sin to get the world. Nor,

2. He will never grieve inordinately to part with the world. Nor,

3. He will never envy those who enjoy much of the world. Nor,

4. He will never dote upon the world, he will never be enamoured with the
world. I have read of a man, who lying in a burning Fever, professed that if he
had all the world at his dispose, he would give it all for one draught of Beer,
at so low a rate do men value the world at such a time as that is. King
Lysimachus lost his Kingdom for one draught of water to quench his thirst. If
men were but so wise to value the world at no higher a rate in health, than
they do in sickness; in the day of life, than they do at the hour of death;
they would never be fond of it, they would never be so deeply in love with it.
Now O that these ten Maxims may be so blessed to the Reader, as to crucify the
world to him, and him unto the world. Gal. 6. 14. He gave good counsel who
said, O man if thou be wise, let the world pass, lest thou Aust^n.
pass away with the world. Fix thy heart on God; let him be thy portion; fix
thy affections upon Christ, he is thy redemption; on Heaven, let that be thy
Mansion. O take that counsel, Love not the world, nor the things of the world.
1 John 2. 15.
Mark, he does not say, have not the world, nor the things of the world: but
love not the world, nor the things of the world: nor he does not say, use not
the world, nor the things of the world; but love not the world, nor the things
of the world: nor he does not say, take no moderate care for the world, nor the
things of the world: but love not the world, nor the things of the world. But
to prevent all mistakes, give me leave to prem^se these three things.

First, It Is lawful to desire earthly things, so far as they As Mr. Tindal the
Martyr, said, I desire these earthly things, so far as they may be helps to the
keeping of thy commandments.
passenger when he comes to a deep River, desires a Boat, but not for the Boats
sake, but that he may pass over the River, for could he pass over the River
without a Boat, he would never cry out, a Boat, a Boat: or as the Traveller
desires his Inn, not for the Inns sake, but as it is a help, a furtherance to
him in his journey homewards; or as the Patient desires Physic, not for
Physic sake, but in order to his health. So a Christian may lawfully desire
earthly things in order to his glorifying of God; and as they may be a help to
him in his Christian course, and a furtherance to him in his heavenly race,
Heb. 12. 1. But,

Secondly, We may desire earthly things in subordination

Thirdly, We may desire such a measure of earthly things, Prove. 30. 8, 9. 1 Timothy 6. 8.
place, calling relation and condition wherein the Providence of God has set
us. As a Master, Magistrate, Prince, Lord, Gentleman, etc. A little of these
earthly things, and a few of these earthly things, may be sufficient to the
order, place, calling and condition of life wherein some men are placed, but
not sufficient for a King, a Lord, a Magistrate, a General, etc. These must
have their Counselors, their Guards, variety of attendance, and variety of the
creatures, etc. A little portion of these earthly things is sufficient for
some: and a great and large portion of these earthly things, is but sufficient
for others. Less may serve the Servant, than the M^ster, the Child than the
Father, the Pesant than the Prince, etc. The too eager pursuit of most men
after the things of this world to make up the losses that they sustained by the
fire, has been the true cause, why I have insisted so largely upon this ninth
Duty that we are to learn by that fiery dispensation that has past upon us.

The tenth Duty that lies upon those who have been 10.
burnt up, is to be very importunate with God, to take away those sins that
have laid our City desolate, and to keep off from sin for the time to come, and
to look narrowly to your spirits, that you do not charge the Lord foolishly,
because he Mal. 2. 15.
has brought you under his fiery rod. Job 1. 16. While he was yet speaking,
there came also another and said, the fire of God is fallen from heaven, and
has burnt up the sheep, and the servants, and consumed them, and I only am
escaped alone to tell thee. v. 22. In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God
foolishly. The fire of God (that is, a great, fierce and terrible fire) that
fell from Heaven, and consumed Jobs sheep and servants, was a more terrible
Judgment, than all the former Judgments that befell them, because God seemed
to fight against Job with his own bare hand, by fire from Heaven, as once he
did against Sodom: In all this Job sinned not: that is, in all this that Job
suffered, acted and uttered, there was not any thing that was materially
sinful. Satan he said, that if God would but touch all that he had, Job would
curse him to his face; but when it came to the proof, there was no such thing.
For Job had a fair and full victory over him, and Satan was proved a loud liar.
For Job sinned not in thought, word or deed: Job did neither speak, nor do any
thing that was dishonorable to God, or a reproach to his Religion, or a wound
to his conscience: under this fiery trial Job did not so much as entertain one
hard thought concerning God: nor let fall one hard word concerning God, under
all the evils that befell Job. Job still thinks well of God, and speaks well of
God, and carries it well toward God: Certainly Job had a great deal of God
within him, which kept him from sinning under such great and grievous
sufferings. O Sirs, it is a far greater mercy to be kept from sinnings under
our sufferings, than it is to be delivered from the greatest sufferings. Jobs
heart was so well seasoned with Grace, that he would admit of no insolent or
unfavoury thoughts of God, or of his severest Providence. In all this Job
sinned not, nor charged God foolishly, or with folly. Some refer the former
part of this Verse to the mind, and the latter to the mouth: showing that Job
(though he had lost all) neither thought in his heart, nor uttered with his
mouth any thing unmeet and unworthy of God. The meek, humble, patient and
gracious b^haviour of Job under all his sore losses and crosses, is here owned,
renowned, crowned and chronicled by God himself. O Sirs, sinning is worse than
suffering; it is better to see a people bleeding, than blaspheming; burning,
than cursing; for by men's sins God is dishonored, but by their sufferings God
is glorified. O that the Christian Reader would seriously consider of these
twelve things,

1. That there is nothing that the great God hates Prove. 6. 16, 17. Jer. 49. 4.
Romans 1. 18. Heb. 6. 6. Ephesians. 4 30. Matthew. 26. ult. Psalm. 30. 6, 7. Isa. 49. 1,
2. Mal. 2. 2. Jer. 4. 18.
but sin.

2. That there is nothing that he has revealed his wrath from Heaven against,
but sin.

3. That there is nothing that crucifies the Lord of Glory a fresh, but sin.

4. That there is nothing that grieves the Spirit of Grace, but sin.

5. That there is nothing that wounds the conscience, but sin.

6. That there is nothing that clouds the face of God, but sin.

7. That there is nothing that hinders the return of prayer, but sin.

8. That there is nothing that interrupts our communion with God, but sin,

9. That there is nothing that imbitters our mercies, but sin.

10. That there is nothing that puts a sting into all our troubles and trials,
but sin.

11. That there is nothing that renders us unserviceable in our places,
stations and conditions, but sin.

12. That there is nothing that makes Death the King of terrors, and the terror
of Kings to be so formidable and terrible to the Sons of men, as sin. And
therefore under all your sorrows and sufferings, crosses and losses, make it
your great business, to arm your selves against sin, and to pray against sin,
and to watch against sin, and to turn from sin, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. Isa. 16, 17.
Chap. 55. 7. Hos 14. 8. Isa. 30. 22.
and to cease from sin, and to get rid of sin, and to stand for ever in
defiance of sin. Assuredly every gracious heart had rather be rid of his sins,
than of his sufferings, Job 7. 21. And why do thou not take away mine
iniquity, or lift up, as the Hebrew runs, to note, that though Job had many
loads, many burdens upon him, yet none lay so heavy upon him, as his sin, Hos.
14. 2. Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously. It Is not take away
our captivity, and receive us graciously; but take away our iniquity, and
receive us graciously: nor it is not take away this or that particular
iniquity, and receive us graciously, but take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously; take away stain and sting, crime and curse, power and punishment,
that we may never hear more of it, nor never feel more of it: nor never be
troubled any more with it. Though their bondage was great, very Dan. 9. 11, 12,
13.
great, yea, greater than any people under Heaven were exercised with, yet
their sins were a more unsupportable burden to their spirits, than their
bondage was. And therefore they cry out, Take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously. And this was the usual method of David, when he was under sore
troubles and trials, he was more importunate with See Psalm. 79. 1, 5, 8. Psalm.
25. 7. Psalm. 32. 4, 5. Psalm. 38. 3, 4.
God to be purged and pardoned, than he was to be cased under his troubles, or
delivered from his troubles, Psalm. 51. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity,
and cleanse me from my sin. verse 7. Purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean:
wash me and I shall be whiter than Snow. ver. 9. Hide thy face from my sin^,
and blot out all mine iniquities. ver. 14. Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O
God. When Pharaoh was under the Exodus 10.
hand of the Lord, he was all for removing of the Plagues, the Frogs, the
Locusts, etc. But when David was under the hand of the Lord, he was all for the
removing of his sins, and for the cleansing, purging, and washing away of his
sins. O that all the burnt Citizens of London would be more earnest and
importunate with God to pardon, and purge, and take away all those iniquities
that have brought the fiery rod upon them, than they are studious and
industrious to have their credits repaired, their houses rebuilded, their
Trades restored, and all their losses made up to them. O that they might all be
driven by what they have selt, seriously to consider what they have done. No
man says what have I done. O that they would all blame themselves more, and
their sins more, and to turn to him who has so sorely Jer. 8. 6. Hos. 6. 1, 2,
3. Isa. 56. 6. Ezekiel. 36. 33, 37.
smitten them, and lay hold on his strength, and make peace with him, that so
he may yet build up their waste places, and make up their breaches, and repair
their losses, and never turn away from doing of them good, Jer. 32. 41, 42, 43,
44. But,

The eleventh Duty that they are to learn that have been Isa. 9. 12. Rev. 11.
18.
face of the times seem sorely to threaten us with greater troubles, than any
yet we have encountered with. Ah London, London! Ah England, England, the
Clouds that hang over thee, seem every day to be blacker and blacker, and
thicker and thicker: thou have suffered much, and thou have cause to fear, that
thou may suffer more: thou have been brought low: yea, thou art this day
brought very low in the eyes of the Nations round about thee, and yet thou
may be Deuteronomy. 28. 43. 2 Chronicles. 28. 18, 19. Deuteronomy. 32. 36.
brought lower before the day of thy exaltation comes. When God intends to
raise a person, a City, a Nation high, very high, he then usually brings them
low, very low, and when Psalm. 79. 8. Psalm. 135. 23. Psalm. 142. 6. Isa. 26. 10,
11. Jer. 8. 6.
they are at lowest, then the day of their exaltation is nearest. It Is commonly
darkest a little before break of day. The hand of the Lord has been lifted up
high, yea, very high over us, and against us, but who repents, who reforms, wh^
returns to the Most High, who smites upon his thigh, wh^ says what have I
done? who finds out the Plague of hi^ Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18. Psalm 106. Hos. 12. 4.
own heart? who cease from doing evil? who learns to do well? who stirs up
himself to take hold of God? who stands in the gap? who wrestles and weeps, and
weeps and wrestles to turn away those judgments that this day threatens us? So
long as sin remains rampant, and men continu^ impenitent, there is reason to
fear a worse scourge than any yet we have been under. Pharaohs stubbornness did
but Exodus 9. 17.
increase his plagues: the more stout and unyielding we are under judgments,
the more chains God will still put on. Eccles. 5. 8.
When his hand is lifted up, we must either bow or break. Such as have been
under the smart rebukes of God, and John 5. 14.
will not take Christ's warning, to go their way and sin n^ more, have reason to
fear his inference, that a worse thing will come upon them. The face of present
Providence looks dismal: dreadful sufferings seem to be near, very near, even
at our very doors. Yet to prevent fainting, we must Isa. 26. 20.
remember, that God never wants chambers to hide his people in, till his
indignation be over past. God has ways enough to preserve his wheat, even
when the whirlwind carries away the chaff. God can find an Ark for his Noah's,
when a flood of wra^h sweeps away sinners on every hand: and God can provide a
Zoar for his Lots, when he rains fire and brimstone upon all round about them.
Look, as God many times by lesser mercies fits his people for greater mercies;
so God many times by lesser judgments fits his people for greater judgments:
and who can tell, but that the design of God by the late Judgments of Fire,
Sword and Pestilence, is to prepare and sit his people for greater judgments.
That God might have inflicted greater judgments than any yet he has inflicted
upon us: I have already proved by an induction of particulars, that greater
judgments may be prevented, and our present mercies continued and ^ncreased,
it highly concerns us to repent, and to turn to the Most High. There are seven
sorts of men who have high cause to fear worser Judgments than any yet have
been inflicted upon them.

1. Such who scorn and deride at the Judgments of God, Isa. 5 19. Jer. 17. 15.
and Chap. 20. 8. 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5.

2. Such who put off the Judgments of God to others, who cry out, O these
Judgments concern such and such, but not us.

3. Such who are no ways bettered nor reclaimed by Judgments.

4. Such as grow worser and worser under all the warnings and judgments, as
Pharaoh and Ahaz did, Isa. 1. 5. Jer. 5. 3. 2 Chren. 28. 22, 23.

5. Such as make no preparations to meet God, when he is in the way of his
Judgments, Amos 4. 12.

6. Such who are careless Gallioes that do not so much as mind or regard the
warnings of God, the judgments of God, Isa. 5. 12, 13.

7. Such as put the evil day far from them, as they did in Isa. 22. 12, 13. and
as they did in Amos 6. 3. and as the inhabitants of Jerusalem did a little
before their City was laid desolate. Some Writers tell us, that though the Jews
had a great many warnings by prodigious signs, and fearful apparitions
Hegesippus. Josephus, etc.
before Jerusalem was besieged, and the City destroyed: yet most of them
expounded the meaning of them in a more favorable sense to themselves, than
ever God intended, till the dreadful vengeance of God overtook them to the
utmost. It is the greatest wisdom and prudence in the world, to prepare and fit
for the worst. The best way on earth to prevent Judgments from falling upon
us, or if they do fall, to sweeten them to us, is to prepare for them. But,

The twelfth Duty that lies upon those who have been Londons Ashes tell you to
your faces, that you cannot secure your Houses, your Shops, your Estates, your
Trades, but the eternal well being of your souls may be secured. Every burnt
Citizen carries a Jewel, a Pearl of price, a rich Treasure about him; viz. a
Divine Matthew. 16. 26.
soul, which is more worth than all the world. As Christ who only went to the
price of souls, as told us, There is Psalm 19. 1, 2.
much of the Power, Wisdom, Majesty and Glory of God stamped upon the stately
fabric of this world, but there is more of the Power, Wisdom, Majesty and
Glory of God stamped upon an immortal soul. The soul is the glory of the
Creation. What Job speaks of Wisdom, is very applicable to the precious Job 28.
13, 16, 17.
soul of man. Man knows not the price thereof: It cannot be valued with the
Gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx, or the Sapphire. The Gold and the
Crystal cannot equal it: and the exchange of it, shall not be for Jewels of
fine Gold. The soul is a beam of God, a heavenly spark, a celestial plant; it
is the beauty of man, the wonder of Angels, Psalm 45. 13. Epictetus and many
others of the more refined Heathens have long since said that the body was but
the Organ, the soul was the man, the Merchandise.
the envy of Devils, and the glory of God. O how richly and gloriously has God
embroydered the soul. The Kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing
is of wrought Gold. The soul is divinely inlaid and enameled by Gods own hand.
The soul is of an Angelical nature, it is of a divine Offspring, it is a
spiritual substance capable of the knowledge of God, and of union with God, and
of communion with God, and of an eternal fruition of God. The soul is an
immortal substance, and that not only per gratiam, by the grace and favor of
God, as the body of Adam was in the state of innocence, and as the bodies of
Saints shall be at the resurrection, but per naturam, by its own nature, having
no internal principle of corruption, so as it cannot by any thing from within
it self cease to be; neither can it be annihilated by any thing from without.
Fear not them which kill the body, Matthew. 10. 28.
but are not able to kill the soul. Some have observed to my hand, that there
are three sorts of created spirits: the first of Gregory, etc.
those whose dwellings is not with with flesh, or in fleshly bodies, they are
the Angels: the second, of those which are wholly immersed in flesh, the souls
of beasts, which rise out of the power of the flesh, and perish together with
it: the third is of those which inhabit bodies of flesh, but rise out of the
power of the flesh, nor dye when the body dies; and these are the souls of
men. When the body returns to the Eccles. 12. 7.
earth as it was, the Spirit shall return to God who gave it. O Sirs, the soul
being immortal, it must be immortally happy, or immortally miserable. Certainly
there is no wisdom, nor policy to that of securing the everlasting welfare of
your souls. All the honors, riches, greatness and glory of this world, are but
chips, feathers tr^fles, p^bbles to your precious and immortal souls: and
therefore before all, and above all other things, make sure work for your
souls; if they are safe, all is safe; but if they are lost, all is lost, and
you cast and undone in both worlds. Chrys^stom observes, that whereas God has
given many other things double, two eyes to see with, two ears to hear with,
two hands to work with, and two feet to walk with, to the intent that the
sailing of the one might be supplied by the other, he has given us but one
soul, if that be lost, have thou another soul to give in recompense for it. If
you save your souls, though you should lose all you have in this world, your
loss would be a gainful loss; but if you lose your precious souls, though you
should gain all the world, yet your very gains will undo you for ever. You have
found by the late dreadful fire, that there is no securing of the things of
this world; and therefore make it your business, your work, to get a Christ for
your souls, grace for your souls, and a Heaven for your souls, that so though
all go to wrack h^re, yet your souls may be saved in the day of Christ. What
desperate madness and folly would it have been in any, when London was in
flames, to mind more, and endeavor more to save their Lumber, than their
Jewels; their goods in their Shops, than their Children in their Cradles, or
their Wives in their Beds; but it is a thousand times greater madness and
folly, for men to mind more, and endeavor more to secure their temporal
estates, than they do to secure their eternal estates. But,

The thirteenth duty that is incumbent upon those who Psalm 16. 5. Psalm 63. 26.
have lost your earthly portion, your earthly poss^ssions, O that you would now
labor with all your might, to get God Psalm. 119. 57. Jer. 10 16. Lam. 3. 24.
for your portion. If the loss of your earthly portions shall be so sanctified
to you, as to work you to make God your portion, then your unspeakable losses
will prove inconceivable gain unto you. O Sirs, God is the most absolute need
full and necessary portion: the want or the loss of earthly portions may afflict
and trouble you, but the want of God for your portion will certainly damn you:
it is not absolutely necessary, that you should have a portion in Gold, or
Silver, or Jewels, or Goods, or Houses, or Lands, or Lordships; but it is
absolutely necessary, that you should have God for your portion. Suppose that
with the Apostles, you have no certain dwelling place, nor no Gold, nor Silver
1 Cor. 4. 11. Acts 3. 6. Luke 16. 20, 21.
in your purses: Suppose with Lazarus you have never a rag to hang on your
backs, nor never a dry crust to put in your bellies: Suppose with Job you
should stripped of all your worldly comforts in a day; yet if God be your
portion, you are happy, you are really happy, you are signally happy, you are
greatly happy, you are unspeakably happy, you are eternally happy. However it
may go with you in this world, yet you shall be sure to be glorious in that
other world. To have God for thy portion O man, is the one thing necessary; for
without it thou art for ever and ever undone: If God be not thy portion, thou
can never enjoy communion with God in this world: if God be not thy portion,
thou can never be saved by him in the other world. Will you consider a little
what an excellent transcendent portion God is?

1. He is a present portion: he is a portion in hand, he is See my Matchless
Por^^on, from p. 8. to p. 107. where all these particulars are fully proved.
a portion in possession.

2. God is an immense portion, he is a vast large portion, he is the greatest
portion of all portions.

3. God is an all-sufficient portion.

4. God is a pure and unmixed portion: God is an unmixed good, he has nothing
in him but goodness.

5. God is a glorious, a happy and a blessed portion: he is so in himself, and
he makes them so too, who enjoy him for their portion.

6 God is a peculiar portion, a portion peculiar to his people.

7. God is a universal portion, he is a portion that includes all other
portions.

8. God is a safe portion, a secure portion, a portion that none can rob a
believer of.

9. God is a suitable portion. No object is so suitable and adequate to the
heart, as he is.

10. God is an incomprehensible portion.

11. God is an inexhaustible portion; a portion that can never be spent, a
spring that can never be drawn dry.

12. God is a soul satisfying portion; he is a portion that gives the soul full
satisfaction and content.

13. God is a perminent portion, an indeficient portion, a never failing
portion, a lasting, yea, an everlasting portion.

14. And lastly, God is an incomparable portion; God is a portion more
precious, than all those things which are esteemed most precious. Nothing can
make that man miserable, that has God for his portion: nor nothing can make
that man happy, that has not God for his portion. O Sirs, why do you think,
that God by his late fiery dispensations, has stripped you of your earthly
portions, but effectually to stir you up to make him your only portion, etc.
But,

The fourteenth Duty that is incumbent upon them that Ponder seriously on these
Scriptures. Psalm. 91. 2, 9, 10. Psalm. 71. 3. Psalm. 57. 1. 2 Cor. 6. 8, 9, 10.
Ezekiel. 11. 16.
God their dewlling place, Psalm. 90. 1. Lord thou have been our dwelling place
(or place of retreat) in all generations: or in generation, and generation as
the Hebrew runs, it is an Hebraisme, setting forth God to be the dwelling place
of his people in all generations before the flood and after the flood. The
Israel of God in all their troubles and travels in their wilderness condition,
were not houseless nor harbou^less: God was both their hiding place and their
dwelling place. He that dwells in God, cannot be unhoused, because God is
stronger than all. It Is brave for a Christian to take up in God as in his
Mansion House. It was a witty saying of that learned man Picus Mirandula, viz.
That God created the earth for Beasts to inhabit, the Sea for Fishes, the Air
for Fowls, the Heavens for Angels and Stars; and therefore man has no place to
dwell and abide in, but God alone. Now the great God has burnt up your dwelling
places, make him your dwelling place, your habitation, your shelter, your place
of retreat, your City of refuge. Certainly they dwell most safely, most
securely, most nobly, most contentedly, most delightfully and most happily, who
dwell in God, who live under the wing of God, and whose constant abode, is
under the shadow of the Almighty. Let the loss of your habitations lead you by
the hand, to make choice of God for your habitation. There is no security
against temporal, spiritual and eternal judgments, but by making God your
dwelling place. How deplorable is the condition of that man that has neither a
house to dwell in, nor a God to dwell in? that can naither say, this house is
mine, nor this God is mine? that has neither a house made with hands, nor yet
2 Cor. 5. 1, 2. 1 John 4. 13. Chap. 3. 24.
one eternal in the Heavens. It Is a very great mercy for God to dwell with us,
but it is a far greater mercy, for God to dwell in us, and for we to dwell in
God. For God to dwell with us, argues much happiness, but for we to dwell in
God, this argues more happiness, yea, the top of happiness. There is no study,
no care, no wisdom, no prudence, no understanding, to that which works men to
make God their habitation. No storms, no tempests, no afflictions, no
sufferings, no Judgments can reach that man, or hurt that man, who has made
God his dwelling place. He that has God for his habitation, can never be
miserable; and he that has not God for his habitation, can never be happy.
That God that has once burnt you out of your habitations, can again burn you
out of your habitations; and if he should, how sad would it be, that God has
once and again burnt you out of your habita^ions, and yet you have not made him
your habitation? etc. But,

The fifteenth Duty that is incumbent upon those who See my Treatise on
Assurance.
that has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. H^b. 13. 14. For here
have we no continuing City, but we seek one to come. These words are a reason
of his former exhortation to the bel^ev^ng H^brews, to renounce the world, and
Ver. 13.
^o take up Christ's Cross and follow him; as is clear by this causal particle
for. It is a probable conjecture made by some, (...).
as Estius observes, that St. Paul speaks prophetically of the Esti^s Exposit
i^ loc.
destruction of the City of Jerusalem, which was then at hand, and that in a
short time, neither that City, nor the Country about it, would be an abiding
place for them; but driven from thence they should be, and be forced to wander
up and down; and therefore they were to look for no other abiding place, but
Heaven. Here we have no continuing City. The Adverb translated here, is
sometimes used for place, and this (...).
more strictly for the particular place, where one is (as for that place where
Peter was, when he said, It is good for us to be here) or more largely for the
whole earth, and so it is taken Matthew. 17. 4.
here, for it is opposed to Heaven. For the present we have no abiding City,
but there is an abiding City to come, and that's the City which we seek after.
This earthly Jerusalem is no abiding City for us: this old world, the glory of
which is wearing off, is no abiding City for us; but Jerusalem that is above,
the heavenly City, the City of the great King, the City of the King of Kings.
This world is a wilderness, Rev. 21. 2. Chap. 1. 5, 6.
and believers as Pilgrims and strangerss must pass through it to their
heavenly Canaan. This world is no place for b^lievers to continue in; they must
pass through it to an abiding City, to a continuing City, to a City that has
foundations, Heb. 11. 10. For he looked for a City which has foundations,
whose builder and maker is God. The Plural Number (...).
is here used, foundations, for emphasis sake: this City is said to have
foundations, to show that it it a firm, stable, immovable and enduring City,
which the Apostle opposes to the Tabernacles or Tents wherein Abraham and the
other Patriarchs dwelt while they were on earth, which had no foundations, but
were moveable and carried from place to place, and easily pulled down, or
overthrown, or burnt up; b^t Heaven is an immovable, firm, stable and
everlasting City. Heaven is a City that is built,

1. Upon the foundation of Gods eternal good will and Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6. 2
T^m. 2. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5. Romans 9. 11. Chap. 11. 5 7. 2 Pe^. 1. 4. Heb.
6. 17, 18, 19, 20.
pleasure.

2. That is built upon Gods election to eternal glory.

3. That is built upon the foundation of Christ's eternal merits and purchase.

4. That is built upon the foundation of Gods everlasting Covenant of free,
rich, infinite, sovereign and glorious grace.

5. That is built upon the immutable stability of Gods promise and oath: Heaven
is built upon the foundation of great and precious promises, and upon his oath,
who is faithfulness it self, and cannot lie. Now O what a strong City, what a
glorious City, what a continuing City, what a lasting, yea, what an everlasting
City must Heaven needs be* that is founded upon such strong and immovable
foundations as they are? Heaven has foundations, but the Earth has none: the
earth hangs upon nothing, as Job speaks Job. 26. 7.
Nineveh, Babylon, Jerusalem, Athens, Corinth, Troy, and those famous Cities of
Asia, were strong and stately Ci^ies in their times, but where are they now?
Both Scripture and History does sufficiently evidence, that in all the Ages of
the world, there has been no firm, stable, or continuing City to be found: and
the Divine Wisdom and Providence has ordered, and that partly to work the sons
of men to put a difference betwixt the things of this world, and the things of
Heb. 2. 5. Col. 3. 1. Heb. 12. 28. 1 Pet. 1. 4. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2.
the world to come: and partly to wean them from the world and all the bravery
and glory thereof: and partly to awaken them, and stir them up to make sure a
Kingdom that shakes not, riches that corrupt not, an in inheritance that fades
not away, a house not made with hands, but one eternal in the Heavens; and a
City that has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Heaven is styled a
City, to set out the excellency, glory and benefits thereof. The resemblance
betwixt Heaven and a City, holds in these respects among others.

First, A City is a place of safety and security, so is Heaven Neh. 3. 1. Jer.
35. 11.
is a soul out of Gunshot, no Devil shall there tempt, no wicked men shall
there assault, no fireballs shall be there cast about, to disturb the peace of
the heavenly inhabitants.

Secondly, A City is compact, it is made up of many habitations; John 14. 2.
Mansions. In our common Cities many times the inhabitants are much shut up,
and straightened for want of room; out in Heaven there is Elbow-room enough, not
only for God, and Christ, and the Angels, those glistering and shineing
Courteours, but also for all b^lievers, for all the elect ^f God.

Thirdly, A City has sundry degrees of persons appertaining Heb. 12. 22, 23.
sundry sorts, with a multitude of Commoners. So in Heaven there is God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, and an innumerable company of
Angels and ^aints.

Fourthly, In a City you have all manner of provisions and

Fifthly, A City has Laws, Statutes and Orders for the etc. as the Government
of Heaven is managed with.

Sixthly, Every City has its peculiar privileges and immunities; Rev. 3. 12.
privileges and immunities.

Seventhly, Cities are commonly very populous; and so is Dan. 7. 10. Rev. 5.
11. Rev. 7. 9.

Eighthly, None but Freemen may Trade, and keep open Rev. 21. 27.
but such whose name are written in the Lambs Book of Life. Believers are the
only persons that are enrolled as Freemen in the Records of the heavenly City.

Ninthly, Cities are full of earthly riches; and so is Heaven Isa. 23. 8. Rev.
21.
the heavenly Jerusalem. All the riches of the most famo^s Cities in the world,
are but Dross, Brass, Copper, Tinn, etc. to the riches of Heaven.

O Sirs, how should the consideration of these things, work us all, to look,
and long, and to prepare, and fit for this heavenly City, this continuing City,
this City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. The Holy
Ghost frequently calling believers, Pilgrims, sojourners, strangers, Heb. 11.
13. 1 Pet. 2 11. Psalm. 119. 54
does sufficien^ly evidence, that there is no abiding for them in this world:
this world is not their Country, their City, their home, their habitation; and
therefore they are not to place their hopes, or hearts, or affections upon
things below. Heaven is their chief City, their best Country, their Col. 3. 1,
2.
most desirable home, and their everlasting habitation; and Luke 16. 9. Rev.
22. 17.
therefore the hopes, desires, breathings, longings and workings of their
souls, should still be heavenward, glory-ward. Oh when shall grace be
swallowed up in glory? when shall John 14. 2, 3, 4
we take possession of our eternal Mansions? when shall we be with Christ,
which for us is best of all? The late fire Phil. 1. 23.
has turned all ranks and sorts of men out of the houses where they once
dwelt, and it will not be long before death will turn the same persons out of
their present habitations, and carry them to their long homes. Death will turn
Princes Eccles. 12. 5.
out of their most stately Palaces, and great men out of their most sumptuous
Edifices, and rich men out of their most pleasant houses, and warlike men out
of their strongest Castles, and poor men out of their meanest Cottages. The
Princes Palace, the great man's Edifice, the rich man's house, the warlike man's
Castle, and the poor man's Cottage are of no long continuance. O how should this
awaken and alarm all sorts and ranks of men, to seek after a City which has
foundations, to make sure their interest in the New Jerusalem which is above,
in those heavenly Mansions, that no time can wear, nor flames consume. But,

Sixteenthly and lastly, Was London in flames on the Lords London, that has
turned that glorious City into a ruinous heap? then Oh that all that have been
sufferers by that ^am^ntable fire, (and all others also) would make it their
^usiness, their work, their Heaven, to sanctify the Sabbath, and to keep it
holy all their days, that the Lord may be no more provoked to lay London more
desolate, than it is laid this day. Let it be enough, that this day of the Lord
has been so greatly profaned, by sinful om^ssions, and by sinful commissions;
by the Immorality, D^bauchery, Gluttony, D^unkenness, Wanto^ness, Filthiness,
U^cleanness, Rioting, Revelling and Chambering, that multitudes were given up
to before the Lord appeared against them in that flaming fire that has laid
our renowned City in Ashes. Let it be enough that the Lord has been more
dishonored, and blasphemed, that Christ has been more reproached, despised
and re^used, and that the Spirit has been more grieved, vexed, provoked and
quenched on the Lords Day, than on all the other days in the week. Let it be
enough, that on this day of the Lord, many have been a playing, when they
should ^ave been a praying; and that many have been a sporting, when they
should have been a mourning for the afflictions of Joseph. And that many have
been a courting of their Amos 6. 6.
Mistrisses, when they should have been a waiting on the Ordinances: And that
many have been fitting at their doors, when they should have been instructing
of their families: and that many have been walking in the Fields, when they
should have been a sighing and expostulating with God in their Closs^ts; and
that many have made that a day of common labor, which God has made to be a
day of special rest, from sin, from the world, and from their particular
callings. Oh that all men who have paid so dear for profaning of Sabbaths,
would now bend all their force, strength, power and might, to sanctify those
Sabbaths, that yet they may enjoy on this side eternity? etc.

But you will reply upon me, How is the Sabbath to be sanctified?

I shall endeavor to give a clear, full and satisfactory Answer

First, We are to sanctify the Sabbath, by resting from all But the Exodus 16.
29, 30. Neh. 13, 15, 16, 17, 18.
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shall not do any
work; thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy manservant, nor thy
maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates. Jer.
17. 22. Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the Sabbath Day;
neither do ye any work, but hallow ye the Sabbath Day, as I commanded your
fathers. Isa. 58. 13. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing
thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the
Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding
thine own pleasure, nor speaking of thine own words. Here are three things
distinctly observable in the words:

1. Words. 2. Works. 3. Pleasure.
Not doing thine own ways, that is, works: not speaking thine own words: not
finding thine own pleasure. Now mark, we have stronger reasons to engage us to
a stricter observation and sanctification of the Lords Day, than they had for
their Sabbath: which may be thus evinced.

(Not to speak of their double Sacrifices upon their S^bbath, Numb. 28. 9, 10.
which (as some think) might typifie our double devotion on the Lords Day: nor
yet to speak of those six Lambs, whereby others conjecture, was fore-prophesied
the abundant services in the time of the Gospel, Ezekiel. 46. 1.-5.)

First, Our Motives are far greater, and more efficacious: For,

First, Our day has many privileges above theirs: witness the honorable
T^tles given to it by holy and learned men. As the Queen of days, Princess,
Principal, Primate, a Royal day, higher than the highest, the first fruits of
the days; yea, says Hierom, The Lords Day is better than any other common day,
than all Festivals, New Mons, and Sabbaths of Moses. By these Titles it is
evident, that the Ancients had the Lords Day in very h^gh esteem and
veneration. Sirs, look, what Gold is among inferior Metals, and what among
other Grain, etc. the same is the Lords Day above all other days of the week.

Secondly, Their Sabbath was celebrated for the memorial of the Creation; ours
for the great work of Redemption. But,

Thirdly, Theirs was celebrated for their deliverance out of Egypt, ours for
our deliverance from Hell. Now if the Jews were bound, and that for a whole day
not to do their own works, nor speak their own words, nor find their own
pleasure; how much more solemnity belongs to our Lords Day? O, what a day is
the Lords Day! and how solemnly and devoutly ought it to be observed and
sanctified? But,

S^condly, We have greater means and helps for the sanctification Moses; and
those Books neither, were not well understood by the common people. And it is
further observable, that the children of Israel being in Egypt under sore
pressures, afflictions and cruel bondage, etc. neither did, nor could keep the
Sabbath in any solemn manner, not being permitted either to rest, or enjoy any
solemn assemblies. And when they were in their wilderness condition, they had
many stations, diversions and incursions of enemies, so that they could not
keep the Sabbath in any solemn public manner, as afterward they did when they
were settled in peace and safety in the Land of Canaan. And so the Primitive
Christians for three hundred years liveing under very great and violent
Persecutions: they neither did, nor could keep the Lords Day with that
solemnity that they should or would; but as for place, they met not openly, but
secretly in Woods, and Deserts, and Holes, and Caves, and Dens of the earth:
and so for time, sometimes they met in the day, and often they met in the
night. But as for us, who have lived, and do live in these days of the Son of
man, what rare means and helps, what abundance of means and helps, what choice
and precious means and helps have we had, and still have (in spite of all
oppositions from high or low) to enable us to sanctify the Sabbath. And O that
all the means and helps, that we yet enjoy, may be signally blessed to that
purpose. But,

Thirdly, The Heathens by the very light of nature, held Flamins which were
their Priests, affirmed, that the Holidays were polluted, if any work were
done upon the solemn days; besides it was not lawful for the King of the
Sacrifices, Macrob^us l. 1. c. 16.
and the Flamins their Priests to see a work done on the holy days; and
therefore by a Crier it was proclaimed, that no such things should be done: and
he that neglected the Precept, was fined; and besides the fine, he which did
ought unawares on such days, was to offer Sacrifices for expiation. And
Scaevola the High Priest affirmed, that the wilful offender could have no
expiation. Now shall Heathens be so strict in the observation of their holy
days, and shall not Christians be as strict in their observation of the Lords
Day? These Heathens will one day rise in judgment against the slight
observers, and the gross prophaners of the Lords Day. But,

Secondly, We must sanctify the Sabbath, by preparing ou^ Eccles. 5. 1, 2.
Hence it is that God has fixed a Memorandum upon this Command, more than he
has upon any other Command. Exodus 20. 8. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it
holy. Sabbath days are our Market-dayes. Now men that are worldly wise, they
consider before hand, what to buy, and what to sell. The Husbandman dungs,
dresses, plowes, harrows, and all to prepare it for seed. I will (says holy
David) Psalm 26. 6.
wash my hands in innocence: so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord. Signifying
that to holy performances, there ought to be holy preparations. When the Temple
was to be built, the Stones were hewn, and the Timber squared and fitted,
before they were brought to the place where the Temple stood. The Application
is easy.

First, The Jews had their preparations, Mark 15. 42. And now when the Even was
come, (because it was the preparation, that is, the day before the Sabbath,
etc.) Their preparation began at three a clock in the afternoon, which the
Hebrews called the Sabbath Eve. The Jews (as I have read) were so careful in
their preparation for the Sabbath, that to further it, the best and wealthiest
of them, even those that had many servants, and were Masters of Families, would
chop Herbs, sweep the house, cleave wood, and kindle the fire, and do such
like things, etc.

S^condly, The Heathens did use to prepare themselves by

Thirdly, The works of the day are great and glorious: etc.

Fourthly, Consider the Dignity, Majesty, Authority and Purity 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16.
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, than men do carry it toward mortal
Princes, whose breath is in their nostrils, and whose glory shall assuredly be
laid in the dust? etc.

Fifthly, Consider if you do not prepare your selves before Matthew. 5. 27.

Sixthly, Consider what blessed yearnings you have made etc.

But you may say, Wherein does our preparation for the Sabbath consist?

In these three things.

First, In a holy care, so to order all our worldly business

Secondly, In putting iniquity far from you, in laying aside Job 11. 14, 15.
James 1. 12.
word with meekness, which is able to save your souls. When the vessel is
unclean, it sowres quickly the sweetest liquors that are poured into it. And so
when the heart is filthy and unclean, it loses all the good, it might otherwise
gain by Ordinances. If the stomach be foul it must be purged before it be fed,
or else the meat will never nourish and strengthen nature, but increase ill
humors. So the souls of men must be purged from soul enormities and gross
impieties, or else they will never gain any saving good by Ordinances. 2 Timothy
2. 21. If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto
honor, sanctified and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good
work, etc.

Thirdly, In acting your graces in all the duties of the day. Sleepy habits
will do you no good, nor bring God no glory: Isaiah 50. 10.
you have, is from the active part of grace: and therefore you must still be a
stirring up the grace of God that is in you, 2 Timothy 1. 6. Stir up the gift of
God that is in thee. I know the Apostle speaks of the Ministerial gift: but it
is as true of the work of grace: for the Greek word (...). signifies grace, as
well as gift. Stir up the grace of God in thee. Mark the phrase, it is a
remarkable phrase: for in the Original it is to blow up thy grace, (...), just
as a man blows up a fire that grows dull, or is hid under the ashes: blow up
the grace of God in thee. Some think, that it is a Metaphor taken from a spark
kept in ashes, which by gentle Calv^n and others.
blowing, is stirred up till it take a flame. Others say, it is an allusion to
the fire in the Temple, which was always to be kept burning. Look as the fire
is increased and preserved by blowing; so are our graces preserved and
increased by our acting of them. We get nothing by dead and useless habits:
Talents hid in a Napkin, gather rust. Look, as the noblest faculties are
imbased, when they are not improved, when they are not exercised. So the
noblest graces are imbased, when they are not improved, when they are not
exercised. Grace is bettered and made more perfect, by acting: neglect of our
graces, is the ground of their decrease and decay. Wells are the sweeter for
drawing: and so are our graces for acting. We had need pray hard with the
Spouse, Cant. 4. ult. Awake O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my
garden, that the spices thereof may flow out: let my beloved come into his
garden, and eat his pleasant fruit. Satan's grand design, is not to keep men
from going the round of duties, nor yet to keep men from attending on
Ordinances, but his grand design, is to hinder the exercise of grace. All other
exercises without the exercise of grace, will do a Christian no good; as you
may see Luke 22. 31, 32, 33. 1 Timothy 4 8 Isa. ^^ 1.-8. Neh. 7. 4, 5. 6.
by comparing the Scriptures in the Margent together. The more grace is
exercised, the more corruptions will be weakened and mortified. As one bu^ket in
the W^ll rises up, the other go^s down; so as grace rises higher and higher,
corruptions fall lower and lower. There was two Lawr^ls at Rome, and when the
one flourished, the other withered; so where grace flourishes, corruptions
wither. As the house 2 Samuel 3. 1.
of David grew stronger and stronger; so the house of Saul grew weaker and
weaker. So as grace in its exercise grows stronger and stronger. So sin like
the house of Saul, will every day grow weaker and weaker. If you keep not grace
Mark 4. 40.
in exercise, it may most fail you, when it should stand you most in stead. If
a man uses a knife but now and then, he may have his knife to seek when he
should use it. That Sword grows rusty in the scabbard, that is used but now and
then. You know how to apply it. But,

Thirdly, You must sanct^fie the Sabbath, by looking upon Prove. 8. 34, 35.
Psalm 27. 4. Psalm 42. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm 63. 1, 2, 3:
looking upon every work of that day, as carrying a reward with it. Psalm 19.
11. And in keeping of them there is great reward: not only for keeping, but
also in keeping of Gods commands, there is great reward. A gracious soul would
not exchange the joy, the peace, the comfort, the assurance, the communion, the
delight, the satisfaction that it enjoyes in the ways of obedience (before pay
day comes, before the Crown be put on, before the full reward is given out) for
all the Crowns and Kingdoms of this world. David was a King, a great and
glorious King; yea, the best King in all the world, and yet he esteemed it as a
very high honor to be the lowest Officer, a doorkeeper in Gods house, Ps^lm
84. 10. A day in thy Courts, i^ better than a thousand: I had rather be a
doorkeeper in the house of my God, (or I had rather sit at the threshold, as
the Hebrew runs) than to dwell in the tents of wickedness. 1 Kings 10. 8. Happy
are the men, happy are these thy servants which stand continually before thee,
and that hear thy wisdom: said the Queen of Sheba concerning Solomon's servants.
O then how many thousand times more happy are they who hear Christ in his
Ordinances, who see Christ in his Ordinances, and who enjoy Christ in his
Ordinances on his own day. Of all days the Sabbath Day is the day wherein
Christ carries his people into his Wine-cellar, wherein he brings them to his
Banqueting*house, and his banner over them is love. This is the day wherein he
stays his Cant. 2 4, 5, 6.
people with Flaggons, and comforts them with Apples, and wherein his left hand
is under their head, and his right hand does embrace them. O the sweet
communion, the sweet discoveries, the sweet incomes, and that blessed presence,
and those glorious answers and returns of prayer, that the Saints have had on
Sabbath days. Christ in his Ordinances on the Sabbath day, does as Mary, open
a box of precious Ointment which diffuseth a spiritual savor among them that
fear him. Though many slight Ordinances, and many deny Ordinances, and many
oppose Ordinances, and many Many in these days are like old Barz^lla^, that
had lost his taste and hearing, and so cared not for David's Feasts and Music.
2 Samuel 19 35.
fall off from Ordinances, and many pretend to live above Ordinances, and under
that pretense, vilify the Ordinances as poor, low, weak things, yet the beauty
and glory of Gods Ordinances, will one day convince the world of the excellency
of the Saints, Ezekiel. 37. 26, 27, 28. I will set my Sanctuary in the midst of
them for evermore. My Tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their
God, and they shall be my people. And the Heathen shall know, that I the Lord
do sanctify Israel, when my Sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for
evermore. I doubt not, but there are many thousands of the precious servants of
the Lord, who are able to tell this poor, blind, dark world, from their
experience, that they have seen, and felt, and tasted, and enjoyed more of God
in his Ordinances on this day, tha^ ever they have enjoyed on any other day.
But,

Fourthly, You must sanctify the Sabbath, by rising as early Psalm. 139. 18.
Genesis 22. 3. Job 1. 5.
and bodily infirmities will permit. Abraham rose up early in the morning to
offer up his only Son. And Job rose up early in the morning, to offer up
burnt-offerings. So David, my voice shall thou hear in the morning. O Lord, in
the morning Psalm 5. 3.
will I direct my prayer unto thee (or martial my prayer, as the Hebrew runs)
and will look up (or will look out as a watchman looks out of his Watchtower,
to discover an approaching enemy) So Psalm 130 6. My s^ul waits for the Lord,
more than they that watch for the morning: I say, more than they that watch for
the morning. Psalm. 88. 13. In the morning shall my prayer prevent thee. That
this may the more work, and the better stick seriously confider of these hints,
etc.

First, God is the first Being; and therefore of right deserves Dan. 7. 2^.
Chap. 2. 20, 21, 22.
the being of that God, who is blessed for ever, let that being be served
first: if not (as I am sure you cannot) then let the first being be first
served. But,

Secondly, As God is the first being, so he is the best being: Psalm. 4. 6.
Psalm. 73. 25. Psalm. 144. 15. But,

Thirdly, As God is the best being, so he is the greatest being: Mal. 1. ult.
greatest good, the greatest Majesty, the greatest Authority; and therefore he
ought to be first served. But,

Fourthly, God gives the greatest rewards and the fullest Psalm 19. 11. Matthew.
5. 12. 2 John 8.
a Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. A Crown of life, Rev. 2. 10. A Crown of
glory. James 1. 12. A Crown of immortality. What han't men done, what will not men
do, what do'nt men do for earthly Crowns? A Crown is the top of Royalty: and
how many Princes have swum through the blood of thousands to their earthly
Crowns. O how much more active for God, should that glorious Crown make us,
which he has laid up for all that love him. But,

Fifthly, Christ rose early in the morning before day, and Mark 1. 35, 36.
make it our business, our work, our Heaven to write after so noble a Copy: we
cannot glorify Christ, more than by our conformity to him, than by imitating
of those blessed patterns that he has set before us. But,

Sixthly and lastly, The children of Israel rose up early in Exodus 32. 4, 5, 6.
and peace offerings to an Idol. So Papists, Turks and Heathens are early in
the mornings at their devotions: and the Harlot rises early in the morning to
trapan the lustful youth, Prove. 7. 15. Therefore came I forth to meet thee
diligently, to seek thee: or as it runs in the Hebrew, In the morning came I
forth to meet thee. Now how should this put Christians to a holy blush, to see
the very basest and worst of people to take more pains to go to Hell, than
themselves do to go to heaven. Shall they rise early to serve their Idols, and
shall not we rise early to serve our God, and save our souls? O Sirs, did you
but love Christ more, and Sabbaths more, and duti^s more, you would then be
more early in your communion with God, as the Spouse was. Mary Magdelen loved
Cant. 7. 11, 1^.
Christ much, Luke 7. 47. And she came early to the Sepulcher to seek him. She
came to look after Christ as soon as it began to down, Matthew. 28. 1. Mark 16.
1, 2. Luke 24. 1. Joh. 20. 1. Men that love the world, can rise early to gain
the world. Now shall nature do more than grace? Shall the love of the world,
outdo the love of Christ? the Lord forbid. And thus I have done with those
Considerations that should quicken you up to sanctify the Sabbath, by rising
as early in the morning, as your age, health, strength, ability and bodily
infirmities will permit. But,

Fifthly, You must sanctify the Sabbath, by a Religious

What are they? 1. Public. 2. Private.


What are the public duties that are to be performed on that

First, To assemble your selves with the people of God, to Neh. 8 1.-9. M^tth.
13. 54. Joel 1. 13. Chap. 15. 16. Luke 4. 16, 17. John 20. 19, 26. Acts 2. 1.
44. 46. Acts 5. 12. 1 Cor. 11. 20.

Secondly, Prayer, Psalm 5. 7. Psalm 42 4. Psalm 118. 24, Is^. 56. 7. Matthew.
21. 13. Acts 1. 13, 14. Acts 2 46, 47. Acts 16. 13. Heb. 13. 15.

Thirdly, The Administrations of the Seals, Acts 2. 46. Chap. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 11.
20, 33.

Fourth^y, Singing of Psalms, Hymns, or Spiritual Songs, Psalm 92. 1. Matthew.
26. 30. 1 Cor. 14. 15. James 5. 13. Heb. 2. 12.

Fifthly, Works of Mercy and Charity, Nehemiah 8. 9, 10, Cor. 16. 1, 2.

Sixthly, and lastly, The Censures of the Church: as casting Tim. 5. 20, 21. 1
Cor. 5. 4. 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7. Romans 14. 1. Chap. 15. 7. etc.

What are the private duties that are to be performed on that

First, Prayer in our Families and Closets, Colossi^ns 3. 17. Luke 18. 1, 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. Ephesians. 6. 18. See my Treatise etc.

Secondly, Reading of the Word, Joshuah 1. 8. Deuteronomy. 6. Chap. 11. 19. and Chap.
4. 10. John 5. 35. Col. 3. 16. Rev. 1. 3.

Thirdly, Meditation, Psalm 1. 2. Psalm 119. 97. 1 Cor. Tim. 2. 11, 18.

But on what must we meditate? 1. Upon the holiness, greatness and graciousness
of God. 2. Upon the person, natures, offices, excellencies, beauties, glories,
riches, fullness, and sweetness of Christ. 3. Upon the blessed truths that we
either hear or read. 4. Upon our own emptiness, nothingness, baseness, vilene^s
and un worthiness. 5 Upon the works of Creation and Redemption. 6. Upon our
spiritual and internal wants. 7. Upon that eternal rest that is reserved for
the people of God, Heb. 4 9.


Fourthly, Instructing, examining and preparing of your Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Deuteronomy. 11.
18, 20. Genesis 18. 19, 20. Joshuah 24 15.

Fifthly, Singing of Psalms, James 5. 13. Coloss. 3. 16. Ephesians. 5. 19.

Sixthly, Holy Conference upon the Word, Luke 14 8, 9, Chap. 24. 14, 17, 18.
Col. 4. 6. Mol. 3. 16, 17, etc.

Seventhly, Visiting and relieving the sick, the poor, the Matthew. 15. 34.-40.
James 1. 27, etc.

Now mark when the Public Ordinances may be enjoyed in Christ's way, and in
their liberty, purity and glory, it will be your wisdom so to manage all your
family duties and closet duties, as that you do not shut out more public
Worship. It is more observable, that the Sabbaths and public service are
joined together. Lev. 19. 30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my
Sanctuary, I am the Lord. Now what God has solemnly joined together, let no
man put assunder. Every Christian should make it his great care, that private
duties do not eat up public Ordinances, and that public Ordinances do not
shut out private duties. More of this you may see in God is totus ^culus, all
eye. As the eyes of a well-drawn Picture are fast^ed, on the which way soever
thou turnest: so are the eyes of the Lord.


Sixthly, You must sanctify the Sabbath, by managing all the duties of that
day, as under the eye of God. Gods eye is very much upon his people whilst they
are in Religious duties, and services. Therefore in the Tabernacle, the place
of Gods public Worship, it was thus commanded, Exodus 25. 37* Thou shall make
seven Lamps, and they shall light the Lamps, that they may give light. To teach
us that nothing there escapes his sight: for in his house there is always
light: and so when the Temple was built, Mine eyes (says God) shall be there
perpetually. It was an excellent 1 Kings 9. 3.
saying of Ambrose, If thou can not hide thy self from the Sun, which is Gods
Minister of light, how impo^sible will Ambros. Offic. l. 1. c. 14.
it be to hide thy self from him, whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter
than the Sun. Subjects will carry themselves sweetly and loyally, when they are
under their Sovereigns eye: and children will carry themselves dutifully, when
they are under their P^rents eye: and servants will carry them selves wisely
and prudently when they are under their M^ste^s eye. Gods eye is the best Tutor
to keep the soul in a gracious frame. It is good to have a fixed eye on him
whose Job 31. 5, 6. Prove. 15. 9. Cha. 5. 20, 21.
eye is always fixed on thee. The best way on earth to keep close to Gods
Precepts, is always to walk as in his presence: no man on earth, by day or
night, can draw a curtain between God and him. There is a threefold eye of God
that is present in the assemblies of his people. As,

First, There is the eye of observation and inspection: God Mine eyes are upon
all their ways, Jer. 16. 17. Psalm 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before
me. Psalm 119. 168. I have kept thy prec^pts and thy Testimonies; for all my
ways are before thee. J^b 31. 4. Does not he see all my ways, and count all
my steps. O Sirs, whether you are praying, or hearing, or reading, or
meditating, or singing, or receiving the Lords Supper, or Mal. 3 17.
conferring one with another; The eye of the Lord is still upon you. But,

Secondly, There is an eye of favor and benediction Amos I will set mine eyes
upon them for good, 2 Chro. 7. 16. Mine eye and my heart shall be there: that
is, in my house. Gods eye is here to approve, and to bless, and to increase the
graces, the comforts, the communions, and the enjoyments of his people. But,

Thirdly, There is the eye of fury and indignation. Gods Mine eyes shall be
upon them for evil. Gods sight can wound as deeply as his sword. He sharpneth
Job 16. 9.
his eyes upon me: s^ith Job. Wild Beasts when they fight, wh^t their eyes as
well as their teeth. He sharpneth his eyes upon me, as if he would stab me to
the heart with a glance of his eye: he that waits on God irreverently, or
worships him car lesly, or that prophaneth his day, either by corporalla bo^r,
or spiritual Idleness, may well expect an eye of fury to be fixed upon him, Jer.
17. ult. Ez^k. 22. 26, 31. B^t,

S^venthly, You must sanctify the Sabbath, by pressing after ^s^lm 27. 4.
^sal^ 42. 1, 2 ^s^^m 43 4 Psa^m 63. 1, 2* ^sa^m 84. 1, 2.
of the day. Oh, do not take up in duties, or Ordinances, or privileges, or
enlarg^ments, or meltings, but press hard after intimate communion wi^h God in
all you do. Let no duty satisfy thy soul, without communion with God in it
C^n. 7. 4. The King is hil'd in the Galleries; that is, in his O^dinances. The
Galleries, the Ordinances, without King Jesus be enjoyed in them, will never
satisfy the Spouse of Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Christ. What is a purse without money, or a T^ble without meat, or a Ship
without a Pilot, or a fountain without water, or the body without the soul, or
the Sun without light, or the Cabinet without the Jewels: no more are all
Ordinances and duties to a gracious soul without the enjoyment 2 Kings 2. 13,
14. The Sea ebbs and flows, the M^on ^ncrease^ and decreases so it is with
Saints in their communion with God in Ordinances: s^metimes they rise, and
sometimes ^hey fall: sometimes ^hey have more, and sometimes less communion
with God.
of God in them. Moses had choice communion with God in the Mount, and that
satisfied him. The Disciples had been with Jesus, and this was a spring of joy
and life unto them. John 20. 20. Then were the Disciples glad, when they saw
the Lord. Here is the Mantle of Elijah, but where is the God of Elijah: said
Elisha: So says a gracious soul, here is th^s Ordinance and that Ordinance,
but where is the God of the Ordinance? Psalm 101. 2. O when will thou come unto
me. O Lord, I come to one Ordinance and another Ordinance, but when will thou
come to me in the Ordinance? when shall I be so happy, as to enjoy thy self in
the Ordinances that I enjoy? The Wagons that Joseph sent to setch his Father,
were the means of bringing Joseph and his Father together. All the Ordinances
should be as so many Wagons, to bring Christ and our souls nearer together.
Man's summum bonum stands in his communion with God: a^ Scripture and experience
evidences.

E^ghthly, You must sanctify the Sabbath, by laboring Isa. 58. 13.
this day: on this day every Saint should walk like an earthly Angel. Mark, the
Sabbath is not only called holy, but holiness to the Lord, Exodus 31. 15. Six
days may work be done, but in the seventh is the Sabbath of rest, holy to the
Lord (or as the Hebrew runs, holiness to the Lord) which shows, that the day is
exceeding holy, and ought to be kept accordingly. The Sacrifices on this day
was to be double, Numb. 28. 9. And on the Sabbath day two Lambs of the first
year without spot, and two tenth deals of flower for a meat offering mingled
with Oil, and the drink offering thereof. The Sacrifices here appointed for
every Sabbath day, are full double to those appointed for every day. ver. 3.
and yet the daily sacrifices, the continual burnt-offering: ver. 10. was not
omitted on the Sabbath day neither. So that every Sabbath in the morning there
was offered one Lamb for the daily sacrifice, and then two Lambs more for the
Sabbath: and this was appointed,

1. To show the holiness of that day above other days; and that God required
more service from them on that day, than he did on any other day.

Secondly, To testify their thankfulness for the worlds Exodus 20. 11.
creation.

Thirdly, To put them in remembrance of Gods bringing them out of Egypt by a
mighty hand, and by a stretched Deuteronomy. 5. 15.
out arm.

Fourthly, For a sign of their sanctification by the Ezekiel. 20. 12. Heb. 4.
Lord.

Fifthly and lastly, for to be a figure of grace, and a sign of that rest in
Heaven that Christ has purchased for his people with his dearest blood. Now
mark, as this day was a sign of more than ordinary favors from the Lord, so he
required greater testimonies of their thankfulness and holiness on this day,
than he did on any other day. Every day should be a Sabbath to the Saints, in
regard of their ceasing to do evil, and learning to do well, but on the seventh
day Sabbath our duti^s and services should be doubled. In Ps^^. 92. (which
Psalm is titled a Psalm for the Sabbath) there is mention made of morning and
evening performances, the variety of duties that are to be performed on this
day, may very well take up the whole day with delight and pleasure on this day
in a more especial manner, we should labor to do the will of God on earth, as
the Angels and Spirits of just men Heb. 12. 22, 23.
made perfect do it now in Heaven: viz. wisely, freely, readily, cheerfully,
saithfully, seriously, universally and unweariedly. If we are not wanting to
our selves, God on this day will give out much of h^mself, and much of his
Christ, and much of his Spirit, and much of his grace into our souls. But,

Ninthly, You must sanctify the Sabbath, by managing all John 4. 23, 24.
and spiritualness. It Is the pleasure of God that we reverence his Sanctuary,
Lev. 19. 30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary: I am the
Lord. Tw^ce in this Chapter the observation of the S^bbath is commanded, that
it may be the better remembered, and that men may know, that it is not enough to
rest on that day, but that rest must be sanctified by a reverent management of
all their soul concernments in all our drawings nigh to God. We must look that
our hearts lie under a holy awe and dread of his presence. To the commandment
of sanctifying Gods Sabbath, this of reverencing his Sanctuary is joined, Genesis
28. 16, 17.
because the Sabbaths were the chief times whereon they resorted to the
Sanctuary.

The Jews made a great stir about reverencing the Temple: they tell us, that
they were not to go in with a staff, nor shoes, nor to spit in it: nor when
they went away, to turn their backs upon it, but go sidelong. But doubtless the
great thing God points at, and expects from his peoples hands on this day, is,
that they do worship him with inward reverence, seriousness and spiritualness.
All other Worship abstracted from this, will neither pleasure God, nor profit
us, 1 Timothy 4. 8. For bodily exercise profits little. Oh labor to be very
spiritual in all the duties of this day. Christ the Luke 1. 35, 36. Matthew. 3.
16. John 1. 32. Chap. 6. 36. Heb. 7. 26. Chap. 9. 14. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Lord of the Sabbath was spiritual in his conception, in his life and
conversation, in his death and passion, in his resurrection and ascension: he
was spiritual in his words, in his works, in his ways, and in his worship; and
therefore let us labor to be very spiritual in all we do on that day. Again,
all the Ordinances of the day are spiritual, viz. the Word, Prayer, Sacraments,
singing of Psalms, etc. and therefore we had need to be spiritual in all the
services of that day. Again, the ends for which the Lords Day was appointed,
are all spiritual: viz. the glory of God, the illumination, conversion, and
salvation of sinners, and the edification, confirmation consolation of Saints:
And therefore we had need be spiritual Ephesians. 6. 12.
in all the duties of the day. Again, the grand enemies that we are to
encounter with on this day, are spiritual, sin within and Satan without; and
therefore we had need be spiritual in all we do. For there is no way to conquer
spiritual enemies, but by spiritual weapons, and by spiritual 1 Cor. 10. 13.
exercises. Again, grace thrives most, and flourishes best in their souls, who
are most spiritual in their duties on the Lords Day. Again, the more spiritual
any man is in his duties on the Lords Days, the more secured and armed he will
be against all spiritual judgments, which are the sorest and dreadfullest of
all judgments. Again, the more spiritual any man is in the duties of the Lords
Day, the more that man acts like the Angels in Heaven, and like the Spirits of
Heb. 12. 22, 23.
just men made perfect. Again, this will d^fference you from hypocrites,
formalists, and all profane persons. An external observation of the Sabbath,
will difference you from Heathens; but a spiritual spending of the Sabbath,
will difference you from hypocrites. An hypocrite never rises so Luke 13. 14,
15.
high, as to be spiritual in the Sabbaths of God. Mark, Sabbaths spiritually
spent, are a sure sign of a sincere heart, and of a saving estate. Now Oh that
all these considerations Exodus 31. 13.
might greatly provoke you, and mightily encourage you to be very spiritual on
the Lords Day, and in all the duties of that day. But,

Tenthly, You must sanctify the Sabbath, by being spiritual 10.
tual in all natural actions, and holy and heavenly in all 1 Cor. 10. 13.
earthly enjoyments. It is reported of a Scotch Minister, that he did eat,
drink, and sleep eternal life. Luther tells us, that though he did not always
pray and meditate, but did sometimes eat and drink, and sometime, sleep; yet
all should further his account. That Is a Christian worth Gold, that has
learned that heavenly art, so to spiritualize all his natural actions, as that
they shall turn to his account in the great day, Zach. 14. 20, 21. In that day
shall there be upon the Bells Cal^^^ renders it stables of ho^ses, which are
the most stinking and contemptible places; and yet these should be holily used.
(or Bridles) of the Horses, Holiness unto the Lord. And the pots in the Lords
house, shall be like the bowls before the Altar. Yea, every pot in Jerusalem
and in Judah, shall be holiness unto the Lord of Hosts. Here is holiness
written upon the bridles of the horses they ride on, and holiness written upon
the cups and pots they drink in. A holy and heavenly heart will be holy in the
use of the meanest things that are for common use. Something of sanctity should
run through every piece of your civility. Something of the spirit, life, and
power of Religion, you should show in all parts of your common conversation on
every day, but especially on the Lords Day. T^rtullian speaking of the carriage
of the Primitive Christians Te^tul. Apollog.
at their meals: says,

1. Our Table resembles an Altar, and our Supper a Sacrifice.

2. Our Table has nothing savouring of baseness, sensuality or immodesty; we
feed by measure, we drink by the rules of temperance.

3. We speak and converse, as in the presence of God: every one repeateth what
he knows out of the holy Scriptures, and his own invention to the praise of
God.

4. As prayer began the Banquet, so prayer concludes it. If you beheld us, you
would say, that we were not at Supper, but at a Lecture of holiness. Should not
the practice of these Primitive Christians, put all such Christians to a blush
in our day, who on the Lords Day are so carnal in the use of spiritual things,
and so earthly in the use of heavenly things.

That is a memorable expression that you have in Exodus 18. 12. And Aaron came,
and all the Elders of Israel to eat bread with Moses Father-in-law before God.
Now mark, in See Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 7. 1 Chronicles. 29. 21, 22. The word Bread is used
for all meat. Genesis 3. 19. Chap. 31. 14.
these words, you have,

1. The greatness of their courtesy: for though Jethro was a stranger and no
Israelite, yet the Elders honored him with their company. And Aaron and all
the Elders came to eat bread with Moses his Father-in law.

2. The graciousness of their carriage: They came to eat bread with him before
the Lord. That is, says Calvin on the Tex^, in gloriam and honorem Dei, to the
honor and glory of God Grace must spice every cup, and be sauce to every dish,
or nothing will relish well with him, whose heart is set to sanctify the
Sabbath: Aaron and all the Elders of Israel eat bread before the Lord: that is,
they eat bread as in the presence of God. Whilst they were eating of bread,
their hearts were under a reverential awe of God. Dian^es Temple was burnt
down, when she was busy at Alexanders birth, and could not be at two places
together. But God is present both in Paradise and in the wilderness at the same
time: he is present both at board and bed; both in the family, and in the
Closet at the same time. O that in all your natural, civil Psalm 139.
and common actions you would carry it, as becomes his eye, his presence, that
fills Heaven and earth with his glory. But,

Eleventhly, You must sanctify the Sabbath, by managing Psalm 33 1. Psalm 32,
11. Phil. 4. 4. 1 These. 5. 16, 18.
as the garment of gladness. God has laid his royal command upon us to rejoice
on this day. Isa. 58. 13, 14. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from
doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight (or as the
Hebrew runs, delights: and so Tremelius reads it) the holy of the Lord,
honorable, and shall honor him, etc. Then shall thou delight thy self in the
Lord, etc. Psalm 118. 24. This is the day which the Lord has made, we will be
glad and rejoice therein Now if you compare this Text with Matthew. 21. 22, 23.
and Acts. 4. 11. you will find, that the precedent Verses are a prophetical
prediction of Christ's resurrection; and so this Verse fore-tells the Churches
joy upon that memorable and glorious day. A fe^st (says Solomon) is made for
laughter. Eccles. 10. 19.
Now on this day the Lord of Hosts is pleased more especially and more
abundantly to make for his people, A feast of fat things, a feast of wines on
the lees, of fat things full of Isa. 25. 6.
marrow, of wines on the lees well refined. On this day we enjoy the freest,
and the fullest, and the sweetest, and the choicest, and the nearest communion
of Saints: And what does this call for, but a spirit of holy joy: on this day
we enjoy all the precious Ordinances in a most solemn manner; and why then
should we not be joyful in Gods house of prayer? The Isa. 56. 7. Luke 2. 10,
11, 12, 13, 14.
heavenly Host sung at his birth: and why should not we sing and rejoice at his
second birth, his resurrection from the dead. O Sirs, Sabbaths are the very
suburbs of heaven: and who can be in the suburbs of heaven and not rejoice? A
beautiful face is at all times pleasing to the eye; but then especially when
there is joy manifested in the countenance. Joy in the face puts a new beauty
upon a person, and makes that which before was beautiful, to be exceeding
beautiful; it puts a luster upon beauty. And so does holy joy put a luster upon
the day of God, the ways of God, and the people of God. It is the duty and
glory of a Christian to rejoice in the Lord every day, but especially on the
Lords Day: God reserves the best wine, the best comforts, and the choicest
discoveries of himself, and of his love, and of his Christ, and of his glory
for that day, and all to make his people joyful in the house of Isa. 56 7.
prayer. The Manichees were wont to keep their Fasts upon the Lords Day: which
made Tertullian say, that that practice Lect. 15.
of theirs was a detestable wickedness. To fast on the Lords Day (says
Ignatius) is to kill Christ. But to rejoice in the Lord this day, and to
rejoice in all the duties of this day, and to rejoice in that redemption that
was wrought for us on this day, this is to crown Christ, this is to lift up
Christ. But,

Twelfthly, You must sanctify the Sabbath, by sanctifying It shall be unto you
a Sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict your souls in the ninth day of the
month at even: from even unto even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath.) What
shall we think the Lord expects upon this day which is mo-Psalm 92. 1, 2. It is
good to sing of his loving kindness in the morning: and of his faithfulness
every night. Jer. 17. 22. You shall do no work, but sanctify my Sabbath. Now
that this may the better stick, consider,

First, God has given you six whole days that you may Exodus 20. 9. Chap. 23.
12.
provide for your selves and families: and therefore do not deny him one day in
seven. What an unrighteous thing is it, to buy by one measure which is greater,
and sell by another which is lesser. Do not rob God of his time, who has been
so noble, as to give you six in seven. But,

Secondly, God rested all the seventh day: he had finished Genesis 2. 1, 2, 3.
the seventh day, and work on the other part of the seventh day; but he rested
all the seventh day. And doubtless it is your wisdom, duty and glory, to write
after the copy that God has laid before you. But,

Thirdly, The Sabbath is not to be an artificial day, but viz. twenty four
hours together: as you may see in Lev. 23. 32. From even unto even, shall ye
celebrate your Sabbath. The days then were so reckoned. But,

Fourthly, You would not take it well at your servants

Fifthly, This has been the judgment of most judicious Divines in all ages.
In the Counsel of Mexicon there was an Assembly of Ministers out of all Nations
in Christendom, and they ordained a Canon concerning the Lords Day. The Canon
runs thus, We ordain that people keep the whole Lords Day holy, and that they
set themselves the whole day to pray to God, and delight in God, and hear his
word; and if a Country man's servant break this day, his punishment shall be to
be beaten with severe blows (ictubus gravioribus are the very words of the
Council) and if a Lawyer offer to plead this day, he shall not have the benefit
of his pleading or case; and if a Minister break this day, he shall be
excommunicated half a year, and thrown ^ut of the Church, and shall not be
received into the Church again, but upon great humi^iation. It is a good
observation of Musculus upon Ex^d. 20. 8. God does not say (says he) r^member
the Sabbath, to keep it holy: for he that keeps it an hour or two, keeps it
holy: but remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: he will have not a part of
a day only, but a whole day kept holy. And Calvin upon these words, Remember
the Sabbath day to keep it holy; says, we are to keep this day holy: and not a
part of it, but all of it. I might produce a cloud of witn^sses in the case;
but let these suffice. But,

Sixthly and las^ly, Consider that the very Heathen have

Th^rteenthly, You must sanctify the Sabbath, by such an Let your moderation
^e known among all men always; but especially on the Lords day, be moderate in
your eating, drinking, entertainments, Phil. 4. 5.
etc. Oh how do many by their immoderate use of lawful comforts on this day,
indispose and unfit themselves for the duties of the day! It is a Christians
duty every day to eat and drink soberly; Titus 2. 11, 12. The grace of God
which brings salvation, has appeared to us, teaching us to live soberly in
this present world. It is both the duty and the glory The Greeks call Sobriety
the Keeper and Guard of Wisdom.
of a Christian, to be temperate in his diet. A little will satisfy nature;
less will satisfy Grace, though nothing will satisfy men's lusts. Sobriety is
a gift of God, whereby we keep a holy moderation in the use of our diet, Prove.
23. When thou sit to eat, etc. consider diligently what is before thee, and
put the knife to thy throat. That is, be very careful and circumspect in taking
thy food, bridle thine appe^i^e, take heed thou do not exceed measure. He may
endanger his health, his life, his soul, that gives way to his greedy appetite.
Some read the words thus, For thou putt^^t a knife to thy throat, if thou be a
man given to appetite. Thou shortnest thy life, and diggest as it were thine
own grave with thine own teeth. Meat kills as many as the Musket; the Board as
the Ch^ysost.
Sword. I know that the bodies, stomachs, callings, constitutions, and
climates, wherein men live, differ; and therefore In the hot Eastern Countries
men have lived long with par^hed Corn and a Cake, but their example is no rule
for us. Phil. 3. 18, 19.
no such particular Rules (as to eating and drinking) can be laid down as shall
be binding to every one. Yet this is certain, that a man that eats or drinks so
much (on the Lords Day) as oppresses nature, and as unfits him for praying,
working, or hearing work, or reading work, or closet work, that man is guilty
of intemperance. Such who feed till they unfit themselves for service, are
Belly-Gods. Paul wept over such in his day, and so should we in ours. Thou
should use thy food O Christian, as a help, and not as a hinderance to thee
in thy Christian course. A full belly never studies well, nor never prays
well, nor never hears well, nor never reads well, nor never repeats well, nor
never does any thing well either on the Lords day, or any other day. What a
shame is it to see a Christian a slave to his palate on any day; but especially
on the Lords day. I may use the creatures so as to support and cheer nature;
but not so as to clog it, and weaken it, and debase it. I may use the creatures
as my servants, but I must never suffer them to be my Lord. Daniel was very
temperate in his diet. Though there was not a greater born of a woman than John
the Baptist, yet his Dan. 1. 8. Matthew. 11. 11.
fare was but Locusts and wild-honey. A little bread was Basils provision.
Hilarion did seldom eat any thing till the Sun went down, and then that which
he did eat, was very mean. Jerome lived with cold water, and a few dried Figgs.
And Augustine has this expression concerning himself. Hoc L^b. 10.
Confessionum.
me docuisti, Domine, etc. Thou Lord have taught me this, that I should go to
my meat as to a medicine; his meaning was, that he went to his meat, not to
satisfy his appetite, but to repair nature. And Luther made many a meal with
Bread and ^ He^ring. Socrates, Anacharsis, Cyrus, Caesar, Herodicus, Augustus,
and many other Heathens were very temperate in ^h^ir diet. The old Gauls were
very sparing in their diet, and used to fine them that out-grew their Girdles.
These H^athens will one day rise in judgment against those nominal Christians,
who are intemperate both upon the Lords day, and other days also. But,

Fourteenthly and lastly, You must sanctify the Sabbath, Cant. 4 3.
scarlet in discoursing of a crucified Christ, and they are thin like a thread
of scarlet, and not swelled with frothy, empty, worldly discourses on the Lords
days, or on other days. Such words as will neither profit a man's own soul,
nor better others, are not to be spoken on the Lords day. It is Gods express
pleasure, that we should not speak our own words on his day, Isa. 58. 13. N^r
speaking thine own words. Caesar passing through the streets of Rome, and
seeing many of the Ladies Pluta ch in the life of Pe^icles.
playing with little Dogs, Monkies and Baubones, asked them, if the women in
that Country had no children. So when men spend the Lords day in playing,
sporting, toying, or talking of this or that trifle, of this or that person, of
this or that fashion, of this or that vanity; we may ask them, whether they
have no God, no Christ, no Heaven, no Promis^s, no Experiences, no Evidences to
talk of. There are Matthew. 12. 36. Alexander forgave many sharp swords, but
never any sharp tongues, etc.
many idle talkers: of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an
account at the day of Judgment. An idle word is a profuse or needless word,
used rashly, or unadvisedly wanting a reason of just necessity, bringing
neither honor to God, nor edification to others, nor conducing to any
profitable end. And as there are many idle talkers, so there are many
over-talkers; and they are such who spend a hundred words, when ten will serve
the turn. And as there Eccles. 5. 2, 3.
are many over-talkers, so there are many that are only talkers, that can do
nothing but talk. To fall under the power Prove. 14. 23.
or scourge of these men's tongues, is to fall under no easy persecution. And
as there are many that are only talkers, so there are many that are
unprofitable talkers. The beginning of the words of their mouth is foolishness,
and the end of his Eccles. 10. 13.
talk is mischievous madness. And as there are many unprofitable talkers, so
there are many unseasonable talkers, that place one word where another should
stand. A wise man Eccles. 8. 4.
discerns time and judgment. And as there are many unseasonable talkers, so
there are many rash talkers, who speak Chap. 5. 2.
first, and think afterward. God has set a double bar about the tongue, the
teeth and the lips, that men should not speak rashly. Words once spoken cannot
return. A man that thinks before he speaks, seldom repents of what he speaks.
Silence is far better than rash speaking, or than vain speaking, etc.

O Sirs, the tongue is the nimble Interpreter of the heart. If there be piety
or iniquity at the bottom of your hearts, Matthew. 12. 43, 44.
your tongues will discover it. The stream rises not above the fountain. We
know not what metal the Bell is made of by the Clapper. What is in the Well
will be in the Bucket: What is in the Warehouse will be in the shop. So what
is in the heart, will be in the mouth; if there be any thing of God, of Christ,
of grace, of heaven, of hell, of sin, of the world, of self in the bottom of
your souls, your tongues will discover it. Man (says one) is like a Bell, and
his tongue Plutarch.
like the Clapper. So long as this stands still, he may be thought to be
without any flaw, craze or crack in him; but let it once stir, and then he
discovers himself presently. No man can so change himself, but his heart may
sometimes be seen at his tongues end. Men watch Interpreters. Oh that on the
Lords day especially, you would make more conscience of watching your tongues:
if the tongue be not watched, it will be sins Solicitor General; it will be a
Bawd to all lusts: it will plead for sin, and defend sin, and lessen sin, and
provoke to sin, and show the pleasure of the heart in sin. There are but five
Virtues of the tongue reckoned up by Philosophers; but there are twenty several
sins of the tongue reckoned up by Peraldus. The Arabians have a Proverb, Take
heed thy tongue cut not thy throat. Many a man's tongue James 3. 3. 11. The Holy
Ghost shows the mischief of the tongue, by the several characters by which he
brands it. He calls it the flattering tongue, the double tongue, the deceitful
tongue, the the lying tongue, the perverse tongue, etc. Psalm 52. 2. Prove. 18.
21. Eccles. 10. 12. Psalm 19. 4. Psalm 73. 9. Mat. 28. 13, 15.
has cut his throat; that is, it has been his ruin. Our Chronicles make
mention of one Burdet a Merchant, who living at the Sign of the Crown in
Cheap Side (in the days of King Edward the fourth, in the year 1483.)
jestingly said to his Son, that he would leave him heir of the Crown, meaning
the Sign of the Crown where he lived: for which he was apprehended, and within
four hours hanged, drawn and quartered. The tongue is often like a sharp Razor,
that instead of shaving the hair, cuts the throat. If a man do not look well
about him, he may every day be in danger of dying by his tongue. Life and death
(says Solomon) are in the power of the tongue. Gaping mouthed men, are noted
for fools by Lucian: and a better and a wiser man than Lucian has told us,
That the lips of a fool will swallow up himself. Ah how good had it been for
many that they had been born dumb. The tongue can easily travel all the world
over, and wound men's names and credits in this Country: and that in this City,
and that in this Town, and that in this Family, and that it can in a trice run
from one place to another: here it bites, and there it tears: in this place it
leaves a blot, and in that it gives a wound: and therefore you have cause to
watch your tongues on every day, but especially on the Lords day. There are
many whose tongues do more mischief, and travel further on the Sabbath day,
than they do on all the other days of the week. You ought to keep a strict
Guard upon your tongues every day, but on the Lords day you should double your
Guard. Satan without you, and that strong party that he has within you, will
do all they can, so to oil your tongues on that day, as to make you miscarry
more ways than one, if you do not carefully look about you. Are there none on
that day, that do watch your Jer. 20. 10. It is better for a man to watch and
stop his own mouth by silence, than to have it stopped by others reproofs.
words to deride you and jear you? Yes. Are there none on that day that do
watch your words, either to ensnare you or trapan you? Yes. Are there none on
that day, that do watch your words, that they may find matter if possible
either to reprove you, or to reproach you? Yes. Are there none on that day,
that do watch your words, that do hang upon your lips, expecting to be
instructed, edified, confirmed, comforted and strengthened by you? Yes. Well
then, if this be your case, how highly it does concern you on this day, to
watch your words, I shall leave you to judge. O Sirs, all your words, whether
good or bad, are all noted and observed by God, as you may see by comparing the
Scriptures Psalm 139. 4. Isa 59. 3. Jer. 33. 24. Chap. 44. 25. Mal. 3. 16, 17.
Job 42. 7. Matthew. 12. 37.
in the Margent together. If a person were by us, that should book all our
words from Sabbath day morning to Sabbath day night, and the like on other
days, would we not be very careful what we spoke. Why God is by and hears all.
Athenodorus a Heathen used to say, that all men ought to be very careful of
their actions and words; because God was every where, and beheld all that was
done and said. And Zeno a wise Heathen affirms, that God sees, and takes
notice of our very thoughts; how much more then of our words. O Sirs, how many
men and women are there, that are choice of what they eat, that are not choice
of what they speak: that are curious about the food which goes into their
mouths, lest it should hurt or poison them, who are no ways curious about the
words that go out of their mouths, lest they should hurt or poison others?

O^ all the members in the body, there is none so serviceable to Satan as the
tongue. And therefore Satan spares Jobs tongue; his grand design being not to
make Job a begar, but a blasphemer: Job was blistered all over by Satan, only
his tongue was not blistered. Satan thought by that member, to work Job to
fight against God, and the peace of his own soul. It is queried in the Schools,
what was the first sin of the first Angel that fell (for they assert that one
fell first, then the rest) Now there are very many opinions about it. Some say,
it was envy, others discontent; and some say, it was their refusing to
undertake the charge that was given to them to Minister unto man. Others think
it was a spiritual luxury; others ingratitude. The most and best say pride, but
wherein that pride consisted, is not easily determined, nor by them unanimously
resolved; and by some it is as confidently observed, that it was a sin of the
tongue. Now if these last have hit the mark, how highly does at concern us all,
to set a watch before the door of our lips at all times, but especially on the
Lords day. Now considering how wonderful apt and prone Christians are to be
speaking their own words. Yea, foolish, vain, worldly and unprofitable words on
the Lords day. Give me leave ^o offer to your serious consideration these four
things.

First, Where the Lord has commanded the whole man Thou shall do no manner of
work, the Lord has commanded the whole Exodus 4. 10.
man to rest from servile works. And therefore the tongue from talking of this
or that worldly business. But,

Secondly, Those things which as lets hinder the duties

Thirdly, Where bodily works are forbidden, there those

Fourthly, That Commandment which ties the outward about this man's matters or
that, or about this pleasure or that, or about this profit or that, or about
this man's calling or that, or about this Gossips Tale or that, etc. All such
persons are prophaners and no sanctifiers of the Lords Day.

I have been the longer upon this particular, to confute and recover those
Christians who give their tongues too great a liberty on the Lords Day.

Now in these fourteen particulars I have showed you how the Sabbath is to be
sanctified. O Sirs, as you desire to see London rebuilt, as you desire to see
London in as great (or greater) prosperity and glory, as she has been in: as
you desire to see her once more the Bulwark of the Nation: As Psa^. 48. 12, 13.
Cant. 6. 4. Isa 60. 15.
you desire to see her a shield and shelter to her faithful friends at home,
and a terror and dread to her proudest enemies abroad. As you desire that she
may be an eternal excellency Zech. 2. 5.
a joy of many Generations. As you desire the Lord to be for ever a wall of
fire about her, and a glory in the midst of her: M^ke conscience of sanctifying
the Sabbath in a right manner: Make it your great business and work to
sanctify the Sabbath according to those fourteen Rules which I have now laid
down.

I know there is a desperate opposition and contrariety in the hearts of carnal
men, to the strict observation of the Sabbath. When Moses had first received a
Commandment Exodus 16. 25. 31.
concerning the observation of the S^bbath, his Authority could not so prevail
with the Jews, but that some of them would be g^dding abroad to seek Manna on
the Sabbath day, contrary to an express prohibition: yea, when it was death
Chap. 31: 13, 14, 15, 16.
to gather sticks on that day: yet in contempt of Heaven it self, one ventures
upon the breach of the Law. How sadly and frequently the Prophets have lamented
and complained of the breach of the Sabbath, I have in this Treatise already
discovered; and therefore need say no more of it in this place. The horrid
profanation of this day in France, Holland, Germany, Sweden, and in th^se
three Nations, England, Sc^tland, and Ireland, and among all Protestants every
where else, is and must be for a sore lamentation. The Sabbath in all Ages has
been more or less crucified between profaneness and superstition, as Christ
the Lord of the Sabbath was crucified between two Thieves. When the observation
of the Sabbath came to be more sacred and solemn in public performances (which
was about Nehemiahs time, as is conceived) presently after Satan stirred up
some Hypocrites who ^un into such an extreme of superstition, that they held
that they might not stir out of their places, nor kill a flea, and a thousand
such like fooleries. Yea, some dangerous fooleries they labored to distill
into the people; as that they might not draw a Sword to defend themselves in a
common Invasion, etc.

For a close, remember this, that there are no Christians in all the world,
comparable to those (for the power of godliness and heighths of grace, holiness
and communion with God) who are most strict, serious, studious and
conscientious in sanctifying of the Lords day. Such as are careless, remiss,
light, slight, formal and carnal upon the Sabbath day, they will be as bad, if
not worse, on every other day in the Week. The true reason why the power of
godliness is fallen to so low an ebb both in this, and in other Countries also,
is because the Sabbath is no more strictly and conscientiously observed in this
Land, and in those other Countries where the name of the Lord is made known.
The Jews were never serious in the observation of their Sabbaths, till they
smarted seventy years in Babylon for their former profanation of it. And who
can look upon the ashes of London, and not see how dearly the Citizens have
paid for their profaning of the Lords day. And Oh that all these short hints
might be so blessed from Heaven, as to work us all to a more strict serious and
conscientious sanctifying of the Lords day, according to those Directions or
Rules, that I have in this Treatise laid before you.

And thus I have done with those Duties that are incumbent upon those who have
been burnt up by that late dreadful fire that has turned London into a ruinous
heap.

I come now to those Duties that are incumbent upon those whose habitations are
yet standing as monuments of divine Wisdom, Power and Grace. O Sirs, the flames
have been near you, a devouring fire has consumed many thousand habitations
round about you; and you and your habitations have been as so many brands
plucked out of the fire. O how highly does it concern you, seriously and
freq^ently to lay to heart, the singular goodness and kindness of God toward
you, manifested in the mighty preservations, protections and salvations that he
has vouchsafed to you, when you were surrounded with all manner of hazzards and
dangers. O that you would strive as for life to come up to duties which are
certainly incumbent upon all those who have escaped the burning flames.

But you will say, What are they?

These that follow.

First, It highly concerns you who have escaped the fiery 2 Pet. 2. 6. Luke 17.
32. Jer. 7. 12. 1 Samuel 4. 11. Psalm 78. 60
at large: If those sins that have brought the fiery judgment upon your
neighbors, are to be found among you, you have cause to fear the fiery Rod, or
else some other judgment that shall be equivalent to it. If you sin with
others, you shall suffer with others; except there be found repentance on your
side, and pardoning grace on Gods. The Lord has punished your neighbors with
that judgment of judgments, the fire; and he expects that you should take
notice thereof, and be instructed thereby, to take heed of those sins that they
have been judged for, else the same, or worser judgments will certainly befall
you. Because Jer. 3. 8. Obad. 11, 12, 13, 14.
Edom made no good use of Jerusalems sufferings, therefore the Lord threatens
her, that shame should cover her, and that she should be cut off for ever. God
expects, that the judgments that he has executed upon all round about you,
should awaken you out of security, and work in you a holy dread of his name,
and provoke you to repentance for what is past, and engage you to a more exact
walking with him for the time to come. But,

Secondly, It highly concerns you, not to think those who Isa. 5. 22. 23, 24.
Chap. 51. 17, 22, 23. ^er. 25. 15. 30.
escaped the consuming flames. Some there were that told Christ of certain
Galileans* whose blood Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifices (an argument of
Gods sore displeasure in the eye of man, to be surpised with a bloody death
even in the act of Gods service) But Jesus answered, suppose Luke 13. 1, 2, 3.
ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they
suffered such things: I tell you nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. And Christ confirms it by another parallel to it, of the men
upon whom the Tower in Sil^am fell, Luke 13. 4, 5. Or those eighteen upon whom
the Tower in Siloam fell, think ye that they were sinners above all men that
dwell in Jerusalem? I tell you nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish. Doubtless there are many fifties in London, whose habitations are laid
desolate, who were more righteous, than many of those whose houses have escaped
the consuming flames. Judgments many times begin at the house of God: The hand
of God is many times 1 Pet. 4. 17. Ezekiel. 9. 6. Job 1.
heaviest upon the holiest of people. Job was stripped of all his earthly
comforts, and set upon a Dunghill to scrape his sores with Potsheards; and yet
Job had not at that time his fellow in all the East Country, for a man fearing
God, and eschewing evil. Job was a perfect peerless man, and yet had his
habitation laid in ashes, and his substance destroyed, when his neighbors
round about him, enjoyed their all without disturbance. Doubtless many of them
whose houses are turned into a ruinous heap, were good people; people of
unblameable lives, people of exemplary lives; yea, earthly Angels, if compared
with many of those who have escaped the fiery Rod. Many have drunk deep of this
cup of wrath who are a people of his choicest love: and therefore do not judge
all them to be greater sinners than your selves, that have not escaped the
fiery Rod, as well as your selves. You who have escaped the consuming flames,
should make other men's lashes your lessons, and their burnings your warning^.
You should not so much eye what others have suffered, as what your selves have
deserved. But,

Thirdly, It concerns you to be much in blessing of God,

Fourthly, Be not secure: do not say, the bitterness of death is past; as Agag
did when he came before Samuel stately and 1 Samuel 15. 32.
haughtily with the garb and gate of a King. Many times when wicked men are in
the greatest security, they are then nearest the highest pitch of misery. Is
there not guilt enough upon all your hearts, and upon all your habitations, to
expose them to as great a desolation as London lies under. Ans. Yes, yes. Why
then do not you get off this guilt by frequent exercises of faith in the blood
of Christ, or else prepare to drink of the same cup that London has drunk off,
or of a worse. Ponder seriously and frequently upon these Scriptures, Isa. 51.
17. Awake, awake, stand up O Jerusalem, which have drunk at the hand of the
Lord the cup of his fury, thou have drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling,
and wrung them out. Verse 22. Thus says thy Lord, the Lord, and thy God, that
pleads the cause of his people: behold, I have taken out of thy hand the cup
of trembling; even the dregs of the cup of my fury, thou shall no more drink it
again. Verse 23. But I will put it into the hands of them that afflict thee:
which have said to thy soul, bow down, that we may go over: and thou have laid
thy body as the ground, and as the street to them that went over. Jer. 25. 15.
For thus says the Lord God of Israel unto me, take the wine cup of this fury
at my hand, and cause all the Nations, to whom I send thee; to drink it. Verse
17. Then took I the cup at the Lords hands, and made all the Nations to drink,
unto whom the Lord had sent me. Verse 18. To wit, Jerusalem, and the Cities of
Judah, and the Kings thereof, and the Princes thereof, to make them a
desolation, an astonishment, an hissing, and a curse (as it is this day) Verse
28. And it shall be, if they refuse, to take the cup at thine hand to drink,
then shall thou say unto The particular Kings and Kingdoms that must drink of
this cup are set down from verse 19. to verse 28. See Lam. 4. 21. Ezekiel. 23. 31,
32, 33, 34.
them, thus says the Lord of Hosts, ye shall certainly drink. ver. 29. For lo,
I begin to bring evil, on the City which is called by my name, and should ye be
utterly unpunished? ye shall not be unpunished: I will call for a sword upon
all the inhabitants of the earth, says the Lord of Hosts. When Jerusalem has
drunk of the cup, if God be God, the Nations round shall certainly drink of it.
God has begun with London: poor London has drunk deeply of the cup of Gods
fury: and therefore let the Nations round repent, or prepare to drink of
Londons cup. Most of those sins that bring the fiery Rod (if not all) are to be
found in all the great Cities of the world. And therefore let all the great
Cities in France, Spain, Italy, Germany, Holland, England, Ireland, Scotland,
etc. take warning by Londons desolation, and prepare to meet the Lord in the
way of his fury: let them cease from doing evil, and learn to do well: let them
repent in dust and ashes, lest they are laid in dust and ashes. Let them break
off their sins, lest God throws down their walls and habitations by furious and
devouring flames. Let all those whose habitations are still standing, remember
that the same sins, the same wrath, and the same malicious hands that has laid
so many thousand habitations desolate, can lay theirs also desolate, except
they reform and turn to the Most High.

Fifthly, It highly concerns you whose houses are standing Genesis 18. Psalm. 102.
13. 2 Cor. 11. 29.
and compassion to those who are burnt up and turned out of all, who are
houseless, harbourless and pennyless this day. God takes it well at our hands,
when we pity those whom he thinks meet to punish. One of Gods great ends in
punishing of some, is to stir up pity and compassion in others toward them. It
should melt your hearts to see other men's substances melted in the flames. God
has threatened an Obad. 12. 13.
evil, an only evil without the least mixture of mercy, to such as show no
mercy to those in misery. Whoever have James 2. 13.
beh^ld London in its former prosperity and glory, that cannot lament to see
London laid desolate? The ashes of London seems to cry out, have pity upon me O
my friends. They that J^b. 6. 14.
will not lament upon the burnt Citizens as the greatest objects of their pity,
may one day be ingulfed under the greatest misery. He was a N^bal, a sapless
fellow, who shut up all bowels of pity against David in his misery. They were
cursed ^ Sam. 25. 10, ^^. ^salm 137. 6, 7, 8.
Edomites, who did behold the r^i^e of Zion, and no^ mourn over it. Let all
burnt Citizens remember, that usually God pities them most, whom men pities
least: but burnt Citizens are not to be mocked or mena^ed, but mourned over.

Sixthly, It highly concerns you whose houses are standing Numb. 11. 1, 2, 3. 2
Kings 19. 4.
you are in the Mount, be sure you bear the sad condition of the burnt Citiz^ns
upon your hearts, Nehem. 1. 3. And they said unto me, the remnant that are left
of the captivity there in the Province, are in great affliction and reproach:
the wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates thereof are burnt with
fire. Well, what does Nehemiab do? Answ. He lifts up a prayer for them, verse
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. O Sirs, your prayers must not be pen^ or confined to
your own private interests, but extended to the benefit of all Gods suffering
servants. Philo the Jew, discoursing of Aarons Ephod, which he put on when he
went to pray, says it was a representation of the whole world, having in it
all colors to represent the condition of all states of all people whatsoever.
It Is brave when we are in the Mount, to bear the conditions of others upon our
hearts, as well as our own, especially theirs, whom the hand of the Lord has
severely reached. The best of men Romans 1. 9. 2 Timothy 1. 3.
have been much in prayer for others; witness, Moses, David, Job, Jeremiah,
Daniel, Paul. And it is very observable, that our Lord Jesus Christ who is our
great pattern, was very much in this noble work, for you shall find in John 17.
that he puts up but one petition for himself in verse 1. which petition is
repeated again in verse 5. And all the rest of his time he spent in praying
both for the converted and unconverted. Now shall our Lord Jesus Christ put up
many requests for others, and but one for himself, and shall we put up all our
requests for our selves, and not one for others? Among the Persians, he that
offered Sacrifice, prayed for all Herodot. lib. 1.
his Country men. These Persians will one day rise in Judgment against many
who are called Christians, and yet make no conscience of lifting up a prayer
for those that are under the afflicting hand of God. He that prays for
himself and not for others is fi^ly compared (by some) to an Hedge-hogg, who
laps himself within his own soft down, and turns his Brissels to all the world
besides. The Jews have a saying, That since the destruction of Jerusalem, the
door of prayer has been shut up. Oh that we had not cause to fear, that since
the burning of London, the door of prayer both for our selves and one another,
has been too much shut amongst us. O that all you whose habitations are
standing, would seriously consider

1. That none need prayer more than the burnt Citizens.

2. You do not know how soon their case may be yours: the same hand, or hands,
that has made them desolate, may make you desolate also.

3. Else what do you more than others. Matthew. 5. 47.


4. To pity and pray for those that are in misery, is honorable and
commendable.

5. It Is one of the most compendious ways in the world, to prevent all those
calamities and miseries that now you fear, and that you think you shall shortly
feel.

6. To lift up a prayer for those whose sufferings have been sore, is no costly
nor chargeable duty, and therefore buckle to it. But,

Seventhly, It highly concerns you whose houses are standing witness those
Kings who escaped the edge of the Genesis 14. and Chap. 19. compared. Exodus 14.
28. 1 Kings 19.
Sword, and were afterward destroyed by fire and brimstone from Heaven: and
witness Pharaoh, who escaped all the ten plagues of Egypt in order to his being
buried with his Host in the red Sea. And witness Sennacherib, who escaped the
Sword of the destroying Angel, in order to his falling by the swords of his own
Sons. Upon what coffeehouse his Sons rose up to slay him, is uncertain. Some
say, it was because he preferred their younger Brother Esharhaddon to Castal^o^.
the Kingdom, who was the last of the Assyrian Monarchs: for after him, the
Monarchy was translated from the Assyrians to the Babylonians. R. Solomon, as
Lyra cites him, says Ly^a. If Tob^t may be credited, he lived not fifty five
days after his return to N^neveh. Tob. 2. 24
that the great men of the Country having lost each one his Son, Brother, or
friend, in that expedition against Jerusalem, were so provoked, that they meant
to destroy him, which he hearing, fled to the Idols Temple, and prayed and
vowed, that if his God would deliver him from this danger, he would give these
two Sons for Sacrifice to him: then they hearing of this, came and slew him
there. I shall leave you to your choice, whether you will give credit to this
relation, or look upon it as a Rabinical invention. In this Judgment that fell
upon Sennacherib, there are these things remarkable:

1. That he should see so great and well prepared an Army Isa. 37. 36. The
mighty Monarchs of Assy ia used to go forth to war, with 500000. and sometimes
with 1000000. men; and therefore this slaughter may well be understood of the
Grandees of his Army. Wherefore Jose^hus says, he fled with his Army.
so suddenly destroyed.

2. That the storm should mainly fall upon the great ones of his Army, 2 Chronicles.
32. 22. And the Lord sent an Angel which cut off all the mighty men of valor,
and the Leaders and Captains in the Camp of the King of Assyria. From whence we
may easily gather, that some of the weaker sort, some of the refuse of the Army
were spared; the prime men and great Officers of his Army being only smitten.
Upon which account the King and his ragged Regiments became contemptible.

3. That he should be forced to fly into his own Country with shame and
contempt; his General and great Officers being destroyed, he had no heart to
keep the field, having none to order the Battle, and the dread and terror of
the Lord and his Judgments abiding upon him and his Army, he provides for his
own safety by fleeing home with his routed scattered troops.

4. That himself should be slain, and that in the Temple of his Idol, and in
the very act of his Idolatry, and that by his own Sons that came out of his own
bowels; as the Holy Ghost observes; 2 Chronicles. 32. 21. And when he was come into
the house of his God, they that came forth of his own Bowels; slew him there
with the sword. Certainly this was a far greater Judgment, than if he had
fallen by the sword of the d^st^oying Angel. And witness those very persons,
who escaped Pestilence, but were not burnt in the very flames, as well as their
houses and estates. O Sirs, though you have escaped the burning flames; yet you
do not know, what other Judgments you may be reserved to; and therefore be not
secure; but be wakeful and watchful, and provide for the worst. Unexpected
Judgments many times seize upon persons, and slay them as the Soldier slew
Archimedes, whilst ^e was basie in drawing lines in the dust. Take heed of
saying, surely the worst is past.

Eighthly and lastly, Do not rejoice in the fiery calamity Prove. 24. 17, 18.
Seriously ponder upon Chap. 25. and Chap. 35. of Ezeki^l, and Lam. 1. 21. 2 Samuel 16, 17, 25. and Lam. 3. 14, 45.
and so do many wicked men rejoice in the sufferings of others. Such as rejoice
in the sufferings of others, are sick of the Devils disease; but from that
disease the Lord deliver all your souls. It Is sad to insult over those whom God
has humbled; it is high wickedness to triumph over those to whom God has given
a cup of astonishment to drink. Such as make the desolations of their
neighbors to be the matter either of their secret repast, or open exultation.
Such may fear, that the very dregs of divine wrath is reserved for them. It Is
bad playing upon the Harp, because others have been put to hang their Harps
upon the Willows. We must not pray with him in the Tragoedie, that it may rain
calamities; nor with Clemens his Gnostick, give me calamities that I may glory
in them. There cannot be a greater evidence of a wicked heart, than for a man
to be merry, because others are in misery. So without repentance such may one
day dance in infernal flames, who have sung and danced at the remembrance of
Londons flames, Prove. 17. 5. He that is glad at calamities, (that is, at the
calamities of others) shall not be unpunished. If God be God, such as
congratulate our miseries, instead of condoling them, shall be sure to be
punished with the worst of punishments: for such do not only sin against the
Law of Grace, but also against the very Law of Nature: the Law of Nature
teaching men to sympathize with those that are in misery, and not to rejoice
over them, because of their miseries. O Sirs, do not make others mourning your
music, do not make others tears, your wine; as you would not be made drunk at
last with the wine of astonishment.

FINIS.
These Books following are to be sold by Nathaniel Ponder, at the Peacock in
Chancery Lane.
Exercitations on the Epistle to the Hebrews, also concerning the MESSIAH.
WHerein the Promises concerning him to be a Spiritual Redeemer of Mankind, are
Explained and Vindicated. His Coming, and Accomplishment of his Work according
to the Promises, is proved and confirmed. The Person, or who he is, is
declared. The whole Economy of the Mosaical Law, Rites, Worship, and
Sacrifices, is explained. And in all, the Doctrine of the Person, Office, and
Work of the Messiah, is opened; The nature and demerit of the first sin is
unfolded; The Opinions and Traditions of the Ancient and Modern Jews are
examined; Their Objections against the Lord Christ and the Gospel are answered:
The time of the coming of the Messiah is stated: And the great fundamental
Truths of the Gospel vindicated. With an Exposition and Discourses on the Two
First Chapters of the said Epistle to the Hebrews By J. Owen, D. D. in Folio.
Times of the Bible: Veyled in Cubits, Shekels, Talents, Furlongs, Chapters,
Verses, Letters, of the Scripture: With the Days, Hours, Watches, Weeks, and
Months of the Jewish Year: By J. S. in Quarto. A Practical Exposition on the
130th. Psalm. Wherein the Nature of the Forgiveness of Sin is declared, the
truth and reality of it asserted. And the Case of a Soul distressed with the
Guilt of Sin, and relieved by a discovery of Forgiveness with God, is at large
discoursed. By John Owen, D. D. John 5. 39. Search the Scriptures: in Quarto.
Books Printed and are to be sold by John Hancock. at his Shop over against
Gresham College, in Bishopsgate-street, next to the White Lion at Great St.
Hellins Gate, and at the first Shop in Popes-head-Alley next to Cornhill, at
the Sign of the Three Bibles.
TWelve Books lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the
Gospel at Margarets N^w-Fish*Street.

1 Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices: Or, Salve for Believers and
Unbelievers sores; being a companion for those that are in Christ, or out of
Christ, that slight or neglect Ordinances, under a pretense of living above
them; that are growing in spirituals, or decaying; tha^ are tempted, or
deserted; afflicted, or opposed; that have assurance, or want it; on 2 Cor. 2.
11.

2 Heaven on Earth: Or, A serious Discourse touching a well grounded Assurance
of man's everlasting happiness and blessedness; discovering the nature of
assurance, the possibility of attaining it, the Causes, Springs and Degrees of
it, with the resolution of several weighty Q^estions on the 8. of the Romans
32, 33. 34. verses.

3 The unsearchable Riches of Christ: Or, Me^t for strong Men, and Milk for
Babes, held forth in two and twenty Sermons, from Ephesians. 3. 8. Preached on his
Lecture nights at Fish-street-hill.

4 His Apples of Gold for young Men and Women: And, A Crown of Glory for Old
men and Women: Or the Happiness of b^ing Good betimes, and the Honor of being
an Old Disciple, clearly and fully discovered, and closely and faithfully
applied. With the young man's Objections answered, and the old man's doubts
resolved.

5 A String of Pearls: Or, The best things reserved till last, delivered in a
Sermon Preached in London, June 8. 1657. at the Funeral of (that Triumphant
Saint) Mrs. Mary Blake, late Wife to his worthy Friend Mr. Nicholas Blake,
Merchant.

6 The Mute Christian: with Sovereign Antidotes against the most miserable
Exigents: Or, A Christian, with an Olive-leaf in his mouth, when he is under
the greatest afflictions, the sharpest and sorest trials and troubles, the
saddest and darkest providence and changes: with Answers to diverse Questions
and Objections that are of great importance: all tending to win and work souls
to be still, quiet, calm, and silent, under all changes, that have, ^r that may
pass upon them in this world, etc. Lately printed and discomposed to all
afflicted, distressed, dissatisfied, disquieted, and discomposed Christians
throughout the world.

7 An Ark for all Gods Noah's in a stormy day. Wherein is showed the
trans^endent excellency of a Believers portion, on Lament. 3. 24.

8 The Cromn and Glory of Christianity: Or, Hol^^^ss the only way to Happiness,
discovered in 48 S^^mons on H^b. 12. 14.

9 The Privy Key of Heaven: Or, A Discourse of Closet Prayer, Twenty Arguments
for it, with the resolution of several Q^estions, etc.

10 A Heavenly Cordial for all that have had, or have escaped the Plague, etc.

11 Newly published, A Cabinet of choice Jewels; or, a Box of precious
Ointment. Being a plain Discovery of what men are worth for Eternity, and how
it is like to go with them in another World.

12 There is now published a New Treatise written by Mr. Thomas Brooks, called,
Londons Lamentations: Or, A sober serious discourse concerning the late fiery
dispensation, wherein the procuring causes, and the final causes of that
dreadful dispensation are laid open, with the duties that are incumbent, both
upon those who have been burnt up, and upon those who have escaped those
consuming flames; with thirteen supports, to bear up the hearts of such as have
been sufferers: Here are many great Objections answered, and many weighty
Questions resolved, and variety of Arguments to prove, that a little that the
righteous man has, is bet^^r ^han the riches of the wicked; with several other
points of grand importance, all tending to the cooling, quieting, set^ling,
refreshing, upholding and comforting of all that have been suff^rers by the
late fiery cal^mity.

The Godly Man's Ark: Or, City of Refuge, in the day of his distress, discovered
in diverse Sermons. The first of which was Preached at the Funeral of Mrs.
Eliz^beth Moor.

Whereunto are annexed Mrs. Moors Evidences for Heaven, composed and collected
by her in the time of her health, for her comfort in the time of sickness: By
Edmund Calamy, B. D. and Pastor of the Church at Aldermanbury.

A Book of Short-Writing, the most easy, exact, lineal, and speedy method,
sitted to the meanest capacity: composed by Master Theophilus Me^calf,
Professor of the said Art.

Also a Schoolmaster, explaining the Rules of the said Book, with many new
additions, very useful.

Another Book of Shorthand, by Tho. Cross.

A Copy-book of the newest and most useful Hands, with Rules whereby those that
can read, may quickly learn to write: To which is added, brief directions for
true spelling and Cyphering, and making diverse sorts of Ink.

An excellent new Book of Mr. Ralph Vennings, entitled, Sin the Plague of
Plagues: or, Sinful Sin the worst of Evils.

All Printed for, and are to be sold by John Hancock at the first Shop in
Popes-Head-Al^ey in Cornhill, at the sign of the three Bibles, or at his Shop
in Bishops-Gate-Street, near great St. Hellins, over against Gresham-Colledge,
1670.

FINIS.
A Brief Declaration and Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity.
As also of the Person and Satisfaction of Christ. Accommodated to the Capacity
and Use of such as may be in danger to be seduced: and the establishment of the
Truth. John 5. 39. Search the Scriptures. By John Owen, D. D. in Twelves.

The Unreasonableness of Atheism. Made manifest in a Discourse to a Person of
Honor: By Sir Charles Wolseley Barronet. The Second Edition Revised and
Enlarged by the Author: in Large Octavo.

There is now published a New Treatise written by Mr. Thomas Brooks, called
Londons Lamentations: Or, A sober serious Discourse concerning the late fiery
dispensation, wherein the procuring causes, and the final causes of that
dreadful dispensation are laid open, with the duties that are incumbent, both
upon those who have been burnt up, and upon those who have escaped those
consuming flames; with thirteen supports, to bear up the hearts of such as have
been sufferers: Here are many great Objections answered, and many weighty
Questions resolved; and variety of Arguments to prove, that a little that the
righteous man has, is better than the riches of the wicked; with several other
points of grand importance, all tending to the cooling, quieting, settling,
refreshing, upholding and comforting of all that have been sufferers by the
late fiery calamity.

FINIS.

