A JOVIALL CREW: OR, THE MERRY BEGGARS. Presented in a COMEDY, AT The Cockpit
in Drury Lane, in the year 1641.

Written by RICHARD BROM.

Mart. Hic totus volo rideat Libellus.

LONDON: Printed by I. Y. for E. D. and N. E. and are to be sold at the Gun in
Ivy-Lane. 1652.

To the Right Noble, Ingenious, and Judicious Gentleman, THOMAS STANLEY, Esquire
SIR,
I Have, long since, studied in these anti-ingenious Times, to find out a Man,
that might, at once, be both a Judge and Patron to this Issue of my Old age,
which needs both. And my blessed Stars have flung me upon You: In whom both
those Attributes concentre and flourish: Nor can I yet find a reason, why I
should present it to You (it being below your Acceptance or Censure) but only
my own Confidence; which had not grown to this forwardness, had it not been
encouraged by your Goodness. Yet we all know, Beggars use to flock to great
men's Gates. And, though my Fortune has cast me in that Mold, I am poor and
proud; and preserve the humor of him, who could not beg for any thing, but
great Boons, such, as are your kind Acceptance and Protection. I dare not say
(as my Brethren use) that I present this, as a Testimonial of my Gratitude or
Recompense for your Favors: For (I protest) I conceive it so far from quitting
old Engagements, that it creates new. So that, all, that this Play can do, is
but to make more Work; and involves me in Debts, beyond a possibility of
Satisfaction. Sir, it were a folly in me, to tell you of your Worth, the World
knows it enough; and are bold to say, Fortune and Nature scarce ever club'd so
well. You know, Sir, I am old, and cannot cringe, nor Court, with the powdered
and ribbanded Wits of our days: But, though I cannot speak so much, I can
think as well, and as honorably as the best. All the Arguments I can use to
induce you to take notice of this thing of nothing, is, that it had the luck to
tumble last of all in the Epidemicall ruin of the Scene; and now limps hither
with a wooden Leg, to beg an Alms at your hands. I will wind up all, with a
Use of Exhortation, That since the Times conspire to make us all Beggars, let
us make our selves merry; which (if I am not mistaken) this drives at. Be
pleased therefore, Sir, to lodge these harmless Beggars in the Outhouses of
your thoughts; and, among the rest, Him, that in this Cuckoe time, puts in for
a Membership, and will fill the Choyre of those, that Duly and truly pray for
you, and is,

SIR, Your humble Servant RIC: BROM.

To Master RICHARD BROM, on his Play, called, a Ioviall Crew: or, The merry
BEGGARS.
Plays are instructive Recreations:
Which, who would write, may not expect, at once,
No, nor with every breeding, to write well.
And, though some itching Academicks fell
Lately upon this Task, their Products were
Lame and imperfect; and did grate the ear;
So, that they mocked the stupid Stationers care,
That both with Guelt and Cringes did prepare
Fine Copper-Cuts; and gathered Verses too,
To make a Shout before the idle Show.
Your Fate is other: You do not invade;
But by great Johnson were made free of the Trade.
So, that we must in this your Labor find
Some Image and fair Relic of his Mind.
John Hall.

To Master RICHARD BROM, on his Comedy of A Jovial Crew: or, The merry
Beggars.
NOt to Commend, or Censure thee, or thine;
Nor like a Bush, to signify good Wine;
Nor yet to publish to the World, or Thee,
Thou merit'st Bays by Wit and Poetry,
Do I stand here. Though I do know, there comes
A Shole, with Regiments of Encomiums,
On all occasions, whose Astronomy
Can calculate a Praise to Fifty three,
And write blank Copies, such, as being viewed,
May serve indifferently each Altitude;
And make Books, like Petitions, whose Commands
Are not from Worth, but multitude of Hands:
Those will prove Wit by Power, and make a Trade,
To force by number when they cannot persuade.
Here Is no such need: For Books, like Children, be
Well Christ'ned, when their Sureties are but three.
And those, which to twelve Godfathers do come,
Signify former Guilt, or speedy Doom.
Nor need the Stationer, when all the Wits are past,
Bring his own Periwig Poetry at last.
All this will not do: For, when their Labor's done,
The Reader's ruled, not by their tastes, but's own.
And he, that for Encomiasticks looks,
May find the bigger, not the better Books.
So, that the most our Leavers serve for, shows
Only that we are his Friends, and do suppose
It Is good: And that is all, that I shall say.
In truth I love him well, and like his Play.
And if there is any, that don't think so too:
Let them let it alone for them, that do.
I. B.

To his worthy Friend Master RICHARD BROM, upon his Comedy, called, A Ioviall
Crew: or, The merry Beggars.
THis Comedy (ingenious Friend) will raise
It self a Monument, without a Praise
Begged by the Stationer; who, with strength of Purse
And Pens, takes care, to make his Book sell worse.
And I dare calculate thy Play, although
Not elevated unto Fifty two.
It may grow old as Time or Wit; and he,
That dares despise, may after envy thee.
Learning, the File of Poesy may be
Fetched from the Arts and Universitie:
But he that writes a Play, and good, must know,
Beyond his Books, Men, and their Actions too.
Copies of Verse, that make the New Men sweat,
Reach not a Poem, nor the Muses heat;
Small Bavine-Wits, and Wood, may burn a while,
And make more noise, then Forests on a Pile,
Whose Fivers shrunk, ma' invite a piteous stream,
Not to lament, but to extinguish them.
Thy Fancie's Metal; and thy strain's much higher
Proof against their Wit, and what that dreads, the Fire.
Ia: Shirley.

To my Worthy Friend Master RICHARD BROM, on his excellent Play, called, A
Ioviall Crew: or, The merry Beggars.
THere is a Faction (Friend) in Town, that cries,
Down with the Dagon-Poet, Johnson dies.
His Works were too elaborate, not fit
To come within the Verge, or face of Wit.
Beaumont and Fletcher (they say) perhaps, might
Pass (well) for current Coin, in a dark night:
But Shakespeare the Plebean Driller, was
Foundered in's Pericles, and must not pass.
And so, at all men fly, that have but been
Thought worthy of Applause; therefore, their spleen.
Ungrateful Negro-kinde, dart you your Rage
Against the Beams that warmed you, and the Stage!
This malice, shows it is unhallowed heat,
That boyles your Raw-brains, and your Temples beat.
Adulterate Pieces may retain the Mold,
Or Stamp, but want the pureness of the Gold.
But the World's mad, those Jewels that were worn
In high esteem, by some, laid by in scorn;
Like Indians, who their Native Wealth despise,
And dote on Stranger's Trash, and Trumperies.
Yet, if it be not too far spent, there is
Some hopes left us, that this, thy well wrought Piece,
May bring it Cure, reduce it to its sight,
To judge the difference 'twixt the Day, and Night;
Draw the Curtain of their Errors: that their sense
May be conformable to Ben's Influence;
And finding here, Nature and Art agree,
May swear, thou liv'st in Him, and he in Thee.
Io: Tatham.

To Master RICHARD BROM, upon his Comedy, called, A Ioviall Crew: or, The
merry Beggars.
Something I Would say, but not to praise thee (Friend)
For thou thy self, do best thy self commend.
And he that with an Eulogie does come,
May to's own Wit raise an Encomium,
But not to thine. Yet I Will before thee go,
Though Whiffler-like to usher in the Show.
And like a quarter Clock, foretell the time
Is come about for greater Bells to chime.
I must not praise thy Poetry, nor Wit,
Though both are very good; yet that is not it.
The Reader in his progress will find more
Wit in a line, than I praise in a score.
I shall be read with prejudice, for each line
I write of thee, or any thing that is thine,
Be It Name, or Muse, will all be read of me,
As if I clawed my self, by praising thee.
But though I may not praise; I hope, I may
Be bold to love thee. And the World shall say
I Have reason for it. I love thee for thy Name;
I love thee for thy Merit, and thy Fame:
I love thee for thy neat and harmless wit,
Thy Mirth that does so clean and closely hit.
Thy luck to please so well: who could go faster?
At first to be the Envy of thy Master.
I love thee for thy self; for who can choose
But like the Fountain of so brisk a Muse?
I love this Comedy, and every line,
Because it is good, as well's because it is thine.
Thou tell the World, the life that Beggars lead,
It Is seasonable, 'twill become our Trade.
'T must be our study too; for in this time
Who Will not be innocent, since Wealth's a Crime?
You Are the Ages Doctor now; for since all go
To make us poor, thou make us merry too.
Go on, and thrive; may all thy sportings be
Delightful unto all, as the are to me.
May this so please to encourage thee; that more
May be made public, which thou keep'st in store.
That though we have lost their Dress; we may be glad
To see and think on the happiness we had.
And thou thereby may make our Name to shine;
'Twas Royal once; but now 'twill be Divine.
ALEX. BROM.

Prologue.
THe Title of our Play, A Ioviall Crew,
May seem to promise Mirth: Which were a new,
And forced thing, in these sad and tragic days,
For you to find, or we express in Plays.
We wish you, then, would change that expectation,
Since Ioviall Mirth is now grown out of fashion.
Or much not to expect: For, now it chances,
(Our Comic Writer finding that Romances
Of Lovers, through much travel and distress,
Till it be thought, no Power can redress
The afflicted Wanderers, though stout Chevalry
Lend all his aid for their delivery;
Till, lastly, some impossibility
Concludes all strife, and makes a Comedy)
Finding (he says) such Stories bear the sway,
Near as he could, he has composed a Play,
Of Fortune Tellers, Damsels, and their Squires,
Exposed to strange Adventures, through the Briers
Of Love and Fate. But why need I forestall
What shall so soon be obvious to you all:
But wish the dullness may make no Man sleep,
Nor sadness of it any Woman weep.
The Persons of the Play.
OOld-rents, an ancient Esquire. Hearty, his Friend, and merry Companion, but a
decayed Gentleman. Springlove, Steward to Master Oldrents. Vincent, two young
Gentlemen. Hilliard, two young Gentlemen. Randall, a Groom, Servant to
Oldrents. Master Sentwell, and two other Gentlemen, Friends to Justice Clack.
Oliver, the Justices Son. Master Clack, the Justice himself. Master Talboy,
Lover to the Justices Niece. Martin, the Justices Cleark. Chaplain, to
Oldrents. Usher, to Oldrents. Butler, to Oldrents. Cook to Oldrents. Rachel,
Oldrent's Daughters. Meriel, Oldrent's Daughters. Amie, Justice Clack's Niece.
Autum-Mort, an old Beggar-woman. Patrico, Four especial Beggars. Soldier,
Four especial Beggars. Lawyer, Four especial Beggars. Courtier, Four
especial Beggars. Scribble, their Poet. Diverse other Beggars, Fiddlers, and
Mutes.
A JOVIAL CREW: OR, The merry Beggars.
Actus Primus.
Oldrents. Hearty. Old. IT has indeed, Friend, much afflicted me.

Hea. And very justly, let me tell you, Sir,
That could so impiously be curious
You tempt a judgment on you; to give ear,
And Faith too (by your leave) to Fortune Tellers,
Wizards and Gypsies!

Old. I have since been frighted
With It in a thousand dreams.

Hea. I would be drunk
A thousand times to bed, rather then dream
Of any of their Riddlemy Riddlemies.
If they prove happy so: If not, let't go;
You Will never find their meaning till the event,
If you suppose there was, at all, a meaning,
As the equivocating Devil had, when he
Cosen'd the Monk, to let him live soul-free,
Till he should find him sleeping between sheets:
The wary Monk, abjuring all such lodging,
At last, by over-watching in his study,
The foul Fiend took him napping with his nose
Betwixt the sheet-leaves of his conjuring Book.
There was the whim, or double meaning on it.
But these fond Fortune Tellers, that know nothing,
Aim to be thought more cunning then their Master,
The foresaid Devil, though truly not so hurtful:
Yet, trust 'em hang em. Wizards! old blind Buzzards!
For once they hit, they miss a thousand times;
And most times give quite contrary, bad for good,
And best for worst. One told a Gentleman
His son should be a man-killer, and hanged for it:
Who, after proved a great and rich Physician,
And with great Fame in the Universitie
Hanged up in Picture for a grave example.
There was the whim of that. Quite contrary!

Old. And that was happy, would mine could so deceive my fears.

Hea. They may: but trust not to it. Another Schemist
Found, that a squint-eyed boy should prove a notable
Pick-purse, and afterward a most strong thief;
When he grew up to be a cunning Lawyer,
And at last died a Judge. Quite contrary!
How many have been marked out by these Wizards
For fools, that after have been pricked for Sheriffs?
Was not a Shepheard-boy foretold to be
A Drunkard, and to get his living from
Bawds, Whores, Thieves, Quarrellors, and the like?
And did he not become a Suburb Justice?
And live in Wine and Worship by the Fees
Racked out of such Delinquents? There Is the whim on it.
Now I come to you: Your Figure-stinger finds,
That both your Daughters, notwithstanding all
Your great Possessions, which they are Coheirs of,
Shall yet be Beggars: May it not be meant,
(If, as I said, there be a meaning in it)
They may prove Courtiers, or great Courtiers wives.
And so be Beggars in Law? Is not that
the whim on it think you? you shall think no worse on it.

Old. Would I had your merry heart.

Hea. I thank you, Sir.

Old. I mean the like.

Hea. I would you had; and I
Such an Estate as yours. Four thousand yearly,
With such a heart as mine, would defy Fortune,
And all her babbling Soothsayers. I Would as soon
Distrust in Providence, as lend a fear
To such a Destiny, for a Child of mine,
While there be Sack and Songs in Town or Country.
Think like a man of conscience (now I am serious)
What justice can there be for such a curse
To fall upon your Heirs? Do you not live
Free, out of Law, or grieving any man?
Are you not the only rich man lives un-envied?
Have you not all the praises of the Rich,
And prayers of the Poor? Did ever any
Servant, or Hireling, Neighbor, Kindred curse you,
Or wish one minute shortened of your life?
Have you one grudging Tenant? will they not all
Fight for you? Do they not teach their Children,
And make 'em too, pray for you morn and evening,
And in their Graces too, as duly as
For King and Realm? The innocent things would think
They ought not eat else.

Old. It Is their goodness.

Hea. It is your merit. Your great love and bounty
Procures from Heaven those inspirations in 'em.
Whose Rent did ever you exact? whose have
You not remitted, when by casualties
Of fire, of floods, of common dearth, or sickness,
Poor men were brought behind hand? Nay, whose losses.
Have you not piously repaired?

Old. Enough.

Hea. What Hariots have you taken from forlorn Widows?
What Acre of your thousands have you racked?

Old. Good Friend, no more.

Hea. These are enough, indeed,
To fill your ears with joyful acclamations
Where e're you pass: Heaven bless our Landlord Oldrent;
Our Master Oldrent; our good Patron Oldrent.
Cannot these sounds conjure that evil spirit
Of fear out of you, that your Children shall
Live to be Beggars? Shall Squire Oldrent's Daughters
Wear old rents in their Garments? (there is a whim too)
Because a Fortune Tellers told you so?

Old. Come, I will strive to think no more on it.

Hea. Will you ride forth for air then, and be merry?

Old. Your counsel and example may instruct me.

Hea. Sack must be had in sundry places too.
For Songs I am provided.

Enter Springlove with Books and Papers, he lays them on the Table. Old. Yet
here comes one brings me a second fear,
Who has my care the next unto my children.

Hea. Your Steward, Sir, it seems has business with you.
I wish you would have none.

Old. I Will soon dispatch it:
And then be for our journey instantly.

Hea. I Will wait your coming down, Sir. Exit.

Old. But why, Springlove,
Is now this expedition?

Spr. Sir, It Is duty.

Old. Not common among Stewards, I confess,
To urge in their Accounts before the day
Their Lords have limited. Some that are grown
To hoary hairs and Knighthoods, are not found
Guilty of such an importunity.
It Is yet but thirty days, when I give forty
After the half-year day, our Lady last.
Could I suspect my Trust were lost in thee;
Or doubt thy youth had not ability
To carry out the weight of such a charge,
I, then, should call on thee.

Spr. Sir, your indulgence,
I hope, shall never corrupt me. Ne'rtheless,
The testimony of a fair discharge
From time to time, will be encouragement
Springlove turns over the several Books to his Master. To virtue in me. You
may then be pleased
To take here a Survey of all your Rents
Received, and all such other payments, as
Came to my hands since my last Audit, for
Cattle, Wool, Corn, all Fruits of Husbandry.
Then, my Receipts on Bonds, and some new Leases,
With some old debts, and almost desperate ones,
As well from Country Cavaliers, as Courtiers.
Then, here Sir, are my several Disbursements,
In all particulars for your self and Daughters,
In charge of Housekeeping, Buildings and Repairs;
Journeys, Apparel, Coaches, Gifts, and all
Expenses for your personal necessaries.
Here, Servants wages, Liveries, and Cures.
Here for supplies of Horses, Hawks and Hounds.
And lastly, not the least to be remembered,
Your large Benevolences to the Poor.

Old. Thy charity there goes hand in hand with mine.
And, Springlove, I commend it in thee, that
So young in years art grown so ripe in goodness.
May their Heaven-piercing Prayers bring on thee
Equal rewards with me.

Spr. Now here, Sir, is
The balance of the several Accounts,
Which shows you what remains in Cash: which added
Unto your former Banck, makes up in all --

Old. Twelve thousand and odd pounds.

Spr. Here are the keys
Of all. The Chests are safe in your own Closet.

Old. Why in my Closet? is not yours as safe?

Spr. O, Sir, you know my suit.

Old. Your suit? what suit?

Spr. Touching the time of year.

Old. It Is well-nigh May.
Why what of that, good Springlove? Nightingale sings.

Spr. O, Sir, you hear I am called.

Old. Fie Springlove, fie.
I hoped thou had abjured that uncough practice.

Spr. You thought I had forsaken Nature then.

Old. Is that disease of Nature still in thee
So virulent? and, notwithstanding all
My favors, in my gifts, my cares, and counsels,
Which to a soul ungrateful might be boasted:
Have I first bred thee, and then preferred thee (from
I will not say how wretched a beginning)
To be a Master over all my Servants;
Planted thee in my bosom; and can thou,
There, siight me for the whistling of a Bird?

Spr. Your reason, Sir, informs you, that is no cause.
But it is the season of the year that calls me.
What moves her Noats, provokes my disposition
By a more absolute power of Nature, then
Philosophy can render an account for.

Old. I find there is no expelling it; but still
It will return. I have tried all the means
(As I may safely think) in humane wisdom,
And did (as near as reason could) assure me,
That thy last years restraint had stopped for ever,
That running sore on thee, that gadding humor:
When, only for that cause, I laid the weight
Of mine Estate in Stewardship upon thee;
Which kept thee in that year, after so many
Summer vagaries thou had made before.

Spr. You kept a Swallow in a Cage that while.
I cannot, Sir, endure another Summer
In that restraint, with life: 'twas then my torment,
But now, my death. Yet, Sir, my life is yours:
Who are my Patron; freely may you take it.
Yet pardon, Sir, my frailty, that do beg
A small continuance of it on my knees.

Old. Can there no means be found to preserve life
In thee, but wandering, like a Vagabond?
Does not the Sun as comfortably shine
Upon my Gardens, as the opener Fields?
Or on my Fields, as others far remote?
Are not my Walks and Greens as delectable
As the Highways and Commons? Are the shades
Of Siccamore and Bowers of Eglantine
Less pleasing then of Bramble, or thorn hedges?
Or of my Groves and Thickets, then wild Woods?
Are not my Fountain waters fresher then
The troubled streams, where every Beast does drink?
Do not the Birds sing here as sweet and lively,
As any other where? is not thy bed more soft,
And rest more safe, then in a Field or Barn?
Is a full Table, which is called thine own,
Less curious or wholesome, then the seraps
From others trenchers, twice or thrice translated?

Spr. Yea, in the winter season, when the fire Is sweeter then the air.


Old. What air is wanting?


Spr. O Sir, you have heard of Pilgrimages; and The voluntary travels of good men.


Old. For Penance; or to holy ends? but bring Not those into comparison, I
charge you.


Spr. I do not, Sir. But pardon me, to think Their sufferings are much sweetened
by delights, Such as we find, by shifting place and air.


Old. Are there delights in beggary? Or, if to take
Diversity of Air be such a solace,
Travel the Kingdom over: And if this
Yield not variety enough, try further:
Provided your deportment be gentile.
Take Horse, and Man, and Money: you have all,
Or I Will allow enough.

Sing Nigtingale, cuckoe etc. Spr. O how am I confounded!
Dear Sir, retort me naked to the world,
Rather then lay those burdens on me, which
Will stifle me. I must abroad or perish.

Old. I will no longer strive to wash this Moor*
Nor breath more minutes so unthriftily,
In civil argument, against rude wind,
But rather practice to withdraw my love
And tender care (if it be possible)
From that unfruitful breast; incapable
Of wholesome counsel.

Spr. Have I your leave, Sir?

Old. I leave you to dispute it with your self.
I have no voice to bid you go, or stay:
My love shall give thy will pre-eminence;
And leave the effect to Time and Providence -- Exit.

Spr. I am confounded in my obligation
To this good man: His virtue is my punishment,
When it is not in my Nature to return
Obedience to his Merits. I could wish
Such an Ingratitude were Death by th'law,
And put in present execution on me,
Yo rid me of my sharper suffering.
Nor but by death, can this predominant sway
Of nature be extinguished in me. I
Have fought with my Affections, by the assistance
Of all the strengths of Art and Discipline
(All which I owe him for in education too)
To conquer and establish my observance
(As in all other rules) to him in this,
This inborn strong desire of liberty
In that free course, which he detests as shameful,
And I approve my earths felicity:
But find the war is endless, and must fly.
What must I lose then? A good Master's love.
What loss feels he that wants not what he loses?
They Will say I lose all, Reputation.
What Is that, to live where no such thing is known?
My duty to a Master will be questioned.
Where duty is exacted it is none:
And among Beggars, each man is his own.
Enter Randal and three or four servants with a great Kettle, and black Iacks,
and a Bakers Basket, all empty, exeunt with all, manet Randal. Now fellows,
what new from whence you came?

Ran. The old wonted news, Sir, from your Guesthouse, the old Barn. We have
unloaden the Breadbasket, the Beef-Kettle, and the Beer- Bumbards there,
amongst your Guests the Beggars. And they have all prayed for you and our
Master, as their manner is, from the teeth outward, marry from the teeth
inwards it is enough to swallow your Alms; from whence I think their Prayers
seldom come.


Spr. Thou should not think uncharitably.


Ran. Thought's free, Master Steward, and it please you. But your Charity is
nevertheless notorious, I must needs say.


Spr. Meritorious thou meantst to say.


Ran. Surely Sir, no; it is out of our Curats Book.


Spr. But I aspire no merits, nor popular thanks, It Is well if I do well in it.


Ran. It might be better though (if old Randal, whom you allow to talk, might
counsel) to help to breed up poor men's children, or decayed laborers, past
their work, or travel; or toward the setting up of poor young married couples;
then to bestow an hundred pound a year (at least you do that, if not all you
get) besides our Masters bounty, to maintain in begging such wanderers as
these, that never are out of their way; that cannot give account from whence
they came, or whither they would; nor of any beginning they ever had, or any
end they seek, but still to strowle and beg till their bellies be full, and
then sleep till they be hungry.


Spr. Thou art ever repining at those poor people! they take nothing from thee
but thy pains: and that I pay thee for too. Why should thou grudge?


Ran. Am I not bitten to it every day, by the six-footed bloodhounds that they
leave in their Litter, when I throw out the old, to lay fresh straw for the new
comers at night. That Is one part of my office. And you are sure that though
your hospitality be but for a night and a morning for one Rabble, to have a new
supply every evening. They take nothing from me indeed, they give too much.


Spr. Thou art old Randall still I ever grumbling, but still officious for 'em.


Ran. Yes: hang 'em, they know I love 'em well enough, I have had merry bouts
with some of 'em.


Spr. What say thou Randall?


Ran. They are indeed my pastime. I left the merry Griggs (as their provender
has pricked 'em) in such a Hoigh younder! such a frolic! you will hear anon, as
you walk nearer 'em.


Spr. Well honest Randal. Thus it is. I am for a journey. I know not how long
will be my absence. But I will presently take order with the Cook, Pantler and
Butler, for my wonted allowance to the Poor; And I will leave money with thee
to manage the affair till my return.


Ran. Then up rise Randal, Bayley of the Beggars.


Spr. And if our Master shall be displeased (although the charge be mine) at
the openness of the Entertainment, thou shall then give it proportionably in
money, and let them walk farther.


Ran. Pseugh! that will never do it, never do 'em good: It Is the Seat, the
Habitation, the Rendevous, that chears their hearts. Money would clog their
consciences. Nor must I lose the music of 'em in their lodging.


Spr. We will agree upon it anon. Go now about your business.


Ran. I go. Bayley? nay Steward and Chamberlain of the Rogues and Beggars. Exit.



Spr. I cannot think but with a trembling fear
On this adventure, in a scruple, which
I have not weighed with all my other doubts.
I shall, in my departure, rob my Master.
Of what? of a true Servant; other theft
I have committed none. And that may be supplied,
And better too, by some more constant to him.
But I may injure many in his Trust,
Which now he cannot be but sparing of.
I rob him too, of the content and hopes
He had in me, whom he had built and raised
Unto that growth in his affection,
That I became a gladness in his eye,
And now must be a grief or a vexation
A noise and singing within. Unto his noble heart. But hark! I there is
The Harmony that drowns all doubts and fears.
A little nearer --

Song.
FRom hunger and cold who lives more free,
Or who more richly clad then we?
Our bellies are full; our flesh is warm;
And, against pride, our rags are a charm:
Enough is our Feast, and for to morrow
Let rich men care: we feel no sorrow.
No sorrow, no sorrow, no sorrow, no sorrow.
Let rich men care, we feel no sorrow.
Sp. The Emperor hears no such Music; nor feels content like this!


Each City, each Town, and every Village,
Affords us either an Alms or Pillage.
And if the weather be cold and raw
Then, in a Barn we tumble in straw.
If warm and fair, by yea-cock and nay-cock
The Fields will afford us a Hedge or a Hay-cock.
A Hay-cock, a Hay-cock, a Hay-cock, a Hay-cock,
The Fields will afford us a Hedge or a Hay-cock.
Spr. Most ravishing delight! But, in all this
Only one sense is pleased: mine ear is feasted.
Mine eye too must be satisfied with my joys.
The hoarding Usurer cannot have more
Thirsty desire to see his golden store,
When he unlocks his Treasury, then I
The equipage in which my Beggars lie.

He opens the Scene; the Beggars are discovered in their postures; then they i
ue forth; and last, the Patrico. All. Our Master, our Master! our sweet and
comfortable Master.

Spr. How cheer my hearts?

I Beg. Most crowse, most capringly.
Shall we dance, shall we sing, to welcome our King?
Strike up Piper a merry merry dance
That we on our stampers may foot it and prance,
To make his heart merry as he has made ours;
As lustick and frolique as Lords in their Bowers.

Music. Dance. Spr. Exceeding well performed.


1 Beg. It Is well if it like you, Master. But we have not that rag among us,
that we will not dance off, to do you service; we being all and only your
servants, most noble Sir. Command us therefore and employ us, we beseech you.


Spr. Thou speak most courtly.


2 Beg. Sir, he can speak, and could have writ as well. He is a decayed Poet,
newly fallen in among us; and begs as well as the best of us. He learnt it
pretty well in his own profession before; and can the better practice it in
ours now.


Spr. Thou art a wit too, it seems.


3 Beg. He should have wit and knavery too, Sir: For he was an Attorney, till
he was pitched over the Bar. And, from that fall, he was taken up a Knight of
the Post; and so he continued, till he was degraded at the whipping-post; and
from thence he ran resolutely into this course. His cunning in the Law, and the
others labor with the Muses are dedicate to your service; and for my self, I Will
fight for you.


Spr. Thou art a brave fellow, and speak like a Commander. Have thou born
Arms?


4. Beg. Sir, he has born the name of a Netherland Soldier, till he ran away
from his Colors, and was taken lame with lying in the Fields by a Sciatica: I
mean, Sir, the strapado. After which, by a second retreat, indeed running away,
he scambled into his Country, and so escaped the Gallows; and then snap'd up his
living in the City by his wit in cheating, pimping, and such like Arts, till
the Cart and the Pillory showed him too publicly to the world. And so,
begging being the last refuge, he entered into our society. And now lives
honestly, I must needs say, as the best of us.


Spr. Thou speak good language too.


1 Beg. He was a Courtier born, Sir, and begs on pleasure I assure you,
refusing great and constant means from able friends to make him a staid man.
Yet (the want of a leg notwithstanding) he must travel in this kind against
all common reason, by the special policy of Providence.


Spr. As how, I prithee?


1 Beg. His Father, Sir, was a Courtier; a great Court Beggar I assure you;

I made these Verses of Him and his Son here.

A Courtier begged by Covetise, not Need,
From Others that, which made them beg indeed.
He begged, till wealth had laden him with cares
To keep for's children and their children shares:
While the oppressed, that lost that great Estate
Sent Curses after it unto their Fate.
The Father dies (the world says) very rich;
The Son, being gotten while (it seems) the itch
Of begging was upon the Courtly Sire,
Or bound by Fate, will to no wealth aspire,
Though offered him in Money, Clothes or Meat,
More then he begs, or instantly must eat.
Is not he heavenly blessed, that hates Earth's Treasure
And begs, with What Is a Gentleman but's pleasure?
Or say it be upon the Heir a curse;
What Is that to him? The Beggar's never the worse.
For of the general store that Heaven has sent
He values not a penny till't be spent.

All. A Scribble, a Scribble!


2 Beg. What City or Court Poet could say more then our hedge Muse-monger here?


2 Beg. What say, Sir, to our Poet Scribble here?


Spr. I like his vain exceeding well; and the whole Consort of you.


2 Beg. Consort, Sir. We have Musicians too among us: true merry Beggars
indeed, that being within the reach of the Lash for singing libellous Songs at
London, were fain to fly into our Covie, and here they sing all our Poet's
Ditties. They can sing any thing most tunably, Sir, but Psalms. What they may
do hereafter under a triple Tree, is much expected. But they live very civilly
and gentily among us.


Spr. But what is he there? that solemn old fellow, that neither speaks of
himself, nor any body for him.


2 Beg. O Sir, the rarest man of all. He is a Prophet. See how he holds up his
prognosticating nose. He is divining now.


Spr. How? a Prophet?


2 Beg. Yes Sir, a cunning man and a Fortune Tellers: it is thought he was a
great Cleark before his decay, but he is very close, will not tell his
beginning, nor the fortune he himself is fallen from: But he serves us for a
Clergyman still, and marries us, if need be, after a new way of his own.


Spr. How long have you had his company?


2 Beg. But lately come amongst us, but a very ancient Strowle all the Land
over, and has traveled with Gypsies, and is a Patrico. Shall he read your
Fortune Sir?


Spr. If it please him.


Pat. Lend me your hand, Sir. By this Palm I understand,
Thou art born to wealth and Land,
And after many a bitter gust,
Shall build with thy great Gransires dust.



Spr. Where shall I find it? but come, I Will not trouble my head with the search.


2 Beg. What say, Sir, to our Crew? are we not well congregated?


Spr. You are A Jovial Crew; the only people Whose happiness I admire.


3 Beg. Will you make us happy in serving you? have you any Enemies? shall we
fight under you? will you be our Captain?


2. Nay, out King.


3. Command us something, Sir.


Spr. Where Is the next Rendevouz?


1. Neither in Village nor in Town:
But three mile off at M^1^-d^wn.

Spr. At evening there I Will visit you.

Song.
COme, come; away: The Spring
(By every Bird that can but sing,
Or chirp a note) does now invite
Us forth, to taste of his delight.
In Field, in Grove, on Hill, in Dale;
But above all the Nightingale:
Who in her sweetness strives t'out-doe
The loudness of the hoarse Cuckoe.
Cuckoe cries he, Jug Jug Jug sings she,
From bush to bush, from tree to tree,
Why in one place then tarry me?
Come away; why do we stay?
We have no debt or rent to pay.
No bargains or accounts to make;
Nor Land or Lease to let or take:
Or if we had, should that remove us,
When all the world's our own before us,
And where we pass, and make resort,
It is our Kingdom and our Court.
Cuckoe cries he etc. Exeunt Gantantes.
Spr. So, now away.
They dream of happiness that live in State,
But they enjoy it that obey their Fate.

Actus Secundus.
Vincent, Hilliard, Meriel, Rachel. Vin. I Am overcome with admiration, at the
felicity they take*


Hill. Beggars! They are the only people, can boast the benefit of a free state,
in the full enioyment of Liberty, Mirth and Ease; having all things in common
and nothing wanting of Natures whole provision within the reach of their
desires. Who would have lost this sight of their Revels?


Vin. How think you Ladies? Are they not the only happy in a Nation?


Mer. Happier then we I Am sure, that are pent up and tied by the nose to the
continual steam of hot Hospitality, here in our Father's house, when they have
the Air at pleasure in all variety.


Ra. And though I know we have merrier Spirits then they, yet to live thus
confined, stifles us.


Hill. Why Ladies, you have liberty enough; or may take what you please.


Mer. Yes in our Father's Rule and Government, or by his allowance. What Is that
to absolute freedom; such as the very Beggars have; to feast and revel here to
day, and yonder to morrow; next day where they please; and so on still, the
whole Country or Kingdom over? there is Liberty! the birds of the air can take
no more.


Ra. And then at home here, or wheresoever he comes, our Father is so pensive,
(what muddy spirit soever possesses him, would I could conjure't out) that he
makes us even sick of his sadness, that were wont to see my Ghossips cock to
day; mould Cocklebread; dance clutterdepouch; and Hannykin booby; bind
barrels; or do any thing before him, and he would laugh at us.


Mer. Now he never looks upon us, but with a sigh, or tears in his eyes, though
we simper never so sanctifiedly. What tales have been told him of us, or what
he suspects I know not; God forgive him, I do; but I am weary of his house.


Ra. Does he think us Whores tro, because sometimes we talk as lightly as
great Ladies. I can swear safely for the virginity of one of us, so far as Word
and Deed goes; marry Thought's free.


Mer. Which is that one of us I pray? your self or me?


Ra. Good sister Meriel, Charity begins at home. But I Will swear I think as
charitably of thee: And not only because thou art a year younger neither.


Mer. I am beholden to you. But for my Father, I would I knew his grief and how
to cure him, or that we were where we could not see it. It spoils our mirth,
and that has been better then his Meat to us.


Vin. Will you hear our motion Ladies?


Mer. Psew, you would marry us presently out of his way, because he has given
you a foolish kind of promise: But we will see him in a better humor first,
and as apt to laugh as we to lie down, I warrant him.


Hill. It Is like that course will cure him, would you embrace it.


Ra. We will have him cured first, I tell you: And you shall wait that season,
and our leisure.


Mer. I will rather hazard my being one of the Devil's Ape-leaders, then to
marry while he is melancholy.


Ra. Or I to stay in his house; to give entertainment to this Knight, or
the other Coxcomb, that comes to cheer him up with eating of his cheer: when we
must fetch 'em sweetmeats, and they must tell us, Ladies, your lips are
sweeter, and then fall into Courtship, one in a set speech taken out of old
Britains Works, another with Verses out of the Academy of Complements, or some
or other of the new Poetical Pamphletters, ambitious only to spoil Paper, and
publish their names in print. And then to be kissed, and sometimes slaver'd --
fagh.


Mer. It Is not to be endured. We must out of the House. We cannot live but by
laughing, and that aloud, and no body sad within hearing.


Vin. We are for any adventure with you, Ladies. Shall we project a journey for
you? your Father has trusted you, and will think you safe in our company; and
we would fain be abroad upon some progress with you. Shall we make a fling to
London, and see how the Spring appears there in the Spring-Garden; and in
Hide-park, to see the Races, Horse and Foot; to hear the jo^kies crack; and see
the Adamites run naked before the Ladies?


Ra. We have seen all already there, as well as they, last year.


Hill. But there have been new Plays since.


Ra. No: no: we are not for London.


Hill. What think you of a Journey to the Bath then?


Ra. Worse then to other way. I love not to carry my Health where others drop
their Diseases. There Is no sport in that.


Vin. Will you up to the hill top of sports, then, and Merriments, Dovors
Olimpicks or the Cotswold Games.


Mer. No, that will be too public for our Recreation. We would have it more
within our selves.


Hill. Think of some course your selves then. We are for you upon any way, as
far as Horse and Money can carry us.


Vin. I, and if those means fail us, as far as our legs can bear, or our hands
can help us.


Ra. And we will put you to it. Come aside Meriel -- Aside.


Vin. Some jeere, perhaps to put upon us.


Hill. What think you of a Pilgrimage to St. Winisrides Well?


Vin. Or a Journey to the wise woman at Nantwich, to ask if we be fit husbands
for 'em?


Hill. They are not scrupulous in that, we having had their growing loves up
from our Childhoods; and the old Squire's good will before all men.


Ra. Me. Ha ha ha --


Vin. What Is the conceit I mervail.


Ra. Me. Ha ha ha ha --


Hill. Some merry one it seems.


Ra. And then, sirrah Meriel -- Hark again -- ha ha ha --


Vin. How they are taken with it!


Mer. Ha ha ha -- Hark again Rachel.


Hill. Some wonderful Nothing sure. They will laugh as much to see a swallow
fly with a white feather imp'd in her tail.


Vin. They were born laughing I think.


Ra. Me. Ha ha ha --


Vin. If it be not some trick upon us, which they will discover in some monstrous
shape, they cozen me. Now Ladies, is your Project ripe? possess us with the
knowledge of it.


Ra. It is more precious, then to be imparted upon a slight demand.


Hill. Pray let us hear it. You know we are your trusty servants.


Vin. And have kept all your councels 'ever since we have been Infant
Playfellows.


Ra. Yes, you have played at all kinds of small game with us; but this is to the
purpose. Ha ha ha --


Hill. It seems so by your laughing.


Ra. And asks a stronger tongue-tie then tearing of Books; burning of Samplers;
making Dirt-pies; or piss and paddle in it.


Vin. You know how, and what we have vowed: to wait upon you any way, any how,
and any whither.


Mer. And you will stand to it?


Hill. I, and go to it with you, wherever it be.


Mer. Pray tell' t'em, sister Rachel.


Ra. Why Gentlemen -- ha ha -- Thus it is -- Tell it you Meriel.


Vin. O, is that all?


Mer. You are the elder. Pray tell it you.


Ra. You are the younger. I command you tell it. Come, out with it They long to
have it.


Hill. When?


Vin. When?


Mer. In Troth you must tell it, sister, I cannot. Pray begin.


Ra. Then Gentlemen stand your ground.


Vin. Some terrible business sure!


Ra. You seemed e'n now to admire the felicity of Beggars.


Mer. And have engaged your selves to join with us in any course.


Ra. Will you now with us, and for our sakes turn Beggars?


Mer. It is our Resolution, and our Injunction on you.


Ra. But for a Time, and a short Progress.


Mer. And for a spring-trick of youth, now, in the season.


Vin. Beggars! What Rogues are these?


Hill. A simple trial of our Loves and service!


Ra. Are you resolved upon it? If not God bw'y'. We are resolved to take our
course.


Mer. Let yours be to keep council.


Vin. Stay, stay. Beggars! Are we not so already?
Do we not beg your loves, and your enjoyings?
Do we not beg to be received your servants?
To kiss your hands, or (if you will vouchsafe)
Your lips; or your embraces?

Hill. We now beg,

That we may fetch the Rings and Priest to marry us.
Wherein are we no Beggars?

Ra. That will not serve. Your time's not come for that yet.

You shall beg Victuals first.

Vin. O, I conceive your begging progress is to ramble out this summer among
your Father's Tenants; and it is in request among Gentlemen's Daughters to devour
their Cheese-cakes, Apple-pies, Cream Custards, Flapiacks, and Pan-puddings.


Mer. Not so, not so,


Hill. Why so we may be a kind of civil Beggars.


Ra. I mean stark, errant, downright Beggars, I, Without equivocation; Statute
Beggars.


Mer. Couchant and Passant, Guardant, Rampant Beggars.


Vin. Current and vagrant --


Hill. Stockant, whippant Beggars!


Vin. Must you and we be such? would you so have it?


Ra. Such as we saw so merry; and you concluded Were the only happy People in a
Nation.


Mer. The only Freemen of a Commonwealth;

Free above Scot-free; that observe no Law,
Obey no Governor, use no Religion,
But what they draw from their own ancient custom,
Or constitute themselves, yet are no Rebels.

Ra. Such as of all men's Meat and all men's Money
Take a free part; and, wheresoever they travel.
Have all things gratis to their hands provided.

Vin. Course fare most times.

Ra. Their stomach makes it good;
And feasts on that, which others scorn for Food.

Mer. The Antidote, Content, is only theirs.
And, unto that, such full delights are known,
That they conceive the Kingdom is their own.

Vin. Before Heaven I think they are in earnest: for they were always mad.


Hill. And we were madder then they, if we should lose 'em.


Vin. It Is but a mad trick of youth (as they say) for the Spring, or a short
progress: and mirth may be made out of it; knew we how to carry it.


Ra. Pray Gentlemen be sudden.
Hark, you hear the Cuckoe. Cuckoe

Hill. We are most resolutely for you in your course.


Vin. But the vexation is how to set it on foot.


Ra. We have projected it. Now if you be perfect and constant Lovers and
friends, search you the means. We have puzzell'd 'em.


Mer. I am glad on it. Let 'em pump.


Vin. Troth a small stock will serve to set up withal. This Doublet sold off of
my back, might serve to furnish a Camp Royal of us.


Hill. But how to enter or arrange our selves into the Crew will be the
difficulty. If we light raw and tame amongst 'em (like Cage-Birds among a
flight of wild ones) we shall never pick up a Living, but have our brains peckt
out.


Vin. We want instruction dearly.


Enter Springlove. Hill. O here comes Springlove. His great Benefactorship among
the Beggars might prefer us with Authority into a ragged Regiment presently.
Shall I put it to him.


Ra. Take heed what you do. His greatness with my Father will betray us.


Vin. I will cut his throat then. My noble Springlove, the great Commander of
the Maunders, and King of Canters, we saw the gratitude of your loyal Subjects,
in the large Tributary content they gave you in their Revels.


Spr. Did you, Sir?


Hill. We have seen all with great delight and admiration.


Spr. I have seen you too, kind Gentlemen and Ladies; and overheard you in
your queint design, to new create your selves out of the wordly blessings, and
spiritual graces Heaven has bestowed upon you, to be partakers and Co-actors
too, in those vile courses, which you call delights, taken by those despicable
and abhorred Creatures.


Vin. Thou art a Despiser, nay a Blasphemer
Against the Maker of those happy Creatures.
Who, of all humane, have priority
In their content. In which they are so blessed
That they enjoy most in possessing least.
Who made 'em such, do think? or why so happy?

Ra. He grows zealous in the Cause: sure he will beg indeed.


Hill. Art thou an Hypocrite, then, all this while?
Only pretending Charity; or using it
To get a Name and Praise unto thy self;
And not to cherish and increase those Creatures,
In their most happy way of living? Or
Do thou bestow thine Alms with a foul purpose
To stint their Begging, and with loss to buy
And slave those free souls from their liberty?

Mer. They are more zealous in the Cause then we.


Spr. But are you, Ladies, at defiance too
With Reputation, and the Dignity
Due to your Father's House and You?

Ra. Hold thy peace, good Springlove,
And, though you seem to dislike this course, and reprove us for it,
Do not betray us in it: your throat's in question.
I tell you for good will. good Springlove.

Mer. What would thou have us do?
Thou talk of the House.
It Is a base melancholy House.
Our Father's sadness banishes us out on it.
And, for the delight thou take in Beggars and their
brawls, thou can not but think they live a better
life abroad, then we do in this House.

Spr. I have sounded your Faith: And I am glad I find you all right. And for
your Father's sadness, I Will tell you the cause on it. I overheard it but this
day in his private Discourse with his merry Mate Master Hearty. He has been
told by some Wizard that you both were born to be Beggars.


All. How. How!


Spr. For which he is so tormented in mind, that he cannot sleep in peace, nor
look upon you but with hearts grief.


Vin. This is most strange.


Ra. Let him be grieved then, till we are Beggars,
We have just reason to become so now:
And, what we thought on but in jest before,
We'll do in earnest now.

Spr. O, I applaud this resolution in you; Would have persuaded it; will be
your Servant in it. For, look ye Ladies: The Sentence of your Fortune does not
say, that you shall beg for need; hungry or cold necessity. If therefore you
expose your selves on pleasure into it, you shall absolve your destiny
nevertheless, and cure your Father's grief. I am overjoyed to think on it; and
will assist you faithfully.


All. A Springlove! a Springlove!


Spr. I am prepared already for the adventure.
And will with all conveniences furnish,
And set you forth; give you your Dimensions,
Rules and Directions: I will be your Guide,
Your Guard, your Convoy, your Authority.
You do not know my Power; my Command
IN the Beggars Commonwealth.

Vin. But how? But how, good Springlove?


Spr. I Will confess all. In my Minority
My Master took me up a naked Beggar;
Bred meat School; then took me to his Service;
(You know in what good fashion) and you may
Collect to memory for seven late Summers,
Either by leave, pretending Friends to see
At far remote parts of the Land, or else,
By stealth, I would absent my self from service,
To follow my own Pleasure, which was Begging,
Led to it by Nature. My indulgent Master
(Yet ignorant of my course) on my submission
When Cold and Hunger forced me back at Winter,
Received me still again. Till, two years since,
He being drawn by journey toward the North,
Where I then quartered with a ragged Crew;
On the high way, not dreaming of him there,
I did accost him, with a Good your Worship
The Guist one small penny to a Creeple;
(For here I was with him) and the good Lord Halts
To bless you, and restore it you in Heaven.

All. Ha ha ha.


Spr. My head was dirty clouted, and this leg
Swadled with Rags, the other naked, and
My body clad, like his upon the Gibbet.
Yet, He, with searching eyes, through all my Rags
And counterfeit Postures, made discovery
Of his Man Springlove; chid me into tears;
And a confession of my forespent life.
At last, upon condition, that vagary
Should be the last, he gave me leave to run
That Summer out. In Avtumne home came I
In my home Clothes again and former Duty.
My Master not alone conserved my Counsel;
But lays more weighty Trust and Charge upon me;
Such was his love to keep me a home-Man,
That he conferred his Stewards place upon me,
Which clogged me, the last year, from those Delights,
I would not lose again to be his Lord.

All. A Springlove, a Springlove.


Spr. Pursue the course you are on then, as cheerfully
As the inviting Season smiles upon you.
Think how you are necessitated to it,
To quit your Father's sadness, and his fears
Touching your Fortune. Till you have been Beggars
The Sword hangs over him. You cannot think
Upon an Act of greater Piety
Unto your Father, then t'expose your selves
Brave Volunteers, unpress'd by common need
Into this meritorious Warfare; whence
(After a few days, or short season spent)
You bring him a perpetual Peace and Joy
By expiating the Prophecy that torments him.
It Were worth your Time in painful, woeful steps,
With your lives hazard in a Pilgrimage,
So to redeem a Father. But you will find
A Progress of such Pleasure (as I Will govern't)
That the most happy Courts could never boast
In all their Tramplings on the Countries cost;
Whose envy we shall draw, when they shall read
We out-beg them, and for as little Need.

All. A Springlove! a Springlove!


Spr. Follow me, Gallants, then, as cheerfully As -- (hark!) we are summoned
forth. Birds singing


All. We follow thee. -- Exeunt.

Enter Randal. A Purse in his hand. Ran. Well, go thy ways. If ever any just
or charitable Steward was commended, sure thou shall be at the last
Quarter-day. Here Is five and twenty pounds for this Quarters Beggar-charge. And
(if he return not by the end of this Quarter) here is order to a Friend to
supply for the next. If I now should venture for the commendation of an unjust
Steward, and turn this Money to mine own use! ha! dear Devil tempt me not.
I Will do thee service in a greater Matter. But to rob the Poor! (a poor trick)
every Churchwarden can do it. Now something whispers me, that my Master, for
his Stewards love, will supply the Poor, as I may handle the matter. Then I rob
the Steward, if I restore him not the Money at his return. Away Temptation,
leave me. I am frail flesh: yet I will fight with thee. But say the Steward
never return. O but he will return. Perhaps he may not return. Turn from me
Satan: strive not to clog my conscience. I would not have this weight upon it
for all thy Kingdom.

Enter Hearty singing, and Oldrents. Hey down hay down a down etc. Remember,
Sir, your Covenant to be merry.

Old. I strive you see to be so. Yet something pricks me within, me thinks.


Hea. No further thought, I hope, of Fortunes telltales.


Old. I think not of them. Nor will I presage,
That when a disposition of sadness
O'rclouds my spirits, I shall therefore hear
Ill news, or shortly meet with some disaster.

Hea. Nay, when a man meets with bad tidings,
why
May not be then compel his mind to mirth;
As well as puling stomachs are made strong
By caring against Appetite?

Old. Forced Mirth though is not good.


Hea. It relishes not you will say. No more does Meat
That is most savory to a long sick stomach,
Until by Strife and Custom it is made good.

Old. You argue well. But do you see yon'd Fellow?


Hea. I never noted him so sad before.
He neither sings nor whistles.

Old. Something troubles him.
Can he force Mirth out of himself now, think you?

Hea. What speak you of a Clod of Earth; a Hind?
But one degree above a Beast, compared
To the aerie spirit of a Gentleman?

Old. He looks, as he came laden with ill news,
To meet me on my way.

Hea. It Is very pretty.
Suppose the Ass be tired with sadness: will you disburden him
To load your self? Think of your Covenant to be merry
In spite of Fortune and her Riddle-makers.

Old. Why how now Randal! sad? where is Springlove?

Hea. He Is ever in his Care. But that I know
The old Squire's virtue, I should think Springlove
Were sure his Bastard.

Ran. Here Is his Money, Sir.
I pray that I be charged with it no longer.
The Devil and I have strained courtesy these two hours about it. I would not
be corrupted with the trust of more then is mine own. Mr. Steward gave it me,
Sir, to order it for the Beggars. He has made me Steward of the Barn and them,
while he is gone (he says) a Journey, to survey and measure Lands abroad about
the Countries. Some purchase I think for your Worship.


Old. I know his measuring of Land. He is gone his old way.
And let him go. Am not I merry Hearty?

Hea. Yes; but not hearty merry. There Is a whim now.


Old. The Poor's charge shall be mine. Keep you the Money for him.


Ran. Mine is the greater charge then.
Knew you but my temptations and my care,
You would discharge me of it.

Old. Ha ha ha.


Ran. I have not had it so many minutes, as I have been in several Minds about
it; and most of them dishonest.


Old. Go then, and give it to one of my Daughters to keep for Springlove.


Ran. O, I thank your Worship -- Exit.


Old. Alas poor knave! How hard a tasque it is to alter Custom!


Hea. And how easy for Money to corrupt it.
What a pure Treasurer would he make!

Old. All were not born for weighty Offices.
Which makes me think of Springlove.
He might have taken his leave though.

Heat. I hope he is run away with some large Trust,
I never liked such demure down-look'd Fellows.

Old. You are deceived in him.


Hea. If you be not it is well. But this is from the Covenant.


Old. Well Sir. I will be merry. I am resolved
To force my Spirit only unto Mirth.
Should I hear now, my Daughters were misled
Or run away, I would not send a sigh
To fetch 'em back.

Hea. To'ther old Song for that.

Song.
THere was an old fellow at Waltham Cross,
Who merrily sung when he lived by the Loss.
He never was heard to sigh with Hey-ho:
But sent it out with a Haigh trolly lo.
He cheered up his Heart, when his Goods went to wrack,
With a heghm boy, heghm, and a Cup of old Sack.

Old. Is that the way on it? well, it shall be mine then

Enter Randal. Ran. My Mistresses are both abroad, Sir.

Old. How? since when?

Ran. On foot, Sir, two hours since, with the two Gentlemen their Lovers.
Here Is a Letter they left with the Butler. And there is a muttring in the House.


Old. I will not read, nor open it; but conceive
Within my self the worst, that can befall them;
That they are lost and no more mine. What follows?
That I am happy: all my cares are flown.
The Counsel I anticipated from
My Friend, shall serve to set my Rest upon
(Without all further helps) to jovial Mirth;
Which I will force out of my spleen so freely,
That Grief shall lose her name, where I have being*
And sadness, from my furthest foot of Land,
While I have life, be banished.

Hea. What Is the whim now?

Old. My Tenants shall sit Rent-free for this twelvemonth;
And all my servants have their wages doubled;
And so shall be my charge in Housekeeping.
I hope my friends will find and put me to it.

Hea. For them I Will be your Undertaker, Sir.
But this is over-done. I do not like it.

Old. And for thy news, the Money that thou have,
Is now thine own. I Will make it good to Springlove.
Be sad with it and leave me. For I tell thee,
I Will purge my house of stupid melancholy.

Ran. I Will be as merry as the Charge that is under me
A confused noise within of laughing and singing, and one crying out. The
Beggars, Sir. Do'e hear 'em in the Barn?

Old. I Will double their allowance too; that they may
Double their Numbers, and increase their Noise:
These Bear not found enough: and one (me thought)
Cried out among 'em.

Ran. By a most natural Cause. For there is a Doxie
Has been in labor, Sir. And it is their Custom,
With songs and shouts to drown the woman's cries.
A Ceremony which they use, not for
Devotion, but to keep off Notice of
The Work, they have in hand. Now she is in
The straw it, seems; and they are quiet.

Hea. The straw! that is very proper there. That Is Randal's whim.


Old. We will have such a lying in, and such
A Christning; such up-sitting and Ghossipping!
I mean to send forty miles Circuit at the least,
To draw in all the Beggars can be found;
And such Devices we will have for jollity,
As Fame shall boast to all Posterity.
Am I not merry Hearty? hearty merry?

Hea. Would you were else. I fear this over-doing.

Old. I Will do it for expiation of a crime
That Is charged upon my Conscience till't be done.

Hea. What Is that? what says he?

Old. We will have such a Festival month on it, Randall --


Ran. Sir, you may spare the labor and the cost:
They Would never thank you for it. They Will not endure
A Ceremony, that is not their own,
Belonging either to the Child, or Mother.
A month Sir? They Will not be detained so long
For your Estate. Their Work is done already:
The Bratling's born, the Doxey's in the Strummel,
Laid by an Autum Mort of their own Crew,
That served for Midwife: and the Childbed woman
Eating of hasty Pudding for her supper,
And the Child part of it for pap
I warrant you by this time; then to sleep;
So to rise early to regain the strength
By travail, which she lost by travail.

Hea. There Is Randal again.

Old. Can this be?

Ran. She Will have the Bantling at her back to morrow That was to day in her
belly, and march a foot-back with it.


Hea. Art there again, old Randal?

Ran. And for their Ghossipping (now you are so nigh)
If you will look in, I doubt not, but you will find 'em
At their high Feast already.

Hea. Pray let us see 'em, Sir.

Randal opens the Scene. The Beggars discovered at their Feast. After they have
scrambled a while at their Victuals: This Song. HEre, safe in our Skipper,
let us cly off our Peck,
And bowse in defiance of the Harman-beck.
Here Is Pannum and Lap, and good Poplars of Yarrum,
To fill up the Crib, and to comfort the Quarron.
Now bowse a round health to the Go-well and Com-well
Of Cisley Bumtrincket that lies in the Strummel.
Now bowse a round health to the Go-well and Com-well
Of Cisley Bumtrincket that lies in the Strummel.
Here Is Ruffpeck and Casson, and all of the best,
And Scraps of the Dainties of Gentry Cofe's Feast.
Here Is Grunter and Bleater, with Tib of the Buttry,
And Margery Prater, all dressed without sluttry.
For all this been Cribbing and Peck let us then,
Bowse a health to the Gentry Cofe of the Ken.
Now bowse a round health to the Go-well and Com-well
Of Cisley Bumtrincket that lies in the Strummel.

Old. Good Heaven how merry they are.


Hea. Be not you sad at that.


Old. Sad Hearty, no unless it be with envy
At their full happiness. What is an Estate
Of Wealth and Power, balanced with their Freedom,
But a mere load of outward complement?
When they enjoy the Fruits of rich Content?
Our Dross but weighs us down into Despair,
While their sublimed spirits dance in the Air.

Hea. I have not so much Wealth to weigh me down,
Nor so little (I thank Chance) as to dance naked.

Old. True my Friend Hearty, thou having less then I,
(Of which I boast not) art the merrier man:
But they exceed thee in that way so far,
That should I know, my Children now were Beggars
(Which yet I will not read) I must conclude,
They were not lost, nor I to be agriev'd.

Hea. If this be madness, it is a merry Fit.

Enter Patrico. Many of the Beggars look out. Patrico. Toure out with your
Glasiers, I swear by the Ruffin,
That we are assaulted by a quire Cuffin.

Ran. Hold! what do you mean, my Friends? This is our Master,
The Master of your Feast and feasting-House.

Pat. Is this the Gentry Cofe?

All the Beggars. Lord bless his Worship. His good
Worship. Bless his Worship.

Exit Beggars manet Patr. Pat. Now, bounteous Sir, before you go,
Hear me, the Beggar Patrico;
Or Priest, if you do rather choose,
That we no word of Canting use.
Long may you live, and may your Store
Never decay, nor baulk the Poor:
And as you more in years do grow,
May Treasure to your Coffers flow;
And may your care no more thereon
Be set, then ours are, that have none:
But as your Riches do increase,
So may your hearts Content and Peace.
And, after many, many years,
When the Poor have quit their Fears
Of losing you; and that with Heaven
And all the world you have made even,
Then may your blessed Posterity,
Age after Age successively,
Until the world shall be untwin'd
Inherit your Estate and Mind.
So shall the Poor to the last day,
For you, in your succession, pray.

Hea. It Is a good Vote, Sir Patrico: but you are too grave. Let us hear and see
something of your merry Grigs, that can sing, play Gambals, and do Feats.


Pat. Sir, I can lay my Function by,
And talk as wild and wantonly
As Tom or Tib, or Jack, or Iill,
When they at Bowsing Ken do swill.
Will you therefore daign to hear
My Autum Mort, with throat as clear,
As was Dame Anisses of the Name;
How sweet in Song her Notes she will frame,
That when she chides, as loud is yawning,
As Chanticlere waked by the dawning.

Hea. Yes, pray let us hear her. What is she your wife?

Pat. Yes Sir. we of our Ministry,
As well as those oth' Presbytery,
Take wives and defy Dignity. Exit.

Hea. A learned Cleark in verity!

Enter Patrico with his old wife, with a wooden Bowl of Drink, She is drunk.
Pat. By Salmon, I think my Mort is in drink.
I find by her stink; and the pretty pretty pink
Of her Neyes, that half wink,
That the tippling Feast, with the Doxie in the Neast,
Has turned her brain, to a merry merry vain.

Mort. Go Fiddle Patrico, and let me sing. First set me down here on both my
Prats. Gently, gently, for cracking of my wind, now I must use it. Hem hem.

She sings. THis is Bien Bowse, this is Bien Bowse,
Too little is my Skew.
I bowse no Lage, but a whole Gage
Of this I Will bowse to you.
This Bowse is better then Rom-bowse,
It sets the Began a gigling;
The Autum-Mort finds better sport
In bowsing then in nigling.
This is Bien-bowse etc.

She tosses off her Bowl, falls back, and is carried out. Pat. So so: your
part is done -- Exit with her

Hea. How find you, Sir, your self?

Old. Wondrous merry, my good Hearty.

Enter Patrico. Pat. I wish we had, in all our store,
Something that could please you more.
The old or Autum-Mort's a sleep;
But before the young ones creep
Into the straw, Sir, if you are,
(As Gallants sometimes love course fare,
(So it be fresh and wholesome Ware)
Dospos'd to Doxie, or a Dell,
That never yet with man did Mell;
Of whom no Upright man is taster,
I Will present her to you, Master.

Old. Away. You would be punished. Oh.

Hea. How is it with you, Sir?

Old. A sudden qualm over-chils my stomach. But 'twill away.


Enter Dauncers. Pat. See, in their rags, then, dancing for your sports,
Our Clapper Dugeons and their walking Morts.

Dance. Pat. You have done well. Now let each Tripper
Make a retreat into the Skipper;
And couch a Hogs-head, till the dark man's past;
Then all with Bag and Baggage bing awast.

Exeunt Beggars. Ran. I told you, Sir, they would be gone to morrow.
I understand their canting.

Old. Take that amongst you. -- Gives Money.

Pat. May rich Plenty so you bless,
Though you still give, you never have less. Exit.

Hea. And as your walks may lead this way:
Pray strike in here another day.
So you may go, Sir Patrico --
How think you, Sir? or what? or why do you think at all, unless on Sack and
Supper-time? do you fall back? do you not know the danger of relapses?


Old. Good Hearty, thou mistak'st me. I was thinking upon this Patrico. And
that he has more soul then a born Beggar in him.


Hea. Rogue enough though, to offer us his what-d'ecalts? his Doxies. Heart and
a cup of Sack, do we look like old Beggar-niglers?


Old. Pray forbear that Language.

Hea. Will you then talk of Sack, that can drown sighing? will you in, to
supper, and take me there your Guest? Or must I creep into the Barn among your
welcome ones?


Old. You have rebuked me timely; and most friendly. Exit.


Hea. Would all were well with him. Exit.

Ran. It is with me.
For now these pounds are (as I feel them swag)
Light at my heart, though heavy in the bag. Exit.

Actus Tertius.
Vincent and Hilliard in their Rags. Vin. IS this the life that we admired in
others; with envy at their happiness?


Hill. Pray let us make virtuous use of it: and repent us of that deadly sin
(before a greatet punishment then Famine and Lice fall upon us) by steering our
course homeward. Before I Will endure such another night --


Vin. what? what would thou do? I would thy Mistress heard thee.


Hill. I hope she does not. For I know there is no altering our course before
they make the first motion.


Vin. Is It possible we should be weary already? and before their softer
constitutions of flesh and blood?


Hill. They are the stronger in will it seems.

Enter Springlove. Spr. How now Comrades! repining already at your Fullness of
Liberty? Do you complain of ease?


Vin. Ease call'st thou it? Did thou sleep to night?


Spr. Not so well these 18 months I swear; since my last walks.


Hill. Lightning and Tempest is out of thy Letany.
Could not the thunder wake thee?

Spr. Ha ha ha.

Vin. Nor the noise of the Crew in the Quarter by us?


Hill. Nor the Hogs in the hovel, that cried till they drowned the noise of the
wind? If I could but once ha dreamt in all my former nights, that such an
affliction could have been found among Beggars, sure I should never have
traveled to the proof on it.


Vin. We looked upon them in their Jollity, and cast no further.


Hill. Nor did that only draw us forth (by your favor Vince) but our
obedience to our Loves, which we must suffer, till they cry home again. Are they
not weary yet, as much as we do think Springlove?


Spr. They have more moral understanding then so. They know (and so may you)
this is your Birthnight into a new world. And we all know (or have been told)
that all come crying into the World, when the whole World of Pleasures is
before us. The World it self had never been glorious, had it not first been a
confused Chaos.


Vin. Well: never did Knight Errants in all Adventures, merit more of their
Ladies, then we Beggar-errants or errant Beggars, do in ours.


Spr. The greater will be your Reward. Think upon that. And show no manner of
distaste to turn their hearts from you. You Are undone then.


Hill. Are they ready to appear out of their privy Lodgings, in the Pigs Palace
of pleasure? Are they coming forth?


Spr. I left 'em almost ready, sitting on their Pads of straw, helping to dress
each others heads (The ones eye is the tothers Looking-glass) with the
prettiest coil they keep to fit their fancies in the most graceful way of
wearing their new Dressings, that you would admire.


Vin. I hope we are as gracefully set out. Are we not?


Spr. Indifferent well. But will you fall to practice? Let me hear how you can
Maund when you meet with Passengers.


Hill. We do not look like men, I hope, too good to learn.


Spr. Suppose some Persons of Worth or Wealth passing by now. Note me. Good
your good Worship, your Charity to the Poor, that will duly and truly pray for
you day and night. --


Vin. Away you idle Rogue, you would be set to work and whipped --


Vin. That is lame and sick; hungry and comfortless --


Vin. If you were well served --


Spr. And even to bless you and reward you for it --


Hill. Prithee hold thy peace (here be doleful Notes indeed) and leave us to
our own Genius. If we must beg, let us let it go, as it comes, by Inspiration. I
love not your set form of Begging.


Spr. Let me instruct ye though.


Enter Rachel and Meriel in Rags. Ra. Have a care, good Meriel, what hearts or
limbs soever we have, and though never so feeble, let us set our best faces on it,
and laugh our last gasp out before we discover any dislike, or weariness to
them. Let us bear it out, till they complain first, and beg to carry us home a
pick pack.


Mer. I am sorely surbated with hoofing already though, and so crupper-crampt
with our hard lodging, and so bumfidled with the straw, that --


Ra. Think not on it. I am numm'd in the bum and shoulders too a little. And have
found the difference between a hard floor with a little straw, and a down Bed
with a Quilt upon it. But no words, nor a sour look I prithee.


Hill. O here they come now; Madam Fewcloaths, and my Lady Bonnyrag.


Vin. Peace, they see us.

Ra. Mer. Ha ha ha.

Vin. We are glad the Object pleases ye.

Ra. So does the Subject.
Now you appear the glories of the Spring,
Darlings of Phoebus and the Summers heirs.

Hill. How fairer, then fair Floras self appear
(To deck the Spring) Diana's Darlings dear!
O let us not Acteon-like be struck
(With greedy eyes while we presume to look
On your half nakedness, since courteous rags
Cover the rest) into the shape of Stags.

Ra. Mer. Ha ha ha -- We are glad you are so merry.


Vin. Merry and lusty too. This night will we lie together as well as the
proudest Couple in the Barn.


Hill. And so will we. I can hold out no longer.


Ra. Does the straw stir up your flesh to it, Gentlemen?


Mer. Or does your Provender prick you?


Spr. What! do we come for this? laugh and lie down
When your bellies are full. Remember, Ladies,
You have not begged yet, to quit your Destiny:
But have lived hitherto on my endeavors.
Who got your suppers, pray, last night, but I?
Of dainty Trencher-Fees, from a Gentleman's house:
Such as the Serving-men themselves, sometimes,
Would have been glad of. And this morning now,
What comfortable Chippings and sweet Buttermilk
Had you to Breakfast!

Ra. O 'twas excellent! I feel it good still, here.

Mer. There was a brown Crust amongst it, that has made my neck so white me
thinks. Is it not Rachel?


Ra. Yes. You ga'me none on it. You ever covet to have all the Beauty. It Is the
ambition of all younger Sisters.


Vin. They are pleased, and never like to be weary.


Hill. No more must we, if we will be theirs.


Spr. Peace. Here come Passengers. Forget not your Rules; and quickly disperse
your selves, and fall to your Calling --


Enter two Gentlemen. 1. Lead the Horses down the Hill. The heat of our speed
is over, for we have lost our Journey.


2. Had they taken this way, we had overtaken 'em, or heard of 'em at least.


1. But some of our Scouts will light on 'em, the whole Country being
overspread with 'em.


2. There was never such an escape else.


Vin. A search for us perhaps. Yet I know not them, nor they me, I am sure. I
might the better beg of 'em. But how to begin, or set the worst leg forwards,
would I were whipped if I know now.


1. That a young Gentlewoman of her breeding, and Heir to such an Estate,
should fly from so great a Match, and run away with her Uncles Cleark!


2. The old Justice will run mad upon it I fear.


Vin. If I were to be hanged now, I could not beg for my life.


Spr. Step forwards, and beg handsomely. I Will set my Goad in your breech else.


Vin. What shall I say?


Spr. Have I not told you? now begin.


Vin. After you, good Springlove.


Spr. Good, your good Worships. --


1. Away you idle Vagabond --


Spr. Your Worships Charity to a poor Crytur welly starved.


Vin. That will duly and truly prea for ye.


2. You counterfeit Villains, hence.


Spr. Good Masters sweet Worship, for the tender mercy of --


Vin. Duly and truly prea for you.


1. You would be well whipped and set to work, if you were duly and truly served.


Vin. Did not I say so before?


Spr. Good Worshipful Masters Worship, to bestow your Charity, and -- to
maintain your health and Limbs.


Vin. Duly and truly pray for you.


2. Be gone, I say, you impudent lusty young Rascals.


1. I Will set you going else. Switch'em.


Spr. Ah the goodness of compassion to soften your hearts to the poor.


Vin. Oh the Devil, must not we beat 'em now? steth --


Spr. Nor show an angry look for all the skin of our backs. Ah the sweetness of
that mercy that gives to all, to move your compassion to the hungry, when it
shall seem good unto you, and night and day to bless all that you have. Ah ah
--


2. Come back sirrah. His Patience and Humility has wrought upon me.


Vin. Duly and --

2. Not you sirrah. The the other. You look like a sturdy Rogue.


Spr. Lord bless you Masters Worship.


2. There Is a halfpenny for you. Let him have no share with you.


Vin. I shall never thrive of this Trade.


1. They are of a Fraternity, and will share, I warrant you.


Spr. Never in our lives trooly. He never begged with me before.


1. But if Hedges or Hen-roosts could speak, you might be found sharers in
Pillage, I believe.


Spr. Never saw him before, bless you good Master, in all my life. (Beg for
your-self. Your Credit's gone else.) Good Hea'ne to bliss and prosper yea.
Exit.


2. Why do thou follow us? Is it your office to be privy to our talk?


Vin. Sir, I beseech you hear me. (S'life what shall I say?) I am a stranger in
these parts, and destitute of Means and Apparel.


1. So me thinks. And what of that?


Vin. Will you therefore be pleased, as you are worthy Gentlemen, and blessed
with plenty --


2. This is Courtly!


Vin. Out of your abundant store, toward my relief in extreme necessity, to
furnish me with a small parcel of Money -- five or six pieces, or ten, if you
can presently spare it.


1. 2. Stand off. Draw.


Vin. I have spoiled all; and know not how to beg otherwise.


1. Here Is a new way of begging!


Vin. Quite run out of my Instructions.


2. Some Highway Thief of my conscience, that forgets he is weaponless.


Vin. Only to make you merry, Gentlemen, at my unskilfulness in my new Trade.
I have been another man in my days. So I kiss your hands. Exit.


1. With your heels do you?


2. It had been good to have apprehended the Rakeshame. There is some mystery
in his Rags. But let him go.


Enter Oliver, putting up his sword. Ol. You found your legs in time, I had
made you halt for something else.


1. Master Oliver, well returned; what is the matter, Sir?


Ol. Why, Sir, a counterfeit lame Rogue begged of me; but in such Language, the
high Sheriffs Son of the Shire could not have spoke better; nor to have
borrowed a greater sum. (He asked me if I could spare him ten or twenty
pound.) I switch'd him, his Cudgel was up. I drew, and into the Wood he escaped
me, as nimbly -- But first he told me, I should hear from him by a Gentleman,
to require satisfaction of me.


2. We had such another begged of us. The Court goes a begging, I think.


1. Dropped through the Clouds, I think; more Lucifers travailing to Hell, that
beg by the way. Met you no news of your Kinswoman, Mistress Amie?


Ol. No. What Is the matter with her? Goes her Marriage forwards with young,
Master Talboy? I hastened my Journey from London to be at the Wedding.


2. It Was to ha'bin yesterday morning; all things in readiness prepared for it.
But the Bride, stolen by your Father's Cleark, is slipped away. We were in quest
of 'em, and so are twenty more, several ways.


Ol. Such young Wenches will have their own ways in their own loves, what
Matches soever their Guardians make for 'em. And I hope my Father will not
follow the Law so close to hang his Cleark for stealing his Ward with her own
consent. It may breed such a grudg, may cause some Clearks to hang their
Masters, that have 'em of the hip of injustice. Besides, Martin (though he be
his servant) is a Gentleman. But, indeed, the miserablest Rascal! He will
grudge her Meat when he has her.


1. Your Father is exceedingly troubled at their escape. I wish that you may
qualify him with your Reasons.


Ol. But what says Talboy to the matter, the Bridegroom, that should have been?


2. Marry he says little to the purpose; but cries outright.


Ol. I like him well for that: He holds his humor. A miserable wretch too,
though rich. I have known him cry when he has lost but three shillings at
Mumchance. But, Gentlemen, keep on your way to comfort my Father. I know some
of his Man's private haunts about the Country here, which I will search
immediately.


1. We will accompany you, if you please.


Ol. No, by no means: That will be too public.


2 Do your pleasure. Exit 1.2.


Ol. My pleasure, and all the search that I intend, is, by hovering here, to
take a review of a brace of the handsomest Beggar-braches that ever graced a
Ditch or a Hedge side. I past by 'em in have, but something so possesses me,
that I must -- What the Devil must I? A Beggar? Why, Beggars are flesh and
blood; and Rags are no Diseases. Their Lice are no French Fleas. And there is
much wholsommer flesh under Country Dirt, than City Painting: And less danger
in Dirt and Rags, than in Ceruse and Satin. I durst not take a touch at
London, both for the present cost, and fear of an after-reckoning. But Oliver,
do thou speak like a Gentleman? fear Price or Pox, ha? Marry do I Sir: Nor
can Beggar-sport be inexcusable in a young Country Gentleman, short of means,
for another respect, a principal one indeed; to avoid the punishment or charge
of Bastardy: There Is no commuting with them; or keeping of Children for them.
The poor Whores, rather than part with their own, or want children at all, will
steal other folks, to travel with, and move compassion. He feeds a Beggarwench
well that fills her belly with young bones. And these reasons considered, good
Master Oliver -- s'lid yonder they are at peep. And now sitten down as waiting
for my purpose. Ent. Vinc. Heart here is another delay. I must shift him. Do
hear honest poor fellow? I prithee go back presently: and at the hill foot
(here is sixpence for thy pains) thou shall find a Footman with a Horse in his
hand. Bid him wait there. His Master will come presently, say.


Vin. Sir, I have a business of another nature to you. Which (as I presume you
are a Gentleman of right Noble Spirit and Resolution) you will receive without
offense; and in that temper as most properly appertains to the most Heroic
natures.


Ol. Thy Language makes me wonder at thy Person. What Is the matter with thee?
quickly.


Vin. You may be pleased to call to mind a late affront, which, in your heat
of passion, you gave a Gentleman.


Ol. What, such a one as thou art, was he?


Vin. True noble Sir. Who could no less in Honor, then direct me, his chosen
Friend, unto you, with the length of his Sword, or to take the length of yours.
The place, if you please, the Ground whereon you parted; the hour, seven the
next morning: Or, if you like not these, in part, or all, to make your own
appointments.


Ol. The bravest Method in Beggars, that ever was discovered! I would be upon
the bones of this Rogue now, but for crossing my other design, which fires me.
I must therefore be rid of him on any terms. Let his own Appointments stand.
Tell him I Will meet him.


Vin. You shall most nobly engage his life to serve you, Sir.


Ol. You Will be his Second, will you?


Vin. To do you further Service, Sir, I have undertaken it.


Ol. I Will send a Beadle shall undertake you both.


Vin. Your Mirth becomes the bravery of your mind and dauntless Spirit. So
takes his leave your Servant, Sir.


Ol. I think, as my Friend said, the Court goes a begging indeed. But I must
not lose my Beggar-wenches. Enter Rachel and Meriel. Oh here they come. They
are delicately skinned and limbed. There, there, I saw above the ham as the wind
blew. Now they spy me.


Ra. Sir, I beseech you look upon us with the favor of a Gentleman. We are in
a present distress, and utterly unacquainted in these parts; and therefore
forced by the Calamity of our misfortune, to implore the Courtesy, or rather
Charity, of those to whom we are strangers.


Ol. Very fine, this!


Mer. Be therefore pleased, right noble Sir, not only valuing us by our
outward Habits, which cannot but appear loathsome or despicable unto you, but as
we are forlorn Christians; and, in that estimation, be compassionately moved to
cast a handful or two of your Silver, or a few of your Golden Pieces unto us,
to furnish us with Linen, and some decent Habilliments --


Ol. They beg as high as the Man-beggar I met withal! sure the Beggars are all
mad to day, or bewitched into a Language they understand not. The spirits of
some decayed Gentry talk in 'em sure.


Ra. May we expect a gracious Answer from you Sir?


Mer. And that as you can wish our Virgin Prayers to be propitious for you.


Ra. That you never be denied a Suit by any Mistress.


Mer. Nay, that the fairest may be ambitious to place their favors on you.


Ra. That your Virtue and Valor may lead you to the most honorable Actions;
and that the Love of all exquisite Ladies may arm you.


Mer. And that, when you please to take a wife, may Honor, Beauty, and Wealth,
contend to endow her most with.


Ra. And that with her you have a long and prosperous life.


Mer. A fair and fortunate Posterity.


Ol. This exceeds all that ever I heard, and strikes me into wonder. Pray tell
me how long have you been Beggars; or how chanced you to be so?


Ra. By influence of our Stars, Sir.


Mer. We were born to no better Fortune.


Ol. How came you to talk thus, and so much above the Beggars Dialect?


Ra. Our speech came naturally to us, and we ever loved to learn by wrote as
well as we could.


Mer. And to be ambitious above the vulgar, to ask more then common Alms, what
ere men please to give us.


Ol. Sure some well disposed Gentleman, as my self, got these Wenches. They are
too well grown to be mine own, and I cannot be incestuous with 'em.


Ra. Pray Sir your noble bounty.


Ol. What a tempting lip that little Rogue moves there! and what an enticing
eye the 'tother. I know not which to begin with. What Is this a flea upon thy
bosom?


Mer. Is it not a straw colored one, Sir?


Ol. O what a provoking Skin is there! that very touch inflames me.


Ra. Sir, are you moved in charity toward us yet?


Ol. Moved? I am moved. No flesh and blood more moved.


Mer. Then pray Sir your Benevolence.


Ol. Benevolence? which shall I be benovolent to; or which first? I am
pussell'd in the choice. Would some sworn Brother of mine were here to draw a
Cut with me.


Ra. Sir, Noble Sir.


Ol. First let me tell you, Damsels, I am bound by a strong vow to kiss all of
the woman sex I meet this morning.


Mer. Beggars and all Sir?


Ol. All, all. Let not your coyness cross a Gentleman's vow, I beseech you --
Kiss.


Ra. You will tell now.


Ol. Tell quoth a! I could tell a thousand on those Lips -- and as many upon
those. What life restoring breaths they have! Milk from the Cow steams not so
sweetly. I must lay one of 'em aboard; both if my tackling hold.


Ra. Mer. Sir. Sir.


Ol. But how to bargain, now, will be the doubt. They that beg so high as by
the handfulls, may expect for price above the rate of good men's wives.


Ra. Now, will you, Sir, be pleased?


Ol. With all my heart, Sweetheart. And I am glad thou know my mind. Here
is twelve-pence a piece for you.


Ra. Me. We thank you, Sir.


Ol. That Is but in earnest. I Will Jest away the rest with ye. Look here -- All
this. Come, you know my meaning. Do thou look about thee, Sweet little One? I
like thy care. There Is no body coming. But we'll get behind these Bushes. I
know you keep each others Counsels -- Must you be drawn to it? Then I Will pull.
Come away --


Ra. Me. Ah ah --


Enter Springlove, Vincent, Hilliard. Vin. Let Us beat his brains out.


Ol. Come leave your squealing.


Ra. O you hurt my hand.


Hill. Or cut the Lechers throat.


Spr. Would you be hanged? Stand back. Let me alone.


Mer. You shall not pull us so.


Spr. O do not hurt 'em, Master.


Ol. Hurt 'em? I meant 'hem but too well. Shall I be so prevented?


Spr. They be but young and simple. And if they have offended, let not your
Worships own hands drag 'em to the Law, or carry 'em to Punishment. Correct 'em
not your self. It is the Beadles Office.


Ol. Do you talk Shake-rag: Heart yond's more of 'em. I shall be Beggar-mawl'd
if I stay. Thou say right, honest fellow, there is a Tester for thee.


Exit, running Vin. He is prevented, and ashamed of his purpose.


Spr. Nor were we to take notice of his purpose more than to prevent it.


Hill. True, politic Springlove, 'twas better his own fear quit us of him,
than our force.


Ra. Look you here, Gentlemen, twelvepence a piece


Mer. Besides fair offers and large promises. What have you got to day,
Gentlemen?


Vin. More then (as we are Gentlemen) we would have taken.


Hill. Yet we put it up in your Service.


Ra. Mer. Ha ha ha. Switches and kicks. Ha ha ha --


Spr. Talk not here of your gettings. We must quit this Quarter. The eager
Gentleman's repulse may arm and return him with revenge upon us. We must
therefore leap Hedge and Ditch now; through the Briers and Myres, till we escape
out of this Liberty, to our next Rendevous; where we shall meet the Crew, and
then, hay toss and laugh all night.


Mer. As we did last night.


Ra. Hold out, Meriel.


Mer. Lead on, brave General. to Spr.


Vin. What shall we do? They are in heart still. Shall we go on?


Hill. There Is no flinching back, you see.


Spr. Besides, if you beg no better then you begin, in this lofty Fashion, you
cannot escape the Jayle, or the whip, long.


Vin. To tell you true, it is not the least of my purpose, to work means for our
discovery, to be released out of our Trade.


Enter Martin and Amie in poor Habits. Spr. Stay, here come more Passengers.
Single your selves again, and fall to your Calling discreetly.


Hill. I Will single no more. If you will beg in full cry I am for you.


Mer. I that will be fine; let us charm all together.


Spr. Stay first and list a little.


Mar. Be of good cheer, Sweetheart, we have escaped hitherto: And I believe that
all the Search is now retired, and we may safely pass forwards.


Am. I should be safe with thee. But that is a most lying Proverb, that says,
Where Love is, there is no Lack. I am faint, and cannot travail further without
Meat; and if you loved me, you would get me some.


Mar. We'll venture at the next Village to call for some. The best is, we want
no Money.


Am. We shall be taken then, I fear. I Will rather pine to death.


Mar. Be not so fearful. Who can know us in these Clownish Habits?


Am. Our Clothes, indeed, are poor enough to beg with. Would I could beg, so it
were of Strangers that could not know me, rather then buy of those that would
betray us.


Mar. And yonder be some that can teach us.


Spr. These are the young couple of Runaway Lovers disguised, that the Country
is so laid for. Observe and follow now. Now the Lord to come with ye, good
loving Master and Maystresse, your blessed Charity to the poor, lame and sick,
weak and comfortless, that will night and day --


All. Duly and truly pray for you. Duly and truly pray for you.


Spr. Pray hold your peace, and let me alone. Good young Master and Mistress, a
little Comfort amongst us all, and to bless you where e're you go, and


All. Duly and truly pray for you. Duly and truly --


Spr. Pray do not use me thus. Now sweet young Master and Mistress, to look upon
your Poor, that have no relief or succor, no bread to put in our heads.


Vin. Would thou put Bread in thy Brains?

All together. No Lands or Livings.
Spr. No House nor home; nor covering from the cold; no health, no help but
your sweet Charity.


Mer. No Bands or Shirts but lousy on our backs.


Hill. No smocks or Petticoats to hide our Scratches.


Ra. No Shoes to our Legs, or Hose to our Feet.


Vin. No Skin to our Flesh, nor Flesh to our Bones shortly.


Hill. If we follow the Devil that taught us to beg.


All. Duly and truly pray for you.


Spr. I Will run away from you if you beg a stroke more. Good worshipful Master
and Misteres --


Mar. Good Friend forbear. Here is no Master or Mistress. We are poor Folks.
Thou see no Worship upon our backs, I am sure. And for within, we want as
much as you, and would as willingly beg, if we knew how as well.


Spr. Alack for pity. You may have enough. And what I have is yours, if you will
accept it. It Is wholesome Food from a good Gentleman's Gate -- Alas good Mistress
-- Much good do your heart. How savourly she feeds!


Mar. What do you mean; to poison your self?


Am. Do you show Love in grudging me?


Mar. Nay, if you think it hurts you not, fall too. I Will not beguile you. And
here, mine Host, something toward your Reckoning.


Am. This Beggar is an Angel sure!


Spr. Nothing by way of bargain, gentle Master. It Is against Order, and will
never thrive. But pray, Sir, your reward in Charity.


Mar. Here then in Charity. This fellow would never make a Cleark.


Spr. What! All this, Master?


Am. What is it? Let me see it.


Spr. It Is a whole silver threepence, Mistress.


Am. For shame, ungrateful Miser. Here Friend, a golden Crown for thee.


Spr. Bountiful Goodness! Gold? If I thought a dear year were coming, I would
take a Farm now.


Am. I have robbed thy Partners of their shares too. There Is a Crown more for
them.


4. Duly and truly pray for you.


Mar. What have you done? less would have served. And your Bounty will betray
us.


Am. Fie on your wretched policy.


Spr. No, no good Master. I knew you all this while, and my sweet Mistress too.
And now I Will tell you. The Search is every way; the Country all laid for you.
It Is well you staid here. Your Habits, were they but a little nearer our
Fashion, would secure you with us. But are you married, Master and Mistress? Are
you joined in Matrimony? In heart I know you are. And I will (if it please you)
for your great bounty, bring you to a Curate, that lacks no License, nor has
any Living to lose, that shall put you together.


Mar. Thou art a heavenly Beggar!


Spr. But he is so scrupulous, and severely precise, that unless you, Mistress,
will affirm that you are with Child by the Gentleman; or that you have, at
least, cleft or slept together (as he calls it) he will not marry you. But if
you have lain together, then it is a case of necessity, and he holds himself
bound to do it.


Mar. You may say you have.


Am. I would not have it so, nor make that lie against my self for all the
World.


Spr. That I like well, and her exceedingly. Aside
I Will do my best for you however.

Mar. I Will do for thee, that -- thou shall never beg more.


Spr. That cannot be purchased scarce for the price of your Mistress. Will you
walk, Master? -- We use no Complements.


Am. By enforced Matches Wards are not set free
So often, as sold into Captivity:
Which made me, fearlesse, fly from one I hate,
Into the hazard of a harder Fate.

Actus Quartus.
Scena Prima.
Enter Talboy. Oliver. With riding switches. Tal. She Is gone. Amie is gone. Ay
me she is gone, And has me left of joy bereft, to make my moan. O me, Amie.


Ol. What the Devil ails the Fellow tro? why! why Master Talboy; my Cozen
Talboy that should have been, art not ashamed to cry at this growth? and for
a thing that is better lost then found; a Wench?


Tal. Cry! who cries? do I cry; or look with a crying Countenance? I scorn it;
and scorn to think on her, but in just anger.


Ol. So, this is brave now, if 'twould hold.


Tall. Nay it shall hold. And so let her go, for a scurvy what do you called; I
know not what bad enough to call her. -- But something of mine goes with her I
am sure. She has cost me in Gloves, Ribands, Scarfs, Rings, and such like
things, more than I am able to speak of at this time -- Oh.


Ol. Because thou can not speak for crying. Fie Master Talboy, again?


Tal. I scorn it again, and any man that says I cry, or will cry again And let
her go again; and what she has of mine let her keep, and hang her self, and the
Rogue that is with her. I have enough; and am Heir of a well-known Estate, and
that she knows -- And therefore that she should slight me, and run away with a
wages-fellow, that is but a petty Cleark and a Serving-man. There Is the
vexation of it -- Oh there is the grief, and the vexation of it -- Oh --


Ol. Now he will cry his eyes out! You Sir. This life have I had with you all
our long journey; which now is at an end here. This is Master Oldrents house,
where perhaps we shall find old Hearty, the Uncle of that Rogue Martin, that
is run away with your Sweetheart.


Tal. I it is too true, too true, too true. You need not put me in mind on it --
Oh -- O --


Ol. Hold your peace and mind me. Leave your bawling, for fear I give you
correction. This is the House I say, where it is most likely we shall hear of
your Mistress and her companion. Make up your face quickly. Here comes one of
the Servants, I suppose. Enter Randall. Shame not your self for ever, and me
for company. Come, be confident.


Tall. As confident as your self or any man -- But my poor heart feels what
lies here. Here. I here it is, O --


Ol. Good morrow, Friend. This is Squire Oldrents House, I take it.


Ran. Pray take it not, Sir, before it be to be let. It has been my Masters,
and his Ancestors in that Name, above these three hundred years, as our House
Chronicle does notify; and not yet to be let. But as a Friend, or stranger, in
Guest-wise, you are welcome to it; as all other Gentlemen are, far and near, to
my good Master, as you will find anon when you see him.


Ol. Thou speak wittily and honestly. But I prithee, good Friend, let our
Nags be set up: they are tied up at the post. You belong to the Stable, do you
not?


Ran. Not so much, as the Stable belongs to me, Sir. I pass through many
Offices of the House, Sir. I am the running Bayley of it.


Ol. We have rid hard, hoping to find the Squire at home at this early time in
the morning.


Ran. You are deceived in that, Sir. He has been out these four hours. He is no
Snayle, Sir. You do not know him, I perceive, since he has been new molded.
But I Will tell you, because you are Gentlemen.


Ol. Our Horses, good Friend.


Ran. My Master is an ancient Gentleman, and a great Housekeeper; and praid
for by all the Poor in the Country. He keeps a Guest-house for all Beggars,
far and near, costs him a hundred a year, at least; and is as well beloved
among the Rich. But, of late, he fell into a great Melancholy, upon what, I
know not: for he had then more cause to be merry than he has now. Take that by
the way.


Ol. But good Fiend, our Horses.


Ran. For he had two Daughters, that knew well to order a House, and give
entertainment to Gentlemen. They were his House-Doves. But now they are flowne;
and no man knows how, why, or whither.


Tall. My Dove is flown too. Oh --


Ran. Was she your Daughter, Sir? She was a young one then, by the Beard you
wear.


Tall. What she was, she was, do you see. I scorn to think on her -- But I do --
Oh.


Ol. Pray hold your peace, or feign some mirth, if you can.


Sing. Tal. Let her go, let her go. I care not if I have her, I have her or no.
Ha ha ha -- Oh my heart will break -- Oh --


Ol. Pray think of our horses, Sir.


Ran. This is right my Master. When he had his Daughters he was sad; and now
they are gone, he is the merriest man alive. Up at five a Clock in the morning,
and out till Dinnertime. Out again at afternoon, and so till Supper-time. Skise
out this away, and skise out that away. (He Is no Snayle I assure you.) And
Tantivy all the Country over, where Hunting, Hawking, or any Sport is to be
made, or good Fellowship to be had; and so merry upon all occasions, that you
would even bless your self, if it were possible.


Ol. Our Horses, I prithee.


Ran. And we, his Servants, live as merrily under him; and do all thrive. I my
self was but a silly Lad when I came first, a poor turn-spit Boy. Gentlemen
kept no whirling Jacks then, to cozen poor People of Meat. And I have now,
without boast, 40. l. in my Purse, and am the youngest of half a score in the
House, none younger then my self but one; and he is the Steward over all; his
name is Master Springlove (bless him where ere he is) he has a world of means:
And we, the Underlings, get well the better by him; besides the Rewards many
Gentlemen give us, that fare well, and lodge here sometimes.


Ol. O! we shall not forget you, Friend, if you remember our Horses, before
they take harm.


Ran. No hurt, I warrant you: there is a Lad walking them.


Ol. Is not your Master coming, think you?


Ran. He will not be long a coming. He Is no Snayle, as I told you.


Ol. You told me so, indeed.


Ran. But of all the Gentlemen, that toss up the Ball, yea and the Sack too,
commend me to old Master Hearty; a decayed Gentleman; lives most upon his own
Mirth, and my Masters Means, and much good do him with it: He is the finest
Companion of all: He do'es so hold my Master up with Stories, and Songs, and
Catches, and the other Cup of Sack, and such Tricks and Jiggs, you would admire
-- He is with him now.


Ol. That Hearty is Martins Uncle. I am glad he is here. Bear up Talboy. Now,
Friend, pray let me ask you a question. -- Prithee stay.


Ran. Nay, marry I dare not. Your Yawdes may take cold, and never be good after
it. -- Exit.


Ol. I thought I should never have been rid of him. But no sooner desired to
stay, but he is gone. A pretty humor!


Enter Randall. Ran. Gentlemen, my Master will be here e'ne now, doubt not: for
he is no Snayle, as I told you.


Exit. Ol. No Snayle's a great word with him. Prithee Talboy bear up. Enter
Usher. Here comes another gray Fellow.


Vsh. Do you stand in the Porch, Gentlemen? the House is open to you. Pray
enter the Hall. I am the Usher of it.


Ol. In good time, Sir. We shall be bold here, then, to attend your Masters
coming.


Vsh. And he is upon coming; and when he comes he comes apace. He is no Snayle,
I assure you.


Ol. I was told so before, Sir. No Snayle! sure it is the word of the House, and
as ancient as the Family.


Vsh. This Gentleman looks sadly, me thinks.


Tal. Who I? not I. Pray pardon my looks for that. But my heart feels what is
what. Ay me --


Vsh. Pray walk to the Buttry, Gentlemen. My Office leads you thither.


Ol. Thanks, good Master Usher.


Vsh. I have been Usher these twenty years, Sir. And have got well by my place,
for using Strangers respectfully.


Ol. He has given the Hint too.


Vsh. Something has come in by the by, besides standing Wages, which is ever
duly paid (thank a good Master, and an honest Steward) Heaven bless 'hem. We
all thrive under 'em. Enter Butler with Glasses and a Napkin. O here comes the
Butler.


But. You are welcome, Gentlemen. Please ye draw nearer my Office, and take a
morning Drink in a Cup of Sack, if it please you.


Ol. In what please you, Sir. We cannot deny the courtesy of the House, in the
Masters absence.


But. He Will come apace when he comes. He Is no Snayle, Sir. Going.


Ol. Still it is the House-word. And all the Servants wear Livery-Beards.


But. Or perhaps you had rather drink Whitewine and Sugar. Please your selves,
Gentlemen; here you may taste all Liquors. No Gentleman's House in all this
County, or the next, so well stored ( -- make us thankful for it.) And my
Master, for his Hospitality to Gentlemen, his Charity to the Poor, and his
bounty to his Servants, has not his Peer in the Kingdom ( -- make us thankful
for it.) And it is as fortunate a House for Servants, as ever was built upon
Faery-Ground. I my self, that have served here, Man, and Boy, these four and
forty years, have gotten together (besides something, more then I will speak
of, distributed among my poor Kindred) by my Wages, my Vails at Christmas, and
otherwise, together with my Rewards of kind Gentlemen, that have found
courteous entertainment here. --


Ol. There he is too.


But. Have, I say, gotten together (though in a dangerous time I speak it) a
brace of hundred pounds -- Make me thankful for it. And for losses, I have had
none. I have been Butler these two and thirty years, and never lost the value
of a Silver Spoon, nor ever broke a Glass -- Make me thankful for it. White
Wine and Sugar, say you Sir?


Ol. Please your self, Sir.


But. This Gentleman speaks not. Or had you rather take a Drink of brown Ale
with a Toast, or March Beer with Sugar and Nutmeg? or had you rather drink
without Sugar?


Ol. Good Sir, a Cup of your Houshold-Beer. Exit. But. I fear he will draw down
to that at last.


Enter Butler with a Silver Can of Sack. But. Here, Gentlemen, is a Cup of my
Masters small Beer: But it is good old Canary, I assure you. And here is to your
welcome.


Enter Cook. Cook. And welcome the Cook says, Gentlemen. Brother Butler, lay
a Napkin, I Will fetch a Cut of the Surloyn to strengthen your patience till my
Master comes, who will not now be long, for he is no Snayle, Gentlemen.


Ol. I have often heard so. And here is to you, Master Cook -- Prithee speak,
Master Talboy, or force one Laugh more, if thou can.


Cook. Sir, the Cook drinks to you. To Talb.


Tal. Ha ha ha --


Ol. Well said.


Tal. He is in the same Livory-Beard too.


Coo. But he is the oldest Cook, and of the ancientest House, and the best for
Housekeeping, in this County, or the next. And though the Master of it write but
Squire, I know no Lord like him. Enter Chaplain. And now he is come. Here comes
the Word before him. The Parson has ever the best stomach. I Will Dish away
presently.

Exit.
But. Is our Master come, Sir Domine?


Chap. Est ad Manum. Non est ille testudo.


Ol. He has the Word too in Latin. Now bear up Talboy.


Cha. Give me a Preparative of Sack. It is a gentle Preparative before Meat.
And so a gentle touch of it to you Gentlemen.


Ol. It is a gentle Offer, Sir; and as gently to be taken.


Enter Oldrents and Hearty. Old. About with it, my Lads. And this is as it
should be. -- Not till my turn, Sir, I. Though, I confess, I have had but
three Morning-draughts to day.


Ol. Yet it appears you were abroad betimes, Sir.


Old. I am no Snayle, Sir.


Ol. So your men told us, Sir.


Old. But where be my Catchers? Come, a Round. And so let us drink.


The Catch sung. And they drink about. The Singers are all Graybeards. A Round,
a Round, a Round, Boys, a Round.
Let Mirth fly aloft, and Sorrow be drowned.
Old Sack, and old Songs, and a Merry old Crew,
Can charm away Cares when the Ground looks blew.
Old. Well said old Hearty. And, Gentlemen, welcome.


Tal. Ah -- He sighs.

Old. Oh mine ears! What was that, a sigh? And in my House? Look: has it not
split my Walls? If not, make vent for it: Let it out: I shall be stifled else.
Exit. Chap.


Ol. He hopes your pardon, Sir: his Cause considered.


Old. Cause? Can there be cause for sighing.


Ol. He*has lost his Mistress, Sir.


Old. Ha ha ha. Is that a Cause? Do you hear me complain the loss of my two
Daughters?


Ol. They are not lost, I hope Sir.


Old. No more can be his Mistress. No Woman can be lost. They may be mis-laid a
little: but found again, I warrant you.


Tal. Ah -- Sigh.


Old. Ods my life! He sighs again: And means to blow me out of my House. To
Horse again. Here Is no dwelling for me. Or stay: I Will cure him, if I can. Give
him more Sack, to drown his Suspirations.


While Oldrents and Talboy drink. Oliver takes Hearty aside. Ol. Sir, I am
chiefly to inform you of the Disaster.


Hea. May it concern me?


Old. Your Nephew Martin has stolen my Fathers Ward, that Gentleman's Bride that
should have been.


Hea. Indeed, Sir.


Ol. It Is most true -- He gives Hearty a Letter.


Hea. Another Glass of Sack. This Gentleman brings good news.


Ol. Sir, if you can prevent his danger --


Hea. Hang all Preventions. Let 'em have their Destiny.


Tal. Sir, I should have had her, it is true -- But she is gone, do you see? And
let her go. To Oldrents.


Old. Well said. He mends now.


Tal. I am glad I am rid of her (do you see) before I had more to do with her --


Hea. He mends apace.


Hearty reads the Letter. Tal. For should I have married her before she had run
away, do you see: And that she had run away (do you see) after she had bin married
to me (do you see.) Then I had been a married Man without a Wife (do you see.)
Where now she being run away before I am married (do you see) I am no more
married to her, do you see, then she to me, do you see. And so long as I am none of
hers (do you see) nor she none of mine (do you see) I ought to care as little for
her, now she is run away (do you see) as if she had stayed with me, do you see.


Old. Why this is excellent! Come hither Hearty.


Tal. I perceive it now; and the reason of it; And how, by Consequence (do you
see) I ought not to look any further after her. Cries. But that she should
respect a poor base fellow, a Cleark at the most, and a Servingman at best,
before me, that am a rich man, at the worst; and a Gentleman, at least, makes
me -- I know not what to say --


Old. Worse than ever 'twas! Now he cries outright.


Tal. I know not what to say -- What to say -- Oh --


Hea. Then I do, Sir. The poor base Fellow, that you speak of, is my Nephew:
As good a Gentleman as your self. I understand the business by your Friend
here.


Tal. I cry you mercy, Sir.


Old. You shall cry no Mercy, nor any thing else here, Sir; nor for any thing,
here, Sir. This is no place to cry in: Nor for any business. You, Sir, that
come on business -- To Ol.


Ol. It shall be none, Sir.


Old. My House is for no business; but the Belly-businesse. You find not me
so uncivil, Sir, as to ask you from whence you came; who you are; or what is
your business. I ask you no question. And can you be so discourteous, as to
tell me, or my Friend, any thing like business. If you come to be merry with
Me, you are welcome. If you have any business, forget it: You forget where you
are else. And so to Dinner.


Hea. Sir, I pray let me only prevail with you but to read this.


Old. Spoil my Stomach now, and I Will not eat this fortnight. He reads aside.


Hea. While he reads, let me tell you, Sir. That my Nephew Martin has stolen
that Gentleman's Mistress, it seems, is true. But I protest, as I am a Gentleman,
I know nothing of the matter; nor where he or she is. But, as I am the foresaid
Gentleman, I am glad on it with all my heart. Ha, my Boy Mat. Thou shall restore
our House.


Ol. Let him not hear, to grieve him, Sir.


Hea. Grieve him? What should he do with her; teach their Children to cry?


Tal. But I do hear you though; and I scorn to cry, as much as you, do you see,
or your Nephew either, do you see.


Hea. Now thou art a brave fellow. So, so, hold up thy head, and thou shall
have a Wife, and a fine Thing.


Tal. Hang a Wife; and Pax of your fine Thing (do you see) I scorn your
Fopperies, do you see.


Old. And I do hear thee, my Boy; and rejoice in thy conversion. If thou can
but hold now.


Tal. Yes, I can hold, Sir. And I hold well with your Sack. I could live and
die with it, as I am true Talboy.


Old. Now thou art a tall Fellow; and shall want no Sack.


Tal. And, Sir, I do honor you (do you see) and should wish my self one of your
Household Servants (do you see) if I had but a gray Beard, do you see? Hay, as old
Master Clack says.


Old. Well, I have read the business here.


Ol. Call it not business, I beseech you, Sir. We desie all business.


Tal. I marry do we, Sir. Do You see, Sir? And a Hay, as old Master Clack says.


Old. Grammercy Sack. Well, I have read the Matter here written by Master
Clack. And do but bear up in thy humor, I will wait upon thee home. Knock
within. Hark! they knock to the Dresser. I have heard much of this old
od-ceited Justice Clack: And now I long to see him. It Is but crossing the
Country two days and a nights Journey. We'll but dine and away presently.
Bear up, I say, Master Talboy.


Tal. I will bear up, I warrant you, do you see, Sir -- But here is a grudging
still -- Exeunt.


Scena Secunda.
A great noise within of rude Music, Laughing, Singing, etc. Enter Amie.
Rachel. Meriel. Am. Here Is a Wedding with a witness, and a Holy Day with a
hoigh. Let us out of the noise, as we love our ears.


Ra. Yes: and here we may pursue our own Discourse, and hear one another.


Mer. Concerning, Springlove and your self, Mistress Amie.


Am. Well, Ladies, my confidence in you, that you are the same that you have
protested your selves to be, has so far won upon me, that I confess my self
well-affected both to the Mind and Person of that Springlove. And, if he be
(as fairly you pretend) a Gentleman, I shall easily dispense with Fortune.


Ra. Me. He is, upon our Honors.


Am. How well that high Engagement suits your Habits.


Ra. Our Minds and Blood are still the same.


Am. I have past no affiance to the other,
That stole me from my Guardian, and the Match
He would have forced me to: From which I would
Have fled with any, or without a Guide.
Besides, his mind, more clownish than his Habit,
Depraved by Covetousness and Cowardice,
Forced me into a way of misery,
To take relief from Beggars.

Mer. From poor Us.


Am. And then, to offer to marry me under a Hedge, as the old Couple were to
day, without Book or Ring, by the Chaplain of the Beggars Regiment, your
Patrico, only to save Charges.


Ra. I have not seen the Wretch these three hours, whither is he gone?


Am. He told me, to fetch Horse and sit Raiment for us; and so to post me
hence: But I think it was to leave me on your hands.


Mer. He has taken some great distaste sure: For he is damnable jealous.


Ra. I, did thou mark what a wild look he cast, when Springlove tumbled her,
and kissed her on the Straw this morning, while the Music played to the old
Wedding-Folks?


Mer. Yes, and then Springlove, to make him madder, told him, that he would be
his Proxy, and marry her for him, and lie with her the first night, with a
naked Cudgel betwixt 'em, and make him a King of Beggars.


Am. I saw how it angered him. And I imagined then, and before, that there was
more in Springlove, then downright Beggar. But though he be never so good a
Gentleman, he shall observe sit time and distance till we are married.


Ra. Matrimony forbid else. (She Is taken.) But while we talk of a Match
toward, we are mist within in the Bride-Barn among the Revell rout.


Am. We have had all the sport they could make us, in the past passages.


Mer. How cautious the old contracted Couple were for Portion and joincture!


Ra. What Feoffees, she being an Heir of fourscore, (and seven years
stone-blinde) had, in trust for her Estate.


Am. And how carefully he secured all to himself, in case he outlived her,
being but seven years older then she. And what pains the Lawyer of the Rout
here, took about it.


Ra. And then, how solemnly they were joined, and admonished, by our Parson
Vnder-hedge, to live together in the fear of the Lash, and give good example to
the younger Reprobates, to beg within Compass, to escape the jaws of the
Justice, the Clutch of the Constable, the Hooks of the Headborough, and the
biting blows of the Beadle. And, in so doing, they should defy the Devil, and
all his Works, and after their painful Pilgrimage in this life, they should
die in the Ditch of Delight.


Mer. O but Poet Scribble's Epithalamium. To the blind Virgin of fourscore,
And the lame Bachelor, of more,
How Cupid gave her Fyes to see,
And Vulcan lent him Legs:
How Venus caused their Sport to be
Prepared with buttered Eggs.
Yet when she shall be seven years wed,
She shall be bold to say,
She has as much her Maidenhead,
As on her Wedding day.



Ra. So may some Wives that were married at sixteen, to Lads of one and twenty.


Am. But at the Wedding-Feast, when the Bride bridled it, and her Groom sadled
it. There was the sport, in her Mumping, and his Champing; the Crew scrambling;
our selves trembling; then the confusion of Noyses, in talking, laughing,
scolding, singing, howling; with their Actions, of snatching, scratching,
towsing and lowsing themselves, and one another -- Enter Springl. ^inc. and
Hilliard. But who comes here?


Spr. O, Ladies, you have lost as much Mirth, as would have filled up a week of
Holy Days.


Springlove takes Amie aside, and courts her in a gentile way. ^in. I am come
about again for the Beggars life now.


Ra. You are. I am glad on it.


Hill. There is no life but it.


Vin. With them there is no Grievance or Perplexity;
No fear of war, or State Disturbances.
No Alteration in a Commonwealth,
Or Innovation, shakes a Thought of theirs.

Mer. Of ours you should say.

Hill. Of ours, he means.
We have no fear of lessening our Estates;
Nor any grudge with us (without Taxation)
To lend or give, upon command, the whole
Strength of our Wealth for public Benefit:
While some, that are held rich in their Abundance,
(Which is their Misery, indeed) will see
Rather a general ruin upon all,
Then give a Scruple to prevent the Fall.

Vin. It Is only we that live.

Ra. I Am glad you are so taken with your Calling.

Mer. We are no less, I assure you. We find the Sweetness of it now.


Ra. The Mirth, the Pleasure, the Delights. No Ladies live such Lives.


Mer. Some few, upon necessity, perhaps. But that is not worth g'rammercy.


Vin. They will never be weary.


Hill. Whether we seem to like, or dislike, all is one to them.


Vin. We must do something to be taken by, and discovered, we shall never be
our selves, and get home again else.


Spr. and Amie come to the rest. Spr. I am yours for ever. Well, Ladies, you
have mist rare Sport; but now the Bride has mist you with her half-half eye;
and the Bridegroom, with the help of his Crutches, is drawing her forth for a
Dance, here, in the opener air. The House is now too hot for 'em. O, here
come the chief Revellers. The Soldier, the Courtier, the Lawyer, and the Poet,
who is Master of their Revels, before the old Couple in State. Attend, and hear
him speak, as their Inductor.


Poet.
HEre, on this Green, like King and Queen,
(For a short truce) we do produce
Our old new-married Pair.
Of Dish and Wallet, and of Straw-pallet,
With Rags to show, from top to toe,
She is the ancient Heir.
He is the Lord of Bottle-gourd,
Of Sachell great, for Bread and Meat,
And, for small Pence, a Purse.
To all that give, Long may you live
He loudly cries: But who denies
Is sure to have his Curse.
Vin. Well said Field-Poet. Phoebus, we see, inspires As well the Beggar, as
the Poet Laureat.


Spr. And shines as warm under a Hedge bottom, as on the tops of Palaces.


Po. I have not done yet. Now this is to incite you to dance.


PRepare your selves, like Faery Elves,
Now in a Dance to show,
That you approve, the God of Love
Has many Shafts to's Bow:
With Golden head, and some of Lead,
But that which made these feel,
By subtle craft, was sure a Shaft
That headed was with Steel.
For they were old; no Earth more cold;
Their Hearts were Flints entire;
Whence the Steels stroke did sparks provoke,
That set their Bloods on fire.
Now strike up Piper; and each Lover here
Be blithe, and take his Mistress by the Goll.
Hill. That Is no Rhyme, Poet.


Po. There Is as good Poetry in blank Verse, as Meetre.


Music. Spr. Come, hay! the Dance, the Dance. Nay we'll have the old Couple
in, as blind and lame as they are.


Bri. What will you so?


Dance. Spr. Well hobled Bridegroom!


Vin. Well grop'd Bride!


Hill. Hay lusty. Hay Holy Day.


Spr. Set 'hem down; set 'em down: They have done well.


Gro. A ha! I am lustier than I was 30. years ago.


Bri. And I, than I was threescore past. A hem, a hemh.


Vin. What a night here is toward!


Hill. Sure they will kill one another.


Po. Each with a fear the the other will live longest.


Spr. Poet, thou have spoken learnedly, and acted bravely. Thou art both Poet
and Actor.


Po. So has been many famous men. And if here were no worse, we might have a
Masque, or a Comedy presented to night, in honor of the old Couple.


Vin. Let us each man try his ability Upon some Subject now Extempore.


Spr. Agreed. Give us a Theme; and try our Action.


Po. I have already thought upon it. I want but Actors.


Hill. What Persons want you? what would you present?


Po. I would present a Common wealth; Vtopia, With all her Branches and
Consistencies.


Ra. I Will be Vtopia; who must be my Branches?


Po. The Country, the City, the Court, and the Camp. Epitomized and personated
by a Gentleman, a Merchant, a Courtier, and a Soldier.


Soul. I Will be your Soldier. Am not I one? ha!


Con. And am not I a fashionable Courtier?


Po. But who the Citizen or Merchant?


Spr. I.


Vin. And I your Country Gentleman.


Hill. Or I.


Po. Yet to our Moral I must add two Persons, Divinity and Law.


La. Why la you now. And am not I a Lawyer?


Po. But where is Divinity?


Vin. Mary that I know not. One of us might do that, if either knew how to
handle it.


Spr. Where Is the old Patrico, our Priest, my Ghostly Father? He Will do it
rarely.


1 Beg. He was telling Fortunes e'ne now to Country Wenches. I Will fetch him --


Exit. Spr. That Patrico I wonder at: He has told me strange things in clouds.


Am. And me somewhat that I may tell you hereafter.


Spr. That you shall be my Bride?


Am. I will not tell you now.


Vin. Well: but what must our Speeches tend to? what must we do one with
another?


Po. I would have the Country, the City, and the Court, be at great variance
for Superiority. Then would I have Divinity and Law stretch their wide throats
to appease and reconcile them: Then would I have the Soldier cudgel them all
together, and overtop them all. Stay, yet I want another person.


Hill. What must he be?


Po. A Beggar.


Vin. Here Is enough of us, I think. What must the Beggar do?


Po. He must, at last, overcome the Soldier; and bring them all to
Beggars-Hall. And this, well acted, will be for the honor of our Calling.


All. A Scribble! A Scribble!


Hill. Come, where is this Patrico, that we may begin?


Enter Patrico. Pa. Alack and welladay, this is no time to play. Our Quarter is
beset. We are all in the Net. Leave off your merry Glee.


Vin. You begin scurvily.


Spr. Why what is the Matter?


Within. Bing awast, bing awast. The Quire Cove and the Harmanbeck.


Some Beggars run over the Stage. Spr. We are beset indeed. What shall we do?


Vin. I hope we shall be taken.


Hill. If the good hour be come, welcome by the grace of good Fortune.


Enter Sentwell, Constable, Watch. The Crew slip away. Sent. Beset the Quarter
round. Be sure that none escape.


Spr. Lord to come with you, blessed Master, to a many distressed --


Vin. Hill. Duly and truly pray for you.


Ra. Mer. Good your good Worship, duly and truly, etc.


Sen. A many counterfeit Rogues! So frolic and so lamentable all in a breath?
You were acting a Play but now: We'll act with you. Incorrigible Vagabonds.


Spr. Good Master, it is a Holy Day with us. An Heir was married here to day.


Sen. Married! Not so I hope. Where is she? It Is for an Heir we seek.


Spr. Here She is Master -- Hide your selves in the Straw -- the Straw. Quickly
into the Straw --


Sen. What tell thou me of this? An old blind Beggar-woman. We must find a
young Gentlewoman-Heire among you. Where Is all the rest of the Crew?


Con. Slipped into the Barn and the Bushes by: but none can escape.


Sen. Look you to that, and to these here.


Exit. with Watch. Spr. Into the Straw, I say.


Vin. No, good Springlove. The Ladies and we are agreed now to draw Stakes, and
play this lousy Game no further.


Hill. We will be taken, and disclose our selves. You see we shall be forced to
it else. The cowardly Cleark has don't to save himself.


Spr. Do you fear no shame, Ladies?


Ra. Do think it a shame to leave Begging?


Mer. Or that our Father will turn us out to it again?


Spr. Nay, since you are so resolute, Know, that I my self begin to find this
is no course for Gentlemen. This Lady shall take me off it.


Am. Make but your Protestations good, and take me yours. And for the Gentleman
that surprises us, though he has all my Uncles trust, he shall do any thing for
me to our advantage.


Vin. If, Springlove, thou could post now to thy Tyring-house, and fetch all
our Clothes, we might get off most neatly.


Spr. A Horse and six hours Travel would do that.


Am. You shall be furnished, doubt not.


Enter Sentwell. Watch. Sent. She Is escaped, or is invisible. You Sir, I take to
be the chief Rogue of this Regiment. Let him be whipped till he brings forth the
Heir.


Con. That is but till he stinks, Sir. Come, Sir, strip, strip.


Am. Unhand him, Sir. What Heir do you seek, Master Sentwell?


Sent. Precious, how did my have oversee her? O Mistress Amie! Could I, or your
Uncle, Justice Clack, a wiser man than I, ever have thought to have found you in
such company?


Am. Of me, Sir, and my company, I have a story to delight you: which on our
March toward your House, I will relate to you.


Sent. And thither will I lead you as my Guest. But to the Law surrender all
the rest. I Will make your peace.


Am. We must fare all alike.


Exeunt. Actus Quintus.
Clack. Martin. Cla. I have forgiven you. Provided that my Niece be safely
taken; and so to be brought home. Safely, I say, that is to say, unstained,
unblemished, undishonour'd; that is to say, with no more faults, criminal, or
accusative, than those she carried with her.


Mar. Sir, I believe --


Cla. Nay, if we both speak together, how shall we hear one another? you
believe her Virtue is Armor of proof, without your Council or your Guard; and
therefore you left her in the hands of Rogues and Vagabonds, to make your own
Peace with me. You have it. Provided, I say (as I said before) that she be
safe, that is to say, uncorrupted, undefiled; that is to say -- as I said
before.


Mar. Mine intent, Sir, and my only way --


Cla. Nay, if we both speak together, how shall we hear one another? as I said
before. Your intent, and your only way, you would have said, was to run away
with her; and that by her only Instigation, to avoid the tie of Marriage with
Master Talboy; that is to say, to shun the Match, that I had made for her; that
is to say, rather to disobey me, than to displease her self. Wherein (although
she did not altogether transgress the Law) she did both offend and prejudice
me, an Instrument; nay, I may say, a Pillar thereof. And you, in assisting her,
furthering, and conveying her away, did not only infringe the Law, in an
unlawful Departure from your Master, but in a higher point; that is to say,
Top and top-Gallows high. I would ha found a Jury should have found it so.


Mar. But Sir, an't please you.


Cla. Must we then both speak together? Have I not born with thee, to speak all
thou please in thy defense? Have I not broke mine own Rule, which is, to
punish before I examine; and so to have the Law the surer of my side? And do
thou still persist? Hold your own peace; or, as I am a Justice of the Kings, I
will unsay what I said before, and set a Currat Lex at you, Sirrah, that shall
course you up the heavy Hill. Oh, is your Tongue fallen into your Leg now? Do
not you know I have acquitted you? Provided -- As I said before. Go your way
in, and see that the Gentlemen, who, I think, were got in Sack, christened in
Sack, nursed with Sack, and fed up to gray hairs with only Sack; see, I say,
that they want no Sack. My Son Oliver (I thank him) has brought me a pair of
such Guests. Enter Sentwell.

O Master Sentwell! Good News?

Sen. Of beggarly news, the best you have heard.


Cla. That is to say, you have found my Niece among the Beggars. That is to say
--


Sen. True, Sir Oliver, I found her --


Cla. Now if we both speak together, who shall hear one another?


Sen. I thought your desire was to be informed.


Cla. I can inform my self, Sir, by your looks. I have taken a hundred
Examinations in my days of Fellons, and other Offenders, out of their very
Countenances; and wrote 'em down verbatim, to what they would have said. I am
sure it has served to hang some of 'em, and whip the rest.


Sen. Justice Clack still! He must talk all. His Clack must only go.


Cla. But to the point. You have found my Niece. You have left her at your own
House; not only to shift her out of her Disguise, but out of her shame, to
come nearer me, until I send her pardon.


Sen. Most true, Sir. But the Company she was in --


Cla. Again! Do not I know the Company? Beggars, Rogues, Vagabonds, and
Hedge-birds.


Sen. But do you know whom, or how many we have taken? and how the rest escaped?


Cla. A needless knowledge. Why should we take more than her self? Or how
could you take those that could escape?


Enter Martin. Mar. Sir, the old Gentlemen within, sent me to wait upon you.
Without you (they say) they need not my Service.


Cla. Tell 'em then, I Will wait on 'em presently.


Exit Martin. Sen. But Sir, we have taken with her such Beggars, such Rogues,
such Vagabonds, and such Hedgebirds (since you call 'em so) as you never knew,
or heard of, though now the Countries swarm with 'em under every Hedge, as if
an innumerable Army of 'em were lately disbanded without Pay. Hedgebirds said
you? Hedge Lady-birds, Hedge Cavaliers, Hedge Soldier, Hedge Lawyer, Hedge
Fiddlers, Hedge Poet, Hedge Players, and a Hedge Priest among 'em. Such we have
taken for the Principals. But to see how the Multitude escaped us; was more
sport than pity. How, upon a Watchword given, they in the instant vanished by
more several ways than there were legs among 'em; how the Creeples leaped
over Pales and Hedges; how the Blind found their way through Lakes and Ditches;
how a Doxie flew with two Children at her back, and two more, perhaps, in her
belly --


Cla. A Hedge Priest have you taken, say you?


Sen. Yes, Sir, an old Patrico, an ancient Prophet, to tell Fortunes, and cozen
our poor Country People of their single Money.


Enter Oliver. Ol. Sir, Master Oldrents, in that he injoyes not your company,
begins to doubt of his welcome.


Cla. Who led him into that doubt? I, or you that brought him hither?


Ol. Sir, his own desire, and love to you, brought him hither. I but showed him
the way.


Cla. You reason fairly. Tell him I come.


Ol. Pray, Sir, be pleased to do so: for he says --


Cla. Nay, if we both talk together --


Ol. Who shall hear one another. Exit. Oliver.


Cla. But are there Players among the apprehended?


Sen. Yes, Sir. And they were contriving to act a Play among themselves, just
as we surpised 'em, and spoiled their Sport.


Cla. Players! I Will pay them above all the rest.


Sen. You shall do well in that; to put 'hem in stock to set up again.


Cla. Yes, I Will put 'em in Stocks, and set 'em up to the Whipping-post. They
can act Justices, can they? I Will act a Justice among 'em; that is to say, I
will do justice upon them; that is to say --


Sen. Pray Sir, be not severe, they act Kings and Emperors, as well as
Justices. And Justice is blind they say: you may therefore be pleased to wink
a little. I find that you have merry old Gentlemen in your House, that are
come far to visit you. I Will undertake that these Players, with the help of
their Poet; in a device which they have already studied, and a pack of Clothes
which I shall supply 'em with, shall give your Guests much content, and move
compassion in you toward the poor Strowles.


Cla. But you know my way of Justice (and that is a sure way) is to punish 'em
first, and be compassionate afterward, as I find 'em upon their Examination.


Sen. But for your Guests sakes, who (I know) do favor and affect the Quality
of Actors very much, permit 'em, Sir. It will enlarge your Entertainment
exceedingly.


Cla. And perhaps save me the expense of a Renlet of Sack the while. Well, Sir,
for that Respect, and upon your undertaking that they shall please, I will
prorogue my Justice on the Rogues. And so to my merry Gentlemen, whom I will
prepare to see their Interlude against after Supper. But pray, Master Sentwell,
as you have found my Niece, look to her, and see her decently brought home.


Sen. In her own best Apparel. But you must prorogue your displeasure to her
too.


Cla. I will do so, until my scarce welcome Guests be gone.


Enter Randall. Ran. Sir, my Master sends you word, and plainly, that without
your Company, your Entertainment stinks. He has commanded me saddle his Nags,
and away to night. If you come not at once, twice, thrice, he is gone presently,
before Supper; He Will find an Host at an Inn worth a hundred of you.


Cla. Good friend, I will now satisfy your Master, without telling him he has
a saucy Knave to his Man. Exit Clack.


Ran. Thank your Worship.


Sen. Do you hear, Friend, you serve Master Oldrents.


Ran. I could have told you that. And the best Housekeeper my Master is of any
Gentleman in the County he dwells in; and the best Master to a man, as I, the
worst of twenty, can say for him, and would be ashamed to say less.


Sen. Your name is Randall.


Ran. Forgi' me! Are you so wise? you are too young to be my Godsire. And I
hope not old enough to be a Witch. How know you, that I am Randall? were you
ever at my Masters House in Nottinghamshire, or at Dunghilford, where I was
born?


Sen. No. But I have Notes to know you by.


Ran. I was never twelve mile from thence in my life, before this Journey. God
send me within ken of our own Kitchen smoke again.


Sen. Your Masters Stewards name is Springlove.


Ran. Master Springlove, an't please you. There is not an honester Gentleman
between this and the head of him. And my heart's with him, where e're he is.
Know you him too?


Sen. Yes, and your Masters Daughters too.


Ran. Whaw.


Sen. And that they are all from home, your Master knows not where.


Ran. Whaw, whaw. Know you that too?


Sen. Yes, and the two young Gentlemen that are with 'em, Master Vincent, and
Master Hilliard.


Ran. Whaw, whaw again. You know 'em all, I think. But know you where they all
are?


Sen. Even here by, at my own House.


Ran. Whaw --


Sen. And they knowing that your Master is here, and Master Hearty too --


Ran. Whaw, whaw.


Sen. And your self too. They directed me to find you, Randall, and bring you
to 'em.


Ran. Whaw, whaw, whaw, whaw. -- Why do we not go then?


Sen. But secretly. Not a word to any body.


Ran. Mum -- Will you go then?


Enter Martin. Mar. O, Master Oldrent's man. Pray let me entreat you into the
Buttery.


Ran. Will you go, Master Gentleman?


Mar. Indeed it is my Masters desire, and he commanded me.


Ran. Now, when it is Supper-time did he? to fill my belly with thin drink to
save his Meat? It Is the manner in Churls Houses. Will you go, Master Gentleman?


Mar. In Troth my Master is so merry with yours within --


Ran. Shite of your Master. My Master's Steward's a better Man. I Will to him, at
this Gentleman's House, and all the rest. Whaw, whaw.


Sen. Randall, you forget.


Ran. Mum again then. Why would you not go then? Exit Sent. and Rand.


Mar. The man's as mad as his Master. The strangest strangers that ever came to
our House.


Enter Talboy Tal. Well, Martin, for confessing thy fault, and the means thou
made whereby she is taken, I am friends with thee. But I shall never look
upon her, or thee -- but with grief of mind, however I bear it outwardly. Oh
--


Mar. You bear it very manfully, me thinks.


Tal. I, you think so, and I know so -- But what I feel, I feel. Would one of
us two had never both seen one another. -- Oh --


Mar. You speak very good sense, Sir. But does my Master continue his merry
humor with the old Gentlemen within.


Tal. Yes. Justice Clack's Clack go's as merrily as any.


Mar. Well said, Sir. Now you speak merrily too. But I could say somewhat that
would still him. And for your comfort, I Will tell you. Mistress Amie is fallen in
love with one of the Beggars.


Tal. Then have I nothing else to do, but to laugh at thee as long as I live.
Ha ha ha -- To let a Beggar cozen thee of her. Ha ha ha. A Beggar! I shall die
merrily yet. Ha ha ha.


Enter Clack. Oldrents. Hearty. Oliver. Cla. A hay Boys, a hay. This is right;
that is to say, as I would have it; that is to say --


Tal. A Beggar. Ha ha ha --


Mar. Ha ha ha --


Cla. A hay Boys, a hay. They are as merry without, as we were within. A hay,
Master Oldrents, and Master Hearty! The virtue of your Company turns all to
Mirth and Melody, with a hay trololly lolly lolly. Is It not so, Master Hearty?


Old. Why thus it should be: How was I deceived! Now I see you are a good
Fellow.


Ol. He was never so before. If it be a Lightning before Death, the best is, I
am his Heir.


Tal. Mar. Ha ha ha --


Cla. Again, Boys, again; that is to say, a hay Boys, ah hay --


Hea. What is the Motive of your Mirth, Nephew Martin? Let us laugh with you.


Old. Was that spoke like my Friend, Hearty? Lack we Motives to laugh? Are not
all things, any thing, every thing to be laughed at? And if nothing were to be
seen, felt, heard, or understood, we would laugh at It too.


Cla. You take the loss of your Mistress merrily, Master Talboy.


Tal. More merrily than you will take the finding of her. Ha ha ha -- A Beggar!
Ha ha ha --


Cla. Can I be sad to find her, think you?


Mar. He thinks you will be displeased with her, and chide her.


Cla. You are deceived, Master Talboy; you are wide, Master Talboy; above half
your length, Master Talboy. Law and Justice shall sleep, and Mirth and good
Fellowship ride a Circuit here to night. A hay, Master Oldrents, a hay Master
Hearty, and a hay Son Oliver, and a hay Nephew Talboy, that should have been,
and a hay, my Cleark Martin, and a hay for the Players. When come they? Son
Oliver, see for Master Sentwell, that is no readier with his new Company.


Tal. Players! Let us go see too. I never saw any Players. Exit Talb. Mar.


Ol. This is the first fit that ever he had of this Disease. And if it be his
last, I say, as I said before. I am his Heir. Exit.


Old. But is there a Play to be expected, and acted by Beggars?


Cla. That is to say, by Vagabonds; that is to say, by strowling Players. They
are upon their Purgation. If they can present any thing to please you, they may
escape the Law; that is ( a hay) If not, to morrow, Gentlemen, shall be acted,
Abuses stripped and whipped, among 'em; with a hay, Master Hearty, you are not
merry. Enter Sentwell. And a hay Master Sentwell, where are your Drammatis
Personae; your Prologus, and your Actus Primus, ha? Have they given you the
slip, for fear of the Whip? A hay.


Sen. A word aside, an't please you. --


Sentwell takes Clack aside, and gives him a Paper. Old. I have not known a man
in such a Humor.


Hea. And of his own finding! He stole it, indeed, out of his own Bottles,
rather than be robbed of his Liquor. Misers use to tipple themselves so.


Old. He does so outdo us, that we look like staid men again, Hearty; fine
sober things.


Hea. But how long will it last? He Will hang himself to morrow, for the Cost we
have put him to.


Old. I love a Miser's Feast dearly. To see how thin and scattering the Dishes
stood, as if they feared quarrelling.


Hea. And how the Bottles, to escape breaking one another, were brought up by
one at once!


Old. How one of the Serving-men, untrain'd to wait, spilt the White-broth!


Hea. And another, stumbling at the Threshold, tumbled in his Dish of
Rouncevals before him.


Old. And most suitable to the Niggardliness of his Feast, we shall now have
an Entertainment, or Play, presented by Beggars.


Cla. Send 'em in, Master Sentwell. Exit Sent. Sit Gentlemen, the Players are
ready to enter. And here is a Bill of their Plays. You may take your choice.


Old. Are they ready for them all in the same Clothes? Read 'em, good Hearty.


Hea. First, here is The two lost Daughters.


Old. Put me not in mind of the two lost Daughters, I prithee. What Is the next?


Hea. The vagrant Steward.


Old. Nor of a vagrant Steward. Sure some abuse is meant me.


Hea. The old Squire and the Fortune Tellers.


Old. That comes nearer me. Away with it.


Hea. The Beggars Prophecy.


Old. All these Titles may serve to one Play, of a Story that I know too well.
I Will see none of them.


Hea. Then here is The merry Beggars.


Old. I, that; and let 'em begin.


Enter Talboy and Oliver. Tal. The Players are coming in: And Mistress Amie and
your man Martin, are to be Actors among 'em.


Cla. A hay then for that too. Some merry device sure. A Flourish of Shalms.
Hark! the Beggars Hoboys. Now they begin.


Old. See, a most solemn Prologue.


Enter Poet for Prologue. TO Knight, to Squire, and to the Gentiles here,
We wish our Play may with content appear.
We promise you no dainty Wit of Court,
Nor City Pageantry, nor Country Sport:
But a plain Piece of Action, short and sweet;
In Story true. You Will know it when you see it.
Old. True Stories and true Jests do seldom thrive on Stages.


Cla. They are best to please you with this though, or a hay with a Whip for them
to morrow.


Old. Nay, rather than they shall suffer, I will be pleased, let 'em Play their
worst.


A Flourish. Enter Patrico. With Lawyer habited like Oldrents. See our Patrico
among 'em.

Hea. That offered you a Doxie in the Barn.


Pat. Your Children's Fortunes I have told,
That they shall Beg e're they be old.
And will you have a Reason why?
It Is Justice in their Destiny. --

Cla. Justice, ha! Are you meddling with Justices already?


Pat. Your Grandfather, by crafty wile
Of bargaining, did much beguile
A thriftlesse Heir of half the Lands
That are descended to your hands.
And, then, by Law, not Equity,
Forced Him and his Posterity
To Woe and shameful Beggary.

Law. That was no fault of mine, nor of my Children.


Pat. But our forefathers Debts and Crimes,
Although forborne till future times,
Are not so paid. But what needs more,
I wish you happy in your Store. Exit.

Old. Do note this, Hearty?


Hea. You said you would be pleased, let 'em play their worst.


Lawyer walks sadly, beats his breast, etc. To him enter Soldier like Hearty,
and seems to comfort him. Old. It begins my Story, and by the same
Fortuneteller that told me my Daughters Fortunes; almost in the same words. I
know him now. And he speaks in the Play to one that personates me, as near, as
they can set him forth.


Cla. How like you it, Sir? You seem displeased. Shall they be whipped yet? A
hay, if you say the word.


Old. O, by no means, Sir; I am pleased.


Soul. Sad for the words of a base Fortune Tellers? Believe him! Hang him. I Will
trust none of 'em. They have all Whims, and double double meanings In all they
say.


Old. Whom does he talk or look like, now?


Hea. It is no matter whom. You are pleased, you say.


Soul. Have you no Sack in the House? am not I here? And never without a merry old
Song?

Old Sack, and old Songs, and a merry old Crew,
Will fright away Cares when the ground looks blew.
And can you think on Gypsy Fortune Tellers?

Law. I Will think as little of 'em as I can.

Soul. Will you abroad then? But here comes your Steward.


Enter Springlove to Lawyer. Old. Bless me! Is not that Springlove?

Hea. Is that you, that talks to him, or that Cockscombe I, do you think? Pray
let 'em play their Play: the Justice will not hinder 'em, you see; he is asleep.


Spr. Here are the Keys of all my Charge, Sir. And
My humble suit is, that you will be pleased
To let me walk upon my known occasions, this Summer.

Law. Fie! Can not yet leave off those Vagancies?
But I will strive no more to alter Nature.
I will not hinder thee, nor bid thee go.

Old. My own very words at his departure.

Hea. No matter. Pray attend.

Law. Come, Friend, I Will take your Council.

Exeunt Lawy. Sold. Spr. I Have striven with my self to alter Nature in me,
For my good Masters sake; but all in vain;
For Beggars, Cuckoe-like, fly out again,
In their own Notes and Season.

Enter Rachel. Meriel. Vincent. Hilliard. Ra. Our Father's sadness will not
suffer us To live in's House.

Mer. And we must have a Progress.

Vin. The assurance of your Loves has engaged us

Hill. To wait on you in any course.

Ra. Suppose we'll go a begging.

Vin. Hill. We are for you.

Spr. And that must be your Course, and suddenly,
To Cure your Father's sadness; who is told
It is your Destiny: Which you may quit,
By making it a trick of Youth and Wit.
I Will set you in the way.

All 4. But how? But how?

All talk aside. Old. My Daughters and their Sweethearts too. I see
The scope of their Design; and the whole drift
Of all their Action now, with joy and comfort.

Hea. But take no notice yet. See a Whim more of it. But the mad Rogue that
acted me, I must make drunk anon.


Spr. Now! are you all resolved?

All 4. Agreed, agreed.

Spr. You beg to absolve your Fortune, not for need.

Exeunt. Old. I must commend their Act in that. Praythee let us call 'em, and
end the matter here. The purpose of their Play, is but to work my Friendship,
or their Peace with me; and they have it.


Hea. But see a little more, Sir.

Enter Randall. Old. My Man Randall too! Has he a Part with 'em?


Ran. They were well set a work, when they made me a Player. What is that I
must say? And how must I act now? Oh! that I must be Steward for the Beggars in
Master Steward's absence; and tell my Master, he is gone to measure Land for him
to purchase.


Old. You Sir. Leave the work you can do no better (I can forbear no longer)
and call the Actors back again to me.


Ran. With all my heart. And glad my Part is so soon done. Exit.


Enter Patrico. Pat. Since you will then break off our Flay:
Something in earnest I must say;
But let affected Riming go.
I Will be no more a Patrico.
My name is Wrought-on -- Start not. But (if you
Desire to hear what is worth your best attention,
More privately) you may draw nearer me.

Oldrents goes to him. Hea. Hear no more Fortunes.

Old. You shall give me leave.

Pat. I am Grandson to that unhappy Wrought-on,
Whom your Grandfather, craftily, wrought out
Of his Estate. By which, all his Posterity
Were, since, exposed to Beggary. I do not charge
You, with the least offense in this. But, now,
Come nearer me: for I must whisper to you.

Patrico takes Oldrents aside. I had a Sister, who among the Race
Of Beggars, was the fairest. Fair she was
In Gentle Blood, and Gesture to her Beauty;
Which could not be so clouded with base Clothing,
But she attracted Love from worthy Persons;
Which (for her meannesse) they expressed in Pity,
For the most part. But some assaulted her
With amorous, though loose desires; which she
Had virtue to withstand. Only one Gentleman
(Whether it were by her Affection, or
His Fate, to send his Blood a begging with her,
I question not) by her, in heat of Youth,
Did get a Son, who now must call you Father.
Old. Me?

Pa. You. Attend me, Sir. Your Bounty, then,
Disposed your Purse to her; In which, besides
Much Money (I conceive by your neglect)
Was thrown this holy Relic. Do you know it?

Old. The Agnus Dei that my Mother gave me
Upon her Deathbed! O the loss of it
Was my sore grief: And, now, with joy, it is
Restored by Miracle! Does your Sister live?

Pa. No, Sir. She died within a few days after
Her Son was born; and left him to my care;
On whom, I, to this day, have had an eye,
In all his wanderings.

Old. Then the young Man lives!

Enter Springlove. Vincent. Hilliard. Rachell. Meriel. Pa. Here with the rest
of your fair Children, Sir.

Old. My Joy begins to be too great within me!
My Blessing, and a Welcome to you all.
Be one another, and you all are mine.

Vin. Hill. We are agree on that.

Ra. Long since. We only stood till you shook off your Sadness.


Mer. For which we were fain to go a begging, Sir.

Old. Now I can read the Justice of my Fate, and yours --


Cla. Ha! Justice? Are they handling of Justice?

Old. But more applaud great Providence in both.

Cla. Are they jeering of Justices? I watched for that.

Hea. I so me thought. No, Sir. The Play is done.

Enter Sentwell. Amie. Oliver. Martin. Sen. See, Sir, your Niece presented to
you.

Springlove takes Amie. Cla. What, with a Speech by one of the Players?
Speak, Sir: and be not daunted. I am favorable.

Spr. Then, by your favor, Sir, this Maiden is my Wife.


Cla. Sure you are out of your part. That is to say, you must begin again.


Spr. She Is mine by solemn Contract, Sir.

Cla. You will not tell me that. Are not you my Niece?


Am. I dare not, Sir, deny't, we are contracted.

Cla. Nay, if we both speak together, how shall we hear one another?


Mar. I must disprove the Contract.

Tal. That is my part to speak.

Sen. None can disprove it. I am witness to it.

Cla. Nay, if we all speak -- as I said before.

Old. Hear me for all then. Here are no Beggars (you are but one, Patrico) no
Rogues, nor Players: But a select Company, to fill this House with Mirth. These
are my Daughters; these their Husbands; and this that shall marry your Niece, a
Gentleman, my Son. I will instantly Estate him in a thousand pound a year to
entertain his Wife; and to their Heirs for ever. Do you hear me now?


Cla. Now I do hear you. And I must hear you. That is to say, it is a Match.
That is to say -- as I said before.


Tal. And must I hear it too -- O --

Old. Yes, though you whine your eyes out.

Hea. Nephew Martin, still the Child with a Suckbottle of Sack. Peace, Lamb;
and I Will find a wife for thee.


Old. Now, Patrico, if you can quit your Function,
To live a moderate Gentleman, I Will give you
A competent Annuity for your life.

Pat. I Will be, withal, your faithful Beads-man; and Spend my whole life in
Prayers for you and yours.


Cla. And now, Cleark Martin, give all the Beggars my free Pass, without all
manner of Correction? that is to say, with a hay get 'em gone.


Ol. Are not you the Gentleman, that challenged me in right of your Friend here?


Vin. Your Inspection's good, Sir.

Ra. And you the Gentleman (I take it) that would have made Beggar-sport with
us, two at once.


Mer. For twelve pence a piece, Sir.

Oli. I hope we all are Friends.

Spr. Now, on my Duty, Sir, I Will beg no more, But your continual Love, and
daily blessing.


Old. Except it be at Court, Boy; where if ever I come, it shall be to beg the
next Fool-Royal's place that falls.


Spr. A begging Epilogue yet would not be,
Me thinks, improper to this Comedy.

Epilogue.
Though we are, now, no Beggars of the Crew,
We count it not a shame to beg of you.
The Justice, here, has given his Pass free
To all the rest, unpunished; only we
Are under Censure, till we do obtain
Your Suffrages, that we may beg again;
And often, in the Course, We took to day,
Which was intended, for your Mirth, a Play;
Not without Action, and a little Wit,
Therefore we beg your Pass for us and It.
FINIS.

