A PLEADER TO THE NEEDER WHEN A READER.
AS all, my friend, through wily knaves, full often suffer wrongs,
Forget not, pray, when it you have read, to whom this book belongs.
Than one Charles Clark, of Totham Hall, none to it a right has better,
A wight, that same, more read than some in the lore of old black-letter.
And as C.C. in Essex dwells -- a shire at which all laugh --
His books must, sure, less fit seem dressed, if they are not bound in calf!
Care take, my friend, this book you never with grease or dirt besmear it;
While none but a wkward puppies will continue to " dog's-car" it!
And over my books when book- worms "grub," I Would have them understand,
No marks the margins must de- face from any busy "hand!"
Marks, as re-marks, in books of Clark's, when e're some critic spy leaves,
It always him so wasp-ish makes, though they are but on the fly-leaves!
Yes, if so they are used, he would not de- fer to deal a fate most meet --
He Would have the soiler of his quires do penance in a sheet!
The Ettrick Hogg -- never deemed a bore -- his candid mind revealing,
Declares, to beg "a copy" now is a mere pre- text for stealing!
So, as some knave to grant the loan of this my book may wish me,
I thus my book- plate here display, lest some such "fry" should dish me!
-- But hold, -- though I again declare Withholding I Will not brook,
And "a sea of trouble" still shall take to bring book-worms "to book!"
THE DURABLE LEGACY.

By H. B. Med. D.

LONDON, Printed by M. White. M DC LXXXI.

To my Beloved CHILDREN.
I Know full well that it is the design of Parents (that are not thoughtless
and altogether improvident) partly by ^rugality and industry, and sometimes by
unjustifiable ways, and with the hazard of their innocence, and violation of
their own peace of Conscience, to acquire estates for their Children, that they
may look big in the World, and be more than common Ciphers: The first do well
in taking care of their posterity, yet when that care is joined with too great
parsimony, and an over earnest desire to advance their Children high in the
worlds esteem, for Riches or Honor; it is a sign they have too great a value
for those things, beyond the Rules of Christian Religion: and by designing
their Sons to be Gentlemen, they slack their necessary industry, and their
honest engagement in business; give them up to vice and idleness, and expose
them to many temptations, and the subtleties of men, watchful for such
opportunities, which an honest calling, and constant love to business would
have freed them from.

The other course of procuring an Estate, is altogether unwarrantable, and is
commonly cursed, and decays in the second, or third Generation, if not in the
first.

The world as it is ordered has many difficulties in it, The people are very
numerous, Trade is overburthened, and all professions almost have too many
engaged in them: Pride and Luxury enforce too great expense, outsides only are
esteemed, Temperance and all other Virtues created with man, and enjoyed by the
founder and first Propagators of the Christian Religion, are much decryed, and
of low esteem. Upon consideration of these particulars, though I reckon it my
duty, not to enter you into the world bare, and without some competent
foundation for your industry, yet do I judge it much more incumbent upon me,
and more advantageous to your well being here, and hereafter, to furnish your
minds with sound and solid knowledge, that may support you in all states, and
conditions: and keep you from those vices that too much swell men in
prosperity, and depress them under adversity.

These are my motives of writing the following discourse, which I therefore
call A Durable Legacy, because though riches may a thousand ways fail, yet
wisdom will always endure, and will best guide and conduct you through all the
rugged paths, which more or less every man meets withal in his passage through
this world: I had thought to have conveyed it to you only by writing; but
better bethinking my self, that that way might meet with difficulty, and
hazard of its wholly being lost, I have been at the charge of Printing it,
with an obligation from him I entrusted with it, that no more than fifty should
pass the press, and only for my use: These I purpose to give amongst you my
children, that you may transmit them to your posterity, and if that should in
time exceed that number, some one amongst you I hope will have so much regard
to his Fathers memory, and so just a value for the Contents of the Book as to
take care for the reprinting it.

The Counsels and Directions I here give, will concern the well managing of
your lives, from the time you are capable of considering what is best for you,
to the age wherein you may be more able, than I that advise you, having this
help and advantage.

It is intended to make you Wise, and Good: the last I chiefly aim at, the
first but in order to it. And indeed he is not to be accounted a wise man, who
is not so to himself: Who acquires not knowledge, and makes the chief end of it
to be, the well regulating of his mind, so that it truly understand what is
best to be done in all occurrences and exigences of Life; no to secure wealth
or honor, but peace of Conscience, a worthy fame from integrity of Life: for
the accomplishment whereof, I take this pains, it being infinitely more
desirable to me, to have it said of you that you are wise and just, than that
you are endowed with great Wealth, or Titles; The truest and most intrinsic
honor, being that which is an inseparable concomitant of Virtue. And which the
Word, will it, nill it, must and does tacitly acknowledge.

Take not up this Book slightly, as if written with the common design, of
furnishing your brain for discourse. It Is better not speak, than talk for vain
glory, or not for some good or allowable end. Look upon it as that which is to
be a Relic to your Families: and ponder upon it, as you would upon advice
given, if life were in danger.

With the Authority of a Father I enjoin you frequently to take Counsel of it,
with the affection of a Father I beseech you: Be assured it was written with a
hearty desire of doing you good: Possessions I am not sure I shall leave you,
nor can you be sure to keep them, but Wisdom will teach you how to avoid
difficulties, and goodness will enable, you to bear what are unavoidable.

I would not have you think meanly of this Book for the plainness of the style,
it was purposely so writ; with a resolution to decline all subtlety of speech,
or curiosity of Language, that no impressions might be made upon you, save what
arise from the verity and apparent certainty of its Contents: It is falsehood,
imposture, and the delusive opinions of the world, that need, and are usually
supported by the artifice of words.

In matters dubious and opinionative, though I have thought fit to declare my
judgment, and acquaint you with the reasons and grounds that have inclined me;
yet I would not have you therefore give up your assents thereunto, for Paternal
Authority does not extend so far; but for what is plain, and agreeable to the
rules of Virtue, and Gods Sacred Word, and therefore universally acknowledged,
here you are bound up, and obliged in your lives to a strict observation
thereof.

I have not writ it methodically, with dependence of one Chapter upon another;
nor does the nature of the Subjects bear it: Besides my business in the world
has been much, especially in my own profession; I have writ it by piecemeal,
and as the several subjects came into my mind, and therefore it is no wonder
they they have no dependence one upon another: They may each be separately
considered, as need shall require, and the Table direct. Methods are for what
is Scholastical, written for Sale, and Fame; neither of which are by me
intended. Besides I never purpose it shall go abroad, and therefore the
homeliness of the dress attended with truth's plainness will not misbecome it.

I design it also as well for my Daughters as my Sons: though some things
therein are peculiar to men, yet much of it is of equal concernment to the
Female Sex, who also may have male Children, and as they are mine, I allow them
an equal title to it: Women of middling quality esteem things worthy, rather
more than men, are generally less vicious, better guarded with modesty, have
less temptations, and a great love to Virtue and Goodness, give an easier
assent to what is just, unless biassed by their Husbands interest, or
prevailing power: And therefore I intend this Book as much for them as my Sons:
not doubting but that they will, and that more frequently peruse it, more
deliberately and seriously weigh the contents of it, because their business
will not be so much, nor their diversions so frequent, as those of my Sons: I
bestow it therefore with a like alacrity and expectation upon them, and expect
at least answerable fruits as from my male Children.

Lastly, let no imputation remain upon me, if I have in the progress of this
Book mentioned the same things upon several occasions more than once; for being
I was it may be, two or three years in writing it, it is no wonder if my memory
did not retain the sense of the whole: Tautologies in this case are not so
disallowable, the intention being good, and the matter necessary.

May it have an influence upon your minds, suitable to the affectionate desires
of my heart, that you may be no dishonor to your Country, nor no blemish to
your Family: That however others demean themselves, it may be truly said, that
you all, and your Families will serve the Lord, in truth and sincerity of
heart, in all Godliness, and Honesty, and so my blessing be upon you all, and
the blessing of him who is the Author of all Beings, the Eternal God.

Thus I am, dear Children, Your Affectionate Father, HUMPHREY BROOK.

Of Man's happiness: and wherein it consists.
THE two great Ends that men are to aim at in this World, are First to live
happily here, and Secondly to obtain the utmost assurance that man can attain
to of being in the number of the blessed hereafter. Both these are no otherwise
to be had, but by the acquisition of Wisdom and Goodness. Now the beginning or
foundation of true Wisdom is the fear of God: so the Wise man has expressed it in
the Counsel to his Son, Proverbs 1. v. 7. The Fear of the Lord is the beginning
of Wisdom, but Fools hate knowledge and instruction: Fools indeed? for what
greater argument of folly can there be than to contemn the means of Happiness:
or to seek it in those ways where it is not to be found: A rich man may be
miserable, and so may they be who are dignified with Titles: A Politic worldly
man creates trouble and perplexity to himself and others, and in all his
grandeur, if he deviates from the paths of Justice, Wisdom and goodness, is
fur-rounded with difficulties, eaten up with cares, condemned by himself; and
the nearer he comes to his journeys end, the greater are his horrors, from the
review of his vain designments, the apprehension of Death, and his fears of
what must ensue after it.

Having therefore a mean esteem of these gaudy nothings, or splendid Vanities,
my first advice to you, my Son, is to have a right apprehension of God, so far
as he has been pleased to manifest himself, which he has fully done both as to
the excellency and perfection of his Being, the glorious explications of his
Wisdom, and singular emanations of his Goodness. He is the only God, there is
none besides him: all things in this world, yea the World it self, the Heavens
and the Earth are the workmanship of his hands: their being and duration are at
his pleasure: with a word he made them, and with a word, when he sees it in his
wisdem fit, he can destroy them. Just ground there is therefore for our fear of
him, and that our chiefest love should be fixed upon him, in comparison to whom
there is nothing valuable, how dear soever in our esteem; nor can we place any
hopes of steadfast happiness, but in our exact obedience to his will and
commands. You are therefore, my Son, to plant the fear and love of him in your
heart, and in all the actions and undertakings of your life you are well to
consider that they bear a strict conformity to his will. No other design, aim
or interest, is to bear sway with you, or hold any proportion in your thoughts.
This Counsel if you well observe, which with the true affection of a Father I
lay before you, your life will be full of delight, the World you pass through,
will be as a garden of sweet smelling flowers, beyond that of Paradise, all
afflictions will be easy, death it self lovely, without sting, without
affrightment, a passage from lesser bliss to greater: To your Fathers House,
the Mansions of the blessed. And therefore, my dear Son, let it have preference
in your mind, let no allurements make you decline it, 'twill be a guide to your
feet, and a lanthorn to the dark paths of your difficult journey through this
Earthly Pilgrimage. Remember, he gives you this Counsel who speaks from great
experience, and greater affection, it is the fruit of all my labors, and the
result of the best observations your affectionate Father has made in the whole
course and progress of his life. Esteem not this therefore as slight and
customary advice, spoken in course or for formality; it is, my Son, what I am
most serious in, and what I prefer before all other Rules or directions I shall
hereafter give, or can (with my utmost intention of doing thee good) be
insisted upon. And therefore what ever esteem you have of the rest, be sure to
give admittance to this, even into the inmost recess of your heart. Look upon
God Almighty as the most excellent Being, that has given life and existence to
all things that are, and by his Wisdom disposes, preserves and continues all
things according to his pleasure, until he shall think meet to put a period to
this world: Be frequent in contemplation of this, then will thou truly love and
honor him, then also will that love, or the dread of his Majesty restrain thee
from every evil action, and put thee in most certain capacity of being happy.

No Conversation with Atheists.
With those who deride Religion or impiously dispute Gods providence, hold no
intimacy, and as near as you can no society: they take off the necessary
restraints of the mind, let Conscience loose, remove the distinctions of Virtue
and Vice, nay they make Virtue the weakness, and Vice joined with wit and
subtilty the strength of the mind: they weaken the principles of Nature, and
the additional graces of Christianity: set up interest and self respect in the
place of Justice, and universal Love; and instead of continuing man as God left
him, like himself in common and diffusive affection, they straiten him, and
shut him up in himself, excluding all just regard to others, in which respect
chiefly man is said to be created in the likeness of his Maker. Let me beseech
thee therefore, my Son, to avoid these, as the bane of humane Society; beware
lest thou be tainted by the enticements of their Wit, to jest away thy
Conscience and Religion, and with them both the peace of thy mind, and thy
reputation among good men.

The best means to avoid Atheism.
To avoid this, and to impress more deeply upon thy Spirit a just and becoming
adoration of the Goodness, Wisdom, Power and Justice of the Eternal Being, in
making and preserving this glorious World, let thy thoughts be often in serious
contemplation of the particular parts thereof, not nicely, or disputatively, to
show thy Parts to others, but to heighten thine own admiration, and adoration
of that Godhead, who gave form, existence, and order to them all. Look often
upon the never sufficiently to be admired bodies of the Sun and Moon, consider
the glory of their luster, their scarce apprehensible magnitude, and less
apprehensible swiftness: the regularity of their diurnal, monthly and annual
motions: their radiations and influences upon the several parts of the Earth:
with many other useful cogitations, which upon sight of these Luminaries, will
easily raise thy thoughts to a higher pitch, and then thou can not choose but
with great reverence adore the power that made them. Please thy self often with
viewing the infinity of the Stars, of great extent in themselves, and yet
placed at such a distance, as to appear so minute, so sparkling, so pleasing to
the eye, so useful to the World. Consider the vast expansion of the Firmament,
which contains all those immense bodies, its various appearances, contents,
productions: the different and many times stupendous forms of Clouds, the
irruptions of Thunder, the dartings of Lightning; the curious body of the Air,
and therein the thickning of the Clouds into Rain, with the manenr of its fall
upon the Earth, the generation of Frost, Snow, Ice, and Hail: the variations of
Seasons: these and all of these fashioned by the inscrutable and only to be
admired Wisdom of our great and good God: who in the making of them had
principal regard to the benefit and accommodation of this Globe of Earth, and
the conservation of those Creatures he has replenished it withal. If we can
give esteem to him that dexterously makes a Watch, Clock, or any other neat or
useful engine for humane use, how must we be transported with wonder and even
swallowed up with admiration of the infinitely glorious Author of the visible
heavens, and of what is contained therein? But look nearer home: and let thy
thoughts move over this Globe of Earth; little, compared to the Heavens and
many of the bodies therein contained, being but as a point in the
circumference: and yet to us and our imagination, a most capacious round;
containing vast Countries, immense Seas, affording habitation and giving
sustenance, to almost an infinite number of Creatures in their various species,
much more in their individuality. See therein the different seasons, face,
temper, and constitution of both Earth and Seas consider the various products
of them both, in all the kinds both of the animal, vegetable, and mineral
classes. Consider the different figures of Animals, not only specifical but
even personal, the curious feature, frame, and connection of parts: the actions
and usefulness of every particle even in the most minute animals, the constant
conformity of nature, as if all things were framed in a mould, the difference
in life and manners of one Animal from another, the instinctive knowledge of all
animals, and the exercise of all the actions of parts without a teacher: the
tenderness and care of the most fierce and boisterous animals in preserving
their young ones, and rearing them to a state of being helpful to themselves:
the accurate formation of parts, so as not only to be in the best manner fitted
for the performance of what is to each part assigned, but also with best
provision for security: the connection and dependence of all the parts of the
universe; and lastly the dignity and prerogative of Man, appointed Gods
Vicegerent upon Earth, to rule and govern all, in subordination to his Maker,
with a power limited and derived, Paternal and Oeconomical, for common
conservation, not tyrannical, for spoil and destruction. The protection and
good government of all other creatures, together with the contemplation and
admiration of the works of God, are the great business of man here: for God
having made no other creature capable of these two offices, and qualified man
in an abundant manner two fitness for discharge thereof, it is clearly employed
that these are two and those no considerable ends of his creation.

Galen when in his Tract of the use of parts, L. 6. c. 13.
he had given a just description thereof, and a reasonable guess at the use and
office of every part, he concludes that the great Artificer chose in all things
what was best, and that nothing could be better or indeed otherwise have been
done. That he writ that Book as a Hymn in praise of the Creator, L. 3. c. 10.
and that Piety consisted more in searching out the Wisdom of God and declaring
it to others, than in offering to him whole Hecatombs or other rich and costly
Sacrifices. That God envied his Creatures nothing that was good or convenient
for them, but endowed them all with parts, composure and ornature expedient. To
be able to do this was a high demonstration of his wisdom, and to have done it
is as signal a proof of his goodness. That there is as great a demonstration of
the sapience of the chief Artificer in framing the most minute and
inconsiderable Creature, as in making the Sun, Moon and Stars; and that he can
no more be imitated by any other in the formation of those than in the
fabrication of these more glorious bodies.

Let it be no wonder that Galen, bred up in the Idolatry of the Gentiles,
should have such worthy thoughts of this Worlds Architect; for there cannot be
a more convincing argument of a Deity, than the contemplation of Nature, his
workmanship, unless he himself should appear in his own person, which would be
too glorious for the eyes of humane frailty to behold. The world has been much
mistaken in thinking those the greatest Atheists, who most contemplate the
works of God in Nature: this slight opinion has been furthered by the artifice
of Divines, who conclude because many Physicians, and other discerning men see
beyond their narrow conceptions, and though they are sincerely Religious, yet
not making show of it, according to that particular form and modification
thereof, which they out of Interest have fashioned and set up, they therefore
take a rude freedom to condemn them as Irreligious: or subtly distinguish
them from themselves and followers, as Naturalists, or Moralists, two names
that God Almighty in their genuine sense never esteemed a dishonor to mankind,
the one referring to the adoration of God in his works of Nature, the other in
squaring the actions of his life, which are properly called his manners,
agreeable to the Rules which God has writ in the heart of man, and exemplified
in his Holy Word. It is unreasonable to imagine that the daily seeing God (for
in every the least Insect or Flower he is seen) should beget a denial of him:
It is not this kind of knowledge has done it, but that which does Inflare
animam, puff up the mind: The explorators of Nature, finding the many
difficulties they cannot but meet withal, and the shortness of their own
abilities to see through, and make any reasonable discovery of the uses and
offices of parts; cannot but take down their Topsails, and make them confess
that their Science must end in Admiration: whereas they who have acquired a
knowledge not grounded upon Nature, only speculative, talkative, artificial,
and so distinguished from what is real and Natural; pride themselves in their
own conceptions, think highly of themselves, despise nature, and by degrees,
first in their actions, which are no way natural, affront and oppose God, and
afterward are forced, though covertly and subtly, to avow it in their
discourses. An Antidote against this is the contemplation of Nature, and
therefore I would have thee often see God in that Book; and when thou art, as
thou can not choose but be, confirmed in the reality of his existence and of
his providence, furnish thy mind in the next place with the knowledge of his
Will and Commands, by the assistance of the two great lights, the one of thy
Conscience, the other of the Scriptures.

Of Conscience.
That God might not leave us ignorant either of good or evil, and that we might
be without excuse, In the first formation of man, the Almighty has planted
this light in his Breast, which is to us, as the Sun to the Aerial and Earthly
Globe; and though the Sun may seem sometimes to be eclipst, yet properly to
speak, it never was since it was first in the Firmament, neither is ever like
to be until God shall put a period to its duration: Nor can man be truly said
to be without this Intrinsic light, it ever shines within, and shows him in
all cases, what he is to do, though we not only frequently, but almost
continually, shut our eyes against it, and walk as if we were in perpetual
darkness.

In this particular God has been equally good to all the sons of men; and
though in reference to some privileges and dispensations, he made choice of
the Jews for his peculiar people, yet of this light they had but their share
with all other People: else all the rest of the World might justly plead
Ignorance of Gods commands, and evade the punishments due for their
miscarriages, but that they had always a Remembrancer within, to prompt them
and direct them in every action of their lives.

This in several ages and in several Countries has been sometimes for
Interest, and sometimes through Ignorance, clouded by the imposition of various
and improper names: but it is most truly and familiarly known by the name of
Nature, the light of Nature, and Conscience; which last implys that there is
something within us that knows together with us, what is good and bad: I mean
not any thing distinct from us, but something which God was pleased when he
made us to breath into us, and which can never be effaced or annihilated in us,
being of too curious and sublime an essence, above the possibility of man's most
malicious endeavors: and therefore though frequently by the assaults of
corrupt interest, of vice and the highest debauchery, by the efforts of witty
Atheism, by the damps of drowsy inconsideration and incogitancy, men have
attempted to raze and extirpate this radical light of Conscience, yet have they
never been able to accomplish in any measure their purpose, but have even in
the very attempt been countermin'd, by the forcible and invincible suggestions
and workings of that within them which they would destroy: our great God having
besides the manifest and irresistible argument of the Creation, the undeniable
demonstration of Miracles, the almost universal consent of Mankind, besides all
these I say he has placed in every man a beam of himself, a Radiation from the
Throne of his own glory, enlightening his dark body, without which, man would be
but as other irrational creatures: Such care did Almighty God take not to have
man without a witness of God in himself, that whilst other creatures were
looking downwards, taking no notice of his excellent wisdom to be seen in
every part of this worlds artifice, his noblest creature man might be taken up,
with a continual contemplation thereof, not only in order to the advance of
Gods glory (for that is an end below the Almightiness of God) but loving
Mankind above all the other parts of his Creation, he made him capable of this
ravishing pleasure, in some proportion agreeable to what we are to have in the
Eternal Mansions of his Heavenly Kingdom.

Another and very considerable end of that sacred light of Conscience is to
instruct us in our behavior (whilst we live here) toward all others of the
same kind with our selves, toward our selves also, and toward all the other
parts of the Creation.

Give ear, my dear child, and take instruction from the light of thy own
Conscience, in thy demeanor toward all the rest of thy fellow creatures; and
in doing so, especially observe that universally allowed, but rarely practiced,
rule of Doing unto others as thou would be done unto thy self. And for the
better fulfilling thereof, let me advise thee in every action of Justice, where
any matter depends between thee and thy Brother, put thy self into the capacity
of both persons, and what thou would not have done to thee, were thou in his
condition, that be sure thou do not to him in the same condition: Let not a
little profit, or the passionate obtaining of thy will, sway thee from this
Heavenly rule: Remember, it is the mind and will of God, and that God placed it
within thee for thy observance: Whilst it was observed, the world was in its
state of Integrity, and nothing under a series of Miracles, can reform the
World, or reduce it to its desirable state again, but the general observation
of this Rule. However, my Son, let it be the practice of thee and thine:
consider with thy self that a little gain, the fulfilling thy appetite or
satisfying thy passion, can hold no proportion being put into the opposite
scale with the favor of God, the love and respect of good men, the peace and
quiet of thy own spirit, which are indeed the greatest blessings upon Earth.
Almost all the mischiefs that are in the world arise from not observing this
rule: and yet it is allowed by all; it was given by God, it was exemplified by
Christ, it is the fulfilling of the Laws of the Second Table, it is the rule of
the Municipal Laws of all well governed Countries, it is of that universal
esteem that never any one had the confidence to make an objection against it;
and therefore as an abbreviation of all good Laws, let it be the Touchstone, my
Son, of all thy actions toward others, by which thou may easily examine, and
restrain thy self, when thou art about to do any injustice to thy neighbor.

This sacred light within us is so radically fixed, that it cannot by the utmost
endeavors that man has used, be utterly effaced: for the most wicked men, who
would fain have believed that there is no God, and consequently no Conscience;
that so the fear of a Deity being removed, they might more freely indulge
themselves in the satisfaction of their Lusts and Wills; have never been able
to accomplish that end: but have that Conscience, which they would stifle,
vigorously working within them, and it self a revenger of their Crimes. And
therefore Caligula and Nero, men infamous for their wickedness, having
committed foul actions, secretly, and which they knew no earthly power could
punish, have yet had day and night before their eyes the horrors of an
awakened and revenging Conscience, which embitter'd all the Pleasures which
they fancied to themselves by the suppression of this unextinguishable light or
rather ^ire within them, maugre all the art and endeavors they could use to
prevent it.

This is attested by that of the Apostle to the Romans, c. 2. v. 15. where he
vindicates the justice of God, for that the Gentiles had the Law written in
their hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the
mean while accusing or excusing one another. Man knows that Divine Laws are to
be observed: if he fails, let him be himself the Judge, his Conscience is the
Witness, and then comes in that indubitable saying, Se judice, nemo nocens
absolvitur: So that let him hide from the world what he can, he carries himself
about him, and though he bears it proudly off, he knows himself a guilty
person, deserving those punishments, which it may be he sits as Judge to
inflict on others. From the sense of this verity, Menander a Greek Poet has
this expression, (...).
No Faults can escape, for in his Breast
Man carries God, his Conscience test.
So Cicero in his Oration for Milo: Great is the force of Conscience to both
purposes, by means of which they who do no evil, fear not: and they who are
wicked, have the dread of punishment ever before them. It may be laid asleep
sometimes, as it is whilst wicked actions are committing; the gust of
pleasure, profit, or revenge, that while taking up, and wholly possessing the
thoughts; but it will certainly awake again, and bring with it those perplexing
thoughts, which the Poets express by Infernal furies. Take therefore, my Son,
the advice of wise Socrates, study Conscience more than Fame, justify thy self
to thy self, by a life of Integrity, rather than to the World, by specious
shows of pretended Honesty, external acts of Religion, plausible appearances of
Virtue: for though thou may abuse the credulous world, which for the most
part judge from the outside, and dissembled actions of men, yet God and thy
Conscience are within thee, from whose irresistible light no man can conceal
himself.

Next consider the regards thou owe to thy self: It may be thou think thou
have full and absolute power over thy own body and mind: But it is a mistake,
my Son, for thy authority over those is bounded by certain rules of Equity;
there is also a greater right even to these than thou can lay claim to, the
right of him that made them; who can gainsay it? and then the right of him that
redeemed them, ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your
bodies and your Spirits, which are Gods: We were once lost, my Son, to all
intents and purposes, forfeited to the displeasure of God, for breach of his
commandments; what is included in that forfeiture is dreadful to imagine: think
then, how justly we owe our selves to him, who by shedding his own blood,
rescued us from the Curse, the pain and penalty of Gods disfavour: We are
therefore Christ's; and shall we take the members of Christ, and abuse them
with falsehood, uncleanness, bestiality, or any vicious habit that may leave a
blemish or reproach upon them? No, my dear Son, have it in thy serious regard
rather to preserve them pure and unspotted, fit habitations for the holy Spirit
to dwell in: This is truly loving thy self; which consists not in the
pleasing thy humors, indulging thy passions; these are sickly and fading
pleasures; nor yet in the accumulation of Wealth, the acquisition of Honor,
the gaining power over thy enemies, all these have many bitternesses joined
with them; but in the subduing thy Inclinations to Vice, reducing thy Spirit to
the Laws of Reason and Nature, recovering thy body and mind to such a frame, as
that they may take pleasure in nothing but what is conducing to health, and
agreeable to the rules of Virtue, and the pattern of our great Master, the
Universal Savior. This is truly self-love, and allowable, in no opposition to
those duties we owe God, and that affection we owe to our Neighbor, which is
to be extended and conformed to this self-love we are thus to show unto our
selves.

I know very well, my Son, that the light of thy mind is very agreeable to
this, and that thou will easily confess that all other self-love, which is
vicious and hurtful either to thy body or thy mind, or detrimental and
injurious to thy Brother, as it is expressly forbidden in holy writ, so is it in
direct opposition to the light of unperverted Nature, which having imprinted in
all of us a love to our selves, and intending thereby the doing good to our
selves, cannot be understood of any thing that is damageable to our bodies or
our mind, as all vicious acts or habits most certainly are.

The last particular wherein the light of Nature and thy Conscience is to guide
thee, relates, my Son, to thy carriage and comportment toward the other parts
of the Creation. Here indeed through long persuasion of injurious custom man is
apt to extend his power and prerogative much beyond what I believe God Almighty
intended: for it is not in the least credible, that our good God who is all
compassion, who was as well the maker of those Creatures as of man himself, and
who when he had made them, upon a pleasing view of them, was delighted
therewith, and saw all to be very good, should ever intend that man should make
such mischievous and unrelenting havoc amongst them, as he has used for many
ages. It Is true, he gave man dominion over them, as being the most excellent
Creature in his first formation, fitly qualified with a supereminent proportion
of Reason's light, to be a superintendent over the Beasts, and the substitute
of his Maker: But it is a very great question whether this power extended
further than to oversee and govern them, to keep them to the regularity of
their natures, to secure the weak against the strong: at leastwise it seems
much to be so, until after the flood; for which almost 2000 years his food was
not of their flesh, but the Herbage of the Earth, and the Fruits of Trees.

And when his liberty was afterward farther extended, and that there was an
allowance to feed upon other Creatures, there was a caution set, that it might
be done with as little cruelty as might be, But the flesh with the blood, which
is the life thereof, thou shall not eat: as if God would have the form first
altered, that so there might be less appearance of bloodthirstiness and
cruelty. And it is very reasonable to think, that this also was done in
compliance with the weakness of Man, against which God was not willing to
strive any longer: but as Moses complied with the Israelites in some
particulars for the hardness of their hearts, so did the Almighty out of
kindness and tenderness to man dispense with his first intention, to lay the
greater obligation upon him for submission and obedience to his other commands.
However this is but my opinion, and may be received or rejected according as
thy mind upon further inquisition into the matter can inform it self.

This though is to be allowed, that at first man's diet was of things without
the animal life, during which time his life was long, and consequently
healthful. It seems therefore very natural, agreeable to Gods first purpose, of
great accord with Reason, that what man cannot make, and what has sense and
feeling of pain, and love to its own life, he should not wantonly or cruelly
destroy: But in this be thou left my Son to thy own liberty. I had some
thoughts in thy education to have brought thee up with an abhorrency of flesh,
and the killing of any Creature, but being at that time my only child, and I at
an uncertainty what the issue might be, being born of those who have been bred
up with flesh, I was easily persuaded to alter that resolution: That therefore
that I shall enjoin thee in this particular is to do it with as little
eagerness and cruelty as may be, to avoid what possibly thou can the killing
any thing with thine own hands: To take no pleasure, in that which is
vexatious, painful, or destructive to other Creatures. I would have thee hate
the barbarous custom of throwing at Cocks, of making it a sport to kill a Cat
or other Animal: and consequently of Hunting, Hawking, Fowling, Fishing,
Cock-fighting; but direct thy pastimes rather to things harmless, wherein
neither thy self nor any Creature suffers; and to this thou will be very
inclinable, when thou considerest the excellent Wisdom and curious Artifice
which God Almighty has shown, in forming and fashioning the parts of every
Animal, Bird, Beast, Fish, Insect, far exceeding, in every little Creature, and
in all its most minute members, the utmost that the Wit or Contrivance of man
can attain unto.

And to incline thee the more to this I would have thee sometimes consider that
several sorts and Sects of men, of greatest repute in the World for an honest
and good life, and many excellent particular Persons have wholly refused flesh,
and lived well and in good state of health without it, their minds have also
been far more Philosophical and far more easily subdued by reason:

The Turks, Indians, and many other people we are pleased to account Barbarous,
are in this particular, from instinct of Nature, much more tender than we
Christians (to our shame be it spoken) And though in their Sacrifices they have
been lavishly profuse, as the Jews also were, yet was it done chiefly in the
service of God, for atonement and appeasement of the offended Deity, or what
they esteemed so; But the meekness and compassionate temper of Christianity,
has to the Honor of our Religion exploded all bloody sacrifices, no small
argument that God is pleased with a repentant mind, sorrow for, and desertion
of Sin, rather than in taking away the lives of the innocent, to satisfy for
the offenses of the guilty.

Besides, my Son, nothing takes away that sweet remorse of mind, and bowels of
compassion, which the Apostle calls Natural Affection, more than actions of
blood; and therefore no people whatsoever are more barbarously savage and
relentless than Soldiers: upon this account also it is, that Butchers and
Surgeons are excluded from being Jurymen upon Life and Death, because one of
them being frequently engaged about Wounds, Ulcers, making incisions in the
flesh and amputating of Members, the other in daily slaughters, ransacking the
Bowels, dividing and dismembering meek and innocent Creatures: from this
frequency in blood, they were not thought fit to be trusted with the lives of
men, the meekness and compassion of Nature being supposed by the Barbarity of
those actions to be worn out in them.

A good man is full of mercy to his Beast, and great reason, my Son, it should
be so: we receive many considerable advantages from them, why should we then
show any severity toward them? It is much to be feared that the sowrness and
cruelty of some of them to others, is, if not occasioned, yet much heightened by
us; and it is promised in the blessed estate of Restoration, that all
antipathies shall be taken away, that the Lion and the Lamb shall lie down
together: Let me persuade thee therefore, my dear one, to fit thy mind for such
a state, and so to live at present as if it were already established: So shall
thou fulfill the desire of thy Father, and which is much more, be merciful, as
our Universal Father, the God of Heaven, is merciful.

Agreeable to this Light of Nature, is that Light which God out of his great
good will to man, has given us for revival and recovery of the other: I mean
that of the Scriptures, concerning which I would have thee, my Son, observe
these following particulars.

Of the Scriptures.
1. Be very conversant in them, for besides that they contain the best
directions for the guidance of thy actions, thou shall find in them also the
Treasures of Life, all that God has been pleased to communicate to man
concerning his future Estate: In both these particulars thou ought highly to
esteem them. As to the first, If all that had been written by the Sages and
Philosophers of any Nation, in any or all the Ages of humane life, if all
Glosses, Comments, Lectures, Sermons, polemical Discourses, or other Treatises
upon the Scriptures, were wholly and irrecoverably lost, thou should not need
to afflict thy self, but rather to be comforted in the consideration, that thy
mind shall not now be distracted by the various opinions, imposed Authorities,
and numerous contradictions of others, but come to this Fountain of Knowledge,
with a pure and unpossess'd heart, not biased or prejudicated, by the
interest, wit, abilities, or fallacies of others; and receive in, wholesome and
sound precepts, agreeable to Original and unperverted Nature, to the good
pleasure of the God of Nature, comfortable to thy own Soul, and beneficial to
all the parts of the Creation.

2. Though the whole and every part of the Bible is to be of great esteem and
Authority with thee, yet does the History of our Saviors life, the Registers
of his sayings, and actions; and also of his Disciples, and Apostles, with
their particular Rules and Directions, given to the several Churches then
established, these I say do contain more express prescripts of Christian
Religion, and so more nearly oblige those who have enrol'd themselves under the
profession of Christianity, and therefore (not neglecting the other) here thou
ought to be most conversant.

3. Read the Scriptures always with regard to the main end; viz. to better thy
Knowledge, for emprovement of thy life. Be not ambitious of the name of an able
Disputant, for the ardour of their zeal, is commonly spent upon their
Antagonist. It is dangerous to be too able that way, and the occasion of
dividing Christ's Seamless Coat, into many pieces; If thy Brother will not be
convinced by plain truth, the express words of Scripture, thou shall never gain
him: Interest and some near concernment holds him fast: Pity him and leave him:
for why should thou perplex thy self with a man that lives by his opinions,
and who (if nothing else will serve) must render thee by any false suggestions
odious to his Auditors; thereby to weaken the credit of what thou urgest, be it
never so apparent and expressly grounded upon Scripture? His reputation must be
salv'd, for thereupon depends his livelihood, and thou shall be but in the
predicament with those who spoke against Diana and her shrines; gaining to thy
self the name of a turbulent fellow, seditious and not fit to live. Be neither
of them, nor engage imprudently against them: acquire knowledge for thy self,
thy family, friends, and all such as seek it for the bettering of their lives,
and leave the disputative part to those different interests, collateral and
extrinsick to Christianity, contenting thy self with what is plain, universally
allowed; which will be amply sufficient to build thy hopes upon, and direct
thee in the Tracts and Courses of thy life.

4. Side not with this or that Sect or Faction in Religion, but follow what the
Scriptures clearly and plainly hold forth: Be neither Papist, Episcopist, nor
Presbyterian, nor Independent, nor Anabaptist, nor Quaker, nor of any other
particular appellation, who for some notion peculiar to themselves, are thereby
distinguished from others: Be a Christian, and take thy denomination from our
great Master, the Author and founder of our Religion, Christ, the Anointed of
God: If Apollos dissent from Cephas, and opine something of peculiarity to
himself, must the Members of Christ divide, and flock into distinct parties? It
is not reasonable to be so: This is not the interest of Christianity, but of
private persons (for so they may justly be named in respect to the whole)
Leaders of these Sects, who are supported by these divisions, who now know so
well how to improve them, as to live gloriously and splendidly upon them: and
raise a heat and zeal in the people, as high and impetuous, as if the strife
were about the very fundamentals and realities of Religion. Peradventure thou
may find something in the Scriptures that may seem to import as much as this
or that particular sort of men hold forth, and yet I see no reason thou
should be of them, and thereupon divide from all the rest: If it be true,
and expressly in Scripture, thou believe it as thou art a Christian; let that
be sufficient: Probably that Sect that maintains it, has many other opinions,
which the Scriptures are dark in; and hold not forth but in a wrested sense: By
being of that party thou intitlest thy self to them all, and art obliged to
maintain them. By my consent, if the Generals will needs have a War, let them
fight it out themselves: do not thou partake nor interest thy self in their
Quarrels. Let thee and thy House serve the Lord in peace; or at least fight
only under Christ's Banner, against Hypocrisy, Atheism, oppression, and
whatsoever else our Lord and Master declared against.

5. Believe what is in the general current of the Scriptures, and if any
particular Text do seem to oppose it, give not easy credit thereunto: thou
may fail in the understanding thereof, or some mistake may have been in the
Translation or derivation from the first delivery thereof: but certainly there
can be none in those particulars, which are the main scope and drift of that
book, and which also agree with the current of other parts of Scriptures. Many
Opinions thou will find which have their foundation only upon one or two dark
places of Scriptures hard to be understood, and capable of another sense than
what is imposed: this I conceive the most reasonable and safe way; and
therefore commend it unto thee.

6. In reading the Scriptures, use thine own understanding, and take the whole
sense together, with what goes before, and comes after: for a Verse taken alone
may be hard to be understood, or bear a sense different from what it does
together with the context: for want of this many errors have been broached: as
also by the glosses of Commentators, who first assume their opinions, and then
incline the Scriptures all they can to the maintenance thereof. When thou
meetest with any thing difficult to be understood, ponder upon it well first
with thy own brain, and if thou can not so attain to the satisfactory
understanding thereof, because it may be it depends upon some usage or custom
of the Jews, Romans, or other Nation, or for that it is not well rendered by the
Translators, search the Antiquities of these times or places, examine the
Original if thou can, or consult the opinions and explication of those
Authors who are most learned, and especially of such as are most esteemed for
integrity, and least obnoxious to self-interest, or the service of any party;
yet so consider what is said by them, as that thou may not be swayed by
their Authority or popular estimation, but ever use thy own understanding, and
be judge for thy self of what thou read, making always Truth and nothing
else, the end of thy search, that as near as thou can nothing may be
entertained by thee, but what is consonant thereunto, and that by thus using
thy parts, thou may be at all times able to give an account to others of
what thou believe, as therewith to satisfy thy self.

Lastly, Let me enjoin thee never to speak slightly or irreverently of the
Scriptures: for it is the way that leads to the doubting of God and his
Providence: The most undeniable instances and demonstrations of both we have
from thence: For though natural Religion afford us great demonstrations of the
reality and necessity of a Divine Being; and the continuance of the World in
its just order implies that the same Transcendent Being takes cares in the
regulation and preservation of what he has made: yet would these natural
impressions daily fade, and impair in us, were they not frequently revived by
the instructions of good men and the frequent hearing and perusal of the Holy
Scriptures: And let it be ever spoken to the Honor of that Divine Book, that
all the good documents therein contained, are but lively expressions of what
God first wrote with his own finger in the Table of our hearts. All these
reluctancies and shudderings of Conscience, these drawings back and internal
whispers against proceeding in any evil action (which the better we are, the
more urgent we find) are but Conservators of the first Copy and original of the
Laws, by which God Almighty intended to bound Mankind, and which he after
exemplified in the Life of Christ, and in the Rules which occasionally flowed
from him and his followers. The best Municipal Laws that any Country, or any
Order of men have contrived for the happiness of man's Life, and preservation of
the public Peace, are abundantly short of what is in this Book contained; and
wherein any Laws of men are opposite to the Rules of Scripture, there may
thou safely conclude, that they are not good, or for a good end established;
but in order to some unworthy and indirect Interest, which intimately examine,
and tho^ shall find it in equal opposition to the Life and Doctrines of our
blessed Jesus. Keep therefore, my Son, close to the instructions of this
Heavenly Book, have it always in just respect and reverence, prefer it before
all the Writings in the World, examine all laws, practices, and designs of men
by it. Give no ear to those loose Spirits who speak irreverently and
contemptuously of it, and though thy whole Library burn, think not thy self
unfurnished, as long as thou retainest, or can purchase the Bible.

Thus, my dear Son, have I taken some pains to persuade thee, to give all
reverence, willing submission, acknowledgement, and adoration to Almighty God,
and prompted thee thereunto from the contemplation of his works in the Creation
and Conservation of the World, and the direction of the two great and agreeable
Lights, that of Conscience, and this of the Scriptures: I shall now proceed to
the more particular actions of thy Life. For though the Light of Nature and
Scripture be a rule adaequate to whatsoever may fall out in thy Life, and which
if thou be true to thy self, will furnish thee with the knowledge of what is
best in every occurrence; yet a Fathers Love cannot rest here, but must proceed
to instructions more particular, referring especially to what I conceive may
most probably fall out, either too hard for thy opposition, as wherein I
observe men commonly to fail, or of such a nature as that men pass it over too
regardlesly and supinely, and yet in such things as are of great moment and
high concernment to the felicity or infelicity of Humane Life: In doing
whereof, I would have thee favor me so far as not to look for any exact
method; I shall not be sollicitous about it, but set down things as they come
in my mind, or occasion brings them in. In defect of a Method, I may perhaps
make thee a Table referring to the particulars; or if I do not, it will be no
time lost to make one for thy self.

Of the Fear of God.
1. Thou art often advised in Scripture to fear God, and it is said to be the
Beginning of Wisdom: This is most excellent Counsel, for he that fears God,
avoids whatsoever is Evil, and consequently ever makes the best choice, which
is the manifestation of Wisdom. Yet I would have thee understand that this
Fear ought to be inseparable from Love: It Is not such a fear as we have of a
Tyrant, whose yoke we would ever shake off, if we knew how; but such a fear as
a good Child has of a very loving Father, and is indeed no other but Love
varied in the expression: He that loves God, and follows the Dictates of that
Love, will do nothing displeasing to him: And what can Fear do more? Were Love
in perfection, there would be no Fear; Fear is therefore from the imperfection
of Love: Hence St. John says, 1 Ep. c. 4. v. 18. There is no Fear in Love, but
perfect Love casts out Fear: because Fear has torment (or pain). He that
Fears is not made perfect in Love.

Consider likewise, that Fear is the fruit of Self-Love, which prompts us to
avoid the sin only to escape the punishment: not because we detest sin, or
because it is contrary to Gods command, but that we may not endure the penalties
which are the wages of it: Such a Fear as this the Devils themselves have, it
is therefore not to be the motive against Sinning to the Children of God. He
that refrains from sin upon this account only, loses not the love and desire to
sin, and does therefore still sin in his Heart: He would not continue to be
innocent, if he could contract guilt without punishment. God will never be
displeased with obedience as it is an effect of Love, and questionless loves
them best who so obey him: Fear was put in because of the perversion of our
Natures, and because we ceast to be good, from the admiration of Gods
Excellency, and Love to Goodness, it was therefore expedient that we should
know that there were punishments which would certainly follow those who broke
his commands, and would not be restrained by Love. In the mean time take
notice, my Son, that God has most delight in uncompell'd Goodness, the sweet
bloomings and productions of Love, and therefore would have all fear resolve
into this: where virtue is delight, and goodness the pleasure of the Soul:
where Obedience has no eye to Punishment, but flows from the heart, as the Suns
rays do from its own fountain of Light. Do not the best Parents esteem those
children most who love them truest, and whose obedience is an effect of that
Love? and we reckon it somewhat a sign of a bad disposition to be good only
from fear of the Rod: Strive therefore, my Son, as the most acceptable
sacrifice to God ever and truly to love him, to love his Commands, as pleasant
in themselves; and therefore chosen by God to be his Commands: For be assured,
that God has commanded nothing but what is good for them to whom he gives it,
and delightful too, were it not for reluctancies begotten in us, either by the
perversion of nature, or the impediments which the depraved world put upon it.

Of Reading, Meditating, and going to Church.
Though Reading of good Books, and going to Church, frequent discourses with
wise and good men, Meditation with thy self, be very good means of acquiring
and improving thy knowledge, yet these things thou must not make thy end, but
the means rather for the better accomplishment of the end. The main end for
which thou take pains in all these particulars, is to lead an honest and good
life, well pleasing to God, just and regardful to thy Neighbor and thy self.
Never therefore go to Church merely for show, nor take upon thee the semblance
of that which men call Religion, for thy profit: It will denote thee a
Hypocrite, the worst and most contemptible sort of men, odious to God, to those
who are good, and in time to thy self: It debases Religion, and makes it serve
the vilest purposes: Whatever the professions of men are, and how great soever
their shows of Sanctity, from the constancy of going to Church, and the
frequency of private exercise, yet must not these things denote them true
Christians, unless the goodness of their lives, not only in their avoiding of
the most noted vices, as Whoredom, Drunkenness, Profaness, etc. but also in
forbearing and detesting the less noted, and more injurious crimes of
oppression, extortion, covetousness, hard and unjust dealing; high mindedness
and overweening of themselves, severe censuring of others, hardheartedness,
want of Charity and natural affection, which are crimes I say more destructive
to mankind, and in my opinion (not in the least to excuse the other) much more
hateful to God: Whatsoever therefore thou take up of public or private duty
(as it is called) exercise it with a sincere mind; but let thy acquisition of
Knowledge be always in order to the bettering thy life, not for vainglory or
to be esteemed better than thy Neighbor. If thy business be the Practice of
Physic, the exercise of Trade, or whatever employment else, let me forewarn
thee that thou take not up any mode of Religion in order to the improvement of
thy employment, but let that depend wholly on thy painful endeavors to acquire
a valuable ability in thy profession, and in a just and conscientious discharge
of the same.

Of Praying to God.
Besides hearing (concerning which the former paragraph is chiefly meant) there
are two other particulars, in which our applications to God Almighty chiefly
consist: And they are Praising of God, and Praying to God: concerning each of
which I shall advise thee: And first of Praying to God. Conceive, that Prayer
ought to be a serious and premeditated application to his Divine Majesty, for
the obtaining of something that we want, or the continuance of what we enjoy,
or the averting some evil we have deserved. Here we are well to consider who it
is to whom we apply our selves, that the greatest King, nay were there an
Universal Monarch of this Earthly Globe, to whom all Kings bowed, he were as
nothing, not so much in dignity as a Mote in the Sun compared to the Majesty of
Heaven, to whom notwithstanding men every day make hasty, irreverent, and
trivial applications. O my Son this is a matter of mighty weight! And therefore
whenever thou make thy addresses to God, do it with the due consideration
of the following Particulars: 1. Let thy Prayer be for what thou want, or
for the continuance of what thou have just cause to fear he will take from
thee: or averting of some deserved punishment. 2. Let it not be hastily or
unadvisedly expressed, nor mixed with numerous and impertinent particulars: but
proportioned to the quality and extent of thy want, in which the need it self
must guide thee. 3. Avoid Tautologies and vain Repetitions, which imply
affectation in Prayer, and disrespect to him thou addressest to: The Primitive
Christians were longer in fixing their hearts in a fit posture for Prayer, than
in Prayer it self; and it is very considerable that we find among them no
Prayers of length, but only private ejaculations, and the short form, that our
Savior himself has set us. 4. Take heed, that thou never make Prayer an
Opus operatum; a work done ending in it self: a form of words spoken like a
Parrot, without premeditation, and the concurrence of the mind, but from the
impulse and urgency of thy wants. 5. Pray not with doubting, but have those
just and becoming thoughts of God, that since he has permitted thee to pray, he
will certainly grant thy requests, if thou prayest as thou ought, that is,
not in formality, not out of course and custom, not to be seen of men; but
because thou art the submissive Son of a gracious Father, always ready to
hear, and infinitely able to accomplish whatsoever his obedient Children shall
request of him: if therefore we miss of what we desire, we must impute it not
to Gods unwillingness to hear, but to some great defect in our selves, for want
whereof our Prayers justly become ineffectual. 6. Consider likewise that Prayer
seems to be rather a privilege than a duty, a gracious concession to us, that
when we are in straits and difficulties, in terrors and disquiets of mind, or
bodily wants, or afflictions, we have the freedom allowed us, yea and a
fatherly invitation, to make our applications to God for relief. It Is well
pleasing indeed to God that those who are good and lead their lives in a
careful obedience to his Laws, do make their applications to his Majesty in
their distresses, but the profit redounds to our selves: and it is then God's
special time to assist his Children when they can find no other way of relief.
7. Lastly, let the ground of thy hopes in obtaining thy desires be chiefly the
goodness and mercy of God, and his promise to hear those who pray in Faith and
as they ought: But withal think not that thy honest and good life is not
necessary for obtaining thy Suit. A debauched and lewd Son has little
encouragement to expect that his Father should give him what he desires, whilst
he continues in the course of his lewdness. And though God be full of mercy,
taking delight in the exercise thereof, yet is it to the good and penitent, not
to the obstinate and contemptuous: otherwise we should make him an encourager
of what he declares against, it would also confirm men in their evil practices,
if notwithstanding the continuance in them, they have hopes to expect a supply
of new favors, when their sins afford them leisure to desire them: No my Son,
This is not to make God like, but worse than our selves, to prostitute Heavenly
blessing to vile uses: Be assured that though God gives common blessings
indiscriminately, making his Sun shine, and his Rain fall as well upon the
unjust as the just, yet are not these always the fruits of Prayer or instances
of a Fathers love, but Gods ordinary dispensations in order to the preservation
of the World; and to those who are contemptuously wicked, marks and ensigns of
their ingratitude and irreligion: All sins are impediments to the obtaining our
desires by Prayer, but especially those which are in contrariety to mercy,
meekness and sincerity, the proper virtues of Prayer; such as pride,
hypocrisy, especially in the act of Prayer, and above all, lust, hard
heartedness, and wrath; for why should we expect that God should grant us
forgiveness, or other signal favors, when at the same time, we foster severe
and cruel purposes toward our brother perhaps much better than our selves?
Consider these things my Son, that thy applications to Almighty God may be
fitly qualified, that so thou may with serenity of mind, and Christian
confidence approach the Throne of Grace, and keep thy self in his favor, who
is able and willing to do for us abundantly more than is in our hearts to
desire, being more ready to hear, than we are forward upon allowable grounds to
make our applications to him.


Of Praising God.
As to the Second Duty of Praising God, we ought to be exceeding instant in it:
It Is the great business and end of our lives: for God has been so bountiful in
the supplying of our wants, that we should be much more frequent in Praising
him, than in praying to him. Now the best kind of Praising God consists chiefly
in acknowledging his absolute power and Sovereignty over the World, as being
the maker, and during his pleasure, the preserver thereof: in admiring his
Wisdom, and the excellency of his Goodness, Mercy, and Compassion toward men:
and in the conformation of our lives agreeable to his will. Thus we and all
Creatures should be always praising God, letting our light so shine forth unto
men, that they may glorify our Father which is in Heaven. And doubtless this
Praise in the life, being seated in the heart, is much to be preferred, before
what is formal and in course, though seemingly done with more devotion, whether
we consider it for its constancy or reality: Thus did our Savior and his
followers praise God, in letting man see, that they denied and rejected all the
specious vanities of the World, Wealth, Honor, Power and Preeminence,
preferring God's favor before that of Princes, and enduring all that the World
counts calamitous, in hopes of enjoying his presence, and a cohabitation with
Angels in the Eternal Heavens. The mercies we receive are daily and hourly,
such and so frequent ought to be the lifting up of our hearts. To praise God in
show, and at set times, and to deny him in the actions of our lives, cannot but
be an abomination to God, a Sacrifice his Soul can take no delight in: And
therefore my Son whenever you make any applications to God, to give him
thanks for blessings received, let it be done with a serious and sincere
intention of mind, and with words pertinent to the occasion for which you are
to give thanks: And let your praises be chiefly manifested by the constant
obedience you show to his Precepts, preferring them before all other interests
and concernments whatsoever.

Of the Word Sacrament.
I purpose now to speak of the two Sacraments of the Reformed Church, Baptism,
and the Supper of our Lord: But first of the word Sacrament. A term you will
frequently meet with, but hardly intelligible even by the Learned, especially
when applied to the two institutions above mentioned. In its proper
signification, it is an Oath or asseveration made a sacra mente, from a holy
mind: so it was used by the Romans, especially in Military employments: It is
also taken for the same with Mysterium among the Greeks, denoting something
Secret belonging to holy things, not to be communicated to the vulgar, as the
people are often but cunningly and injuriously called. In the latter sense it is
a Priestly term, artificially devised for their Reputation, and that they may
the better impose upon the people.

In neither of these senses is it properly applicable to Baptism, and the Lords
Supper: there is no Oath given or taken in either of them, nor are they
properly Mysteries to be concealed, but institutions to be used, for the
benefit and behoof of Mankind. Look therefore upon those institutions as they
are in themselves, and not as they are clouded by an unintelligible word:
Curselleus.
concerning which a good and very learned Man wonders how it came to be
induced, and applied to such a purpose, and wishes that as by an unhappy Star,
(so he expresses it, but I think he might better have said as it was craftily
and for bad purposes) introduced, so it might for the future be abdicated, and
never applied to these holy and necessary institutions.

He mentions also one great mischief more which it has been the occasion of,
and that is the introduceing of numerous controversies and contentions in the
Church; by means whereof the minds of men have been taken up about nice and
unnecessary matters, and the bond of Brotherly love thereby dissolved.

Let us come therefore to the things themselves, and leave out this improper
appellation: which indeed makes them arcana, secret mysteries, which our
Savior when he instituted them, designed as the most easy and intelligible
matters, which in the whole affairs of Humane Life could be pitched upon.

Of Ceremonious Institutions.
The heart of man as it has been long corrupted, is very apt to neglect the
serious and solid acts of Religion, which consists in a just and holy life, and
to satisfy it self in the practice of external Rites and Ceremonies: Which the
Priests in all ages and Countries observing, and concluding that more of
reverence to themselves, and of profit likewise was to be gotten, by inventing
and encouraging them in the exercise of these external acts of seeming
devotion, than in the real acts of Sacred virtue, have not been wanting to find
out and fashion numerous Ceremonies, and commend them to the practice of
people, by which they have every where acquired great honor and riches to
themselves, eclipsing thereby the natural lights of Conscience, and the
improved methods and divine precepts of true Religion. This was manifest in the
Jewish Priests, and was the ground of those accusations which the men of God,
so called because they were prophetically and divinely inspired, did declare in
their Books of prophecy both against Priests and people, in the first for being
misleaders, and in the second for being misled, from acts of Justice and
Righteousness, to rest themselves and rely upon external Rites, of Sacrificing,
observation of times, new Moons, Sabbaths, formal Fasts, and other observances,
without designing the purification of the heart from all sorts of vice and
uncleanness: Which Complaints and Accusations of the said Prophets were smartly
seconded by the Worlds great Reformer, our ever blessed Savior, stiling those
who were, by reason of such outward performances, esteemed the most Religious,
but painted walls and Sepulchers, outwardly specious, but inwardly full of
rottenness and corruption; yea by reason of their cruelty and severity in
exacting those performances, and exercising acts of pride and injustice toward
those who were really good, a generation of Vipers.

In this kind the Gentile Priests were highly guilty, as has appeared in all
Countries, and most remarkably amongst the Greeks and Romans: whose Temples
dedicated to various Deities, as they falsely called them, were almost infinite:
whose Ceremonies were numerous, and exceedingly burdensome, invented for the
honor of their Priests, and the interest of their States, taking up a very
considerable part of the peoples time, and drawing from them no inconsiderable
proportion of their substance.

But that which is most remarkable, and much more to be abhorred, is, that upon
the plain and innocent basis of the Christian Religion, instituted by him who
thought fit to appear in the World as the Son of a Carpenter, and propagated by
men of mean professions, and common, yea for the most part unlearned education,
and this done on purpose that the Religion commended to the World might have no
gloss or esteem from its external grandeur, which God could easily have
furnished it withal; that I say which is most to be taken notice of, is, that
upon this plain and innocent basis, has been erected a superstructure of quite
different quality and condition, namely, a stately Scene of external pomp and
splendour: the representation whereof, and its discordancy from the Original
both Institutions and Founders, is visible to all eyes, but those who will not
see though matters appear never so conspicuous.

The seeming excuse to this is, that it was not to be expected, that a Church
in its infancy should be of equal accomplishment with what in process of time,
and by the endeavors of learned men it might be raised to: All things have
their season, their periods of growth and augmentation; and as long as nothing
is altered in the substance and essentials of Religion, no fault is to be found
in circumstantial additions, which by the wisdom of the Apostles successors
have been invented, as ornaments and decencies in the exercise of Religious
duties, and helps to the peoples devotion.

To this so specious a justification of what there is no foundation for in the
Original Charter, which is the good word of God, it may not unfitly be replied,

1. That the Children of this world are in their Generation wiser than the
Children of Light: How wiser? not with true wisdom which is ever attended with
truth and goodness; but with that which is worldly: Craftier they are, and
cunning to do things for their own advantage, though with shows of Honor to
God, and good to man. Can we think that God was deficient in wisdom, and so
short and weak in his establishments, as to need the additional assistance of
Man? we must not suppose it: His Institution was at first absolute and perfect:
and whatsoever is superadded is of a different piece, and though glorious in
show, it is false Coin, dishonorable to the first Institutor, though specious
and profitable to the worldly inventors.

2. That which is spoken of the Churches Infancy needing growth and
augmentation from man's wisdom, is a gross and obvious mistake. It Is not with
the Christian Religon, as with Arts and Sciences: These indeed being humane
inventions are capable of large additions, because the first beginnings being
the products of weak men could not be brought to light in their perfection; but
the Institution of Christian Religion flowing from the divine nature of Christ,
and the radiations of the blessed Spirit, were in their first establishment
pure and perfect: If Almighty God had judged those circumstantials, as we call
them, necessary, what hindered but that at first he had established them? but in
that he did not, but declining them, as we may well suppose, upon great and
weighty considerations, it may well be concluded that he judged them altogether
against the good of Mankind, and opposite to his main end, which was, that man
should be most seen in sincere actions of Piety, Truth, Mercy, Justice, and all
other real acts of Righteousness, without the formal impediments of Ceremonious
Devotion.

3. And Lastly, The invented Ceremonies are so far from being helps to
Devotions, that they are indeed diversions from it; so certainly God Almighty
in all former ages found, and his Prophets so complained of them: And therefore
our good Savior left them wholly out in his two institutions of Baptism, and
his appointed Supper: Injoyning us only these two plain and familiar actions of
washing and eating together, the one as a token of our engaging in the
Christian Religion, with a renunciation of all others, and the other to
preserve in our memories the greatest benefit that mankind could receive from
the Son of God; namely, his offering himself a Sacrifice for their
Transgressions: and of these I am now particularly to speak.

Of Baptism.
It was judged expedient that they who embraced the Christian Religion, should
by some public way manifest their desire of being a Disciple of Christ, the
establisher thereof, which was in submission to the easiest, but most
significant action of being washed with water, before which there ought to
precede a belief and acknowledgement that Christ was the Son of God, the true
Messiah, and Savior of the world: as also a Renunciation of all other
Religions, both Jewish and Gentile: a steady Repentance and Sorrow for evil
life past, and a resolution for the future to become a new man, and to observe
carefully all the Rules and Precepts left by Christ and his Apostles, in hope
and assurance of being received after this Life, into the Society and Communion
of the blessed in Heaven.

What more easy way of Induction could be contrived, than that of washing,
which amongst the Jews was a custom very familiar upon far lesser occasions,
and not unfrequent also among the Gentiles: It was what John before had
introduced, who was therefore called the Baptist: and which our Savior himself
had submitted to; not in way of Penitence, or for Remission of sins, for he was
without sin, as St. Peter testifies of him, 1 Pet. 2.22. not that by the
contact of the waters, with his pure and immaculate body, he might sanctify
them, and endow them with a regenerative power and virtue, as Jacobus de
Vitriaco with others, have but guessingly, and without ground imagined: Nor yet
that by being Baptized himself he might sanctify Baptism to others, for in
these particulars the Scripture is wholly silent: But for the reason which he
gave to St. John, when he modestly refused to do it, mentioned in Matthew. 3.15.
with which St. John was satisfied, namely; Because, he says, it becomes us to
fulfill all Righteousness: that is, all that God commands, whose precepts being
ever most just, are therefore called Righteousness. He was therefore baptized
by John who introduced the custom, and that he might by his example encourage
others to a submission to so easy and significant an Institution, which was
his express command afterward to his Disciples, Matthew 28.19.

Submission to this Institution is the duty of all Christians; for how should
we be accounted members of that Society, if we do not make our entrance
according to the Injunction? This I conceive to be the true end of its
Institution: that there is in it besides an efficacious power to wash away ones
sins, is to attribute more to it than I think was ever intended; no external
ceremony has power to cleanse the heart, and render us upon that account more
acceptable to God: for that is the work only of the inward Baptism, for so the
Apostle Peter expresses it, 1 Ep. c. 3. v. 21. The like figure whereunto even
Baptism, does also now save us (not the putting away the filth of the flesh,
but the answer of a good Conscience toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ: The meaning as I conceive is, that as Noah and the other seven
Righteous were saved from the devouring flood, so all those who have the inward
Baptism, viz. a good Conscience toward God, shall be saved by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ. To attribute that to the external, which is due only to the
inward Baptism, is the work only of those whose interest it is to create a
reverential regard to external actions, that so honor and profit may thereby
redound to them. Whereas indeed regeneration, that is cordial resolution to
become a new man, ought to preceed Baptism, or else there is wanting the chief
means that should fit us to be Baptized. Let us therefore give the institution
a just esteem, but not extend it beyond its due, and the intention of the
Institutor, or attribute to it what belongs only to that which is mental and
internal.

From the same Spring arises that detestable conclusion, that all are in a
damnable estate who are not Baptized, which comprehends all Children dying
unbaptiz'd, and all Heathens or Gentiles who never received that convincement
from good instruction to capacitate them for Baptism. As to Children, it is most
uncharitable, and repugnant to the mind of our good Savior. It Is most
uncharitable, for Charity interprets all things in the best and most favorable
sense, to those of whom it makes a Judgment. There being then no express
Scripture commanding children to be baptized, but only a supposition because
the Jailer and all his Household were baptized, (which may well be interpreted
of those of his Household, who upon hearing Peter were convinced, and did desire
it) such a conclusion ought not to be made, so much against the Laws of
Charity, and upon Subjects of all the world the most innocent. It Is also
repugnant to the mind of Christ, who made much of children, took them in his
arms and blessed them, and declared them to be the examples to men and women
grown, of an innocent fitness for the Kingdom of Heaven. But, good God! what
will not interest labor to persuade, when it endeavors to render them in a
damnable estate, when none of us can be saved, unless we become as Children,
unto whom Salvation belongs?

Moreover it seems much more reasonable and agreeable to the institution, that
submission to this ordinance should be a spontaneous act, not done at the
pleasure of others, but upon our own desire and choice.

This is proper as it is an act of Religion, which should be voluntary, being
the distinguishing character of a Christian. For in deed and truth, he that is
Baptized against his will, is no more distinguished from the other part of the
World, than if he were never Baptized: Neither is the Injunction of the Bishop,
for appearance before him at years of discretion, for Confirmation, a
reasonable matter, or consonant to Christ's institution, being introduced from
the unwarrantable injunction of Baptizing Infants.

Furthermore, If Infants had been to have been Baptized, some provision would
certainly have been made about Godfathers and Godmothers: Which being some
hundreds of years introduced after the Institution, invalidates Paedo-Baptism,
as needing forits maintenance such a help as was not at all in the institution.
Neither is it a reasonable thing that one should in matters of Faith and
Christian obedience, answer or promise for another, what indeed is not in their
power to perform. Yea they promise in their own persons, and yet this must
stand for the Child's promising: As if God Almighty who is the fountain of what
is true and reasonable, could be pleased with a service so absurd and
unreasonable.

That which has begot the establishment of Infants Baptism, and sureties, is
what was mentioned before, the supposed necessity of Baptism to Salvation, even
in all persons, though under age and years of discerning the Grounds and Reason
of things. But let us calmly consider, that though Baptism was enjoined to such
as upon hearing the Gospel Preached, or upon reading the Scriptures, and
acquiring thereby the knowledge and submission to the Laws of Christianity, and
assent to the truth of Christ's taking flesh, and suffering for the Sins of the
World, were fully convinced of the verity and excellency of Christian Religion,
in whom being so convinced, it is Sin not to engage in the Society of
Christians, and submit to Baptism, as an introduction thereunto: Yet this
implies not, that they also should be proselytes who cannot understand, nor
give assent to the verity of what is to be believed: or that they should be
sufferers, and to such a height, even to the loss of their precious Souls, for
not engaging in that they understand not, nor are in any capacity to
understand: This seems a matter most unreasonable, and quite beside the purpose
of the Institutor, who commanded his Disciples, to teach all Nations, baptizing
them, etc. He that believes and is Baptized shall be saved, they are fitly
joined together, and our Saviors care it was that by the one a willingness
should be begot, yea an earnest desire of submission to the other.

For let us consider the state of things as they were in the first
establishment of Christianity, and it will be found a matter then very
praiseworthy to enter by Baptism into the Christian Society: when that way was
evil spoken of, under persecution, and the followers thereof despised as the
vilest of Mankind, he then, as things so stood, that heard what was spoken by
Christ and his Disciples, and was convinced of the verity thereof, and
thereupon forsook Relations, Honor, Profit, security from persecution, etc.
and rankt himself by Baptism amongst that despicable sort of men, as they were
then in the Worlds esteem, This man shall be saved, because he depended upon
the power of God against all persecutions, trusts God for all, and expects his
recompense of reward in the World which is to come. Whereas now the case is not
the same; for though the command for Baptism is yet of equal force, taken in
its genuine sense, yet is not submission to it now so praiseworthy, as then:
because there are now no discouragements in the way, yea where it is even
infamous, at least after years of discretion, and conviction not to be Baptized.

It it urged often, and by many, that the Baptizing of Infants, if there were
nothing else to enforce it, is a prudential act, of great use, and moment,
because it obliges both Parents and Sureties to take care that Baptized
Children be so educated, and their minds so furnished with true Christian
knowledge, that in the conduct thereof they may make good the promises made in
their behalf by their sureties.

To this a Reply may with much ease be made. 1. That the Question is not, what
may prudentially be done, but what Christ in that Ordinance has Instituted: If
it be not within the compass of the Institution, it is arrogance in man to
interpose his prudence, to make up the decrees of God: And see the effects of
it. When the Baptizing of Infants, after some hundreds of years was brought
into use in the Church, for ends no doubt profitable enough to the inducers,
and their successors: How many controversies did it occasion? how sharply was
it opposed as an innovation, and humane invention? And indeed how could it be
otherwife, it being then a novelty, and there being nothing expressly to
countenance it in the Sacred Book, from whence the institution it self was to
have its foundation?

2. Notwithstanding its prudent Induction, it is the occasion of much guilt in
the Sureties, who usually performing that office, as a fashionable and
customary matter, after the work is done, think no more of it, nor have any
regard to the education of their Godsons, as they are called, or to the
performances of those promises which were made to God and before him, in the
face of a Congregation. And if some few of them, regarding their promises, take
care that the Children be taught the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and ten
Commandments, they think their performance is then made, when usually they are
taught and learn those things memoriter, with little understanding, or true
knowledge of them, or resolution in the course of their lives to observe them.
Thus is the most excellent, and most significant Institution made, an Opus
operatum, a mere Pageantry, and uncordial imitation of what was really and
truly designed by it, which was, that the understanding should be first
informed of the Principles of Christian Religion, heartily believe Christ to be
the Son of God sent by his Father into the World, to suffer for the
transgressions of man, and reconcile God to him: He must be desirous of
associating and listing himself in that Society, and as an induction thereunto,
to enter by the Gate of Baptism.

3. As to the prudential part, it seems to be much more prudent, that Baptism
be forborne, until the understanding be informed: for that obliges young men
timely to learn and understand the Christian Doctrines, that being fully
informed therein, by the care of Parents and other Teachers, a desire may be
begotten in them, of being admitted by Baptism into the Society of Christians:
This seems much more Rational, and agreeable to the methods of Divine
Institution, which aims much more at possession of the mind, than an implicit
and ignorant submission to an external Ceremony. My Son give me thy Heart, that
only is a Sacrifice pleasing to God. If I had not done the works that no man
ever did, ye had had no Sin; which implies that our Savior did expect
conviction of the understanding, and did therefore afford means for it, before
an outward and irrational Subjection.

4. It is to be considered likewise, that there is no express Text of
Scripture, nor no evident instance of the practice of Christ and his Disciples,
to prove Infant Baptism, yea, it is not so much as pretended to by the
Assertors and practicers thereof: which yet in all reason and probability would
have been, had our Savior or his followers ever intended that Infants should
have been Baptized. And it is but a very weak foundation, to have forced
inferences, and fallible conjectures, to be a sufficient Ground, to so
considerable and public an Institution.

From the premises a prudent man may very safely and justifiably make this
conclusion, That he is not with any bitterness or violence to oppose, much less
to persecute or oppress those who assert, that believers only, and such who in
their own persons can give an account of their Faith, are to be Baptized, but
rather to look upon the Baptists in this particular tenet, as the assertors of
the more probable opinion.

But then in the last place, it is to be considered, that seeing Peace is one
of the greatest blessings to mankind; and that (except for the greatest and
most weighty causes) it is not to be violated, especially tumultuously and by
private persons, we are not to make this a ground of opposing Authority, and
the Laws in being, but fairly and with strength of Reason and Argument, to
insinuate the same into the minds of Men, and to wait until the Lawmakers be
so convinced of the verity thereof, as to alter the present constitution; Since
no opinion though of apparent verity is a sufficient ground of disturbing the
public Peace.

Of the Lords Supper.
This is the true and Proper name of this Divine Institution: first used by
Christ himself at the end of the Passover Supper, and afterward, upon his
command brought into a custom by his Apostles, to keep in remembrance amongst
Christians, the Death of our Savior, and the benefits thereby received. An
easy and familiar institution, it being our blessed Masters pleasure not to
burden Christians with many and intricate Services, (having exploded all the
numerous Ceremonies of the Jews) but to leave them two only, and those used in
the most common actions of life, the one of washing, then familiar amongst
them, to denote our entrance into, and embracing the Christian Religion: and
that by the external action of cleansing the body with water, we should be put
in mind to cleanse our Souls from the filth and contagion of Sin: and the other
that at certain times we should eat together and keep fresh in our memories the
Crucifying of his body, and the shedding of his blood, for a common
propitiation and atonement of the World to God, justly incensed against us by
our transgressions and disobedience.

The word Sacrament, is not found in Scripture, and being hardly intelligible,
especially by ordinary capacities, who are notwithstanding, nothing less
concerned in this duty than the learned, it has rendered intricate, what was
easy and obvious to the most unlearned. It is therefore not to be used, but
relinquished, as introduced by artificial men who have troubled the waters, and
rendered obscure, what our good Savior made easily intelligible. Of the same
Nature are the Learned names of Eucharist, Host, Transubstantiation, and many
more, together with the introduction of other Services, and Sacraments, not of
our Saviors, or his Apostles making, but brought in by crafty and designing
men, for the advance of their own Honor and profit, by which the people are
captivated, deluded, and impoverished.

The unworthy receiving this Supper, consists chiefly in two Particulars; The
one is receiving it out of custom, without consideration, and observance of
the end of its Institution, not considering the Lords body, as the Scripture
expresses it, but eating it as a common meal, as many of the Primitive
Christians, greedily, and disorderly did, not communicating to others what they
brought themselves, which the Apostle blames them for, in 11. c. of the 1 ep.
to the Corinthians: asking them, whether they had not houses where they might
eat their fills at home, and not upbraid them who were not so furnished: In so
doing they eat their own condemnation, not considering the end of the
Institution. The other unworthy receiving it, is, not having found resolutions
to amend our lives; when they did not beforehand examine themselves, and
consider wherein they were faulty, with purpose of amendment. For what a gross
absurdity is it that men should come to such a Service, wherein they were to
remember that Christ is their Savior, that he came into the World, and offered
himself a Sacrifice for their Sins: and that yet they should without any
gratitude of mind, persist in those crimes for which he suffered? Which is what
the Apostle elsewhere condemns, namely, To Sin or to continue sinning, because
Grace has abounded.

The first usage of this was at the Passover, or rather at the end, or after
the same, although for its excellency it may bear the name of Supper: Hereupon
a command of our Savior followed, that they should so do in remembrance of his
death: where by the way the word consecration is unduly brought in here; making
it still more mysterious than our Savior intended it. In the Gospel of St.
Luke it is said, that both in taking the bread, and taking the Cup, he gave
thanks: and so it is said of the Cup, both in St. Matthew, and St. Mark: And
though as to the bread in those two Evangelists it is said, he blessed it, which
is supposed to imply consecration, and upon which, the custom of Consecrating
is introduced, yet is it much more probable that no more is meant thereby than
what is expressed by St. Luke, that he gave thanks for the bread, as he did for
the wine. And therefore the translators of the Bible in King James's time, say
upon the words in St. Matthew, c. 26. v. 26. Jesus took bread and blessed it,
That many Greek copies have it, and gave thanks, and therefore say they,
blessing is not a Consecrating, with a conjuring kind of murmuring, and force
of words. The bread and wine are as they were before, no more but signs of
Christ's body crucified, and his blood shed for our Sins.

That many learned men do make it a Sacrifice, is but an effect of their
learning, giving improper names to plain things: in which they do the World
great injury, and as well in other particulars as in this, the unhappy effect
of their skill is to be lamented. A Sacrifice is properly an offering of
thanksgiving for benefits received, or of satisfaction and atonement for evils
committed, or else performed upon hopes of some blessing expected. But in none
of these senses, can the eating of bread and drinking of wine, be properly
called a Sacrifice: In a figurative sense it may be employed in the first of
those acceptations, because we not only receive the Bread and Wine in
remembrance of Christ's death, but express our thanks to God both for the
Institution, and for what we are thereby to remember: But then this is no
otherwise a Sacrifice, than all the acts of praise and thanksgiving are. The
offering of Christ's Body and his being slain for the sins of the World is
indeed a Sacrifice, he being Sacrificed to atone the wrath of God, but our
eating and drinking the Bread and Wine, in remembrance thereof, has no
resemblance thereunto; it is an action of a quite different nature: It may be
called, the remembrance of a Sacrifice, but it is very improper to call the
remembrance of a Sacrifice, a Sacrifice, there being no analogy between the one
and the other.

This I say may be reckoned amongst the bewailed effects of the great abilities
of learned men, who in confidence of out-speaking others, with gloss of words,
and subtlety of argumentation, do nodum in scirpo facere, make knots in a
Bulrush, make difficult matter of what is most obvious and easy to be
understood: A design certainly of exceeding contrariety to the deportment and
precepts of our ever blessed Savior.

The last remark upon this shall be to take notice, to what degree of cruelty
the pride and insolence of bad men supported by power, will extend it; an
instance whereof we have in the dealing, of bloody Statesmen, and hellish
Priests, in Queen Maryes days, against good and pious men, who would not
against Conscience, and even to the contradiction of their senses, acknowledge
and adore the Bread and Wine, as the very body of Christ, really, and carnally
present: even the body that was crucified at Jerusalem, and had ascended into
Heaven, and was sitting at the right hand of God. It is to admiration that men
should have the easiness to believe so notorious a falsity, or have the
impudence to force it upon others, with severities hardly less than what the
Devils themselves would inflict, were they amongst us. But as the propagation
of truth which is of God, and by God, is commended fairly to the World, upon
the convincing beauty of its own excellency, mildly, sweetly, with reliance
only upon the power of its own intrinsic worth: So error and falsehood, Satan's
offspring, wanting in it self, what should give it esteem, must be supported by
glosing art, political stratagems, (...) compulsion, and cruelty, arguments
sufficient (a man would think) to good men, who will not purposely shut their
eyes, or give up their understandings to an implicit belief. I thought fit to
use this excursion, as judging it meet that upon all occasions notice should be
taken, and a brand of infamy stuck upon those horrid practices, and the gross
abuse of so plainly intelligible, and significant an institution.

See Mr. Hales's Tract of the Lords Supper, Printed 1677. Who has written
excellently well thereupon, as also toward the latter end, he has beyond all
other men, that I know, explained the true meaning of the phrase, [the Spirit
of God] to which all Parties and Sects of men have arrogantly and in their
Sense fasly pretended.

Of Justice.
Whatsoever thy profession be, let me enjoin thee my Son, to preserve not only
the reputation, but the reality also of being a just and upright Man. Many I
have known so reputed, who cry guilty to their own Consciences: who a long time
carry it fair to the World until shame overtake them. Be just, not for interest
sake, for they who are so, would be otherwise if interest required it; but out
of love to Justice, a most noble quality, and properly denoting a man: The
Divine Being, is Justice it self: His will is the rule of Justice: Beasts are
not so capable of it, theirs is rather gratitude, which is indeed a kind of
Justice: But in its latitude it is a quality peculiarly proper to Man: He
therefore unmans himself, who is not just. What punishment is it if rightly
considered, to walk about and look men in the face, with a guilty Conscience?
if men's hearts were not feared, through custom in this evil, they would be
ashamed to walk out of their own door, who now judge their reputation safe,
because their guilt is not known; and if it be suspected, they satisfy
themselves with conceiving that they are but in the predicament with other men:
O pitiful Salve to so foul an Ulcer! If the respect thou ought to bear thy
Father has any power upon thee, let it be prevalent in persuading thee, to
study and dread more thy Conscience, than thy reputation. Make all quiet at
home, and then thou may with comfort and the countenance of a man look
abroad. If it comes to that pinch between thee and thy neighbor, that it is
hard to judge which way the Balance will descend, make bold rather with thy
self than him: for thou art under thy own power, it will accustom thee to be
strict to the rules of Justice, where they are plain: If thou dealest with one
who is ignorant of the affair you are negotiating upon, be then a just
Moderator between thy self and him, and because he cannot plead his own cause,
and man is commonly partial to himself, be wary that thou be'st not so
inclined, but argue for him within thy self the utmost thou can, and do
accordingly. Let not secrecy encourage thee to be unjust, for how can thou
promise thy self it shall be always so? and when discovery is made, thy shame
will be the greater. In the mean time thy fear will be ever vigilant, the peace
of thy mind broken, and it will be no small discomfort to thee to be always
chidden by thy self.

Let not Power, Riches, and the potency of Friends incite thee to do injustice
to another, for 1. It will be base and unworthy in thee, and shows thou have no
sincere love to Justice, that thou can upon such grounds decline it. 2. It
puts thee into the condition of a man armed, and invading another disarmed:
thou art to be esteemed a violator of the Laws, a man void of Generosity, and
indeed of Humanity. 3. Upon the foregoing considerations, thou shall ever be
punished, with horror of Conscience, which do what thou can, will perplex
thee, and at such times when rest is most needful: Nor can thou quiet thy
fears; for nothing is so contemptible, but may in time find means and
opportunity to right it self, of which thou must live ever in danger. Lastly,
thou do pervert that excellent end for which God gave thee riches and power:
the first to supply thy own needs, and to be helpful to those who want, and the
other to protect the weak and afflicted, which is an end quite different from
what thou make it, and will therefore add no small matter to the disquiet of
thy Conscience.

Let me add one consideration more, that by being unjust thou losest one of the
greatest comforts of this life, the love of mankind, for that is one recompense
of being upright, especially if it be accompanied with kindness, and readiness
to assist others. And what an excellent thing is it to have no enemy in the
whole stock of mankind! to be in effect assured of the loving respect of all,
what is more delightful? On the other hand by being dishonest, thou will be
suspected, hated, and avoided of all: For by one dishonest action, a suspicion
is begotten, and no man can promise himself security but that he also may
suffer in the same kind. An unjust man may by craft carry this or that design
thorough, but when found out, he is declined, and used no more than where there
is necessity, and that with all wariness and circumspection. These things
consider and digest in thy mind. I purpose not to write a Scholastical tract of
Justice, but to bring before thee such matters as are obvious in the course of
thy life. Time was when I studied Moral Philosophy; turned over Aristotle, and
many of our modern Ethics; and could dispute upon the definitions, divisions,
properties, extents of prudence, justice, and every virtue; and all this while,
was as uncultivated in my actions, and as little regardful of reforming any
irregularity, vice, or enormity in my life, then, as if I had all that while
handled predicaments, syllogismes, quodlibets, or other metaphysical Trumpery.
Waving therefore these impertinent, and not only useless notions, but such as
disturb and pervert our understanding, I write to thee of justice, that I may
make thee a just man; and not so much able to talk and nicely to distinguish
thereupon, as to let Justice be as the warp is to the woof, the ground and
foundation of thy actions, connatural with thee, and running through every
course and tract of thy life. To know what is just in this or that particular,
thou will find no difficult matter, especially whilst thou preservest thy
integrity; for nothing so much blinds us, as the loss of innocence, and the
force of corrupt interest: If any difficulty do arise, consult timely with a
prudent friend, and seriously with thy self, and thou can hardly go astray.

Of Oppressing the Conscientious.
But allowing that the Golden Rule of our Savior, and what is also assented to
by those whose light is that of Nature, should be the square of our justice,
viz. to do unto others as we would be done unto our selves: Can there be a
greater act of injustice (except that of selling or buying men for Slaves) than
to prosecute, and afflict others for serving God, or holding opinions different
from our selves? Who made us Judges, or do we make our selves so? That Throne
of judicature is for the Almighty alone to sit in, who only can judge of the
heart, and discern between real persuasion, the rational conviction of the
mind, and the dissembled shows of zeal or conformity for the promotion of
interest: The former though erroneous is by man to be dispensed with, or
changed by the more prevailing light of sounder reason: the last is punishable,
but by whom? Man has made few or no Laws against Hypocrisy; when it discovers
it self, shame and reproach attends it, but scarce any other mulct or
punishment: and the reason is, because we can properly judge but of the outward
man, it is the bound of man's judicature: Witnesses cannot reach the inward, and
the Law expects that testimonies should be plain and positive, and therefore
God alone to whom our thoughts are as obvious as our face, has reserved to
himself that Sentence of condemnation, against the great day, when all men's
veils shall be taken off, and every man seen as he is, without the colorable
pretenses of his dissimulation. It is no wonder, where men take not up their
opinions from their being the allowed ones of the Country they were born in,
without the trouble of examination, that they should differ; since the tempers,
ages, inclinations, and intellects of men are different: What 10, 6, 4. yea 2
men understand in all things alike? Neither is the apparency of what is to be
believed, in matters commonly contended for, so perspicuous, as to make all men
consenters in their tenets: It is to be feared also, that in the conveyance of
Doctrines and positions to us, fair play has not always been used: how can it
be then that with any ground of reason it should be judged fit, that some
should take upon them to conclude for all the rest, and to make their dissent
or noncompliance punishable, not only with detriment of Estate, but also with
loss of Liberty, yea with Banishment, and Death? To decry which practice there
needs no other argument, than that every man throughout the Universe that in
these cases becomes the sufferer, condemns it as unjust and injurious, though
at another time he himself practices it, when power and disdain to be opposed
by such as he accounts his inferiors, or the impulse of some supposed necessity
for conservation of a corrupt interest, blears his eyes, and makes him to do to
others what he would not have done unto himself.

Never be instrumental, my Son, in being thus an opposer of thy Brethren,
choose rather, if thou can not with a good Conscience decline it, the
suffering part. Consider in how much a happier estate Paul was, in his
persecuted condition, than when he was breathing out threatenings and slaughter
against the Disciples of the Lord: and how much a nearer resemblance they who
persecute, have, to the high Priests and rigid Pharisees, than to Christ and
his followers. It Is not the plea of Authority can excuse thee. Paul was not
unfurnished with it, when he went to Damascus: The Papists had it, when they
prosecuted with Fire and Faggot those who have now the repute in this Country
of being the most Orthodox: and who knows (the uncertainty of things
considered) but that those who are now under the censure and lash of the Law,
may in time be on the top of the wheel, and have their opinions pass for
Sterling? and it may be then also be as severe against others, now above or
below them, as they are now dealt withal themselves. Authority may give
countenance to variety of opinions, and successively to those in themselves
opposite, but it is not always attended with veracity: And there is no opinion
of any repute amongst us, but besides its numerous followers, has many able and
sufficient Champions furnished with art enough to say and write much in
vindication of their Tenets; sufficient to beget not only resolution in
themselves to suffer, but zeal also in their followers, and a confidence that
engages them oftentimes, and that spontaneously to undergo many difficulties
and disadvantages.

Things thus dubious and capable of exaltation and depression, are not to
oblige thee, for their vindication, to an engagement against the certain,
allowed, and infallible rule of doing to others as thou would be done unto
thy self: Verity is pleaded by all, and by each imposed as such when they are
uppermost: But still they make themselves Judges, where no judgment can be
entrusted to them, (matters of Conscience being indeed incapable of trust) and
with equal confidence, themselves assume the Chair, and dispense to others even
capital punishments. It Is upon no other ground that this arrogant presumption
of condemning others for dissent in matters of opinion, is practiced, but upon
a presumed supposition that the Church cannot err in matters of Faith, and that
its decrees therefore are of infallible verity. This binds the Catholic people
to an implicit obedience and submission to whatever is determined by their
Church, or its head the Pope, be it never so apparently repugnant to the light
of their own understanding, or even the testimony of their senses: As is
notorious in the business of Transubstantiation. They therefore make their
Church answerable to God for all their opinions: and content themselves with an
easy and slothful submission and obedience, casting away the glorious light of
reason, by the use whereof they are made men, or using it only in matters not
relating to Religion. This false foundation which degrades man from the very
state of manhood in which God made him, is sufficiently exploded by the
Protestant Church; and well it may: since God in all his dispensations,
especially in his promulgation of Christian Rules, communicates to man as a
rational Creature, and expects conformity upon the convincement of his
understanding. But then what pretense can there be for the severities which
Protestants use toward their Brethren, since Protestants pretend not to
infallibility? Surely none that is just: but such as men in power do assume,
for the maintenance of Lordliness and dominion, even against the current and
evident rules of the Sacred Word.

The words Heresy, and Sectary, which have made a great noise in the World,
were at first taken in a good sense: Heresy being in Greek but an election of
such opinions as every one thought to be best, and most agreeable to truth:
Therefore the Apostle Paul said, he lived a Pharisee: Secundum exquisitissimam
Haeresin, according to the most exact Heresy or election he could make choice
of: But afterward when differences and dissentions arose in the Church, both
the word Heresy and Sect, which signifies the followers of some peculiar
opinions, were taken in the worst sense, and denoted such as in some opinions
dissented from those which were received by the Church. As long then as the
Church maintained purity, and did not innovate, or introduce opinions of their
own making, repugnant to evident and Christian verities, who ever dissented,
were in a measure blameworthy; but when upon the Churches deviations from
express rules of the Scripture, and introduction of novelties, or such opinions
as served to maintain worldly ends and interests, those that were Conscientious
dissented from them, retaining the first principles, and sincere Doctrines of
the Christian Religion, though they were charged with the names of Heretics,
and Sectaries, yet were those names so far from being marks of Infamy, that
they became indeed appellations of Honor denoting their sincerity: Since those
dissents were not a deserting the Christian Doctrines, but novel opinions, for
worldly ends introduced. Under this Character are the Protestants to be
esteemed: and in like manner all those who have upon the same grounds separated
from the Protestant Church. A Heretic in the Scripture sense is indeed one
that is contentious in the Church; the Contentious Corinthians were so called
when they divided into parties, 1 Corinthians. 1. and so were the dissentions about
the external form of celebrating the Lords Supper, because thereby the bond of
Unity and Charity was broken: And this is employed in the direction the Apostle
Paul gave to Titus, c. 3. v. 10. That he should avoid or reject a Heretic,
after the first and second admonition.

Admonition refers not to opinion, but some fault or misdemeanour: for an
opinion cannot be reformed by admonition but rectification of the mind, with
clearer reason and convincement of the understanding: Whereas those who are
contentious in the Church, and for matters of small moment, occasion strifes,
to the breach of peace, by the admonition of the Governors of the Church and
other grave and prudent persons, may be persuaded to forbear, or else may
justly be commanded to withdraw from the Society, until their Spirits are
reduced to a more quiet and sociable temper.

Hereby then appears that the reason of exclusion out of the Church was not to
be matter of opinion, but a troublesome temper of mind, rendering the person
unfit for Christian Society, until a reclaimer and a testimony given of a
better frame of Spirit: and this is punishment sufficient, both in reference to
the Church, and the person offending. He therefore that dissents from a
Christian Society, because of apparent innovations introduced for politic
ends, is not properly a Heretic: but a sounder Christian; and the blame lies
upon those who innovated, and gave the ocasion of dissent.

But admit the word Heretic taken in the harshest sense, be extended against
those who hold opinions differing from the Doctrines plainly deducible from
Scripture: What course is properly and according to Gods word to be taken
against these? The matter is of nice consideration: for first, if they are
conscientious in holding their Tenets, the remedy naturally appears to be
convincement, not force or Punishment: This is evident, if we heartily consider
the nature of Religion, which is Spiritual, for the propagation of which, force
and compulsion, is a very improper Medium: Those torments that excruciate the
body, work not upon the mind, beget no voluntary assent, which Religion
requires, but at the most, a dissembled one, for fear of the punishment: It may
make men feign to believe that which they do not believe, but never plants true
faith in the heart, or eradicates any error. That Religion or Belief is never
acceptable to God, which is extorted by threats, or procured by fear: It begets
Hypocrites, and dissemblers in Religion, the worst sort of men; because it
makes them equally liable upon the same reasons, to entertain any sort of
Religion, and consequently in time, to have an indifferency to all: Which is in
effect to deface and eradicate both Religion and Conscience out of the hearts
of men. See then what force procures, impiety and improbity, instead of faith
and verity; for if that which is not of faith is sin, that is, where hesitancy
and doubt yet remains, what shall we judge of that which is done with a
repugnancy of Conscience, and against its light? and how can those men hope to
be found innocent, who compel men to such improbity?

2. It is fit I here recite that approved axiom, granted by all Philosophers,
Civilians, Divines, yea by all sober men, That no one ought to be punished for
an involuntary act: Where therefore the will is absent, the party is pronounced
innocent by the most rigid Judges: This appears in the excuse of Abimelech,
pleading his ignorance of Sarah's being Abraham's wife, Genesis 20. and in the
building of six Cities of refuge, for those to fly to, who unawares killed a
man. Men may through weakness entertain a false opinion, but there is no man so
wretched, voluntarily, and knowingly, to embrace one. And if it be said, that
for indirect and base ends they do assume opinions which indeed they believe
not. Respon. This must evidently appear, and by undeniable proofs be
manifested, which is rarely done, and hard to be effected: otherwise the
process will be upon a false ground; an allegation or bare assertion in this
case is not sufficient, for then every man may be branded, if so he holds any
Tenet different from what is received: It must appear by evident matter of
fact, and sufficient eviction; and then the person is punishable, not as an
Heretic, but a Hypocrite. It is hardly in any instance to be found, that this
is attempted: Inquisitors and other Persecutors seldom going further than the
proof, that a man holds such or such an opinion which they call Heresy.

3. I know not upon what sufficient grounds it can be evinced, that one sort of
men are proper Judges of the opinions of others, or upon what Text of
Scripture, or evidence of sound reason, it can be proved that any part of
mankind are Judges and have the power of Condemnation, of the opinions of
others, to such an extent, as thereupon to inflict punishment: men are born
equal, and this right must arise either from evidence of Scripture, or else it
must be a voluntary grant of part of mankind, to others whom they so constitute
Judges. As for Scripture, it is altogether unknown to me, from what part of it,
it can be produced. Christ himself did not practice it, nor yet his disciples:
I know very well that every man takes upon him to judge of another, and each
man in his mind condemns the dissenter from himself, insomuch that he who is
accounted a Heretic, differs no further, from him who esteems himself
orthodox, than he who is orthodox does from the Heretic; but this is still but
judicium mentale: not in foro civili: It extends but to opinion, not to make
guilty or inflict punishment: And all men in this sense are upon even terms.
But as for any other Authority given in Scripture, constituting a Consistory
judicial, to have the power of punishing in case of dissent, of one sort of men
from another, or from a Church, it remains yet to be evidenced, and I believe
will ever so remain.

I am not willing to swell this discourse with all that may be said pro and con
upon this matter; but I am willing you should understand it to be my opinion,
That no clear evidence appears to me from Scripture, that a power is given to
any sort of men, either Magistrates or Ministers, upon pretense of zeal to God,
to Uniformity, to Order, Government, the good of others (for even that is urged
as a justification of Persecution) to force men by mulcts or punishments, to
believe and conform to such Articles or Canons as they shall draw up: For that
being allowed it will follow, that men must believe as the Magistrate or Synod
believes, which is but the same thing with that of the Papist, That we must
believe as the Church believes. 2. The opinions of Magistrates and Synods have
differed even to contrariety, and consequently men must, in different times and
ages be forced to believe and conform to different and contrary Tenets, for if
that opinion be true at one time, it must be so also at another. 3. It condemns
all dissenting Protestants from the Church of Rome. 4. It takes away from man
the free use of his reason, for either he must so use it, as to believe and
conform to what is established, or he must not use it at all. 5. There has yet
been shown no convincing reasons of it from Scripture, and it may well be
presumed, that it cannot be evidenced, because then it would conclude a
necessity of obedience to whatsoever power and persons are uppermost, be their
opinions of never so great contrariety to the Sacred Word. These reasons I have
set down to show you that my opinion in this particular is not taken up without
due consideration.

As to the second, a supposition, that mankind has entrusted a part of
themselves to form Articles and Doctrines of Religion, with a tacit
acknowledgment, That they ought to believe them, and conform unto them. That
such a grant was ever made, can never be proved, and upon grounds of reason be
allowed. The contrary thereunto may thus I think be evinced: 1. Because, it is
against the very nature of belief, which ought to be a voluntary act,
proceeding from conviction of the mind, and an assent freely, and
unconstrainedly, flowing from a due consideration and examination of the matter
to be believed: Since therefore every man is to examine and consider, it
follows that assent must attend, and be the offspring of his own
consideration: It Is an intrinsic action, and every man's own; others may show
reason, and express the grounds of their conviction, but my belief and assent
must follow my own conviction.

2. Man cannot convey a trust to another, of that which in its own nature is
not to be committed to another trust: Every man's belief is such a matter not
capable of being transferred to another: Nay, there is no man Master of his own
belief, for it is not an object of his will, but of his understanding. Men do
not believe, because they will believe, but they do so, or so believe, because
they are so or so convinced. They cannot choose but believe as they do, until
further conviction appear. If therefore my belief is not in my own power, how
can I entrust it to the management of another?

3. Our Savior though he had all wisdom, and knowledge, though he was the
Fountain of Truth, and that nothing could flow from him, but what was truth it
self: And also his followers though they were enlightened by the Spirit of God,
which led them into all Truth; yet they dealt with mankind as men, and expected
no conformity, but upon conviction of the mind: They used no force, or
violence, no threats, or punishments: and where they expressed themselves bitter
against gainsayers, or opposers, it was for their Hypocrisy, and other
notorious crimes, for opposing where there was conviction, of which they were
capable Judges, our Savior as being Cardiognostes, a knower of the heart: And
his Apostles, as being endowed with a Spirit of discerning, which are
qualifications now wanting. If then our blessed Master and his Disciples so
qualified, used no force upon mankind, but dealt with them as creatures of
understanding, and expected obedience and conformity to their blessed
Doctrines, and rules of life, from the excellency of their Tenets, and
profitableness even to mankind, who was to obey, and that only upon an
uninforced conviction of his understanding. How can any others without extreme
presumption, arrogate such a power over their brethren, where apparent
fallibility appears, and where there is no ground to presume there ever was or
indeed could be such a trust?

But let us return to consider further the Hellish Tenet of punishing Heretics.

We will suppose that Heresies are false opinions in the opinion of the
prosecutor, though those which are often so called, are allowed to be true:
Does it not argue a great distrust of their ability, or of the verity of those
men's opinions, who would force a belief by punishment? Is this the way to
convince the Heretic, or others who shall observe, that instead of the weapons
of Spiritual warfare, or the irresistible force of sound reason, Imprisonment,
seizure of Goods; Fire, and Faggot are used? For whose sake is this done? For
the sake of the Heretic, him you recover ^ot, but destroy: If in History some
few be found that have recanted, for fear; for the most part, either an
irrecoverable Melancholy has succeeded, or they have become as a due punishment
for their Apostasy, seven times more the Children of wrath, than even their
persecutors: Those who persist to Death, you convince not, they dye as Martyrs,
glorying in suffering for the truth, and being found worthy thereof: What
remains after but infamy upon the Persecutors, and a worthy memory of them who
suffer. This is as to what follows in this World, but for the next read in the
Epistle to the Thessalonians, Ep. 2. c. 1. and mark it well, my Son, for there
you will find sufficient to preserve you from being in the number of
Persecutors.

See this point more fully argued, in Curcellius 's institutions, l. 7. c. 37.
de haereticorum poenis.

I have been something longer, my Son, upon this point (though abundantly more
may be spoken to it) because I would have it take deep impression in thy mind,
that it may frame in thee such a temper of Spirit, as to be willing and ready
to do all the good thou can to all, but hurt to none.

Of the Minds Victory over the Passions.
As one of the principal and most considerable means of being just, let me
persuade thee to endeavor the gaining a mastery over thy desires, that thou be
able to check and suppress them, when they are most impetuous: as a skilful
rider can give stop to a well managed Horse in the midst of his speed. He that
can moderate his desires, withdraws the fuel of injustice: Content thy self
therefore with mean and competent enjoyments, to what ever degree of plenty
thou arrivest, and herein thou will find most solid happiness. Be assured that
plenty was not left thee by me, and allowed thee by God the sole Author of all
good things, to satiate thy desires: esteem the right ends thereof to be, the
furnishing thee for thy convenient occasions, the taking off the anxieties of
thy mind, and the enabling thee to do good to others in acts of well-guided
Charity. If the pains I have taken to acquire a good foundation for thy
industry, which is the great end and encouragement of Parents labor, if it
should be by thee imprudently converted, to subminister to thy ungoverned
lusts, how much better had it been thou never had had the advantage of such a
blessing, should thy folly convert it into a curse, the unhappy means of
idleness and riot! It is irksome to thy Father, to have so much as the
imagination of such a disposition in thee: nor will I stay upon such an
unpleasant subject; no my dear Son: There is a vast distance between pleasure
and happiness, cast your eyes into the World, and you will find those who give
up themselves to the enjoyments of sensual delights, to be in reality, and in
the opinion of all good men, (whose opinions only are to be valued) the worst,
and most despicable part of mankind: contemners of the Law, regardless of
Conscience, riotous and profuse in vain and unprofitable expense, close handed,
and sordid in acts of Charity, the assistance and support of a good and honest
family wanting assistance. Severe in their exactions, positive and partial to
themselves in their unjust demands: proud, contemptuous: giving value to men
only for their outside, the show and port they bear in the World: and if any
seeds of virtue have been by their Tutors or Parents, in their more innocent
age implanted in them, they daily fade, and by degrees wither to nothing:
instead whereof there arises such opinions as they loosly gather up, profane
and Atheistical, derogatory to the Scripture, to the dignity of virtue, and to
divine Providence: understand therefore betimes, and give early check to the
enticements of pleasure: place your happiness in the lasting delights of a
sober and honest life: Let your divertisements be directed to innocent
pastimes, healthful to the body, and harmless to the mind, neither expenceful
of Money or Time, and such as may serve to make honest labor and business, the
more tolerable and delightful.

On the other hand, be not earnest and over solicitous to heap up riches, which
you will not be, if you give not too great a value thereunto; as the coveteous
part of the World ever have done: felicity and wealth are two, seldom joined
together, and never but where the mind is master, and keeps riches as
subservient to those good and honest ends, the virtuous design them for. The
true happiness of the mind may find some assistance from external enjoyments,
so far especially as it guards it from the sharpness of want and necessity,
(which to a generous mind are very pungent) but happiness is essentially placed
within us, both in the rules of the best Philosophy; and much more expressly in
the satisfactory Precepts of our blessed Master, who upon the assurance of the
unconceivable happiness of our future estate in Heaven, has persuaded us to a
kind of indifferency in the enjoyment of things below: That we should use the
World as if we used it not, that having food and raiment, we should be
therewith content: That we should not lay up our treasure here, where is
nothing but uncertainty; but in Heaven, where it shall be liable to no
casualty: What needs other motive to the moderation of desire, than the low
esteem and hazard of Worldly wealth, the richness and perpetuity of that which
is Heavenly.

Of Industry and Business.
There are many considerable reasons, that thou should accustom thy mind and
body to a habit of industry, and moderate business: As, 1. It is the means of
passing thy life in much more content, than when it is wasted in fruitless
pleasure, or irksome idleness. 2. Thou will be more acceptable, and useful in
the place thou live, than those idle drones who seem born only to waste and
devour: industrious people also are seldom so perverse and contentious as the
idle, nothing so luxurious and devoted to pleasures, of greater fortitude in
the maintenance of just Laws and general rights; more considerate in the
advising and promoting what is for common good: and much more forward in their
voluntary assistances for just occasions, public, or private: whatever
therefore thy profession be, give thy chief time thereunto, that thou may
acquire an ability therein, equal at least with other men: which will be no
little satisfaction to thy mind, and no small advantage to thy profit.

If thy estate should be so plentiful, as to encourage thee to rely upon it,
without engaging in any profession, be well advised first, and consider, that
if thy body be healthful and active, and thy mind fit for business, it is
better to be obliged to some easy employment, the profits whereof may the more
enable thee for good, and charitable actions: Or if thou should not think
fit, so to engage; yet must not you reckon, that God has so blessed you, to be
unserviceable to the World; much less to wear out thy life in unprofitable
pleasure; Rejoice rather giving thanks to God for being exempted from the
necessity of importunate toil, and the anxiety of care, and then consider with
good deliberation, and choose, besides what shall commonly offer it self, the
most useful ways of profiting and doing service to thy Neighbors, and
Country, which will the more effectually be accomplished, by thy impartial
candor, and daily manifestation, that it is not any profit of thy own, but thy
regard to the real good of others that obliges thee. And I do think, that of
all the pleasures which this World affords; those of composing differences,
reconciling enemies, instructing the ignorant, assisting the indigent,
improving useful accommodations to mankind, and other practicable ways of
doing good (all which Gentlemen ought to employ themselves in) may be placed in
the first rank, holding some resemblance, in its small degree, with that
delight which God Almighty takes, in communicating his daily blessings and
benefits to the Sons of Men.

Read a Book upon this subject, entitled, the Calling of a Gentleman. If thy
fancy inclines thee to the practice of Physic, I purpose to give thee
particular instructions relating thereunto, in a small Tract by it self.

Against Covetousness.
But then on the other hand, to be a slave to business out of love to the
profits accrewing from it, to make wealth the chief good of this World, and to
sacrifice all that is really and substantially such to the acquisition of
riches: and according to the present hymour of vitiated man, to prefer them
before faith, honesty, virtue, and friendship: Quitting any or all of them when
they come into competition. This my Son, is one of the sorest evils under the
Sun, and the source of many of the rest: for hence comes oppression, extortion,
common perjury, faith-breaking, and a multitude of other enormities,
destructive to the felicity of mankind: A vice this is, from which even they
who would be thought to be of a finer grain, and pride themselves in shows of
more eminent Sanctity, are not exempt, and to which I wish I could not say,
they are more liable: Concerning this earthly mindedness the Laws of men are
silent; and therefore how express soever God in his Word speaks against it, yet
being no transgression of the Laws of our Country, they bear it off, with the
reputation of their wealth, and the opinion they labor to gain from their
shows of zeal, and forms of Religion, though even those are taken up, for the
advantage of their Traffic: Link not thy self with those men, partake not of
their secrets, their confederacies, and combinations; for what is not built
upon the basis of natural Justice, and the sincere regard to unshaken honesty,
though it may make a show, and seem to prosper in the judgment of those (who
are by many indeed the most) that take wealth for reputation, and riches for
true happiness, yet are they themselves otherwise conscious, who often feeling
the gnawings of the worm within, in the unavoidable reflections upon the
disproportion between their actions, and the rules they profess, find always a
little Colloquintida in the Pot, which imbitters the specious enjoyment of
their lives, and renders them miserable, even when they are thought to be most
happy. Remember that before this Quicksand I place a Buoy, that thou may
avoid the being what our good Master calls a Painted Sepulcher; and elsewhere a
Generation of Vipers, a sort of people full of venom and destruction, to those
who are not aware of their frauds, blinded with the specious shows of external
performances, which are indeed but as the tithing of Mynt and Cummin, the
weightier matters of true justice and integrity being neglected: If thy mind be
well seasoned with true and honest principles, enlivened with the love of God,
and thy neighbor, thou will easily find out, distinguish, and loath these
Hypocritical pretenders, who speak of Virtue as a worldly qualification,
undervalue and deface all the lights of nature, by which God distinguished man
from other Creatures, and to recover which from the defilements of the
profane, and the disregards of the Pharisaical pretenders, was one of the
chief businesses of our blessed Master. Regard well what I have said in this
particular, and consider well, that though riches well got, and with an honest
mind, are convenient helps, for our better passing this troublesome World; yet
what is otherwise, is an indiscernable canker, eating insensibly into an
estate, the justice of God having so ordered it, to deter men from avarice and
oppression.

Of Truth.
Love truth, my Son: and for no advantage whatsoever speak a lie: It Is a worthy
reputation, to be known to be a man of ones word: that it may be relied upon,
and no obligation beyond it thought necessary: Though it is not in a man's power
to be rich, it is to be a True man, which in a just balance much overweighs
the Rich man that is not so: How heinous it seems to every man to be given the
lie, which is an argument that we all applaud and prefer Truth: And yet to the
shame of mankind, what is more common than falsehood, not amongst the slighter
sort of people only, but even amongst the sober, where advantage in trade
prompts them? in which they satisfy themselves with tacit reservations, and
other palliating excuses, which are indeed rather aggravations, because they
imply an allowance of the Authority of Truth, and yet dare wittingly offend
against her Crown and Dignity. The beginning of the perversion of any age, is
the low esteem of Truth, when the mind begins to faulter in that, there is
scarce any vice but upon opportunity and occasion will be admitted: As to be
sincerely true, is the foundation of all virtues, and the first Article which
Plato required in the Government of his Commonwealth: But now adays, as
Montaigne truly says, That it is not Truth which is True, but what we impose
upon others: Falsehood is so common, that to be taken napping, is of no
disreputation: The Man's witty we say, and would live in the World: He must be
excused, thinks the grave senior, for he knows he has done it before him: It Is
taught now, and transmitted from Master to Servant, and to Son too; Men fashion
themselves to it as to a part of their Craft, and it is esteemed no mean
quality of this age. The reason one gives, we are so angry at the reproach of a
Lie, is, that Men are aptest to quit themselves of those vices they are most
tainted withal: for thereby we seem to free our selves from the blame and
imputation; we condemn it in appearance, but practice it in reality: Consider
my Son he that tells a lie, contemns God, and is a coward toward Men: He knows
that God understands him, and yet dare utter falsehood; he dares run the hazard
of that guilt, when he is afraid to be known to man, it may be for some small
seeming disrepute, or from the persuasion of some little advantage. It Is this
falsehood that has begot the necessity of Laws, Bonds, Obligations; and many
other Nets of constraint, to hold us to the performance of our faiths and
duties; an unsufferable affront to manhood, by which we are come to be almost
of another kind, than in what we were created: what other bond is there of
human Society than the truth of men's words, for the heart being no otherwise to
be known, if there be falsehood in that, man is at a loss in commerce, and
converse, and is now no longer guided by Truth, but the nice observation of
interest, which is as much as to say, that men are no farther to be credited
upon their words, than it is for their profit to observe them: Who is resembled
in this? God or his opposite? Not God for he requires Truth in the inward
parts, and commands us by his Apostle, that putting away lying, we should speak
everyman truth to his Neighbor, being members one of another: That as man is
true to the parts of his own body, so should we be one man to another: There is
not, (the corruption of mankind considered) there is not any particular more
frequently, more effectually to be pressed than this: and therefore have I
besides my intention, somewhat the more freely expatiated upon it: Oblige me by
a constant regard to Truth, and thou can not deeplier endear me: thou may
then use me, and all my endeavors, as my Soul I shall love thee, my substance
shall be a Servant to thee: Nor will it less glad thy own heart than mine; it is
Honey in the inward parts, it gives beauty to the countenance beyond Wine and
Oil: It is a Pot of precious ointment to thy name and memory: The value of it
being now greater than at first, because of Men's deflections from it; Man was
created with it, and no doubt it was long, dear and precious unto him, 'till
pride, and profit crept in, and justled Truth out. How sweet till then was man's
life, when every Man's heart was in his words, and face? When every stranger was
as a Brother? Accursed force, gain, and self interest, which have deprived the
World of that inestimable blessing! when we are not now ashamed to say Truth
goes a begging: That the just man's a fool, and knows not how to grow rich: Let
it be so thought my Son, prefer it however, and thou shall find something
sweeter within thee, than the delight of riches, more certain here, and a
blessed earnest, of that which is better hereafter: Though I judge that it
would be no difficult thing to prove that a prudent man, manifesting sincerity
in all his dealings, is at the long run in a fairer road of acquiring riches
than he that uses craft or subtle falsehood for the obtaining thereof.

For 1. Nothing invites more than just dealing, and not only the just, whose
custom will be certain, but even they who practice subtilty themselves love
plain dealing in others: For a time happily they may suffer, because for a
while their fidelity will not be believed, men having vainly assumed the shows
of it to gain a name, that they may the more freely deceive: But when time and
experience manifests, that they hate all circumventing policies, may be
credited and relied upon in what they say and promise: Both the implanted love
of Truth, which though weakened is yet in the Conscience of every man, with the
profit, content, and satisfaction every man cannot choose but take in such
dealing, must of necessity invite numerous Chapmen, the only means of acquiring
riches. Whereas a man who in making his bargain, speaks falsely, and by little
arts designs to overreach, and to lay foundations of future advantage, must in
time as their circumventions appear, be warily avoided, or dealt with only out
of necessity, which last no longer than that necessity compels. However, be the
matter in this particular as it will, let the love to Truth be thy chief
motive, and in that thou will stand right to God, thy Neighbor, and thy own
Soul: and then thou shall find that there are other recompenses, and rewards,
as far beyond riches, as virtue is beyond vice, or the joys ^f Heaven, above
those which are worldly and sensual.

Of Wisdom.
In the Government of our selves here, there is nothing so necessary as the
guidance of Wisdom; I mean not the crafts of the World, or the policies of
artificial men: those I would have thee, my Son, understand, not to use them,
but to know how prudently, and securely to avoid them. Remember that true
Wisdom (which only deserves that name) is always joined with goodness and
virtue: Take it therefore for a rule, that whatsoever is not so associated,
though it may be called craft, policy, art, wit, all which have their esteem in
this artificial state of the World; yet Wisdom it is not, which is ever
agreeable to the rules of right reason, consonant to the life and principles of
our blessed Savior: and is properly defined to be, the knowledge how to demean
our selves in the best manner in all the occasions, and occurrences of humane
life.

Now Wisdom thus defined is acquireable, by these helps. 1. By the instructions
and examples of prudent Parents. 2. By reading the Books of wise men, and
principally the Scriptures, which as they are intended to make us wise to
Salvation, so are they very effectual to secure us against all the assaults of
temptation, and to steer us right upon all occasions. 3. By conversing with
those, who by long experience, and true Conclusions drawn thereupon, have
attained a high measure of prudence, and are able to advise the best and
securest ways in all accidents and variations of life. 4. By meditating
frequently and seriously with our selves.

As to the First of these, the instruction and good example of prudent Parents:
I know it is the duty of all for their childrens sakes, as well as their own to
be such: the defects in this particular are, a radical cause of the Worlds
depravation; I know it is a much more difficult matter for Children who have
not such Parents, to gain any proportionable measure of prudence, the attaining
thereof being uncertain where there are such: I think also, that the defects
and imprudencies of Children are justly chargeable upon Parents, where they
have not done their parts; though Children are not thereby wholly excused,
because God has offered many other helps for the attainment of Wisdom: I
conceive it is fondness and regard to themselves in Parents, when they love
their Children imprudently, that is, when their affection is not directed
chiefly to the making them Good and Wise: This should be the prime end, wealth
but secondary.

That in order to this, they ought to be very careful, that they indulge them
in nothing that may any ways cross those ends. Neither out of compliance with
the World; the fulfilling their own humors, the powerful inclination of their
own bad examples; improvidence and negligence in doing their duties; omission
of taking times and seasonable advantages to instruct and reform them;
moroseness, and keeping an imperious distance, out of an ill use made of their
Paternal authority and prerogative; loosing thereby the fair occasions of
preserving and reclaiming them, which decent and prudent familiarity would
daily afford them.

This as to Parents, which may concern thee, if ever it pleases God to bless
thee with Children: In the mean time, let it not be grievous to thee, but
rather a pleasure, to give an attentive ear, and to lay up in thy mind the
advices and instructions of thy Parents: Consider, That what they advise is as
near as they can, for your good; that it flows from their affection, even when
they rebuke or correct; that it is grievous even to them to have occasion to do
it, and taken up out of necessity, lest they should fail in their duty toward
you. Consider that they have lived many years, and have had experiences in the
World, and are therefore in fit capacity to instruct; That affection persuades
them to extract the best of that knowledge they have, and communicate to you,
there being nothing more delightful to them, than to see your understanding
improve, in the acquisition of true Wisdom; That the young of all creatures, do
learn of the old, it being the method which God has placed in the order of
Generation, and continuation of all species, and that consequently it is
unnatural not to have regard to it: Lastly consider, that Solomon reputed the
wisest man (our blessed Master excepted) spent a great part of those
experimental instructions, he thought fit to communicate to the World, in
commending to us the excellency of Wisdom, and persuading youth that it is
chiefly to be gained, by giving heedful attention to the counsels of Parents;
that besides the profit arises from it, a blessing also attends it from God
Almighty, who is well pleased, when we guide our selves according to the course
and order which in his infinite Wisdom he has planted in the World. This is
what I thought necessary to mention to thee, in order to the first means of
acquiring Wisdom. The giving heed to the instruction and example of Parents:
With this caution subjoyned, that if upon improvement of thy own knowledge thou
shall discover some blemishes or defects in them, that thou upbraid them not
therewith, neither practice them, as thinking thou have warrant for it, because
they are thy Parents: but remember that thou art by prime right the Son and
Servant of Almighty God, to whom thou art always, and against all competitions
to yield prime obedience. 2. That thy abundant obligations otherwise, ought to
persuade thee prudently to hide all their imperfections, and withal imaginable
meekness, and submission, seasonably and warily to endeavor their alteration,
which is most consistent with that honor which is due from thee to them, and
which God commands thee upon his blessing to render unto them.

2. Means of acquiring Wisdom, is reading the Scriptures, and the writings of
wise and good men: First the Scriptures, for they are pure, and to be confided
in: The writings of the wisest extant, have many things in them, dubious,
perplexed, opinionative, impertinent, and it may be false, and therefore are to
be read with a wary and watchful understanding, as also an examining judgment,
lest otherwise thou drawest into thy mind insensibly, imperfect and erroneous
Ideas: which impressed in thy young and tender age, will not without great
heedfulness, and intention of mind be eradicated: Whereas in reading the
Scriptures, (though serious consideration thereupon is not to be excluded) yet
may thou with great assurance and confidence rely upon the truth of what is
there written, and build thy faith and practice thereupon.

2. Chiefly read the Scriptures, because they are more comprehensive than all
other books: there being no occasion of man's life, in which thou may not
there receive sufficient directions and guidance, how to bear thy self therein:
thy Faith is there to be established, thy Hopes assured, thy doubts and
diffidences cleared: There thou may learn how to behave thy self in
prosperity, and in adversity: To bear afflictions, to regulate desires. There
thou may observe the chief and visible transactions of God with man: The
lives of the Patriarchs, the dispensation of the Jews, the states and
ordinances given to them, their disobediences, and consequences thereof, the
blessing upon those who were good, the judgments upon the refractory and
rebellious: The experiences of David, and Solomon: The courage of the Prophets
against Kings, Priests, and People, swerving from the commands of God: And
lastly, as of highest moment, thou shall there find, for thy imitation (as far
as human frailty can reach) the most excellent pattern, and rule of living in
the life, precepts, and doctrines, of our Master the ever blessed Jesus, his
Apostles, and Disciples: In a word, whatsoever is necessary for thy
instruction, respecting thy duty and behavior toward God, toward men, and in
reference to thy self, the Scripture above all other writings, amply
comprehends the same, and therefore in the acquisition of Wisdom, esteem this
as an inexhaustable Fountain, ever full, free from taint and mixture, and in
order to that end, be here chiefly and daily conversant,

But let me further advise thee, that in reading of them, thou do it not
transiently, supinely, and carelessly; but with purpose, either to lay up in thy
heart, the unvaluable treasures thereof, to serve thee upon all future
occasions; or else in reference to some present difficulty, and emergency which
perplexes thy mind, out of which the light of those most glorious radiations
will certainly, and in the best manner steer and deliver thee.

Concerning the writings of wise men, out of which wisdom is also to be
gathered; you must read them, I have said, with many allowances and cautions:
the most of what is written being mixed and much encumbred: Men regarding not
solely, (as they ought) the doing good to mankind, but consulting their own
fame: and have therefore come abroad with too much flourish and cloquence, and
the Authors been too solicitous about method, collections from other men,
regards to the humor of the times, and flattery of the Great: and have
therefore writ not precisely what is truth, and good, but what will pass, and
at least not displease. Others though they have by long experience, gained many
excellent rules of Wisdom, yet being sraught with the knowledge of common and
frivolous matters, and with many false opinions in their youth acquired, or
from ignorant and imprudent Tutors derived, retain so strong a tincture
thereof, that their writings are tainted therewith; and much pains is to be
taken, and Wisdom to be used, in gathering the little corn from the heaps of
chaff, and to pass over those erroneous infantile apprehensions, which they
with the same Spirit and passion communicate, as they do the most received and
undeniable verities.

3. The third means of attaining Wisdom, is frequent converse with wise and
experienced Men: The mind of man is by nothing so certainly formed, as by
conversation: This alters the very natural dispositions of men, sometimes for
the better, and sometimes for the worse: and we sind that men are fashioned
both in their Religion, and in their Manners, according to what is received in
the place of their nativity or education, and modified by the particular
humors, bents, and inclinations of their Masters, Governors, or Tutors: As
this is verified in matters of opinion, so is it much more in the moralities of
men, and in the prudent or imprudent conduct of their lives: If God vouchsafes
me life to remain with thee, I shall take the utmost care I can to caution thee
about the tempers of men; and to give thee the characters of whom I esteem the
best, and let me say that in my life I have met some few of them, with whom I
would have thee principally associate, and from whom I shall hope, thou shall
learn nothing but what is agreeable to the unchangeable rules of true Wisdom
and Honesty.

I have often inculcated to thee, that Wisdom is an inseparable of goodness,
and that therefore you are to distinguish between crafty or politic men, and
the wise: be exceeding wary in this point, for certainly the subtle are of all
mankind the most pernicious sort: Because to them are justly attributable all
the evils, and vexatious perplexities of the world: and not only so, but being
no way bounded, by a sense of their obligations to God or love to goodness,
they are at freedom daily to invent new stratagems, and contrivances further to
imbitter the peaceable lives of the innocent, and establish power and force, in
the place of justice and innocence. I would much rather have thee a natural
Fool than one of these; for such have a fair excuse from the irremediable
imperfections of their bodies and minds: Whereas these having great knowledge,
and great ability of mind, make use of them, not for the securing of
themselves, or protecting the innocent, but advisedly to distract the World,
from the small temptation of a little gain, or the flattery of some despicable
advancement.

When thou have either by my assistance or thy own care, acquired an
acquaintance with some wise men, be industrious to improve the same, which is
no otherwise to be done, but by persisting in the tract of goodness; for to the
truly wise, there can be no greater disobligation, or motive to estrangement
than desertion of honest principles and practice: And though, after the manner
of the great Apostle, their Souls may be grieved at such a desertion, and they
moved to use all means of reclaimour; yet where great slips have been, the
former confidence will be something weakened, and therefore let no advantage or
passion prompt thee to slacken thy mind, from persisting resolutely in the
ways of virtue.

The benefits which are gained by such a converse are many. As 1. Improvement
of the best knowledge, which is of thy self and of the World: Here thou will be
ever learning, that which is truly profitable, which will insensibly unite
itself with thy mind, and in short time enable thee to be a teacher of others:
for in truth thou will find that the ways of Wisdom are easier learned, than
the intricate mazes of folly, that is to say, of craftiness and vice.

2. Thou will be thereby strengthened, in the means of thy support and honest
interest: for no people whatsoever are so able, so faithful, so ready to give
assistance, not only in sage and deliberate Counsel, but in all other
convenient ways that may hopefully free thee from any perplexity, or in the
accomplishment of any good and laudable designment: It is therefore the
greatest folly for a man to stand upon his own single basis, and not to unite
himself with such as are in a capacity so to assist, scarce needing so much as
being desired therein.

3. By this means thou gainest the best reputation: For men as they are indeed
very much what their Society makes them, so have they an answerable esteem in
the World: Now that this is the best, appears from the tacit concessions even
of those who tread the paths of vanity; who not only inwardly condemn
themselves and their associates, whose guilts they are acquainted withal, but
oftentimes show an outward, and unfeigned respect to such as they know prudent
and good, unless in some cases where interest is concerned, or shame restrains.

4. It is no small benefit, that by daily conversation with the wise, thou
avoidest the vain improvidences of the foolish or vicious, and thy
disreputation is thereby acquired: Consider of these things, and timely with
due deliberation make a good choice, that thou may be seasoned, grow, and
improve in the ways of Wisdom, the richest Jewel of the mind, and a glorious
beam from the Son and Father of righteousness.

The last means of acquiring Wisdom, is, frequent meditation with thy self;
without this the rest will be nothing fo effectual: by meditating with thy
self, thou make all thy readings thy own, thou distinguishest good from evil,
thou examinest what thou see in others, and bring all thy own opinions and
practices to the test of Scriptures, and right reason: Without this, the most
of thy time spent in reading and conversation is lost: or at least in no
measure so much improved; This is truly the digestion of the mind, by help
whereof all thy knowledge is sorted and distributed; it makes thee ready and
pertinent upon all occasions, and is much to be preferred before booking thy
experiences, which either thou drawest out of others, or occasion draws out of
thy self: and as in the acquisition of any useful art, the best way of study,
after thou have gained the first rudiments, from reading or converse is
retiring into thy self, and there exercising thy own faculties thereupon: So in
the attainment of sound knowledge, and true wisdom, no expedient is so necessary
as frequent and serious meditation: Employ therefore a competent time hereupon,
not only upon difficult emergencies, but at certain times of the week or day,
and assure thy self that thou shall reap a pleasing and plentiful Crop of the
best kind of knowledge.

I conceive that what we now call craft, subtlety, and policy, rhetorical
insinuations, and persuasions, the Apostle calls, Human Wisdom, or the Wisdom
of this World, and of the Princes and Statesmen of this world, which he says,
comes to naught: But Wisdom joined with Virtue and Goodness: Wisdom which
inquires into things Holy, and Heavenly, which prefers our future concernment
as the greatest, before some little earthly advantages: Wisdom which Solomon so
much invites us to purchase, and which he prefers before all earthly things:
Which the Apostle calls Heavenly, because it is conversant about the Virtues,
the Graces, our Celestial State, all which are things Heavenly. This thou can
not buy at too dear a rate, because it is the most precious Jewel, which God
Almighty has entrusted with the Sons of Men.

This though in it self, it comprehends every virtue without any taint of Vice,
yet is it not enough that I speak of it so generally, but shall for thy sake,
my Son, give thee light and easy Touches of every Virtue, in order to the
making them appear lovely, and acceptable to thy dearest embraces.

Of the Chief Good.
The Question of the Chief Good, is with us Christians out of Question, it
being the leading of an Honest and Good life here, and enjoyment of the
immediate presence of God, and the Society of the blessed hereafter: Other
controversies hereupon reject, as useless, vain and burdensome to the
understanding.

Of Felicity.
Determine in the same manner also concerning Felicity. Let the Peripateticks,
Stoics, Platomists, Epicureans, and other Sects of Philosophers, agree at
leisure, and those Scholars who think it worth their while, to side and partake
with them, leave them as groping in the dark, and often buffeting one another:
whilst they everlastingly dispute, do thou enjoy; upon assurance that he who
lives according to the rules of Honesty, and right reason, lives a pleasant and
a happy life, and though he may now and then meet with some rubbs, and adverse
occurences, yet prudence arms, and enables him either to overcome those
adversities, or patiently to bear them.

Of Fortitude.
There are very few cases in which the active part of Fortitude is to be
employed. It Is the weakness of the mind to be moved upon every slight occasion,
or the provocations of imprudent men: give no just cause to others, by any
injurious word or deed, and then if their passions be causlesly incited, a soft
word, a gentle demeanor will turn wrath into calmness, and the height of
passion into moderation. The true causes of Valor, are the necessitated
defense of ones self, Wife, Children, Estate, in case of violence and affault;
or of ones Country, in case of Invasion, or tyrannical oppression: It Is useful
and necessary against Baseness, Crafts, Deceits, Hypocrisy, Vice, but ought to
be warily managed, that it may convert, or shame and detect the faulty; and do
no certain injury to our selves: above all it ought to be ready against
deceitful impositions upon the people, where a man may hopefully prevent a
mischief, and do his Country service; In all these cases to be timorous and
mealy-mouthed, is a fault like that the Psalmist charges the evil man withal,
when he said, thou saw a Thief and consentedst unto him: For passing over
without punishment, reproof, or notice, is in some sort an allowance, because a
permission of the fact, which by a generous courage thou might have
prevented: And further than that, it seems to be some encouragement, for that
sort of men when they find no pertment opposition, grow bold, and confident in
their practices, glorying in their base subtleties, because successful: when if
men stood upon their guards, and would be with them at every turn, there are no
such sheepish people as they, nothing more naturally dastardizing the Spirits
of men, than treacherous baseness and actions Criminal.

But to this noble and necessary Fortitude, prudential wariness is to be added,
for nothing is so bestially cruel as powerful Tyranny, which for the most part
gains by opposition that is not effectually managed: No man is required to
thrust his head into the fire, or with his single strength to force a strong
wall; be assured thou can not do practicing men a greater mischief, than
rashly, unseasonably, imprudently, to expose thy self and others to inevitable
dangers.

Be careful also that thou engage in no public action, but where the Law
allows and invites you; be not surprised and heedlesly hurried on, with the
plausible pretenses of ambitious men, to actions illegal, and undertaken not as
pretended for common good, but concealed ends of their own: for the hazard will
be great, the public good uncertain, although they succeed in their
enterprise: nothing ought to engage you but where the destruction of the
Government and Religion is apparent, and the engagement almost universal: where
these are not, sit still, and quietly suffer what you cannot prudently avoid:
and though this passive Fortitude, may be accounted, Neutrality, Lukewarmness,
and it may be cowardice, yet is it better to suffer so than to act against Law,
and be a stalking horse to crafty and ambitious men. So that except in the
cases above mentioned, sit still and enjoy your self as peaceably as you can:
Consider the advantages of great men, which are numerous, and make the gain
forty to one of their side: Ponder likewise upon the little assurance you can
have of the fidelity of those who would invite you to side with them; and
Lastly, believe my experience of the ignorance, and instability of the people,
that though you intend nothing but what is good and warantable, shall if any
evil comes to you, make a Holyday at your misfortune: upon the whole, you will
find it the best way as the world is now deviated, to follow your own private
business, to enjoy your self as well as you can in the diligent attendance upon
your own calling: and make your self comfortable to your Wife and Children, and
Family: This advice though many will not allow, yet you have my opinion and
approbation of it; which I think ought to bear great sway with you: And
although youthful heats judge otherwise, yet in time you will come to your O
utinam! and say I wish withal my heart I had followed my Fathers advice: Wisdom
dear bought is the fools purchase, but happier is he that attains it without
the need of repentance, or the smart of sufferance.

It will be easily assented to, that what evils we cannot with Wisdom prevent,
we are with patience to endure: So it is in respect of Poverty, Sickness, pain,
imminent Death, discontent of Mind, loss of Liberty, loss of Friends, and many
other things which use to be grievous to man: In these cases a Christian man
has these supports. 1. That it is the condition of human life, to which man
when born was unavoidably exposed. 2. This life as it is liable to numerous
evils, so is it short, and a more certainly happy one is expected. 3. For
poverty, in our plentiful Country, it is more in imagination than in reality:
For did we in our exigence reduce our minds, and the inordinate desires
thereof, to the being content with Bread, Cheese, Milk, Roots, Fruits,
Spring Water, and Salt, which is a condiment to them, with many other easily
acquireable meats, which are no where wanting; and if they were, how could want
reach us, and our bodies be thereby pind (which is a case here scarcely
imaginable;) what would all this amount to, but a passing out of this vale of
misery, some few years, and it may be but days before we should otherwise have
done? where otherwise it may be riot, luxurious feeding, and some smart disease
thereby occasioned, had to our greater obloquy and disquiet wrought the same
effect upon us.

In one respect we are much beholding to poverty: because it prompts us, by
being but meanly furnished with the good things of this World, to expect
happiness in a better, and in order to that (weaning our thoughts from the
contemplation of those felicities here which other men enjoy) fixes our
thoughts upon God and his Goodness, the joys of Heaven, the perpetuity of
bliss, the felicity of the Saints communion; which meditations yield greater
content of mind, than any worldly enjoyments can afford: and besides that,
fixing our thoughts upon the end, it makes us more careful in leading a good
and honest life, which we know God requires in order thereunto.

What matters it, though as Solomon says, Prove. 14.20. The poor is hated even
of his own Neighbor: it is but of his weak and inconsiderate neighbor, his
ignorant and fantastical neighbor, who knows no worth but wealth: Whereas the
good and virtuous will both pity and relieve him: and give those graces and
abilities of his mind, which shine through his poverty: their just value and
esteem

Again when our mind is rightly set, a small measure of Fortitude will make us
patiently and cheerfully endure poverty: Now the mind is rightly set when it
places its felicity in Heavenly enjoyments: our treasure being stored up there,
our hearts will be there, and then how little shall we make of wanting the
trivial things of this World? Whereas if our hopes and contents are fixed here,
our Spirits must necessarily fall flat, as riches are withdrawn: A motive to a
right frame of Spirit in this particular, is, that God has placed it in our
powers to obtain it, and it is not in the power of Tyranny, oppression,
violence, or any casualty to take it from us.

Peradventure, it would be no difficult task to prove, that poverty or a mean
condition is better than riches, not with the flourish of words, but undeniable
realities: Supposing the mean man to have health, strength of body, industry,
and an honest mind: for without these no condition is happy: Consider only in
brief, that this condition yields him daily maintenance with some little
overplus; that his mind is bounded with his condition: that his Children are no
burden but an assistance to him, the boys soon assisting him in his labor,
and the girls the mother: That no anxious thoughts possess them about portions,
since what the father had, which is his industry, he leaves a legacy to his
Children: His labor that gets him bread, procures him an appetite, which makes
it sweet to him, to digest it well also, and maintain his strength: sleep
follows sound and undisturbed: He is past fear of want, and without desire of
acquiring riches: these particulars considered, and compared with the numerous
perplexities, crosses, temptations, which a great estate is liable to, and
daily distracted withal, will make it very evident, that poverty is not so
contemptible as it is esteemed, and that a small proportion of fortitude may
well enable us to undergo what through mistake and inconsideration, seems to be
so great an evil.

4. For the bearing of sickness and pain, consider, that patience enables thee
to bear them best, it keeps thy body in better temper, it moderates those
Spirits in thy blood, which impatience would heighten to a great degree of
sharpness, and consequently would render both the one and the other more
intense and intolerable: therefore if ease be thy end, bear thy pain and
sickness with composed meekness: as the best way to attain that end Epicurus
his argument is, that if pains be of long continuance they are tolerable; if
very accute they are but short, and often intermitting.

5. For loss of Friends: This touches I confess nearly, and requires my Son,
all thy virtuous strength to enable thee to bear so cutting an evil, supposing
them to be true Friends, fitly qualified; thou need not however despair,
time may make up that want with the supply of others, as true, firm, and well
tempered: However thou have thy self to enjoy, not in the sensuality of
pleasure, but in the sweet meditations of thy mind, thou have the remembrance
of thy lost Friends which should be pleasing to thee in recollection of all the
sweet discourses, and converses you have had together, in the good Counsels he
has given, in the assistance and supports it may be you have mutually afforded,
and in all other acts of real and generous friendship: above all you have the
wisdom and goodness of God, Man's chiefest Friend to contemplate upon, and to
supply the vacancy of these hours the Society of thy lost Friends use to take
up: which is a supplement abundantly sufficient.

6. As to the minds discontent, there are many arguments to strengthen the mind
against it, but the principal are two. The First (...) deduced from the thing
it self: The other from Christian hope, which is a compensation against any
evil the mind is liable to: As to the First it is to be considered, that there
is no real evil to the mind, but what it makes so to it self: For could the
mind be fortified before hand with the Principles of sound Reason, whatsoever
can happen to us from without, though at the first surprise, it might a little
startle and discompose us, yet should we, so prepared, soon recover our just
temper, and repel all assaults any adverse occasion may raise against us: It is
misunderstanding, and the weakness of false opinion which gives a sting and
asperity to those things we call evil, which indeed only are so, because we
suffer them to be so; and so Epicurus fully renders it in his excellent Axiom,
when he says, That discontent of mind is not grounded upon Nature, but upon
mere opinion of Evil. And that it is reason alone which makes life happy, and
pleasant, by expelling all such false conceptions and opinions, as may any way
occasion perturbation of mind.

But Secondly, There is a stronger argument to be raised from our Christian
expectation: the hopes of an infinite and permanent good may easily persuade us
to content, when we lose a small and transient one: If a man be worth 10000 l.
and loses 5 l. Why should this trouble him? Such and a far greater
disproportion does 10000 l. bear to the joys of Heaven, or else our belief of
Gods sacred word has no strength or validity in it: If then we have assurance
of this Beatitude, let us not be perplexed at small losses (for such they are
in themselves) though made great by the error and weakness of our
misconception, (...) of such things too we cannot truly call our own, because
liable to a thousand accidents that may bereave us of them: It is indeed our
pride makes them a real loss, for had we the prudence to reduce our minds to a
compliance with our condition (a lesson which though the Apostle had fully
learned, the most of us are but novices in) the abatement of our port, and fall
from popular estimation, would seize little upon us, against which I say there
cannot be any more cogent argument than that assurance the Scripture was given
to beget in us.

The great impediment to this fortitude is when either pain, (which is a real
evil) or the other grounded upon false conceit are occasioned and brought upon
us, not only through our own error or negligence, but our vices: In this case
also the remedy is obvious, namely to abandon those faults whose effects they
are: for it will be found one of the hardest matters in the World, to exercise
reason, and express the fruits of true wisdom, whilst we wallow in vice, and
pursue those enormities which debase and enervate the Soul; darkning its
brightest beams, subjecting us to captivation in all the assaults which either
from within or without can be made against us.

Loss of liberty seems at the first view, to be a great and insupportable evil,
against nature and the privilege of all other Creatures, upon some of whom,
however we have put restraint: it takes from us the opportunity of following
business, the choice of abode for livelihood and health, is usually grievous to
the mind, debauches often the manners and moral Habits, and is destructive to
health. Some of these inconveniences by prudence may be prevented, as what are
within our power, and others much mitigated by such considerations as arm us
with patience. If Imprisonment be for faults against the Law committed, the
best remedy is acknowledgment of the justice by which we are committed, and
repentance for the faults, a sight and loathing whereof being gained by the
restraint, in which being at freedom we might have persisted, makes
Imprisonment like David's affliction, when he said, It is good for me that I
was afflicted, otherwise I had gone astray.

If it be causless and unjust, we have the Balm of Innocence to comfort our
minds, and the consideration that our Great Master so suffered before with most
of his good Disciples, that in a bad World the Portion of the Righteous is
affliction, easy and tolerable (how severe soever in it self) because of the
evidences we have of a joyful estate in perpetuity after a momentany season.
The same supports are to us if it prove for debt, which being an effect of
those causes which are without our power, and and control, we have reason
patiently to submit to them upon the same considerations. Some other
alleviations there are, after we have used all prudent ways for our
enlargement: such are temperance, and reducing our appetites to things
wholesome, and easily acquirable: Contemplation of the Worlds vanity and
uncertainty, of Heavens joys and their perpetuity: That the Prison by taking
us off from other employment, gives us leisure to look back into our lives, to
mend what is amiss: to record the best of our experiences, for the benefit of
others; or any other way to do service to the world in communicating that
knowledge, and those notices we apprehend may be of use to mankind. We have
else to add, that Imprisonment as an evil, comes short of an oppressors Gout,
or fit of the Stone; yea of the perplexities which an ambitious man's projects,
in the course and process of them enforces him upon: Lesser evils are made
lighter by being compared with greater.

Lastly, as to death it self, reckoned the greatest evil, thou should bear
the apprehension of its approach, with the greatest fortitude. For if thou have
spent thy days well, there is no evil in it; thou art going to a better place,
to better company, to better enjoyments: The terror is chiefly in the
misapprehension, for Children dye without fear of it, it is the recompense of
innocence: Nothing but guilt makes it dreadful, nor ought that neither when
there is sorrow for sin, a reliance upon Gods mercy, through the merits of
Christ: without this, Death would be terrible to every Man and Woman in the
World; but where this hopeful assurance has possessed the mind, Death is truly
apprehended to be an unavoidable passage, to a better life. These are my Son,
the grounds upon which thy courage is to be maintained against the fear of
Death which being once gained, life will be more pleasant, because the greatest
disquiet thereof uses to be the dreadful apprehension of Death.

We have invented many ways to make it terrible to our selves; as the stories
of dying men, the amazement which their groans, and sometimes agonies before
departure raise in us: the laments at departure, all the funeral preparations,
keeping the sore fresh, and smarting: All which need not be, did we keep our
minds prepared, and our belief steady, that our Friends or our selves are
quitting a place of troublesome agitations and disquiets, for rest and a
participation of the joys of those who shall be received into the Society of
the blessed: Let all that can, be spoken upon this subject, the reality of the
whole matter must resolve into this, That an honest and good Life makes death
acceptable, and takes off all the horrors that use to attend it: This is the
highest persuasive to a good life, this and this only makes the way pleasant,
and the passage easy: But this however not of merit, because in the best there
are abundant defects, but God is merciful, not extreme to mark what is done
amiss, and the death of our blessed Savior was on purpose to advance the mercy
of God, by clearing his justice, and to cover a multitude of Transgressions:
were it not for this no flesh could be saved, and a well governed mind, though
conscious to it self of multitude of failings and offenses, may yet with great
asfurance rely upon the signal promises of Gods mercy, and having his firm
reliance therereupon, pass through this vale of misery, without affright, and
meet Death with the minds quiet.

The means of begetting true fortitude is wisdom: so that Fortitude is not born
with us, but is a warm affection of the mind, raised in us by the right
exercise of our reason; Others may be rash, audacious, hare-brained, or
tyrannically furious, but the wise and good only are truly valiant; Fortitude
being rightly dignified by the justness of the cause, and the excellency of the
end, which excludes from this worthy rank, the passionate, imperious,
revengful, the Soldier of fortune, the duelist, and who ever else causelessly
injures another; or occasions any private or public disturbance, for any
indirect, and unallowable end: Neither is fortitude strength of body, for so a
Horse or any other stronger Creature would be more valiant than a Man, and the
strongest men than those who are weaker. It Is true where strength of body is,
men are too often prompted, in confidence thereof to engage in quarrels, and
boisterous attempts, and so to be injurious to themselves and others: but this
is so far from being true valor, that it is rather a Bestial quality, which
the passion of those Creatures often exercises, and would do oftener did they
know their own strength, and the most advantageous ways of using it. Reason
teaches otherwise; That he who has most strength, either natural, or conferred
by the Law, should use it only for those good ends it was given for, the
protection of innocence, and reducing of contemptuous and injurious Persons, to
those just bounds, Nature or the Laws have set them.

God who is Almighty, against whom all other Powers, are but as the weakness of
a Babe, or what is more infirm; who to his might, has infinite wisdom joined,
never used this strength but in doing good or restraining evil, being in his
own nature, the most exact rule of Justice to himself. And what instance, or
what argument can be greater to man, than thus, to use his own little strength?
Not boasting of it, but giving thanks for it, as being a means of performing in
some proportion those good offices, which God Almighty takes greatest
satisfaction in.

Fortitude being no less eminent in patient sufferance, than in courageous
action.

To this virtue of Fortitude as it is passive, belong many other virtues: Such
are Meekness, Humility, Patience, readiness to assist the Distressed: Not to be
Contentious, or Revengeful, not to incense differing Persons, by Partaking,
Backbiting, useing a double Tongue; concerning each of which let my experience
advise thee, and lay up my Advices in thy heart, as more valuable, than
whatsoeve^ of wealth my industry can get, and my affection leave to thee.

Of Meekness.
Meekness will beget thee numerous Friends, but a contentious Spirit raises
multitude of Enemies: Moses though the greatest and chief Ruler of Gods people,
is styled the meekest upon the Earth. And yet a greater than he, was more Meek,
even our blessed Master. To the Meek belongs the inheritance of eternal life,
and what are all the Kingdoms of the Earth in comparison to it?

No suffering is grievous to them that are Meek, they are able to bear more
than the mighty.

Meekness is the fruit of Wisdom and sound understanding, but pride is the
daughter of ignorance and folly.

Through Meekness Christ overcame the Principalities of the World, and having
subdued Death it self, rose again victorious.

The Meekness of the Apostles was the contempt of arrogant worldlings, and yet
upon that Basis God established the Christian Church.

Of Humility and Patience.
Near akin to Meekness, are Humility and Patience, Meekness consisting in a
gentle and quiet demeanor, notwithstanding many provocations given; Humility
in not vaunting our selves above others, but having a low esteem of our selves
through consciousness of our many infirmities; Patience in a quiet sufferance
of those evils the World rudely throws upon us: These I would have the
complexion of thy mind, united and made one with thy Soul; Be very careful that
thou take them not up as the Politician does, to deceive the credulous, and by
their speciousness to compass some unworthy end, with which these excellent
graces hold greatest repugnancy: So to convert the best qualities to the vilest
uses, is Satan's office, when he assumes the shape of an Angel of light, and
those are doubtless guided by his instincts, who put on the garments of
Holiness and Virtue, for ends little different from his. Be therefore as thou
seem; neither judge of those Virtues as the World judges: Propose rather to
suffer than to do injury: But thy self to thy choice, whether thou had not
rather be John Baptist than Herod: Remember who are the blessed in the fifth of
St. Matthew, that we are not to judge of our condition as it is abstractedly
here; for then the most unjustly suffering Persons, the Apostle tells us, would
be of all men most miserable, that is doubtless in the Worlds account: but
conjoyntly, by taking in that interest and those promises good men have of
hereafter:

If thou look upon the World, and the deportment of Men and Women, thou will
either not think Humility to be a Christian grace, or that there are very few
deserving that appellation to be found. We generally have too mean an esteem of
others, and think too highly of our selves: Wealth puffs us up, and though it
be most uncertain, and no part of our selves, yet we vaunt as if it were, and
from the encouragement of it, despise those who have real and in trinsick
worth; Honor swells us, and the more if it be accquired by wealth, unworthy
office, or Servility: For they who have by true merit attained it, esteem it
least, and are most humble.

Learning lifts us up above others, and is aptest so to do when it is notional,
traditional, and most imperfect; for they who know best and most distinctly,
know also that the degree of knowledge man can reach is so small, and his
ignorance so infinitely exceeding his knowledge, that he has reason rather to
blush and hide his head, than arrogantly exalt himself above his Brother:
Divine knowledge has a contrary effect, for that gives us so true an
acquaintance with our selves, and so plainly discovers to us the multitude of
our defects and infirmities, together with the necessity of dependence upon
another for our Salvation, that it suddenly makes flat our Spirits, and stops
all the heavings, and commotions thereof.

But that which begets the greatest pride, and variance amongst us, is the high
conceit we have of our selves, for being of an opinion or mode of Religion
different from others: thus the Catholic despises the Protestant, The Turk
slights all Christians as despicable in their opinions: The Russian all other
professors of Christianity, as erroneous and unclean. The Episcopals think
slightly of others, as meanly learned, Heretical, and Schismatical. The
Presbyterian condemns the Papist as idolatrous, the Bishop as superstitious.
The Annabaptist prides himself in some nearer conformity with the Apostolical
Rules and Practice: The Quaker condemns them all, not only for errors in
Doctrine, Discipline, and practice, but difformity also in life and
conversation, to the Laws and Precepts of Christianity. Thus all arrogate to
themselves a nearer affinity to Truth than is in others, to the exalting
themselves, and debasing their Brethren, to the breach of Charity, and to the
extirpation of Humility, which is the most infallible Badge and token of true
Christianity. Weigh these things well (my Son) and conform thy practice to the
true purpose and intention thereof.

Let me only add further, that in what I have said, I would not have thee
think, that I conceive it altogether, and at all times unfit for good men to
manifest that they have courage, or that they are never to show a just anger
against whatsoever provocations: All kind of wickedness is a just object of our
anger, though it may not be prudence always to show it, and upon every slight
occasion: The defense of our Country, and of the good Laws which maintains the
peace and quietness thereof, is a just motive to our courage, which to want at
times when those require it, imprints upon us the indelible mark of Coward
below manhood; Religion was never designed to unman us, or to reduce us to such
a frame of Spirit, as by our pusillanimity to encourage all wicked and
injurious persons, to offer what violence they please to those whose principles
engage them not to defend themselves, their Wives and Children, their Laws,
their Country, their Religion; whatsoever principle is thus irrational must
doubtless be grounded upon some mistake, or misunderstanding, when it leaves
all that is estimable and sacred amongst us, to the rapine of unreasonable men:
It makes us in part guilty ^f their insolences, and taxes the commands of God
with the same blemish of injustice. It Is true indeed the Primitive Christians,
sent abroad to convert the World, without strength or power, more than what was
in the verity of their Doctrines, the convincing efficacy of their miracles,
the sanctity of their lives, used no other force than what those contained, for
they had no other: But the World being now (at least in show) converted, and
professing Christianity, for one part of us to expose our selves to the other,
or for any of us to judge that we are to leave all that is near and dear to us,
in whatsoever distress, is contrary to the reason and nature of man; and
therefore cannot be agreeable to the precepts of Christianity: This is almost
of universal consent, for do not all engage in Wars, and partake where they
conceive the cause is most just? And even those who at first said, they must
use only prayers and tears, have upon the urgency of provocation, flown into
Arms, and given prof of almost irresistible Valor. I speak not this my Son,
to prompt thee to slacken the reins of reason, or to beget in thee an aptness
to fly out upon every slight occasion administered, which is against the scope
of almost all that I have written; but to keep thee a Man that no misconceived
opinions may ty up thy heart and hands, when the defense of Justice, the Laws
and common preservation requires thy assistance.

Otherwise I commend Patience to thee, let thy prudence bear what thy passion
would make worse: He that is angry upon every little occasion, loses the
effects of it, and renders it despicable: He that raises a patient man to
anger, will be generally condemned, and the World will conclude there is a
competent cause; it must be a very great wind, or some hurricance that shakes a
strong foundation. Be assured that Patience will sweeten thy life, and make
thee avoid many evils impatience would thrust thee upon. Again Patience is to
be commended to thee, upon the account of frustrating the purpose of an enemy,
for if he designs to break thy peace, by offering some injuries, if thou
show thy self insensible thereof, or rather return good for evil, thou
preservest thy mind from being shaken by his evil purpose; and peradventure by
the sweetness of thy temper, thou gainest a proselyte, and make a Friend of
an Enemy.

Concerning moderating our Desires.
Earnestness in Desire is an impetuous passion: usually bred with us, for even
infants have it: And is continued to old age, unless the right use of reason,
and experience bridles it: As Children cry for baubles, which in a few hours of
enjoyment they throw by and covet new: So man is quickly satiated with what he
has, and even in perplexity for new acquisitions. This is a great diminution to
his content, and thrusts him always upon new designs to acquire what will but
still heighten his desires: Sit down therefore, and continue in the tract of an
honest calling: contenting your self with slow and moderate gain, for he that
makes have to be rich cannot be innocent; that is, will put himself upon ways
of hasty profit, which in his serious mind he cannot justify. Need does not so
much breed desire, as desire begets need: And therefore he that has much, and
yet desires more, begets a need of that which he desires: A desiring man is
therefore always needy; yea, as a just punishment upon him, he wants even that
which he has: because through the earnest desire of more, he enjoyes not what
he has, nor takes not that satisfaction in it, which he might do, were it not
for his desire of what he has not.

The cure of immoderation in desires, consists in these particular
considerations:

1. That the happiness of man does not consist in the enjoyment of much wealth,
great honors or irrational pleasures. This all the ancient Philosophers in
their writings acknowledged, though their lives often contradicted their
Doctrines; like many of our Divines, who are one thing in the Pulpit, and
another in conversation. However it is a truth, which experience every where
makes good, and both the Lives and Doctrines of our great master, and his
Disciples, in the whole current of the new Testament evinces it. If then our
happiness consists not in these, why should we be earnest in their pursuit, and
not content our selves with easy acquisitions, wherein indeed happiness
consists: we hunt too earnestly for that which is at hand, and lose what we may
enjoy, and indeed have already, if we would content our selves within the
bounds of due moderation, and not place it in that which has it not.

2. A second expedient is, That we live within the bounds of our estate, and
not think our selves unhappy if we have not so fine a House, so rich clothes,
nor live in so great port as many of our neighbors. They can have but Content,
and that may be, if you are wise, within your reach: This would be a hard
lesson if necessity were upon you, absolute necessity: But if it be not, (as if
you prove a good Husband, diligent, and temperate, I believe it never will be,)
the lesson is easily learned. On the other hand, if you lanch out beyond, or
but to the extent of your estate, you can bear no cross, you can lay up little
for your Children, and you necessitate your self to immoderate desire, and
unjustifiable courses to fulfill them.

3. You will then easily moderate your desires, and content your self with what
God blesses you withal, if you consider that you are but to pass through this
life to a better: and that you may the more surely attain it, you are to place
your desires chiefly upon the best and most excellent object of desire, which
is the fruition of God, and Heavenly happiness hereafter. Riches may fail,
Honor is vanity, and pleasures sickness, and the wise man styled them madness:
What matters it then with how little you content your self withal for the
present, when by this way of Moderation, and a sober and good life, you gain
assurance of enjoying durable, yea, eternal pleasures hereafter: This will
sweeten your life in what soever state it is; and if it be sufficient to make
all afflictions tolerable, how can it fail to give you true solace and content,
in a middle, and no uneasy condition. Little and much are then all one, when
the bent of your thoughts is directed chiefly on the enjoyment of him, who is
the Fountain of all true happiness, and in whose mansions there are sulness of
pleasures for evermore. Weigh these things, my Son, with a sound mind, and
learn with the blessed Apostle in what ever State you are to be therewith
content.

Of helping the distressed.
Concerning helping the distressed: let me advise, that thou be always in a
ready mind to do it, in thy Purse, counsel, or other personal assistance: If
you do it not, why should you expect to be helped in your distress: You are not
to say, what is such a ones sorrow or affliction to you? for in every ones
calamity you are concerned, by the relation of mankind, by the tie of humanity,
from the great command and example of our Master; who went about doing good,
and healing all that were sick: Pray what is your misery to God Almighty? or to
another man? and yet you will implore divine aid, and expect the assistance of
your Brother: It Is a pleasure in which the Divine nature is much delighted, and
yet vouchsafes that man also should partake thereof: It Is the great office of
the Angels Ministry, who stand ready at the Throne of Grace to put in execution
the pleasing mandates of the Almighties Benedictions. Let not prosperity make
thee despise the sorrows or wants of thy Brother, it is an argument and effect
of Ignorance, for there are ten thousand ways to bring thee into adversity,
and no man is secure a moment: the whole is said, if thou rememberest that
remarkable promise, He that shows mercy, shall find mercy in the day of his
trouble.

Not to be Contentious.
The next is not to be Contentious: This relates to opinion and propriety: Men
are very much pleased with making others of their own opinion, this should be
done only out of desire of doing good to others, from a just apprehension of
Truth, and a strong persuasion, that it will in some regard or other be better
with them you would convince, in case they believe as you believe: Were these
your Motives, you would not be contentious in your debates, but reason gently
with mildness of Spirit, and strength of Argument: It Is ambition, pride of
Victory, or design that makes men passionate, and froward in their discourses:
And it is ignorance if we think we shall effect more by that than by reasonings
friendly managed: What has all contentious arguings produced? but confirmation
in each party in their several opinions; animosities, divisions, breach of
charity; and sometimes the worst effects, envyings, hatred, war: and that
because we were, or are not steered by the ends above mentioned: Content your
self that others are of an opinion different from yours; it is sufficient that
yours is built upon justifiable grounds, and have so much charity as to believe
that others think theirs so too, unless you see design swayes them, which cuts
off all your hope of convincing them, unless you can alter their design.

I like not the holding an argument for argument sake, it should never be done
but for the sake of Truth, and therefore (contrary to the custom of the World)
weigh heartily what is urged by him thou arguest withal, that if thou see
reason for it, thou may by being better informed, change thy opinion. I
dislike therefore the terms of the Schools, of Opponent and Defendant, and the
word Polemical: as if to dispute were to set us together by the ears, or to
enable us to maintain a bad cause: He is but a very little gainer who conquers
another by his greater ability to dispute; as I think it is scarce honesty in a
Lawyer, to undertake the defense of a cause he knows to be bad: and therefore
our Logical niceties, and syllogistical crafts, are justly banished from all
grave and reverent Assemblies, who worthily prefer truth and reality, before
the charms of Rhetoric and subtleties of Logic: Let thy Conscience be first
persuaded before thou openest thy mouth in any dispute, and then urge fairly
the grounds by which thy Conscience is persuaded. My Father Walwyns rule in
this case was: Argue mildly, conscientiously.

In the Second place, Contention refers to Propriety; which respects thy
Person, or what is else thine. If in any of these thou be'st injured, consider
first, whether it be not greatest prudence, to pass it over unobserved; or if
it be needful to take notice of it, whether it be not best to let the fear of
punishment or legal satisfaction keep him in aw from doing a fresh injury, or
persuade him by thy patience, to ask thee pardon: try what fair and gentle
means will produce: Moderate and impassionate reasonings: But if thou find
obstinacy, rancour, and malice, let thy prosecution be vigorous, spare no
pains, no time, no cost, to make the Law do thee right, this is necessary to
slavish natures, to whom fear of punishment is a greater restraint, than the
love of Virtue. It Is a justice also thou owe as well to mankind as thy self,
that troublesome and unreasonable men, may meet with sufficient
discouragements, and since they cannot by power of reason, they may by
sufferance, or fear of it be persuaded, to bear themselves, with candor and
justice to other men: However be assuredly convinced that it is better suffer
them to do an injury, by how much some little trouble of body, or detriment in
estate, is a lesser evil than the worm that gnaws the Conscience, and keeps it
in continual anxiety: Besides injuries are almost immortal, very fruitful, ever
charging the memory; nothing can extinguish them but Repentance, and
satisfaction.

Arm therefore, as a wise man said, slowly, swiftly: Slowly, from thy own
inclination and calmness of mind, from thy own unwillingness to do an injury,
or engage in contention: Swiftly, from an appearance of thy Adversaries evil
purposes, that thou may timely obviate his wicked ends, and that he may
receive no advantage from thy delays or neglect, but be titely followed with
sound advice, and diligent prosecution; which course if good men would observe,
and be assistant to one another therein, the number of villainous and vexatious
persons would soon lessen; For nothing makes a Tyrant in any degree, but the
easy yielding of the people to the admission of gradual injuries, by which
right in time comes to be easily and wholly oppressed, and none to flourish but
the injurious. What therefore thou do in this particular, is not for thy own
sake only, but a common debt thou owe to the good of mankind.

Of Revenge.
Concerning revenge. It Is a Drugg transplanted out of Italy and France into
England, The French is a brisk biting Plant, the Italian more poisonous: The
French wreak their anger more quick and openly, the other cowardly, moodily,
and maliciously, both against the rules of Philosophy and Christian patience.
Let your rule be, that you never use revenge that bears not exactly the stamp
of justice, of which therefore the Law should be the executioner, and not your
passion: Endeavor therefore in case of high injury, or provocation to bring it
to this; and what is above or besides that leave to God Almighty, and the sting
of the offenders Conscience, it is better do so than by afflicting your own mind
in prosecution of revenge, keep the ungratefulness of the injury fresh in your
memory, to your perpetual disquiet, and it may be contract a guilt by some
irregular or evil course your passion makes you take, more grievous afterward
and mischievous to you than the injury you would revenge: Not that I would have
thee slightly or easily fly to the Law, but use it where necessity requires for
relieving thy self or others oppressed, and for preventing of injuries: To
forgive is most noble on the part of the injured, It is the glory of a man to
pass by an offense, said Solomon. To be forgiven most obliging on the part of
the injurious, prevailing far, unless upon very perverse natures. If thy
Stomach rises, and thou think much to forgive; Consider how much greater thy
offenses have been against God, how infinitely exceeding his kindnesses have
been toward thee; that thou daily beg'st his forgiveness, that thy remission
toward others is the condition of what thou ask of God: And Lastly, that
thou remittest but pence, and expectest to have thy Bonds canceled of hundreds
and thousands. By Revenge we design to bring the person doing the injury to a
real sorrow for it, and to a willingness to make acknowledgment and
restitution: The best way to effect thi^, is to take but a slight notice of the
injury, to do kindness to him that did it, to win him to thee by thy
courtesies, this will be very pleasing to thy self, and if any spark of good
nature remain, it must be exceeding operative upon thy Adversary: So that thou will better recover thy end by pardoning and obliging, than by prosecuting thy
Revenge.

Revenge as the word usually imports, is a tenacious retention of an injury
closely in thy mind, with a purpose to repay it when opportunity serves, by
whatsoever unlawful ways, making ones self the Judge; and so it can be
executed, it matters not to what damage to thy self, to thine own or the
othersrelations; I would have thee heartily abhor this, opposite to all good
Laws, the Principles of Nature, and Christianity: It will keep thee much
perplexed before thou have done the fact, and abundantly more after: the
violence of passion begets and maintains it, whereas in a high degree partaking
the nature of all other vices, it in like manner leaves repentance, shame, and
horror of Conscience behind it; It Is bestial, despising the documents of
reason, and Gods Sacred Word; void of prudence, using no other conduct than
what a Fox, a Wolf, a Bear makes use of, when lust or rage incites them, and
therefore never to be practiced by those who bear the image of the Almighty,
who is said to be long suffering, slow to anger. And who never exercises it,
but either, and that chiefly, for correction and reclaimer of offenders, or
upon the incorrigible, who are not justly the subjects of thy Anger, but whom
the lash of the Law, or Divine vengeance alone must punish.

Of heightning the differences of others.
Never engage in the heightning others Differences, it is the proper business of
the great enemy of mankind, and of wicked men: Leave it to them, and be thou in
the number of those who are blessed, because peace makers: The general
affection thou should bear to mankind, ought to oblige thee to this: for
what ever particular obligations or respects thou have to Relations, Friends,
or Neighbors, whereby thou art prompted readily to assist, and do them all
good offices, yet ought not this in any measure to warp or oppose the duty we
all owe to mankind in general, and common equity, without which every little
Town or Village would be ever in conttest, and run into Faction: He is very
unfit to be a peace maker, who comes not with all indifferency to the decision
of a controversy, knowing no Friend or Relation, but prepared to adhere solely
to what is right on which side soever it appear: you may give away what you
please of your own, but in this case you defraud another to pleasure your
Friend; and become much more unjust than he who gave occasion to the
controversy; because besides the breach of the Rules of Justice, you betray a
trust, which either is committed to you by the parties in difference, or which
Laws of Humanity entrust, every man withal for conservation of the Peace and
Government of the World.

A most remarkable instance of this we have in the life of Sir Tho. Moor, who
being Lord Chancellor of England, determined a Cause in Chancery against his
Son in Law, who in confidence of his near affiance with the Judge his Father,
would come to no fair and reasonable terms with his Adversary: He might easily
have found plausible pretenses for an opposite Decree, and been born out, by
the greatness of his place and power, but he did much better, by leaving
himself, not only in this case, but in multitudes of others, the great example
of an exact and worthy Justiciary, whereby he preserved that cheerful and
pleasant frankness which in all his actions he showed, and left behind him the
richest perfume, and sweetest savor, of an honest name, to be preferred before
all wealth or Honors of the World: Follow so good an example: Partiality as it
is the offspring of injustice, so is it a procurer of hatred, and just distaste
from the person injured, which no ingenious man would draw upon himself; though
the tie of Conscience should be his greatest, and most valued reason.

I have spoken much of justice through the whole course of this advice, and
that thou should much rather suffer wrong, than do any: I shall therefore
add little to the persuasion of this so excellent a virtue: Only remember that
I disown thee in every unjust action, thou stand upon thine own legs there,
and the weight thou bear will certainly depress thee: Be watchful therefore,
and let a line of justice run through every action of thy life: Remember thou
art bound to love thy neighbor as thy self; thy reason therefore is to stand
in an indifferency, when thy self and neighbor come in competition: Do justice
then as if thou were the Umpire, and thy self unconcerned: How happy would this
world be, and how pleasant would it be to live in it, were this so general
principle digested and practiced by every man: we should not need then to be so
anxiously careful for our selves, for we should all take care one of another:
Whereas by being partial to our selves, and thoughtless of what injuries we do
to others, friendship, concord, security, peace of mind, readiness to assist:
and all sweetness of human life is lost amongst us; man stands single every one
for himself, and is thereby deprived of those mutual helps and assistances,
which would flow from the principles of general justice. God loves and provides
for us all, has given us commands and motives to be good one to another: not
superficially in words and shows, but as we are to our selves. Guide thy self
my Son by those commands, and do what lies in thee to rectify the world in
this particular. Thou have to encourage thee, besides the justice of it, the
improbability that it will be to thy damage: since doing good to all, and hurt
to none, thou may rationally expect, if not to be beloved and kindly dealt
with, yet to be less injuriously handled, than where thou have not softened the
Spirits of men, by thy own amicable deportment.

It is necessary to the performance of just actions, to be knowing in the
nature and circumstances of things: and for that end and purpose to examine
particulars with advice and deliberation, that thou may not either do
injustice at unawares, or justice by chance: Be not then too sudden, and
positive, when thou have not sufficiently deliberated: Be careful not to be
swayed by affection to either party, by persuasion of friends, by any
temptation; and where it is meet to moderate extremities, do it with the
consent of both parties: and be very inclinable to it if thou thy self be the
injured party. Be armed however against the three great assailers of Justice,
Fear, Love, Gain, and then thou stand an upright man, if thou give way to
the first, thou art a Coward, and deliverest up a Fort that was tenable, to the
damage of thy Country: If to the second, thy love is unseasonably shown, and
where the matter admits it not, thou may as well snatch off another man^
Cloak, and give it him thou accountest thy Friend: If to the last, thou art
notoriously unjust, and wilt be infamous; They are only worldly wise, whose
eyes are blinded by bribes, but are indeed to be ranked in the number of those
Fools who have said in their heart there is no God, for did they then give
credid to it, or at all consider it, they would prefer a little gain, to the
loss of inward peace, and the favor of God which must follow acts of
injustice, he being a God of pure eyes that cannot behold unrighteousness.

Of Temperance.
Were it not for the perverseness of custom, it would be sure no difficult
matter to persuade thee to Temperance, since it is the best and most allowed
means of healthful, long, and happy life: But mankind, led by sensual and
present pleasure does scarce do any thing with his reason: Observe it in what
you will, in Meats, Drinks, Clothing, Pleasures, Gain, Knowledge; in this also
he strives to take in more than he can digest, that is, make use of, in the
progress of his life, which ought to be the end of his knowledge: Concerning
Temperance as it relates to health, enough is writ of it, and thy experience
and reason will soon assent, though at first it may be thy sense and addiction
to pleasure will despise it: But young men will hardly be wise by others
instruction, but from their own sufferings: In this as in the quest of other
Virtues, how can you do better than observe the lives of the best men: and not
the lives only but the Precepts. It was not from necessity, but choice, that
our Savior declined the Courts of Princes, and splendour of greatness, or being
himself a Prince: Preferring rather Parents and a profession of mean esteem in
the opinion of the sensual world: and chose for his Disciples, and was attended
by men of lowest rank: as if purposely God had designed, to rectify the
judgments of mankind, and shame them out of the fond Idolatry they generally
bestow on what is in esteem amongst the great ones of the World. To be content
with food and raiment, not in our Divines sense when we can get no more, but as
the best expedient for keeping us truly Religious, and in the tracts of Virtue:
Not to mind, or labor after high things to equal our selves to men of lowest
degree, for association if virtuous; for reclaimer (as our Savior did) if
vicious. You may think at first sight that this is a strictness not to be
endured, a penance too great to be suffered, but look upon it with the Eye of
Reason, and you will find it the pleasure, and happiness of Life: for it cuts
off the necessity of Toil and anxiety: The temperate have less to provide, and
are better armed against Losses, and the Casualties of Time: less liable to
expensive Sickness, less obnoxious to Envy, and may more easily recover a
contentful being, in a common calamity: I had rather leave thee, and it is
better thou should leave thy Children, with patient and prudent minds and
remperate desires, than great estates, for much is too little to satisfy
inordinate appetites, and when Riches are lost, which have Wings and will fly
away, a Temperate Spirit once gained by the sound exercise of Reason will ever
remain, and stand thee in great stead whatever befalls thee. Besides the Lives
and Precepts of the best men, guide thy self in this by thy own Reason, and
just regard to thy own health: What ever crosses either of these, decline with
care, and be true to thy self in the observation thereof. Plain, wholesome, and
simple feeding, prefer before dainties and variety: convenient and cleanly
living, with few and well qualified Servants, before State, and a great
retinue: A competency, before a vast estate; Mediocria firma, was the beloved
Motto of a wise Man of my acquaintance: Decline Honors, and Offices, power to
oppress and do injuries: In a word, enjoy thy self and a Friend, which thou
can never do, if thou lanchest out in the ways of excess and luxury: For
those who do so are never at home, never themselves, but are still harassed,
and hurried from their natural tempers, ever in a vain quest of that content
that is to them unattainable, which whilst they are fruitlesly pursuing, thou
may in the paths of Temperance easily and constantly enjoy.

Many men regard not what they have, but proposing the acquisition of an estate
to such an extent, as they in their minds fancy, neglect the present, and for
the compassing of it embroile themselves in multiplicity of business, and
anxious cares; during which time; nothing tastes with them but their profit:
Nay, if they chance to retire to some Country solitude, for a small space,
being persuaded to it as necessary to alleviate their minds, they carry their
cares with them, which so wholly possess them, that all the relish and delights
of innocent diversions, Philosophical or Religious discourses, are taken away,
and wholly swallowed up in the gulf of their designs: They reckon to live when
their ends are obtained: But Creed mihi, non est Sapientis dicere, vivam:
Martial Ep. 16. l. 1.

Sera nimis vita est crastina, vive hodie.
It Is not a wise man's part, Julius, to say,
I live to morrow: Better live to day.
The Argument's plain, the present is hardly certain, the future altogether
uncertain. To say you will live, that is, enjoy your self hereafter is
therefore mere folly. Yea the ground of your resolution is as vain, for you may
better enjoy your self with a moderate estate, than when you are encombred with
the many cares that unavoidably attend a great: For content and peace of mind,
is a matter founded within us, not depending upon excess and great superfluity,
but is the blessed fruit of sound understanding, and the right observation of
the principles of uncorrupted nature and pure Religion.

The Temperate man is ever in the best capacity to give and take Council: they
have made the best use of their time, and gained the truest Aphorisms from
their experiences: they have been least biassed by corrupt interest, and kept
nearest to the implanted light of nature, and additional or communicated by
Grace, in the personal appearance of the Son of God: The corrupt customs of the
world have not so much prevailed upon them, or blinded the eyes of their
understandings, by the false, artificial colors luxury has brought in, and
perverseness still maintains: This enables them to advise best, and well to
discern the sincerity, and goodness of what others advise them: A thousand
benefits thou will find from this lovely Mistress, which I cannot on a sudden
enumerate, but which thou will daily find verified to thee, if thou addict thy
self to her pleasing Society. If occasion brings thee to great Feasts and
variety, then is thy time to be wary and to exercise Temperance, which do with
least regret to the Society, but with just regard to thy own health. Some
degrees of excess can hardly be avoided, without distaste: but use thy reason,
and do thy best. Observe the most Temperate, and either follow theirs, or be
thy self their example.

Concerning Diet and Apparel.
It is an unhappiness to be of too curious an appetite, and not contented with
plain and wholesome Food, which that you may, allowing a competent distance of
time between your meals, interpose not ordinarily other trivial repasts, that
so your stomach may be preserved vigorous, and fit for a new meal. Especially
forbear sitting in a Coffee-house, Alehouse, Tavern, for those intervenient
drinkings, which are now exceeding common, beside other evils, dull the
appetite, and take off that quickness of stomach and hunger, which makes
feeding pleasant. Be not curious in dressing or sawces, so your victuals be
cleanly and wholesome, every thing is best in its natural taste, especially when
Hunger is the Sauce.

Feed Temperately, leaving with some appetite: Decently, not in too great
morsels, and in no unseemly posture: Not greedily, or hastily: Chew your meat
well, and prepare it for the stomach: Cheerfully, engage not at meals in over
serious discourses: Civilly, strive not for the best, but offer it to others,
and keep it not, but upon importunity; This gains great respect and Creates
kindness.

Have a care of that which you love: of too great variety and a feast.
Drunkenness is a foolish vice, and has nothing to commend it, but its hoity,
toity, insensibility; if that may be accounted commendations: Drinking is for
thirst or pleasure, the first is best performed by the natural drink,
Spring Water, or a middle sort of Beer: The other is lost after the second
draught. But if there were a pleasure in drunkenness, which yet the Friar
appointed for a punishment, the numerous mischiefs it creates, does abundantly
more than countervail it: I will not enumerate them, look about you, with a
sober eye, and you may daily and every where find them. Let this suffice, that
a drunkard loses much time, and is at great expense to make his body sickly,
his reputation crazy, to diminish his estate, and shorten his life. This is to
be considered, before the habit is gained, for that once gotten, the vice is
sufficiently punished by it self, for a Drunkard ends in a Sot, and though he
sees and hates his own folly, he cannot leave it.

Cloth your self answerable to your condition, decently and cleanly, but never
gawdily. Let not Clothing be a burden either to your body or estate, but a
defense against the cold and injury of the air. Alter as the weather does: and
be before hand against a surprise. Be not singular in your habit, nor too nice
a follower of the fashion. Regard ease and convenience in the first place, and
handsomeness in the Second. No more need be said to this Particular.

Of Chastity.
For the clothing of the mind I have taken care in what has been before
written; I shall only mention one virtue more, which I have reserved to the
last, not as of least concernment, but that it may make the greatest
impression, that is of Chastity: you are to keep your body clean and wholesome,
free from all pollution, either by unseemly actions upon your self, or
defilement from Women: I enjoin you therefore to be strict to your self in
these particulars, and exactly continent: This will render you healthful,
active, and vigorous: preserve your color and strength: make you desirable for
a husband, able to get Children sound and healthful, and so preserve posterity:
Whereas if you should render your self a prey to Harlots, who know not what
love is, being swayed by lust or gain, your body will be enervated, your
strength decayed, your health lost, your color and complexion faded, and your
self rendered an unfit companion for a good and virtuous Woman, by joining with
whom, in that state of pollution, you will endanger the conveying of Diseases
to her and your posterity, and so render your and their lives perpetually
miserable. Take notice that of all Diseases the Pox is the worst, both in
respect of the ignominy that attends it, as also of the multiplicity of
grievous maladies, noisome, painful, and hardly if at all perfectly curable,
that are inseparable from it. Nor let it in the least encourage you, that some
have been seemingly cured of it, for the contrary is most certain, that whoever
has in any reasonable degree been defiled with it, they have never recovered a
perfect, no not their former state of health: But are upon changes of weather,
or any adventitious sicknesses exposed to returns of pains. And those
sicknesses likewise thereby become more difficultly cured. This I speak of
those who seem to have been most perfectly curable. Whereas in the cure, great
hazards are run in the methods that are used, generally consisting in the use
of Mercurial Medecines, little errors committed in the use thereof proving
often of worse consequence than the disease it self. My experience has met with
many instances of this kind: Against all this there is no sure preservative but
Chastity.

The remedy that Bocalines Mountebank Zeccha used to prevent the getting that
foul Disease, was very remarkable; he advised that when desire had got the
victory of reason, and was hurrying a man to the use of a Woman of sale, that
he should only give so much respite to the impulfe of his passion, as to look
upon a Picture (which he was always, as a preservative to carry in his pocket)
of a Gentleman, otherwise handsome, but without a Nose; not doubting but the
sight of that deformity, and the consideration that he was now about that which
might render him such another unsightly object, would make him pause, and so
dispirit him, as to render him unfit for that dangerous encounter: For what
security can there be from a Woman that has prostituted her body to all comers;
and who takes delight to communicate that disease to one Man they have received
from another? Be assured there is not in the world so vile a thing as a Whore,
so foul, so false, so treacherous. And though men may flatter themselves that
they can oblige them by great gifts to themselves only, they meanly suffer
themselves to be deceived; for there are but two things that make a whorish
Woman, Lust, or Gain, be it either of them or both, they are motives to her
self, and have no respect to you, but to make a prey of you.

If Zecchas Picture be hard to get, I will tell you of one more easily
acquirable, and no less effectual: That is to carry about you two of Solomon's
Verses, which read over before you go about the engagement. One is in the 6. of
Proverbs the 16. By means of a Whorish Woman a man is brought to a piece of
Bread. And the Adulteress will hunt for the precious life. The other is in the
7. Chap. v. the 26. She has cast down many wounded, yea many strong men have
been slain by her, Her house is the way to hell, going down to the Chambers of
Death.

What can be more? Here Is Poverty, and in that sadness, dejection of Spirit,
contempt: Yea, here is destruction, death, and Hell it self; And all for what?
A pleasure mixed with doubts and fears: A pleasure (if it may therefore so be
called) short and faint, inferior to that of Beasts, and which only has a true
value from the hopes of Posterity.

A Prostitute regards particularly her own interest, and is to get from you all
she can: She is from her followers to provide for herself, and lay up for
sickness, and in them hastily approaching Age: When you are sucked dry, and your
money is spent, you are to expect the Prodigals fate, to be turned out of doors,
and perhaps to end your days in a loathsome some Prison, she cared not for you
in your prosperity but for her ends, which being served she scorns, and hates
the sight of you, being conscious that your misery was caused by her, she
avoids so upbraiding an object: But oh! oh the contrary, the pleasures of a
truly good Wife: Your health and safety is her desire, and interest: she take
from you all the care of household affairs: she is provident in your family:
careful to provide for you all the contentments of your life: desirous of
Children (which to Prostitutes are a shame, and a burden) solicitous for their
education, retaining that sweet and Motherly affection which Harlots have lost:
In your health cheerful, comfortable, and provident: In your sickness
officiously assistant: grows up with you, knows and is thoughtful in all your
occasions: studies the preservation of your, to her precious, life, as beauty
declines in her, other indearments increase, and amply supply that want: These
and a thousand contentments more (which I have amply enjoyed in the society of
your good Mother) you also may find in a Wife, if preserving your body Chaste
and unpolluted, you make not too precipitate a choice; consult therefore those
instructions I have set down in the Chapter of Choosing a Wife: And be assured
that there is no state of man so happy if on both sides prudently managed, as
that of Marriage: Which therefore in Countries Christian and civilized, is
established by Law, and of highest Reputation; The other that is loose and
licentious is by Law and the Judgment of wise men condemned as ignominious. And
if in any times or Country, it proves otherwise, it is the clearest argument,
that the people thereof are growing up to the highest state of Debauchery; and
depravation of Human nature. Consult this Chapter very carefully, and intently
in your youthful days, before the allurements of this vicious world, and the
insinuations of bad Council, and example, have stopped your ears, and so
vitiated your affections, as to reduce you to that miserable and reprobate
state, as not to be capable of Council or Reclaimer.

Of the Prosperity of the Wicked.
But to wave Method, and to speak of things as they come in my way, or casually
offer themselves: Admire nothing, but the works of the Almighty, and the
prosperity of the Wicked: and yet not the last neither; for observing their
end, thou shall find cause of pity, they are miserable in their happiness, a
great proportion of bitter is mingled with their sweet, and their close is
calamitous: Their felicity is an object of thy compassion, more than of thy
envy, they have made a bad choice; and their greatest unhappiness is not to he
punished in this life. Like persons that travel easily and in state, to a
dismal Prison, where they must endure all the penalties their extravagant lives
have merited, and in consideration of which they would gladly make an exchange
with them who have seemed here to be most miserable.

This must be as certain as that there is a God, Heaven, and Hell: For it is
not consistent with a Deity, and with that which he has declared of himself,
that Wicked Men should go unpunished; since else all the precepts and
incitements to virtue, all the ^^hortations, and threats against Vice, would
not only be of no effect, but mere bugbears to affright only the weak and less
apprehensive. Thou will it may be say, that Virtue is in it self so lovely,
that it needs no reward but it self: And Vice has its own horrors, an
inseparable punishment: It is doubtless so: But man has lost his natural taste,
and deviated, by force of custom, into a disrelish of things according to
nature: So that were it not for punishment and reward the world could not
subsist: Wickedness would have no bounds, the number of the good would be
infinitely inconsiderable: Force, Lust, and Rapine would overspread the face of
the earth: and therefore the ever wise God, who does all things in the best
manner, and for the conservation and continuation of the World, has not only
engraven in our hearts a liking of what is good, and an abhorrence of what is
evil, but, finding those hand writings of his in some measure defaced, has in
all ages and Countries declared himself by positive Laws, severe threats,
frequent and exemplary punishment, against the growing wickedness of man; so
that it is a matter altogether vain, and frivolous, to think that sin should go
unpunished, except where by hearty penitence, and steady resolutions of
amendment, with the performance of those resolutions, his wrath is averted, and
his favor gained, which upon those terms he is always willing to afford, he
having sworn as he lives, That he wills not the Death of a sinner, but
rather that he may repent and live. Esteem therefore the impenitent Wicked, to
be in the most miserable condition of all men; and that their seeming
Prosperity is matter rather of lamentation than of admiration. That it is good
for them to be punished here, and that nothing is of more dismal aspect than
prosperous evils, not only because of those who suffer thereby, but even of the
Actors themselves, who are reserved for the more extreme and durable
punishments prepared for them hereafter.

Of Constancy in good Resolutions.
I am now to speak of Constancy in mantaining good Resolutions, one of the most
excellent, and most difficult performances of Man. The good that I would, I do
not, and the evil that I would not, that I do, because sin is ever present vith
me: The Apostle so confesses in the Person of mankind: They who love innocence,
and examining their own ways, find this or that to be disliked in the progress
of their lives, and thereupon take Resolutions of amendment, will easily
confess the difficulty of this task, and wise men have esteemed this conquest
preferable, before victory over our enemies: Sin being our greatest and most
potent adversary.

Yet I think they have ill compared it, for that Victory is far below it, whose
cause is grounded upon ambition, desire of rule, revenge, or gain, because
fighting is then not our duty, but our crime: And the Victory, whose foundation
is a noble courage in defense of our Country, our Laws, and Rights, against
haughty usurpation and Tyranny, is in some degrees above it: because its end is
a general good: this, a particular. But this by the way: It Is soon confessed that
he is the best man who has fewest inclinations to evil: And that man how
vicious soever he has been, who now detesting his vices, takes resolutions, and
performs them, of putting off all his vicious habits; is dear to Almighty God
and his holy Angels, as having upon prudence and choice declined the opposite
party, and Listed himself under Christ's Banner: It Is also much easier to
continue the constant tract of goodness, which we have trod from our infancy,
than to recover our selves when we have gone astray: Study this point, my Son,
and when thou have examined thy own heart, and found therein any wanderings from
the Laws of Conscience, let it be thy task with great diligence to take up, and
recover thy innocence, set thy self with vigor to it, for it is an undertaking
thou will find great difficulties in. Let me advise thee to be especially
watchful, when temptation and opportunity incline thee to a relapse: for then
is the hour of battle, and shows of valor are but vain boasts, if they are not
active in the instant of danger: Compliance with old acquaintance; yielding to
the present instigations of passion: And insensible forgetfulness of thy
promises to God and thy Conscience, these are the Rocks against which this
Virtue is in danger to be Shipwrackt: Remember God is thy best Friend, and
therefore not be displeased, dependency upon him is certain, and never failing:
upon others doubtful, and not to be relied on: abide the inconsiderable blame
of thy slight Companions, rather than the piercing objurgations of thy own
Conscience: Think of the delight thou will take when thou art master of thy
desires, and have subdued thy vicious inclinations: What peace, what
contentment at home; and above all consider, that one victory will make thee
hardy, and more confident to undertake the rest of thy enemies, if any remain,
to shake the resolutions off thy mind. It Is the greatest imprudence and
cowardice, to go back from thy good Resolves, it is better thou had never
promised, self conviction will attend thee. Thou carriest thy Jury within thee,
whose evidence being apparent, what can thou expect but judgment, and if thy
own Conscience condemn what can acquit thee?

Of Secrecy and Reservation.
Open not thy breast too suddenly to thy new made Friend; it is sufficient that
thou art faithful to him: Thou know not how times may alter, and interest
may then make him thy Enemy: This is the great reason why wise men advise to
have but few Friends, I mean intimate ones: In the worlds infancy and
innocence, there was no need of any reserves, every man's breast was and might
safely be open to all: till propriety, and the various self concerns of men,
made us all draw several ways, and every man labor to fill his own Barn.
Brotherly love, natural and common affection, being now scarce known, or not
esteemed amongst us, puts man upon the the necessity of standing upon his
guard, communicating no more to another, than is consistent with his own
security: This do with caution, but not with moroseness, and too visible a
distrust: with a sincere resolution never to injure any, and as near as thou
can to avoid being injured. I would not however have this Counsel prompt thee
to play the Hypocrite: You know there is much difference between not speaking,
and speaking what the heart assents not to. If thou dislikest the actions of
others, as it would be unworthy in thee to sooth and flatter them, so is it
dangerous to thy self to discover thy just resentments, until thou have a fair
and hopeful opportunity, neither should thy dislikes arise from doubtful and
private sentiments and animosities, but from a sense of common detriment. Words
unwarily spoken are past recall, let them not be drawn from thee by heat of
discourse; thou may speak that suddenly, and unadvisedly, yea and without
any design too, which may prove much to thy prejudice, and the disturbance of
thy quiet; since others must be judge thereof, who peradventure bear thee no
good will, and whose interest it is to quell and wholly destroy what may
oppose, and those who do at present distaste their actions. There was a time
says Cornwallis, when all were good, and then praise was superfluous, they had
motions and instigations more excellent; Now men are so ill, that they deserve
thanks who are good: and vice has persuaded that to call naught, naught, is
uncivil, and dangerous. Let not an opinion of thy own ability prompt thee to
speak what is inconvenient; but let thy knowledge be seasoned with prudence: Few
suffer by moderation, by rashness too too many: Be not reckoned in the number
of the talkative, for they who are such are least regarded when they speak, and
least retentive when secrecy is required. Let thy understanding, always go
before thy tongue, and thy Conscience with thy understanding. It Is a sign of
great weakness to covet being heard, or to be almost sick until thou have
vented thy mind, as if praise were due to talking; speak what just occasion,
and the subject invites thee to, and not too forwardly that, but rather at the
desire, and importunity of others. It Is a great advantage to speak slowly,
which therefore the ancient have before the youthful, and is commonly a fruit
of wisdom, and experience. It Is a difficult matter to an honest mind, when it
meets with a base servile Spirit, crafty in designing mischief; selling his
Soul and Conscience for gain, and preferment, slighting all ties of Religion,
and the Laws, regardless of the good of mankind, and instrumental in the
introduction of all his evils, it is almost an impossible thing for a free and
sincere heart to contain himself when occasion is offered, and provocation
given; I do not therefore advise thou should at all such times be silent,
but that rather thou should both speak and do, when a fair opportunity shows
it self, but poorly and out of passion to throw away thy own life, and put thy
self into the Trap, his baseness set for thee, is an effect of indiscretion and
untimely courage, than which nothing can more gratify the ends and designs of
those who lay the snare, and would make thy own Mettle thy destruction. Be
advised and diliberate in things of this nature, since it is not only the
concernment of thee and thine, but of thy Country also.

Though I would have thy mind so well established as to be a Law to thy self,
preserving thee from the violation of all other Laws, yet I would have thee
give them all a true and just esteem. 1. The Law of the Creation, which is the
Law of God, and usually called the Law of Nature: Offer no violence as near as
thou can, to any part thereof. 2. The Laws of Christ; conform thy life as
near as thou can thereunto. 3. The Laws of thy Country made for conservation
of the just rights of the Inhabitants thereof: and to secure the peacable, and
innocent from the crafts and injuries of great and wicked Men: In defense of
this Law, as a Servant to thy Country, joined in a common Bond with the rest of
thy Countrymen, thou art ever to be ready in a Legal and regular way, when
wicked men shall labor in the subversion thereof. Thou will find it however
necessary amongst those Laws to distinguish between what are radical and
Fundamental; and those which are since made, especially if in opposition, and
to the subversion of the former: Our forefathers were more sincere, regardful
of common good, not broken into factions and parties, but guided by a just
indifferency toward all, and therefore made such Laws, as they conceived would
be perpetually good, notwithstanding all emergencies, the variations of times,
circumstances, and occasions whatsoever: Thou must therefore esteem them as the
touchstone of what ever shall succeed them, or be made pro hic and nunc, in
doing whereof thou shall but guide thy self by the reason of Parliaments, who
from the reverence and esteem they have had to those eversacred and inviolable
fundamental Laws have in multitude of Acts declared, that all Laws, made
against Magna Charta, (one of the best instances we have of the Fundamental
Laws) are void in themselves, well knowing that the chiefest Bulwark against
corruptions encroachments and innovations, was the preserving inviolate, the
Dignity and Majesty of those Sacred Laws. Which was also the opinion of one of
the sagest and most renowned Pillars of the Laws, which ever England bred, Sir
Edward Coke, whose opinion in conformity with what I have expressed, thou shall
find scattered quite through his Institutes; and whatsoever you find him
speaking with quickest spirit, and heartiest energy, you shall observe it to be
in some point or other that has respect to the conservation of those radical
Laws.

Of going to Law.
As to Particular differences between man and man, be careful thou art not
litigious, apt to encourage others, or engage thy self upon every slight
occasion, invited thereunto from some knowledge thou have gained in the
intrigues, and irregular proceedings of the Law, which are not the allowed and
beaten tracts thereof, but its By ways, which crafty men have found out to
support and maintain wrongful causes: As if the decision of what is right were
not to be determined by the merit and equity thereof, but by cunning and
fraudulent skill in its management: Whatever is gotten or said by such indirect
courses, may justly be expected to be a canker to the residue of thy estate,
attended with a curse unless thou repent, and make restitution. I would however
have thee, knowing in the fair and just methods of the Laws, that thou may
be able to secure thy self, and advise thy Friends: Notwithstanding which, Be
as backward as thou can from going to Law; labor by all fair and gentle
means, by a plain and particular demonstration of thy right, and by the
instance of Friends to persuade with thy Adversary: But if these will not
serve, be most vigorous, active, and diligent in managing thy Cause, Spare no
cost, procure the ablest Lawyers to assist thee, and thy most prudent Friends
to advise thee, use thy utmost endeavors, that others by observing thy
diligence, and that thou art vigorously skilful in maintaining thy right, may
cease to do thee injury; which course would men generally observe, and be
assistant one to another, against those who are contentious and injurious, (a
debt which we all owe one to another, and all of us to our Country) it would
the best of any thing give check to those pert, pragmatical and oppressive
Spirits, who confident of their own craft, and others ignorance, are
encouraged, and hunt after occasions to embroile their neighbors in troubles,
and themselves too, even to their impoverishment, and undoing, it being seldom
found that persons so disposed, (though they may for once, or twice be
succesful in their evil practices) yet in the conclusion, their credit being
lost, and their means litigiously spent, their end is shameful and miserable;
such a line of justice, has the just God drawn, through the course of all
humane affairs.

To bear false witness upon Oath, is one of the greatest Crimes man is capable
of: A man that bears false witness against his Neighbor, says Solomon, c.
25. v. 18. is like a Hammer, a Sword, and a sharp Arrow: Weapons that every way
assault, and against which there is scare any defense: and therefore it ought
to be punished most severely, and almost unmercifully by the Law, because it
renders the most innocent man obnoxious to every evil, in his estate, liberty,
and life.

Be not forward to make use of any witness, that thou know apt to speak
inconsiderately, or in thy favor, out of affection to, or expectation from
thee: If thou certainly know it, and that he will not speak the truth
without respect to thy Person, make no use of him; for this though it be not a
subornation of a witness, yet is it a tacit allowance for thy own advantage of
what thou know to be a falsity, which is against the ties of Justice and
Honesty, and therefore, not to be admitted by thee: Though the chief guilt lie
upon the witness, neglecting or going contrary to his oath, defying thereby the
justice of God: abusing the Laws of his Country, slighting the reputation of
Honesty; yet art not thou to be excused (although thou do not prompt him to
this) since thou connivest at a known falsity, and art the gainer by his
Testimony.

He that warps in any thing, and is not tite to the rules of justice, will by
degrees grow worse and worse, as occasion and temptation swayes him, and in
time by custom fall into the highest pitch of injustice. It is one punishment
which is annexed to evil actions, more easily and with less opposition to admit
greater, especially when security in defense of the former persuades thereunto:
insomuch that there are few evil actions that men would undertake if they could
at one prospect foresee, the consequent evils, which they seldom do, until
either suffering brings on the remembrance, and horror of them, or the approach
of Death, a time when their formerly neglected Conscience inforces an audience.
But to the matter, Passion does often hurry men into differences, which
animosites and Lawyers foment: And at last after long toil, much money, and
time spent, and both perplexed more at the irregular methods and proceedings in
Law, than at one another, with shame they make an end of what they might more
prudently never have undertaken. Be forewarned therefore, my Son, and use all
handsome diligence to be at peace with thy Adversary, and if thou do abate
something of thy right, and manifestest not a sheepish, but a prudent and
rational compliance, thou will be no loser, either in thy credit, in the
opinion of wise men: or in point of profit, considering the loss of time, and
great expense Law Suits require, which you will soon know has often brought the
two Clyents to be content with the Oyster shell, when the cunning Lawyers have
devoured the Oyster. When you have a little way traversed the World, you will
quickly find, that though our Laws (the common and Fundamental Laws I mean) are
better than any Country enjoyes, for just distribution of right, and speedy
determination, yet have the Lawyers for their profit, brought in so many
intricate ways of proceeding, that it is much better, if it may be upon any
reasonable terms obtained, to prevent engaging in Law, by a Friendly and
equitable composure: which not only saves the expense and trouble on both
hands, but prevents those animosities and feuds which long suits occasion, and
which are oftentimes propagated from Fathers to Children through several
generations.

Of Recreation.
Something of necessity you must allow your self, to swetten the anxieties and
business of thy Life: But it is very fit that beforehand you consider what are
the just ends thereof, and use it only in order to those ends: These are 1. The
refreshment of the body, by convenient stirring it, and dispersing the humors,
which otherwise would stagnate, and be a foundation for diseases: The caution
here is, that instead of refreshing it, you do not wear and overtire it by
spending too immoderately those necessary Spirits and moistures, which give
desirable plumpness, beauty, and strength to the body. And this refers not only
to the violence, and long continuance of exercise, but to the frequency also.
Assure your self that what is beyond moderation, tends rather to the impair
than improvement of health: I have known diverse, who by using overmuch exercise
in their youth, have acquired leanness, and impotence before age has come on,
and made the latter part of their days unhappy, through lameness and aches,
effects (which they would not foresee) of ungoverned exercise. It Is very little
that the body of man requires as to health, and you shall find by truest
observation, that they live longest and in best health who use but very little:
living temperately.

2. End of Exercise is the allevation of the mind, by employing it in things of
small moment, cheerful and pleasant, not requiring that intentness and earnest
thoughtfulness which business does, nor liable to so many cross, and adverse
accidents: you must therefore exclude sports that require too great an
intention of Spirit, either as being in their own nature difficult, or from the
often using them, or the too long continuance of them, or from the loss that
follows them, any of these frustrate the end of exercise: Remember that it
ought to be but diversion, and as a Parenthesis to business: That by relaxing
the Spirits for a little time, which else would too soon be exhausted, the
convenient employments of life may more delightfully and vigorously be
undertaken. Let me therefore caution thee, as having seen the World before
thee, and through the manner of my education, and spent life, been enabled to
advise thee, to avoid these evils, in that which is miscalled, Recreation;
which if thou do not decline, will certainly procure thee much infelicity,
and clog thy life with many unavoidable hazards, not without danger of Ruin in
the end.

My First Caution is, that whatsoever estate is left thee, or thou acquirest,
let almost the whole of thy time be taken up in business or rest: Except an
interposition of some little vacancies for diversion, agreeable to the ends
above mentioned.

They are therefore blame worthy, and very ill advised, who spend the greatest
part of their time in Sports, and Pastime, as most of the Gentry of England do,
and many others: who framing to themselves no business, are every day casting
about how idly, and as they call it pleasurably to spend their time, in
hunting, hawking; coursing, fishing, drinking, gaming, or other unprofitable
ways, and are ill at ease, and even sick, till they have found Companions, so
to pass the day: All kind of business to these is irksome: Their lives useless
to themselves, their Families and Country: Their minds unfurnished with
necessary knowledge that should make them serviceable in their Generation: Their
Estates (of which they are but Stewards) misspent, and they disabled to provide
for their younger Children; and all these consequential evils, the effects of
not being used from their youth to some useful employments, unto which their
great estates and as it should be ordered, a generous breeding, with regard to
common as well as particular profit, should and might well adapt them. Hence
arises the degeneration of the people of England in their manners, and
vitiously acquired habits of mind: considering the influence the Gentry have
(to go no further) upon the Farmers, and their under-Tenants. How unhappy has
the frugality and industry of their Forefathers been, to acquire an estate for
their posterities, thus misimployed, as the fuel of their idle extravagancies,
and all because it is esteemed a kind of derogation, forsooth, from their
gentility to be bred up in the acquisition of useful knowledge, or some
profitable employment. It shall be therefore my care, my Son, and I would have
the same purpose transmitted by thee to thy posterity, to be engaged in, and to
be in love with business.

Consider here, that being used to, and expert in business, it will become at
least as pleasurable to thee, yea far more pleasurable, than all the Sports the
idle Gentleman imployes his time in: Thou will take great content in the
progress and product of every days affair, delighting thy self at night in the
contemplation thereof; and if thou meetest with any cross occurrences therein,
being used to business, thou will know much better how to overcome the fame,
and free thy self from the extricacies thereof: Whereas the idle Gentleman,
ignorant in almost all matters out of the road of his pastimes, is upon every
little occasion disturbed, and distracted, and becomes often thereby a prey to
a subtle Steward, or other Servant, or to the craft of a neighboring Lawyer,
seemingly his Friend, but indeed only his own, who is ever watchful, and glad
of such an occasion. Now since that is to every particular person his pleasure,
which he esteems so, it is better by far, to propose before hand, upon advice
thus given, to make that so to thee, which is also both creditable and
profitable, than to place it in that which is altogether vain, and of no
reputation, and attended also with numerous evils, such as thou shall confess
them to be, when I shall presently have recited them unto thee.

2. Let thy Recreations and Sports never be for money, or at least for no more
than what is inconsiderable, and whose loss cannot be felt, nor beget in thee
any trouble or anxiety: A thousand inconveniences attends the Itch of Gaming;
rather believe my experience, than be convinced by thy own suffering. Some of
them (that thou may have the greatest detestation against it) I will
enumerate to thee.

1. It is attended with the common evil of all other Vices, to bewitch the
mind, and beget such a dotage thereupon, that when thou see the evil thereof,
and hate it, thou can not decline it: especially if thou acquirest any
skill therein, hope of gain will then prompt thee on, even against thy best
Resolutions.

2. It will make the business thou undertakest in the course of thy life
irksome to thee, partly from the tickling pleasure thou will take therein, and
partly from its having been a hindrance to thee, in the acquiring those
abilities should raise thy esteem and make the eminent in thy profession.

3. It will be certain and very considerable loss to thee, for if thou gainest
the craft of play, and usest false arcts to cozen and deceive, thou losest this
way most of all: That is to say, the favor of God and esteem of good men. If
thou playest fair, trusting to Fortune (besides that thou will be liable to be
cheated by others, who have made their livelihood depend upon it, and have no
other subsistence, which sort of fellows in this City numerously abound) in the
frequency and continuance of play, thou must be a certain loser: For reckoning
Fortune but equal, the very incident expense of Gaming will eat thee out: and
that this is true is demonstrably evidenced, by the visible decays of all
those that use it fairly.

To this may he added the certain loss of what thou might in that time have
gained in thy honest employment.

4. It disposes thee insensibly to the being tainted with the other incident
vices of Gamesters, as drinking, swearing, proneness to passion, forwardness
upon every slight occasion, and many other evils, which I hope in God thou
wiltnever find verified in thy self.

5. Loss of time, and neglect of business, and many mischiefs thereupon
attendant.

6. Blemish in reputation, and that for the most part irreparable.

7. Impair of health, which the perplexity of thy mind upon losses, neglecting
due hours of feeding and rest will bring upon thee.

8. Disorder it occasions in thy family, for want of thy constant eye and
observance, and those disrespects thou drawest upon thy self, by their taking
notice of thy ill hours and inclinations.

Many other evils, clear and undeniable I might enumerate, but here are enough
to let thee see, and make thee detest that hateful and most mischievous Vice of
Gaming: Let me therefore upon my blessing warn thee, and from the tender
affection, and true regard to thy good, beseech thee, never to play for money;
or not for any thing of moment: neither at Dice, or Tables, or Cards, or design
to have any craft or skill therein: It will be a difficult, and almost an
impossible thing in thee to forbear, if thou becomest dextrous at any Game, and
therefore wholly decline them: I advise thee thus with the greatest seriousness
imaginable: The fiction of Vlysses's men, being bewitched with the charms of
Circe, is but an emblem of this, as of other things men account pleasures: It
is easier wholly to forbear than afterward to decline. Remember likewise, how
many useful things thou may be Master of, with the time is misspent upon
play, each of them creditable and profitable: Whereas the subtleties of play,
are diminutions of repute. And what an imprudent thing it will be found to be,
that after Weeks, Months, and Years so misspent, the harvest is only, shame,
loss, and poverty.

But because I did advise at first, that some recreation might be necessary,
you will expect that I should mention what I would approve, and what are most
innocent and convenient. To this I shall say, that it is not for me
particularly to prompt you, but leaving the matter to your own genius: I shall
only give some general rules, and so pass this distastful Paragraph.

1. Let them be innocent, not attended with any vice, or blemish in the
exercise thereof: and this can hardly be, if money be the incentive.

2. Engage in no pastime, that is to the ruin or hurt of any Creature, for
consider that the destruction of other Creatures was not designed for thy
Recreation: And insomuch as they have fears and sense of pain, if by degrees
thou becomest insensible thereof, thy tenderness and humanity will in time
degenerate into fierceness and cruelty: Many Sports are comprehended here, to
which depraved custom, and inconsideration, will as others incline thee, if a
Fathers commands, cannot prevail, or the early and free use of thy own
understanding.

3. Not too violent: as Tennis; and several others, as they may be too
earnestly and too long used. These I prefer.

Moderate Bowling, for small matters, at seasonable times, and not too
frequent; Shooting with the Long Bow, in the fields, with the same cautions,
and ever in good Company: But above all I prefer walking with a Friend or good
Companion: Sufficient and the best exercise for the body, cheerful also, and
profitable for the mind: there, if they be of the same faculty, may be
discoursed any part of their Art, their late readings, and more profitable
experiences: There one may assist the other in any difficulties or intricate
occurrences: There may be discoursed any point of Religion, of true and
legitimate policy, of Morality, of History, of the humors and misbehaviours of
men, of the excellency of Truth, Friendship, Virtue, or whatever else offers it
self a subject of profitable discourse, or inoffensive mirth: And how much this
is beyond the unprofitable vanity of other pastimes, when thou can well
exercise thy reason, thou will easily conclude: This is a Recreation that thou
may use within doors also, when bad weather forbids it without: A Game at
Chess, because it rarely is for money, neither depends upon chance, is
allowable; but I would advise it should not be too often, because it too much
intends the brain, and the end is but victory: in acquiring which either at
this or any other Game, let it be with as little regret and disquiet to thy
Adversary as may be.

Of Gentility.
Esteem not of Gentility, from the advantages of title or wealth, but from what
the word imports, kindness, affability: readiness to do every body good, and
care to avoid the doing any body hurt: and especially regard integrity, and
sincerity of mind: These are worthy and generous qualities: and will certainly
render a man the object of all men's esteem: They are properly the man's own:
Others are but properties left to thy Family, notwithstanding which, a man may
no more truly be a gentleman, then a Kite a Pidgeon, though with Doves
Feathers, or a Wolf a Lamb, though in sheeps clothing. His wealth enables him
only to perform those good Offices of Charity and Munificence; which the poor
cannot execute, but the real grounds of that denomination are the virtues of
the mind. It Is therefore in every Man's power to be a Gentleman; It Is a matter
of mer it not of birth: it is to be esteemed and preferred in rags: whilst the
mere Title is despicable in all its bravery, and Lordships. According to this
rule guide thy estimation of others, and of thy self. And be not wanting to thy
self in the acquisition of these good qualities, which are in thy own purchase;
and which either supply the want of Wealth, or render it more useful to the
owner and others.

The shame to this Title, are the sour, morose dispositions: effects that
arise partly from ill temper of body, but chiefly from Pride, and ignorance:
These are so elated with the opinion of their own worth, that they think meanly
of others: and thence despise them: or else envying the greater ability of
others, malign them for that they are defective in them selves, not considering
all that while, that no ability in the Arts, in any Manufacture or Science, is
of equal weight and worth, with that eveness and composition of mind, that
arises from the good qualities before mentioned: which whosoever has, need envy
no man, and will certainly despise, afflict, or distaste none: but such as
meanly esteem of Virtue, and scoff at the very being of Religion. A further
shame to the Title of a Gentleman, are the proud and scornful, the luxurious,
the debauched, the idle, and grossly ignorant: Who trusting and relying wholly
upon the name derived from, it may be, worthy Ancestors, vainly think, that
their Vices cannot lose, what the others virtues attained. Remember that God
Almighty who is the most excellent being, and from whom all living things
receive theirs, is yet full of gentleness, kindness, love, patience,
compassion; and that notwithstanding all provocations; which may serve thee
instead of all arguments to heighten thy endeavors in the acquisition of those
qualities may make the retain the image of Gods likeness, and raise thee above
that degenerated complexion which mankind has acquired from the heat and
extravagance of his unruly passions. Whether the title follows this disposition
of the mind, is not material: The just respects of a few good men, are to be
preferred before the common vogue, and the observance of those whose pride and
ignorance renders them incompetent Judges of what is praiseworthy, and to be
esteemed.

I am now to advise thee in two Particulars of great moment, the one in the
choice of thy profession, the other of thy Wife.

Concerning the choice of thy Profession.
If it pleases God that I live until thou art grown up to a man's estate, I
purpose to persuade thee, and shall endeavor to enable thee, for the practice
of Physic: as also your Brother, as I would have you do some of your Children,
that so there may not in any future age be wanting in this City (God protecting
and blessing you) one of your name and lineage, bred up in, and professing the
practice of that art. Not that I esteem so much the reputation of the name, or
the Honor attained by such an acquisition (for I have often declared to you,
that true honor has not its just rise from things without us, nor yet from the
abilities of the brain, but the truth and sincerity of the mind.) But because I
think it of very great advantage to the real attainment of some considerable
perfection in the acquisition of an Art, to be educated by a Father therein,
and both directed by him to avoid all the superfluous studies and readings, by
which much time both by himself and others has been lost, and directed also in
the best practical method, and choice of the best Books for attaining the
utmost accomplishments therein that your limited Age is capable of. Besides it
is no small reputation, (and consequently an equal advantage to your being
applied to) that you are the Son of a Physician: It being presumed that you
have both the assistance of your Fathers knowledge, and your own additional
acquisitions.

Besides these reasons given you, why I would incline you to the profession of
Physic: I may add, 1. That is is a study of great latitude, comprehending
particulars enough, to take up delightfully the whole time of your life, and
that will be more pleasant to you even in your old age: By means whereof you
can never want delightful objects for your thoughts to be employed upon, and
thereby kept from other diversions upon which the greatest part of mankind,
engage themselves, to the great impair of their health, the loss of their time
and reputation.

2. It Is a profession of everlasting use, and the Professors there of if able
and honest of good esteem: It Is in the middle Region, not too high for the
converse of the meanest, not too low for the respect of the greatest.

Consider besides that it is not over laborious to the body: that it has many
privileges, as exemption from Offices, and several duties both chargable and
burdensome: That it is of all others most independent, not so liable to the
vicissitudes of times, not engaged to declare it self in vindication or refusal
of fashionable opinions, taken up by prevalent Parties.

And Lastly, amongst other the blessed designs of our Lord and Master, this
took up no small part of his time, for he went about doing good and healing all
that were sick: which though we cannot with certainty perform, yet according to
that Sphere and Capacity God has placed us in, it is sufficient that we use an
honest and careful endeavor.

If you should have many Sons, and that it be necessary to dispose some of them
into other professions, observe these Rules following:

Avoid in choosing for them, those that are over laborious, and toylesome to the
Body: for they occasion aches and diseases, and shorten life.

Avoid those which are dirty, and greasy, as a Tallow-Chandler, Soap-boyler,
Cook, especially roasting one: etc.

Avoid those which depend most upon the vices, and ill Husbandry of the people,
and which also by being their profession endanger the vitiating and debauchery
of them who profess them: As Alehouse keeper, Vintner, Tobacco-Men,
Srongwatermen. etc.

Above all avoid being engaged in any thing that is vexatious to the people, I
had rather you should be Cobblers, than Excise-men, Sergeants, Promoters,
Projectors, or any other profession that depends not upon honest business,
helpful and serviceable in its measure to others.

Lastly, be sure you well understand, and be well pleased in the choice of your
Profession: Acquaint your Children therefore before hand with the conveniences
and inconveniences of what they seem most inclined to, that so thy good Council
may guide their judgments to the being engaged in that they shall not
afterward repent of: For all actions undertaken with good deliberation, though
they may miscarry, being subject to common casualties; yet in some measure
satisfy the mind, beyond what is undertaken rashly and imprudently.

Now forasmuch as in all professions, it is expedient that some diversions
should be interposed, to sweeten the business and toil thereof, I think it
meet (beside what I have mentioned in reference to the body in the Paragraph of
Recreation) to advise thee concernining some particulars, wherein thou may
in thy Closet, or more openly at home employ thy self, both to the refreshment
and profit of the mind: as particularly, often in reading and meditating upon
the Scriptures, and other good Books: for whatever care you have of your
livelihood here, your eternal being hereafter is often to be thought upon: Nor
is the knowledge of God and Divine things without its exceeding delight, when a
mind well seasoned comprehends the same: This may be often performed with thy
Wife, Children, Servants: And assure your self, that you will find much comfort
in time thus spent, and in knowledge thus gained.

2. Another Diversion profitable and pleasant, may be the study of the
Mathematics: Especially of Arithmetic, Geometry, and Music: Not too
superficially, but radically, for though Fundamental knowledge be more
difficultly attained, yet after the acquisition of some part thereof, the rest
proves much more delightful, and is longer retained; whereas the superficial
becomes soon nauseous, and through want of use in a little time vanishes.

By the way, design not to let your knowledge in these things end in
speculation, but in what may be brought into use, and is of some commodity, or
at least innocently pleasurable; which I would have to be the rule of your
Choice, in selecting only such parts of those Sciences, as may serve you in
some of your occasions, or create an inoffensive pleasure to your self, and
Family, of this kind is Music: of the other Arithmetic, which well to
understand, qualifies a man, and becomes serviceable to him in almost all
businesses that occur in his life.

3. The Third particular in which at leisure hours you may divert your self, is
the reading of History, and gaining knowledge in the Laws of your Country: You
will find these of very great pleasure and use.

In the reading History, let me advise you to these Cautions.

1. To decline those which are trivial, foolish, and full of falsities:
Imprinting in the mind chimerical notions of things that never were, stories of
Giants, Fairies, Ghosts, and Goblins, Walking Spirits, and many such like
appearances, which though merely chimerical, having no being but in the minds
of those who fancy them, have yet an ill effect upon youthful apprehensions,
Creating frightful and unhealthy Dreams, making them fear the dark, and being
alone, to the great affright and debasing of their Spirits, which should by
truth and realites be kept vigorous and hearty.

2. Contemn the Reading of Romances, unless some very few, which are innocent,
virtuous, and of good design, or which are purely Moral, and under proper names
commend the Virtues, truth, and Religion to the practice of mankind: Such in
particular is, Dr. Ingelos Bentivolio and Urania, a Discourse not only
excellently well written for accomplishment of those good ends he designed;
which I now mentioned: But purposely also, to substitute a useful discourse
written in a Romantic way, in the place of what are more common than Bibles in
many families, and Create in young Men and Maidens, false and corrupt notions
of Government, Love, and Valor, the constant and almost only subject of those
Idle Pens. For as to Government it usually supposes that all mankind is made
for Princes, it justifies their Wars raised upon private animosities, or for
enlarging of Dominions: it makes them usually absolute, unbounded by Law: and
through the bewitching pleasure the youthful take in reading those Books, they
suck insensibly those false opinions, which complying with the common designs
of Governors, are not without much difficulty afterward eradicated, making
them in the mean time easily stoop to a willing slavery. Then as to valor it
considers not the true ends thereof, which only can render it justifiable: Such
are, defense of our Country, our Laws, just Government, common safety, or
particular, lawlesly invaded: Whereas the Idol they set up in their Romances,
has no regard to these things, but is made to do things beyond humane belief,
and for ends as barbarous, as his Valor is prodigious. This also has no small
influence upon the youthful that read them, in raising their passions upon
every trivial occasion, and from a similitude they make of themselves, with the
Romantic stripling, despise other people as vulgar, the Herd, Rabble,
Multitude, who yet are in God Almighties esteem of equal rank with themselves,
many of whom also have parts and virtues more eminent than themselves; the
vices and debaucheries also of the rest, owe themselves for the most part to
the countenance, and ill example of the great ones. Then as to Love, the very
writers themselves are ignorant of what is truly such; grounded upon Virtue,
and terminated in the sweet effects of Conjugal amities, the production and
education of Children, and the Government of a Family, which is the foundation
of the Worlds continuance, and for the preservation of which God implanted that
noble passion in the minds of Men and Women, this kind of love these Romantic
vapors are ignorant of, crying up in place thereof an idle, fantastical,
useless, impracticable affection, not without frequent mixtures of lustful
amors, tending to the increase and nourishment of vain or evil concupiscence,
filling the mind with busy and fantastical apparitions, and leaving them
muddy, melancholy, and useless as to what is truly good and substantial: That
notice of Dr. Ingelo, speaking of these Romances is very true, and worth your
observation, That looked upon with a judicious eye, they will appear to be full
of the grossest indecorums of invention, as odious representations of Divinity,
unnatural descriptions of human life, improper and profane allusions to Sacred
things, frequent and palpable contradictions, sottish stories, and in short all
the absurdities of wild imagination. Such also is the greatest part of Poetry
both Ancient and Modern, and therefore my Son, be advised, and advise your
Children, against not only so great loss of time, as is required in reading
these Fables, but in avoiding the having not only your understandings
misinformed, by the false representations therein, but your minds also
vitiated, by the lustful and vain insinuations thereof.

In reading of History, 1. You are to propose the best end to your self, which
is not barely to enable your self for discourse, but to be serviceable in your
Generation, by gaining knowledge of what has been good and well acted by those
who have gone before you; by acquainting your self also with the fallacies,
impostures, frauds, usurpations, innovations, and whatsoever irregularities
else have been committed by any of them: That so you may be able to resent and
discover the abuses of those who are at present, and especially, to discover
evil designs veiled under fair pretenses, and thereby rescue the weak and
ignorant from those abuses the proud and crafty would impose upon them.

2. Tire not your self with multiplicity of Authors; but when you desire to
acquaint your self with the transactions, Customs, Government, and manners of
any Country, advise with those who are knowing, and learn from them who has
best and most faithfully writ thereof, insisting chiefly upon matter of fact,
and rendering impartially the grounds and secret reasons of all transactions.

3. In reading Histories, regard not so much the less remarkable and cursory
passages thereof, but only what is material to the bettering of your manners,
and that may be in some kind useful for the improvement of our well-being at
home: The description therefore of places, of Palaces, great Houses, Churches,
Monasteries, Cities, Rivers, the distances of Towns, and many such like
passages, cast but a transient eye upon: taking notice especially of what is
good, or evil in the Governors, in the manners, and behaviors of the people,
judging thereof by the instincts of nature, and the rule of right and
unperverted reason.

Aim chiefly at the knowledge of what has been, and is now acted in your own
Country: for it is a vain thing to be well skilled abroad, and ignorant at
home: The end of reading the Roman or Grecian Histories, or those of any other
Country, should be chiefly with reference to what is or ought to be done at
home, without which respect the knowledge of Foreign matters is a useless
expense of time which may be more profitably employed.

5. Keep a Common place Book, in which as you read, recount all memorable
passages, to which you may upon all occasions have recourse by an Alphabetical
Index.

Lastly, divert your self with gaining knowledge in the Laws of your Country:
Especially by reading some few Books that write fundamentally and particularly
thereof; especially of Institutes, and other writings of Judge Coke; as also
the usages and customs of London (whereof much is written) which being the
chief City, and probably the place of your residence, will require some of your
time, because to be totally ignorant therein, is to expose your self to many
inconveniences, and will render you disregarded and unserviceable to your
neighbors.

I know very well that all these particulars I have mentioned and each of them
too, are studies of great extent, requiring much time to attain a reasonable
perfection therein, but let not that discourage you, since my aim is not at the
acquisition of such a degree as those are to attain, who are particularly
versed therein, and live thereupon, but at such a proportion as may be a fair
content and recreation to your mind, and enable you, when either your self or
any neighbor or friend is to be engaged and concerned therein, to suggest some
fit course or expedient, and to be the better able to advise further, with
those who are better skilled in the intrigues and difficulties thereof.

And thus much I thought good to suggest to you concerning those mental
diversions which may take up your leisure Hours, in the vacances from the
business or proper study in your profession, from which both pleasure and
profit may be reaped, idleness and vicious employments avoided. I now am to
advise you concerning the choice of a Wife.

Of the choice of a Wife.
Marry not until thou attainest a confirmed age, and strength, for so thou
consultest thy health and long life, and preserve thy self Chaste, that thy
posterity may be strong and vigorous, thy self in heart and fruitful. Before
thou Marriest, see the way clear, that thou be in a good condition to
maintain a Family, and not necessitated to depend upon her dowry: In Choosing
take good advice with Friends, and thy self, that is with thy reason, and sound
understanding, carefully avoiding the being transported with the outside of a
Woman, where inward graces do not answer external Beauty: You are not to Marry
for a day, a week, a mouth, a year: but until death parts you. And therefore
you are especially to look at those qualities which be pleasing to you, as long
as you live.

These are the particulars I would have thee chiefly regard in the choice of a
Wife. 1. That she be of a family of honest and untainted repute: for otherwise
the stains of that stock thou ingraftest thy self into, will have if not a
reflection upon thee, yet unavoidably some tacit regret upon thy mind, which
thou will find very difficult to remove.

2. Let her be of a healthy body, and derived from healthy Parents, for
otherwise thou may justly fear, that their infirmities will be transmitted
to thy Posterity.

3. Avoid in thy Choice, the Proud, Peevish, Subtle and Disdainful disposition:
Thou will easily suggest reasons to thy self against every one of these:
especially when you shall consider the sweet effects of the contrary virtues:
The having a Wife that is prudently courteous to all, full of true affability,
and meekness: Patient and impassionate, making the best of every thing that
falls out: Sincere and plain hearted: esteeming nothing the better of her self
or others, for Riches, Birth, Beauty, or other things without her: but showing
a decent kindness to all, and preferring how mean soever, those who are truly
good and virtuous.

4. I need not caution thee against those who are tainted with any ill fame,
for personal misbehaviours, men of ordinary prudence are cautious enough in
avoiding such: Unless where they are ensnared with the alurement of external
form, or some cunning and counterfeit behaviors. In this case the best way of
prevention is not to make too much have; for time, strict inquiries, and the
assistance of friends, will soon discover the truth of things, and give thee to
understand, how dangerous a quicksand thou have escaped, that for want of good
foresight, has been the destruction of many reputed wise men.

5. Aim not at those who are reputed the great Beauties, but prefer the amiable
with the good qualifications of the mind far before beauty. In our age it is an
unhappiness for Women to have too much of it, for besides that it exposes them
to frequent visits, thereby tainting their mind; it raises their own conceits
too high of themselves, and consequently makes them not so fit to be Wives, as
Women of more ordinary forms: Set not also too great a value upon some other
acquisitions, which have much the same influence upon them as Beauty has; such
are Dancing, Singing, witty Discourse, too great promptness in Speech,
acuteness in following Fashions, frequency in Visits and Entertainments; these
are particulars, which it may be custom, and the present ages inclination give
countenance to, but they are so far from adding any thing to the happiness of
Marriage; that they rather are the unhappy occasions of distasts and
irreconcilable breaches, too too frequently seen amongst us.

6. It is as expedient also that thou be as wary in entertaining one who is
an opinionatrix in matters of Religion; unless she has the good qualities in
the third Caution mentioned: For if her mind be elevated thereby, and thou
dissentest, she will have a mean opinion of thee, as carnal, and out of the
state of grace, and her affection will accordingly cool, especially being
steered by the reverend Pastor or other crafty Sire, of whose Sanctity she has
more than ordinary opinion. Consider it thus, that true Religion is attended
with all Christian Graces, especially Meekness, Humility, a low esteem of our
selves, a just esteem of others: Whereas the little modifications thereof which
are assumed for indirect ends, raise the pretenders to proud, and exalted
thoughts of themselves, and contempt of other folks, therefore I thought
necessary thus to caution thee as to this particular.

7. Let not Wealth sway thee, where there is not a concomitance of other things
more essential to happiness. Yea let not want of an estate deter thee, where
there are all other good qualifications; thou thy self being in plenty: Thy
content will every day increase by it; it is praiseworthy and generous; a
benefit to the World; a practical information of the people, in preferring
goodness before wealth: and lastly thou securest thy own happiness, in an
obligation which cannot but have a^^^s^ing and indelible influence, upon the
Virtuous.

Lastly be sure to please thy self in the person of her thou marriest, and
therefore avoid the unwholesome and deformed: Thou can not be mistaken, taking
time before marriage, unless thou provest so unhappy as to let wealth, or some
other by considerations oversway thee, even against thy own genius, and
aversion: Remember the pleasure of wholesome, and handsome Children, remember
the improbability of having any, where there is a secret and a real dislike:
Remember what disgusts will arise in thy breast, when thou shall see others
happy, in a suitable match, in a numerous and amiable offspring: Take all
these things together, and before thou set forth upon this expedition, read
over again and again the Memorandums I have here given thee, as the fruit of my
experience and observation, and which I have delivered unto thee, in hopes to
make thee in this particular truly happy.

The happiness of a Married life requires that both be good.
But it will not be an expedient sufficient for the procurement of thy
happiness, to have chosen a good and virtuous wife with the best qualifications
above intimated, unless thou also prove as fit and suitable a Husband: For
though thou can not be happy with a bad one, yet thou may so demean thy
self as to be very unhappy, though thou have a good one: Thy own vices and
vanities, will in the continuance and consequence of them, bring many evils
upon thee both as thou art a Husband, a Father, a Master of a Family: As thou
art a Husband if thou debauchest thy self, becomest a Drunkard, a common
Gamester, negligent of thy fame, and thy calling, besides the evils, more
immediately will attend thee, thou will by degrees sour the good disposition
of thy Mate, and turn thy sweet nourishing, and delicious Wine into Vinegar:
Thou will bring upon her, Melancholy, and Sickness, cool and lessen, if not
totally extinguish her affection; for there being in all naturally implanted,
self love, and desire of good to our selves, what reason is there you should
expect a permanency of her affections, when through your default she is made
most miserable. For what ever humor and obstinacy may persuade you to, yet love
is naturally the off spring only of love, and you will but vainly exact it from
her as her duty, when notwithstanding the mutual obligation, you have broken
all the ties, and by a vicious and imperious carriage (which usually follows
it) you incite her to a reliction of those respects, she would otherwise
inviolably have maintained. You must remember that you marry not a Saint but a
Woman, that you have past your promises as well as your Wife, that the Tie is
equally obliging, and withal ask your self whether if she were become so
vicious, so neglectful of all the parts of her duty, you would not think it
unreasonable that she should expect any degree of affection from you, having
done all that lay in her to sink you into irreparable Calamities.

Consider further, that if through your default, the temper of her mind and
constitution of her body be perverted, (which should indeed by your sweetness
be improved) you are justly to be charged with all the ill effects that may
thereupon ensue, which will be no small burden to your Conscience, and a
certain diminution or destruction of all the contentments which would otherwise
flow from that relation.

A Vicious Father seldom makes good Children.
2. Your Vicious habits will not only have an influence upon your Wife, but
your Children also; for how can you then be capable of the due oversight of
their education, and giving them those good instructions which are necessary
for forming and fashioning their minds, and seasoning them with fit principles
of Religion and Virtue: What power also can your instructions have, when as
they grow up, they shall discover in your own life, vicious practices contrary
to the instructions you give them: It Is by all allowed, that practice and
example persuade much more powerfully than precept: and therefore it will be
certain that they will every day warp and decline that original innocence, and
good nature they are born with, by observation of your daily deviations: How
can you implant and cherish in them that Reverence they owe to God, that love
to honesty and virtue, they cannot but perceive you contemn, by practicing
contrary thereunto? So that since the happiness of man in his posterity, is not
in having Children, but in having good ones, you must never expect a
participation in that blessing, when you take a course that can in no reason
produce other than the contrary. You will find it (as the World is constituted)
a difficult matter to steer them right, with the utmost care a good and prudent
Father can use: what little hopes then will remain, when there is not only a
neglect of the paternal duty, but your own persuasive example, to hurry them
into vicious extravagancies? It is not force, and a rude hand, that fashions
the mind, you shall find, looking with an unperverted eye into the World, and
examining things aright, that when Parents are playing the Beadles with their
Children, that for every lash the Parents (it may be passionately or humerously
give them) they deserve ten themselves, were the cause fairly pleaded, as
either foolishly beating them for trivial lapses, by other means more easily
amended, or for such faults, as they themselves, either for want of good
instruction, or by giving bad example, or some occasion thereunto have thereby
produced. This is indeed one of the greatest causes of the Worlds perversion:
And therefore my Son, for the sake of your self and Wife, whose felicity is
here much concerned, for the respects you owe to your Children (who will owe
more to you for good education than their lives, for it is better never to have
been born than to be vicious) and lastly for the common respect you owe to your
Country, and to mankind, whose integrity is preserved by the good of
particulars, be circumspect in this, and careful to discharge your Paternal
duty, by preserving your self in a fit capacity, both for seasoning the minds
of your Children by prudent instructions, and affording them the more powerful
incitement, from your own well led life, and laudable example.

The concernment to the Family, that the Master be a good Man.
3. A Vicious man can never make a good Master of a Family: The good will
either be corrupted by him, or with detestation leave him: You are not Master
of Slaves that you can force to serve your will; God be praised, the Law of
England knows no such tenure: But of Servants by contract, who when they are
admitted, you are tacitly charged with a care of them, not only to afford
conveniences for their livelihood and external support; but it is a duty
incumbent upon you to form and fashion their minds with a love to all that is
good, and Honest. This you are obliged to in several regards, as,

1. Out of respect to the good of your Country, of which Servants are a
numerous and considerable part: And therefore it is a deserved blemish upon
Masters if their Servants fly out into unworthy actions, unless they can
manifest that they have not been wanting on their part to teach them better,
and afford them the benefit of their good example.

2. If on your default or ill example your Servants grow depraved, you are to
be charged with their crimes, if not in Curia humana, yet in Foro Conscientiae,
and before the Divine Tribunal: This is a position that I confess may be
extended further to Magistrates and Governors, but that however lessens not
the verity and validity of it, since it is grounded upon this just Maxim, That
all crimes have a reflection of guilt upon those who by their Authority and
power, being employed in their charge, might have prevented, if through supine
negligence, or their own encouragement they promote them. The neglect or
inanimadvertency of this rule takes not from it its essential verity, and
therefore think not, that since you might by your good management of your self
have made your Servants good, you can become guiltless, if in default of your
care they become otherwise.

3. A Man by his vicious life loses the respects of his Servants, the truth and
reality of their Service, and grows into their contempt: For indeed nothing
renders a man cheaper, and lower in esteem than vice: Honor is the reward of
Virtue, and though a Vicious man may think to have it by the prerogative of his
Mastership, yet he but deceives himself, he may have lip or knee-service, but
little of the heart, they may be obliged by interest but never by affection,
which is the productrix of the truest service. I know the Apostle advises
Servants contrary to this. That they should discharge their duty well, even to
the froward and perperse: But where will Servants so qualified be found, or if
they have attained that Christian and honest disposition, how long will they
stay under the roof of those, the sight of whose evil lives are a vexation and
grievance to their Spirits? If therefore a man expects to be well served, Let
him show a just regard to those that serve him: Let it appear to them, that he
intends their good, by paying duly their wages, affording them reasonable
conveniences: forbearing froward and passionate carriage to them, giving them
prudent instructions, such as tend to the improvement of their knowledge and
bettering their lives; and lastly let him not spoil all by exposing to them the
daily sight of his own vicious habits, invalidating thereby all that he
otherwise says to them: and rendering him cheap and of low estimation among
them. The almost universal complaint of the scarcity of good Servants, their
negligence, indisposition to business, their Pride, Frauds, Purloynings, and
other debaucheries, will upon a fair scrutiny be found to be the product and
imitation of the same vices in Masters and Mistresses, and therefore the
redress and reformation must begin above, and from thence derive its influence
to those who are subordinate and but imperfectly transcribe their Copy.

Of Boldness or Confidence.
I will speak to thee now of several occasional matters, and first of Boldness
or Confidence. It is counted a fault in education to see Children bashful: It Is
what Parents count their Childrens shame, and their own: My opinion of it is
quite otherwise, when it does not proceed from debauchery, or universal
ignorance: I judge it a man's great honor to take upon him no more than his
skill fully reaches to, sometimes fairly to profess his ignorance, and where he
knows to express it civilly and modestly: Nothing gives a greater value to his
knowledge. What though the greatest part of mankind are shallow in judgment, and
weak in Courage, and consequently apt to be wrought upon by the confident; it is
a poor despicable victory, and of short continuance: As appears by the little
and fading repute of Mountebanks in Physic, State matters, or whatsoever
profession: Acquire my Son, real worth from thy Virtue and Honest life, acquire
it also in thy profession, and let thy actions of desert gain thy esteem, and
not thy vauntings, or confident extollings of thy self. The Bashful are every
where thought to have more than they show, the Boaster suspected ever to have
less: However use neither one nor other for advantage, but depend upon Gods
blessing in the constant practice of honest dealing, and acquisition of solid
skill: The Bold appear best at first encounter, but gradually lessen, till they
vanish to nothing: Nor is any thing more contemptible than ignorant confidence
discovered in its failings: Whilst the esteem of Persons, of real worth daily
increases, and indears it self.

Of Ceremonious behavior.
Concerning Ceremonious behavior; the less of it the better: it implies a
defect of real worth, and where it is studied and affected, is very despicable,
it has to the real prejudice of mankind, justled honest and plain dealing out
of practice and esteem: In lieu of it my Son, I would have thee use a natural
and free civility, giving every man his just due and respects, especially where
desert claims it, though in mean condition: They who are Ceremonious, aim
therein at their own fame or advantage, whereas decent civility is a debt due
to others, and terminated in them. What can be more unworthy and derogatory
from manhood, than to express an outward respect, and fawning, where there is
no reality in the heart, yea and many times a dislike and abhorrency of the
person we seem to honor? Guide thy self in this particular by the rules of
Honesty and Justice: Let thy conversation be plain and courteous, showing
always a dislike of the Vicious, and undeserving, plainly but heartily, where
it may be done with safety to thy self; to reclaim as much as thou can but
not to irritate, and that for the common love to mankind, and to Virtue.

They who are most ceremonious, do commonly little regard more worthy matters,
they are either superstitious and ignorant, or crafty and designing, and
therefore it is a practice most used by Statesmen and Courtiers, who aim at
advantages by it, and who though they are great explorators of other men's
hearts, keep their own skreened with the outside of Ceremony, and art of
obliging: Good men are of another mould, they do not hide their hearts in the
formality of their carriage and expressions, but intend to be known by them;
Reservation being for the most part an argument of ill intentions, and secret
frauds, than which nothing has more debased and unmanned us, and will in time
make us, as it has done some other Nations, a Proverb to express falsehood by; I
would not have thee therefore, my Son, to study and affect any particular
carriage, but to let it naturally flow from the integrity of an honest heart,
and a will to do no man any wrong, and thy self only just right: Let thy
behavior therefore be free and unaffected, manly, agreeable to the Laws of thy
Country, hearty and consonant to the just regard thou bear to the good and
well being of mankind: Leave the other to men of outside, apes, parasites,
falsehearted Courtiers, to the deceitful, superficial, ignorant, and impostors.

Of Deformity.
They who are deformed are rather to be pitied and gently used, than despised
or therewith reproacht: For it being no crime in those who are so from the
birth, or through some chance or oversight of Parents or Nurses, it ought not
to be urged, or taken notice of, without meriting thereby our selves to be so
deformed: We usually suppose that the minds deformity goes along with that of
the body, but that is uncertain, and therefore never to be reckoned as a sign,
though sometimes it may be as a cause. And this is usually through our own
default, for we by imprudently observing and reproaching it, raise in them
thereby a froward, and revengful Spirit, which setting their brains too often
at work, makes them subtle in replies, and diligent in spying out other men's
faults, that they may have wherewithal to recriminate. Be tender therefore my
Son, in this particular, in justice they ought to have more respect than those
who are not so, as well to compensate and alleviate the misfortunes of their
corporal defects, as also to prevent the distortions of their minds, which are
justly chargeable upon such uncivil advertencies: The deformities of the mind
are ever worse than those of the body, not only as they are the fruits of our
own choice, and justly chargeable upon our selves, but because the Deformed in
body are sufferers, but those of ugly minds are the doers of evil: When thou
see therefore any Deformed, be more than ordinary civil to such, to avoid all
occasion of their distaste, and tacitly give thanks to God that thou art not so:
Or if thou chancest to be so in any particular, let the goodness and
excellencies of thy mind, conciliate every bodies kindness toward thee, which
is the best way of overballancing any Deformity.

Of a single Life.
Concerning a single Life: It is of two sorts, that which is so with
resolutions of Chastity; and that which is grounded upon abuse of Liberty. As
to the first I have little to say, it being seldom in our Country the resolve
of Men: of Maidens it is often, upon sincere love not succeeding, or the
difficulty of finding a Companion to liking; or from observation of the
unhappiness of cross marriages, and their fears that theirs may be such. For
the other sort I would by no means have thee to be one of them, either from
taking too great a liberty, or upon any other account, except disability of
body, or Purse: If by any accident thou growest impotent, make not another
miserable, and thy self much more, by Marriage: To Marry where there is no
present or probable means of maintaining the unavoidable charge, occasions
frequently such inconveniences, as will soon cool affection, and lay a
foundation for future sorrows: This however is spoken with some allowance, for
it is common in the World where exigents happen that by doubling of industry,
and practicing necessary frugality, preserving especially the deserved
reputation of every sort of honesty, small beginnings soon grow up and spread
into handsome Fabrics, making up a decent part of the structure of the World:
But this is commonly where there is either some small stock of Money, or
credit, or of that which is fully equivalent, signal fidelity, joined with the
real skill in some necessary function or employment.

For the licentious who not only avoid, but declaim against Marriage, as an
Abridger of their natural liberty; I would have thee abhor their Counsels and
company, as a sort of people from whose Society nothing is gained but
propensions to all sorts of vices, and certain loss of honesty and reputation.
You must reckon that but an ill resolve that is grounded upon what is Vicious:
Which is of so ill credit amongst men, that it is a shame to use arguments for
its defense. That Marriage is agreeable to Nature, it appears, for that Men
naturally would choose their Mates, and were not their natures perverted, would
live Chastely and Honestly with them, though there were no divine or civil
institutions for confirmation thereof: But where both these are, and are of
high esteem, there to abandon them upon a pretense of a mere imaginary right
and liberty, is no doubt the height of folly, and is attended with numerous
evils, the just punishments of such extravagance: Again, what danger do they
continually run, in exposing their bodies to the hazard of a disease of all
others the most noisome, painful, and opprobrious? For since they must be
slight and vicious Women they frequent; what assurance have they, but that at
every congress they may receive that infection from them, which has been
imparted to them from others? and that heightened too by the use of Mercurial
and Antimonial Medecines, too frequently engaged in the cure of that disease.
To have either no Children, which is the common case of such extravagants, or
such as they shame to own, and upon whom they leave a blemish, both in the
Childrens, and the Worlds esteem, and of whose education (for want of an
orderly and regular life in themselves) no competent care is taken to prevent
those dispositions to vice, which both on the Father and Mothers side, may well
be presumed to be transmitted to them: These forsooth are some of the bitter
fruits of that sweet Liberty they dare sometimes plead for, when through a long
practice in vice, they have quit shame and modesty, (the outworks of Virtue)
and impudently profess, what at first they timorously and covertly undertook,
and are therefore declined by sober and wise men, who esteem their Society a
blemish; and warily caution all their acquaintance to shun them, as no less
contagious to their minds, than a blot to their reputation. That weak objection
of theirs which is ever ready in their mouths, of the numerous cares, griefs,
afflictions, which attend a married life, which to avoid they account prudence,
and a true effect of the exercise of reason; they are grossly mistaken in: For
God Almighty has so abundantly overballanc't those cares with the sweet
enjoyment of a married life, of the sense and relish whereof, these by their
doting merely upon sensualities are wholly deprived, that they are undergone
with much content and delight, except where some vicious habits interpose,
producers of want and necessities; otherwise where men do soberly, prudently,
and with a competent industry engage in business for the maintenance of a
Family, a thousand pleasures at home daily show themselves, sweetning and
rendering easy all the toils of business. The Creating Woman a meet help to Man,
besides the propagation of the World, respects the sweetness of converse and
Society, the mutual assistances that are to be given to each other, in
sickness, and all the cross accidents of life, her houswifery, and careful
providence, in governing the Family, educating the Children, assisting with no
despiseable advice, and comforting in all afflictions: On those depends the
honor, the content, the felicity of the Husband, blessings which the
licentious were never acquainted with: who instead of love meet with flattery
and falsehood, which when means fail shows it self in contempt, railings, and
treacherey: Instead of affectionate and hearty care, meet with self-interest,
and respect, which upon occasion and temptation breaks out into disdain,
reproach, private robbery, and too frequently into secret Murder: For those who
have sold their honesty for gain, will not stick for the same traffic to
venture all. And therefore how miserable are those deluded people, who part
with so much of real and solid happiness, to purchase misery, and the
extremest hazzardsmen in this world can run: Bless God therefore my Son, that
you are cautioned beforehand, and be wise by Counsel, rather than by sufferance.

Of Expenses.
Of Expense I now purpose to advise thee, being a matter of no small influence
upon thy happiness or misery: The world you know is full of people, a small
part whereof by fine arts, or as the fruits of Paternal frugality, industry,
and lucky opportunities, have gotten into their hands the fat and plenty of the
Land: so that the poorer sort live upon the sweat of their brows, in their
daily labor: The middle sort, of which number I suppose you may be, though
they are not so anxiously put to it, living more upon the ability, and artifice
of the brain, than the toil of the body; yet without care and good husbandry
these find it a difficult matter to acquire, preserve, or increase an estate,
and consequently to provide well for present occasions, devouring casualties,
and laying up a competency for posterity. It is expedient therefore thou
should so manage and moderate thy expenses, as neither to deny thy self or
thy needful conveniences, with due refreshments to sweeten your lives, nor yet
to bring upon your self a yearly diminution, and in time a certain decay of
estate; the consequence whereof, will be either to render thy life Melancholy
and disconsolate, or to weaken thy honesty by the assault of pressing
temptations, which though it should stand unshaken against all storms; yet it
is better (human frailty considered) not to bring it to the conflict, where
pressing necessity takes part against it. Let me advise thee therefore against
the common vanity of Men, not to place thy happiness in too much finery, or in
the imitation of others above thy quality. Remember that true reputation is not
grounded upon things without, but in Honesty, and Wisdom: What sober men are
there who do not prefer a well governed and prudent man in plain habit, and
that provides answerably for his Family, without base pinching, and penurious
saving, before a flaunting prodigal, who Comet-like makes a present blaze, and
draws the eyes of wondering people to him, but in a short time vanishes into
air, and his memory with him? Let not (as the custom is) thy expense rise with
thy gains, at least but to a moderate proportion, for if what thou have already
got be uncertain, how much more is the continuation of thy gettings, where
there are 1000 ways to beget a discontinuance. 'Twill be a trouble to the mind
to be forced to lower expense, when your own vanity is the occasion of it: for
what is the effect of common casualty, and calamity, (to which all mankind is
liable,) should not bring down a man's esteem in the opinion of others, and that
straitness which is occasioned by it, we should cheerfully bear, and ought
indeed, not only to pity, but readily to assist: in others for it is certainly
in this sense, in what ever other that man is said not to be born for himself.
It Is needless to give rules for the just proportion of your expense, some have
done it to the one half of your income, others to a third, as my Lord Burleigh,
and Lord Verulam, making thereby provision for casualties, and for posterity:
It Is well where it may so be done; but that is only for great estates: In the
main be careful that at the years end, all charges defrayed, you are growing,
and find a competent and pleasing increase, so that year goes cheerfully round:
But if you get much and raise your expenses answerably, at New years day you
are but where you were the year before, and all your toil and labor amounts
not to so much, as less gains with honest thrift, and rational parsimony would
have advanced; and then every casualty will be a plummet upon your Spirit, and
when Portions are called for, and you have not wherewithal, your Children with
your self grow Melancholy, and peradventure vicious, which is the case of most
of the gentry of England, and of very many improvident Citizens.

It Is a good caution of my Lord Bacons, that if you show upon some great
occasion, some extravagance in expense, it should be in such cases as do very
rarely, perhaps once in an age happen, not in such as may grow into a custom,
and be a constant charge upon you: Neither would I advise you to such a
lanching out, if you can prudently avoid it, which in your middle estate may
certainly be done, for many are the inconveniences of such high expense, and
especially because it raises an opinion in your Neighbors that you are
wealthier than you are, which is of ill consequence: and it heightnens the
minds of your Children, who with all prudential cautions should be bred up to a
love of decent thrift and industry, whose warm youthfulness will be ever apt to
fly out, especially if their heat be blown up by your improvident example.

Consider not expense by retail, but in gross, or but in passant: only so far
as to keep it within the bounds thou allowest in the main for the year; for
what matters it how thy wood, thy coals, and other wasting materials consume,
if the waste exceeds not the proportion thou allowest, or can be well content
to bear: This was always my practice, the other I esteemed too troublesome,
and pedantick: of no use unless to trouble the mind, and engage it in a
vexatious trifle: It Is expedient however to be so far circumspect as to prevent
waste and fraud, to which Servants (being concerned to avoid them by the ties
only of Conscience or reputation, now little valued) are too inclinable. This
is however to be done in such a manner, as may effectually prevent them, and
not show too low a suspicion, which when there is just ground to have, remove
it speedily by discharging the person suspected (otherwise thy mind will never
be at rest), which fairly do upon some other occasion, unless the matter be
very apparent: and then it is goood to be plain and express, and take some pains
with the offender, by discourse and good Counsel, as well to reform the guilty,
as to preserve other persons from the like sufferance. When thou art married
commit the care of those matters and the oversight of particular expense to thy
wife, for whom it is a meet employment, and diversion, who will be ready to
advise with thee upon all emergences extraordinary.

Of Tobacco.
Now I come to the consideration of that which from custom, and the reputation
of many of those who are eminent for sobriety and wisdom, who use it, has so
strongly planted it self, that it is looked upon as an effect of humor and
moroseness to decry it, I mean the use of Tobacco, which I esteem a great enemy
of health, and long life, and not only of the health of the body, but to the
dominion of the mind over the impetuosity of desires, and its victory over
assailing Temptations. Let me injoin thee never to use it, believe my
experience and the reasons which now follow.

1. It is not rational, that any man should use his body to any thing that may
beget considerable alterations in it, unless he be probably assured before
hand, that it will be for the better: Very few are so of Tobacco, since it is
generally taken up, without deliberate advice, consultation with such a
Physician as is an impartial Judge in the case; or Friends of much experience.
The common motives being either conformity with others, misled by prevailing
custom; or a false conclusion that there must be at least inoffensive pleasure,
if not profit in it, because it is so generally used.

2. It impairs the appetite, few that use it eating with a natural gust and
relish, refusing for the most part meats of mild and nutritive juice, and
desiring those which are acid, salt, and spicy: which only have smack with
them: whereby their blood and nervous juice becomes sulphurous, hot, and
productive of such kind of diseases. They desire also high and spirituous
drinks: which give an additional flame to the Sangineous mass. Hence for the
most part it makes the body lean, the sweet juice being drawn off from the
Muscles, unless in such as drink much; and to them also as great and many evils
are attendant, as Feavours, peripneumonia's, tremblings, soporous effects, the
Apoplexy, and also the Stone, and other diseases also, especially those of the
nerves and Limbs.

3. It impairs the memory, drawing away those sweet and convenient moistures
from the brain, that were designed to bedew and irrigate it, and so renders it
incapable of receiving impressions from sensible, and intelligible objects:
This is a generally confessed detriment arising from it.

4. As to the mind, by sharpning the blood, it begets an easy, and unresisting
subjection to passions, a facile compliance, and yielding to vicious
temptations.

5. It much indisposes us for business, both by dulling the animal faculties,
especially the memory, as also by rendering all business tedious to us, where
the opportunity of taking Tobacco is denied: and making men neglect business
and lose opportunities.

6. It renders many men less capable of getting Children, especially hot and
dry bodies, by withdrawing from the brain and nervous parts, and evacuating
that which should suppeditare materiam semini: give bulk and consistency to it:
provoking also a too frequent excretion thereof: And whereas every man ought by
studying his own Temper, use all diligence to have healthful, strong, and well
proportioned Children, which are a blessing to himself, and an Honor to his
Country: The use of Tobacco for the reasons above given, disposing him to many
sicknesses, propagates the same to his Children, and consequently to his
Childrens Children for many generations.

7. It becomes by the continued use thereof, its own punishment as most other
vices are; Pharaoh first hardened his own heart, and was then punished with
hard-heartedness; many have resolved upon observation of the many evils
attending this unjustifiable custom, and that with great seriousness, and many
times upon considerable obligations to shake off the fetters of so enticing a
Circe, but have found it too potent for their unsteddy purposes: which ought to
be a prevailing motive to those who never took it, to forbear, and keep
constant to their aversation: and to those who have taken it but for a little
time, to give it over, whilst freedom and ability for conquest remains.

To prevent an objection, I must say that I have used it, and therefore may be
thought unfit to give this Counsel, but weigh my Son, what I have to say in my
defense.

1. I never took pipe until I was 46 years old, until which time I enjoyed my
health as well as most men.

2. I was obliged to attendance in the City in the time of the great sickness,
in 1665, which was the first of my taking it: persuaded thereunto by its being
generally esteemed the best antidote against infection, and especially from the
experience of Isbrandus de Diemerbroecke, who was the Physician resident during
a three years plague at Nimiguen: How far other preservatives might have
prevailed I cannot say, but during my stay in the plague 1665, and visiting
daily all sorts of infected persons, I was never touched with any symptom
proper to the plague, or any other-sickness, save weakness of body through
decay of appetite, and wearisomeness from overmuch business.

3. After that plague was past I never took pipe, until after Dinner, and never
in great quantity: nor did it ever occasion me to drink Wine or strong Drink,
but I ever preserved my self from immoderation and intemperance.

4. I almost daily used the best antidote against Tobacco, which is Milk, a
mess whereof I eat almost every morning, and kept my stomach clean, neither
eating nor drinking after it until Dinner.

5. I think it has preserved me from defluxious upon my Lungs, by discharging
at the mouth those moistures which might otherwise very probably have fallen
upon them: However I will not be positive in this: because I have no
demonstrative argument to confirm it. These circumstances here set down I
alledg by way of excuse, and intend them not as a justification of my taking
Tobacco: because for ought I have said, I might probably have enjoyed my health
as well or better without it. And therefore I stick to my first reasons, by
which they being by my experience verified, I would persuade, and do hereby
injoin you my Son, never to take it: For many inconveniences I find from it,
and could heartily wish I had never taken it. Whereby I am persuaded out of my
affection to you, to caution you against it.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. He that has suffered Shipwreck is
no unfit person to advise another to avoid that rock he run his Ship against.
It Is your happiness I aim at, and therefore give these Cautions.

Of Contentment in our present condition
Man does ill consult his own happiness, in not enjoying the present, and in
being over sollicitous about the future. If he would be friendly to himself, he
should ever make the best of the condition he is in, by comparing it with that
which is worse, by considering that it is Gods great mercy to him, that it is
so good as it is, and beyond his desert, that though it has some evils
attending it, as all conditions and states of men have, yet it has also many
comforts, which are to be enjoyed without regret, or reflection upon what might
be; which to lose or to neglect, out of a passionate longing for what we have
not, and perhaps never may have; or having, may be never the happier, is no
small part of folly. Certes, Contentment must be within, grounded on the
innocence, and honesty of the mind: And an assurance of a blessed condition
hereafter, which will make us easily pleased with small matters here, as being
but in our way to a perfect state of Bliss in the world to come. Wealth and the
affluence of all our hearts can desire, is not our Portion here, but content in
the quiet and cheerful enjoyment of what we have. And God has been so
bountiful, as to furnish enough for all that are industrious, not riotous, or
prodigal, pleased with plain, wholesome, and familiar meats, and other
convenient accommodadations: which have the advantage of bringing little
trouble in the acquisition, and little grief in their loss, as being easily
again acquirable. How do men daily lose the comforts of the present, by hunting
greedily after something they have not, from which indisposition of mind it
follows, that when they have acquired what they pursue, they are as little
satisfied, but like Children dislike and neglect the Bables they have, crying,
and vexing themselves for trifles they have not. It is a good effect of Wisdom
and experience to be better minded in this particular, and with well composed
and thankful hearts to taste the sweetness of Gods goodness in the sober
enjoyment of what we have, using only the easy and ordinary tract of industry,
for continuance of things necessary, remembering that common and good saying,
That nature is content with a little, (not to be so therefore is unnatural) and
that the same contentment is by our blessed Master, confined to food and
raiment.

About the foreknowledg of Futurities.
Before I pass this, I will instance one vanity of the mind, in our
solicitation about the future: And that is a vain and earnest desire that men
have to know events and successes in future contingences. In the times of
greater ignorance, and in those Countries now whose knowledge is but darkness,
this was and is much in use, and some there are, even where a discovery of such
delusions has been plentifully made, who by their folly and credulity give
opportunity to crafty men to milk their purses: and exercise their cheats upon
them. But be armed my Son, against so deluding, or being so deluded: and that
you may, consider well the ensueing Arguments.

1. It is the prerogative of the Almighty God alone to foreknow what shall be
hereafter: See this expressed, and with some jealousy claimed by God in the
book of the Prophet Isaiah, from the 41 Chapter to the 48. From which places it
may be thus argued: Whosoever is not truly God, understands not future
contingences; But the Gods of the Heathens, are fasly so called, have no
divinity in them, therefore they are altogether ignorant of future
contingences. Or thus, whosoever foreknows future contingences, to him belongs
the divine name, and honor: But to no created being the divine name and honor
belongs, therefore no created being can foreknow future contingences. Almighty
God challenges all those who were believed by the people to have prescience of
future events, to come forth, and give demonstration thereof, and they should
be acknowledged to be Gods: What arrogance therefore is it, yea impudent
assumption to themselves of the perogative of the Divine Nature, for any person
to take upon them to declare the contingent events of human undertakings,
success of Journeyes, Voyages, Lawsuits, Marriages, Battles, to foretell the
accidents of men's lives, or any other matters, not predetermined and signified
in their causes: which bold undertaking is not barely a deception of the
people, in gaining money; for pretending to do what they know they are not able
to perform, but a sitting down in Gods Chair, and by ways of imposture, and
confederacy, pretending to that which he has reserved peculiarly to himself,
and from himself by his blessed Spirit only to some few communicated, for
establishing and propagation of his Gospel. It is very meet therefore not only
that the people should be rightly informed in this particular, that they may
give no credit to such deceivers, but that the Laws also should punish such
Arrogance and Imposture, in zeal to God, and to prevent those deceits that are
by them imposed upon the ignorance and credulity of the people.

2. The virtues and influences they bestow upon the Planets, their Aspects,
Oppositions, Conjunctions, Ascensions, appropriate Houses, are all the device
and fictions of men, gratis dicta, spoken at their pleasure, not grounded upon
any real proofs from nature, as are also the grounds of predicting from Comets
and Eclipses, and have no other means of gaining followers than their being
formed into an Art, consisting of terms uncommon, and methodized like other
Sciences, by means whereof many young students, and men of light and fanciful
brains, conceiving that so great pains would not have been taken, to cultivate
an Imposture, have applied themselves to the study thereof. And though the most
ingenious, and able, have upon the discovery of the emptiness and weakness of
its foundations, as also the tedious vanities of its superstructures, wholly
declined it as a delusory fiction, purposely invented to deceive the people.
Yet diverse others, and especially men of volatile and capricious brains,
unwilling to have it thought that they had spent so much time to no purpose,
and it may be not questioning the grounds thereof, but taking them for granted
as allowed traditions, have continued to maintain its Authority, and set their
brains at work to find out specious arguments for its defense: which have been
learnedly confuted by the able Pens of Savanorola, Erastus, Gassendus, and very
many others: the art it self also, quatenus Judicial, condemned by the wisest
States, and by none Christian ever justified: All which are motives sufficient
for men of sobriety wholly to condemn it as vain and fallacious.

It Is true indeed that many little people driven to want and exigence, have
spent time in the study thereof, and thereby acquired a small livelihood, since
in all places people will be found for want of good instruction, easy to be
wrought upon by such as can amuse them, and talk in Terms above their
understanding, with the help also of Schemes, Figures, Characters, etc. But
these by so doing, as they lose their innocence and conscience, knowing full
well that their art is but imposture, so are they recompenc't with the scorn
and contempt of the sober and wise, and therefore had much better have
recovered their wants by honest industry in a lawful art or manufacture, where
they might have been useful in some measure to their Country, and not as now,
its shame and disgrace.

3. I shall only add to this, that it is from the great mercy of God that he
has denied us the foreknowledg of futurities, nothing conducing more to man's
felicity than such an ignorance: how perplexed would he ever remain in the
foreknowledg of all the cross accidents of his life, which he must also
foreknow he cannot avoid, for otherwise he could not foreknow them: How would
it sower and imbitter all his present enjoyments to be acquainted before hand
that shortly he must break his Leg, at another time have his house burnt, or
lose his Wife, and Children, or Estate; sufficient certainly is the sorrow of
each day for it self. How does it make the countenance of men and their Spirits
to fall, when upon losses or other accidents, they find the feilure of their
Estates, and in a short time to their apprehensions, an inevitable breaking;
certainly the anxiety before it happens is greater than after, when the worst
being known, and the discredit digested (which is but an imaginary reproach)
the mind by degrees is quieted. Let us therefore give thanks to Almighty God,
who out of his abundant wisdom, and loving kindness to man, has denied us what
we so eagerly covet, and what would tend to our so great vexation: Let us with
humble and thankful hearts enjoy the present, and so lead our lives, that our
assurances of the future enjoyment of God in the mansions and society of the
blessed, may make us contentful in any condition here, since it will be but a
little time before we shall be possessed of eternal beatitude hereafter.

Of Pride.
It is meet that I say something of Pride, because it is a general vice, the
cause of much, yea most of the evils in the World, and not only very
prejudicial to others, but to our selves also. The foundations of it are
ignorance, and presumption: Ignorance I say, for though men accounted knowing,
are very incident to it, yet it always arises from their folly, in having a
better opinion of themselves than they deserve: This is evident from this
undeniable truth, That there is no man without numerous defects, the knowledge
of the best is poor, low, and imperfect: the possessions of all uncertain,
matters depending much upon chance, exposed to numerous casualties, wholly
extraneous to man, and their estimation depending upon vain opinion. Pride has
always something of Herod's fault, for which he was eaten up of Vermin, for
arrogating honor to himself, which is due only to God: It makes him apt to
practical Atheism, that is to rely upon, and attribute what he obtains, to his
own parts, and consequently to think he has no need of God.

But see the consequence of it in the 16 of the Proverbs the 18. Pride goes
before destruction, and a haughty Spirit before a fall: For such contemning God
are justly despised by him, and then follows that of St. James, c. 4. v. 6. He
resists the proud, but shows grace to the humble, and that of St. Luke,
1.51. He scatters the Proud in the imaginations of their hearts. This is true
of private persons, and of States, both which are nearest to destruction, when
they appear most arrogant and secure.

It is common with proud men to use an hypocritical humbleness, to invite
thereby greater respect from others; by which they tacitly confess their own
unworthiness, of which they are justly conscious, and bewray the baseness of
their own minds: They who have most of worth abominate such practices, decline
it themselves, and hate it in others. All kind of honor, as it should be the
recompense of Virtue and true worth, so should it flow freely from others who
are benefited by good Actions: but should never be sought by our selves, yea,
should be avoided, not out of a fallacious design of gaining otherwise thereby,
but from a true sense of our own imperfections, and because it is but our duty
to do all the good we can. That saying of the Poet, Contempt of Fame, is the
contempt of Virtue, is grounded upon a false supposition, that the motive to
Virtue is applause, whereas indeed, it should arise from a sense of its own
excellency, and that God has commended it to human practice, as that which
carries in itself, the blessed fruits of peace, joy, and the solace of the
mind, as the greatest means of happiness this world can afford us. And hence is
it that Christ dissuaded his followers from accepting worldly Honors,
Dominion, Praise, and all other the esteemed darlings of corrupted men,
preferring to them peace of Conscience here, and assurances of real felicities
hereafter.

Consider well of this; and let thy mind (my Son) possess the knowledge thereof,
lead thy life in conformity to it, for thereby thou will avoid many evils which
the proud are exposed to. Its remedy is humility; grounded upon a just esteem
of our selves, and of others: In our selves we are chiefly to consider how much
we want of what we should be, and here we can hardly be mistaken* in others, to
value what we see worthy in them, and to consider how easily they may attain
(if they exceed not already) what we judge good in our selves: to weigh above
all, that we are all born for the good, one of another, and that there is no
greater evil to human Society, than for us so to love our selves, as to be
detrimental to others, that the love of our selves is the rule and extent of
our love to others, that it is Christ's great Commandment, That no man can truly
love God, whom he has not seen, if he love not his brother whom he has seen:
That we should make our selves equal to men of low degree, peradventure as
being the best, or as having most need of encouragement, or to show that men
are not to be esteemed for their riches, or disesteemed for their poverty, but
all are to be loved, and the virtuous chiefly to be respected. Man will soon
cease to be proud, if he well considers that he has nothing to be proud of, not
of Wealth or what is purchased by it, for it is no part of himself, it is full of
uncertainty, the fool or vicious may be master of it, as well as the wise and
virtuous. Not of Honor, for if it arise not from good and worthy Actions, it is
a false Coin, and is therefore contemptible: If it be the effect of true
desert, the foundation of that desert, which is virtue, will teach him to think
meanly of it, since virtue praises it self with its own contentment, and is
rather diminished than satisfied by reward: especially since it cannot but be
conscious of coming abundantly short of its duty, being attended with many
defects, which are too well known to the possessor: Not of Learning and great
Parts, since both of them are but acquisitions to promote common good, and no
further valuable but as they do so, which carry with them, when in the best
manner exercised, solace and contentment of Mind: The great Apostle St. Paul,
which next to his and our blessed Master, did the most good in the world,
protested that he had nothing to glory in, But the Cross of Christ, and that he
was counted worthy to suffer for the giving testimony to that blessed Name, and
the profession of his Discipleship: renouncing all esteem that might otherwise
arise to himself, from his education, learning, or whatever else the World is
too apt to applaud, all which considered, ought to take down in us all high
thoughts, and to teach us not to despise others, or to overvalue what the world
accounts worthy in our selves.

Consider that Pride is always attended with envy, is for the most part
despised, makes it self many enemies; is the proper fruit of ignorance, and
misconceit: it is a fault proper to youth, where there wants knowledge and
experience: and therefore the Council I give is necessary, to supply the
defects thereof, and it is no small gain to learn wisdom from the observations
of him who has gone before you, and communicates his knowledge to you, with no
other design but to do you good, and to make you wiser and better than himself.

That it is better to live upon a man's own private business than public
Offices or Employments.
Seek not public employments, places, or offices, if possibly you can live
upon a profession of your own: for so you depend not upon uncertain favor, and
avoid the many disgusts and accidents that attend them: the most of them are in
the execution irksome to the people: They are therefore ill resented,
especially by the more industrous and ingenuous, who look upon most officers as
Drones, if not Caterpillars wasting much, and producing nothing: sucking the
sweet and fat of other men's Labors, Covetous, Griping and Vexatious: apt to
bribery and deceit, ready for the most part, and assistant in such projects as
tend to the infringement of just and Lawful liberty. Choose therefore, and
advise thy Children to choose any employment rather that depends upon their own
honest industry, and wherein thou may serve in thy Sphere, others as well as
thy self.

What esteem is due to Arts.
Concerning the esteem thou should give to Arts, Let it be resolved thus,
That none are to have a place in thy affection, but what are in themselves
consistent with the strict rules of Honesty, and Virtue: what also are useful,
and innocently pleasant: innocently I say, for no pleasures should be embraced
that either defile thy self, or are injurious to others. Thus far Arts are to
be esteemed, as supplements, and assistants to nature: as good effects of the
latitude of that understanding, with which God has endowed man more than other
Creatures, by which he has produced all implements, and convenience for his
House, his Trade, his Husbandry, his Traffic abroad, his Health, his
Habitation, his preservation from Fire, and inundation, and many other
appurtenances to the well being of his life: But all others which come not
within the characters abovementioned, disclaim, such as are vexatious to
mankind, delusive, opinionative, having no foundation upon nature, but rather
opposite and injurious to her: All dishonest Crafts, base and subtle
projections, confederative impostures, heighteners and propagators of vice and
debauchery: as the World goes, and it may be has for a thousand years gone, it
is exceeding necessary thou should make such a distinction: since many of
these later sort have an equal esteem in the worlds vogue, with what we first
named; mankind being both apt to embrace, what is for the promotion of his
licentiousness, and easy to admit, what subtle Arts-men have for their own
advantage with much cunning introduced.

Of Education in Schools and Universities
Amongst the number of the useless may be reckoned, what is professed and
acquired for many years in the Schools and the Universities. I speak it not to
upbraid them, or to arrogate ought to my self in thus declaring against that
kind of Learning: but inasmuch as I judge them in great measure useless, and
not only so, but hinderers also of much better, and more useful knowledge, and
profitable Learning that might in less time be acquired; it is meet, and a part
incumbent upon me, that I should caution you my Son, to take the nearest and
better tract for the attainment of Science truly so called, to sift the Wheat
from the Bran, that you may not mispend your youth and manhood, upon what will
indeed pervert your understanding, instead of rightly informing it.

Of Learning the Latin Tongue.
What the Education is of Boys in Schools, and of young men in the
Universities, I shall not need to express, it is obvious enough, but I shall
first declare some of my sentiments thereof, and then propose a better way of
education.

1. Then it is to be understood, that every Language was, before it was reduced
into an Art: Grammar being but a system of Rules made out of the speech of
those, who expressed their minds best in that Language: Now inasmuch as each
Language is learned by the Children of each place where every different
Language is spoken (the case having been the same in Latin) so as that in five
or six years time from their birth, they can readily express themselves so far
as their small business and occasions require, increasing in readiness and
copiousness of expression, as they grow further acquainted with men and things,
and this without learning any rules, it is obvious to conclude that the way of
learning a Language by Rule, in doing whereof eight or ten years is commonly
found necessary, is a tedious, improper, and impertinent way of acquiring a
Language: Especially if it be considered that there would be no comparison
between a Child that learns it by custom of speaking of six years, and a boy
that learns to speak it by Rule of sixteen. The child speaking it upon all
common occasions readily, fluently, and without hesitation. The youth if at
all, doubtfully, and timorously: The Child with more regard to things, and the
matter he has to say, the Grammarian youth with intentness of mind chiefly if
not solely, upon words, and the manner of his expression: The youth learning
the Language by the by, and chiefly acquiring several other useful knowledges,
as he grows up and his understanding is fitted for them: The Grammarian a mere
Linguist, designing little more than the attaining the Language, yea, and to
the greater shame of that way of education, in all that time is not so much as
a Linguist neither, there being scarce a boy so educated that can speak the
Latin Tongue, I mean as a Language should be spoken, and as a Child bred up in
it would in six or seven years speak it.

This is well known to be a sad Truth, notwithstanding the boast, that nothing
is spoke in some of our Latin Schools, but Latin: This may be in some little
forms of speech, belonging to some common occasions; but in familiar converse,
it is otherwise: So that take them out of those Modes of speech customary in
their Schools: bring them to play, to tell a tale, to talk of the business of
the Town, or their houses, and they speak English, because they cannot speak
Latin: or let any stranger ask them an unusual question, and they cannot
answer, although they could readily have answered it in their native Language:
Yea the Masters themselves, unless it be in the common road of their
examination in the boys performance of their exercise, speak English to them,
and it may be because they cannot readily express themselves in the Tongue they
profess to teach. So that summing up the whole it is a most improper, useless,
delusive way of education, to keep a boy at School for learning a Language
until he be fifteen, sixteen, or upward, and in no competent measure to perform
it, and all this from the impediment of the rules and manner of teaching; and
therefore my Son, I have thus freely expressed my self, that if I die before thou
art brought up, some other way may be thought upon, for thy better education in
that Language, which I purpose here to suggest, and which I would that by thee
it may be transmitted to thy posterity.

Where by the way, because the Latin Tongue is the Language which chiefly takes
up the time of Youth, I would have thee to understand, that there is no more in
that than in any other Language, that a knowing man useful in his place, and to
his Country is to be preferred before him that has that or two or three more
Tongues, and wants the better knowledge of things and business, and the prudence
to understand the true value of a Language, boasting and arrogating a great
matter to himself, because he can utter in a Foreign Language, what another can
more pertinently, and less affectedly express in his own. Upon this men have
been apt to grow too conceited, and pragmatical, larding their language with
ends of Latin, as if it bore more weight than when spoken in English, and that
with the impertinency often of speaking to them who understand nothing but
English. The chief uses of the Latin Tongue, are 1. the understanding of many
things that are writ only in that Tongue. 2. the converse with strangers. 3.
The advantage in travel. 4. The management of differences between Country and
Country in Courts of Admiralty. 5. Because it is made the Language of Scholars,
and most things transmitted to posterity in it. Of each of these a few words.

As to the first it is fit to be considered, whether the infinite damage we
receive, by the many thousand things transmitted to us in that Language, either
trivial, useless, false, or corrupting our understanding, does not abundantly
countervail the benefit we receive by any thing so transmitted, which if good
and necessary, might probably be better gained out of our selves without the
mixture of numerous falsities, and impertinences. I profess I know no salvo to
this: for the selection of Books, by wise and good men in each faculty, being a
business never hitherto done, and yet being the most probable expedient. The
inconvenience in the objection remains entire, and to me unanswerable: Besides
the dependence upon Books is no small impediment to true Learning, since the
greatest part of the world have acquiesced in the opinions of those who have
gone before them, and are therefore properly Learners, and rarely finders out
of any thing themselves; whereas did men read little except some institution,
and use their own brains, in each branch of their art, by manual experiments,
and rational observations thereupon, each man would be more ready and expert in
his art, and some men of more capacious Brains would in every art, find out
some useful and pertinent additions: So that the restraining of men's
understandings by multiplicity of Books may be added as a second and very
considerable evil.

2. As for converse with Strangers. It is either to learn of them, or to
instruct them, being strangers, in matters whereof they are here ignorant, or
to understand their minds, that they may be furnished in their occasions. To
these particulars I say, If they have business here, they have also
correspondents, and interpreters in some Language they jointly understand: And
in this case, the Dutch, French, Italian, or Spanish, are the more general
Languages, If it be matter of State, they have their Interpreters: The chief
point is if they be Scholars that traffic in learning, and therefore are well
furnished with the learned Tongue: In this exigent as Latin has been taught,
they can very hardly find men that can readily maintain, converse, and hold
society with them: I speak not this at guess, but as what is, I conceive
confessed by all: viz. That it is very rare to find men, though esteemed very
Learned, that can hold discourse readily upon all occasions with Learned
Strangers: who speaking Latin commonly and familiarly in their own Country, are
much more apt to express their minds, being hardly ever put to it to pump for
words, as our Scholars usually are, who though they have apt conceits in their
minds, yet are fain oft-times to wave them, or imperfectly to express them for
want of copious Language. Whereas the Latin learned by constant and customary
speaking, whilst we are young, would render us as ready of expression in that,
as now we are in our native Language. The case would also be the same in
Travel, in the management of differences, between Country and Country in Courts
of Admiralty, a notable instance of the defect of acquiring the Language, being
lately seen in our Court of Admiralty: where after the Spanish Civilians had
most readily expressed themselves, and urged their arguments copiously, and
fluently in the Latin Tongue, the most able of our Civilians were at a stand,
not for want of matter, and reasons for reply, but fit words, and ready
expressions answerable to opponents. From what has been said, I would have you
to understand. 1. That things are not to be valued, because they are in the
Latin, Greek, or any other Tongue, but because they are True, Good, and in some
kind or other useful to mankind. And 2. That the common way of acquiring the
Latin Tongue in our Schools, is a very improper, dilatory, and abusive way, not
only coming short of teaching the Tongue as it ought to be spoken, but attended
with many other inconveniences, and diplorable mischiefs, as mopeing and
debasing the spirits of young men; dulling their brains by overcharging their
memories, with multitude of Rules they understand not, by a savage and furious
demeanor toward them, in the Masters often out of humor, and for things
trivial, also by making them mispend a vast deal of precious time, in which
they might acquire many things useful, and commodious to their future life, and
to this injurious way of education is justly chargable that unwillingness, and
averseness Children have of going to School, and consequently those impetuous
desires they have to pastimes, and pleasures, which are usually so implanted in
them, that their reason though grown strong is not able to overcome them in the
whole course of their lives.

Of Logic.
Logic is the Art of that which should never be brought into an Art, that is
of Reasoning: For men should Reason only from the force of that sound knowledge
they have of things, and not from the slight, and artifice of Words: Logic is
therefore called by one of no mean account in the World, The skilfulness of
contention, or darkness, by which all other Sciences are made more obscure, and
harder to learn: An unhappy art by which evil men have learned to justify
error, vice, and all sort of corruptions, which they could never have done by
plain and direct reasoning, such as every man is according to his knowledge of
things, apt enough unto. By the help of this knowledge, or rather craft, Popery,
which is a mere politic contrivance, and as such, obvious to common sense, is
justified by infinite swarms of Monastical men, Cardinals, Bishops, Monks,
Friars, of numerous sects and distinctions, who have thereby drawn into
themselves the fat of those Lands they inhabit, and erected a proud and lofty
edifice upon the plain and unartificial rules of humble Christianity: By the
help of this, cunning intricacies are brought also into the Protestant
Religion, both by the Orthodox, and Heterodox: by which the leaders in all
opinions, declining the plain rules of practical Christianity, and insisting
chiefly upon such points wherein their several differences consist, draw to
themselves, and from one another numerous Disciples, whereby they live at ease
and in great plenty, and some little devices of advantage are raised to the
people also, by means whereof divisions are kept alive to the no small
detriment, and defamation of true Christianity, of truth, integrity, and common
freedom, the most precious Jewels that mankind has in this World: It is
therefore a most unhappy craft, introduced by deceivers, not at all used by our
Savior or his Disciples, whose plain and powerful speaking, even to the
capacities of the weakest, was more convincing than all the artificial
reasonings of the subtilest Arts men of those times: and has in great measure
retained its luster, and overruling force, notwithstanding all the artificial
endeavors, and eclipsing sophisms, of the nicest Logicians. Decline therefore
my Son, this not so truly called superfluous, as delusive science, gain with
thy utmost endeavors, true and distinct knowledge in the realities of things,
and they will furnish thee with sufficient arguments, for the just proof of any
thing that is just and honest.

Keep but true to thy self in observation of true Christian Graces, and
Virtues, and sully not thy self with reproachful vice, and thou will be
abundantly able from the plain rules of the Scripture, and the dictates of
unperverted reason, to withstand and disannul all the sophistical engines which
the subtlety of man can raise against the fortress of truth. See things as they
are, and understand Logic, to be as I have declared, and without learning
Logic, thou will be able to defend thy self against it: Though I doubt not,
but if thou should go about to learn it, without the prepossession of its
supposed worth and necessity, and merely as an unbyassed man, thou would
soon be a weary and convinced of its irksome vanity, and esteem it rather an
hindrance to sound reasoning, and a mere entanglement of words. The ten
predicaments which is a reduction of all things in the World within the
comprehension of these ten words, 1. Substance. 2. Quantity. 3. Quality. 4.
Relation. 5. Action and Passion. 6, 7. Where, which is a denotation of Place.
8. When, which is a denotation of time. 9. Site, or posture of Body. And 10.
Habit, viz. of the body. Of these certain things are predicated, and from
thence arise five Predicables. Genus, Species, Difference, Propriety, and
Accident. Besides there belong to the Predicaments, Anti-predicaments, and
Post-predicaments. Anti-predicaments, as three Definitions, one of Aequivocals
the Second of Univocals: the third of Denominatives. Two Divisions, one of
Voices or words: the other of things.

Two rules, the First, Whatsoever is said of the Predicate, the same may be
said of the Subject. The Second Rule is, That of Genus's, not subalternately
put, there are diverse Species and differences.

The Post-Predicaments are also five, as First, Opposition, which presupposes
Identity, and diversity of things. The ways of Indentity are many, of
Diversity more. Opposition is the repugnance of two Simple Terms, so that one
cannot be said of the other: nor both of them agree with a Third, in the same
respect, manner, and time. Of these opposites there are four sorts, Relative,
Privative, Contrary, and Contradictory: Contraries are Mediate, and Immediate;
the Mediums are threefold, of abnegation, of Proportion, and of Participation.

Privative opposites are Privation and Habit: Privation is twofold, Total, and
Partial. Privation Total is both of the act, and of the Organical Power.
Partial is only of the Act.

The Contradictory opposition is an affirmation and negation of the same simple
voice: which opposition is of all others the most strong, because it wants the
Medium both of Abnegation and of Participuation.

Add to these their several ways of Priority, and of being together; of the
First there are five, Priority in time, in Nature, in Order, in Dignity, and as
a Cause.

Thee Modes there are also of being together, viz. in Time, in Nature, and in
Division. So are the Species, and Differences dividing the same Genus.

Lastly, They handle motion, as it is a Successive, or instantaneous change of
Substance, or Accidents, in order to the receiving another form, either
internal or external. And of these there are six kinds: Generation, Corruption,
Augmentation, Diminution, Alteration, and Lation, or change of place: all which
are defined by the terms from which, to which they are moved.

To these they add eight modes of having any thing, as a quality, v. g. Virtue.
2. Quantity, as two Cubits length. 3. A Garment. 4. Something in part, as a
Ring upon the right finger. 5. A part it self, as an eye. 6. Something in a
vessel, as wine in a Pitcher. 7. Possessions. 8. A Wife. And sure they might
have added as many more.

All this ado is made about simple voices or things, before they make up
propositions, or are joined together: And of these there are endless
controversies, and abundance of Volumes writ: for how can it be otherwise, when
men will be so vain, as to descend to so nice a consideration of words, never
used or thought upon by plain and well meaning men; but doubtless the invention
of such as either were too needlessly curious about voices or speech, or such as
intending to distract the world by bringing imposture, fallacy, Domination by
unbounded will, and imposition of false opinions opposite to nature, and true
Religion, have by this Art entangled mankind in words, that so the truth and
reality of things, and the otherwise clear virtues of Nature, which are
opposite to all impostures, and delusive opinions, might be at least obscured,
if not wholly defaced.

It is but a third part of Logic, of which I have recited but the bare heads:
But this being so tedious, so vain, so useless, why should I trouble my self or
you to do the like to the two other Parts, each of them comprehending as many
particulars as this first, The one being of complex voices, or single
propositions: The other of united propositions, or syllogisms: In both which
there are abundant particulars, and upon them infinite controversies writ by
learned Clerks, and grave Fathers, who have dealt with our understandings, as
he would do with our eyes, that could fill the air with dust, flocks, and
feathers, and that in order to the clearing and making more diaphanous the
medium of sight.

Whilst men are learning this kind of Logic, and acquiring competent skill in
its objections and controversies, they might in the same time, well and
advisedly employed, have gained one or two Languages, and it may be a very
great insight in some profitable art, besides the chiefest acquisition of the
knowledge of men, and the realities of things: whereas a mere and sound Logician
is usually the veriest animal in nature, and taken out of the road of his
unnecessary studies, not able clearly to discourse, or to use manly reasoning
upon any useful subject whatsoever.

2. What Controversies have these acute Logicians brought to a period, and
convincing determination: Yea, what contests have they not raised, both in this
their peculiar voluminous art, and in all other matters, wherein it has been
the worlds unhappiness that they have been engaged, and those to the Worlds end
by them undeterminable: From hence is it that Lawyers are so able to maintain a
bad cause, and others false opinions: From hence colors and false glosses are
set upon base and injurious practices, as taking too amongst the credulous, and
hereby deluded people, as if they were sound reasonings; and those not the
vulgar only, as they are called, but even the Learned, who by receiving
themselves some tinctures of such deceptions in their education, do more easily
afterward yield to well couched Sophisms, and Fallacies.

3. It it almost confessedly a useless Art, because although 6, or 7. years is
in great measure spent thereupon in the Universities, yet afterward, to what
ever profession man ingages himself, it is in effect wholly laid aside, as to
the form and method of it: Whereas all useful arts, that are preliminary to the
rest, are continued through the whole process of those that depend upon them.
The alteration it leaves upon men, is an aptness to contention, and a
forwardness, upon a vain supposition of a formal ability, from the readiness of
Topics, and knowledge of Sophisms, to engage in the maintenance of things
unjust, and which they would otherwise themselves have condemned.

4. Its use is wholly declined where business of the greatest moments are
transacted: In Parliaments, and all other Councels, in conventions, and
Companies of Merchants, and other Tradesmen: in all other meetings also for the
dispatch of civil affairs, in the Courts of Lawyers, in the Colleges of
Physicians, yea and in the consistory of Divines, And to say truth, the utmost
use that is made of it, is in the supplement of some fallacies in pleadings
easily discerned without the necessity of learning the Art, by prudent men: In
the inabling a contentious parson to contrast, and go to Law with his
Parishioners: How unhappy a matter is it therefore, that this so useless
science should be some years a learning in the Universities, and that they
should manage their Disputations in the public Schools, and Colleges, in this
restrictive way of arguing, where he is like often to carry the question, not
who is best skilled in the nature and extent of the thing debated, but who has
attained the best ability to form Syllogisms, and most subtly to manage them.

Of Rhetoric.
Near a kin to Logic is Rhetoric, and as far as it is Artificial, that is so
far as it proceeds from acquired abilities, from Rules and devised Methods, it
is as despicable amongst honest men, of as ill consequence, and as destructive
to mankind: This is also learned in the Universities, where there are public
Schools and Lectures read upon the same. This also my Son, I would have you
make little or no esteem of, forasmuch as every man ought to speak from the
knowledge of things, and from the truth and real conviction of his own mind, and
not besides them, for the friendship of any, or for the advantage of any
Worldly good: Were it thus amongst men, how happy would our lives be, whereas
from Rhetoric, which is termed an Art of gaining belief and credit to what is
spoken, be it honest, or dishonest, true or false, right or wrong, which refer
to the three species of Rhetoric; from this delusory art I say arises,
flattery, dissimulation, fallacy, perversion of judgment, justification of what
is bad, condemnation of what is good; all which are spring heads of most of the
evils that have been brought upon mankind: From respect to this Art forsooth
Scholars are allowed in the Schools and Universities, to maintain opinions they
know to be false, and it is allowed even in Courts of Judicature, with subtelty
of words, and eloquence to maintain bad causes, nor is it any blemish, but
rather an Argument of great ability to be well able so to do. As if men had
quitted Conscience, and placed their reputation in having acquired skill to
deceive, and pervert the tract of justice. There is nothing in the world but
what may be expressed in plain speech, and easily intelligible words that
concerns the manners, and common affairs of men, and here indeed should we
rest, for in this is truth, and in this should be persuasion, and acquiescence.
But when men come to use long, and subtle discourses, eloquent orations,
adorned with their flowers of Rhetoric, various tropes and figures, arguments
to the men, and not the matter, what is then aimed at, but deluding the
understandings of those that hear, swaying them from truth to falsehood, to
condemn the innocent, and acquit the guilty: For the performance of all which
the elements and rules of this art do abundantly enable its disciples. Nor are
these Rhetoricians ever the less esteemed among the gross of men, partly from
the captivation of their understanding, by these their subtleties, and partly
for that the people themselves are in great measure tinged with some ability in
this delusive art, and therefore the more apt to be deceived, and to deceive
others.

If corrupt states undertake bad designs, destructive to the Laws, and the just
rights of mankind, they have advocates to plead in its justification, who by
fine woven speeches and declarations, shall at least so far prevail, as to
delude a great part even of them over whom the net is at the same time casting,
and who must partake in the slavery: And then these very people who are so
deluded, shall endeavor to corrupt, and even despise those who are not
deluded, as judging them shallow and short-sighted.

By virtue of this art are false opinions introduced into the World, taking
place in the understandings of men, and justling out Nature, Truth, and
Honesty: as matters of mean regard. These have also their Advocates,
distinguished into various sects, the heads and leaders of all which by the art
of speaking, have divided the people, and made them confidents and abettors of
their several errors (for truth being but one, and they being of numerous
distinctions and diversities in opinion, must consequently be erroneous) and
are so far from being discovered by them, that those leaders are supported, and
maintained in better plight and equipage than most of their very maintainers.

Rhetoric has been an Art of greater esteem than now it is, there having been
in several Countries of Greece, Masters teaching it as we now teach Grammar or
Music. But in continuance of time, the people finding many evils to arise
therefrom, and especially the justification therewith of falsity, and even of
vice it self: They found it necessary to banish that sort of men, and to
interdict the teaching thereof in their Countries. The wisest Lawmakers have
for the same reason excluded them; and the wisest men despised them: Socrates
esteemed them dishonest, regardless of truth, and virtue, ever to be suspected,
and therefore men of no estimation. Plato thought it necessary they should be
kept out of his Commonwealth, as corrupters of the manners and integrity of
mankind: From whom derive indeed their Descent, Accusers, Advocates,
Sycophants, and all those who for indirect ends study the art of speaking, and
the methods of deluding mankind: It is therefore very rare to find good men
eloquent, for such having no ends but what are honest and justifiable, seek no
assistance from the fine contexture of words, it being sufficient that they can
plainly and significantly in proper words speak to the present matter. Where as
such as are minded to deceive, must not speak plainly to the point in hand, but
are forced to use flourishes, preambles, circumlocutions, and windy ambages, to
amuse the understanding, and by degrees through several windings, and Meanders,
to draw it out of the easy and obvious path of truth, into the labyrinths of
error, and false persuasion.

Marcus Cato forbid the three Athenian Orators, Carneades, Critholaus, and
Diogenes, to be received into the City of Rome, because they had so sharp wits,
such pleasant speech, and passing eloquence, that they could persuade any
thing, and justify a cause though never so unrighteous: For error having
oftentimes a very great resemblance to truth; Men that love not truth, and
design not in their words and Actions to promote it, may easily find colorable
words so to dress error in a specious shape, that it may pass for that which it
is not, to the delusion of many. Rhetoricians were therefore three times
banished out of Rome, 1. When Caius Fannius Strabo, and Marcus Valerius Messala
were Consuls. 2. When Cneus Domitius Enobardus and Lucius Lucinius Crassus,
were Consuls. And 3. in the time of Domitian by a general Decree of the Senate,
they were banished not only out of Rome, but all Italy. The Athenians forbid
them the place of judgment, as perverters of justice. Nor was there any thing
more odious among the Lacedaemonians, than this curious cunning of the Tongue,
which is to the understanding, as Legerdemain is to the eye.

I would not have you therefore my Son, spend time in gaining this deceitful
Art, which though banished the best Commonwealths, is however taught in the
Schools and Universities, and used much in our Courts of Justice, Pulpits, and
Assemblies of men. Acquaint your self with the realities of things, with
Nature, and Truth, and you shall never want words, pertinently, and enough
forcibly to acquaint others with what is necessary, even to the shame of those
who use glozing words, and deceitful eloquence. For as Cornelius Agrippa has
well expressed, the speech of Truth is simple lively, piercing, a searcher of the
inward intentions of the heart: And like a two handed Sword does separate and
cut in sunder all the artificial arguments of Orators. Such was that of our
Savior, when he had to do with the Learned Scribes, Pharisees, and Lawyers.
How plain, and yet how convincing were his answers, how short, and yet how
sufficient: Such were the pleadings of Paul: The Letters of the Apostles: Yea
the whole style of Scripture, furnished with Truth, soundness of Reason,
plainness and pertinency of expression: This is the best example can be set
before you, which if with care and sincerity of heart you observe and follow,
you shall have a firmer, and a more deserved esteem, amongst the best and
wisest of men, than those who study eloquence, and prefer the artifice of words
before truth and realities.

Of Opinion.
From these particular false Coins that pass in the World for true ones, I come
to discourse a little of opinion it self, as it is exalted in the World, and
oftentimes placed in the Throne of Truth and Reality: And yet it is but my
Ladies false glass, with which she is well pleased, because it gives a fair
aspect to her deformity, and hides all imperfections of Nature. It Is this
opinion every where Deified, that does the greatest mischief to mankind:
because it takes away the real regards to Virtue, and gives men satisfaction in
the false shows, and bare appearances of her. Machiavel has expressed by her what
his Princes are: A sort of strangly disguised creatures, that are to seem to be
Religious, Just, Merciful, and stored with all Virtues, yea even with Fidelity
and Truth: But upon forfeiture of their Crowns, to be none of these indeed:
It Is King-craft this, and the most adored Motto of Regality, well to know how
to dissemble: So that when several Kings have to deal one with another, knowing
each others Latitude, what cautions, bonds, and ties are thought necessary to
hold one another: and yet both reckon themselves at Liberty, when interest
persuades, and opportunity is offered, as if the tie of pacts, Oaths, and
Agreements, were to them only matters of form, in themselves, and to them not
obligatory. But oh the mistake of these Counsels! the mischiefs, the numerous
mischiefs they produce, I need not say to the inhabitants of Countries, but
even to Princes themselves, who for the fulfilling of some exorbitant desires,
not in the least producing any increase of happiness, yea infinitely
diminishing, and eclipsing it: They lose what is beyond all value, the
inestimable solace of Virtue, the unexpressible contentment that follows doing
good, and being as Gods, that is in making others happy: and in that gaining to
themselves the highest pitch of earthly felicity: I have often thought with my
self what an advantage that Prince would have over all others in the world, who
would propose to place his own felicity in the steady actions of Virtue and
Wisdom, and likewise of Truth and Justice, both as to the people, and all
Nations and Countries, he holds any Commerce or Correspondence withal abroad:
That would make it his great design to recover the depraved people, and reduce
them to honesty, Truth and integrity of life: That would countenance none who
were of evil fame, or blemished reputation: That would encourage honest labor
and industry: That would allow and secure to all men the use and benefit of the
Laws, and study the rectification of what is amiss, not out of a poor design of
weakening or vacating those that are good, but recovering original institutions,
and supplying out of a hearty purpose of good what is defective. It is not
possible for man to contrive more effectual means of providing for his own
substantial happiness, than by being in this manner, as Gods to the people, nor
could their security be less; for who would not lay himself out to the utmost
in their protection, no enmity at home, no malice from abroad, would dare to
attempt ought against a Prince so qualified, and thereby secured by the
unfeigned, and deserved love of all who love goodness, or what is more
universal, Themselves: But this is an excursion occasioned by that inviting
Subject.

What is there that is bad in the world, but ows its being to vain opinion? in
preferring what has a seeming show of good, under the false notion of pleasant,
or profitable, against what nature teaches, reason, or the word of God. Nature
teaches us to be content with little, Opinion not without having much, and very
hardly, if at all with that. Reason and the Scripture tells us, that there is
no solid felicity but in the paths of virtue and goodness: Opinion despises and
derides these, as the weakness and ignorance of the mind, and allows them not
in their reality, but in show: The dividing of men into Sects and parties, is
an effect of false Opinion, whereby they decline the being truly Christian in
name, and thing, for the colorable appellation of Papist, Episcopal.
Presbyterian, Independent, or some other rank of men, into which they are fallen
through the bent of education, or inclination of interest: By means whereof
mankind being so divided, they severally prosecute several interests, distinct
from the common good of mankind (which ought to be every man's aim) and are laid
open to the artifices of those who are their Leaders, and through the force of
opinion the subduers of their Reason, and likewise through those divisions,
become useless in the defense of their Country and Laws; yea for the most part
either through ignorance, animosities, or baseness of Spirit enemies thereunto,
and assistants to those crafty men, that know how to work upon their divisions.

Amongst thousand other false Opinions of things, you must reckon in that
Catalogue, the supposition of Elves, Fairies, and other specter, or
apparitions, Will of the Wisp, Robin Good Fellow, and many others, which though
they are called old Wives Fables, yet they have been but the propagators of
them, not the inventors. These owe their first being to the Heathen Priests,
who to plant fear in the minds of men, have like cunning managers, begun with
them, whilst they were Children, and by such little, and seemingly trivial
artifices, have laid a foundation for that Dominion they designed to gain over
the minds and faculties of mankind: For these apparitions being first
entertained as realities, whilst reason was weak, and unable to examine, or
make opposition, so planted themselves, that even in adult years, and age it
self, they continued powerful, and predominant.

Nor have the Popish Clergy (and I wish I could say, no other sort of
Clergymen) been wanting in propagating this no inconsiderable support of their
interest: But especially in the matter of Witches; which has been done with so
much art, and seeming verity, and has been so generally received, that few or
none have taken the freedom to question the same: Concerning which particular I
would have you carefully peruse a Book entitled, The Question of Witchcraft
debated, written by John Wagstaff, 1671. But in short consider, that because
the name of Witch in Scripture is mentioned, which denotes either those that
endeavored to draw the people from believing the true God, to the worshipping a
false God or his Idol, and from believing of truth, to the giving credit to
false opinions, or lies: or else to those that used impostures, and
counterfeited apparitions, to Oracles, and such as used intoxicating potions,
all which are specified in Scripture; they have cunningly transferred the same
name of Witch, to such a meaning of a Witch, as they have given, and the common
people have ignorantly received, and maintained; as namely that there are some
persons, men and women, who make real and visible contracts with the Devil,
giving them power over their bodies, and souls, upon condition, that the Devil
for a certain number of years shall be at their command, and assist them in
their pleasures, in the executing of their Malice and Revenges upon Men, Women,
Children or Cattle, and in the doing of whatsoever they shall desire, in
subserviency to their. Lusts, or other passions. Concerning all which there is
not the least intimation in the holy word of God: And yet this Opinion, for
most wicked ends introduced and propagated, has been the occasion of the
burning of many thousands where the Papists have Dominion: Yea such are the
ways that the Inquisitors have to examine, vex and torment such as they desire
to have culpable in this kind, that it is very hard for any man if heretically
suspected, to escape the fire. Yea, not only amongst the Catholics, but in
times of ignorance amongst the Reformists also, especially the Presbyterians,
abundance have suffered in this kind, (as I my self can well remember, between
the years 1640 and 1650. Which practice though good and ingenuous men did much
lament, yet did this Opinion so generally spread, that it was hardly safe for
any man to show himself in opposition thereof. But from their Councels O Lord,
for ever deliver me, and mine. In the close of all, the Witch-finder himself
one Hopkins, a bold and insolent fellow, was caught like Perillus, in his own
trap, and suffered as a Witch, which put an end to those bloody practices,
never I trust in God to be revived again amongst truly reformed Christians.

Of this nature also and from the same false opinion, is that bold and arrogant
assumption of skill to determine the reason and event of prodigies, natural,
and supernatural, which arises from the presumptuous imposture of crafty and
designing men, who dare particularize their Prognostications upon Persons, or
Countries according to the force of their dislikes of things, and men opposite
in opinion to themselves, which is largely discovered in a discourse of
Prodigies, and Prophecies, Written by the ingenious pen of Dr. Spencer, to
which I refer you: disireing, that you would peruse and examinethat book with
due caution and consideration, lest you give credit to many things therein
justly to be suspected.

It Is Opinion that gives Divinity to the Clergy, though they are not such,
either in their institution, or sanctity of life. Not in their institution, for
though the Disciples, and Apostles of Christ were at first such, as being fitly
qualified from above, by the their mission, and possession of the Spirit
inableing them to do Miracles, and perform all those supernatural works, which
were properly the manifestations of that blessed Spirit, yet the succeeding
Ministers being unfit receptacles for so celestial a guest, do no otherwise
enter upon the Ministerial office, than as other men do upon their ordinary
Trades and offices for a livelihood, and are therefore properly Ministers or
Servants of the State, endued with no gifts, but what they acquire by study and
learning: Not in the sanctity of life, being therein not at all distinguishable
from other men: Indulging themselves in ease and pleasure, lovers of gaiety in
themselves and samilies: as proud, haughty, and high-minded as other men:
prosecuting their particular interest with the same eagerness and ambition:
Respecters of Persons, in their dispensations, and judgment: Lovers of the
World, and as much of themselves, as other men: And although there may be some
amongst them of greater strictness and severity of life than others of the
Fraternity, yet touch even those in the matter of their worldly interest, and
they will quickly show you another inside, than what appears to the world: in
the main they are but a distinct rank of worldly men, and so are indeed
esteemed, if not by themselves, yet by all sorts of knowing and distinguishing
men.

It were an infinite labor to reckon up the numerous evils that befall mankind
through and by the means of false opinion: Sufficient it is to have said that
all evils owe their being to her: and therefore (my dear Son) in all the
actions of your life, give no ear to what is falsely suggested by her, but guide
your self by natures light, that is by reason, cleared, improved, and verified,
by the glorious and celestial radiations of the holy Scriptures. By which with
an unprejudiced mind, you are to examine all the opinions that education,
converse, Ministers, Tutors, Statesmen, have planted in you: In doing whereof
you must do as Abraham did when he went to Sacrifice his Son, leave the young
men at the foot of the Hill, I mean, pride of heart, external same or vain
glory, pleasure, profit, or whatever else may cloud or pervert your reason, and
make her unserviceable in so good and necessary a work.

Other particulars I might insert concerning this subject, which occur in our
daily practice, for it is a matter of vast extent, and is to be taken notice of,
almost in all the affairs of humane life: The esteem we give to persons for
their external dignities, (the inward virtues of the mind deserve it) their
wealth, their titles, their Offices, is indeed grounded upon false opinion: it
sets too great a value upon those feathers in the cap, and transfers our
affections and respects which are only due to intrinsic worth, and the
beauties of the mind, to matters of cheap regard, Idols of our own setting up:
It Is commonly thus acknowledged, but rarely practiced: for men many times
approve one thing in their minds, but practice the contrary, I, and that
smoothly, and without considering what they are about, as if they were forcibly
and involuntarily hurried into action, by something without them, and not by
the conduct of their own reason. Whereas indeed an Ass is an Ass still, though
he carry Ingots of Gold: I would not have this understood as upbraiding the
weakness of men's parts, or infirmities of nature: for I chiefly intend it
against the vicious: To have a proud, envious, domineering, cruel rich man
reverenc't because he is rich, is to take off the blemish of the vices, as if
the false splendour of riches should all other things preponderate. Verily such
a one ought to be despised, and set lower in the esteem of the word than a
vicious poor man, for he has no temptation to vice but the evil of his depraved
nature. It Is not good however to make every bad rich man your enemy, or to
think your self obliged to tell every man his faults, to be either the Weeping,
or the Laughing Philosopher, to take away the content of your own life, by
finding fault with others. Wisdom is to govern in all things, which ever
directs the best seasons and opportunities: It Is her Province and hers only, to
give a just value and estimate to things, for wisdom is but reason directed to
particular actions, and reason unless very much perverted by education, and
false guides, judges truly, when not overruled by passion: To keep that under
therefore, and to give reason the rule and dominion in all the actions of your
life, is life's great business without which a man sits upon a mettl'd horse
without bitt or bridle, where instead of guiding, and governing that, he is
hurried impetuously, according to the bent and inclinations of his beast, which
is the truest resemblance of his passions.

Of strength of Body.
Amongst multitude of other matters, there are three things which are in
themselves good and estimable, which yet often occasion many evils to unwary
youth, viz. Strength of body, Agility of Body, and quickness of wit. The strong
man hurts himself as soon as the weak, because from the encouragement of his
strength he ingages in hazardous undertakings, which the weak avoid: and
therefore often the feeble and infirm through extraordinary care, keep freer
from sickness, and live longer than the strong and healthy: They are usually
more intemperate, they venture upon dangerous designs, they lift great weights,
they wrestle, fence, quarrel, fight, and so for want of using, and living by
the guide of reason, they lose the advantage that nature gives them.

Of Agility of Body.
So it is also with the nimble and active persons: To be so is in it self a
great benefit to life, for dispatch of business, early rising, quick going, and
it is also an argument of a clean, brisk, and well tempered constitution. But
when through confidence thereof, it ingages it is possessioss in violent
exercises; or meeting with Antagonists, in striving for victory, or foolish
fame, it puts them upon forcing their bodies beyond their natural extents:
weaknesses and aches are begotten, beyond what the infirm are born with, and
which are for the most part, during life irremediable.

Of quickness of Wit.
Lastly, for quickness of Wit and Understanding, and great capacity in
receiving, and retaining knowledge, when this is not accompanied with true
wisdom and sobriety: it is the occasion of many evils to the owner of it, and
others.

1. Whilst they are young, it invites praise, and that praise creates Pride:
they then despise Lads of lesser parts, and overvalue themselves.

2. The confidence of their own parts, makes them reckon that they can acquire
that in a little time, which they see others long plodding at, this makes them
negligent and slothful.

3. They are apt from the briskness of their natures, to keep company, where
being masters of discourse, and praised by their associates, they ga^n from
delight, a habit of ill husbandry, and in time become sots, and useless Drones,
losing both health and reputation: Hence arises that saying in Oxford, of
certain persons that came thither Golden Scholars, and became Leaden
Batchelors, and wooden Masters. Soon ripe, soon rotten. Quick ripe fruits are
horary, of short duration, whilst others keep round the year.

4. If they escape the quicksands of intemperance, and follow their Studies
hard, they commonly prove subtle, full of contrivance, and exceeding arrogant:
From such as these commonly the World is chiefly disturbed, their great
abilities prompting them to great undertakings, and when true wisdom and real
goodness is wanting, they become fit instruments to promote the worst designs.

You will therefore find in common experience that the best men, and the best
Magistrates, and Governors, are those of middle capacities, men that
understand things well, of steady motion, and well grounded persuasion, that
love to keep the tract of the Law of the anciently established Government: that
are not capritious, that is always in motion, changing from one thing to
another: That love the mild, and moderate course, and hate cruelty, and
innovations: Whereas the quickwitted, and deeply designing men, think they hold
the Helm of the world in their own hands, and can turn it as they please, that
attempt things out of the course and order of the Law, in confidence that they
can bear them through, and out wit their opposers: This makes them soon lose
their integrity, and tie of Conscience; which being lost, they become
mischievous to the World, and in conclusion to themselves.

Hence it is that the main end of this writing is to furnish your mind with
solid prudence, and steady honesty; that if through industry you acquire
substantial knowledge, you never employ it for other ends (my Sons) but what
are consistent with Virtue, and your Christian profession; and then the more
knowledge you have, and the more useful Science you are Master of, the greater
will be your content, the more permanent your felicity, and the higher esteem
you will obtain from the best and wisest men, and the blessing of God will
always attend you.

Of the Love that ought to be between Brothers and their Sisters.
I will close my Advices to you, with injoyning you most entirely to love your
Brothers and Sisters: And notice is to be taken, that the Counsel I give to
one, is to be taken by all: When the Poets would describe the worst Age, Which
they called the Iron Age; amongst other the evils which were eminent therein,
they say, Fratrum quoque Gratia rara est: There was seldom found any kindness,
even between Brothers; intimating, that where so great a tie as Brotherhood
could not oblige to a mutual affection, it was manifest that the age was in the
highest degree depraved.

It Is true indeed that man ought to bear an universal respect, and kindness
toward all, for that is natural, and a resemblance of the love of God to all
minkind: But since the world has been depraved through interest, our kindness
is, what it ought not to be, lessened, and contracted to a few, and there is no
hopes to reduce the World to its Original simplicity, and common affection.
However I do advise you, my Children, to continue that natural affection
toward all, but especially and in a more eminent manner, to maintain it
toward your own Relations. The Reasons whereunto are.

1. Because it is a thing in it self good and laudable, it preserves a good
Fame, and esteem amongst men; for it is in this sense that the contempt of Fame
is said, to be the contempt of Virtue: Otherwise to despise Fame when it arises
not from good and Virtuous Actions, is no crime, for it is but despising vain
glory: Every one will speak well of you all, when they observe you to be
united, not only in blood but in Brotherly Affection. It Is true indeed the
Command is universal, in which every man is accounted a Neighbor, and a
Brother, for we are all Originally the offspring of one Man, nor do I give you
the particular Advice to exclude or lessen the Universal Mandate. But
considering how the World is depraved, what difficulties are introduced, even
where plenty, is to acquire a competent livelihood, and that interest draws all
men to provide for, and take care of their own, you will be exceeding
blameworthy to be deficient in that particular.

2. If you are to love your Neighbor as your self, you are upon a greater tie
to love your Brother so, inasmuch as you are all the immediate Offspring of
one Father and Mother. This Love is several ways to be manifested: as in the
care of one another health, in assisting one another, in Counsel, upon losses,
and all difficulties that may occur in your lives. For if some of you should
prosper, and others not, the prosperous ought to be helpful to those who are in
distress. This I would have you cordially, and voluntarily do: For all
kindnesses that come freely, are much to be preferred before what are procured
by importunity: To this you are to be persuaded not only from duty, but from
interest: For if you maintain true friendship and brotherly affection one
toward another, you will each of you be stronger by Union: Which Bond, who
ever of you breaks, through discord, and perverseness of Spirit, breaks the Law
of Christ, which commands Brotherly Love, neglects the Mandates of a Loving
Father and Mother, and exposes himself singly to a thousand difficulties which
Union would prevent or mitigate. Be advised therefore, my dear Children, and
yield obedience frankly and readily to this injunction of your Parents, which
out of tenderness, and great regard to your welfare, we leave as an
indispensable command upon you.

But if it shall so happen, that any of you should prove rio^ous, and bring
themselves by an evil and debauched life to want and misery, though I would
have the rest assistant in Council, and endeavor by all amicable, and prudent
ways, to reclaim and recover them that have so brought evil upon themselves;
yet do I not think it reasonable, that the vices of some of you should bring
misery, and necessity upon all the rest. Rather let them, who against all the
saving counsel that is given them, neglecting the Laws of God, and the
injunction of Parents, bring ruin upon themselves, and dishonor to their
Family, bear the burden of their own Crimes, and smart for their own follies,
until such time as it appears by a real repentance, that they are sensible of
the evil of their ways; In which case compassion is to be shown, and assistance
is to be given freely, gladly, and without upbraiding: For such is the method
of Gods goodness, who has declared that there is more joy in Heaven for the
recovery of one Sheep which was lost, than for the ninety nine which never went
astray. Take him therefore into your bosom, associate with him, and jointly
assist him with part of your substance, with sound and prudent advice, preserve
him from Relapse: sweetly, and affectionately persuade him, let him see the
difference between good and evil, in their own natures, and in their effects
and consequences: Render your Societies very pleasing to him, that he may
prefer it before that of his Vicious Companions: Keep him by your own examples
to business, which make pleasant to him, and entertain him in the intervals,
with delightful and harmless diversions: Study all the ways you can to
continue him in his new and good resolutions; and be assured that of your pains
and Charge in this particular you will never repent: For admitting the worst,
that notwithstanding all means used, he should continue perverse, and
unreclaimable; yet this comfort will attend you, that you have done but what
Heaven does, who is wanting in nothing necessary for the recovery of lost
Sinners: and that no blame remains upon you, in ommitting any needful course in
such a case requisite.

And now I grow weary of Counselling, and indeed enough has been said, if you
prove considerate, and will give an attentive ear to the instructions of a
Father that most entirely loves all his Children, and is therefore thus
solicitous for their good: Whilst I am living, I will endeavor to fashion your
minds aright, when I am dead, let this speak to you: For your Fathers sake, be
as regardful of these Counsels, as you would be of your Father. I will end all
with a Prayer to the Fountain of Goodness.

God of Heaven and Earth, in whom is all Perfection, the only God: Give ear to,
and accept the humble supplication of thy Servant, however unworthy, let not I
beseech thee my Sins and infirmities render my petition ineffectual: For thou
art all Goodness and Mercy: It is not Riches I desire, Honors, or any other of
the fadeing and mean things of this World, but that thou would fashion, and
form the hearts of my Children so, that they may love thee above all things,
and be truly obedient to all thy Commands manifested in thy sacred Word: And
though that word duly meditated upon with a sincere heart, in order to the
information of the understanding, and guidance of the will, be sufficient to
make us wise unto Salvation; yet since the minds of youth are every way beset
with multitude of Temptations, apt to mislead them into paths of Perdition; and
since thou have also promised that thou will be aiding and assisting with those
silent, and to us undiscoverable ways of turning the hearts of men, to a due
fear and love of thee, and thy Laws, I humbly beseech thee to afford thy aiding
Grace in their restraint from Sin, and inclinations to all Christian Virtues:
That they may see and detest the Loathsomeness of sin, in whatsoever dress it
is represented to them, and that they may cheerfully embrace and follow the
dictates of Truth, and Realities of that only Religion which was commended to
our practice by the words and example of the ever blessed Jesus, the glorious
Author, and Founder thereof. That they may distinguish between Truth and
Falsehood, between Truth, and dissembled appearances, that they may love and
follow the one, and abhor the other as opposite to the pure eyes of the
all-seeing God. Touch their hearts with the secret radiations of thy blessed
Spirit, suggesting to them, This is the way, that they may walk in it, and
commend it to their Childrens Children through all Generations. I rely Glorious
God upon thy Fatherly goodness, thy mercies are as rivers of Oil, soft and
healing; my rest and desires are in thee, O thou rock of my Salvation.

The End.
THE CONTENTS.
OF Man's happiness: and wherein it consists. p. 1. No conversation with
Atheists. p. 3. The best means to avoid Atheism. p. 4. Of Conscience. p. 9. Of
the Scriptures. p. 20. Of the fear of God. p. 27. Of Reading, Meditating, and
going to Church p. 29. Of Praying to God. p. 31. Of Praising God. p. 34. Of the
word, Sacrament. p. 36. Of Ceremonious institution. p. 37. Of Baptism. p. 41.
Of the Lords Supper. p. 50. Of Justice. p. 55. Of oppressing the Conscientious.
p. 59. Of the minds victory over the passions. p. 71. Of industry and business.
p. 74. Against Covetousness. p. 75. Of Truth. p. 77. Of Wisdom. p. 81. Of the
chief good. p. 92. Of felicity. ib. Of Fortitude. p. 93. Of Meekness. p. 105.
Of humility and patience. p. 106. Concerning moderating our desires. p. 111. Of
helping the distressed. p. 113. Not to be Contentious. p. 114. Of Revenge. p.
117. Of heightning the differences of others. p. 119. Of Temperance. p. 123.
Concerning Diet and Apparel. p. 127. Of Chastity. p. 129. Of the prosperity of
the wicked. p. 133. Of constancy in good resolutions. p. 135. Of secrecy and
reservation. p. 137. Of going to Law. p. 141. Of Recreation. p. 144. Of
Gentility. p. 152. Concerning the choice of thy Profession. p. 154. Of the
choice of a Wife. p. 163. The happiness of a married life requires that both be
good. p. 167. A vicious Father seldom makes good Children. p. 168. The
concernment to the Family, that the Master be a good man. p. 170. Of boldness
or confidence. p. 172. Of ceremonious behavior. p. 173. Of Deformity. p. 175.
Of a single life. p. 176. Of Expenses. p. 180. Of Tobacco. p. 183. Of
contentment in our present condition. p. 188. About the foreknowledg of
futurities. p. 189. Of Pride. p. 193. That it is better to live upon a man's own
private business, than public offices or employments. p. 197. What esteem is
due to Arts. p. 198. Of educatation in Schools and Universities. p. 199. Of
learning the Latin Tongue. ibid. Of Logic. p. 205. Of Rhetoric. p. 212. Of
opinion. p. 217. Of strength of Body. p. 225. Of agility of Body. p. 226. Of
quickness of Wit. ibid. Of the love that ought to be between Brothers and their
Sisters. p. 228. A Prayer. p. 232.
The end.

