THE READING OF M. ROBERT BROOK, SERIEANT of the Law, and RECORDER of LONDON,
Upon the Stat. of MAGNA CHARTA, CHAP. 16.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by M. FLESHER, and R. YOUNG, and are sold by Laurence Chapman,
and William Coke. Anno 1641.

The Contents.
Chap. I. OF high Treason. page 1 Chap. II. of petie Treason. page 3 Chap. III.
of Murder, Manslaughter, and what not. page 4 Chap. IIII. What acts and
misdemeanors may be called Robbery, and what not; and what Felony, and what
Burglary. page 9 Chap. V. Accessaries, and good Indictments, etc. page 14 Chap.
VI. Arraignment of Felons, and what pleas they shall have, and what not; and
where they shall be put to penance, and where not; and where a man shall be
arraigned twice for one Felony; and where ones life shall be put twice in
jeopardy for one felony. page 19.
The Reading of Mr. ROBERT BROOK, Sergeant of the Law, and Recorder of London,
upon the Stat. of Magna Charta, the seventeenth Chapter.
CHAP. I.
of high Treason.
INprimis, If any man imagine the death of the King, or of the Prince, or
Princess, or of any that is Heir apparent to the Crown, it is high Treason.

If any keep war against the King in his Realm, 25. E. 3.
it is high Treason by the Stat. of 25. E. 3.

If any be ayders or assistants to the Kings enemies, 23. E. 3. and
either within the Realm, or elsewhere, it is high Treason.

If any affirm by writing, or other act, that the King is not supreme Head of
the Church of England; or if any imagine to deprive the King of his estate
Royal, or of the titles of his Realm, it is high Treason.

If any to whom the Crown is committed by Act of Parliament, 35. H. 8. cap. 1.
usurp it, or demean it in other manner then is expressed in the Act, or will
keep the King from it, it is high Treason by Stat.

If any man kill the Chancellor, or Treasurer, or any of the Justices of one
Bench or other, Justices of Oyer, Justices of Assize, or of Oyer and Terminer,
sitting in their Offices, it is high Treason.

If any counterfeit the Kings Seal manual, Privy Seal, or his Signet, it is
high Treason.

If any countefeit the Kings coin of this Realm, or of any other coin current
in England, or clip, wash, file, round, or diminish the said coin, it is high
Treason.

If any man bring false money or counterfeit into England, having knowledge of
that money to be counterfeit, it is high Treason.

If any man kill the Kings Messenger in his message, it is high Treason.

If any man kill one that rides with men to aid the King, it is high Treason.

CHAP. II
Of petie Treason.
IF the Wife kill the Husband, or the Husband the Wife; or the Servant his
Master or Mistress, this is petie Treason. 12. E. 3.


A woman of the age of thirteen years kills her Mistress, 19. H. 6.
this is petie Treason; but she shall not be hanged and drawn, 40. R. 2.
but burnt.

The Servant procures another to kill his Master, 25. E. 3.
which kills him, it is not petie Treason in the Servant; for the principal
is no Traitor, and the accessory is no ways cast, and so they be both Felons.

A man beats his servant, which departs from him, and after the end of his
term he kills him that was his Master in revenging his old quarrel, 30. E.
3. sol
this is petie Treason; for the murder comes of the malice that began in his
service.

A man marryeth his cousin, and she kills him, this is not petie Treason, for
they were never lawfully married.

A man retains J. at S. to be his Steward of his Courts, 25. E. 3.
and he kills his Master, this is not Treason; for he is no servant that
owes to his Master obedience, as is contained in the Statute of 25. E. 3.

If an infant of the age of ten years marry a wife of the age of nine years,
3. H. 7.
and she kills her husband, this is petie Treason, for at that age she
shall be endowed.

A man retaining a woman for 40. s. a year to be his Concubine, and she kill
him, this is no Treason, for the retaining was not lawful, and therefore she
was not his servant.

The Husband and the Wife be divorced (causa frigiditatis) and after she
kills her Husband, this is petie Treason, for that is but a divorce from
table and bed, and matrimony does continue, and therefore she ought to be
faithful and obedient.

The Husband and the Wife be divorced (causa consanguinitatis) and after she
kills her Husband, this is no Treason; for the marriage was against the Law.

A man marryeth with a Turk or a Jew, and she kills him, this is no Treason:
for the marriage was unlawful.

A Villein kills his Master, this is no Treason.

The Tenant does homage unto his Lord, and after kills him, this is no
Treason.

A man hireth an infant of the age of 10. years, 28. E. 3.
and he kills his Master, and 2. H. 4.
this is not Treason; for the retaining was void.

CHAP. III.
Of Murder, Manslaughter, and what not.
WHat shall be said Murder, and what Manslaughter, and where a man may
justify the killing of a man.

A man is indicted of felony, 22. E. 3.
and a Cap' is awarded to take him, and he resists; if the Officer kill him,
he may justify it, if he could not otherwise take him.

The Jailer comes into the prison, and finds his prisoners at large, 22. E.
3.
and breaking their fetters; if he kill them, he may justify that act, if
he could not otherwise take them.

A prisoner in ward for felony breaks the prison, 22. E. 3.
and escapes, and I. S. comes to him, and cannot take him but by killing of
him, and so does kill him, this is justifiable.

Two women fight, 22. E. 3.
and I. S. comes to part them, Manslaug(...)
and one of them strikes I. S. and kills him without malice, this is
manslaughter and felony, and she shall die for it, for she sees I. S. But
quere if she had stroke him behind his back, if it had been felony or not.

A thief comes to the house of I. S. and sets fire on it, 25. E. 3.
fol(...)
and I. S. shoots at him and kills him, this is neither felony, murder, nor
manslaughter.

The Master and the Servant riding by the way, 25. E. 3. fol(...)
a thief assaulteth the Master, and strikes the Master to death; the servant
hastily to rescue his Master, kills the thief, this is neither murder nor
manslaughter.

A thief assaulteth I. S. to rob him, 25. E. 3. fol(...) v^l. 22.
and I. S. kills him, this is neither murder nor manslaughter.

A man goes in an high way within a Park, and the Keeper has malice toward
him, and cries to yield, and he will not, but stands at defense, and the
Keeper kills him, this is felony of his death.

An Infant within the age of discretion, (that is, nine years) kills his
companion, and after excuses himself, 12. E. 3. fol. 30.
this is felony of death; for by the excusing of himself it does appear that
he has discretion to know good from evil.

A man non sanae memoriae kills a man, this is no felony, 21. H. 7.
neither shall he die for it; for others of discretion cannot take example at
him.

A man kills one that is outlawed of felony, this is not felony of death.

A man that is deaf, 2. E. 3. fol. 3.
dumb, and blind, kills a man, 2. E. 3. fol. 3.
this is neither felony, manslaughter, nor murder, causa qua supra.

A man beats a woman that is with child, and she labors, and the child
is dead borne, this is neither murder nor manslaughter. 23. E. 3. fol. 2.


A man cutteth a tree, and the branches of the tree fall upon I. S. 6. E. 4.
fol. 8.
and kill him, unknown to him that cutteth the tree, this is not felony, for
it is not done with a felonious intent.

A man shoots at the pricks, and kills a man, this is not felony; for the
marks be certain, every man ought to keep himself off: but otherwise it is
where the pricks be not certain, for then he that shoots must take heed
where he shootes.

Two men fight, 6. E. 4.
and one of them kills I. S. being behind him as he strikes at his
adversary, this is not felony, because he does not see him: but otherwise it
had been if he had seen him.

A man has judgment to be hanged, 3. H. 5.
and the Sheriff does behead him, this is murder.

A man strikes another down to the ground, and holding his dagger in his
hand, the other, for haste to arise to strike him again, runs upon his
dagger and is killed, this is neither murder nor manslaughter in him that held
the dagger.

A man strikes another, 30. E. 3. fol. 3(...)
which dies without a year and a day, it is neither murder nor manslaughter;
for if he dyed out of the year, it shall be intended he dyed of the
visitation of God, and not of the stroke.

A man impaleth his ground, and puts in his Dear, and has a Keeper to keep
them, and I. S. comes through the Park, 23.
and hunteth, and the Keeper cries unto him to yield him to the Keeper, and
he will not, and the Keeper kills him, this is murder per Statutum de
malefactoribus in Parcis, and it is not material, be it by day or by night,
for it is no Park if the Lord have not the Kings Leters Patents.

A man perceives his Father to be sick, 2. E. 3.
and under pretense of amity he carries him from Town to seek Physic, and
kills him by importunate carriage, this is murder.

A Physician or Surgeon takes a man in cure, 3. E. 3.
which does kill him by the insufficient medicine, this is not murder nor
manslaughter.

A man that is neither Physician nor Surgeon takes upon him to know Physic
and Surgery, 3. E. 3.
and takes upon him the cure of men, and one dies for the insufficiency of
medicine, this is murder.

A man abjured going to his Port or Sanctuary, 10. H. 4.
meets a man in the high way, and kills him, this is murder, but he shall
not be arraigned for it, for he had judgment of death before, and he shall
not have another judgment of death before that he have avoided the first
judgment.

The Prince strikes a man of malice, which dies of the stroke, and the King
dies, this is not felony, for by the death of the King the Prince is King, and
cannot be a felon.

A Turk or a Jew comes into England without the Kings license, and I. S.
kills him, this is not felony; for he is neither or the faith of Christ, nor
under the Kings protection.

I. S. ^1. E. 3.
Deane of Paul's, and fourteen of the Chapter steal sheep, this is not felony
in the Body politic, but in their material bodies.

A man comes to a Park, and finds the Keeper, and binds him to a tree, and
gaggs him, this is murder if he dye.

CHAP. IIII.
What acts and misdemeanors may be called Robbery, and what not, and what
Felony, and what Burglary.
A Man assaulteth another to rob him, and takes from him but one penny, this
is robbery, and felony for the fear he puts the other in.

A man assaulteth another to rob him, and snatcheth at his purse, and takes
hold of his girdle, and the true man escapes away with his purse, and the
thief has but the girdle, this is felony.

A thief goes by the high way, and finds I. S. Null Ley per Stat. de 4. E
sleeping, and the thief takes out of I. S. his purse 12. d. and leaves him
sleeping, this is not felony; for I. S. was never put in fear of his life.

A man meets his Villein in the night, and takes from him his horse, this is
no felony; for he may take any thing away from him by way of seizure.

Lord and Tenant: The Lord comes to the house of the Tenant in the night, and
takes from him his bacon or his beef for rent, or service in arrere, this was
not felony, for it was not with a felonious intent.

A Writ is directed to the Sheriff, to attach I. S. in a personal action, and
coming in the night, finds I. S. leading his horse in his hand, and tacheth
I. S. by his horse, this is not felony, for he has color to take his horse
by precept.

A Tailor receives of I. S. cloth to make for him a coat, and the Tailor
puts in other lining then I. S. his lining; I. S. takes the coat and lining
from the Tailor, this is not felony; for the lining and the thread be of the
same nature as the principal is, which is the coat.

A man claymeth as heir lowmes after the death of his Father more stuff then
he ought to have, and comes in the night, and takes them from the Executors
by force, this is not felony; for he makes title unto the goods.

A man meets another in the night with a greyhound in his slip, 12. (...). 8.
and assaulteth him to rob him of his dog, this is felony; although the taking
of the dog without fear is not felony, yet because the party was put in fear
of his life, it is felony.

A man comes into a wood, 32. E. 3. fol. 32.
and cutteth and takes away trees to the value of 20. s. it is not felony; for
they be parcel of the Franktenement; but otherwise it is if a man steal away
trees that be felled.

If a man ravish a woman it is felony.

A man comes into an house to rob a man, and sudden fear takes him, and he
departs without doing any harm, this is felony.

A man comes to the house of I. S. 1. H. 7.
to arrest one S. for felony, and I. S. does resist him, this is felony in I. S.

A man is robbed, ^7. E. 3.
and pursues the felon, and arresteth him, and takes his goods, and suffers
the felon to go, this is felony in him that was robbed.

A man enters into an house to rob, and no body lies in the house, 31. E. 3.
and he retireth again, and takes nothing; yet this is burglary and felony.

A man takes a flight of Doves in the field, this is no felony.

A man steals fish out of my several ponds to the value of 13. 22. H. 8.
d. this is felony; for the Stat. of 22. Auterment (...) per 5. El. ca.
H. 8. which is revived, makes mention, where a man hunteth with a visard, or
disguised.

A man enters into the Church in the night to rob it, 22. E. 3.
and finds nothing, this is burglary.

A man that is Lord claymeth the best beast that his Tenant has for herriot
custom, and the Lord takes his herriot in the night, S. H. 7. fol. 1.
this is no felony, for the property of the beast is in the Lord by the death
of his Tenant.

A thief steals my horse, and I pursue him, and for fear he delivers me
my horse, and I take him, I am neither felon nor accessory; for it is at mine
election to make the taking of my horse felony or trespass: but otherwise it
is if I arrest him by an Officer.

A man steals goods that be wrecked up in the sea, 22. E. 3. fol.
it is not felony, for the property of the goods is in no man.

A man lies in an Inn, fol. 32.
and in the night takes his sheets and coverlets and hides them, 5. H. 4.
and goes for his horse, and before he can escape away, he is taken, this is
felony by Statute.

A man commands his Wife to steal money from I. S. 27. E. 3. fol. 16.
she does, it is not felony in the Wife, for by the compulsion of her husband
she is obedient.

A woman that is heir apparent unto her Father, 5. H. 7.
is taken away against her will by I. S. and after is by him married by
cohercion, this is felony by Statute.

A man steals I. S. and puts out one of his eyes, this is not felony; for
the Statute speaks of putting out both the eyes, and a penal Statute shall
be taken strictly, for he has put out but one eye.

A man steals a box of evidence, 10. E. 4.
this is not felony, for the box is of the same nature as the Charters are, and
the Charters concern the Franktenement.

A man delivers his beasts for another to sell for him, 15. E. 4.
which flies with them, this is not felony, because he came lawfully by them.

A man delivers his plate to his Butler to keep, and he flies with it, 13.
E. 4. and 21. H. 7.
this is felony, for so long as the plate remains within his house, it is in
his possession.

The Wife takes the goods of her Husband, 13. E. 4.
and carries them away secretly, this is not felony; Quaere the Receiver.

A man steals young Doves out of their nests, 16. E. 4.
this is felony.

Hawks taken out of their nests is felony: 18. E. 4.
but if they be taken with nets when they are branchers, it is not felony, for
they be out of every man's possession.

A man steals fish out of my trunk in the day, 18. E. 4.
this is felony.

A man steals Faulcons eggs out of the nests, 3. and 4. H. (...)
this is felony by Statute.

If a man burn another man's house, 1. E. 4. 3. H 13. E. 4.
it is felony.

A woman that is married and I. S. be confederated to rob the Husband, and the
Wife steals the goods, and delivers them to I. S. this is felony in I. S.
but not in the Wife.

A man steals my Popingay or Linet, 12. H. 8.
or other such bird of pleasure, it is not felony.

The same law for stealing of Hounds; 12. H. 8.
but if a man steal a Mastiffe, it is felony; for Hounds be but things of
pleasure, and not of profit; but the Mastiffe is contrary.

A man enters into my house in the day to rob, and takes nothing, it is
felony.

A Jailer compels a prisoner to approve or appeal others that are not
guilty, 14. E. 3.
it is felony in the Jailer by Statute.

If a man steal at twenty times twenty pence, it is felony; yet if he had
stolen twenty pence at one time, it had been but pety larceny.

A man steals a seat out of the Church, 9. H. 7.
this is not felony; for it is parcel of the Franktenement.

A man makes a grant of the next voydance of a Benefice, and I. S. steals
it, this is felony; for the Charter is of the nature of a Charter royal.

A man steals milstones off a mill, 14. H. 8.
it is no felony.

A man is outlawed in the common law by the name of I. S. 9. H. 6.
for debt, and one raseth the record, and puts in T. D. this is felony by
Statute.

A man baileth goods to I. S. to keep, and after the bailor steals the goods
from the bailee, 7. H. 7.
it is not felony, for the property is in himself; but it is adjudged contrary.

A man steals glass out of windows which be made fast with sprignailes, 27.
H. 7.
it is felony.

But contrary, if they be fastened with great nails, for then they be parcel
of the Franktenement.

Felons do break my doors, towers, or ports, to the intent to rob, kill, or
fear any man; this is felony, though they take nothing.

CHAP. V.
Accessaries and good Indictments. What persons may be called accessaries to
the felons, and what not; and where the accessaries shall be put to answer,
and where not; and which shall be said good indictments of felony, and which
not.
NOte, Accessory before. Accessory after.
That there be two kinds or manners of Accessaries, one before the felony,
and another after the felony. Accessory before the felony is he that moves
the felon to do the felony: Accessory after, is he that receives, or does
aid or help the felon in any manner after the felony done, to his knowledge.
7. H. 4.


Principal and Accessory; 7. H. 7. 3.(...) fol. 1. 11. (...) 9. E. 4.
the principal not being arraigned, the accessory shall not be put to answer.

The principal is taken and put in prison, and dies in prison, 7. H. 4.
the accessory shall not be put to answer; for by the death of the principal,
the accessory is discharged.

Two men are indicted for killing of a man, the one as accessory, the other as
principal; and it is found the principal killed him se defendendo, the
accessory shall not be put to answer: for when the principal is acquit of the
felony, the accessory shall not be in worse case.

A man commits felony, fol. 34. 25. E. 3. fol and 5.
and I. S. says for his deliverance according to the Law, he is not accessory
to his felony.

I. S. is accessory to a felony, and W. S. knowing of it, receives or
comfort I. S. he is accessory, and it is felony in him; for he that is
accessory is a felon, and the first accessory is a felon, and therefore he is
accessory to the felony.

A man procures I. S. that he should procure I. K. to kill W. D. the first
procurer is accessory.

A man steals goods, and I. S. is indicted, quod ipse felonice recepit, 27.
E. 3.
knowing that the goods were stolen, I. S. is attainted, and there is another
accessory to I. S. he shall never be put to answer; for he is accessory to the
goods, and not to the man.

If an infant, or a man that is mad receive goods that be stolen, it is not
felony nor accessory.

If the principal plead the Kings pardon, the accessory shall not be put to
answer.

If a woman covert baron receive a felon, or goods at his hands, knowing that
they be stolen, she is accessory.

If the principal plead not guilty, 7. H. 4. and 15.
and be found guilty, and pray his clergy, and has it, the accessory shall
not be put to answer, for the principal may make his purgation, and go at
large.

A man commits felony, and his wife knowing of it, brings to her husband
meat and apparel, and other necessaries, she is not accessory.

Principal and accessory be, 22. E. 3, 4, and 6.
the principal is hanged for another cause, the accessory shall not be put to
answer.

If the principal confess the felony, 13. E. 4. fol. 7.
and upon his arraignment he pray his book, the accessory shall be put to
answer, for by the confession the principal is concluded to make his
purgation: but upon a verdict, if the principal pray his Clergy, the accessory
shall be discharged; for it were against reason to hang the accessory, and
suffer the principal to go at large.

A woman that is married does felony, and comes to her husband, and he
knowing receives her, is accessory to the felony.

Note, The indictment of felony may be taken before the Justices of the Kings
Bench, or before Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or Justices of peace in
letters. Fol. 35. 9. E. 4. fol. 4.


A man is indicted for that he such a day and year did feloniously steal the
gown of a certain man unknown; this is a good indictment, but this word
unknown is not a good word in an appeal.

A man was indicted of a rape, eo quod ipse tali die an. 1. E. 6.
and hora a se, and eam tunc and ibidem carnaliter cognovit, contra voluntatem
suam: this indictment is naught, for it lacks felonice, and by the Stat. it
shall be rapuit, and cepit, and carnaliter congnovit.

In an indictment for breaking of the prison, 9. E. 4.
the indictment shall make mention, that the prisoner was in prison for felony.

A man may be indicted by the name of I. S. 21. H. 6.
hostler, for that is a good addition.

It is not a good indictment of murder to say, 9. E. 4.
felonice interfecit, for it should be, felonice murderavit.

A man may be indicted by the name of I. S. 22. E. 4.
parish Clarke, and it is a good addition.

Widow, 10. H. 6.
or single woman is a good addition.

I. S. is indicted eo quod ipse est communis latro; 22. E. 3.
this is not a good indictment, for it is not certain what felony he has
done, so that he cannot tell how to have traverse to it.

A man is indicted in the Sheriffs turn the fourth day of Novem. 31. E. 3.
it is as coram non Judice, for the Sheriff ought to hold his turn in the
month of Easter or Michaelmas, by the Stat. 31. E. 3. as it does appear 6. H.
7. fol. 1. 38. H. 6. fol. 7.

A man is indicted of felony at the great Leete of I. N. holden, 10. E. 3.
etc. this indictment is not good, for the Lord cannot award process for the
party in that Court.

If a man be indicted of rape by formal indictment in a Leet or Sheriffs
turn, the indictment is void; for by the Statute rape is not inquirable in a
Leet or Sheriffs turn, but as trespass, as it was before the Statute; the
same Law of the Decrees tantum, though that a man have congnisance of plea by
the Kings grant.

If a man be indicted for felony done upon Saint John's day, 3. H. 4.
the indictment is void, for there are two S. John's days, and the indictment
ought to show which.

A man is struck in one County, 2. E. 6.
and dies in another County, he that stroke him is indicted in the County
where he dyed, this is a good indictment by the Stat. of 2. E. 6.

If a man be indicted for counterfeiting the Kings coin before the Justices of
peace, 2. R. 3.
it is void, for they have not authority to do that.

If a man be indicted for felony, for stealing of an horse, if the indictment
want any of these words, that is to say, 2. E. 3.
felonice cepit and abduxit, the indictment is void, for these words shall not
be taken by implication, if they lack.

If a man and two women be indicted for ravishing one A. S. 44. E. 3. fol. 15.
and 13.
this is not a good indictment, as well against the two women as the man, quare
cognovit quod unum feme poet foultra ovesque un auter uncore el poet estre al
home coadjutor.

A man is indicted for that he was privy unto a murder done by I. S. 14. H. 4.
this is not a good indictment, for the indictment does not show that he did
strike, and counsel or consent unto the felony.

A man indicted of felony in the time of H. Fol. 36. 1. E.
8. that indictment will serve well in the time of E. 6. per Statut. I. E. 3.

Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, of felons by Commission in the time of H.
8. take indictments in the time of E. 6. the parties indicted shall not be
arraigned upon the said indictments, for by the death of the King, their
Commission is determined.

Crowners made in the time of H. 4. E. 4. fol. (...).
8. may take indictments super visum corporis in the time of E. 6. for they be
made by Writ, and not by Commission, and they shall endure until they shall be
discharged by Writ: but otherwise of Commissioners.

CHAP. VI.
Arraignment of felons, and what pleas they shall have, and what not; and where
they shall be put to penance, and where not; and where a man shall be twice
arraigned for one felony, and where his life shall be put twice in jeopardy
for one felony.
A Man is arraigned of the death of I. S. 16. E. 3. fol.
which was killed at B. he says he was another time arraigned, indicted, and
acquitted of the death of the same I. S. at B. interfect. in another place, and
shows the Record under seal, and averreth that he is the same person that is
I. S. this is a good plea.

A man is outlawed of felony, 7. H. 6.
and is led unto the Bar, and demanded of him what he has to say wherefore
he should not die; and he says that in the time of the outlawry he was in
prison in the Castle of B. sub custod' etc. this is a good plea.

A woman is arraigned of felony, and is convict by verdict, and is demanded
what she can say why she should not dye, which says she is with child; this
is a good plea: it was holden contra 12. E. 3, fol. 11.

A man is indicted as accessory unto a felony committed by I. S. 8. (...). 4.
sol. 4.
which was arraigned and attainted: the defendant says that there is no such
record, and prays allowance, and pleads over to the felony, not guilty; this
is a good plea.

Two be arraigned, and one pleads the Kings pardon, and a release to his
companion, and shows that it is no plea, 21. E. 4.
21. E. 4. for felony cannot be joint; but otherwise it is of trespass.

A man arraigned of felony, says that another time he was arraigned of
another felony committed since that felony was done, and acquit where his life
was in danger, and demands judgment: If for any other felony committed before
he shall be arraigned, this is no plea; but if he had pleaded he had been
condemned, and had the Kings pardon after, and so delivered, it had been good
plea; for judgment of death is a discharge of all felons done before.

A man commits murder, 2. H. 7.
and the King pardons him the murder, and the next day he beats and maymeth
I. S. and he is arraigned of the murder, and pleads the Kings pardon, by the
beating of I. S. the pardon is become not good, 2. H. 7. for by the Stat. 10.
E. 3.
of 10. E. 3. he shall find surety of his good behavior for 3. months after
the pardon.

A man steals goods in the County of A. 4. H. 7.
and brings them in the County of N. and after is indicted and arraigned in
the County of A. and he says he carried the goods into the County of N. fol.
37.
and there he was indicted and acquitted for the same goods, and prays
allowance, and to the felony not guilty, this is good plea; for though he
commit felony in two Counties, his life shall not be in jeopardy twice for one
felony.

A man arraigned of felony pleades not guilty unto the issue, 11. H. 4.
and when the Jury appears he pleades the Kings pardon, and shows it, that
is no plea, except the pardon bear date after the issue joined.

A man arraigned of felony pleades the Kings general pardon by Act of
Parliament, although he has pleaded not guilty before, that pardon shall be
allowed, for every man is bound to take notice of that pardon.

A man is indicted by the name of I. S. of B. and upon the arraignment, 1. H. 5.
he says his name is I. Roe of B. and not I. S. and prays allowance, and
pleades over to the felony not guilty, this is no plea, for he ought to give it
in evidence if he be mis-named. for if he be the same person, he shall answer
to the felony: but otherwise it is in appeal.

A man arraigned of felony says, that another time I. S. appealed him of the
same felony, unto that which he pleaded not guilty by battle, and has
vanquished the appeal, and went quit: this is no good plea, for his life shall
not be put in jeopardy twice for one felony.

A man is arraigned of felony upon an indictment, 7. H. 7. fol. 5.
and says, that another time he was outlawed upon the same felony, and
reversed the outlawry by error, this is no good plea; for though he reversed
the outlawry, yet if the indictment be good, he shall answer unto the felony:
but otherwise it is upon outlawry of debt or trespass, for the plaintiff
shall have a new Original.

A man is arraigned at the Kings suit for killing I. S. which says, that at
another time he was arraigned for the killing of the said I. S. in an appeal
at the suit of K. daughter and heir of the same I. S. this is no plea, but he
shall be at another time arraigned; Magna Charta, cap. 3. 4.
for by the Stat. of Magna Charta cap. 3. and 4. no man shall be appealed of
the death of a man at the suit of a woman, except it be of the death of her
husband.

A man is arraigned upon an indictment for killing I. S. 21. H. 6.
which says, at another time he was arraigned at the suit of I. S. son and
heir of the same I. S. this is no good plea, if the wife of I. S. was alive at
the time of the appeal brought; but he shall be another time arraigned.

A man is arraigned of the death of I. S. 21. H. 8.
which says, at another time he was arraigned of the same felony, and acquit
at the suit of R. S. son and heir of the said I. S. this is no plea, if the
party that makes the same be not the eldest son of I. S. at the time of the
appeal, or if he have an elder son alive.

Two men commit a felony, fol. 38.
and one of them is arraigned and acquit, and after the acquittall he
receives his companion, which is attainted after of the same felony; this
receiver which was acquit before, 17. E. 3. and 10.
shall now be arraigned as accessory to the same felony of which he was acquit
before as principal: and if he plead this matter, it shall be no sufficient
plea for him, for that he was accessory after the acquittall.

A man arraigned of felony pleads not guilty, and the Jury is deferred for
default of Jurors, and a talis is awarded, and at the day given by the talis,
he pleads the Kings pardon bearing date after the day of default, this is no
good plea.

Note, that when a man pleads a bar in matter in fact, he may pray
allowance, and plead over to the felony; but when he pleads a matter of
record in bar, he shall not plead over to the felony as a formal
acquittall, the Kings pardon, and such like.

FINIS.

