The WAY to the Sabbath of Rest. Or the Souls Progress in the Work of
REGENERATION. Being a Brief Experimental Discourse of the New Birth. IN WHICH
Many of the Serpents Wiles are detected: The Mysteries of the Cross unvailed:
The Death of the Old Man, the Life of the New Man, the Angelical Dispensation,
with the Entrance into the Divine; clearly laid open and discovered.

By Mr. Thomas Bromley.

Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God,

John 3.3. Whosoever does not bear his Cross and come after me, cannot be my
Disciple,

Luke 14.27. Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life,

Rev. 2.10. (...). London Printed, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationer's Hall. 1692.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE following Practical and Experimental Treatise of the New Birth, was Writ
and Published by the Author in his Youth, about Forty Years since; and having
been long out of Print, and desired by many, has put those who are entrusted
with his Writings to communicate it to the Public a second time, with some
Alterations and Amendments, by the Authors own hand, to prevent any occasion of
Offense or Mistake. And forasmuch as it has pleased the Lord, not long since,
to take his Servant up into that Rest, whereof so many Years ago he had given
him so ravishing a Pisgah sight (as will in part appear from the following
Sheets) it has, been the desire of many of his Friends (to whom his Memory is
and ever shall be most sweet and precious) that this DisDiscourse might be
usher'd-in with a short Account concerning Him, and some of his last Moments,
till a fuller Relation of his Holy Life be prepared for public View, which is
a thing much desired by many, to the end, that so Saint-like and Exemplary a
Life might serve for a Copy and Encouragement of the Godly, and for the
Reclaiming and Converting of the Wicked and Profane in these Dregs of Time,
wherein we have so great a Scarcity of such Examples, and in which true
Religion and the Fear of God seem to have left the Earth. But in the mean time,
till some or other undertake this Task, be pleased Reader, to accept of these
short Hints, concerning the Instrument by whom our good God has been pleased to
reach forth the following Truths and Directions, in the Way and Progress to the
New Birth (that Land of Rest and Peace) unto thee, and all those who have Ears
to hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

Mr. Thomas Bromley was born at Vpton upon Severne in Worcestershire, of an
Ancient and Honorable Family, according to the Worlds Account (but methinks in
mentioning this, I sink below the Subject I am speaking of; for what is this to
one who by his better Birth, was a Son and Heir of God, and Coheir with the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Holy and ever Blessed Jesus?) He was in
his younger Years religiously Educated, and after he had gone through the
Learning of the Schools, became a Member of All Souls College in Oxford, where
God was pleased to reveal his Son in him, and to make great and glorious
Discoveries of himself unto him, such, as it may be, should they be here
related, some would scarce be able to understand or bear. And from that time
forwards the Supreme Love having ravished his Heart with his All-surpassing
Beauty, became a Vail to his Eyes, keeping him from beholding Vanity, or
lusting after it; and he again in return of this special Divine Grace and
Favor, wholly Dedicated himself to his Service from his Youth; and parting
with all, and denying himself, became a faithful Follower and Disciple of his
great Lord and Master, the Holy Jesus, and a true Minister of the Gospel, not
of the Letter, but of the Spirit, one that needed not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the Word of Truth.

But having spoke a few words of the Rising of this Bright Star, I must next
lead you to it is Setting, passing by it is whole Course; he therefore having
thus for many Years walked with God, the Lord was pleased (before he took him
to himself) to exercise him with a long continued Weakness, which yet did not
hinder him from exercising the Functions of an Evangelical Preacher. About
three Weeks before his Departure, he preached his last Sermon from these Words;
Acts 14.22. the latter part of the Verse, That we must through much Tribulation
enter into the Kingdom of God; from whence he took occasion to discourse not
only concerning the Outward, but more especially concerning the great Inward
Spiritual Sufferings and Combats of Gods People. After this Sermon he grew so
weak that he could not Preach, and but seldom Pray in the Family: Yet at
sometimes when he felt the Power of God upon him, he would have them called
into his Chamber, and would pray with great Fervency and Strength of Voice, as
if he had been in perfect Health. During this time (for his Setting was of one
piece with his Rising and whole Course) he gave many holy Exhortations to those
that came to visit him; and would often say, He could take delight in nothing
but God, as having been dead to the World these many Years. He declared to a
familiar Friend of his more than once, That except the Lord would be pleased to
restore him to such a degree of Health, that he might Preach the Gospel, and so
help to Edify the Church of God, he had rather (if he might choose for himself)
die than live, for he knew whither he should go, viz. to God and Christ, and
all the Blessed Angels, etc. But that he must resign. And would often say, That
he lived in the Will of God. He was observed to be much introverted and
exercised in Mental Prayer, or Prayer of Silence; and when he heard too much
talk in his Chamber, he would say, Be silent, be silent; for Silence and
Stilness is best.

He had one Evening (being about Ten Days before he died, such a mighty Power
of God upon him, as many Years ago he had experienced in the Company and
Communion of his special Spiritual Friends, so that having called some dear
Friends up to his Chamber, he broke forth into singing and praising of God, to
the great joy, comfort and refreshment of all that heard him; and so likewise
did about four or five days before his decease. Sometime before this, he
discoursed to some Friends of the Difficulty of Salvation, which was not to be
secured but by giving our Hearts wholly up to God, without any reserve
whatsoever. And then mentioned the great Love he had to Souls, and desire that
they might not miss of Salvation; and testified his Universal Charity to all
that feared God, of what Persuasion or Division soever.

The day before he dyed, some Friends being come some Miles to Visit him, he
with great earnestness and demonstration of Truth discoursed to them of God, of
the Immortality of the Soul, the Excellency of the Holy Scriptures, and how
much those who profess to believe the Christian Doctrines, are bound to live a
holy Life; and so gave a short, but powerful Exhortation to Holiness, as the
only way to Happiness. And then said, I have Peace of Conscience, I have lived
up to my Light, and loved God above all things. And at another time he said to
two intimate Friends, I have Peace of Conscience, I have walked with God, tho I
have made no Noise in the World.

The same day he died (which was on Easter-Monday, April 13th. 1691.) he often
cried, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly! O when! when! And one time he said, My
Lord! my Rock! and my strong Habitation! Which words came from him with great
Power. The last words that ever he spoke were, Watch, watch; whereupon he fell
into a sweet Slumber for an hour, and in it departed; thus truly falling asleep
in him, to whom, for whom and in whom he had lived, to whom be Glory and Praise
for ever and ever.

This was the End, Reader, of that precious Saint, who from the Light and Grace
of God conferred upon him, penned the following Treatise; concerning which I
shall not need to add any thing further, seeing the following Advertisement of
the Author gives a full Account of the Design and Usefulness thereof. The
Paraphrase in Verse upon the 13th. of the First of Corinthians (printed at the
end of the Treatise) being found amongst the Authors loose Papers, was thought
fit to be published herewith, because it expresses much of his Spirit and
Temper.

But I must conclude after that I have informed the Reader, that the Author has
left several other excellent Spiritual Discourses behind him, which if this be
well received, are intended to be made Public for the use of the Church in her
present Wilderness Condition. The great and glorious God, who has given this
Seed to the Sower, make it with all Fruitfulness to spring up in the Hearts of
all that are of Good Will to the Regeneration in Christ Jesus. Amen.

AN ADVERTISEMENT FROM THE AUTHOR. To all that shall read this following
Discourse.
I Have written this Experimental Discourse of the New Birth, not for the Wise
and Rich, who think they see, and enjoy enough, but for the Poor in Spirit, who
enquiring the way to Sion, are sensible of their Defects, and breath after a
Supply. Let none then come with Prejudice, for that will give a false Tincture
to the Eye of the Mind, and prevent the sight of Truth, by a prepossession that
it is Error. If any have attained, and enjoy as much, or more than is here
expressed, let them bless God for his Goodness, both to themselves and me: If
not, let them not be ashamed to learn and practice more than they have already;
for, Teach a wise Man, and he will be yet wiser, Prove. 9.9. And it is no
diminishing of Esteem, to grow in true Knowledge, or disparagement of Age, to
gain Wisdom from those that are Young; because true Wisdom is the Gift of God,
who is no respecter of Persons, bestowing his Gifts on whom he pleases. But
think not, I have here chalked out a Way for every one to walk in; for I have
only wrote my own Experience: And I know there may be great variety in Gods
Works upon Souls; so that none are to be confined to one exact Path, though all
are to be informed, That we must turn, and become as little Children, and be
wholly dead with Christ, before we can be as the Angels in the Resurrection,
delighting our selves in the Light and Life of Eternity: Therefore the Perfect
Death should be aimed at by all, for nothing less can fit us for Glory. For how
can any Imperfection enter there, where is nothing but Perfection? or any thing
of Darkness dwell with him, who is Light, and in whom there is no Darkness at
all? It Is true, many (from mastaking that Principle, of Gods being the Root of
all things) have endeavored to reconcile Light and Darkness, Good and Evil,
Flesh and Spirit, Christ and Belial; and so to laugh Tall Mortification and
Self-denial out of the Church. But alas! what have the Practices and Notions of
such ended in, but shame and confusion of Face? for they have sowed to the
Wind, and reaped the Whirlwind, grasped at an Imaginary Heaven, and
Perfection; but have fallen like Lucifer into Hell, and palpable Darkness,
having like foolish Virgins, spent their Oil, and received Poison into their
Lamps, and so made themselves unfit to meet and entertain the Bridegroom.
Others there are, who come forth in such Outward Strictness and Severity, as
they are ready to judge all that are not in their peculiar Mode, and Form; and
so refuse Communion with some, who have attained much further in the true Death
and Resurrection (and are more acquainted with the Renewal of Gods Image, and
the State of Restoration) than themselves. And there be many others, who though
not owning the first sort, and much disgusting the last, yet give themselves
too much to Earthly Indulgements, under the notion of Christian Liberty, and so
make no real Progress in the Change of their Souls. Some of which, are cheated
with false Notions of their being in Christ; and others of, them with sublime
apprehensions of false Imaginary Deaths, and ways of Self-denial, which they
much feed upon, instead of that Death and Cross, which should work their
Spirits and Natures out of Flesh into the true spiritual Divine Image. There
are another sort, who are too much offended at Forms, and all usual ways of
enjoying, and speaking of God, decrying them as Cheats, and empty things,
though they be used never so spiritually and advantagiously to those that
appear in them; which is a great mistake, flowing from Ignorance; and the want
of a clear sight, which could not so confine the great and infinite Jehovah
within the limits of No-forms, and exclude him from appearing and working in
and through Forms; being it is at his own pleasure, to show himself how* and in
what he pleases. But lastly, a great part of those that profess Religion, are
such who rest too much upon the first work of Regeneration, and two much eye
their first Change, afterward running in a Circle of Duties and Performances,
without making that Progress and Growth toward Perfection, which the frequent
Exhortations and Examples of the Holy Scriptures call and incite us to. Now the
work of Regeneration, renewing both the Will and Understanding, will bring
those who persevere in it, to a clear sight of the forementioned Mistakes; by
which they will be able to discern betwixt Light and Darkness (Chaff and Wheat)
and come to own the Good Seed in all; and endeavor by walking according to the
Royal Law of Love and Charity, to cherish it. Now this Law of Love, is the Rule
of Perfection, being the Scope and end of a Christians Progress; a true
Conformity to which makes us like God, who is Love, and delights to impress his
own eternal Character of Love upon his Children, who are nearer to, or further
from Perfection, as they partake more or less of this Essential Love, which is
the Spirit and Life of Christianity; without which, all Duties and Observances
are but as sounding Brass, and perishing Shadows: In which, all have their
worth and use. From the Dictates and Impulses of this Law, I have written this
small Discourse, as believing it may be instrumental to undeceive many, who are
wandering in the Labyrinths of Error; yet seek the true way: And to confirm,
strengthen and direct oothers, who are making their way through the Cross to
the Crown of Life. And truly th^s Subject is of great Concernment to all,
because all are capable of the New Birth; and none without it can ever be
happy. To mistake this work is very dangerous, because it is the Passage to
eternal Rest. The highest Heaven is situate in the large Plains of Eternity;
yet the Way to it is very narrow. At the Entrance, the sharp Sword of
Circumcision is placed. On the left hand there is a Gulf of Fire, on the right
hand a deep Water; at the end there stands a Cherubin with a flaming Sword,
whose Office is to cut off the Relics of all Corruption from the Soul; so
that the least Grain of Selfishness or Flesh, cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. The Spirit of Man is totally to be inhabited by Christ: There Is not one
Weed to be left there. We are to be stripped of all the Riches of corrupt Nature,
before we can pass through the last Gate into the City. A naked Spirit quickly
enters. Hence that of Christ, Blessed be the poor in Spirit, for their's is the
Kingdom of God. An empty Spirit God will fill. For, God is Love, and delights
(through his Son) to communicate of his own Fullness, to all that can receive
it. The Soul cannot be emptyed, but through Regeneration; nor filled, if not
first emptyed. We part with Darkness, Vanity and Lust; We receive Light,
Substance, and Love. A complete exchange brings complete Happiness. How few are
willing to sell all for Christ? How many Distinctions are created by Reason, to
avoid the Cross and Death of Christ? But it is very dangerous to take up such
Principles, that may indulge any part of that which must be destroyed. It may
make us fall short of Heaven, when we expect to enter into it. It Is far more
safe to be too strict than too remiss: But the mean is best; which (I believe)
is here somewhat clearly discovered.

Farewell.

The Way to the SABBATH of REST: OR, THE Souls Progress in the NEW BIRTH.
CHAP. I.
REgeneration is absolutely necessary to Salvation, John 3.3. Hence it greatly
concerns us, to know its Nature and Operation; how it is to be considered,
either in it is Initiation, Progress, or Consummation. As it is taken for the
Beginning of the Work, it implies that first Change of the Soul, when in
general the Frame of the Will is swayed God and Heavenward. In it is Progress,
it is the growth and motion of the Soul, from the Image of the Earthly toward
the Image of the Heavenly. In it is End, it is the bringing forth of the perfect
and complete Image of God in our Humanity, 1 Cor. 15.49. When we attain this,
we are completely in Christ, wholly Newborn, 2 Cor. 5.17. and made fit to see
and enjoy that eternal Kingdom, which has been prepared for us from the
beginning of the World.

Regeneration then in it is full Latitude, Regeneration described.
comprehends all three States, and may be thus defined: It is that transforming
quickening Work of Gods Spirit, which begins, carries on, and compleats Gods
Image in us. And so it is taken by Christ, Matthew. 19.28. where he promises
twelve Thrones to his twelve Disciples, as Rewards for their Faithfulness in
following him, Foreseeing Matthias to be Surrogated into the place of Judas.
(...), in the Regeneration; where it is expressed by an emphatical Note,
insinuating the Fullness and Completeness of it, as there meant. But in the
ordinary acceptance amongst Professing Christians, it is used in the most
restrained sense, for the first Change of the Soul, when the bent of the Heart
begins to be habitually carried toward God in Christ. And by what I have heard
and seen, from most I have conversed with, I find too much weight laid upon
this first Work, as though it were the complete New Birth; and that which might
give sufficient ground of Comfort, even to those who feel not the comfortable
growth of the inward Man in it is Motion toward Perfection. Hence many rest
upon their first supposed Conversion, and have a continual Eye to it, as a
great prop to their Souls, though they feel their Chariot-Wheels stand still,
yea, go backward, and are in much more Deadness and Drowsiness of Spirit
habitually, than when they first entered into the work of the New Birth. But
certainly, this is dangerous, Ezekiel. 18.24. and may much deceive the Spirits of
many, by making them more eye what they were, than what they are, or may be by
pressing toward the Mark of perfect Union; for it stops their Motion; and
hinders their Ascont toward Heaven, and their constant practicing Conformity to
the Death of Christ; by which Death only we pass out of the Fall, are fitted
for Glory, and at length attain the Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10.

Oh! then take heed of resting there,
Where living Flesh brings deadly fear,
And casts the Soul on that sharp Reed,
Which for a Cure will make it Bleed.
Then stand not still, nor turn thine Eye
Backward unto Mortality;
But winged with Faith, move apace
Forward, in thy Heavenly Race.
CHAP. II.
HAving briefly showed what I mean by Regeneration, I shall now proceed to it is
actual Work, as it gradually discovers it is self in the Soul. The first
Appearance of it in the Heart is by Acts 2.37.
Conviction, through which the Soul comes to see its Corruption in the darkness
of the Understanding, the vanity of Imagination, the delusion of the Will (in
embracing defiled Carnal Objects) and the irregular motions of the Affections,
running earthward, like swift Torrents down a Precipice. In a word, the Light
of God shining into the Soul, gives it a view of it is sad Eccles. 7.29.
Apostasy from it is Primitive State, when it was created in the Image of God;
whereas now it sees it self in the Image of the Serpent, bespattered with the
dust of the Earth, clothed with polluted Rags, wrapped up in darkness and
hellish Confusion, stained with the poison of Sin, centred in the fire of Gods
Ephesians. 2.3.
Wrath, dwelling in the Valley of the shadow of Death, where Devils are it is
Associates and Companions, pleasing themselves in the pollutions and stains of
the Soul, as delighting to dwell in such Luke 8.27.
Graves of Corruption. Now when the Soul once beholds this, Oh how it begins to
be amazed! How it wonders at it is self! What Tumults begin to be raised in it!
What Earthquakes discover themselves! What a Monster it appears to it is self,
when compared to the Righteousness, Holiness, and Purity of God, expressed in
the Image of his Law! It sees, it is impossible in this State, ever to enjoy
God, or come near him; for, without Holiness Heb. 12.14.
no Man can see the Lord. Here it sees, it is eternally undone, without the
great Mercy and Compassion of God, not being Romans 3.19.
able to Answer the strict Requirings of the Law, obliging to that which the
Soul is not capable to perform, through the presence and strength of
Corruption. Here the Soul is driven to Christ, the only Mediator betwixt God
and Man, who long waited for this time, that so he might discover himself,
having long stood in the midst of it Ioh. 1.26.
unknown, and unregarded; who upon the melting of the Soul into Tears of
Repentance, upon the renouncing Flesh and Blood, with all corrupt Objects, and
upon the opening of the Will (in the Thirst and desire of Faith) enters Rev.
3.20.
into the Heart, or rather shows himself to be There, by opposing Hell, by
shedding abroad his holy Blood, to quench the fire of Gods Wrath, and wash 1
Ioh. 1.7.
the Soul from those sad Defilements it then lies under: Here he quiets the
Soul, gives the wings of Faith to it, by which it flies above the reach of
despairing Fears, and by little and little enters into Peace and Stilness, and
shrouds it is self in some measure, from the awakened Storms of wrathful Terror.
Now, so far as the Soul can get by Faith into Christ, so far it finds Ease,
Refreshment and Peace, and a cessation from the sense of Guilt, with cherishing
Belief of the present Pardon of Sin, as finding at such a time no stirring of
the Will to that which had so endangered it before, by it is poisonous
Insinuations. Now therefore beginning to hate Evil as a Monster, and to love
Christ as a Savior, it feels the Effects of Christ's Meditation, by satisfying
Gods Justice, taking away the Enmity in the Romans 5.10.
Soul, by the Blood of his Cross, by the meltings of Love which it feels
toward God, and sweet Refreshments it receives from him. Now it comes to be
sensible how it has resisted Gods Love, Christ's Mercy, the Spirits motions;
how it has given the Devil interest in Christ's Tabernacle, and shut Him out
from his 1. Cor. 6.20.
own Possession. Hence flow Tears of Love, and Soul-melting Groans, with the
Mournings of the Turtle: Now it embraces Jesus, weeps over Him whom it has
pierced, and is wounded the more, the kinder He seems in Returns of Love; in
regard he was before so much disobliged by the Souls Unkindness; now the Soul
wants ways of expressing Love Cant. 2.5.
overwhelmed with the sense of Goodness. In this State it could die Ten
thousand Deaths, undergo any thing in requital to it is Savior; all it is
Motions and Expressions tend to advance Christ, to extol Him, and Cant. 1.2.
predicate His unutterable Love, thinking nothing enough for Him, who thought
not his own Life too much for it.

O that the Soul would faithfully remain
In this sweet Frame, until He comes again
To waft her in his Chariot to that Throne
Where God and Man are in full Union.
For Love does pitch its true Pavilion there;
In other Places Love is mixed with Fear.
CHAP. III.
WHen the Soul after its shakings, attains this Settlement in Christ's Love,
freely streaming toward it, usually it is much carried out in the sight and
opening of Free-Grade, which for a time, strongly work upon it, and induce it
to yield suitable Returns, in constant Obedience. And this is commonly a Season
of much Joy and Refreshment; the Soul feeling that sensible Consolation, and
Divine Sweetness, that causes it to break forth into continual Praises and
Halelujah's to God. Now, as this flows from the lively apprehension of Gods
Love in Christ, so likewise from the clear sight of Christ in us, and of that
mystical transcendent Union, Colos. 2.27.
betwixt him and the inward Man; the Soul now beholding him in the ground and
center of her own pure humanity (there thence darting forth the Rays of Love
upon her,) whom before she looked upon as at a distance, without her, as only
sitting at the right hand of God in Heaven. Now whilst this Dispensation lasts,
the Soul is in a Cant. 2.4, 11, 13.
perpetual Spring, and a kind of delightful Paradise, bathing and delighting
its self in the sweet Cant. 1.2.
Fruition of Christ's Love, who in this time, expresses much kindness to it,
and gives frequent Testimonies of his Divine Presence. But this day seldom
continues very long, and this Summer by little and little usually inclines
toward an Autumn, in which the Flowers of sensible Comfort, and love-Raptures,
begin a little to wither, and benumming flesh again shows its power, in secret
(almost insensible) dullings of the Souls Affection, till by little and little,
it comes to a sensible Rev. 3.1.
Deadness, which is the more tedious and burdensome, the more the former
dispensation was pleasant and Joyous. Now what may be the reason of this
declining in the Souls Enjoyments, I shall not positively determine, for it may
proceed from different causes, in different persons: In some it may flow from
the want of Rev. 3.2.
Watchfulness over their Hearts; thorough the great Elevations of Free Grace,
in which time the flesh by little and little may collect Strength; Gifts then
being more eyed then Graces: It may also flow from the decay of the Souls
lively apprehensions of Gods Love, which it felt in freeing it from the poison
and Guilt of Sin, when it groaned sadly under them; for so long as the strong 1
Ioh. 4.19.
impressions of that state remained, Gods mercy eminently discovered, forced
the Soul into suitable meltings at the sight of it, but these somewhat
vanishing in time the effects likewise might cease by little and little. It may
also come from want of practicing the way of the Cross, through our
misapprehensions of being Dead when we are not, or accidentally through the
sensible overflowings of new Comforts, which may carry the Soul out of that
watchful Exercise of the Cross, which at such a time is most needful. But
whatever is the Cause of it, the Soul ought to enter into a strict Examination
of it is self, to sift every corner of it is inward Chambers, and to pray for a
clearer Light to view all subtle Corruptions* that may gull it and hinder its
Progress, and make it set up a Standard as though all were done. Oh! it is
dangerous sticking here, and resting upon former Changes; for this tends to the
indulging of spiritual Drowsiness and Stupidity, and may bring the Soul in
danger of losing 2 Ioh. ver. 8.
it is former Works, by present Idleness and Relapses: For God looks not at what
we were, but what we are; our present State making us either capable of Gods
out-flowing Love, or obnoxious to his chastising Justice.

If so, awake dull Soul, think not to be
Excused from thy present Lethargy
By former Kindness, when the force of Love
Did pierce thy Heart, and made it upward move;
Awake and pray, that Christ in thee may give
New quickening to thy Dead, that it may live.
CHAP. IV.
MAny Souls stick long in this Condition, before they make a new advance
toward Perfection, usually much reflecting upon their former work of
Conversion, as the chief Basis of their Comforts: And though sometimes they
look forward, and desire Isaiah 1.19.
growth, yet that desire of growth is so weak that it terminates in its self
short of effectual accomplishment; and though they sometimes begin, yet their
Endeavors are Gal. 5.7.
nipt in their first Blossoming, and they themselves cast back into wonted
Deadness, and so they come to run in a Circle, without getting ground of their
Corruptions. And I confess, I was long detained in this State, without any
clear evident progress toward Eternity: And though I grew much in Knowledge
and mystical Notions of the Life, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ,
and of our Conformity to his Example; yet not in the Power of his Cross, and
Death, working the same in my Nature. But afterward I came to a clearer sight
of the Narrow Way which leads to Life Eternal, and of the necessity of our
exact 2 Timothy 2.11.
Conformity to Christ's Sufferings and Death, to bring us unto his Life, and
Resurrection: And that every degree of Life must come through a degree of
Death; and the New-man Romans 8.13.
spring up by the continual decay of the Old. And though I saw This before, yet
not so distinctly and effectually, as now: Here likewise I was more powerfully
convinced of the Mat. 7.13.
Straitness of the Pilgrims Path, which leads through the Visible and Invisible
Worlds, into the third Heaven: Every step being to be made through Death and
Resignation; and that the Soul could not attain perfect Bliss, but through a
Death to Luke 14.^^
all things, which it came to love through the Fall. For as the Soul entered
into Selfishness, so it must come out of it, casting away all that clothing it
is covered with, through Lust. And as it descended from Paradise into the
Spirit of the World, and the Kingdom of the Devil, so it must re-ascend out of
the Spirit of the World, and the Kingdom of the Dragon, through the Root 1 Pet.
2.21.
of fallen Nature into the Bosom of Abraham. Here I saw what a real Progress
the Soul must make from the External into the Internal, from thence into the
Eternal: And as it descended so it must ascend; and as it fell by a gradual
Change of the Will into Lust and Earthliness, so it must Rise by 1 Cor. 15.49.
a gradual renewing of the Soul, from Lust into Divine Love. Here I saw nothing
without us could advantage, but as it was applied to make a real change within.
For Mat. 18.3.
except we turn, and become as Children, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God. It must be by a Transmutation, and Metamorphosis of the Soul from the
Image of the Earthly into that of the Heavenly. Nothing can ascend into Heaven,
but that which came from Heaven, even the true I exclude not the Soul nor the
Resurrection-Body, for they both (vested with this image) shall arrive at
Immortality, and possess Heaven, 1 These. 4.17.
Image of God; the Earthly being predestined to destruction: For Earth it is,
and unto Earth it must return. Now the motion of the Soul through the gate of
Death toward Life Eternal, is the motion of a Spirit, which is to be looked
upon as ascending or descending, as it comes nearer or removes further from God
the Center, as Bodies ascend or descend in relation to their Center, by their
tending toward or from ward the Visible Heavens. Upward therefore to a Soul, is
Inward; Outward is Downward. The Center is the Highest, the Circumference the
lowest. God is in the Center, being most Inward; Matter in the Circumference,
being most Outward, Isaiah 66, 1.
yet God is in the Outward, as his footstool, but in the most Inward, as his
Throne; filling both, though in both, not manifest alike. In the Inmost, he
shows himself wholly in the Love; in the Outmost, in Love and Wrath, Life and
Death, Generation and, Corruption: But in the Inward dark World, altogether in
Death, Darkness, and Wrath; as in the Inmost, all in Light and Life. Therefore
our Progress is from the Outward, through the Inward, to the Inmost. The
Outward is the place of Good and Evil, and as to its corrupt State, the Kingdom
of the Beast. The Inward is twofold, either the Dark or Light world. The Dark,
is the Kingdom of the Dragron, the Center of Evil and Wrath: The Light World is
the Paradisical Sphere, or that Garden of Eden, which is situate also in its
Mesopotamia. or betwixt the two great Rivers of Wrath and Love. The first of
which is called (in Revelation 19.20.) The Lake of Fire, burning with
Brimstone; the last, in Rev. 22. A pure River of Water of Life, clear as
Crystal, which proceeds out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. The Inmost,
is the eternal Sanctuary, or the true eternal Tabernacle of God, and that
spiritual Land of Peace, where Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
glorified, departed Saints live and inhabit. But none can ever reach This, but
through the perfect Death; and as we die daily, so we rise nearer and nearer
it. Death giving us a gradual passage toward this Eternal Kingdom of Life.

And is it so, that Death must waft us ore
The Sea of Nature, to the Heavenly Shore?
Then bring thy Boat, blessed Death, that thou and I
May sail together toward Eternity.
A sweet Companion thou will be to me,
Till I imbosom'd am in Unity.
CHAP. V.
THe Soul having arrived so far as to see the necessity of a complete Death,
and of a perfect Conformity to the Cross of Christ, and discovering much
Selfishness which before it saw not, as matter of this Death and Cross, begins
afresh the serious Practice of the Cross, with great earnestness and resolution
of Spirit, Phil. 3.8.
to indulge (i) nothing that stands betwixt it and God. Now it enters upon a
strict Enquiry into its own Heart, searching its own Jerusalem with the Candle
of the Lord, that so all Selfishness may be discovered and extirpated; and now
it finds, that although (before this Dispensation) the chief Bent of the Will
inclined habitually toward the Good, yet it was not strong enough to bear down
that Opposition of Flesh that hindered its constant Ascent toward Heaven, and
had therefore need of a new Alarm from thence to awaken it, and raise it from
that Bed of Drowsiness, and arm it with Power and Resolution to cast out the 1
Cor. 5.7.
Relics of the Flesh, and Corruption, and defend its self against the Assaults
of the Devil, who having long possessed the unregenerate part of the Heart, is
loath to quit his hold, least the Soul should get wholly out of his Kingdom and
reach. At this remove therefore the Spirits of Darkness Rev. 12*7.
exceedingly oppose and use all their art and strength to betray and weaken the
Souls Endeavors. Here then begins a new and great War in the Soul between the
Seed of the Woman and the Serpent. Michael and his Angels fight against the
Dragon and his Angels; Christ and Antichrist strongly oppose each other. The
Wrath and Love bring forth their mighty wonders, being both stirred and
awakened afresh in the Soul. But the Soul being now sensible of its present
state, and seeing that there is no Safety where the Devils have such access and
influence, sinks down into the Mercy and Love of God, and flies to the Cross,
embracing and delighting in it; that so the 1 Ioh. 1.7.
Blood of the Cross may be shed into it, to cleanse it throughout, and to take
away those Stains, which are the Devils Mansions. And here it clearly finds,
there is no way of triumphing over the Prince of Death, but through Death; so
Romans 6.5.
it dies daily, to that the Evil One lives in, and lives to that which is death
to Sin. In this way, there may much Discouragement sometimes seize on the Soul,
through the strength of Satan's working and the reluctance of Flesh, and the
Outward Man, which is loath to subject his Neck to the sharp Axe of Death. But
this Bitterness is recompensed with that Refreshment the Soul finds in its
Constancy of Self-denial, which is attended with many glances of Divine Comfort
darting in upon the Soul to encourage it, and though it should, for a while,
remain in this Progress, which is bitter to the Flesh, without any sensible
Comfort (which may well be, through that great opposition the Dragon will make
at this remove of the Soul;) yet when Patience has had its Work, and the Soul
is come to be wrapped up in Contentation and Passiveness, as to any Change of its
Condition, and so fitted for Enlargement, the showers of God's Love will
seasonably and sweetly descend to the strength and blessed Support of the
Heart; so that it will be forced to cry out, It is good that a Man should both
hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord: And what the Spirit
sometimes now enjoys, so sweetens the Cross that it cannot but thus break forth.

Why should the Soul refuse that Cross
That Gold returns instead of Dross?
Why should it fear that piercing Nail
Which rends away the fleshly Vail?
And gives a Prospect of that Place,
Which Time and Age cannot deface.
CHAP. VI.
BY this time the Soul begins to delight in the habit of 1 Cor. 9.27.
strong Self-denial, and watches diligently over its self, to discover whatever
is to be slain upon the Cross of God's pure Will: and now it begins to be
ashamed of all Passions and Affections that flow from the Animal Man; and
therefore much restrains it, and keeps it in subjection to the Angelical; which
is according to that Order God himself set at the beginning. Now it likewise
sees how the Animal Mortal part (with its Motions and Passions) is too much
embraced by most; few understanding how it was in the Beginning; or how it is
to be changed, and again subjected to the Angelical Part, in the Children of
the Resurrection: But the Soul having now some Sight and Enjoyment of the
inward Spiritual Body, raised from the dead, is much ashamed of the outward
Body, which stands in the Curse, under awakened Wrath; seeing what Temptation
Spirits are exposed to, by Union with this, which should continually be under
the Law of Mortification, till its Change; lest through its Earthly
Inclination, it should infect the Intellect (and draw the Immortal Soul into
Defilement) which now dares not hearken to the Allurements of the sensitive
Spirit, which as tempting Eve often presents the Apples of Mortality, as those
which are pleasing to the Eye, and good for Food. But through the renewal of
the Spiritual Body, with its Heb. 5, 14.
five Faculties, or Powers; (answering to the five Senses of the External Body)
the Objects and Pleasure of the Outward begin to be forgot, and to displease,
instead of alluring and affecting the Heart. For by the Exercise of the
Internal Senses, we see Spiritual Objects, as the Internal Light-World, Visions
of Angels, and Visions of Representation. In this state we likewise hear the
Songs, Voices, and Harmony of Angels, with the Harpers upon Mount Sion, who
there continually praise the Lord: We smell the Perfumes of Christ's Garments,
and are often entertained with Paradisical Odours. We touch and feel the powerful
tincture of Christ's Body which many times strongly affects the Heart with
powerful delight: We also often taste the Heavenly Manna, and those Dews of
Paradise which are sweeter than Honey, to that Part which receives them. I
could here more largely particularize the several Objects, Delights, and
Enjoyments of the inward Spiritual senses; but because there may be great 1
Cor. 12.5.
Variety, according to the different Gifts and Capacities of several Persons;
and in regard some (for ought I know) may pass far in the Progress of the New
Birth, without a particular knowledge of those Enjoyments; I shall not instance
in many particulars, I could; nor set down my own (with some others) peculiar,
and various Experiences. Yet in general, I cannot but affirm, that the
unlocking the Senses of the inward Man, is a great Privilege: and that the
Soul by it attains many great Supports and Refreshments to uphold it, and give
it encouragement to hold out to the end. For truly, this Communion it lives in
now, with the Heb. 12.22.
Angels of God, and other Divine Objects, continually minds it of Heaven, and
Paradise; and exceedingly draws the Heart from all that is in the World, where
Death and Corruption is wrote upon every thing; And the Dragon and Beasts bring
forth their various Wonders: But in this state the Soul blesses God for that
Constancy he afforded under the Cross; and for that Death it has undergone, in
Resignation to his Will, which has proved a passage into this Life; in which
the Soul beholds the opening of a 2 Kings 6.17.
New World, with its glorious Hoasts: And begins to feel the Sweetness of the
Angelical Life, and to see what we fell from by descending into the Spirit of
Mortality, and the sensitive Nature: Now this state cannot be attained but by a
Death to that which was the chief Engagement of the Soul to the World, and the
primary Chain that hindered its gradual Ascent toward God. And we may find
there is something in every one, which is the Heb. 12.1.
Souls Dalilah, that shaves its Locks and betrays its strength; and whilst this
remains, it cannot effectually grow in the Love of God, and Conformity to
Christ's Death. But when this subtle Harlot comes to be discovered and killed,
the Soul flies apace, and very swiftly to Eternity; for when this Wheel is
taken away, the smaller that depended on it, lose their strength and motion and
so cease with it; giving Freedom to the Soul, of tending toward its true
Center; which (having regained this Liberty, and attained in some Measure the
Restoration of the Holy Powers of Sensation) sings a Song of praise to God, in
this manner.

Blessed be that Power, which has that Idol broke,
Which did so long depress me with her Yoke!
Blessed be that Hand which has restored to me
An Eye, within this World, a World to see!
Where Angels and blessed Spirits freely move,
As they are acted by the Laws of Love;
Whence they a Visit Genesis 32.1, 2.
sometime deign to give
To those imbodied Souls that purely live.
CHAP. VII.
THe Soul having now attained to the Death of that which so long hindered its
growth in the Pure Life (and to the Enjoyment of those Spiritual Objects, which
exceedingly refresh and quicken the Heart, in the midst of all discouragements)
proceeds cheerfully in the strait way of Resignation; Rev. 1.6.
offering up its Sin-Offering daily as a Sacrifice to the Fathers Justice. For
now the Daily Oblation is restored in the Holy Place, which must continue till
the death of sin, and the rending away the Vail of Heb. 10.20.
flesh from before the most Holy: Now therefore the Circumcising Knife of Gods
Power constantly cutts off the Fleshly part, which is offered up in the Fire of
Justice and consumed before the Lord: Now the Soul sees it must resist to
blood, that is, to the Heb. 12.4.
Death of the Body of sin, which is wholly to be separated from the Spirit,
with all its Members: For this is that false Covering it has wrapped it self
in, through the Fall, instead of that naked Innocence in which there was no
uncomliness, and therefore Genesis 2.25.
no shame: Except therefore this Foreskin of the Flesh be cut off, the
Angelical Robe cannot be put on: and as that falls off, this is assumed;
increasing as that decays: for, they cannot both rise and fall together; for
while the outward Man decays, the inward Man is renewed day by day. Here it
clearly appears, we must forsake all we have; otherwise we cannot be Christ's
Luke 14 33.
Disciples: All Objects of our Carnal Affections, all complacency in Fleshly
things; all Propriety of Will, which assuredly came through the Fall, and the
Souls Departing from the Universal Love, (the true ground of heavenly
Community) into the particular Objects of self-affections, which as it has
been awakened by the Souls going out of Gods Will, into its own; so it must be
Crucified by returning from its self into the pure eternal Will of God, which
we can never attain, till we Gal. 5.24.
are dead to the affections of the sensitive part. For, carnal Love, Joy, Hope,
Fear, Desire, Displeasure, are all the selfish Motions of the Natural Man, the
corrupt Members of the Body of Sin, together with earthly Pride, Covetousness,
Envy, Jealousy, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, all which are the Legs of the
earthly Adam, and therefore to be cast away and Col. 3.5.
destroyed; and in their Fall, the Will comes to be crucified to all their
Objects, and so to all selfish Propriety. Here we come to lose our own Lives,
to hate our selfish Motions, to be slain to all fleshly Things, the Will has
espoused, instead of God in Christ. Here we begin to be truly Poor, renouncing
all Mat. 19.27.
for Christ, owning no Propriety in earthly Estates. We see here, that the
Earth is the Lords, and the Fullness thereof; and that Covetousness has been
the cause of Propriety, and of all those engrossings of Land and Money, which
most are involved in; and that Christ came to destroy this Work of the Devil,
by his Doctrine and Pattern, who had all things in common with his Disciples,
even as the Primitive Christians one with another, which was a renewing of the
Law of Love, by which we were, and still are obliged to love our Neighbors as
our selves, and to do Gods Will on Earth as it is done in Heaven, where the
holy Angels and glorified Saints inherit their eternal Substance in common: For
he that overcomes Rev. 21.7.
shall inherit all things. Here likewise we die to, and forsake earthly
Relations, as part of that we call Ours: And though we are not to destroy
natural Affection, nor to neglect the performing1 forming of any due Obligation
laid upon us by the Law of Nature, Luke 14.27.
as it accords with the Will and, Justice of God; yet we are to die to all such
Propriety of Affection, as flows from corrupt Nature, and hinders the impartial
Communication of our Love to every one, according to the perfect Example of our
Heavenly Father, who takes in no fleshly Respects, in the giving forth of his
Love to his Creatures, which is our Pattern to imitate; for we are to be
perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect. Here those that have Wives, are as
though they had none, returning from Idolizing, and desiring the Woman of the
World, to the Virgin Sophia, who is the unspotted Mirror of the eternal World,
the first and chief Spouse of Christ, Rev. 21.2. And they that are unmarried
follow the Example of Christ, who lived and died in Virginity, as he was born
of a Virgin; and this they do for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, according to
that precept, Mat. 19.12. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it;
where Christ speaks concerning the abstaining from Marriage, and of those that
have made themeselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven: Whence it is clear,
that the dying to, and crucifying of that Root, whence the enjoyment of that
State comes, is to such a real mean to the growth and increase of Gods Kingdom
in the Soul, which is to be presented as a Chaste Virgin to Christ, 2 Cor.
11.2. And Paul, 1 Cor. 7.31, 32, 33, 34, 25. prefers the Virgins State far
before the Married; and therefore Verse 7. says, I would that all Men were as
I am: Which certainly he spoke according to true Light, found Judgment, and
great Experience in the Work and Progress of Regeneration.

But in a word, in this State before described, we come to see, that we our
selves are not our Own, but the Lords, and that we are to consecrate our
Bodies, Souls, and Spirits to him, and to resign up all we call ours to him,
whose is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever. And truly our
gradual incorporation into the Body of Christ, with the Enjoyment of new
Relations and Treasures, which are Spiritual and Eternal, make it the more
easy to die to, and forsake all earthly Things; which being of a lower Nature,
show their Rise by their Fall; for being of the Earth, they are earthly and
return to Earth, as utterly 1 Cor. 15.50.
incapable t^ enter with us into the Kingdom of Love. As we then leave the
Spirit of the World, they leave us; and so we arrive to a good degree of
Conquest and Victory over that Rev. 13.16, 17.
Beast, which rules the whole World, which gives the Soul occasion thus to
express its self in praise. Though I hint at the mystical Sense of the Beast in
Rev. 13. yet I deny not the Historical, as it has been truly applied to a
Succession of Persons in the signally lapsed or Antichristian Church.


Blessed be that Power, by which the Beast
Is made to serve, and we releast
From that base servile Drudgery,
Which some mistake for Liberty.
Sad Liberty! that chains poor Souls to Dust,
And soils immortal Things with mortal Rust.
CHAP. VIII.
THe Soul having arrived so far in the Circumcision of the Heart from the Body
of Flesh, and in the Renovation of the Spiritual Image, cannot but have
attained a good step in the Command over Imagination, especially in the death
of it to Complacency in any corrupt fleshly Object, which now becomes too gross
for the renewed mind to regard. But yet we shall find the Tempter working much
upon Imagination, sometimes taking advantage of the strong Influences of the
external Heavens; and if we are so strong as to reject Thoughts, which tempt to
speculative Delight in Objects, which our corrupt Nature formerly embraced, but
now (being changed) abhors; we shall find the Evil One drawing us to close
with, and entertain thoughts not evil in themselves, yet very evil to us,
because they present and feed the Soul with unprofitable Pictures, which should
be alone entertained with the sweet Meditation of Christ's Love, and the way to
be completed in it. And I know many are exceedingly troubled with the working
of their Imaginations on inconsiderable trifling Objects, when as they dare not
entertain any Thoughts grossly evil; and where this State is grown into a long
habit, it will be difficult to come out of it, though a Soul be very sensible
of the Vanity of it, and long to be freed from it, as finding the Imagination
in these workings to be like the Witch of Endor, raising up the Old Prophet
Samuel, or the Inward Man from the sleep of Silence, and innocent Stilness, to
be disquieted with vain Earthly things, 1 Samuel 28.15. In this case therefore,
it concerns the Soul to stand continually upon its Watch, lest it be sometimes
snatched away unawares, and engaged in Vanity, before it sees where it is. Here
the continual Exercise of the Cross is very necessary, that by it we may 2 Cor.
10.5.
cast down imaginations, and lead Captive every thought into the Obedience of
Christ: so that the chief work now, is the reducing this moveable Sea into
Subjection to the illuminated Understanding: therefore the Soul prays and
strives continually against the Power of Imagination and Activity of Thoughts,
which hinder the silent actings of the Intellect upon Eternity, and
supernatural Truths. And here Faith and Perseverance are very needful: We need
Faith to believe that by the Power and strength of Christ we may overcome these
Imaginations; and Perseverance, that we may not faint in the Way, and give off
the constant Exercise of the Cross in rejecting, beating down, and ceasing from
these Motions of the imaginary faculty, till we come to be conquerors, and to
Command them; which is possible through Christ, who is come into our World, to
destroy the Works of the Devil, and to rule till he has put all his Enemies
under his Feet, of which these idle Thoughts are a part. And as the Soul here
uses the Power it has received from Christ in checking, rejecting, and beating
down all idle thoughts, as a means to overcome them; so likewise it is often
Exercising of its Understanding upon the Eternal Love and free Grace of God,
and in considering the mystery of that Phil. 3.20.
Paradisical World, in which the Angels and Spirits of the just are: It much
also reflects upon the Presence of its Savior who has promised to be with us
to the Mat. 28.20.
end of the World, filling Ephesians. 4.10.
all things in his Divine Nature, for he continually stands at the Door and
knocks, so that the Soul waits every moment for the fulfilling of that Promise
of his coming into it, and supping with it, Rev. 3.20. And this constant
attending upon God with the Eye of the Understanding, proves a very effectual
mean to the destroying of those Imaginations which come to Entangle the Soul in
unprofitable diversions. In this practice the Understanding gets such power
over the Imaginations, that it enjoys almost a continual sight or Heb. 11.27.
apprehension of God's Presence, and sees beyond the working of Imagination, by
the Ephesians. 1.18.
Eye of the Understanding enlightened, and by little and little attains that
strength, that although we should have necessary occasion to take up our
thoughts in some external Employment, yet the Understanding pierces thorough
it, and in the very time of exercising its reason on that particular, it has
strong and clear Apprehensions of the Presence of God, and the Spiritual World:
which clearly shows that Intellection, or the true acting of the Understanding,
is somewhat beyond Reason, which is not able to do two things at once, and Act
upon several Objects, at the same instant. And this constant Apprehension or
Sense of the divine Presence is without any Fantasm, it being in that Moment
when the Phantasms are employed upon another Object, and they having somewhat
of materiality, cannot afford that spiritual Sight and Apprehension such a Soul
has constantly of God, which is without Act. 17.29.
figure, color, or similitude; yet I must confess the usual Contemplations of
the Soul (in this state) upon spiritual Objects, whether of Paradise, Angels,
supernatural Truths, and Scripture Verities, are not without the use of
Phantasms, which being ordered by Divine Light and Wisdom do in some measure
(according to their nature) express spiritual Truth. Though I confess this is
far below the true Intellection of the Understanding, informed with the
presence of Divine Light, in regard these Phantasms, being generally drawn from
Corporeal Objects, cannot reach the essence of a Spirit. And truly here the
Soul plainly discovers its fall from the Divine Mind, Genesis 1.27.
Image, and Light in which it saw intuitively, and could give Gen 2.19.20.
Names according to the natures of things into the imaginary Eccles. 7.29.
Spirit, which belongs to this World, and is too gross a Glass to express truly
and essentially, Spiritual Eternal Objects. And here it appears how easily
Man's Reason (being the apt and methodical ordering of his Phantasms) may 1.
Cor. 2.14.
misguide the Understanding in Spiritual things, as in Comments upon
Scriptures, which were inspired by the Holy Ghost, and wrote by Revelation, and
so require the Joh. 14.26.
help of that same Spirit, to elevate the Understanding above Imagination, in
the true Interpretation of them, especially in things which are out of the Road
of those Moral V^^ities, which the light of Nature impresseth upon Men's
Consciences, to steer them in their Lives and Conversations.

Then let us pray for that true Light,
Which gives a true and constant Sight
Of God, Christ, Angels, who do lie
Much deeper than lapsed Reasons Eye;
Which in the Glass of Fantasy,
A lively Picture may espy,
But not the Essence of true Verity.
CHAP. IX.
THe Soul having arrived so far, as to enjoy almost a continual apprehension of
the Presence of God and Angels, finds its self much freed from those vain
thoughts, which in former Dispensations were very troublesome: But being
Conqueror over these, it must take heed lest the new Objects of Heaven,
Angels, and spiritual Gifts, set the Imagination too much a work, in
representing their Excellencies, and picturing forth such a State of the Soul
enriched with them, which may yield too much imaginary Delight, and draw the
Spirit into the admiration of fine pleasant Isaiah 2.16.
Pictures instead of the true Substance. Therefore we are strictly to watch
over the Fantasy, which may easily err in this particular, and not without
great prejudices following upon it; for first, by such working of Imagination,
we come to slacken the Exercise of the Cross, both upon Imagination its self,
(which 2 Cor. 10.5.
is continually to be restrained, and as much as is possible reduced unto
subjection, to the illuminated Understanding) and also upon the Relics of the
Old Man in any other Faculty, which are always to be slain in their first
Buddings; and therefore to be strictly eyed, which cannot be, whilst
Imagination is so busy in its motions.

The second is, that Complacency which the Soul may take, by representing its
self adorned with, and enjoying the Gifts of Hearing, Seeing, Touching,
Tasting, and Smelling, in a spiritual Way, (with all the Beauty and Sweetness
of the Objects of those Faculties) both in its self so proviledged, and in the
Objects themselves; most of which being but Streams, and not the Fountain it
self, the Soul may be in danger of taking too much delight, and so of being
entangled in them.

The third inconvenience is, the obstructing that Still Silence of the Soul, in
which it Psalm. 40.10.
should be often wrapped up, as a mean to those extraordinary effusions of Light
and Power which God many times affords the Soul in its passive quiet waiting;
Whereas this labor of Imagination too much keeps the Soul in action, and so in
an unfitness for those Divine Impressions, which very seldom come down but into
a Spirit profoundly silent. Seeing then there may be so much danger in
indulging Imagination, even in these pure Objects, we shall find it very
requisite, often to cease from all Imagination, and to act no Thought upon any
thing, in the heights above, or the depths below; I say no Thought, Thoughts
being but Images, which reach not the Essence of spiritual Objects. But this
Practice excludes not that general, constant, intellectual sight and
apprehension of God, which the Soul (thus far arrived) enjoys: Therefore I
speak not here to those who have not attained a continual, habitual
apprehension of the Divine Presence; for if they should strive to cease from
their good Thoughts, they might fall into a kind of Stupidity, far worse. But I
here give Directions to those who having attained constant habitual Communion
with God, press after Perfection in their constant Progress, through all
Impediments; of which, this working of Imagination being one, we here give
experimental Directions to over come it: And certainly there is no better way
than the Annihilation of all Thoughts, and the retiring from the Fantasy into
the silent Rev. 1.10.
Mind, which more fits the Soul for Divine Irradiation, and spiritual Embraces;
for the more quiet we are, the less resistance we make against a supernatural
Impression, and the easier we perceive the Beginnings of Divine Attraction, and
so yield our selves to it. And truly, when the Soul has attained the Power to
throw its self (as often as it is meet) into the silent super imaginary State
(which must be attained by the habitual constant Practice of it) it will then
come to internal Rev. 4.2.
Openings, and intellectual Sights of the Invisible worlds, and many times
receive quickening Glances from the Eternity, with those strong infusions of
Love that bring the Soul many times near to a Rapture: And truly, the enjoyment
we have in this State fully recompenceth all that Self-denial, we pass through
to the attainment of it.

Here then the false Rev. 16, 13, and 19, 20.
Prophet (which is irregular Imagination) comes to be conquered, being
commanded by the inward Mind, that now often draws up the Soul into the
Paradisical World, Though I here allude to the false Prophet mentioned in the
Apocalypse, yet I exclude not the External Prophetic sense of this or any
other part of the Revelation, which is a Prophetic History of the Church to
the end of the World.
from the motion of Fantasy and Imagination.

And now the Soul does bid Adieu
To Phansies Glass, 'cause it is not true;
And to that Mirror turns its Eye
Where Things are viewed Essentially:
And there in silence waits that State to know,
To which all former Dispensations bow:
Wait on, blessed Soul! and know this Passive Life,
Will send thee into Oneness, from all strife.
CHAP. X
IMagination being now overcome, and the Animal Man mortified, the Soul cannot
but clearly discover its growth in the Image of God, and the Resurrection of
the Angelical Man, which now evidently perceives its self springing up in a new
Principle, above the Spirit of the 1 Cor. 2.12.
World, and its mixed Laws: And here we come to own and receive new Relations,
contracted by our Progress in the New Birth, and our tendency from the Spirit
of the World toward Eternity. And as through the Act of Generation we came to
be invested with Earthly Relations, so by the Work of Regeneration we come to
possess those that are Spiritual. Here we come to honor God, as our Father in
the Spirit, (not excluding any other of his beloved Ones, who have been
instrumental to beget us into the Divine Image and Wisdom,) or Jerusalem above,
as our true Gal. 4.26.
Mother: And so all other Saints who have been begotten by the same Power into
the same Nature, become our true Brothers and Sisters; all standing upon one
Root, drawing one nourishment, and knit together by Ephesians. 4.4.
one Spirit, which is the Instructor, Leader and Comforter of all. But we shall
here find a nearer Union and Communion amongst those who have been by one
particular Instrument begotten into the Life of Christ, having a peculiar Vein
of Spiritual Enjoyment running through them; which others, who received not
that particular Tincture, do not partake of. And had we lived in the Apostles
times, we should have seen this among the Primitive Christians; for certainly
they that were begotten by Paul, had a particular endearment to him, and to one
another; and so it may be said of those that were converted by Apollo, Cephas,
and others: Which is clear by that Scripture 1 Cor. 1, 12. Ev^ry one of you
says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas: And though Paul blames
them here for Contention, Emulation and Irregularity in their particular
Affections, to their Spiritual Fathers, yet not for a peculiar ownment of those
who instrumentally converted them, for that is according to the Law of pure
Justice, seeing he that Converts a Sinner, saves a Soul from Death, Iam. 5.20.
and covers a Multitude of Sins. And Paul himself in some places speaks of
himself, as a Spiritual Father, requiring of those he had begotten into the
Faith, due Respect, Obedience and Love. But amongst those who are thus
peculiarly united, we shall see some more closely knit in Spiritual agreement
than others, and essensed into one another Spirits; as may appear by that
great Union which Christ had with John, and that particular Affection he bare
toward him, which was the reason why John was called (by way of eminency and
distinction from the rest) The Disciple whom Jesus Loved. Now when we come to
experience this, we shall know the meaning of that Scripture, where Bone is
said to come Ezekiel. 37.7.
to His Bone: For as some Bones are locked one in another, and some Members
grow more immediately one out of another, though all make up but one Organical
Body: so some Spirits are nearer united in Christ's body then others, and stand
closer joynted, and more intrinsecally compacted, but all make up but one
spiritual and mystical Body. And this we shall find to flow from the Harmony
and agreement of Spirits and Natures, as they were signatured in the first
moment of Existency: For Grace and the work of Regeneration do not destroy Our
Natural signatures, only rectify them by that Heavenly Principle which
reduces all our Spirits into the highest perfection they are capable of, by
their primary Model and Frame. Hence it appears that they are more Truly
Brethren (even according to Natural Nature,) who thus agree, and correspond
their Essences, then they that are ordinarily called so, who are many times
very contrary signatur'd: And the reason of this assertion is in that when our
Natures come to their perfect rectitude, and restoration by Union with God;
this secret propension and harmonious closing with those that are
like-essenced, remains; whereas from mere natural Relation, there nothing
continues; though in those who are related, there may be this agreement too:
But mere Relation is not the cause of it, but that secret Law of influence
which God has established to signature some one way, some another; some in
much agreement and proportion; others more differing, though all representing
something of that variety which is wrapped up in the Unity of the Eternal Nature.
I could not but give an hint of this, because It may open some things
concerning Relations, which may lie dark to those who know not the deepest
ground and Root of them. But I shall proceed to the further opening of those
Enjoyments, which flow from Union with new Relations, which come now to be very
dear, because the ground of their Relation is so pure and good, being Ioh. 1.13.
not of Man, or the Will of Man, but of God. Here we shall experience the happy
effects of our pure Union, which produces that Divine Love, that none can know,
but those that enjoy it. But this will be strongest, where there is most
Harmony and Agreement in Spirits and Natures; because the Eternal Tincture
works upon, and through every thing occording to its Nature and Capacity: Hence
we come to enjoy more from some, than others; and some from us receive more
than others: But that Brotherly-love and friendship, which now come to be
renewed in Spirit, far transcend any enjoyments merely Natural: And whatsoever
we parted with, in dying to all Earthly affection and its Objects, we regain in
the Resurrection of our Spirits, in this pure Love, which is not Affection but
something above it, not consisting in sudden out-flowings and eruptions, but in
a constant sweet inclination, and secret propension of the Spirit, to those
which are one with it in the pure Life: And this good-willingness is so great,
that from it the Soul could give 1 John 3.16.
its Life (or if there were any Gal. 4.15.
thing dearer than Life) for its Brother; and choose Sufferings, to free others
from them: In this state there will be a sympathizing in Joy and Sorrow; and
where the Union is eminently great, there may be some knowledge of each others
Conditions, at a Col. 2.5.
distance, which comes from their being essenced in each others Spirits and
Tinctures, which is the cause of this invisible Sympathy: And they that are in
this near Union, feel a mutual in-dwelling in the pure Tincture and Life 2 Cor.
3.2.
of each other; and so, the further we come out of the animal Nature, the more
universal we are, and nearer both to Heaven, and to one another in the
Internal; and the sitter Instrumentally to convey the pure streams of the
Heavenly Life to each other, which no external distance can hinder: For the
Divine Tincture (being such a spiritual Virtue, as Christ imprinted into the
Heart of the Disciples, with whom he talked after his Resurrection, making
their hearts to burn within them, is able to pierce through all distance, and
reach those that are far absent; because it is not Corporeal, nor Subject to
the Laws of place or time.

Now this is known to some by Experience, who in absence enjoy such influences
of Spirit, and secret Insinuations of Spiritual Virtue from one another, that
they cannot but value this Spiritual Communion, above all Enjoyments in the
World; which compared to it, seem but like the basest Metal to the purest Gold.

Then quit that wretched state, Immortal Soul,
Where poisoned Ghosts in flesh together roll;
And take thy flight into that Mount of Love,
Where Newborn Spirits in bright Bodies move,
And sport themselves in that Eternal Joy,
Which totally excludes Lusts base alloy.
Lust's left below for those that flesh desire;
Love dwells on High, Love fills the Heavenly Quire.
CHAP. XI.
THE Love which in this Spiritual Union, (before described) we come to enjoy,
is unexpressibly refreshing, proving to be sweeter than the Honey or the Honey
Comb, and continually raises the Soul to the true Fountain of it, who being
the true cause of all pure Union, both preserves and increases it: But the
Soul now having a View, and Experience of the Beauty and Sweetness of the
Spirits of other Christians, and of the Excellency of that Love which may be
enjoyed through them may (if it be not prevented by much self-denial and
Watchfulness) suffer very much Selfishness to spring up in a new Dress; for
here may arise Spiritual Covetousness, or a desire of engrossing Spirits to
ones self. Here Spiritual Pride may also discover it self in desiring much
esteem of such: Envy likewise may start up against those we fear may draw them
from us, or enjoy more Love from them than our selves: and so all other Selfish
Affections may here crowd in, in a refined dress: And as these Spiritual Evils
may flow from the sight of the Excellency and suitableness of the Spirits of
other Christians; so also they may break in upon us from large and Eminent
Gifts of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 12.7. For we seeing the Amiableness and Worth of
these may come immoderately to desire them; may fear to have them Eclipsed; may
reflect too much upon Ezekiel. 16.15.
our selves in the enjoying of them; may look too much after Eminency in the
use of them; and (in a word) may take too much Complacency in the pleasant
fruition of them; even to an hindrance of our looking up to the Fountain, as
all in all: If then the Soul be here entangled (as it is hard totally to
escape) it must fly to the Gal. 6.14.
Cross, and lay the Ax to the Root of the Tree of Self, that so it may be hewn
down and cast into the Fire: And it must pray for the Sword of Power, to
circumcise and cut off this refined Selfishness, as it did the grosser part:
And to take away this Propriety, and Self-ownment of all Spirits, Gifts and
Graces. Here we must come to offer up the very Good it self, (as Genesis 22.2.
Abraham did Isaac) to God the Fountain and Bestower. Here we must dye to the
Coveting of any Spirit, Grace, Vision, Revelation, Rapture, or sensible
Comfort. Here we must come to be nothing in all these; to enjoy them as though
we enjoyed them not, and not to reflect upon our selves on any account; to
rejoice to see others 1 Cor. 12.25, 26.
flourish in the Riches of those; and to have far more Light, Wisdom, Comfort
and Honor, than our selves; to be willing when we are rich in Gifts (and
esteem of the Saints) Phil. 3.8.
to part with them, if God so please, and to hang so loose from all things
below God, as that nothing may the least hinder our Conformity to the Death of
Christ, or our rising again in the pure Life of Love and Innocence. And truly
when we have known the Glory of those Spiritual Objects, and have been rich in
possessing them, we may find it exceeding difficult wholly to give up, and to
own no Propriety of Will in them, becoming nothing in the greatest Union of
Spirits, fruition of Gifts and Spiritual Honor; keeping a sweet innocent
Spirit free from Selfishness in all these. Now the Reason of the difficulty in
being wholly freed from Self here, is the Excellency of the Objects, and the
sweetness of their Enjoyments: For their Nature and Effects being very suitable
to the Soul, they have the stronger Influence upon it, to close with them in
too much delight and adherency: Whence it may be more difficult, totally to
give them up, than it was to leave outward gross things, which could not be so
pleasing to the nature of the Soul: And though some (who think they have passed
far in the New Birth) never experienced this; and may therefore look upon it as
a thing not much to be regarded, yet let all such know that the Reason may be
in that they never yet passed clear out of the Spirit of the World; nor
overcame their Animal Nature by a Complete Circumcision and Renunciation; and
so were not capable to receive any extraordinary Enjoyments of Visions,
Revelations, In-speakings, Prophesies, Unions of Spirits; and being not come
into the Inward Wilderness, where the Soul is fitted for such things, and where
these Spiritual Temptations arise to try it: Whereas being in the outward
Sensitive (Spirit) and detained in Flesh and Blood, as Israel in Egypt, the
inward spiritual Faculties of Sensation lie locked up and can have no knowledge
of those Spiritual Operations and Enjoyments: But they that are come so far in
the Work of the New Birth, as to be acquainted with, and to live to these
things, must of necessity dye to them, and come to be 2 Cor. 6.10.
Nothing in them, giving up all to God, and forsaking the Propriety of their
own Wills. Now this is a parting with our own Lives, and the giving up the
Ghost of refined selfishness, which strikes at the Root of Sin and Evil, and
brings us to the Death of the Cross, in Conformity to the Example of our
Savior's Progress, who was Crucified betwixt two Thieves, One of which was
lost, though the other went with him into Paradise, which we in the Mystery
likewise fulfill; for our Wills are Crucified betwixt the outward Animal Man,
and the Inward Old Man, or sinful Nature; The first of which in the
Resurrection, shall be received (after Purification) into Paradise; but the
last, must be destroyed and swallowed up into the fire of Wrath.

The Soul which on the Cross thus freely dies,
Becomes to God a pleasing Sacrifice,
Through that Eternal Spirit, and that Blood,
Which by mere Reason are not understood;
Nor by those Rabbis, who Divines would be,
Though they know not the true Divinity.
CHAP. XII.
AFter this death upon the Mystical Cross, the Soul in Conformity to Christ's
progress, passes through a state Analogous to that of Christ's descent into
Hell, being that Principle which stands as a smoking Furnace before the
Entrance of Paradise, into which none can pass, but those that are dead with
Christ, and washed from the Pollutions of flesh and Spirit by the Blood of the
Lamb: For whosoever retain the spots of Guilt will be kept back by Gods Wrath,
which in this principle, burns like fire, Isa. 30.33. This also is spread (at
least potentially as to its Root) through the whole World, yet invisible to the
outward Eye. In this the Dragon and all Evil Angels and Spirits are, for Jud.
Epist. ver. 6. The Lord reserves the fallen Angels in everlasting Chains under
Darkness, or as 2 Pet. 2.4. has cast them into Hell, and delivered them into
Chains of Darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment. Now though the fallen Angels
are every where tempting the Saints, yet they are always in the Chains of this
invisible Darkness, which could not be if this were not every where in this
World. Whence, Ephesians. 6.12. it is called, the Darkness of this World: of which
the chief Devils are the (...) or Wordly Rulers. And although evil Spirits
receive some Refreshment by mixing with the Souls of Men, which are clothed
with the Animal sensitive Nature, and live in the Spirit of the World! yet they
are still in Chains under this Darkness, as in their proper Center. And
although it is said, Luke 8.31. That the Devils, whose name was Legion,
besought Christ, (after they were cast out of the Man) that he would not
command them to go out into the Deep, as though the Deep or bottomless Pit, had
been at a distance from them: Yet the meaning is, that they might not wholly go
out of the Spirit of the World, and out of Union with it, deeper into the
Center of Darkness and Wrath; for in Union either with Men or Beasts, who live
in the Spirit of the World, they receive some mitigation of their Torment,
which they have not, when they are naked and uncloathed in the Abyss: Therefore
their going into the Abyss from union with the Spirits of Men or Beasts, is not
as we depart from one Room into another (which are disjoined by outward
distance) but a sinking deeper from the Circumference toward the Center, from
the outward to the inward, which we call the Dark World, and Hell; which
(according to the sight and experience of some deep mystical Men) is made up of
Spiritual Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, not united and harmonized in sweet
proportion, for then they would be Paradise; but as in discord and
disproportion working in contrary Motions, through the absence of that pure
Balsamical Oil, which flowing from the heart of God, makes Paradise so
delightful. Now as all things in this visible World are compounded of these
three Material principles, Sulphur, Mercury and Salt, so are the Invisible
Worlds, in their spiritual nature, from whence the Visible World proceeded, and
in which it is erected; for ( Heb. 7.3.) The things which are seen were made
((...)) not of things that do appear, but consequently out of things invisible,
as the Vulgar Latin has it, ut ex invisibilibus visibilia fierent, and to the
same sense is the Syriack Versions. But to proceed, the dark World ( Rev. 9.2.)
is called the Abyss or Bottomless Pit; and whosoever go down into this Sea, see
Gods Wonders in the Deep, Psalm. 107.24. for there is the great Leviathan, the
crooked Serpent, the Dragon, Isa. 27.1. Out of whose mouth Job. 41.19, 20, 21.)
go burning Lamps, and sparks of fire leap out: (a) I deny not but some great
Sea Monster is (in the Letter) here described, but that the Devils is here also
alluded to, and intended, is not only my judgment, but of many of the Ancients,
as appears clear by ver. 34. which is a Key to the Rest.
Out of his Nostrills goes Smoke, as out of a seething Cauldron: His breath
kindles Coals, and a flame goes out of his Mouth, v. 31. He makes the Deep
to boil like a Pot of Ointment. 34. He beholds all high things: He is a King
over all the Children of Pride, which are the Principalities, Powers and
spiritual Wickednesses of this Dark World; Many of which in their Dark Bodies
bear the forms of terrible Beasts, Rev. 9.3.17. Into this Region, Christ
descended after his giving up of the Ghost upon the Cross; for this is a
distinct Article of the Ancient Creed and agrees with Acts 2.27. Thou will not
leave my Soul in Hell, which was Prophetically spoken by the Psalmist, of
Christ's descending into Hell, and of his Redemption from it; and Ephesians. 4.9.
it is said, that before he ascended, he descended into the lower parts of the
Earth, which cannot be meant of his outward Body, because that lay in, or near
the superficies of the Earth: or as in Mat. 12.40. into the Heart of the Earth:
Where there is a parallel made betwixt Jonas and Christ, the Type, and the
Antitype, which cannot well correspond except Christ descended into the Sphere
of the inward Spiritual Leviathan, as Jonas into the belly of the outward: from
whence (in Type of Christ) he said, Jonah 2.2. Out of the Belly of Hell cried
I, and thou heardest my Voice. Now Hell or the Dark World, may be called the
heart of the Earth, 1. In allusion to that large Sphere or Lake of Fire, which
according to Des Carts and some learned Hermetick Philosophers, is seated in
and about the Center of the Earth.

2 dly. In that acording to the eternal Gradation of Beings and Principles, it
may be said to be within, in the middle or Center of it; the Earth and all
Terrestrial Matter being more outward, in the Circumference. And though Hell is
called (...) ( Mat. 8.12.) The utter or more outward darkness, yet that is
spoken in relation to Paradise, and the Eternal World, not in reference to the
Earth and this World. Now Christ having passed through this Principle into
Paradise, draws us all after him, according to that Promise; When I am lifted
up on the Cross, I will draw all Men unto me. Now this is no other way, than
that he went through himself; for there is but one way into everlasting Life,
and the Kingdom of Glory; and that very narrow too, according to Christ's words,
Strait is the Gate and narrow, or afflicted, is the way that leads into Life,
(...). Mat. 7.14.
and few there be that find it: Even they only who deny themselves and take up
their Crosses, and follow him, who is the Way, not only through this World, but
even through Death and Hell also; for, though in conformity to his pattern, we
come to be cast into Hell, which ( Mat. 13.50.) is called the Furnace of Fire,
(typed forth by Nebuchadnezzars fiery Furnace, into which the three Children
were cast:) yet the Son of God walks there with us, keeping us from that
Torment and Pain, which the damned undergo; and making us (with him) to triumph
over Principalities and Powers, and to conquer them by the Blood of the
everlasting Covenant; which quenching the fire of wrath, raises the Spirits of
the Obedient out of this dark grave, into the joys of Paradise. But we must
know that in our Progress we may many times be cast into Terror and Anguish;
Yea feel Hell awakened in us, and afterward be delivered by some influence of
Christ's Spirit, and infusions of his Love, and yet be short of this
Resurrection, and of passing through Hell as Conquerors, which can never be
till we descend thither without Guilt, in Child-like Innocence, with the Candle
of the Lord in our hands, which is the Pillar of Fire which alone can lead us
through this Night, into the Day of Paradise. To which State whoever attain,
cannot but sing thus, in the joy of their Spirits.

Ye Morning Stars, ye Sons of Light,
Rejoice with Jubilation:
As Job. 38.7.
once ye did when that first Night
Was scattered by Creation.
Behold the Prince of Night is thrown
Into his proper Place:
And he that cast the Dragon down,
Has Ezekiel. 37.12, 13.
raised me by his Grace.
And now I stand above that Grave,
Where Wrath entombed is;
And wait, that rich Crown to receive,
Which will be perfect Bliss.
CHAP. XIII.
BY this time the Soul experienceth the happy state of being freed from the
principle of Selfness, in returning to God from the Spirit of the World, and
sees the real progress it has made from the Outward through the Inward Dark
World, into the Internal Paradise; where Adam lived before his Fall, and where
Christ conversed, betwixt the time of his Resurrection and Ascension. In this
spiritual Region the Curse is not manifest, there being a perpetual Spring.
Here are the Idea's of all visible bodies, in much Beauty and appearing,
luster. Here are those bright Clouds which overshadowed Christ on the Mount,
and when he was received up into Heaven; in which he will descend Rev. 1.7.
when he comes again to judge the Earth. Now the Soul having attained to the
State of this Angelical Garden, knows what it is to turn and become as a 1 Pet.
2.2.
Child, and to attain a secret and quiet Life of Innocence and pure Love, free
from those Passions and Evil Affections it had formerly groaned under. And here
it experienceth what it is to be born of Joh. 3.5.
Water and the Spirit, as a necessary qualification to do the will of God: And
sees its Conception in the Womb of Wisdom (which is our new Mother) who here
distills the Milk of the Eternal Word, (from the Eternal World) to feed and
nourish the Soul: whither it now Travels as fixing its sight upon that pure
River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal, Rev. 22 1.
proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. But now likewise the
Soul lives the life of Spiritual Vegitation, and grows like a Willow by the
WaterCourses, or Hos. 14.5.
a Lilly in the Garden of the Lord, being continually refreshed with the Dews
of the Eternal Heavens, and quickened by the Beams of the Sun of Righteousness,
and cherished with the enlivening gales of the Holy Spirit. All that are in
this state are like the harmless flowers in a fruitful Garden, springing from
the same ground, yet differing in Color, Virtue, Smell, and growth, according
to their several Natures, and times of Planting; yet all serving to express the
Power, Love, and Wisdom of their Creator, without any Strife or Contention for
Eminency Place or Esteem, being all satisfied with what God affords them, and
their different Capacities fit them for. O what a sweet Harmony is here! What a
beautiful consent in expressing the goodness of the great Creator of all
things? How far are Spirits here from envying the different Beauties and
Ornaments one of another? How sweetly do they incline to mutual love and
agreement? as being the Branches of one pure Root, as enjoying the same kind of
nourishment, and receiving Life from the same 1 Cor. 12.13.
quickening Spirit? How is all Wrath and Contention here forgot? How amiable do
Spirits now begin to grow in the Eyes of Christ, by their innocent
Childishness? And truly in this dispensation, we come to be clothed with
humility, wrapped up in meekness; expressing nothing but the blessed Effects of
Heaven upon Earth; here we are full of Love-meltings toward Christ, who
baptiseth us in the soft Water of Spiritual Meekness; which overspreads the
Soul, not suffering any of the fire of Passion to spring up. In this state the
Soul is very watchful over every motion, in the outward and inward Man, fearing
to step down again into Nature, where before it had so much Trouble and Heb. 12
15.
Bitterness; whereas now it is in a sweet pleasant Rest, lying upon the Bed of
Innocence, solacing its self in the sweet Cant. 2.6.
Embraces of its Savior, who now begins to show himself very clearly, and to
afford almost continual Refreshments: In a word, this is a life of Stilness,
silence, and Spiritual Simplicity; in which the Soul turning its Eyes from
Nature, looks directly forward to Heb. 12*2.
Eternity; and strongly breaths after its arrival there. And here we come to
know the Work of the fifth day in our New Creation, answering the fifth of
those seven Spirits, which are the Eyes of the Lamb of God, Rev. 5.6.

If Harmony does in this Fifth arise,
What will it be, when thou do Sabbatize,
In that last day, where all variety
Concenters in a perfect Unity!
Then stand thou fast, poor Soul, and keep thy ground,
Till with Eternal Love thou shall be Crowned.
Take heed of Lust which Genesis 3.7, 23.
unlocked Adams Eyes,
And Cast him to the Earth from Paradise.
CHAP. XIV.
WHen the Soul is arrived to this, Baptism of Meekness and innocent Love, and
has experienced the comfortable distillations of the Heavenly dew to its very
great profit and growth, it comes to be much confirmed and established in this
principle, and finds the effects of its present station to be very blessed, in
comparison of what it was* when it stood in the fire of awakened Nature. And
now seems as one that has passed thorough a hot fiery Region into a moderate
cool Air, where gentle gales of Wind breath upon it, and refreshing dues
entertain it, and cooling Psalm. 46 4.
waters are afforded to take away the sense of Thirst. And now it perceives the
happiness of those who have made their way by death thorough irregular and
discording Nature, into that Spiritual state where there is Joy, Peace, Heb.
4.3.
Rest and Harmony. This condition then brings with it a greater Death Gal. 6.14.
to the World and all Worldly things, a total disrelishing of all things
corrupt and impure though more refined, and so as it is deadned to the World
and Selfishness, it 1 Pet. 4.2.
lives the more to God and all Goodness, and finds its Will more strongly drawn
to Christ and Eternity. And this dispensation into which the Soul now enters,
is a state of much 1 John 8 3.14.
life and Quickening, and of much pleasing Enjoyment from the Objects of the
internal Senses renewed and restored by the Spirit of God; for here the Heb. 5.
internal Faculties of Spiritual Sensation are more opened, and give a greater
enjoyment of the first Angelical 1 John 1.1.
Life which was in Paradise: And we attain the Use and Restoration of these
Faculties, through our growth in Regeneration, and as a privilege purchased
for us by Christ: So that all Saints shall partake of them, either Here or in
Heaven, according as their Seize are. In this state our Internal 2 Kin.
6.17.
Eye is more unlocked to behold the Paradisical. World with those Luminous
Objects and Inhabitants that are in it: Here we see such bright Clouds as the
Disciples ( Math. 17.5.) saw on the Mount and at Christ's Ascension when he was
taken up into Heaven ( Acts 1.9.) In which he will likewise descend again Math.
24.30. Here also we see the Angels of God ascending and descending, as Jacob at
Bethell, Genesis 28.12. In this state also our inward Ear is sweetly entertained
with Angelical Harmony, hearing the sweet Rev. 14.2.
Harpers upon Mount Sion, and the Voices of those that sing the Song of Moses
and the Lamb, and of those that cry Hallelujah! Hallelujah! Rev. 19.1, 3, 4, 6.
with many other voices out of the Eternal World, Rev. 4.1. Moreover our
internal Feeling is almost continually entertained with the strong Contactions
of the 1 John 1.1.
Word of Life, which sometimes discover themselves by thrilling Motions
throughout the whole Man; but most commonly by strong Infusions of the pure
burning tincture of Jesus ( Luke 24.32.) into the Heart. In this state likewise
we often Smell the hot perfumes Psalm. 45.8.
of Paradise, and are pierced through with most delightful Odours, which infuse
themselves into the Tincture of the heart* and create Delight, and give a plain
feeling and sense of the presence of Paradise, and that invisible light World
where there is no Curse nor Corruption. And in a word, here we feed upon the
Heavenly Manna, Angels food, which is living bread, that quickens, enlivens,
and corroborates the Soul; and we often taste very sweet Dews diffusing
themselves with much pleasure into that internal Sense of taste, which lies
within the Organ of the Tongue. Thus all the Spiritual Faculties of Sensation
are in this dispensation more opened, and more freely entertained with their
peculiar Objects. But yet we are not to rest in these Enjoyments, nor to go to
build Tabernacles with them, but to look forward and to press after perfect
Union with the Divine Nature in the Eternal World, where is our true Sabbath of
Rest, in the Vision of God, and perfect fruition of his Love for ever, 1 These.
4.17. Heb. 4.9.

The Pleasures which in this state we enjoy,
Are only known to those that do Obey;
For Souls that do Imbibe sins poison here,
Have neither Eyes to see nor Ears to hear
Those sacred Objects of Divine Sensation,
Which are the Pleasures of the new Creation:
Man's lapsed Sense and Reason know them not,
They are the Little Childrens Sacred Lot.
CHAP. XV.
BY this time the Soul begins to draw near the Eternal World, in its fixed
station and habitual Enjoyment, lying under the showers of Love, which descend
from the heart of God and the bosom of Sophia: Here the blessed Tincture of
Jesus coming so powerfully, as though it streamed from his glorified Humanity,
flows into the Soul like a River of Oil mixed with fire, which affords that
unutterable Delight, which cannot be conceived by those that know it not
experimentally. Here Christ says, Drink* yea, drink abundantly, O beloved, and
filts large Cups of Love, Heavenly Love to power into the Soul; so that it
sometimes comes to be Cant. 2.5.
sick of Love, not knowing how to carry its self through the abundant showers
that fall upon it* For Christ many times touches the Soul with a piercing Beam
of Love, which by this, is suddenly drawn to a quick return; and this gives
freer passage for a new Impression, which more exciting the Powers of the Soul
to a new Embrace, opens the way more for the King of Glory to enter with that
power and unutterable force of Divine Love, that the Soul becomes filled,
swallowed up, and transported into a kind of Rapture, not being able to express
those Pleasures, Gusts, Embraces, Love-Extasies, which then are piercing
thorough it; nor sufficient Praises and Hallelujahs to the great King of
Saints, who bestows such Royal tokens of Love upon it. And as in this state
there is such holy Commerce in pure Love betwixt God and the Soul, so there is
betwixt the Soul and Psalm. 16.3.
other Saints, who cannot but wonderfully own and love one another, and delight
in that likeness of God, which they see in each other, and bless him for those
living Powers of Grace and Love that are communicated in the Worship of God, by
which they exceedingly refresh each others Spirits. (Now this mutual love
chiefly flows from a Ioh. 17.21.
sight and sense of Oneness, which exceedingly enforces this great closing and
out-slowing of Spirit to delight, comfort, and refresh one another. And here is
that strength of Love that we could give our 2 Cor. 12.15.
lives for the Brethren, and endure much Affliction to flee them from
sufferings: Here we bear one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Royal Law of
Love; for we can keep nothing as our own, but what we heartily communicate and
make our Brethren partakers of, because they are part of our selves. Here we
come to practice that heavenly Law, of loving our Neighbors as our Selves, and
of doing Gods Will on Earth as it is done in Heaven; for which end Man and the
visible World were brought forth. For the breaking forth of sin and wrath, was
not according to Gods most pure and holy Will, which is good, and tends to
Salvation and Blessing, and the keeping of his Creatures in that primitive
Harmony, in which they came out of Gods hands as fitted to glorify him through
mutual Love, and regular Obedience. And this is the end of Christ's Coming into
the World of Man's Nature, even to restore it from the Discord of Sin and Wrath,
to the Harmony of pure Love and Righteousness; therefore it is a happy state to
have attained this Habit of Love before described, which will not terminate
within the Sphere of our Neighbors and Brethren, but in some measure flow out
to all; causing us to breath after, endeavor, and 1 Timothy 2.1.
pray for their Change: for it is the Nature of true Love to communicate it
self and to delight in propagating its own heavenly Image, that so many may
come to partake of Bliss and Happiness through it: And in this Enjoyment, if we
find any that know and posses but little, yet thirst much after God, O how will
our hearts burn within us! How ready shall we be to employ our Talents for
their good, and to discover that Way which leads through Nature into the
Kingdom of the Love? What labor and pains could we take to be instrumental in
changing, and quickening them, and in bringing them through the Cross to our
own state of Happiness; so that this Dispensation abounds much in Love, both
to God and our Neighbor, fitting the Soul for Ascension into Eternity, there
to see and know with Satisfaction and Delight, those Wonders which the holy
Angels and glorified Saints are continually viewing with Joy and Admiration.

Blessed is that Soul which is arrived here,
Where quickening Love casts out dejecting Fear;
And gives that sweet Composure to the Mind,
That it lies passive to that Holy Wind,
Which blowing from the highest Paradise,
Invites the Soul to come and Sabbatise
In that bright day, where the Archangels sing
Sweet Hallelujahs to our Christ their King.
CHAP. XVI. Being the Conclusion to the Rest.
THE Soul being brought thus far in the Heart-Work by the Power of Jesus,
through the practice of the Cross, in Self-denial and Resignation, lives in
habitual springings up of the Love in the Center of it is Spirit, where the work
is near finished, the Will being constantly drawn toward the Heart of God in
the Chariot of Love. And in this State the Soul is completely fitted for
Ascension, and the opening of the Eternal World, which is part of the
Head-work; for in that the spiritual Eye is seated, which is capable to see and
know the wonders of Eternity. And though some in a rapture may be taken up into
that World long before the work in their Hearts, Wills, and Affections is
finished; yet such must afterward go through the work in Nature, of rectifying
all their Properties, and of bringing their Wills into Death, and pure
Resignation, that so they may be fitted for the Birth of the Love; whence its
clear that this State of Regeneration, attained in the Will through the Death,
is far more considerable, and nearer Perfection than the highest Rapture
without such a foregoing work; and the Ascension after this work of
Regeneration in the Heart, is more weighty, and more tending to Perfection,
than any Rapture of Transportation before, can be; because by such a Work, the
Will is wrought up into a constant Union with Christ, which by Ascension, is
more confirmed and established, the Heart through that, being more raised above
Col. 3.1.
all mortal corruptible Objects, and more reduced into a passive silent waiting
for the Opening of the Eternal Temple, whence the infallible Voice proceeds,
and where the great High Priest sparkles with the most bright Beams of divine
Glory. But the manner of the Souls Ascending from the Internal to the Eternal
World, is very remarkable and wonderful. It John 15.5.
cannot of its self move one degree upward; That same hand of power which
carried it downward, to see the Wonders of God in the Depths, must carry it
upward to see his Wonders in the high places above. So that in this the Soul is
merely passive; The Spirit of Christ being the Agent, which descending with an
over-shadowing Virtue upon it, wraps 2 Cor. 12.
it up swiftly, and in a strong force (by which the Souls Acts are for a while
suspended) translates it, as it were, in a strait Line from the Inward, toward
the Inmost. In this Translation or Ascension, what Wonders are seen and felt, I
shall not particularly express: But in general, this I must declare, That there
is an unutterable Power transfusing the Soul in this Ascent, which first comes
into the Womb of the Invisible Worlds (out of which they issue) in which it
finds an Universal Silence or Stilness; and above which, it discovers a great
Glory, inhabited by glorified Spirits, who there live in perpetual Harmony and
Joy, singing Halelujahs to the Lamb of God; and continually waiting upon the
Infallible Voice proceeding from the Throne of God. To be taken into this, is a
further degree of Ascension, being the second Mansion in the Eternal World;
where Rev. 5.11. and 7.
Myriads of Angels attend those Commands, which come out of the Most holy
place, which is the last and highest Mansion in that World, answering to Love,
as the second to Life, and the first to Light, corresponding with the threefold
manifestation of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. But to speak much of the two
last, requires greater Experience than yet I have enjoyed. Neither is it
expedient to describe the first, nor those Wonders which are in it, in regard
of that Blindness and general Enmity which is in Men's hearts against the deep
Mysteries of God in Invisible Nature. But after Ascension into the first, the
Soul becomes so much endued with the sense and apprehension of those Spiritual
Mysteries it was there acquainted with; and has such a clear View of the
outward World, and of the Misery that most there lie in, that it cannot but
weep over the greatest part of Men, as Christ did over Jerusalem, as seeing
them exceeding Ignorant of Eternity, and so of their own Everlasting happiness;
and involved in the Spirit of the outward World, where the Prince of the World
holds them Captive, and makes them Enemies to the Kingdom of Love, in which
there is no Enmity, Covetousness, Lust nor Deceit, nor any such things as those
are, which in the World are most courted and admired. After this also, the Soul
begins to discover the Evil Properties and Habits of Men's Spirits, very much
portrayed in their Faces, discovering in their very Aspects and Signatures,
those Bestial and devilish Passions by which they are swayed and captivated
within, so that the Eye many times affects the Heart with grief, in viewing the
sad Estate of Souls estranged from the Life of Innocence and pure Virginity,
and imprisoned in the dark Chains of Corrupt flesh and blood. Here likewise the
Soul is exceeding Passive, and much comprehended in deep abstract Silence, by
which it much enjoys unutterable Pleasures and Gusts from the inward ground of
Eternity, having much sense of the nearness of that Kingdom, where the
Angelical Thrones sing Hallelujahs, and sport themselves in the Innocent
delights of their Eternal Spheres and Luminous Mansions. And as the Soul
passes from the first Mansion toward the second and third, Jesus Act. 22 and
1. 23.
of Nazareth (in his glorified Humanity) begins to give great demonstrations of
his Presence; Joh. 14.
and to visit the inward Man with frequent and very great impressions; so that
it cannot doubt but that he is some times personally present, infusing the
Tincture of his glorified Body into the Heart, which is sweeter than Honey, and
burns like Oil and fire mixed together. And truly this Dispensation is
exceeding comfortable and very weighty; for the discovery of Christ's presence
sometimes swallows up the Soul into unspeakable Joy, being transfused with the
breath of his Mouth which is most Odoriferous; and quickened by the touch of
his Body, which is most Delightful; and pierced through with the Sound of his
Voice, which is most harmonious and powerful; causing the Soul deeply to admire
the Grace of God, and to cry out with Thomas, my Lord, and my God. In this
dispensation Christ shows very powerfully the necessity of his Mediation, as
God-Man; and that whatever we receive is through him, who standing in the
deepest Union with the Father, conveys all Light, Life and Love from himself,
into us, who at the time of the Restitution of all things, Act. 3.21. will
again Breath the Holy Ghost on his chosen Vessels, of which those in the
Primitive time received but the first Fruits. He also reveals in this state how
the Mystery of Iniquity (even the Spirit of Antichrist) works in most Sects of
Christians; carrying them either to deny or slight the great Mystery of his
Mediatory Office: Or by misconceptions, to cry up his Blood and Merits, to the
prejudice of Mortification, Self-denial, and the Imitating of his most Innocent
Life, as our Pattern to walk by in this World. Moreover in this Dispensation,
the Soul enjoys very great Openings of Eternity in the Heart, which are
different from Openings in the Head, where the inward Senses of hearing and
seeing are resident; for whatever in a Divine Sight (Eternity opening in the
Head) we clearly and distinctly view and behold the same (in a Heart-opening)
we really feel and handle in a Spiritual way; for in it we come experimentally
to know and perceive the Motions and Administering Influences of Angels, the
Virtue and Efficacy of Christ's universal and particular Body: The Harmony,
Love, and Enjoyments of the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect; with much of the
Glory and Majesty of that Kingdom prepared for us, from the beginning of the
World, into which none can enter, but those who have Luke 14. 33.
forsaken all for Christ, and have divested themselves of all the Vestments of
Corruption, and have put on the Robe of Innocence, which is the Garment of true
Virginity, in which they will not be ashamed to stand before the Son of Man, in
his Kingdom.

Then be ye wise Immortal Sparks of Fire,
And strive to get you Garments of pure Light;
In which you may from mortal Dregs retire
Into that Glory, where is no Spot of Night.
O do but weigh how swiftly Time goes by,
And how all Earthly Pleasures rise and fall;
As soon as they a Being have, they die,
And nothing can their hasty Joy recall.
But when the outward Garment is withdrawn,
Eternity presents its constant Face,
In which all Actions clearly will be shown,
Which ever have been wrought in Times short Race.
But such alone can there possessed be
Of Happiness, that have been born again:
Others will feel the Pangs of Misery,
Who in their Wills Corruption still retain.
Then die to Sin, while on the Earth you live;
So after Death, true Life you shall receive.
A Brief ESSAY In VERSE, Upon the 13th. Chapter of Corinthians the First.
1. Though I with Eloquence should vested be
Above the Pitch of mere Humanity;
So as in Tongues with Angels for to Vie,
Yet all is Nothing without Charity:
Like Sounding Brass, or the The Greek words imports rather a loud sounding,
than a tinkling Cymbal.
loud Cymbals Noise,
Without true Life, I should but form a Voice.
2. And though I have the Gift of Prophecy,
And hidden Wisdom be unvailed to me;
So that in Knowledge equal I become
To the great Soul of Mighty Solomon:
Yea, though by Faith vast Hills I could remove,
Yet all is nothing without perfect Love.
3. Though all my Goods on the Poor I bestow,
And so great Zeal for my Religion show,
As to consent my Flesh in Flames should burn,
Rather than from my Dear Opinion turn:
Yet thence no Profit to my Soul can rise,
Except to Love, it is self's a Sacrifice.
4. This Love by its true Characters may be
Distinguished from pretended Charity;
It perseveres in Patience, and is kind,
Then when to try it, all things seem combined.
Envies black Tincture it did never know,
Nor Ostentation in its great Deeds show.
It Is not inflated, but will kiss the Dust,
To help those Souls, which in its Goodness trust.
5. Comely to all it self it does express.
Through Condescension seeking for to bless.
No Self-Love ever did its Actions stain,
It stoops to suffer, to make others Reign.
No The Greek imports, it is never provoked into high Passion, or Imbittered.
bitterness did ever in it rise
From the worst Actings of its Enemies;
But still it thinks the Best, is not severe
Sin to impute, but rather all would clear.
6. All Falsehood and Injustice distant are,
As from it is Joys, so from it is spotless Sphere:
But Truth in Heart, Word, Works, are it is delight;
A pleasing Object to a Virgin sight.
7. It In the English, it bears all things; but according to the Greek it may
be better rendered, It covers or hides all Things: Else the last words of the
Verse and these import the very same.
covers all that Malice would reveal;
It pardons, and would fain all Breaches heal.
It does believe all that may Crimes excuse,
Except mere Evidence makes it refuse.
And though things at the present appear bad,
It hopes at length they will be better made.
Thus it endures all things, waits to see,
Through the long Patience, a full Victory.
8. Which Love will gain; for it can never die,
But must out-last the Gift of Prophecy;
Yea, and of Languages, for they must cease,
And give way to The Division of Tongues divided and scattered Mankind.
United Blessedness:
When all our Twilight Knowledge will expire
In the Bright Beams of it is Eternal Fire.
9. Knowledge and Prophecy are but in Part,
But Love's that Essence which must fill the Heart;
By that imperfect Gifts absorpt must be,
But that ends well that dies in Charity.
10. Children like Children reason, think and speak,
Their Intellectual Actings are but Weak;
But when to Manly Age we do arrive,
No longer then in Childish things we live.
So when our Hopes in Love consummate are,
Imperfect Lights and Gifts will disappear.
11. For little here but Images we see,
And Pictures of Essential Verity;
Eternal Truths in Riddles do appear,
Much is obscure, but very little clear.
Yet when the perfect Love we shall possess,
With Intuition Heaven will us Bless:
Then Face to Face we shall that Beauty see,
By which Angelick Hosts astonished be.
Then shall we know, as we of him are known,
By Rays of Intellect and pure Sensation.
12. Therefore when Faith, Hope, Love, we do compare,
Love has the Palm; this Love the Crown does wear.
The Evidence of things not seen Faith is,
And Hope our Anchor till we come to Bliss;
But then they both expire, and both resign
To Love the Firstborn of the Sacred Trine;
Without which Heaven could not Heaven be,
Neither a Place of Rest, nor Unity.
It Is this that links Eternity to Time,
And makes the Heavens with our Earth to chime.
It Is this that knits Eternal Souls in one,
And bind's the Angels in Conjunction.
It Is this that draws down the Almighty Powers
To over-shadow us in Golden Showr's,
That so our Hearts might more enriched be
With the abundant Fruits of Charity.
FINIS.

