A CABINET OF CHOICE JEWELS OR, A Box of precious Ointment.

Being a plain Discovery of, or, what men are worth for Eternity, and how it is
like to go with them in another World. Here is also a clear and large Discovery
of the several rounds in Jacob's Ladder, that no Hypocrite under Heaven can
climb up to. Here are also such closs, piercing, distinguishing and discovering
evidences as will reach and suit those Christians who are highest in Grace and
spiritual Enjoyments; and here are many Evidences, which are suited to the
Capacities and Experiences of the weakest Christians in Christ's School: And
here Christians may see as in a Glass, what a sober Use and Improvement they
ought to make of their evidences for Heaven; and how in the use of their
gracious evidences they ought to live. First, upon the free grace of God.
Secondly, upon the Mediatory righteousness of Christ. Thirdly, upon the
Covenant of Grace: With several other Points of grand Importance, etc.

By Thomas Brooks, formerly Preacher of the Gospel at St. Margarets,
New-Fishstreet.

Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.
Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves, know ye
not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates?
Or, (...), unapproved or rejected. Omnis anima est aut sponsa Christi, aut
adultera Diaboli. Austin. London, Printed and are to be sold by John Hancock at
the first Shop in Popes-Head-Alley in Cornhil, at the sign of the three Bibles,
or at his Shop in Bishops-Gate-Street, near great St. Hellins, 1669.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir John Frederick Knight, and the Lady Mary
Frederick his pious Consort. To Mr. Nathaniel Herne, and Mrs. Judith his
virtuous Wife. All confluence of blessings, both for this Life and for that
which is to come, from the Father of Mercies and God of all Consolations.
Honored and Beloved in our Lord Jesus,
THough I crowd your Names together, yet I owe more than an Epistle to each of
your Names; but the Lo^d having made you near and dear one to another, more
ways than one, I take the boldness to present this Treatise to you jointly.
Here is nothing in this Book that relates to the Government of Church or State:
The design of this Treatise is to show what men are worth for Eternity, and how
it is like to go with them in another World. Granctensis tells of a woman that
was so affected with souls miscarryings, that she besought God to stop up the
passage into hell with her soul and body, that none might have entrance.

O anima! Dei insignita imagine, desponsata fide, donata spiritu, etc. Bern.

O divine soul! invested with the image of God, espoused to him by faith, etc.


There are none of the sons of men, but bear about with them precious and
immortal souls, that are more worth than ten thousand thousand worlds; if the
soul be safe all is safe, if that be well all is well, if that be lost all is
lost. The first great work that men are to attend in this World, is the eternal
safety and security of their souls; the next great work is to know, to be
assured, that it shall go well with their souls for ever. And these are the
main things that are aimed at in this Discourse. The soul is the better and
more noble part of man; upon the soul the Image of God is most fairly stamped;
the soul is first converted, and the soul shall be first and most glorified;
the soul is that spiritual and immortal substance that is capable of union with
God, and of communion with God, and of an eternal fruition of God. Plato though
a Heathen, could say, That he thought the soul to be made all of eternity, and
that the putting the soul into the body, was a sign of great wrath from God.

Each living corpse must yield at last to death,
Pindarus.
And every life must leese his vital breath.
The soul of man that only lives on high,
And is an image of Eternity.
The Romans, when their Emperors and great Ones died, and their bodies were
buried, they caused an Eagle to mount on high, thereby to signify the souls
immortality and ascent. He gave good counsel, who said, Play not the Courtier
with your soul; the Courtier does all things late, he rises late, and dines
late, and sups late, and repents late. A Scythian Captain having for a draught
of water delivered up his City, cried out, Quid perdidi, quid prodidi? What
have I lost, what have I betrayed? So many at last will cry out, What have I
lost, what have I betrayed? I have lost God, and Christ, and Heaven, and have
betrayed my precious and immortal soul into the hands of divine Justice, and
into the hands of Satan. Who these men are that will at last thus cry out, this
Treatise does discover. I have read that there was a time when the Romans did
wear jewels on their shoes: Most men in this day do worse, for they trample
that matchless jewel of their souls under feet; and who these are, this
Treatise does discover. One well observes, Chrysostom.
That whereas God has given many other things double, two eyes to see with,
two ears to hear with, two hands to work with, and two feet to walk with, to
the intent that the failing of the one might be supplied by the other; but he
has given us but one soul, and if that be lost, have thou (says he) another
soul to give in recompense for it? Now, who those are whose souls are in a safe
estate, and who those are whose souls are in danger of being lost for ever,
this Treatise does plainly and fully discover. Psalm. 15. Psalm. 144.15.
To describe to the life who that man is that is truly happy in this world, and
that shall be blessed for ever in the other world, is the work of this ensuing
Treatise. The grace of the Cov^nant in us is a sure evidence of Gods entering
into the Covenant of grace with us. To be in a gracious state is true
happiness, but to know our selves to be in such a state, is the top of our
happiness in this world. A man may have grace, and yet (for a time) not know
it. 1. Joh. 5.13.
The child lives in the womb but does not know it. A man may be in a gracious
state, and yet not see it; Psalm. 77. Psalm. 88.
he may have a saving work of God upon his soul, and yet not discern it; he may
have the root of the matter in him, and yet not be able to evidence it. Now to
help such poor hearts to a right understanding of their spiritual condition,
and that they may see and know what they are worth for another world, and so go
to their graves in joy and peace, I have sent this Treatise abroad into the
world. Will you give me leave to say,



Treatise is fitted up for the service of these poor hearts; for the weakest
Christians may turn to many clear and well-bottomed evidences in this Treatise,
and throw the Gantlet to Satan, and bid him prove if he can that ever any
profane person or cunning hypocrite under heaven had such evidences, or such
fair certificates to show for heaven, which he has to show. The generality of
Christians are weak, they are rather Dwarfs than Giants, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. 1 John
2.12, 13, 14. Isa. 40.11.
they are rather bruised Reeds than tall Cedars, they are rather Babes than
men, Lambs than sheep, etc. Now, for the service of their souls, I have been
willing to send this Treatise into the world; for this Treatise may speak to
them when I may not, yea when I cannot, yea which is more, when I am not.
Famous Mr. Dod would frequently say, He cared not where he was if he could but
answer these two Questions. 1. Who am I? And, 2. What do I hear; am I a child
of God, and am I in my way? But,

Thirdly, Some there are who are so excessively and Signs, Marks and Evidences
of grace, and of their gracious state, etc. that Christ is too much neglected,
Where Christ was born, they were all so taken up with their guests, that he was
not minded nor regarded; when others lay in stately rooms, he must be laid in a
manger. Luke 2.7.
and more rarely minded by them, their hearts don't run out so freely, so
fully, so strongly, so frequently, so delightfully toward Christ as they
should do, nor as they would do, if they were not too inordinately taken up
with their Marks and Signs. Now for the rectifying of these mistakes, and the
cure of these spiritual maladies, this Treatise is sent into the world; we may
and ought to make a sober use of characters and evidences of our gracious
estates, to support, comfort, and encourage us in our way to heaven, but still
in subordination to Christ, and to the fresh and frequent exercises of faith
upon the person, blood, and righteousness of Jesus. But O! how few Christians
are there that are skilled in this Work of Works, this Art of Arts, this Mystery
of Mysteries. But,

Fourthly, Some there are who in these days are given up to Enthusiastical
Fancies, strange Raptures, Revelations, delusions of their own hearts, crying
down with all their might all discoveries of Believers spiritual estates by
Scripture Characters, 2 These. 2.9, 10, 11.
Marks and Signs of Sanctification, as carnal, and low, and all this under fair
pretenses of exalting Christ, and maintaining the honor of his Righteousness
and Freegrace, and of denying our selves, and our own righteousness. Though
sanctification be a branch of the Covenant of grace as well as Justification,
Jer. 33.8. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27.
yet there are a sort of men in the world, that would not have Christians to
rejoice in their sanctification, under a pretense of reflecting dishonor upon
their free justification by Christ. There are many who place all their Religion
in opinions, in brainsick notions, in airy speculations, in quaint
disputations, in immediate Revelations, and in their warm zeal, for this or
that form of worship. Now, that these may be recovered, and healed, and
prevented from doing further mischief in the world, I have at this time put to
a helping hand. But,

womb of divine Providence; The Brathmanni had their graves before their doors.
The Sybarites at Banquets had a deaths head delivered from hand to hand by
every guest at the Table. The Egyptians in the midst of their Feasts, used to
have the Anatomy of a dead man set before them, as a memorandum to the guests
of their mortality. The poor Heathen could say, that the whole life of man
should be meditatio mortis, a meditation of death. Dwell upon that, Deuteronomy.
32.29. Prove. 27, 1.
no man can tell what a a day, a night, an hour, may bring forth. Who can sum
up the many possible deaths that are still lurking in his own bowels, or the
innumerable hosts of external dangers which beleaguer him on every side? or how
many invisible arrows fly about his ears continually? and how soon he may have
his mortal wound given him by one of them, who can tell? Now, how sad would it
be for a man to have a summons to appear before God in that other world, before
his heart and life is changed, and his evidences for heaven cleared up to him?
The life of man is but a shadow, a post, a span, a vapor, a flower, etc.
Though there is but one way to come into the world, yet there are many thousand
ways to be sent out of the world; and this should bespeak every Christian to
have his evidences for heaven always ready and at hand, yea in his hand as
well as in his heart, and then he will find it an easy thing to die. The King
of terrors will then be the King of desires to him, and he will then travel to
glory under a spirit of joy and triumph. We carry about in our bodies the
matter of a thousand deaths, and may die a thousand several ways several
hours: As many senses, as many members, nay as many pores as there are in the
body, so many windows there are for death to enter in at. Death needs not spend
all his arrows upon us, a Worm, a Gnat, a Fly, a Hair, a stone of a Raisin, a
kernel of a Grape, the fall of a Horse, the stumble of a Foot, the prick of a
Pin, the pairing of a Nail, the cutting one of a Corn; all these have been to
others, and any of them may be to us, the means of our death within the space
of a few days, nay of a few hours. Don't it therefore highly concern us to
have our evidences for heaven cleared, sealed, shining and at hand. Naturalists
tell us, That if a man sees a Cockatrice first, the Cockatrice dies; but if
the Cockatrice sees a man first, the man dies. Certainly, if we so see death
first as to prepare for it, as to get our evidences for heaven ready, we shall
kill it; but if death sees us first, and arrests us first before we are
prepared, and before our evidences for heaven are cleared, it will kill us
everlastingly, it will kill us eternally. Time travelleth with God's decrees,
and in their season brings them forth; but little does any man know what is in
the womb of to morrow, till God has signified his will by the event. Boast not
thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth. That
man that knows what himself intends to bring forth, does not know what the day
will bring forth; the next day is not so near the former in time, as it may be
remote from it in the effects of it. Seneca could say, Seneca, Epist. 102.
Nihil est miserius dubitatione venientium, quo evadunt; There is nothing more
miserable than the doubtfulness of things to come, to what they will come.
Providence in this life is the Map of changes, Ezekiel. 1.16.
the picture of mutability. Who can sum up the strange circumferences, and rare
circuits and labyrinths of providence. Providence is as a wheel in the midst of
a wheel, whose motion, and work, and end in working, is not discerned by every
common eye. Three dreadful judgments God has lately visited us with, viz.
Sword, Pestilence and Fire; but who repents? who smites upon his thigh? Isa
1.16, 17. Psalm. 106.23.
who finds out the plague of his own heart? who says, what have I done? who
ceases from doing evil? who learns to do well? who turns to the most High? who
lays hold on everlasting strength? who makes peace with God? who throws
himself into the gap? etc. Are not multitudes grown much worse after judgments
than they were before? Don't they bid higher defiance to heaven than ever? and
therefore, who can tell what further controversy God may have with such a
people, especially considering that terrible Scripture, Levit. 26.14. to the
34. verse. with scores of others that sound that way. Were our forefathers
alive, how sadly would they blush to see such a horrid degenerate posterity as
is to be found in the midst of us? How is our forefathers hospitality converted
into riot and luxury, their frugality into pride and prodigality, their
simplicity into subtilty, their sincerity into hypocrisy, their charity into
cruelty, their chastity into chambering and wantonness, their sobriety into
drunkenness, their plain-dealing into dissembling, and their works of
compassion into works of oppression, etc. And may we not fear, that even for
these things God may once more visit us. The Nations are angry, and we are low
in their eyes; our enemies are not asleep abroad, and are not we too secure at
home? and what further conclusions may be in the world, who can divine? I point
at these things only to provoke all those into whose hands this Treatise may
fall, to make sure work for another world, to make sure their evidences for
heaven, and to keep their evidences for life and glory always sparkling and
shining, and then I am sure the worst of calamities, the sorest of judgments,
shall but translate them from earth to heaven, from a wilderness to a paradise,
from misery to glory, and from mixed and mutable enjoyments, to the pure and
everlasting enjoyments of God, Christ, the Angels and the spirits of just men
made perfect, Heb. 12, 22, 23, 24. But,

Sixthly and lastly, In this Treatise, as in a Glass, profane persons, and all
sorts of self-flatterers, and all sorts of hypocrites may see, 1. That their
present state and condition is not so safe, nor yet so happy as they judge it
to be. Again, in this Treatise, as in a Glass, all sorts of profane persons,
and all sorts of self-flatterers, and all sorts of hypocrites may see, 2. The
happy and blessed state of the people of God, against whom their spirits rise
and swell, etc. Again, in this Treatise, as in a Glass, all sorts of profane
persons, and all sorts of self-flatterers, and all sorts of Hypocrites may see,
3. What those things are that they need, and that they ought to beg of God.
Again, in this Treatise, as in a Glass, all sorts of profane persons, and all
sorts of self-flatterers, and all sorts of hypocrites may see, 4. What those
things are, without which they can neither be happy here nor hereafter. Now,
were there no other Reasons for my sending forth this Treatise into the world,
this alone might justify me.

But Honored and Beloved, before I close up this Epistle, give me leave to
say, That there are two sorts of men that my self, and all the world, are
bound, 1. Highly to prize. 2. Cordially to love. And, 3. Greatly to honor
above all other men in the world, and they are these: First, men of public
spirits. Secondly, men of charitable spirits, men of merciful spirits, men of
tender and compassionate spirits.

public spirits, my self and all others are bound, 1. Highly to prize. 2.
Cordially to love. And, 3. Greatly to honor above all other men in the world,
and that,

public spirited man is a common good, a common blessing; all in the Family,
all in the Court, all in the City, all in the Country, fare the better for
that Christians sake that is of a public spirit. All in Laban's family did
fare the better for Jacob's sake; Genesis 30.27. and 19.21, 22, 23, 24. and 41.
etc.
and all in the City of Zoar did fare the better for Lot's sake, and all
Pharoah's Court, and the whole Country of Egypt did fare the better for
Joseph's sake. Sodom was safe whilst Lot was in it; Eliah was a man of a
public spirit, 2 King. 2.12.
and he was the chariots and horsemen of Israel; Moses was a man of a public
spirit, and he often diverted ruining judgments from falling upon Israel. Psalm.
106.23. Number. 16.46.49.
Phineas was a man of a public spirit, and he takes up his Censer and stands
between the living and the dead, Though I do not, I dare not say, that every
public spirit is a gracious spirit, yet this I must say, that every gracious
spirit is a public spirit.
and the Plague was stayed. Men of public spirits are public mercies, public
blessings; a man of a public spirit is ((...)) a public, diffusive blessing
in the place where he lives; men of public spirits are the true Atlasses both
of Church and State, they are the Pillars on whom all do rest, the Props on
whom all do lean; do but overturn these Pillars, and all will fall about your
ears, as the house did about the Philistines when Sampson shook it; wrack but
these, and Kingdoms, and Commonwealths shall be quickly wrackt themselves. When
Metellus heard of the death of Scipio Africanus a man of a public spirit, he
ran out into the Marketplace and cried out, O Citizens, come forth and consult
what is to be done, for the walls of your City are fallen down. But,

Secondly, Because public spirited Christians are John 17. Heb. 2. Isa. 63.3.
Romans 8.30, 31, 32, 33. Heb. 7.25. John 14.1, 2, 3, 4. Acts 10.38. Phil. 2.4, 5.
Christ made himself poor to make others rich, but men of narrow souls make
others poor to make themselves rich. 1 Cor. 6.8. 2 Cor. 8.9.
Christ left his Fathers bosom for a public good, he assumed our nature for a
public good, he trod the wine press of his Fathers w^ath for a public good,
he died for a public good, and he rose for a public good, he ascended to
heaven for a public good, and he continues in heaven for a public good; when
he was in this world he went up and down doing good, he healed others but was
hurt himself, he fed and filled others but was hungry himself; Christ was all
for a public good. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on
the things of others. Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus.
Though self be a great stickler, yet he that will write after Christ's Copy,
must neglect himself to serve others. That Christian acts most like Christ, who
prefers the public interest before his own private interest. The Stars have
their brightness not for themselves, but for the use of others; and the Sun
has her shining light, but not for her self, but for others. In the natural
body every member is diffusive, the eye conveys the light, the head spirits the
liver, blood, etc. And why should it not be so in the politic body also? And
as Christ, so Moses was a man of a public spirit, when God made a very fair
profer to him, that he would make him a great Nation, Exodus 32.10, 11, 12. So
Number. 14 4, 10, 13, 14.
if he would but stand Neuter till he had revenged himself upon a rebellious
people; but Moses had no mind to preserment upon those terms, he preferred the
public good before his own honor, profit and advancement, and therefore
follows God closs, and never gives over pleading for them till he had procured
their pardon, Ver. 13.14.
and turned away the wrath of God from them. So Joshua was a man of a public
spirit. Josh. 19.49.
When they had made an end of dividing the Land for inheritance by their coast,
the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them.
Joshua might have served himself first, and he might have taken as large an
Inheritance as he had pleased, but he preferred the good of the people before
his own; he who had divided the Land to others, was himself contented with very
mean preferment, for his inheritance was among the barren Mountains, Hierom.
as some observe. So Jehoiada was a man of a public spirit; 2 Chronicles. 24.16
you read that they buried him in the City of David among the Kings, because he
had done good in Israel, both toward God and toward his house. Men of public
spirits shall be honored both living and dying. Neh. 5.14, 15.
So Nehemiah was a man of a brave public spirit, he holds on twelve years
together in public work upon his own cost and charge. Esther 4.16.
So Esther was one of a public spirit, and therefore she takes her life in her
hand, and goes in to the King with an If I perish, I perish. And so Mordecai
was a man of a public spirit. Mordecai the Jew was next unto King Ahashuerus,
and great among the Jews, Esth. 10.3.
and arcepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his
people, and speaking peace to all his seed. Mordecai was more mindful and
careful of his peoples peace, prosperity and welfare, than he was of his own
concernments. And so D^vid was a man of a public spirit, for after he had
served his own generation he fell asleep. Acts 13.36.
The spirit of the Lord has put this upon record for David's honor and our
imitation. David's soul did not live in a narrow Bowling-alley, he was not a man
of so poor, low and narrow a spirit, as to make himself the center of his
designs and actions. David was a man of a generous, noble spirit, the public
good lay nearest his heart, and to serve his generation he was willing to spend
and be spent. The public spirited man of all men is most like to Christ, and
to those Worthies who were once glorious on earth, and are now triumphing in
heaven. The Apostle speaks of some who are lovers of themselves, 2 Timothy 3.2.
and who are seekers of themselves, Phil. 2.21. and who are minders of
themselves, Phil. 3.19. They mind earthly things. Of all these we may say as
God speaks of Israel, Israel is an empty vine, Hos. 10.1.
he brings forth fruit unto himself; yea of all these we may say, that light is
not more contrary to darkness, heaven to hell, glory to shame, than these are
contrary to Christ, and to those precious servants of his who are crowned and
chronicled in the blessed Scriptures for their public spiritedness and public
usefulness in the world. But,

Thirdly, Men of public spirits are rare men, excellent of all men they most
resemble God, Mat. 5.45. Vir bonus magis aliis prodest quam sibi.
who does good to all; there are none so excellent and truly honorable as
these. All the Instances cited to make good the second particular evidences
this, to which I may add that of Daniel, who was a man of a public spirit, and
of that excellent spirit, as that he carried the Bell from all the Presidents
and Princes of Darius his Court. Dan. 6.3. Then this Daniel was preferred above
the Presidents and Princes, because an excellent spirit was in him, and the
King thought to set him over the whole Realm. I might give you many other
Instances from the Patriarchs and Apostles, but what need that, when blind
nature speaks so loud in the case. Men of public spirits have been very
excellent and honorable in the very eyes of all the Heathen. Take a few
Instances among the many hundreds that might be produced. M. Attilius Regulus
was a man of that public spirit, In Austins account he was the gallantest of
all the old Romans.
that he valued neither State nor Life to serve his Country and preserve his
own honor; he got very much for his Country, but little for himself, seven
Acres of Land being all that ever he had; he was a man highly honored among
the Romans.

Titus Vespasian was a man of a public spirit, he governed so sweetly,
moderately and prudently, that he was generally termed Delitiae humani generis,
the delight of mankind; he was greatly honored whilst he lived, and when he
died the people wept so bitterly for him, as if they had been resolved to have
wept out their yes.

Curious Dentalus was a man of a public spirit, and very victorious; when his
Country was settled, he was found at dinner feeding hard on a few parched
Pease, when the Ambassadors were sent to tender him a great sum of gold, which
he refused, saying, He had rather be at his pease, while they whom he ruled
over had the gold, than he to have the gold and they the Pease When some
unworthy persons once accused him for keeping back somewhat from the public,
he brought forth a wooden platter, and did swear, That it was all he had
reserved to himself of the spoils. He was had in great honor and reputation
among the people.

That Pilot dies nobly (says Seneca) who perishes in the storm with the Helm
in his hand.

Aristides was a man of a public spirit; after the overthrow of the Persians,
when there was a Mass of treasure, gold, silver, and rich apparel, he would not
touch it, nor take so much as one farthing of it to himself, he was in high
esteem among the people.

Tully in his Book of Scipio's dream, brings in a dead Father (now in heaven as
he supposed) encouraging his son to do service for his Country (wherein
himself had given him a most noble and notable example) upon a very high
consideration, viz. There is a most sure and certain place in heaven for every
man that shall procure the weal of his Country, either by freeing it from
peril, or increasing the happiness of it any way. To hear a Gentile tell of
heaven, as of a thing certain; to hear him tell of certain places provided
there for those that should do virtuously, to have the service of ones Country
pressed on his soul with so celestial an argument, what matter of wonder and
admiration is it!

Another speaking of men of public spirits, says, Such ennobled spirits, they
are the dear offspring, Cicero.
the delight and care of God; a divine race it is, from the heavens they come
down to us, and to the heavens again when ever they take their leaves of us,
shall they triumphantly return.

A Cataline says the Satyrist) a trouble of mankind grows as the weed, Jur.
almost every where; but a Brutus, a worthy Patriot, that bears the welfare of
others, the true prosperity of his native Land upon his heart, and sets his
eyes perpetually thereon for good; such an one is a rare jewel, worthy of all
honor and embraces where ever he is found. Men of public spirits of all men,
1 Samuel 2.30.
do most exalt the Lord, and honor the Lord, and therefore the Lord first or
last will most exalt them and honor them. In all the Ages of the world, and in
all the Nations of the world, men of most public spirits have been best
beloved, and most highly honored. A man of a narrow spirit is like the
Hedgehog, that never goes abroad but to gather what he can for himself, who
ever suffer by it; but a man of a public spirit is like the Pelican that
draws out her own blood for the good of others, and therefore the light of
nature as well as the Law of grace, will lead men by the hand to honor such.

public spirits do most and best answer to one of the noblest and highest ends
of their creation. Does the Be gather honey for it self? Does the Sheep yield
wool for it self? Does not all creatures serve the community. Non nobis solum
nati, said the Heathen.
By the Law of creation every man is bound to serve the public, to serve his
generation. A narrow, a private spirited man is a shame to his Creation,
because he walks so contrary to the great intendment of God in it. It Is a base
and unworthy spirit, for a man to make himself the Center of all his actions.
The very Heathen man could say, That a man's Country and his Friends, and
others, challenge a great part of him. That man sins against the very Law of
his being, who is swallowed up in his own, private interests. Men of public
spirits should not bear the sword of justice in vain, for by the Law of
creation they are bound so to handle it as to be a terror to evil doers, Romans
13.3, 4
and a praise to them that do well. It Is cruelty to the good to spare the bad,
it is wrong to the Sheep to let the Wolves alone, it is the death of the Lambs to
spare the Lions. If you will pity Cataline (says one) pity Rome much more; let
the whole have a share in your pity rather than a part. (Pereat unus magis quam
unitas) better have one injurious person sit mourning, than a whole Nation
languishing, etc. Men of public spirits should be for the ease of all, and the
peace of all, and the comfort of all, and the encouragement of all, and the
safety of all. But this Age is full of Droans and Ciphers, and of spiritless,
lifeless men, who look at nothing, who design nothing, who aim at nothing, and
who endeavor nothing, but how to raise themselves, and greaten themselves, and
enrich themselves, and build up themselves, though it be upon others ruinnes.
How many are there who are so swallowed up in their own interests and private
concernments, that Gallio-like, they care not whether the public sink or swim.
Acts 18.7.
These put me in mind of Jothams Parable. Judge. 9.8, 9, 10, 11, etc.
The Trees went forth to anoint a King over them. They go to the Olive, to the
Fig Tree, and to the Vine; but shall I leave my fatness, says the Olive? shall
I leave my sweetness, says the Fig Tree? and shall I leave my wine, says the
Vine, and go up and down for other Trees? This is the very temper, spirit and
carriage of many in our day: If you go to them and desire them to lay out
themselves for the public good. What say some, shall we leave our ease, our
pleasure, our profits? And say others, Shall we run this and that hazard? Shall
we lose such and such friends, and create to our selves such and such enemies,
to serve other men, to save other men, to advantage other men? we cannot do it,
we will never do it. Learned Tully was a zealous Patriot and lover of his
Country; he wished two wishes (though he never saw either of them effected)
one was, That he might see Rome set^led in its just liberties; and the other
was. That he might see every man's estate p^oportionable to his affection and
love to the public. Deubtless if Tullies wish might take place in our times,
the purses of many would be more empty, and the public Coffers would be more
full. But,

earth, there are none that have such a stock of prayers going for them as men
of public spirits. Men of public spirits are not only most highly prized, and
cordially loved, and greatly honored, but they are also most upon the hearts
of all sober and serious Christians, when they are in the Mount with God. The
lives of such are most desirable, and the deaths of such will be most lamented,
who make it their business to serve their generation. 2 Chronicles. 21.20
Men of public spirits shall never die as Jehoram did, undesired and
unlamented. Men of public spirits lie most open to snares, temptations, and
oppositions, etc. This all sober Christians well understand, and therefore they
cannot but pray hard for such: The names, the lives, the liberties, the estates,
and all the concernments of men of public spirits always lie nearest their
hearts, who lie nearest to the heart of Christ. Men of the greatest name, and
of the greatest renown, and that have had the greatest stock of prayers going
for them all the world over, have been men of public spirits. But,

of public spirits come to dye, their public spiritedness and general
usefulness will be no small comfort and cordial to them. Nehemiah was a man of
a public spirit, and accordingly he pleads it with God. Think upon me, Neh. 5.
ult. See Chap. 13.22.
O my God for good, according to all that I have done for this people. This was
that which sweetened death to Hezekiah, I beseech thee, O Lord, to remember now,
how I have walked before thee in truth, 2 King. 20.3. Acts 13.36.
and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And
when David had served his generation, he fell asleep. Sleep is not more welcome
and sweet to a laboring man, than death is to him who has made it his
business, his work sincerely and faithfully to serve his generation. Such
Magistrates, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8, 9. John 17.
Ministers and Christians who have made it their business according to their
different measures faithfully to serve their generation, have found the King of
terrors to be but the King of desires to them; when death to men of narrow,
selfish spirits, has been like the handwriting upon the wall, Dan. 5.5, 6.
very terrible. Many score Instances might be produced out of History to
evidence this. Take one for all. Henry Beauford that rich and wretched
Cardinal, Bishop of W^nchester, and Chancellor of England (a man swallowed up
in self interest) in the Reign of Henry the Sixth, when he perceived that he
must dye, Acts and Mon. fol. 925.
and that there was no remedy, O! how terrible was death to him? and, O! how
did he murmur, and fret, and vex at death, that his riches could not reprieve
him till a further time? For, says he, wherefore should I die being so rich;
if the whole Realm would save my life, I am able either by policy to get it, or
by riches to buy it. Fie upon death (says he) will not death be hired? will
money do nothing? I might instance in men of a higher rank, but then I should
exceed the bounds of an Epistle.

The second sort of men, that my self and all others are bound. 1. Highly to
prize. 2. Cordially to love. And 3. Greatly to honor: Are men of charitable
spirits, men of merciful spirits, men of tender and compassionate spirits. The
Hebrew word for godly (...) signifies merciful, to note that the godly man is
the merciful man, and the merciful man is the godly man. Loving kindness is an
ingredient unto godliness. The godly man is frequently called Chasid, gracious
or merciful; it notes one that has obtained mercy, goodness, grace, piety and
benignity from the Lord, and that is pious, kind, The Italian form of begging
is, Do good to your selves.
gracious and merciful to others. Though charity, bounty, is the most
compendious way to plenty, and giving to getting, and scattering to increasing,
and layings out to layings up, Prove. 11.24. There is that scatters, and yet
increases. Ver. 25. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters
shall be watered also himself: Yet how few in our days do honor the Lord with
their substance? Prove. 3.9. Mic. 4.13.
how few look a this as a duty, to consecrate any part of their gain unto the
Lord, or of their substance to the Lord of the whole earth? Most men now carry
it as if God himself had last his propriety, and as if there were no rent-penny
due to his poor. But yet some there are, who have liberal hearts and open
hands; Deuteronomy. 15.11.
some there are, who do open their hands wide to the poor and needy. Now, here
give me leave to say, Mat. 25. Prove. 31.8, 9.
That these, 1. Discharge their consciences in the duty of charity, 2. These
rightly improve the talents of mercy, with which they are entrusted. 3. These
treasure up a stock of prayers, Job 29.13. 2 Timothy 1.16.
both for themselves and theirs; the blessing and the prayers of them that were
ready to perish will come upon them and theirs. 4. These evidence the
liveliness of their faith, James 2.17. Even so faith, if it has not works, is
dead being alone. Ver. 18. Yea, a man may say thou have faith, and I have
works; show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my
works. Ver. 26. For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without
works is dead also 5. These take the surest way, the readiest course to assure
their own souls of Gods eternal favors and mercies to them, 1 Timothy 6.17.
Charge them that be rich in this world. Ver. 18. That they do good, that they
be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate. Ver. 19.
Aeterna vitae, vera vlta. Aug.
Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on eternal life. Charitable Christians are as wife
Merchants, happy Usurers, parting with that which they cannot keep, that they
may gain that which they cannot lose. 6. These take the surest way to draw down
more outward mercies upon themselves. The fountain is not diminished, Pedagog
-- 3. c. 7 Clemens, Alex.
but augmented by giving water to the thirsty. The widows oil did increase by
running; we do not lose, but increase our mercies by imparting of them for
God's honor, and the comfort and benefit of others. Luke 6.38.
Give (says Christ) and it shall be given to you, good measure, pressed down,
and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. The Jews
more large and loose garments, so that they could bear away much in their
bosoms. Hence this expression, into your bosom. The meaning is, That the Lord
will largely reward the beneficence of his people; yea, that he will so reward
them, that they shall perceive that they are rewarded. Honor the Lord with thy
substance, Prove. 3.9, 10.
so shall thy Barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with
new wine. God will certainly bless their substance, who honor him with their
substance. The Jews at this day, Godw Heb. ^ntiq. 27.7.
though they are not in their own Country, and though they have not a
Levitical Priesthood, yet those who will be reputed Religious amongst them do
distribute the tenth of their increase to the poor, The safest chest is the
poor man's Box. God will never forget your charity to his, Heb. 6.10.

Cicero could say, that to be rich is not to possess much, but to use much

And Seneca could rebuke them that so studied to increase their wealth, that
they forget to use it.


being persuaded that God does bless their increase the more; for they have
among them a very elegant Proverb to that purpose; Decima ut dives fias, Pay
thy tithes that thou may be rich. The poor man's hand is Christ's Treasury,
and he shall not lose his reward that casts his mites into that Treasury. It is
fabled of Midas, that what ever he touched he turned it into gold. But this is
most sure, that whatever the hand of charity touches, it turns it into g^ld;
be it but a cup of cold water, nay into heaven it self, Mat. 10.42. And
whosoever shall give to drink, unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold
water only, in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no
wise lose his reward. Cold water having not fuel to heat it, cold water which
cost not the charge of fire to warm it. A Sea of pleasures, a heaven of
blessings attends men of charitable minds, though their charity can extend no
further than to a cup of cold water; for God measures men's deeds by their
minds, and not their minds by their deeds. The Kenites in Saul's time, that were
born many Ages after Jethro's death received life from his dust, and favor
from his hospitality, nay, the very Egyptians, for harboring, and at first
dealing kindly with the Israelites, though without any respect to their
righteousness, were preserved by Joseph in that sore famine, and kindly dealt
with ever after by Gods special command. I have read a story of one Evag^i a
rich man, who lying upon his deathbed, and being importuned by Sinesius, a
pious Bishop, to give something to charitable uses, he yielded at last to give
three hundred pounds, but first took bond of the Bishop that it should be
repaid him in another world; but before he had been one day dead, he is said to
have appeared to the Bishop delivering in the bond cancelled, as thereby
acknowledging, that what was promised was made good. Whether the Relation be
fabulous or not, I shall not now stand to determine; but this is certain, that
all acts of charity shall be certainly and signatly rewarded. Several Writers
observe, that the ground is most barren nearest the golden Mines; and
experience tells us, that many who are enriched with fair estates, are most
barren in good works, but this will be bitterness in the end. He that shall
consult two Scriptures (among many others) will conclude, that he that has a
withered hand has no honest heart, 2 Chronicles. 31.10. 1 John 3.17. The wealth that
such men have, is but as Aristotle calls it, Arist. Rhetor. l. 2. c. 6.
Foelix amentia, a happy madness, because they are so taken up with their
wealth, that they neither know what they are, nor what they do. Josephus
writing of the waters of Egypt, says, That they were blood in the hands of an
Egyptian, but water in the hand of an Israelite. Wealth in the hand of a
worldling, is like blood in the hand which is good for nothing; Josephus.
but wealth in the hand of a charitable Christian is like water in the hand,
which may be of use both to a man's self and others. By what has been said,
there is nothing more evident than this, viz. That men of public spirits, and
men of charitable spirits, of all men on earth, are, 1. To be most highly
prized. 2. Most cordially loved. And 3. Most greatly honored, etc.

Gentlemen, those that shall read what I have writ in this Epistle, concerning
public spiritedness and charitableness, and know you well, they know how to
make the Application without any further direction from me. Sir John, I must
crave leave to say, that it is and will be your honor and comfort, both in
life and death, and in the day of your account, that in all the great Places,
Offices and Employments unto which divine Providence has called you for diverse
years together, you have laid out your time, your strength, your estate for the
public good; when others have been serving themselves upon the public, you
have been a serving of the public. Sir, it is your great mercy and happiness,
that you can stand forth and say; as once Samuel did, Behold, here I am,
witness against me, 1 Samuel 12.3.
whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded?
whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine
eyes therewith? Your prudence and moderation before your Mayoralty, and in it
(when you had many a narrow bridge to go over) and after it, to this day will
never be forgotten by all sober Citizens. Sir, the French History tells us,
that when an old Courtier would needs depart from the Court, and retire himself
to a private life, the King desired him to leave his advice in some general
Rules, about the Government of his Kingdom: Upon this motion of the King, the
old Courtier took a sheet of white paper, and writ upon the top of the leaf
Moderation, and in the middle of the leaf Moderation, and at the bottom of the
leaf Moderation, intimating to the King, that the only way to keep his Kingdom
in Peace and Prosperity, was to manage his Government throughout with a spirit
of Moderation. When Vespasian asked Apollonius what was the cause of Nero's
ruin; he answered, That Nero could tune the Harp well, but in Government he did
always wind up the strings too high, or let them down too low. Both of your
staying in London in the time of the last great Plague, when death peeped in at
every window, and when most Magistrates, Ministers and People were fled from
their Habitations (the terror of the Lord and of his judgments being very great
in that day, upon all sorts and ranks of men) and that chiefly, mainly (if not
only) upon the account of public service, and that nothing might be wanting on
your side, to preserve poor creatures from perishing. The old Romans for lesser
services than you did in these dismal days, have set up many a statue of
brass; but the Lord is faithful, and will not forget to reward your work, your
great work, your hazardous work, and that matchless love and bowels that you
showed to very many that were impoverished for want of Trade, and to very many
that lay in a sick, languishing and dying condition: How free, how full, how
seasonable, how suitable, how impartial, how constant, and well regulated your
charity then was, and since has been, is very well known to God above, and to
some faithful friends still alive; but all will out in the great day. Mat. 25.
I know you don't love that your left hand should know what your right hand
does, Chap. 6.3.
and therefore I shall not provoke you by sounding a Trumpet. Ezekiel. 1.8. and
10.8.
The Angels have their hands under their wings, they do much good, and yet make
no noise. There are some in the world that are like to them; the Violet grows
low and covers it self with its own leaves, and yet of all flowers yields the
most fragrant smell to others. There are some charitable Christians that
resemble this sweet flower.

Gentlemen and Ladies, your respects and undeserved favors, that have been
many ways manifested unto me, has emboldned me to Dedicate and present to you
this Treatise as a real Testimony of my unfeigned love, service, gratitude and
desires to promote the internal and eternal welfare of all your precious and
immortal souls: And wherein could I (or any body else) be more truly
serviceable to you than in endeavoring to promote your assurance of eternal
salvation, which is the grand Design and Project of this Book. 1 Pet. 5.1^.
Now, the God of all grace fill all your hearts with all the fruits of
righteousness and holiness, Gal. 5.22, 23.
unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, Heb. 10.22.
and of faith and hope in this Life, and at last crown you all (and all yours)
with ineffable glory in the life to come. To the everlasting arms of his
protection, and to the perpetual influences of his grace and mercy in Christ,
he commends you all, who is to you all

Your much obliged and affectionate friend and souls servant in our dear Lord
Jesus. THO. BROOKS.

The CONTENTS.
A
Of the appearance of sin. EIght Arguments to arm us against the appearances of
sin. 114 to Page 126
Of Assurance. The sense and evidence of the least grace, yea of the least
degree of the least grace, may afford some measure of assurance. Page 17, 18,
19, 20 That Christians may more easily attain to a comfortable assurance of
their gracious estate, than many (I than m^st) do apprehend or believe; This is
strongly and fully made good. Page 25 to Page 57 There is a threefold Assurance
Page 27 Perfection of Assurance, in respect of degrees, not attainable in this
life. Page 57, 58 Assurance is not to be expected by any extraordinary way of
Revelation. Page 58, 59, 60 Assurance excludes not all fears, doubts,
conflicts, etc. Page 351, 352

B
About Babes in grace. The generality of Christians are but Babes in grace.
Page 339, 340

C
About changing a man's condition. A godly man will not change his condition with
men of this world, for ten thousand worlds Page 200, 201
About choosing. Mo man can choose God and Christ, grace and glory, holiness and
happiness, as their chiefest good, but such who are really good Page 202, 203
Of the commands of God. He that has a respect to all Gods commands, shall
never be ashamed. Page 27, 28 See O, of Obedience.

About heart-condemning. He whose heart does not condemn him, in six things,
may have confidence toward God. Page 29, 30
About confession of sin. The second part of true repentance lies in confession
of sin Page 234, 235, 236 There are eight properties or qualifications of true
penitential confession of sin. Page 236, to 255
Of the Covenant of grace. When a Christian casts his eye upon his gracious
evidences, he must remember that he has to do with God in a Covenant of grace
Page 83, 84, 85, 86, 87 The Covenant of grace is a Christians Fort Royal Page
363, 364 In the Covenant of grace, God stands engaged to give what ever he
requires, which is evidenced by an induction of twelve particulars. Page 364,
to 369 The Covenant is everlasting, in two respects Page 370, 373, 374 The
Covenant is a sure Covenant. Page 370, 371, 372
About delighting in God. Five Arguments to prove that no Hypocrite can delight
himself in God. Page 322, 323

D
Of desires. That true desires of grace is grace proved by six Arguments. Page
170, to 178 No man can sincerely desire grace for grace sake, but he that has
true grace. Page 178, 179, 180, 181 No man can sincerely desire every grace,
but he that has grace. Page 181, 182 No man can sincerely and graciously desire
grace for gracious ends and purposes, but he that has true grace in his soul.
Page 182, 183 No man can sincerely desire, and earnestly endeavor after the
highest pitches of grace, but he that has grace. Page 183, to 186 No man can
always desire grace, but he that has true grace Page 186, 187 No man can
sincerely desire to abound, to abound and excel most in those particular
graces, which are most opposite and contrary to those particular sins, which
his natural temper, constitution, complexion, etc. does most expose him and
incline him to. Page 187, 188, 189
About the dominion of sin. He over whom presumptious sins have no dominion, is
upright. Page 29 Eight ways for a man to know whether he be under the dominion
of sin or no. Page 39, to 48
Against trusting in our own duties. Three Arguments against trusting in our
own duties. Page 374, 375, 376, 377, etc.

E
Of Evidences. Sound ^^id Evidences are the best way to prevent delusions Page
4, 5 Two special Rules are still to be seriously minded in propounding of
Evidences for men to try their spiritual and eternal estates by Page 6, 7.
Seven Reasons why many men cry down Marks and Signs, and deny sanctification to
be an evidence of men's justification. Page 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342 It Is
lawful and useful to make use of gracious evidences. Page 342, 343 Such Saints
as are now triumphing in glory, have made use of their gracious evidences, etc.
Page 343, 344, 345, 346 He that can find but one gracious evidence in his soul,
he may safely conclude that all the rest are there. Page 347 What a Christian
should do when his evidences are so clouded and blotted, that he cannot read
them. Page 352, 353, 354, 355, 356 When a Christians evidences shine brightest,
his heart and the eye of his faith is to be most firmly fixed upon three Royal
Forts. Page 356, 357, 358 and 374, 375, 376, 377, etc.

F
Of Christians folly. Eight Arguments to show the folly of such sincere
Christians, who make their condition worse than it is. Page 51 to 57
Of forsaking of sin. There is a fourfold forsaking of sin. Page 28
Of Free Grace. When a Christians evidences are either clear or blotted, it
highly concern him to be still a living upon free grace. Page 356, 357, 358, 359

G
Of Grace and Graces. Where there is any one grace in truth, there is every
grace in truth Page 7, 8, 9 The sense and evidence of the least grace, yea of
the least degree of the least grace, may afford some measure of assurance. Page
17, 18, 19, 20 Probabilities of grace may be a great stay, support and comfort
to poor Christians that want assurance; probabilities of grace are mercies more
worth than ten thousand worlds. This is made good by ten Arguments. Page 60, to
65 Six considerable things about probabilities of grace. Page 65, 66, 67, 68,
69 If a Christian cannot say he has grace, yet he should not say he has no
grace; for he may have grace, and yet not know it. Page 81, 82 He that prizes
the least dram of grace above ten thousand thousand worlds, certainly that man
has true grace in him. Page 200 It Is the wisdom, and ought to be the work of
every Christian to own the least measure of grace that is in him, though it be
mixed and mingled with many weaknesses and infirmities. Page 332, 333 It Is the
wisdom, and should be the work of every Christian, to look upon all his graces
and gracious evidences, as favors given him from above, as gifts dropped out of
heaven into his heart, as flowers of Paradise stuck in his bosom by a divine
hand. Page 333, 334 335 When you look upon your graces in the light of the
spirit, it highly concerns you to look narrowly to it, that you don't renounce
and reject your graces as weak and worthless evidences of your interest in
Christ, etc. Page 335, 336, 337 The spirit does four things in respect of our
graces Page 348 Christians may safely rejoice in their graces. Page 349, 350,
351 The more grace any man has, the more clear, the more fair, the more full,
the more sweet will his evidences be for heaven, etc. Page 378, 379, 380, 381,
382 When your graces are strongest, and your evidences for heaven are clearest,
and your comforts rise-highest, then in a special manner it concerns you to
make it your great business and work to act faith afresh upon the free, rich
and glorious grace of God, and upon the Lord Jesus Christ. Page 382, 383, 384,
385

H
Of the hatred of sin. An Hypocrite cannot hate sin as sin. Page 303, 304, 305
True hatred of sin includes six things. Page 305, 306, 307, 308
Of the heart, and of keeping of it. Where the constant standing frame of a
man's heart, desires and endeav^urs, are set for God, Christ, Grace, Holiness,
there is a most sure and infallible work of God upon that man's soul. Page 127,
128, 129, 130, 131, 132 A gracious heart is an uniform heart Page 161, 162,
163, 164. A gracious heart sets himself most against his darling sin, his bosom
sin, his constitution sin, etc. Page 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170 He that
has given up his heart and life to the Rule, Authority and Government of
Christ, he has a saving work of God upon him. Page 203, 204 That man that will
cleave to Christ with full purpose of heart, that man shall certainly be saved.
Page 204, 205 That man that makes it his principle care, his main business, his
work of works to look to his heart, to watch his heart, to reform his heart,
that man doubtless has a saving work of God upon his heart. Page 205, 206,
207, 208, 209, 210 Ten ways showing how men should keep their hearts. Page
210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216 There are many that are great strangers to
their own hearts. Page 339
Of Hypocrites. First, an Hypocrites inside is never answerable to his outside.
An Hypocrites inside is one thing, and his outside another thing. Page 287, 288
Secondly, no Hypocrite under heaven is totally divorced from the love and
liking of every known sin. Page 288, 289, 290, 291 Thirdly, an Hypocrites heart
is never thoroughly subdued to a willingness to perform all known duties. Page
291, 292, 293 Fourthly, There is never an Hypocrite in the world, that makes
God, or Christ, or holiness, or his doing or receiving good in his Station,
Relation or Generation, his grand end, his highest end, his ultimate end of
living in this world. Page 294, 295; 296, 297 Fifthly, no Hypocrite under
heaven can live wholly and only upon the righteousness of Christ, the
satisfaction of Christ, the merits of Christ, for justification and salvation.
Page 297, 298, 299, 300 Sixthly, an Hypocrite never embraces a whole Christ, he
can never take up his full rest, satisfaction and content in the person of
Christ, in the merits of Christ, in the enjoyment of Christ alone. Page 300,
301, 302, 303 Seventhly, an Hypocrite cannot mourn for sin as sin, nor grieve
for sin as sin, nor hate sin as sin, nor make head against sin as sin. Page
303, 304, 305 Eighthly, no Hypocrite is habitually low or little in his own
eyes, no hypocrite has ordinarily mean thoughts of himself, or a poor esteem of
himself. Page 308, 309, 310, 311, 312 Ninthly, no Hypocrite will long hold out
in the work and ways of the Lord, in the want of outward encouragements, and
in the face of outward discouragements. Page 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318
Tenthly, no hypocrite ever makes it his business, his work, to bring his heart
into religious duties and services. Page 318, 319, 320, 321 Eleventhly, an
hypocrite never performs religious duties from spiritual principles, nor in a
spiritual manner. Page 321, 322, 323, 324, 325 Twelfthly, no hypocrite in the
world loves the Word, or delights in the Word, or prizes the Word, as it is a
holy Word, a spiritual Word, a beautiful Word, a pure Word, a clean word. Page
325, 326, 327, 328, 329 Thirteenthly and lastly, an hypocrite cannot endure to
be tried, and searched, and laid open. Page 329, 330, 331

I
Of judging our selves. We must not judge our selves Hypocrites by those things
that ^he Scripture never makes a character of an Hypocrite. Page 74, 75, 76,
77. We must not judge our selves hypocrites for such things which being
admitted and granted to be true, would unavoidably prove the whole generation
of the faithful to be Hypocrites. Page 77, 78, 79 In judging of our spiritual
estates and conditions, we must always have an eye to our natural tempers,
complexions, etc. Page 79, 80, 81
Of judgments. Spiritual judgments are the worst of judgments. Page 338

L
Of love to the Saints. No man can truly love grace in another, but he that has
true grace in his own soul. Page 189, 190 Six ways whereby men may certainly
know whether their love to the Saints be real or not. Page 190, to 200

M
Of singular manifestations. Some Christians live under the singular
manifestations of divine love. Page 341, 342
Of Melancholy. The evil effects of Melancholy. Page 72, 73, 74
Of merciful men. Such as are truly and graciously merciful, are blessed, etc.
Page 34, 35, 36
Of true mourners. Such as are true mourners are blessed. Page 32

N
Of Name, and of a great Name. Many Professors take up in a great Name. Page
337, 338.

O
Of Obedience. If your obedience springs from faith, then your estate is good,
then you have assuredly an infallible work of God upon your souls. Page 132
Seven ways to know when your obedience is the obedience of faith, with the
resolution of some considerable questions about obedience, worthy of serious
consideration. Page 132, to 161

P
Of the Promises. The Promises of God are a Christians Magna Charta, his
chiefest evidences for heaven. Page 9, 10 Q. How may a person come to know
whether he has a real and saving interest in the promises or no. This great
Question receives nine Answers. Page 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. All great
Promises are made over to faith and repentance. Page 26, 27 The promises prove
an inseparable connection between true faith and eternal glory. Page 48, 49, 50,
51, 52 Many scores of promises will be of no use to a Christian, if he may not
lawfully come to the knowledge of his gracious estate, in a discoursive way
arguing from the effect to the cause, Page 346, 347
Of being poor in spirit. To such who are poor in spirit the kingdom of heaven
belongs. Page 30, 31, 32
Of prizing grace. No man can really prize grace above a thousand worlds, but
he that has true grace in him. Page 200
Of purity of heart. They that are pure in heart are blessed, and shall see
God. Page 36, 37, 38, 39

R
Of Relapses. A true child of God may relapse into the same sin again and
again. Page 278, 279, 280, 281 That a child of God does not relapse into the
same sin in such a manner as wicked men do relapse, is made good seven ways.
Page 281, 282
About receiving of Christ. Such as receive Christ aright are the Sons of God.
Page 26
About Repentance. There is a Repentance that does accomcompany salvation. Page
217 See sorrow for sin, see confession of sin, and see turning from sin.
Of Christ's Righteousness. When a Christians evidences are either clear or
clouded, it highly concerns him to have his heart fixed upon the Mediatory
righteousness of Christ. Page 359, 360, 361 Five admirable comforts the
Mediatory righteousness of Christ will afford to every gracious soul. Page 361,
362, 363
Remedies against fears. Two Remedies against those fears that many times rise
in a gracious soul. Page 388, 389, 390

S
Of Satan. Satan is a grand enemy to the peace, joy, comfort, settlement and
satisfaction of every poor Christian. Page 340, 341
Of Scripture. All men and women that are desirous to know how it will go with
them in another world, they must peremptorily resolve to be determined by
Scripture, in the great matters of their interest in Christ. Page 20, 21, 22,
23, 24
Of sin, many weighty things about it. A universal willingness to be rid of all
sin, is an infallible evidence of the truth of grace in a man's heart. Page 88,
89, 90, 91, 92 A constant habitual willingness to be rid of all sin, is an
infallible evidence of the truth of grace in the soul. Page 92, 93 A
transcendent willingness, a superlative willingness to be rid of sin, is an
infallible evidence of the truth of grace in the soul. Page 93, 94, 95, 96, 97
That soul that does not allow himself, or indulge himself in a course of sin,
or in the common practice of any known sin, that soul is certainly a gracious
soul. Page 97, 98, 99 That soul that conflicts most with heart-sins, and is
m^st affected and afflicted with spiritual sins, he is certainly a gracious
soul. Page 99, 100, 101, 102 That soul that abstains from sin, and whose heart
rises against sin, because of the evil nature of it, etc. that soul has
certainly a principle of grace, a seed of God in him. Page 102, 103, 104, 105,
106 Where there is an irreconcilable opposition in the soul against sin, there
is a saving work of God upon that man's heart. Page 106, 107, 108 Where the very
prevailings of sin are ordinarily made serviceable to high and holy ends, there
certainly is a saving work of God upon that man's soul. Page 108 109, 110 Where
a bare naked command of God is commonly of that power, force and authority with
the soul, as to curb sin, and restrain the soul from sin, and to fence the soul
against the encroachments and commands of sin, there is certainly a saving work
of God upon that man's soul. Page 111, 112, 113 Constant desires, and earnest
and constant endeavors to avoid and shun all known appearances of sin,
evidences the truth and reality of grace in the soul. Page 114, 115, 116 He
that sets himself mostly, resolutely, habitually, against his bosom sins, his
constitution sins, etc. he has certainly a powerful, a saving work of God upon
his soul. Page 126, 127 That soul that would not willingly, wilfully,
resolutely, maliciously, wickedly, habitually, etc. sin against the Lord to
gain a world, that soul is certainly a gracious soul Page 201, 202 Paul lays
down eight aggravations of his sins, and all to greaten and heighten them. Page
244, 245, 246, 247 Many indulge their lusts. Page 338, 339
Of sorrow for sin. When a man's sorrow for sin is sinful, showed in six
particulars. Page 87 Sorrow and grief of heart for sin committed, is that first
part of repentance to which the promise of forgiveness of sin is made Page 218,
219 Eight ways whereby men may know that their sorrow is true godly sorrow,
that it is that very sorrow that is a part of true repentance. Page 219, to 229
There are seven concomitants or companions that attend and wait on godly
sorrow. Page 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234
Of the Spirit. Without the light of the Spirit our graces shine not Page 347,
348, 349

T
Of thirsting. They which truly hunger and thirst after righteousness are
blessed. Page 32, 33, 34
Of time and times. Christians should take the m^st compendious time for the
casting up of their spiritual accounts. Page 69, 70 There are seven times,
seasons or cases, where a Christian should not cast up his spiritual accounts.
Page 70, to 74
Of turning from all sin to God. The third part of true repentance lies in
turning from all sin to God. Page 254, 255, 256 First, that turning from sin
which brings a man within the compass of the promise of forgiveness of sin, is
a cordial turning from sin. Page 256, 257 Secondly, a true penitential turning
is an universal turning, a turning not from some sins, but from all sins. Page
257, 258 Eight great Reasons why the true penitent turns from sin universally.
Page 258, to 269 In answer to an Objection it is declared, that a true
penitential turning from all sin consists in six things. Page 269; to 274
Thirdly, a true penitential turning is a constant, a continued turning from
sin. Page 274, 275, 276; 277 Q. But in what respects is a true penitential
turning from sin, such a turning from sin, as never to return to sin any more?
in what respects is the penitents turning from sin, a continued and steadfast
turning from sin. Sol. This is a very sober, serious, weighty Question, and
bespeaks a very sober, serious and satisfactory Answer; and therefore it is
answered, First, Negatively, from 277, to 282. And Secondly, Affirmatively,
from Page 282, to 284 A true penitential turning from sin includes a returning
to God; sin is an aversion from God, and repentance is a conversion to God.
Page 284, 285, 286

W
Of walking. There is no condemnation to such who walk after the Spirit Page
47, 48
Of the witness of the Spirit. Their mistake pointed at, who have made the
witness of the Spirit the only marks or evidence of our interest in Christ.
Page 1, 2, 3, 4.

There is at the end of this Book, a Catalogue of all Mr. Brooks's Books.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line. 14. fleshly for flashy, p. 16. in the Margent, r. dance, p. 17.
Margent, pat for part, p. 18. l. 32. for gradually r. perfectly, p. 19. l. 2.
r. it, l. 25. for Marcol r. Murcot. p. 30. l. 2. hat for that, p. 35. l. 8. r.
(...) p. 39. l. 31. r. Asa's, p. 63. l. 17. for wate^ r. children, p. 106. l.
15. r. gerandum, p. 110. l. 28. r. Antiperistasis, p. 142. l. 30. add only, p.
239. l. 2. for heels r. feels, p. 258. l. 19. outging for outing, p. 292.
Margent, r. vitiums for vitium, p. 117. l. 16. for were r. where, p. 311.
Margent, r. (...), p. 326. l. 22. r. word for world, p. 333. l. ult. add the,
p. 347. l. ult add as. p. 356. l. 21. for five r. three, l. 26. for five r.
three, l. 34. for five r. three, p. 357. l. 8. springs for spring, in the
Margent r. (...), p. 368. l. 13. r. patent, p. 376. l. 14. r. (...) p. 383. l.
16. to for in, in the fourth leaf of the Epistle, in l. 9. blot out one, in the
same leaf, l. 32. conclusions for confusions.

CHAP. I.
Containing eighteen special Maxims, Considerations, Rules and Directions that
are seriously to be minded and observed, in order to the clearing up of a man's
interest in Christ, the saving work of God upon his own soul, and his title to
all the glory of another world.

The first Maxim or Consideration.
FIrst, Some have made the witness of But this opinion being well laid asleep
in these days, I shall not put my self to the trouble of awakening of it
afresh, but leave it to sleep with the Authors, who are now in their graves.
and deny all signs from the fruit of the Spirit; but this is to deny the fruit
growing upon the Tree to be a sign that the Tree is alive, whereas our Savior
expressly tells us, That the Tree is known by his fruit, Mat. 12.33. Certainly
it is one thing to judge by our graces, and another thing to rest on our graces,
or to put our trust in our graces, or to make a Savior of our graces; there is
a great deal of difference between declaring and deserving. Doubtless
Christians may look to their graces as evidences of their interest in Christ,
justification and salvation, though not as causes of their interest in Christ,
justification and salvation. O Sirs, we must always carefully distinguish
'twixt the root and ground of our comfort, and between the testimonies or
evidences of our interest in the root of our comfort. Now it must be readily
granted that Jesus Christ is the only root and ground of a Christians comfort
and triumph; and therefore says Paul, Gal. 6 14.
God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing, but in the Cross of Christ. And
so in that, 2 Cor. 2.14. New thanks be unto God, which always causes us to
triumph in Christ. So that, if at any time we behold this or that saving grace,
or this or that part of holiness shining in our hearts or lives, we take
comfort in it, not as the cause, or root, or ground of our comfort or triumph,
but as in a testimony or evidence, because it does manifest our interest in
him, who is our comfort, Luke 2 25. Col. 3 11. Genesis 9 13, 14, 16. v.
our peace, our joy, our salvation, our all in all. Look as the Rainbow is not
a cause, why God will not drown the world, but a sign that God will not drown
the world; and as it is a sign that God will not drown the world, we may and
ought to rejoice in it, and to take comfort from it. So here, etc. It Is agreed
on all hands, that sanctification is a precious benefit of the Covenant of
grace, Jer. 33.8, 9. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. Heb. 8.10, 12. etc.
as well as justification; and what crime can it then be, to evidence one
benefit of the Covenant of grace, by another benefit of the same Covenant. That
he that is justified, is also sanctified, and that he that is sanctified is
also justified, is so clear, so bright, so sparkling, and so full a truth
contained in the Covenant of grace, that no man or devil can deny. Now what
evil or error can it be for a man to assert, That he that is certainly
sanctified, is certainly justified; (it being the very language of the Covenant
of grace) and that therefore he that knows himself to be sanctified, may also
know thereby that he is justified. Certainly, those persons that shall deny
sanctification to be a most sure, sweet and comfortable evidence of a man's
justification, they must not only blot out and abolish the Epistles of James
and John, but must also race out and abolish all those Evangelical promises of
grace and mercy, of happiness and blessedness, that are made to such persons as
are invested, enriched and bespangled with the several graces of the holy
Spirit; this might be made evident by many hundred Scriptures: but take that
one for all, Mat. 5. where our Savior himself (who was the most Evangelical
Preacher that ever was in the world) makes eight or nine promises of mercy and
blessedness to those very persons that had the graces of the Spirit inherent in
them, as poverty of spirit, mourning, meekness, hungering and thirsting after
righteousness, etc. O Sirs, why should we be so frequently and earnestly called
upon to try and examine our selves, 2 Cor. 12.5. ver.
whether we be in the faith or no, if we were not to come to the knowledge of
our faith, in a discoursive way, arguing from the effect to the cause. Have not
the Saints of old come to assurance and the knowledge of the goodness of their
estates this way? Ponder seriously on that, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is
this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity
we have had our conversation in the world. Mark, their joy was founded on the
testimony of their conscience, and their conscience gave in this testimony from
the sincerity of their conversation in this world. So Paul in that, 2 Timothy 4.7,
8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, (...) Certamen illud
praeclarum certavi. Beza. I have fought that excellent fight. By wrestling the
Apostle uses the same Metaphor also in that, 1 Cor. 9.25. v.
I have kept the faith; henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness.
How plainly, how fully, how with open mouth (as I may say) does he conclude his
right to the crown of Righteousness (so called, partly because it is purchased
by the righteousness of Christ, and partly, because he is righteous that has
promised it, and partly, because it is a just and righteous thing with God to
crown them with glory at last, who have for the Gospel sake, and his glory
sake, been crowned with shame and reproach in this world, and partly (if not
mainly) because it is a crown that can only be had (or obtained) in a way of
righteousness and holiness) from his graces and gracious actings in this world.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith;
yea, it is further observable, that in the blessed Scripture, we are strongly
pressed to do good works, that by them we may make our calling, election and
salvation sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to
make your calling and election sure. By good works; so say all the Latin
Copies, and so say some Greek Copies, though not those that our English
Translators have been pleased to follow, and that is the reason why those words
(by good works) are not in our English Bibles; but he that shall seriously
weigh the scope of the Apostle in this place, he must of necessity grant, that
good works are to be understood, though they are not expressed in the Text; and
that of the Apostle, in 1 Timothy 6.16, 17, 18. seems plainly and strongly to
sound the same way.

The second Maxim or Consideration.
SEcondly, consider, That true, sound, solid marks, signs and evidences, are
the best way to prevent delusions; there is no such deceit in sound and solid
evidences, as there is in fleshy joys, and in high and strange raptures, by
which many glistering Professors have been sadly deceived and deluded. Young
Samuel being not acquainted with any extraordinary manifestations of the
presence and power of God, took the voice of God from heaven to be the voice of
old Ely. 1. Sam. 3.5.
Ah, how many have there been in our days, that have taken the irregular
motions of their own hearts, and the violent workings of their own distempered
fancies, and imaginations, and Satanical delusions, to be the visions of God,
celestial raptures, divine breathings, and the powerful impulses of the Spirit
of God, and so have been stirred up to speak, write and act such things that
have been, not only contrary to the holy Word of God, but also contrary to the
very Laws of nature and Nations. Satan by transforming of himself into an Angel
of light, has seduced and ruined many Professors, 2 Cor. 11.14. v. Gerson in
his Book (de probatione spirituum) of the trial of spirits.
against whom, as an Angel of darkness he could never prevail. Gerson tells a
remarkable story of Satan's appearing to a holy man, in a most glorious and
beautiful manner, professing himself to be Christ; and because he for his
exemplary holiness was worthy to be honored above others, therefore he
appeared unto him; but the good old man readily answered him, that he desired
not to see his Savior in this wilderness, it should suffice him to see him
hereafter in heaven, and withal added this pithy prayer: O let thy sight be my
reward, Lord, in another life, and not in this; and so he became victorious
over Satan, though he had transformed himself into a glorious Angel of light;
but such a a victorious crown has not been set upon every ones head to whom
Satan has appeared as an Angel of glory. See Dr. Casaubon, and Dr. Moore,
concerning Enthusiasm.
Certainly, they that stand so much, so mightily for an immediate testimony,
seem to open such a gap to Enthusiasm, as will not be easily shut; yea, how
will they be ever able to secure to purpose, poor souls from sad delusions? for
how easy a thing is it for Satan (who is the father of lies? Joh. 8.48. who is
an old deceiver, Genesis 3.13. 1 Timothy 2.14. who is the grand deceiver, Rev. 12.9.
Rev. 13.14. Rev. 19.20. Rev. 20.10. who has his devices, Cor. 2.11. his wiles,
Ephesians. 6.11. his snares, 1 Timothy 3.7. his depths, Rev. 2.24.) to find various
artifices to counterfeit this immediate testimony, and bear witness in the
spirits stead; so that, when poor souls thinks that they have the Spirit of
grace and truth to assure them that all is well, and shall be for ever well
with them; they have none but the father of lies to deceive them, they have
none but the devil in Samuels mantle, to put a soul-murdering cheat upon them.
I am not fond of advising any poor souls to lay the stress of their hopes of
heaven and salvation, merely upon immediate impressions, lest they should
subject themselves to infinite delusions. O Sirs, the way of immediate
Revelation is more fleeting and inconstant, such actings of the Spirit are like
those outward motions that came upon Sampson, Judge. 13.25. The Spirit came upon
him at times; and so upon every withdrawment, new doubts and scruples arise;
but the trial of a man's estate by grace is more constant and durable, saving
grace being a continual pledge of God's love to us; flashes of joy and comfort,
are only sweet and delightsom whilst they are felt, but grace is that immortal
seed that abides for ever, 1 John 3.9. But,

The third Maxim or Consideration.
Mat. 15 28. and Chap. 8 26. It is one thing to show you the properties of a
man, and another thing to show you the properties of a strong man, 1 Pet. 2.3.
1 John 2.1, 12, 13, 14. v.
so there are evidences that are proper to a strong faith, and evidences that
are proper to a weak faith: Now, he that cannot find in himself the evidences
of a strong faith, he must not conclude that he has no faith; for he may have
in him the evidences of a weak faith, when he has not the evidences of a strong
faith in him; in Christ's School, House, Church, there are several sorts and
ranks of Christians, as babes, children, young men, and old men; and
accordingly, Ministers in their preaching and writing, should sort their
evidences, that so babes and children may not be found bleeding, grieving and
weeping, when they should be sound joying and rejoicing. Secondly, no man must
make such characters, marks or evidences of a child of God, which may be found
in an hypocrite, a Formalist, etc. for this were to lay a stumbling block
before the blind, this were to delude poor souls, Ezekiel. 13.22. v.
and to make them glad whom God would not have made glad; yea, this is the
highway, the ready way, to make them miserable in both worlds. The rule or
evidence that every Christian is to measure himself by, must be neither too
long nor too short, but adequate to the state of a Christian; that is, it must
not be so long on the one hand, as that all Christians cannot reach it, nor yet
so short on the other hand, as that it will not reach a true Christian; but the
rule or evidence must be such as will suit and fit every sincere believer, and
none else: Some Christians are apt to judge of themselves, and to try
themselves, by such rules or evidences as are competent only to those that are
strong men in Christ, and that are grown to a high pitch of grace, of holiness,
of communion with God, of spiritual enjoymen^s, and heavenly seize, and
sweet and blessed ^avishments of soul; and by this means they come to conclude
against the works of the blessed spirit in them, and to perplex and disquiet
their own souls with needless fears, doubts and jealousies; others on the other
hand, are apt to judge of themselves, and to try themselves, by such things,
rules or evidences that are too short (and will certainly leave them short of
heaven) as a fair civil deportment among all sorts and ranks of men, a good
nature, paying every man their d^e, charity to the poor, Mat. 23. Luke 18 9,
10, 11, 12. v. Isa. 1.2, 3, 4, 5.
a good name or fame among men (yea, happily among good men) outward exercises
of Religion, as hearing, praying, reading, fasting, or that they are good
negative Christians, that is to say, that they are no drunkards, swearers,
liars, adulterers, extortioners, oppressors, Sabbath Breakers, persecutor, etc.
Phil. 3.4.5, 6 v. Gal. 6.3. Isa. 33.14.
Thus far Paul attained before his conversion, but if he had gone no further,
he had been a lost man for ever; and by this means they flatter themselves into
misery, and are still a dreaming of going to heaven, till they drop into hell,
and awake with everlasting flames about their ears: And oh, that all that
preach or print, read or write, would seriously lay this to heart, some in
describing the state of a Christian, show rather what of right it should be,
than what indeed it is; they show what Christians ought to be, rather than what
they find themselves to be, and so they become a double edged sword to many
Christians. But,

The fourth Maxim or Consideration.
FOurthly, consider, Where there is any one grace in man by his living under
the reign and dominion of any one sin, As they say of the cardinal virtues;
Virtutes sunt inter se connexa, The virtues are chained together; so we may say
of the graces of the Spirit, etc. Mark, says Chrysostom, it is not working of
miracles, casting out of devils, but love to our brethren, that is the
infallible proof of being a Disciple.
though he does not live under the power of other sins, because there is not
any one sin mortified in that man, that has any one sin reigning in him, and
that does not set himself in good earnest against it as his greatest enemy. So
when a Christian can but find any one grace in him, as love to the Saints, for
grace sake, for godliness sake, he may safely conclude, that there is in him
all other graces; where there is but one link of this golden chain, there are
all the links of this golden chain, Joh. 13.35. By this shall all men know ye
are my Disciples, if ye love one another. He does not say, if ye work miracles,
if ye raise the dead, if ye give eyes to the blind, or ears to the deaf, or
tongues to the dumb, or feet to the lame, but if ye love one another. There
have been many, yea, very many precious Christians, who have lived and died
with a great deal of comfort and peace from the application of that Text to
their own souls, 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from death to life,
because we love the brethren. Sincere love to the brethren, is a most evident
sign of a Christians being already passed or translated from death to life;
observe, the Apostle does not say, we think we have passed from death to life,
but we know we have passed from death to life; nor he does not say, we
conjecture we have passed from death to life, but we know we have passed from
death to life; nor he does not say, we hope we are passed from death to life,
but we are assured that we are passed from death to life, that is, from a state
of nature into a state of grace, because we love the brethren; for ever
remember this, when all other evidences have failed, many gracious Christians,
and all other Texts of Scripture have afforded them no comfort here, they have
anchored here, they have found rest for their distressed souls, and upon this
one single planck, this one evidence they have swam safely and comfortably unto
the haven of eternal happiness. Every real Christian has in some measure,
every sanctifying grace in him; as a child so soon as it is born is a perfect
man, for integrity of parts and entireness of limbs, though not for bigness and
bulk of body, so every regenerate person, at the very first hour of his
conversion, 1 These. 5.23. John 3 5, 6, 7, 8. Chap. 1.16. Psalm. 45.13. The new
creature has all the pa^ts and lineaments; as in the body there is a
composition of all the elements, and a mixture of all the humors.
he is in part renewed in all parts, all the habits of grace are infused into
the soul by the Spirit at once; at first conversion, the soul is bespangled
with every grace, though every grace is not then grown up to its full
proportion or perfection; so that where there is one grace in truth, there is
every grace in truth; that soul that can truly and seriously conclude, that he
has any one grace in him, that soul ought to conclude, that there is every
grace in him. Such as diligently search the Scripture, shall find that true
blessedness, Mat. 5.3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Every child of God has all the graces of
the spirit in him radically, though not gradually.
happiness and salvation is attributed to several signs, sometimes to the fear
of God, sometimes to faith, sometimes to repentance, sometimes to love,
sometimes to meekness, sometimes to humility, sometimes to patience, sometimes
to poverty of spirit, sometimes to holy mourning, sometimes to hungering and
thirsting after righteousness; so that if a godly man can find any one of these
in himself, he may safely and groundedly conclude of his salvation and
justification, though he cannot see all those signs in him; there is no Saint
but may perceive one sign in him, when he cannot another. Now, he that can
groundedly be persuaded of any one sign of grace, he may safely conclude he
has all the rest, though for the present he can neither see them nor feel them
in himself. But,

The fifth Maxim or Consideration.
FIfthly, consider, That the promises of God are a Christians Magna Charta, his
chiefest evidences for heaven; divine promises are Gods Deed of Gift, they are
the only assurance which the Saints have to show for their right and title to
Christ, to his blood, and to all the happiness and blessedness that comes by
him. Look, Genesis 38.18-27
as Judah by pleading and bringing forth the signet, the bracelets, and the
staff, saved her life, so we by believing, pleading, and bringing forth the
promises, must save our own souls; the promises are not only the food of faith,
but also the very life and soul of faith, they are a Mine of rich treasures, a
garden full of the choicest and sweetest flowers, in them are wrapped up all
celestial contentments and delights. And this is most certain, that all a
Christians conclusions of interest in any of those choice and precious
privileges which flow from the blood of Jesus Christ, ought to be bottomed,
grounded and founded upon the rich and free promises of grace and mercy.

But how may a person come to know, whether he has a real and saving interest
in the promises, or no? Now to this great Question, I shall give these nine
following Answers.



'Twas a good saying of Augustine, Da quod jubes, and juhe quod vis, Give what
thou command, and command what thou will. To such a frame the promises
belong. Numb. 13.28. to the end.
Psalm. 119.6. Act. 13.22. Luke 1.5, 6. There is no soul under heaven that
commonly lies under the commanding power of the Word, but that soul that has an
interest in the word of Promise; men that have no interest in the word of
Promise, commonly live in the neglect of the word of command; if the word of
command commonly carries thy soul, then the word of promise, without all
peradventure, belongs to thy soul: Many deal with the commands of God, as the
Heathens dealt with the commands of their gods; When their gods called for a
man, they offered a candle; or as Hercules offered up a painted man, instead of
a living man. Such as deal thus with the commands of God, they have no interest
in the promises of God; flesh and blood looks upon the commands of God as
impossible to be obeyed, like the unbelieving spies; O we cannot conquer the
Land; but faith and love, like Caleb and Joshua, conclude the Land may be
conquered, the commands may be Evangelically obeyed, and accordingly they
readily ^ndertake it. Now, to such a frame of heart the promises are entailed.
But,

Thirdly, If in the face of all objections, The longer, said the Emperor's son,
the Cooks are preparing the meat, the better cheer I shall have. His meaning
was, that the longer he staid for the Empire, the better and greater it would
be; so the longer the soul waits for a mercy, the better and greater it will be
when it comes, etc.
discouragements Abraham's was, Romans 4. then certainly the promises belong to
thee. There are some prom^ses that relate to the subduing of sin, as that, Jer.
33.8. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. Mich. 7.19. Psalm. 65.3. And there are other precious
promises that relate to a growth in grace, as that, Mal. 4.2. Job 17.9. Psalm.
92.12, 13, 14. Prove. 4.18. Hos. 14.5, 6, 7. Now if thy heart be kept up in a
waiting frame, for the accomplishment of these promises, then they do certainly
belong to thee; the same I may say of all other promises, The waiting soul
shall be sure to speed, Psalm. 40.1, 2, 3. Isa. 40.29, 30, 31. Isa. 30.18. Heb.
6.12, etc. God never did, nor never will, frustrate the expectations of the
patient waiter, etc. But,

Fourthly, He that has those divine qualities or supernatural

Fifthly, He that lives upon the promises as his daily food, them as his daily
food, he has a most assured interest in them; our outward man lives not upon
kickshaws, though now and then we may taste of them, but we live upon wholesome
food; so here, no man lives upon the blessed promises as his appointed food,
but he that has a real interest in the promises. Look, as there is a
nourishment proper to every Animal Spiders feed on flies, Moles on worms, the
Horse on g^ass, the Lion on flesh, etc. so there is food (nourishment) that is
proper for men's souls, viz. the precious promises; and Christ's flesh, which is
meat indeed, and his blood, which is drink indeed, John 6. and he that daily
feeds on this food, will be happy for ever. But,

Gal. 3.29. Gal. 4.28. Heb. 1.2. Rev. 21.7.
And if you be Christ's, then are you Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the
promise. The promise is the Jointure, and there is no way under heaven to enjoy
the Jointure, but by matching with the person of Christ. And faith is the grace
of graces, by which the soul gives both its assent and consent to take the Lord
Jesus Christ, as he is tendered and offered in the Gospel, and is therefore
called sometimes a receiving of Christ, John 1.12. The only way to enjoy a
Ladies Jointure, is to marry her person; and so the only way to enjoy the
promise of Christ, is to be willing to marry the person of Christ; it is our
marriage-union with Christ, that gives us a right and title to all the promises
of Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. For all the promises of God in him, are yea, and in
him, Amen. All absolute and conditional promises, either of grace or unto
grace, are made to us in Christ, and only enjoyed by our enjoying of Christ.

2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. Ephesians. 5.22, 23. 2 Pet. 1.4.
has a right in every link of the chain. As there is a chain of graces, so
there is a chain of promises. He that can lay his hand upon any one promise,
and truly say this is mine, he may safely lay his hand upon every promise, and
say these are mine; he that is an heir to any one promise, he is an heir to
every promise. Hence it is they are called heirs of promise, Heb. 6.17. not hei
s of this promise, or that, but of promise; that is, of every promise, or the
Covenant which comprehends all the precious promises of the Gospel in it.
Though the promises may be distinguished one from another, yet they may not be
severed one from another; he that has a right to any one promise, he may safely
infer his right to every promise. The whole Covenant (which is a bundle of
promises) is certainly thine, if any one promise be thine; the promises by a
divine hand are mutually tied and linked together; and those whom God has
joined together, no man may put asunder. The promises can be no more divided,
than Christ can be divided, or than heaven can be divided; the promises are not
like loofe and unstringed pearls, but as pearls made into one entire chain. He
that can lay his hand upon that promise, Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they which
hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied, and truly
say, this promise is mine, he may safely lay his hand upon that promise, ver.
8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, and say this promise
is mine; and the same he may say of the rest of the precious promises that are
specified in v. 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11. of that Chapter. He that can lay his
hand upon any one promise, that God has made to them that love him, and truly
say, this promise is mine, he may safely lay his hand upon every promise that
God has made to them that love him, and say these are all mine. He that can lay
his hand upon any one promise that God has made to them that fear him, and
truly say this promise is mine, he may assuredly lay his hand upon every
promise that God has made to them that fear him, and say these are all mine. He
that can lay his hand upon any one promise that God has made to faith in
Christ, to believing in Christ, and truly say this promise is mine, he may
safely lay his hand upon every promise that God has made to faith in Christ, to
believing in Christ, and say all these promises are mine. He that can lay his
hand upon any one promise that God has made to the returning sinner, and truly
say, this promise is mine, he may securely lay his hand upon every promise,
that God has made to the returning sinner, the repenting sinner, and say all
these are mine. He that can lay his hand upon any one promise, that God has
made to the waiting soul, and truly say this promise is mine, he may without
all peradventure lay his hand upon every promise that God has made to the
waiting soul, and say all these are mine; prove but your right in one, and you
may safely infer your right to all. But,

Abraham did, Romans 4.17-22. and thus Jacob did, Genesis 32.6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12.
compared, and thus Sarah did, Heb. 11.11. and thus Moses did, Number. 10.29. and
thus Jehosaphat did, 2 Chronicles. 20.1, 10, compared with the 7, 8, 9. verses of
that Chapter. And this was David's common practice, Psalm. 27.12.13. and Psalm
60.1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. compared, and Psalm. 119.49, 50. Turn to these
Scriptures, and ponder upon them. And so when a man is under the guilt of sin,
he flies to promises of pardon and forgiveness, as to his surest and choicest
City of refuge, Number. 14.19. Isa. 55.7. Jer. 33.8. Isa. 40.1.2. Chap. 43.25.
Mich. 7.18. Jer. 31.34. Exodus 34.7. Dan. 9.9. And so when a man is under the
strength, power and prevalency of sin, he runs to such promises wherein God has
engaged himself to subdue the sins of his people, and to purge and cleanse away
the sins of his people ( Mich. 7.19. Romans 6.14. Psalm. 65.3. Isa. 1.25. Mal.
3.3. Zach. 13.9. Isa. 27.9. Mat. 3.12. Ezekiel. 36.25.33. Jer. 33.8.) as to his
surest and choicest City of refuge. And so when a man is deserted, he runs to
such promises as are proper to that state, as to his surest and choicest City
of refuge, Mich. 7.19. Isa. 54.7, 8, 9, 10. Psalm. 5.12. Psalm. 84.10. Psalm.
97.11. Psalm. 112.4. Isa. 49.14, 15, 16. And so when a man is tempted, he runs
to such supporting, succouring and encouraging promises as are most suitable to
that state, as to his surest and choicest City of refuge, 1 Cor. 10.13. Heb.
2.18. Romans 16.20. James 4.7. Now certainly, such as in all their inward and
outward straits run thus to the promises, as to their surest and choicest City
of re^uge, they have an unquestionable interest in the promises. The rich man's
wealth is his strong City, Prove. 10.15. Wealthy worldlings in times of distress
and danger, do run to their hoards and heaps of riches, as to a strong City
that is able to outstand all sieges and assaults, and to be safety and security
to them; so when once a man makes the precious promises to be his strong City,
and runs to them in the day of his distress and dangers, as his only safety and
security, then he has doubtless an interest in them. But,

Ninethly and lastly, If you daily present a greater and a choicer good in the
promises to your souls, than any this world affords, then certainly you have an
interest in the promises. If when honors, or riches, or pleasures, or the
applause of men do present themselves unto you, you can readily present to your
own souls higher honors in the promise, 1 Samuel 2.30. Luke 12.32. Rev. 2.17,
26, 27. Chap. 3.5, 12, 21. Chap. 5.10. and more durable riches in the promise,
Prove. 8.18. 1 Pet. 3.4. and sweeter and choicer pleasures in the promise, Psalm.
16.11. Isa. 12.3. Chap. 35.2, 10. Jer. 33.9, 11. Psalm. 132.16. and greater
applause in the promise, Mat. 10.32. Whosoever therefore shall confess me
before men, him will I confess also before my father which is in heaven; I, and
before the Angels too, Luke 12.8. Mat. 25.31-41. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. 2 These. 1.6, 7,
8, 9, 10. Rev. 3.9. Isa. 60.12, 13, 14. Then certainly you have an interest in
the promise. When a man can show his own heart daily, in the glass of the
promises, a greater worth, excellency and glory, than all this world affords,
without all controversy he has an interest in the promises. Thus those
Worthies, of whom this world was not worthy, Heb. 11. and the Martyrs in all
ages, did commonly present better, higher and greater things to their own souls
in the promises, than any their adversaries were able to propose to draw them
off from Christ, their profession or principles, etc. and by this means they
did very courageously and honorably maintain their ground in the face of all
the gay and golden temptations that they met withal. Mat. 5.10, 11, 12 Burn my
foot if you will (said that noble Martyr S. Basil) that it may da ce
everlastingly with the Angels in heaven.
Crudelitas vestra, gloria nostra, Your cruelty is our glory, said they in
Tertullian; and the harder we are put to it, the greater shall be our reward in
heaven. Basi^ will tell you, that the most cruel Martyrdom is but a crafty
trick to escape death, to pass from life to life, as he speaks; It can be but a
days journey between the Cross and Paradise. Though the Cross be bitter, yet
it is but short: A little storm, as one said of Julians persecution, and an
eternal calm follows. Adrianus seeing the Martyrs suffer cheerfully such
grievous and dreadful things, asked, Why they would endure such misery, 1 Cor.
2.9.
when they might (by retracting) free themselves; upon which one of them
alleged that Text, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into
the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.
The naming of the Text, and seeing them suffer such hard things cheerfully, did
(by a blessing from on high) so really and effectually convert him, that
afterward he became a Martyr too. Acts 16.25.
When we see poor, weak, feeble Christians, defying their torments, conquering
in the midst of sufferings, singing in prison as Paul and Silas did, kissing
the stake, as Henry Voes did: clapping their hands when they were half consumed
with fire, as Hawks did; blessing God that ever they were born to see that
day, as John Noyes did; calling their execution day, their wedding day, as
Bishop Ridley did; we cannot but conclude, that they had an eye to the
recompense of reward, and they saw such great, and sweet, and glorious things
in the promises, that did so refresh, delight and ravish their hearts, and
transport their souls, that all their heavy afflictions seemed light, and their
long afflictions short, and their most bitter afflictions sweet and easy to
them. But,

The sixth Maxim or Consideration.
SIxthly, consider, That it is granted on all hands, that the least degree of
grace, if true, is sufficient to salvation; for the promises of life and glory,
of remission and salvation, of everlasting happiness and blessedness, Mark.
16.16. John 3.16, 36. M^t. 5. John 6, 40.
are not made over to degrees of grace, but to the truth of grace, not to faith
in triumph, but to faith in truth; and therefore the sense and evidence of the
least grace, yea of the least degree of the least grace, may afford some
measure of assurance. Grace is the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. and the Tree
is known by his fruit, Mat. 12.33. I don't say, An eminent Minister, who was a
famous instrument of converting many to God, was wont to say, that for his own
pat he had no other evidence in himself of being in the state of grace, than
that he was sensible of his deadness.
that weak grace will afford a strong assurance, or a full assurance (for that
rather arises from strength of grace, than from truth of grace) but I say, weak
grace may afford some assurance: And oh, that all weak Christians would
seriously lay this to heart, for it may serve to relieve them against many
fears, doubts, discouragements and jealousies, which do much disturb the peace
and comfort of their precious souls; though the least measures of grace cannot
satisfy a sincere Christian, yet they ought to quiet his conscience, and cheer
his heart, and confirm his judgment of his interest in Christ. The least
measure of grace is like a Diamond, very little in bulk, but of high price and
mighty value, and accordingly we are to improve it for our comfort and
encouragement. A Goldsmith makes reckoning of the least filings of gold, Slight
not the lowest, the meanest evidences of grace. God may put thee to make use of
the lowest as thou think, even that, 1 John 3.14. that may be worth a
thousand worlds to thee. Page 33. of a little piece called a choice drop of
honey.
and so should we of the least measures of grace. A man may read the Kings
Image upon a silver penny, as well as upon a larger piece of coin. The least
dram of grace bears the Image of God upon it; and why then should it not
evidence the goodness and happiness of a Christians estate. It Is a true saying,
That the assurance of an eternal life, is the life of this temporal life. I
have read, that Mr. Jordain, one of the Aldermen of the City of Exeter, would
use to ask grown Professors, whether they had any assurance; which if they
denied, he would tell them, that he was even ashamed of them; In good earnest
(says he) I would study the promises, and go into my closet, and lock the
door, and there plead them to God, and say, that I would not go forth, till he
gave me some sense of his love. He would often mention and try himself by these
three Marks: First, a sincere desire to fear the name of God, which he grounded
upon that, Neh. 1. ult. Secondly, a sincere desire to do the will of God in all
things required; which he grounded upon Psalm. 119.6. Thirdly, a full purpose of
heart to cleave to the Lord, which he grounded upon Act. 11.23. The discovery
of grace in thy heart though but one grain, and that of mustard seed, will
assure thee of thy election and final salvation. Fords spirit of Adoption, p.
248.
These he would often press upon others, and these he frequently tried himself
by, and from these he had much assurance and comfort. Mr. Stephen Marshal, in a
Sermon of his, on Isa. 9.2. says, Look and examine, whether thou do not
loath thy self as a base creature; and do thou make this nothing? Secondly,
Do thou not in thy heart value and prize the meanest child of God, more than
the greatest men in the world, that have not the image of God, the image of
grace and holiness stamped upon them, I pray God (says Mr. Marshal) that many
of God's people do not want these evidences. If our souls (says another) shall
like of Christ for a Sui^or, when we find no other jointure but the Cross, Mr.
Dod on the commandments page 313, 314.
we may be sure we are Christians. A man may want the feeling of his faith, and
cry and call again and again for it, and feel nothing all this while, and yet
nevertheless have true and sound faith: For the feeling of, and mourning for
the want of faith, and the earnest and constant desire of it, is an infallible
sign of faith. For this is a sure Rule, that so long as one feels himself
sick he is not dead; and the high estimation of faith, joined with a vehement
desire of it, is a singular evidence that there is a sound and lively root of
faith in our hearts. 1. Pet. 1.2. Mr. Love, his zealous Christian, page 29.
last part.
All the elect of God shall have the sanctification of the Spirit unto
obedience, and the sprinkling of the blood of Christ upon their hearts, sooner
or later. I do not press the having of these things gradually, but sincerely;
an elect person may want many a degree of grace, but if he have them in
sincerity, Dr. Sibbs, his commentary on the first Chapter of the second Epistle
of Paul to the Corinthians, ver. 22. page 491, 492.
though in the least measure, it is a sufficient evidence of his election. An
earnest is little in regard of the whole; perhaps we have but a shilling to
secure us of many pounds: so then the point is this, That howsoever we may be
assured of our estate in grace, and likewise that we shall hold out, yet the
ground of this assurance is not from any great measure of grace; but though t
be little in quantity, it may be great in assurance and security. As we value
an earnest, not for the worth that is in it self, but because it assures us of
a great bargain; we have an eye more to the consummation of the bargain, than
to the quantity of the earnest; so it is here, grace is but an earnest: yet
notwithstanding, though it be little, as an earnest is, yet it is great in
assurance and validity, answerable to the relation of that it has to assure
us. Though grace be little, yet as little as it is, seeing it is an earnest,
and the first fruits (as the Apostle says) which were but little in regard of
the whole harvest, yet it is of the nature of the whole, and thereupon it comes
to secure. A spark of fire is but little, yet it is fire as well as the whole
element of fire; and a drop of water is but little, yet it is water as well as
the whole Ocean. When a man is in a dark place, put the case it be in a
dungeon, if he have but a ^ittle light shining into him from a little crevice,
that little light discovers that the day is broke, that the Sun is risen. Put
the case there be but one grape on a Vine, it shows that it is a Vine, and that
the Vine is not dead: So put the case that there be but the appearance of a
little grace in a Christian, perhaps the Spirit of God appears but in one grace
in him at that time, yet that one grace shows that we are Vines, and not
thistles, or thorns or base plants, and it shows that there is life in the
root. Thus you see how fully this Reverend Doctor speaks to the case. That
friend that writes the life and death of Mr. John Marcol, once Preacher of the
Gospel at Dublin, says, See his Treatise, published by Mr. Winter, Mr.
Chambers, Mr. Eaton, Mr. Carryl, and Mr. Mantou, page 36, 37.
That in preparation for the Supper-Ordinance, he would bring himself unto the
Test, and to say the truth, was very clear in the discovering and making out
his own condition, being well acquainted with the way of Gods dealing with the
soul, and with the way of the souls closing with Christ. Instance, April. 3.
1653. Upon search I find, 1. My self an undone creature. 2. That the Lord Jesus
sufficiently satisfied as Mediator, the Law for sin. 3. That he is freely
offered in the Gospel. 4. So far as I know my own heart, I do through mercy
heartily consent, that he only shall be my Savior, not my works or duties,
which I do only in obedience to him. 5. If I know my heart, I would be ruled by
his Word and Spirit. Behold, in a few words (says he that writes his life and
death) the sum and substance of the Gospel. By these Instances we may see, that
some of the precious servants of God have found a great deal of comfort,
support, rest, content, and some measure of assurance, from a lower rank of
evidences, than those that many strong Christians do reach unto, etc. But,

The seventh Maxim or Consideration.
This we believe, when we first begin to believe, that we ought not to believe
any thing beyond Scripture. Tertullian.
and therefore if a person can prove from Scripture that his graces are true,
or that he is in a gracious estate, or that he has an interest in Christ, or
that he has sayingly, graciously stricken Covenant with God, then he must
resolutely and peremptorily resolve to grant so much as unchangably to
acquiesce in it, to stick fast to it, and to hear nothing against it, from the
world, the flesh, or the devil. God has plainly told us in his blessed Word,
who shall be saved, and who shall be damned, though not by name, yet by the
qualifications, by which they are described in the Bible; there are the
Statute-Laws of heaven, and the standing Rule by which all must be tried, every
man must stand or fall, be eternally blessed, or eternally miserable, as his
condition is consonant to, or various from the infallible characters of saving
grace contained in the holy Scripture, witness that, Isa. 8.20. To the Law and
to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there
is no light (or no morning) in them. So John 12.48. He that rejects me, and
receives not my words, has one that judges him; the word that I have spoken,
the same shall judge him in the last day. Mat. 5.18. For verily I say unto you,
till heaven and earth pass, on jot, or one title shall in no wise pass from the
Law till all be fulfilled. So John 10.35. And the Scripture cannot be broken,
or violated, or made void; but though this be an indispensable duty, yet
certainly there is (especially in times of great afflictions, temptations,
desertions, fears and doubts) a very great aptness and proneness in Christians
to expect strange means rather than right means, and new means rather than old
means, and invented means rather than appointed means, and to build their faith
upon something beside the Word, or that is without the compass of the Word,
rather than upon the plain and naked Word it self; being in this very like to
many weak, crazy, distempered and diseased Patients, that are more ready to
fancy every new Medicine and new Doctor they hear of, and to be tampering with
them, than to expect a recovery, by going through a course of Physic
prescribed by the Physician that best understands their diseases, and the most
proper and effectual means for their recoveries. You know when Naaman the
Assyrian came to the Prophet Elisha to be cured of his Leprosy, he only sent
out a Messenger to him, who bid him go and wash seven times in Jordan, and his
flesh should come again unto him, and he should be clean, 2 Kings 5.10. but
Naamans blood rises, and his heart swells, and he grows very wrath, and all
because he did not like the means prescribed by the Prophet, and because he
thought in his own heart, that the Prophet would have used more likely means to
have wrought the cure, ver. 11, 12. So many Christians when they lie under
great agonies and sore perplexities of soul, and are encouraged to act faith
upon the promises, and to rest their weary souls upon the Word of grace, they
are ready to think and say, that these things, these means will never heal
them, nor comfort them, nor be a relief or support unto them, unless the Lord
does from heaven, by extraordinary Revelations, Visions, Signs and Miracles,
confirm his promises to them; and hereupon they make light of the blessed
Scriptures, which are the springs of life, and the only bottom upon which all
our comforts, peace and happiness is to be built; yea, they relinquish that
more sure word of prophecy which shines as a light in a dark place. 2 Pet. 1.19.
Certainly the acting of faith on the precious promises, and the cleaving of
the soul unto those blessed truths declared in the Gospel of grace, is the most
sure, ready and compendious way of obtaining a blessed assurance, Ephesians. 1.13.
and a full establishment of heart, Com. on Genesis cap. 38.
in all sound, solid and abiding joy and peace; and therefore Luther, though
(as he confesses) he was often tempted to ask for Signs, Apparitions and
Revelations from heaven to confirm him in his way, yet tells us how strongly he
did withstand them, Pactum feci cum Domino Deo meo, etc. I have (says he)
indented with the Lord my God, that he would never send me Dreams, Visions,
Angels, for I am well contented with this gift, that I have the holy Scripture,
which does abundantly teach and supply all necessaries for this life, and that
also which is to come. Certainly, Austin hit the mark, when he prayed, Lord,
let thy holy Scriptures be my pure delights, in which I can neither deceive, or
ever be deceived. Certainly the balance of the sanctuary should weigh all the
Oracles of God, decide all, and the Rule of Gods Word be the square and judge
of all. O Sirs, dare you venture your souls upon it, that the blessed
Scriptures are false, that they are but a Fable? dare you stand forth, and say,
if the Scriptures be not a lie, let us be damned for ever and ever? dare you
stand up and say, we are freely contented that the everlasting worm shall gnaw
on our hearts for ever, and that our bodies and souls shall for ever and ever
lie burning in infernal flames, if the Scriptures prove not at last a cheat, a
deceit, a mere forgery and imposture? Now, if you dare not thus to say, and
thus to venture, then peremptorily resolve to be determined by Scripture, in
the great concernments of your precious souls. They that would take their parts
in promised comforts, they must follow the voice of the Word, and subscribe to
the sentence of conscience, following that Word. If the Word approve of thee,
as sound and sincere with God, assuredly thou art so, for that rule cannot err:
If the Word says, that thy heart is right with God, thou must maintain that
Testimony against all disputes whatever. Never enter into dispute with Satan,
or thine own self, about thy estate, but by taking and making the Scripture the
judge of the controversy; when fears rise high, you say you shall never have
mercy; b^t dot^ the Word say so? The Lord never gave himself to me; but does
the Word say so? Never was any as I am; but does the Word say so? I cannot see,
nor conceive, nor think, that the Lord has any love for me; but does the Word
say so? yea, does not the Word say, That his thoughts are not as your thoughts,
nor his ways as your ways? Isa. 55.8, 9.
But as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are his ways higher than
your ways; and his thoughts than your thoughts. I have not that peace and joy
that others have, therefore the Lord intends no good toward me; but does the
Word say so? Oh, but if my inside were but turned outward, good men would loath
me, and wicked men would laugh at me; but does the Word say so? Oh, but my
heart was never right with God; but does the Word say so? Oh, but that which I
have taken all this while for saving grace, is but common grace; but does the
Word say so? Oh, but the face of God is hid from me, my Sun is set in a cloud,
and will never rise more; but does the Word say so? Oh, but Satan is let loose
upon me, and therefore God hates me; but does the Word say so? yea, does not
the Word tell you, That those who have been most beloved of God, have been most
tempted by Satan? Witness Christ, David, Job, Joshua, Peter, Paul, etc. Oh, but
I am afflicted, so as never was any before me; but does the Word say so? Oh,
let the Word have the casting voice, and not thine own frail distempered
reason: Oh, don't only hear what sin, and Satan, and thine own heart can say
against thee, but hear also what the Word of the Lord Jesus can say for thee.
Let the Word of the Lord be judge on both sides, and then all will be well.

I know that the impenitent and unbelieving person that lives and dies without
grace in his heart, and an interest in Christ, shall as certainly be damned, as
if I saw him this very moment under everlasting burnings; because God in the
Scripture has said it, Mark 16.16. John 3.18.36. Rev. 21.8. Romans 2.4, 5. 1 Cor.
6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Heb. 12.14. And I know that the holy, humble, true,
penitent, believing, self-denying, and sin-mortifying Christian, shall be as
certainly saved, as if at this very time I saw him in an actual possession of
glory; because God in the Scripture has said it, Mat. 5.3-12. Romans 8.1.13. Act.
10.43. Joh. 3.15, 16, 36. Chap. 6.37, 38, 39, 40, etc. O Sirs, no man in his
wits dares dispute against the Authority of Scripture, or deny it as false and
erroneous; and therefore if the Scripture say, a man has grace, he ought in
conscience to subscribe to it against all objections or temptations to the
contrary. For ever remember this; Till a man comes to be willing to have his
spiritual and eternal estate to be determined by Scripture, he will never enjoy
any settled rest or quiet in his spirit. When once the goodness of a man's estate
is cleared up to him by the Word, he is never to regard what Satan or carnal
reason objects against him; Satan is a liar and a deceiver, of near six
thousand years standing; he is full of envy, and full of malice, and full of
wiles, devices and fetches, and therefore give no credit to any of his reports
against the report of the Word, but stand by the testimony of the Word, and the
witness of your own consciences, against all Satan's cavils, temptations,
objections and suggestions; and then, and not till then, will you find rest to
your souls. He that would hold on cheerfully and resolutely in a Christian
course, and go merrily to his grave, and singing to heaven, he must maintain
the testimony of the Word against all the gainsayings of sense or carnal
reason, he must hear nothing, nor believe nothing against the Word, nor against
the goodness and happiness of his own estate or condition, which has been
evidenced to him from the Word. Men will not be easily baffled out of their
estates: If some great man should come and lay claim to your estates, you will
not presently give them up, though your evidences are not at hand, or though
they are blotted, or though perhaps you cannot clearly make out your title, yet
you will not tamely and quietly give up your estates; and yet how ready are
many Christians, upon every clamor of Satan against their souls and spiritual
estates, to give up all, and to conclude, that they are hypocrites, and have no
true grace and spiritual life in them! etc. But,

The eighth Maxim or Consideration.
EIghthly, consider, That a godly man may not only come Romans 8.15.
look in what way the spirit of bondage does ordinarily work fear, terror and
horror in the hearts of unconverted persons, in the same way the spirit of
Adoption does ordinarily work hope and assurance in the heart of the Saints.
Now, John 16.8.
the spirit of bondage commonly awakens secure sinners, and fills the hearts
and consciences of poor sinners with fear, horror and amazement, by setting
home upon their souls such practical syllogisms as these:

Every liar shall have his portion in the lake, Rev. 21.8.
that burns with fire and brimstone.

But I am a liar,

Therefore I shall have my portion in that lake that burns with fire and
brimstone.

Or thus.

He that believes not, is condemned already. John 3.18.


I believe not,

Therefore I am condemned already.

Or thus.

He that hates his brother, is a murderer, 1 John 3.15.
and has not eternal life abiding in him.

I hate my brother,

Therefore I am a murderer, and have not eternal life abiding in me.

Or thus.

Christ shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, 2 These. 1.7, 8,
to take vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gosspel of
his Son.

I know not God, I obey not the Gospel of his Son,

Therefore Christ shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, to take
vengeance on me.

Or thus.

Psalm 9 15.
The wicked shall be turned into hell.

I am wicked,

Therefore I shall be turned into hell.

Now in like manner the spirit of adoption brings the heirs of the promise to
the assurance of hope, Heb. 6.17.
by setting home such practical syllogisms as these.

(...), signifies authority. Such as receive the Lord Jesus, have authority to
be called the sons of God. Others may call God father, and themselves sons, but
they have not that right and authority to do it as believers have, Mark 16.16.
Joh. 3.16, 18, 36 Mat. 3.2, 8. Luke 24 47. Act. 5.31. Chap. 3.19. Luke 13.3.
Joh. 1.12. But I have received Christ all the ways that the Word there can
import; I am heartily willing to receive the Lord Jesus Christ in all his
offices, viz. as a King to rule me, a Prophet to teach and instruct me, and a
Priest to offer and intercede for me; I am willing to receive him as a
Sanctifier, as well as a Savior, and to receive him as my Lord, as well as to
receive him as my Redeemer, and to receive him upon his own terms, viz. of
taking up his Cross, denying my self, and following of him; therefore I may
safely, boldly, plainly and warrantably conclude, that I am a son of God, and
that I have an interest in God, according to the Scripture last cited; which
Scripture cannot be broken, nor cannot fail, nor cannot be unbound or loosed,
as the Greek word in that, John 10.35. imports, etc.

both these. We read in Scripture of a threefold assurance: As first, an
assurance of understanding, Col. 2.2. Secondly, an assurance of faith, Heb.
10.22. Thirdly, an assurance of hope, Heb. 6.11. And it is a very choice note,
that acute D. A. has upon it, viz. That these three make up one practical
Syllogism, wherein knowledge forms the proportion, faith makes the assumption,
and hope draws the conclusion. I do (says the Christian) assuredly know from
the Word that cannot deceive me, That the believing and repenting sinner, shall
be saved, my conscience also tells me, that I do unfeignedly believe and
repent, therefore I do firmly hope, that I shall (how ever vile and unworthy
(otherwise) be saved. Now mark, answerable to the evidence that a man has in
his own soul, that faith and repentance is wrote in him; so will his hope and
assurance be weaker or stronger, more or less. If a man's evidence for the truth
of his faith and repentance be dark, and weak, and low, and uncertain, his hope
and assurance that is born of these parents (as I may say) must needs partake
of its parents weakness and infirmities, and be it self weak, and dark, and
low, and wavering, and uncertain, as they are from which it results; ^ope and
assurance ebbs and flows, as the evidence of a man's faith and repentance ebbs
and flows.

Assurance cannot be ordinarily had without a serious examination of our own
hearts, for assurance is the certain knowledge of the conclusion drawn from the
premises, one out of Scripture, the other by a reflect act of the understanding
or conscience, thus: He that believes and repents shall certainly be saved,
that is the voice of the Word of God; then by the search of a man's own heart,
he must be able to say, but I believe and repent, and from these two does
result this assurance, that he may safely conclude, therefore I shall be saved.
And, O that all Christians were so wise, as seriously to ponder upon these
things.

Thirdly, a godly man may argue thus. He that has respect Psalm. 119.6. Then
shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto a l thy c^mmandments. Shame is
both the tempora^^ deternal fru^^ sin, Rom 6^ ^. Dan. 12.2.
He that is so honest and faithful with God, as to do his best, shall find that
God will be so gracious as to pardon his worst. And this Gospel indulgence,
David does more than hint at in those words, Then shall I not be ashamed, when
I have respect unto all thy commandments. Or, as the Hebrew has it, Then shall
I not blush when my eye is to all thy commandments. The Traveller you know,
has his eye toward the place where he is going; and though he be yet short of
it, yet he is putting on and pressing forward all he can to reach it; so when
the eye of a Saint is to all the commands of God, and he is still a pressing
forwards toward full obedience, such a foul shall never be put to shame, it
shall never be put to the blush, but it shall be able, living and dying, boldly
to appear in the presence of the Lord. Mark, the Psalmist does not say, when I
obey all thy commandments, but when I have respect to all thy commandments; and
that implies an inward aw and reverential eye toward every duty God requires:
You know, to have respect unto a thing is this, When that of all others swayes
most with us, as when a Master commands such a business, the servant will do
it, because he respects him; and at his command he will go and come, though he
will not at the command of any other.) But I have respect unto all his
commandments, therefore I shall never be ashamed.

John 3.18, 19. But I love the brethren, therefore I am passed from death to
life, and so consequently am in Christ.

Prove. 28.13. But I confess and forsake my sins (1. In respect of my sincere
desires. 2. In respect of my gracious purposes. 3. In respect of my fixed
resolutions. 4. In respect of my faithful and constant endeavors) therefore I
shall certainly find mercy.

Sixthly, a godly man may argue thus. He that has the Cor. 1.12. Isa. 38.3.
But I have the testimony of a good conscience, therefore I may rejoice in that
testimony.

Seventhly, a godly man may argue thus. He over whom Psalm. 19.13. keep back thy
servant from presumptious sins, let them not have dominion over me; then shall
I be upright.) But presumptious sins has not dominion over me, therefore I am
upright. Mark, unfeigned willingness to part with every sin, and to mortify
every sin, is a sure sign of uprightness, a sure sign of saving grace; when a
man is sincerely willing to leave every sin, and to indulge himself in none, no
not his darling sin, it is a most certain sign of his integrity and sincerity,
as you may evidently see, by comparing of these Scriptures together, Psalm.
17.1, 3, 4. Psalm. 119.1, 2, 3, 6. Job 1.8. and Chap. 2.3. Psalm. 18.23. I was
upright before him. Oh, but how do you know that? how do you prove that? how
are you assured of that? Why by this, that I have kept my self from mine
iniquity. Doubtless, there is as much of the power of God required, and as much
strength of grace required, and as much of the presence and assistance of the
Spirit required to work a man off from his bosom sins, from his darling sins,
from his beloved sins, as there is required to work him off from all other
sins; a conquest here, clearly speaks out uprightness of heart.

Eighthly, a godly man may argue thus. He whose heart does known positive duty
against light and conscience, or of an ordinary shifting off of any known
service hat God requires of him in that place or station wherein God has set
him) may have confidence ((...) is boldness, liberty of speech) toward God, 1
John 3.21. But my heart does not condemn me, 1. Of giving my self over to a
voluntary serving of sin. Nor, 2. Of making a trade of sin. Nor, 3. Of allowing
my self in any course or way of sin. Nor, 4. Of sinning as wicked men sin, viz.
studiously, resolutely, affectionately, delightfully, customarily, wilfully.
Nor, 5. Of indulging, conniving, or winking at any known sin. Nor, 6. Of living
in the daily neglect of any known duty against light and conscience; therefore
I may have confidence or boldness toward God, I may use liberty of speech with
God, I may use the liberty and freedom of a favorite of heaven, I may open my
heart to God, as favorites do to their Prince, viz. freely, familiarly,
boldly. When Austin was converted, and his heart sincere with God, he could
bless God that he could think of his former evil ways (which were very bad)
without fear: O, to what a height of holy boldness and familiarity with God,
had this man of God arrived to! But,

Mat. 5.3. By poor in spirit, is not meant poor in substance, that not being a
thing praise worthy in it self, Chrysostom. in loc.
but the broken and humble in heart, who has no high thoughts or conceits of
himself, but is lowly in his own eyes, as a young child. Blessed are the poor
in spirit; that is (non habentes inflantem spiritum) who has no lofty or
puffed up spirit. Augustine. Hilar. Tertullian.
The poor in spirit, are those that are lowly, being truly conscious of their
own unworthiness. Nulli pauperes spiritu nisi humiles; none are poor in spirit,
but the humble. Blessed are the poor in spirit; that is, blessed are they whose
spirits are brought into such an humble gracious frame, as willingly, quietly
and contentedly to lie down in a poor low condition, when it is the pleasure of
the Lord to bring them into such a condition. Blessed are the poor in spirit;
that is, blessed are they who are truly and kindly apprehensive and sensible of
their spiritual wants, poverty and misery, There are some that are poor in
estate, and others that are poor in spirit; and there are some that are poor
spirited in the cause of God, Christ, the Gospel and their own souls, and there
are others that are poor in spirit; there are some that are spiritually poor,
as all are that are destitute of grace, and others that are poor in spirit;
there are some that are Evangelically poor, and others that are superstitiously
poor; as those Papists who renounce their estates, and vow a voluntary poverty.
The poverty that has blessedness annexed to it, is only an Evangelical poverty.
that see their need of God's free grace to pardon them, that see their need of
Christ's righteousness to cloth them, that see their need of the Spirit of
Christ to purge, change and sanctify them, that see their need of more
heavenly wisdom to counsel them, that see their need of more of the power of
God to support them, and of the goodness of God to supply them, and of the
mercy of God to comfort them, and of the presence of God to refresh them, and
of the patience of God to bear with them, etc. that see their need of greater
measures of faith to conquer their fears, and of greater measures of wisdom to
walk holily, harmlesly, bl^mlesly and exemplarily in the midst of temptations,
snares and dangers; and that see their need of greater measures of patience to
bear their burdens without fretting or fainting; and that see their need of
greater measures of zeal and courage to bear up bravely against all sorts of
opposition, both from within and from without; and that see their need of
greater measures of love to cleave to the Lamb, and to follow the Lamb whither
ever he goes; and that see their need of living in a continual dependence upon
God and Christ, for fresh influences, in-comes and supplies of grace, of
comfort, of strength, whereby they may be enabled to act for God, and walk with
God, and glorify God, and bring forth fruit to God, and withstand all
temptations that tend to lead the heart from God; and that see nothing in
themselves upon which they dare venture their everlasting estates, and
therefore fly to the free, rich, sovereign and glorious grace of God in
Christ, as to their sure and only sanctuary, Luke 18.13. Phil. 3.9. Blessed are
the poor in spirit; that is, blessed are they that are truly apprehensive and
sensible of their spiritual poverty, that see themselves fallen in the first
Adam from all their primitive purity, excellency, and glory. There are five
things we lost in our fall. 1. Our holy Image, and became vile. 2. Our Sonship,
and became slaves. 3. Our Friendship, and became enemies. 4. Our Communion, and
became strangers. 5. Our Glory, and became miserable. And that see an utter
inability and insufficiency in themselves, and in all other creatures, to
deliver them out of their fallen estate.) But I am poor in spirit, therefore
the Kingdom of heaven belongs to me.

Mat. 5.3. (That is, such as mourn for sin with an exceeding great mourning,
that mourn for sin with a funeral sorrow (as the word (...) signifies) that
mourn for sin, (...). Beati lugentes. Blessed are they that mourn. The way to
Paradise is through the valley of tears. Some report of Mary Magdalen, that she
spent thirty years in Galba, weeping for^er sins.
as a man mourns for the loss of his only Son, Zech. 12.10. or as Jacob
mourned for Joseph, or as David mourned for Absalom, or as the people mourned
for the loss of good Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35.24, 25. That mourn for secret sins as
well as open, for sins against grace as well as for sins against the Law; that
mourn for sin as the greatest evil in the world, that mourns for his own sins,
Ezekiel. 7.16. as David did, Psalm. 51. or as Ephraim did, Jer. 31.18, 19. or as
Peter did, Mat. 26.75. or as Mary Magdalen did, Luke 7.38. And that mourns for
the sins of others as well as for his own, as David did, Psa. 119.136, 158. and
as Jeremiah did, Jer. 13.17. or as Lot did, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. or as they did in
that, Ezekiel. 9.4 That mourns under the sense of his spiritual wants, that mourns
under the sense of his spiritual losses, as loss of communion with God, loss of
the favor of God, loss of the presence of God, loss of the exercise of grace,
loss of the joys of the Spirit, loss of inward peace, etc. or that mourn, not
only for their own afflictions and miseries, but also for the afflictions and
miseries of Joseph, as Nehemiah did, Neh. 1.2, 3, 4, or as Jeremiah did, Ier.
9.1.2. or as Christ did when he wept over Jerusalem, Luke 19.41, 42. or that
mourns because he cannot mourn for these things, or that mourns because he can
mourn no more, or that mourns because God has so little honor in his heart, in
his house, in his life, in the world, in the Churches.) But I am a true
mourner, therefore I am blessed, and shall be comforted.

shall be filled, Mat. 5.6. They are not therefore blessed because they hunger
and thirst, but because they shall be filled; blessedness will be in fullness,
not in hunger; but hunger must go before filling, that we may not loath the
loaves. Aug. de verbis Domini, Sermon. 5.
(Or they that are hungring and thirsting, as the Greek runs, being the
participle of the present tense, intimating, that where ever this is the
present disposition of men's souls, they are blessed: He that sees an absolute
necessity of the righteousness of Christ to justify him, and to enable him to
stand boldly before the throne of God; he that sees his own righteousness to be
but as filthy rags, Isa. 64.4. to be but as dross and dung, Phil. 3.7, 8. He
that sees the Lord Jesus Christ, with all his riches and righteousness, clearly
and freely offered to poor sinners in the everlasting Gospel; he that in the
Gospel-glass sees Christ to be made sin for them, that knew no sin, that they
may be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5, 21. He that in the same
glass sees Christ to be made wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption, to all those that are sincerely willing to make a venture of their
immortal souls, and eternal estates, upon him and his righteousness; and he
that sees the righteousness of Christ to be a most perfect, pure, complete,
spotless, matchless, Some take hungering and thirsting here literally,
comparing of it with Luke 6.21 Others understand the words morally, by
hungering and thirsting they understand a moral hunger and thirst, which is
when men hunger and thirst for justice and judgment to be rightly executed.
Psalm. 119.5, 10, 20, 131. Judge. 15.18. 1 Chronicles. 11.18. Psalm. 42.1, 2.
infinite righteousness, and under these apprehensions and persuasions, is
carried out in earnest and unsatisfied hungerings and thirstings, to be made a
partaker of this righteousness, and to be assured of this righteousness, and to
put on this righteousness as a royal robe, Isa. 61.10. he is the blessed soul;
and he that hungers and thirsts after the righteousness of Christ imparted, as
well as after the righteousness of Christ imputed, after the righteousness of
sanctification, as well as after the righteousness of justification, he is a
blessed soul, and shall at last be filled. The righteousness of sanctification,
or inherent righteousness, lies in the spirits infusing into the soul those
holy principles, divine qualities, or supernatural graces that the Apostle
mentions in that, Gal. 5.22, 23. These habits of grace which are severally
distinguished by the names of faith, love, hope, meekness, etc. are nothing
else but the new nature or new man, which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. He that hungers and thirsts after the
righteousness of sanctification, out of a deep serious sense. of his own
unrighteousness; he that hungers and thirsts after the righteousness of
sanctification, as earnestly as hungery men do for meat, or as thirsty men do
for drink, or as the innocent person that is falsely charged or accused, longs
to be cleared and righted, or as Rachel did for children, or as David did after
the water of the Well of Bethlehem, or as the hunted Heart does after the water
brooks; he that hungers and thirsts not after some righteousness only, but he
that hungers and thirsts after all righteousness, he that hungers and thirsts
not only after some grace, but all grace; not only after some holiness, but all
holiness; he that hungers and thirsts after righteousness, out of love to
righteousness, he that hungers and thirsts after righteousness, from a sight
and sense of the loveliness and excellency that there is in righteousness;
Phil. 3.10-15.
he that hungers and thirsts after the highest degrees and measures of
righteousness and holiness, Psalm. 63.1.8. Jer. 15.16.
he that primarily, chiefly, hungers and thirsts after righteousness and
holiness, he that industriously hungers and thirsts after righteousness and
holiness, he that ordinarily, habitually, constanly, hungers and thirsts after
righteousness and holiness, Psalm. 119.20. My soul breaks for the longing that
it has unto thy judgments at all times. By judgments we are to understand the
statutes and commandments of God) Mark that word, at all times. Bad men have
their good moods, as good men have their bad moods: A bad man may under gripes
of conscience, a smarting rod, the approaches of death, or the fears of hell,
or when he is Sermon-sick, cry out to the Lord for grace, for righteousness,
for holiness; but he is the only blessed man that hungers and thirsts after
righteousness at all times, and that hungers and thirsts after righteousness,
according to the other forementioned short hints; he is certainly a blessed
man, heaven is for that man, and that man is for heaven, that hungers and
thirsts in a right manner after the righteousness of justification, and after
the righteousness of sanctification.) But I do truly hunger and thirst after
righteousness, therefore I am blessed, and shall be filled, etc.

and graciously merciful, are blessed, and shall obtain mercy, Mat. 5.7. Micha
6.8. Luke 6.36. August. de civit. Dei, 9.13.
(Mercy is a commiserating of another man's misery in our hearts, or a sorrow
for another man's distress, or a heart-grieving for another man's grief, arising
out of an unfeigned love unto the party afflicted. Or more plainly thus: Mercy
is a pitying of another man's misery, with a desire and endeavor to help him to
the uttermost of our ability. The Hebrew for godly, (...) Chasid signifies
gracious, merciful. The more godly any man is, the more merciful that man will
be. Blessed are the merciful, that is, blessed are they that show mercy to
others, out of a deep sense of the mercy of God to them in Christ: Blessed are
such who show mercy out of love to mercy, out of a delight in mercy; blessed
are such as show mercy out of love and obedience to the God of mercy; blessed
are such as show mercy to men in misery, upon the account of the image of God,
the glory of God that is stamped upon them; blessed are such as extend their
piety and mercy, not only to men's bodies, but also to their precious and
immortal souls: Soul-mercy is the chief of mercies; the soul is the most
precious jewel in all the world, it is a vessel of honor, it is a spark of
glory, it is a bud of eternity, it is the price of blood, it is beautified with
the image of God, it is adorned with the grace of God, and it is clothed with
the righteousness of God; such are blessed as show mercy to others, from
gracious motives and considerations, viz. It Is free mercy that every day keeps
hell and my soul asunder, it is mercy that daily pardons my sins, it is mercy
that supplies all my inward and outward wants, it is mercy that preserves, and
feeds, and clothes my outward man, and it is mercy that renews, strengthens and
prospers my inward man, it is mercy that has kept me many times from committing
such and such sins, it is mercy that has kept me many a time from falling before
such and such temptations, it is mercy that has many a time preserved me from
being swallowed up by such and such inward and outward afflictions. Such as
show mercy out of a design to exalt and glorify the God of mercy, such who
show most mercy to them to whom God shows most mercy; these are blessed, and
shall obtain mercy. Now mark, to such who are thus graciously, thus
spiritually, thus divinely merciful, do these precious promises belong, Psalm.
41.1. Blessed is the man that considers the poor and needy, Prove. 22.9. He
that has a bountiful eye shall be blessed, for he gives of his bread to the
poor, Prove. 14.21. He that despises his neighbor sins, but he that has
mercy on the p or, happy is he, Prove. 11.25. The liberal soul shall be made
f^t, and ^he that waters shall be watered also himself. That 2 Cor. 9.8. is
very remarkable; And God is able to make all grace abound toward you, that ye
always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work.
Behold, how words are here heaped up to make grace, and all grace, and all
grace to abound; and who is it to? unto the liberal man, the merciful man, Job
29.13. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused
the widows heart to sing for joy, Luke 6.38. Give and it shall be given unto
you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall
men give into your bosom. Behold and wonder at the height of these expressions,
that you have in this Text; we account it good measure when it is heaped up,
but when it is heaped up and pressed down, that is more; but when it is heaped up
and pressed down, and then heaped up and running over again, this is as much as
possible can be made, this is as much as heart can wish. O Sirs, those that are
of merciful spirits, they shall have mercy heaped up, pressed down, and running
over; certainly that man must needs be in a happy and blessed condition, that
can be in no condition wherein he shall not have mercy, yea mercy heaped up and
running over, to supply all his necessities, Mat. 25.35. Come ye blessed of my
father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.
Come ye blessed, that is their estate; receive the kingdom, that is the issue and
reward; and why so? I was hungry, and you gave me meat, I was thirsty, and you
gave me drink, etc. But I am truly and graciously merciful, therefore I am
blessed, and shall obtain mercy, etc. But,

him, and live for ever with him) Mat. 5.8. But I am pure in heart, therefore I
am blessed and shall see God. By the pure in heart, here in the Text, we may
safely understand the sincere and single hearted Christian, 1 Timothy 1.5. Jam.
1.8. 1 Pet. 1.22. Prove. 20.6. Eccl. 2.21. 1 John 1.8. James 10.3. John 3.2.
Luke 1.5, 6.
in opposition to the double minded Christian, as you may easily perceive by
comparing the Scriptures in the margent together. Mark, purity is twofold:
First, simple and absolute; and in this sense, no man is pure in this life, no
not one. Secondly, respective and in part, and that is the purity here meant. A
pure heart, is a plain simple heart, without fraud or guile, like Nathaniel, in
whom there was no g^ile; it is a heart that is evangelically blameless and
sincere. But secondly, purity is opposed to mixture, purity consists in the
immixedness of any thing inferior; that metal we account pure metal, which has
not any baser than it self mixed with it; if you mix gold with silver, the
silver is not made impure by the mixture of gold; but if you mix lead or tin
with it, it is made impure. Remember once for all, viz. that a pure heart is
such a one as has cast off and cast out the love and allowance of every known
sin, and mingles not with it, though never so small; such a heart as has
renounced every known way of sin, though there is corruption remaining in it,
etc. yet it can solemnly and seriously appeal to God, that there is no known
way of sin, but it hates, and abhors, and strives against, and will upon no
terms allow of. This heart, in the language of the Gospel is a pure heart; yea,
it is such a heart as dares venture upon the trial of God himself, Psalm. 139.23,
24. Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, and see
if there be any wicked way in me (or any way of pain, or of grief, or of
provocation, as the Hebrew has it, or any course of sin that is grievous to
God or man. A gracious heart, a pure heart, can neither allow of any way of
wickedness, nor wallow in any way of wickedness, nor make a trade of any way of
wickedness, nor give up it self to any way of wickedness. Though sin may cleave
to a pure heart, as dross does to silver, yet a pure heart will not mix nor
mingle with sin) and lead me in the way everlasting, or in the way of eternity,
or in the way of antiquity, as the Hebrew has it; that is, J^r. 6.16.
that good old way that leads to peace and rest, to heaven and happiness.
Evangelical purity of heart lies in this, that it will not admit any known sin
to mingle with the frame and purpose of the heart; a pure heart like a pure
fountain, will still be a working and a casting out the mud and filth that is
in it: Though sin may cleave to a regenerate man, as dross does to the silver,
yet it mingles not with the regenerate part, nor the regenerate part mingles
not with it, no more than oil mingles with the water, or water mingles with the
oil. Now you know, though the water and the oil touch one another, yet they do
not mingle one with another; so though grace and sin, in a regenerate man, may
as it were, touch one another, yet they don't mingle one with another. Dear
hearts, look, as we truly say, that that gold is pure gold that is dug out
of the Mineral, though much dross may hang about it; and as we truly say, that
such and such an Air is pure Air, though at times there be many fogs and mists
within it; and as we truly say, that such and such springs are pure springs,
though mud, and dirt, and filth may be lying at the bottom of those springs;
and as we truly say, that face is a fair face, though it has some freckles in
it; so we may as truly say, that such and such a heart is a pure heart, though
there may be much sinful dross and filth cleaving to it. The Jews report, that
when Noah sent forth his sons to people the world, he delivered to every one of
them some Relics of old Adam; it may be fabulous for the history, but it is
true in the morality, the Relics of his sinful corruptions cleaves close to
us all. Beloved, the best, the wisest, the holiest, and the most mortified
Christians on earth, Romans 7.22, 23.
do carry about with them a body of sin and death, they have in them a fountain
of original corruption, and from this fountain sin will still be arising,
bubling and a boiling up as the scum in a pot over the fire: but mark, as in
wine, or honey, or water, though scum and filth may arise, yet the wine, the
honey, the water, will be still a purging and purifying it self, and a working
and casting it out; so though sin, though corruption, though spiritual filth
may, and too often does, arise in a gracious heart, yet there is a spring of
grace, a spring of living water in him, John 4.14. All resistance of sin in a
Scripture phrase, is called conquest; for in the resistance of it, there is as
much love showed to God as in the conquest of it, though there be not so much
power seen.
there is a holy cleansing and purifying disposition in a regenerate person,
that will still be a working and casting it out. But now mark, in men of impure
hearts and lives, the scum does not only arise, but it seeths and boyls in,
Ezekiel. 24.12. She wearied her self with lies, and her great scum went not f r^h
out of her; notwithstanding all the threatenings of God, and all the judgments
of God upon her, yet her scum and filthiness boiled in; though God boiled
Jerus^lem in the pot of his judgments, yet her scum and filth stuck to every
side of her; wicked men's scum and filth does not only arise, but it also seeths
and boyls in, and mingles together with their spirits, but so does not the scum
and filth that rises in a gracious heart; a Sheep may fall into the mire, but a
Swine delights to wallow in the mire. But,

Fourteenthly, A godly man may argue thus. Such as sin Romans 6.14. But sin has
not a domi^ion over me, therefore I am not under the Law, but under grace. Sin
may rebel in a Saint, but it shall never reign in a Saint. Look as those
beasts, in that, Dan. 7.12. had their dominion taken away, though their lives
were spared and prolonged for a season and a time; so when Christ and grace
enters into the soul, they take away the dominion of sin, though they do for a
time spare the life of sin. To prevent mistakes, premise with me briefly these
few things. First, Romans 7.
that in every regenerate man there are two men, an old man and a new man; or
if you please, flesh and spirit. Secondly, The old man, the fleshly part, will
incline the soul, and bias the soul, as well to sins against the Gospel, as to
sins against the Law, and to great sins as well as to small sins, witness
Noah's drunkenness, Lot's incest, Assur's oppression, David's murder and
adultery, Solomon's idolatry, and Peter's blasphemy. Thirdly, The old man, the
fleshly part is as much in the will, as in any other part of the regenerate
man; and therefore, when he falls into heinous sins, he may fall into them with
consent, delight and willingness, so far as his will is unrenewed. 1 These. 5 22.
Though a real Christian be changed in every part, yet it is but in part, and
imperfect. Fourthly, The old man, the fleshly part is in a regenerate man's
members, as well as in his will, and therefore they may be exercised and
employed in and about those sins they have consented unto. Fifthly, High
sinnings do waste and wound the conscience of a regenerate man, and lay him
open to the sore rebukes of God, and call for great repentance, and fresh and
frequent applications of the blood of Christ. These things being premised, a
Question may be propounded, viz.

What does the dominion of sin import, and wherein does it consist? Now to this
considerable question, I shall give these eight following Answers.

Mat. 8.9. For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me; and I say
to this man go, and he goes, and to another come, and he comes, and to my
servant do this, and he does it. Now when sin has such a universal and easy
authority and command over the whole man, body and soul, as that it can use
them in the service of sin, when and where, and how it pleases, then sin is in
dominion: where there is a peaceable, Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
uncontrouled, willing, universal subjection of the whole man unto the commands
of sin, there sin reigns. But,

Romans 6.13, 14, 15, 16.
that speaks out the reign and dominion of sin. Dominion of sin imports a
complete and universal resignation of the whole will, and man to the obedience
of it. That man that is wholly addicted and devoted to the ways of sin, that
man is under the reign of sin; that man whose whole heart is universally
married to his lusts, that man is under the dominion of his lusts; when a man
does as freely, cheerfully, universally and readily obey his lusts, Ephesians. 2.3. 1
King. 21.25. Micah 7.3. A man may be subjects as a captive in this or that
particular, tyranny of sin, who is not obedient as a servant to all the
government of sin, for that takes i^ the whole will, and an adequate submission
thereof to the peaceable and uncontrouled power of sin. Romans 7.15, 19, 23
as a child does his father, or a wife her husband, or a servant his Master, or
a subject his Prince, then sin is in dominion; when a man sins with greediness,
when with Ahab he sells himself to work wickedness, when he commits wickedness
with both hands, when he gives himself up or over to all uncleanness and
filthiness, when he freely and voluntarily resigns and surrenders up his body
and soul to the obedience of sin, then sin reigns, then it keeps the throne;
where the dominion of sin is erected, there it sits in the heart, as a King in
his Throne, and gives forth its Laws and commands to the soul and body, and
those commands are listened and consented to, approved and delighted in, etc. A
subject cannot in a course more freely, willingly, universally and cheerfully
obey the commands of his Prince, than a sinner does in a course freely,
willingly, universally and cheerfully obey the commands of his lasts; and where
ever this sad temper of spirit is, there is sin in dominion. But now mark, The
Apostle, as Chrysostom and Theodoret observe on Romans 6.12. does not say, Let
not sin tyrannize, for that is sins own work and not ours; but he says, Let it
not reign in you; for when a King reigns, the Subjects do (^s it were) actively
obey and embrace his command, whereas they are rather patients than agents in a
tyranny.
a regenerate man's will rises against his sin, even then when he is worsted by
sin, and led captive by sin: A Tyrant is obeyed unwillingly, the wills of his
subjects rise up against his commands, and if his power were not superior to
their wills, they would never obey him. Sin is no King, but a Tyrant in the
souls of the Saints, and therefore their wills so far as they are renewed,
cannot but rise against it. O Sirs, remember this for ever, that the molesting,
vexing and tempting power of sin, does not speak out its dominion; for sin may
molest, and vex, and tempt as an enemy, where it does not rule and reign as a
King; as you see this day in many Nations of the earth, there are many enemies
that do molest, vex and tempt the subjects of those Nations, who yet are far
enough off from having any rule or dominion over them; but then sin is in
dominion, when it commands in the heart as a King in his Throne, or as a Lord
in his house, or as a General in his Army, freely, boldly, universally,
cheerfully; and when the soul does as freely, boldly, universally and
cheerfully subject it self to sins commands; where men commonly yield up their
wills and affections to the commands of sin, there sin reigns; and this is the
case of every unregenerate man; but where the will does commonly make a stout
opposition to sin, there it reigns not; now this is the case of every
regenerate man. That Prince cannot truly be said to reign in that Kingdom,
where commonly he meets with stout opposition: So it is here; A sincere
Christian makes it the great business and work of his life (above all other
things in this world) to make all the opposition he can against his lusts, and
is thoroughly resolved to die fighting against his sins, as Pietro Candiano (one
of the Dukes of Venice) died fighting against the Nauritines, It is a harder
thing to fight with a man's lusts, than to fight with the cross. Augustine.
with the weapons in his hand. A^ Caesar said in a battle he fought against one
of Pompey's sons, at other times I fought for honor, but now I fight for my
life: so a sincere Christian fights against his sins, as for his life.
Castellio's opinion was vain, viz. That men are of three sorts, some
unregenerate, some regenerating, and others regenerated, and that these last
have no combat betwixt flesh and spirit, which is quite cross to Scripture,
Romans 7.14-24. Gal. 5.17. etc. and contrary to the experience of all Saints, in
all the ages of the world. But,

Prove. 29.1. Jer. 5.3, 4. and 44.15, 16, 17.
then sin is in dominion; when the constant bent of the heart is inflamed
toward sin, and when the desires of the soul are insatiably carried after sin,
and when the resolutions of the soul are strongly and habitually set upon sin,
Hos. 2.6, 7.
then sin is in the Throne, and then it reigns as a King; when God hedges up
the sinners way with thorns, yet the sinner will break through all to his sin;
when life and death, heaven and hell, glory and misery are set before the
sinner, Deuteronomy. 30.15, 19. and 11.26, 27, 28.29.
yet the sinner will be peremptory in his sinnings, though he lose his life,
his soul, and all the glory of another world, then sin reigns. But,

Fourthly, When men ordinarily, habitually, commonly, Romans 13. ult. Make no
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof; or as the Greek has it,
David in an hour of temptation, once made provision for his lusts, 2 Samuel
11.14, 15. but this was not his course, his trade, etc.
Make no projects for the flesh, or cater not for the flesh; when a man's head
and heart is full of projects, how to gratify this lust, and how to satisfy
that lust, and how to fulfill the other lust, then sin reigns, then it is in its
throne, Jam. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because you ask amiss, that ye may
consume it upon your lusts. Both the Law of God and nature, requires me to make
provision of raiment, food and physic for my body, and for theirs that are
under my charge; but it may cost me my life, my estate, yea my very soul, to
make provision for my lusts. Such as ask amiss, shall be sure to ask and miss;
he that would make God a Baud to his lusts, may ask long enough before God will
answer; of all affronts there is none to this of making God a servant to our
lusts, Hos. 2.8.
and where this frame of spirit is, there sin is in dominion. He that abuses
mercies to serve his lusts, fights against God with his own weapons, as David
did against Goliath, and as Benhadad did against Ahab, with that very life that
he had newly given him; such a soul, like the waters of Jordan will at last
certainly drop into the dead lake. But,

Fifthly, When sin is commonly, habitually sweet, and the Joh 20.12, 13. Prove.
2.14. Amos 6.13. Zeph. 3.11. 2 These. 2.12.
when a man daily takes as joyful contentation and satisfaction in his lusts,
and in walking after the ways of his own heart, as he does in his highest
outward enjoyments, o^ in his nearest and dearest relations, then certainly sin
is in dominion. Such men as can go constantly on in a way of wickedness, merely
to delight and content the flesh, such men are certainly under the power and
reign of sin. Many of the Heathens, who knew what rational delights were,
scorned sensual delights as inferior to them: These will one day rise in
judgment against many of the Professors in our days. I know there is no real
pleasure or delight in sin; if intemperance could afford more pleasure than
temperance, then Hiliogabalus should have been more happy than Adam in
Paradise; yea, if there were the least real delight in sin, there could be no
perfect hell where men shall most perfectly sin, and most perfectly be
tormented with their sins. Hark Scholar, said the Harlot to Apulciu^, it is but
a bitter sweet that you are so fond of. P^^^rh.
When an Asp stings a man, it does at first tickle him, and make him laugh till
the poison by little and little gets to his heart, and then it pains him more
than before it delighted him. It Is so with sin, it may tickle the soul at
first, but it will pain it at last with a witness. I have read of a Gallant
addicted to uncleanness, who at last meeting with a beautiful Dame, and having
enjoyed his fleshly desires of her, he found her in the morning to be the dead
body of one that he had formerly been naught with, which had been acted by the
Devil all night, and left dead again in the morning; so that the Gallant's
pleasure ended in no small terror. And thus it is doubtless with all sinful
pleasures: What sin is there so sweet or profitable, that is worth burning in
hell for, or worth shutting out of heaven for? etc. But,

Romans 6.19, 20. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Titus 3.3.
but where the soul readily, resolvedly and habitually strives against it,
conflicts with it, and makes war against it, there it is not in dominion, there
it reigns not, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the margent
together. Romans 7.23, 24. Gal. 5.17. Romans 8.13.
That man that can truly appeal to God, and say, Lord, thou that know all
hearts and things, thou know that there is nothing under the whole heavens
that I am so desirous and ambitious of as this, that my sins may be subdued,
that my strongest lusts may be mortified, and that those very corruptions that
my nature, constitution and complexion is most inclined to, may be brought to
an under. That man that can appeal to God, and say, O Lord, what ever becomes
of me, I will never be reconciled to any known sin; yea, Lord, though I should
perish for ever, yet I am resolved to fight against my sins for ever: Let God
do what he will against me, I will do all I can against my sins, and to honor
my God; that man is not under the reign and dominion of sin. But,

Seventhly, When sin commonly rises by opposition, then Sam. 6.22. I will yet
be more vile. Mark 10.47, Act. 4.6. to the 34 and 5.40, 41, 42.
48. And many charged him that he should hold his peace, but he cried the more
a great deal, Thou son of David, have mercy on me; so when sin is in the
Throne, it rises higher and higher by opposition. As the more water you cast
upon Lime, the more fiercely it burns; so when sin is in its reign and
dominion, it flames out the more by opposition; witness the Jews malice and
envy against Christ, which when it received but a little easy gentle check by
Pilate, Mark 15.12, 13, 14.
they cried out so much the more, Crucify him, crucify him. A man that is
under the reign and dominion of sin, is like the Rainbow; the Rainbow is never
on that side of the world, that the Sun is, but wheresoever it appears, it is
in opposition against the Sun; if the Sun be in the East, the Rainbow is in the
West, etc. Where sin has the Throne, it will still rise higher and higher by
opposition; reprove a swearer for swearing, and he will swear so much the more;
yea many times he will swear, that he did not swear, when indeed he did; and so
it holds in all other vices that the sinner is given up to. It Is said of
Catiline, that he was a compound and bundle of warring lusts and vices; the
same may be said of all others, where sin is in dominion. But,

Romans 6.17, 18.
Christ has no dominion over that soul that sin has dominion over, and sin
has no dominion over that soul that Christ has dominion over; Christ and sin
cannot have dominion over the same soul at one and the same time, Christ's
dominion is destructive and inconsistent with sins dominion, etc.

But how shall I know, whether the Lord Jesus Christ has dominion over my soul
or no? How shall I know whether the Lord Jesus Christ be my Lord, or no? For if
I can but groundedly conclude, that Christ is my Lord, then I may very boldly,
safely and undoubtedly conclude, that sin is not my Lord; but if Christ be not
my Lord, I may more than fear that sin is certainly my Lord.

Sol. Can thou truly say, in the presence of the great and glorious God,
Psalm. 139.23, 24. Psalm. 26.2. Jer. 11.20. and 17.10. Prove. 17.3. 1 These. 2.4.
that is the tryer and searcher of all hearts, that thou have given up thy
heart and life to the Rule, Authority and Government of Jesus Christ, and that
thou have chosen him to be thy Sovereign Lord and King, and art truly willing
to submit to his dominion, as the only precious and righteous, holy and
heavenly, sweet and pleasant, profitable and comfortable, safe and best
dominion in all the world, and to resign up thy heart, thy will, thy
affections, thy life, thy all, really to Christ, wholly to Christ, and only to
Christ. Can thou truly say? O dear Lord Jesus, other Lords, viz. the world,
the flesh, and the devil, have had dominion too long over me; Isa. 26.13.
but now these Lords I utterly renounce, I for ever renounce, and do give up my
self to thee, as my only Lord, beseeching thee to rule and reign over me for
ever and ever: O Lord, though sin rages, and Satan roars, and the world
sometimes frowns, Josh. 24.15.
and sometimes fawns, yet I am resolved to own thee as my only Lord, and to
serve thee as my only Lord; my greatest fear is of offending thee, and my
chiefest care shall be to please thee, and my only joy shall be to be a praise,
a name, and an honor to thee: O Lord, I can appeal to thee in the sincerity of
my heart, that though I have many invincible weaknesses and infirmities that
hang upon me, and though I am often worsted by my sins, and overcome in an hour
of temptation, yet thou that know all thoughts and hearts, thou do know
that I have given up my heart to the obedience of Jesus Christ, and do daily
give it up to his rule and government, and it is the earnest desire of my soul,
above all things in this world, that Jesus Christ may still set up his Laws in
my heart, and exercise his dominion over me. Now doubtless there is not the
weakest Christian in the world, but can venture himself upon such an appeal to
God as this is, and without all peradventure, where such a frame and temper of
spirit is, there the dominion of Jesus Christ is set up; and where the dominion
of Christ is set up, there sin has no dominion; Mat. 6.24.
but where the dominion of Christ is not set up, there sin is in full dominion.
Christ's dominion cannot consist with sins dominion, nor sins dominion cannot
consist with Christ's dominion. Now by these eight things, if men are not
resolved before hand to put a cheat upon their own souls, they may know whether
their sins have dominion over them or no, and so accordingly conclude for or
against themselves. But,

Fifteenthly and lastly, A godly man may argue thus. There Walking in
Scripture, signifies to hold on a course of life, Genesis 5.22. and 17.1.
but after the spirit, Romans 8.1. But I walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit, therefore there is no condemnation to me. Walking after the flesh,
notes a course of sin; and walking after the spirit, notes a course of
godliness: Now to such as keep off from a course of sin, and that keep on in a
course of godliness, there is no condemnation, there is not one condemnation;
for God the father will not condemn such a person, nor Jesus Christ will not condemn
such a person, nor the holy spirit will not condemn such a person, nor the word of
grace will not condemn such a person, nor no commandment or threatenings will
condemn such a person, no nor such a man's own heart nor conscience (if it be
rightly informed) will not condemn him; and therefore well may the holy Ghost say
to such a one, there is no condemnation to such a one, there is not one
condemnation, etc.


Now, thus you see, by comparing spiritual things with spiritual things, and by
a rational arguing from Scripture, a man may attain unto a comfortable
certainty of his gracious state, and safely and groundedly conclude his
interest in Christ. Now this assurance of Gods favor, by the witnessing of our
own spirits, which assurance is deduced by way of argument syllogistically, is
more easily attained than many (may I not say, than most) Christians imagine;
for let a gracious man but clear himself of heart-condemning sins, 1 John 3.20,
21.
and rationally argue as before has been hinted, and he will speed^ly reach to
some comfortable supporting, soul-satisfying, and soul-quieting assurance,
there being an infallible connection between the forementioned graces, and
future glory. These fifteen arguments may well be looked upon as fifteen sure
and infallible evidences of the goodness and happiness of a Christians estate.

O that you would often, every day think on this, viz. That the undoubted
verity of Gods promises, proves an inseparable connection between true faith
and eternal glory, John 3.14, 15, 16. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up; That whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life. John 5.24. Verily, verily (these serious
asseverations or protestations amount almost to an oath) I say unto you, he
that hears my words, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life.
John 3.36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life. (He has it in
the promise, he has it in the first Fruits, Romans 8.23. he has it in the
earnest, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. and he has it in Christ his Head, Ephesians. 2.6.) Mark
16.16. He that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, he that believes not
shall be damned. 1 Pet. 2.6. Behold I lay in Sion a chief Corner stone, Elect
precious, and he that believes on him, shall not be confounded. John 6.40. And
this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and
believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day. Verse 47. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes on me,
has everlasting Life. John 2.25. Jesus said unto her, I am the Resurrection
and the Life, he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.
Verse 26. And whosoever lives, and believe^h in me, shall never dye. John
20.31. But these are written, that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ the
Son of God, and that believing, ye might have life through his name. Look as
certainly as the unbeliever shall be cast into outer darkness, so certainly
shall the Believer be partaker of the glorious inheritance of the Saints in
light; for certainly the Promises are as true as the threatenings, Acts 16.30,
31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. Josh. 23.14.
chap. 21.45.
The Apostle speaks not doubtingly, perhaps thou shall be saved, nor they do
not say, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and it may be thou may go to
Heaven, but they speak boldly, confidently, peremptorily, believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved. O my Soul, what greater certainty and
security can any man have, than the infallible promise of that God that is
truth it self, who will not, who cannot deny his word. but the same love and
free Grace that moved him to infuse grace into his childrens souls, will move
him also to keep the word that is gone out of his mouth, and to make good
whatever he has promised; thus you evidently see that the Promises prove an
inseparable connection between Grace and glory, between Faith and everlasting
Life; so that let me but prove that I have a saving Faith, and the Scriptures
last cited, prove infallibly that I shall be saved.

O labor as for life, daily to give a firm and fixed assent to the truth of
those blessed Promises last cited, and hold it as an indisputable and
inviolable Principle, That whosoever believes on the Lord Jesus Christ, or
whosoever has received Christ as his Lord and Savior, shall be certainly
saved. 1 Timothy 1.15. 1 John 1.9. Heb. 6.17, 18. ^zek. 32.11. and chap. 18.32. 1
John 5.10.14. Jam. 2 19.
This is the person that has the Word, the Promise, the Covenant, the Oath of
that God that cannot possibly lie, or dye for the pardon of his sin, and for
the Salvation of his Soul. Now O my Soul, what security could thou ask more
of a deceitful man, than that which the great Jehovah, ^he faithful God of his
own accord has given to thee, viz. his word, and his. Oath. Now not to believe
God upon his Promise and Oath, is to make him a Liar, yea the worst of Liars;
yea, it is to do worse than the D^vils ^^r they believe and tremble. Though the
word of the Lord des^rves the greatest credit that any mortals can give unto
it, (he being truth it self that has said it) though it had no Oaths, nor no
Asseverations to be its surety, yet God in his infinite condescending love to
poor sinners, that he may sink the truth of what he says deeper into the
hearts and minds of his people, and leave the fairer and fuller print in our
assents to the same, he sets on the word of Promise with the weight of
Asseverations and Oaths; yea, and to all these he has annexed his Broad Seal,
the Lords Supper, and the Privy Seal of his Spirit: O unreasonable unbelief!
shall not the Oath of God silence all Disputes? A man would never desire of any
honest man, so much as God has condescended to, for the confirmation of our
Faith, witness his Promises, his Covenant, his Oath, and his Seals; and
therefore let us give glory to him by believing, and quietly rest upon his
faithfulness.

O Sirs, that soul that dares not take his sanctification as an evidence (yea,
as a choice and sure evidence) of his interest in Christ, and of the Lords
precious love to him, according to the Promises of his favor and Grace
(several of which has been but now under consideration) that Soul ought to
acknowledge it as his sin, yea as his great sin, for which he deserves to be
smartly rebuked, as making God a loud Liar. O my friends, it is a spiritual
peevishness, and sinful crossness that keeps many good men and women long in a
sad, dark, doubting, perplexed, and disconsolate condition; and certainly it is
no small sin to set light by any work of the blessed Spirit, and the joy,
comfort, and peace that we might have by it; ah how many are there that fear
the Lord, who quench, grieve, vex, and provoke the holy Spirit, by denying his
work, and by quarrelling against themselves, and the blessed work of the Spirit
in them? Certainly it is the duty of every Christian to hear as well what can be
said for him, as what can be said against him: Many poor, Psalm. 77.2. Psalm. 88.
Job 15.11. chap. 16.8, 9.
weak (and yet sincere) Christians are often apt to be too sour, rigid and
bitter against their own souls, they love to practice a merciless severity
against themselves; they do not indifferently, impartially consider how the
case stands between God and their own souls. It is in this case, as Solomon
speaks in another. There is that makes himself rich, Prove. 13.7. Ever since
man ceased to be what he should be, he striveth to seem to be what he is not.
It is not the outward show, that shows what things are.
and yet has nothing. And there is that makes himself poor, and yet has
great Riches. That is, there be those in the world that pretend they are rich,
and make a show before men as if they were men of great estates, whereas indeed
they are exceeding poor and needy.

There are not a few that stretch their wing beyond their nest, that bear a
port beyond their Estates, that trick up themselves with other men's plumes,
laying it on above measure in clothes, in high entertainments, in stately
Buildings, in great Attendance, etc. when not worth one groat in all the World,
but either they dye in Prison, or lay the key under the door, or compound for
twelve pence in the pound, etc. And there are others again that are exceeding
rich and wealthy, and yet feign themselves, and look upon themselves to be very
poor and needy. To apply this spiritually. It Is the damning sin of the
self-flattering Hypocrite, Rev. 3.17.
to make himself rich, to make himself significant, to make his condition
better than it is: And it is the vanity, the folly, of some sincere Christians,
to make their condition worse than indeed it is, to make themselves more
miserable and unhappy than indeed they are. Ah Christians, it is sad with you,
t^s night with you, when you read over the evidences of Gods love to your
souls, as a man does a Book which he intends to confute. Is it not sad when
Christians shall study hard to find evasions to wheel off all those comforts,
refreshings, cheerings, and supports, that are tendered to them that are due to
them, and that they may upon Gospel-grounds justly claim as their portion, as
their inheritance. And O that all such Christians would seriously and
frequently lay to heart these eight things.







Fourthly, They bear false witness against Christ, his Spirit, Thou shall not
bear false witness, etc. who yet make no Conscience, no bones of it, frequently
to bear witness against the Lord Jesus Christ, and his gracious works upon
their own hearts? But,

Fifthly, they join with Satan and his work, and his suggestions, See Mr. Dod
on the Commandments, p. 310, 311. and p. 321, 322, 323, 324.
Sin is Satan's work, and Grace is Christ's work: Now how sad is it to see a
Christian fall in with Satan's work in him, against the work of Christ that is
in him. Satan has a strong party in their souls, and Christ has but a weak
party; now how unjust is it for them to help the strong against the weak, when
they should upon many accounts be a helping the w^ak against the strong, a
helping the Lord against the mighty, a helping weak grace against strong and
mighty corruptions: An how skilful and careful are many weak Christians to make
head against the work of Christ in their own Souls, and to plead hard for Satan
and his works in them, as if they had received a Fee from him to plead against
Christ and their own Souls. O Christians, that you would be wise at last, and
let Baal plead for Baal, let Satan plead for himself, but do you plead for
Christ and that seed of God that is in you. Well, remember this, John 1.3, 9.
that as fire is often hid under the embe^s, so grace is often hid under many
soul distempers; and as a little fire is fire, though it be even smothered
under the embers, so a little Grace is Grace, though it be even smothered under
much corruption: Now by these short hints, you may easily perceive how many
Royal Commands these poor Christians transgress, who deny and belly the blessed
work of the Lord in them. But,

Romans 8.11.
equivalent to that by which the world was created, and by which Christ was
raised from the dead, to find it overlookt, and not at all acknowledged.
Spiritus sanctus est res delicata, the Holy Spirit is a very tender thing, but
do these poor doubting Souls carry it ^enderly to him, surely no. Dear
Christians, the standing Law of Heaven is, Quench not the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19.
Now if the word Spirit is not here taken essentially, for the three persons in
Trinity, nor yet metonymically, for the fruits of the spirit, but
Hypostatically, for the Third person in Trinity, (as some conceive) then you
must remember that you may grieve and quench the Spirit, 1. Not only by your
enormities, Isa. 63.10. 2. Nor only by refusing the Cordials and comforts that
he brings to your doors; yea that he puts to your mouths, Psalm. 77.2. 3. Nor
only by slighting and despising his gracious actings in others, Acts 2.13. 4.
Nor only by Fathering those sins and vanities upon him, Mark, you cannot
despise the gifts or graces of any that are sincere, but by interpretation, you
judge the Spirit, and despise the Spirit, as it is said of the poor in Prove.
17.5.
that are only the B^ats and fruits of Satan and your own hearts. But also in
the fifth place, by misjudging and miscalling the precious Grace that he has
wrought in your Souls, as by judging and calling your Faith fancy, your
sincerity hypocrisy, your W sdom folly, your light darkness, your zeal
wildfire, etc. Now O S^rs, will you make Conscience, yea much Conscience of
Quenching the Spirit in the four first respects, and will you make no
Conscience of Quenching the Spirit in this fifth and last respect? O how can
this be! O why should this be? But,

Job 19.28. 1 These. 1.5.
or that the work that is past upon it, is not a work in power, or that it is not
a special and peculiar work, but some common work of the spirit, which a man
may have and go to Hell? But,

E^ghthly and lastly, They very much discourage, dishearten,

Dear hearts, a gracious soul may safely, boldly, constantly, and groundedly
say that which the Word of the Lord says: Now the Word of the Lord says,
Matthew. 5.3, 4, 6, 8.
That the poor in spirit are blessed, and that they that mourn are blessed, and
that they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness are blessed, and that they
that are pure in heart are blessed, and therefore he is blessed. And assuredly
he that cannot embrace and seal to these as true and blessed evidences of a
safe and happy condition, is greatly to lament and mourn over his unbelief, and
earnestly to seek the Lord to persuade his heart, and to satisfy and overpower
his Soul in this thing, as the poor man in the Gospel did, Mark 9.24. And
straightway the Father of the Child cried out with tears, Lord I Believe, help
my unbelief.

O Sirs, the condition of the Promises last cited, being fulfilled, the
Promises themselves must certainly and infallibly be fulfilled, else the great
and blessed God should lie, Josh. 21.45. chap. 23.14, 15. 1 John 5.10, 11, 12.
be unrighteous, unfaithful, and deny himself, which is as impossible as for
God to dye, or to send another Savior, or to give his glory to Graven Images.
Ass^redly the too hard, the too harsh, the too severe, the too jealous thoughts
and conjectures, and the too humble (if I may so speak) censures and surmises
that many weak doubting Christians have of themselves, or of the goodness or
graciousness of their Estates (by reason of the weakness of their Graces, or
depth of melancholy, or the present prevalency of some unmortified lusts, or
the subtilty of Satan) shall never make void the faithfulness of God, or the
Promises of God, which in Christ Jesus are all Yea and Amen. Doubtless God will
never shut any poor weak doubting Christian out of Heaven, 2 Cor. 1.20.
because through bashfulness or an excess of modesty, or the present darkness
tha^ is upon his understanding, or through the ungroundedness of some strong
fears of an eternal miscarriage, he cannot entertain such good thoughts, such
honest thoughts, such gracious thoughts of himself, or of the goodness or
happiness of his condition, as he should entertain, and as he would entertain,
if once he could but be too hard for the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

O that you would remember this for ever, viz. That the Lord never makes any
Promises to support, comfort, cheer, and encourage his people against their
sadness, darkness, doubts and droopings, but they shall support, comfort,
cheer, and encourage his poor people in that condition, for otherwise the Lord
should provide means for an end, out of his infinite Wisdom, love, and tender
care and compassion toward his people, and yet they should never attain that
end, but thus to imagine is no small folly; yea, it is little less than
Blasphemy. Well Sirs, this is to be for ever remembered, viz. That whatsoever
gift or Grace of God in man brings him within the compass of Gods Promises of
eternal favors and mercies, that gi^t, that Grace must needs be an infallible
sign or evidence of Salvation; but such are the gifts and Graces specified in
the fifteen particulars but now cited, and therefore that Soul that really
finds those gifts and Graces in himself (or any of them) shall certainly be
saved. But,

The Ninth Maxim or Consideration.
NInthly, Consider this, That in diverse men there are Cor. 13.12. For now we
see through a glass darkly (Gr. in a Riddle) but then face to face: Now I know
in part, but then shall I know even As, is not a note of equality, but
likeness, so that the sense may be this, look as God knows me after a manner
agreeable to his infinite excellency, so shall I know God according to my
capacity, not obscurely, but perfectly, as it were face to face.
as also I am known. A clear distinct, immediate, full and perfect knowledge of
God is desirable on earth, but we shall never attain to it till we come to
Heaven, this Well is deep, and for the most part we want a Bucket to draw
withal, the best of men can better tell what God is not, than what he is; the
most acute and judicious in Divine knowledge, have and must acknowledge their
ignorance, witness that great Apostle Paul, who learned his Divinity among the
Angels, and had the Holy Ghost for his immediate Tutor, yet he confesses that
he knew but in part; certainly there is no man under heaven that has such a
perfect, complete and full assurance of his Salvation (in an ordinary way) as
that one degree cannot be added to the former; Neither is there any repugnancy
in asserting an infallible assurance, and denying a perfect assurance, for I
infallibly know that there is a God, and that this God is holy just and true,
and yet I have no perfect knowledge of a Deity, nor of the holiness justice and
truth of God, for in this life the most knowing man knows but in part: Dear
friends, in the Church of Christ there are Believers of several growths, there
are Fathers, young men, Children and Babes, 1 John 1.13, 14. 1 Pet. 2.2. And as
in most families there are commonly more Children and Babes than grown men; so
in the Church of Christ there are commonly more weak staggering doubting
Christians than there are strong ones, grown up to a full assurance. Some
think, that as soon as they be assured, they must needs be void of all fears,
and filled with all joy in believing; but this is a real mistake, for glorious
and ravishing joy is a separable accident from Assurance, nor yet does
Assurance exclude all doubts and fears, but only such doubts and fears as
arises from infidelity and reigning hypocrisy. But,

The Tenth Maxim or Consideration.
TEnthly, Consider we have no ground from Scripture to Gregory tells us of a
Religious Lady of the Empresses Bedchamber, Vide Gregorii Epistolae a Lapide
in 8. ad Romans v. 16.
whose name was Gregoria, that being much troubled about her Salvation, did
write unto him, That she should never cease importuning of him, till he had
sent her word that he had received a Revelation from Heaven that her sins were
pardoned and that she was saved. To whom he returned this Answer, That it was a
hard, and altogether a useless matter which she required of him; It was
difficult for him to obtain, as being unworthy to have the secret Counsels of
God to be imparted to him, and it was as unprofitable for her to know; and that
first, because such a Revelation might make her too secure; and secondly,
because it was impossible for him to demonstrate and make known unto her or any
other, the truth and infallibility of the Revelation which he had received, to
be from God, so that should she afterward call into question the truth of it,
as well she might, her troubles and doubtings concerning her Salvation would
have been as great as they were before. O therefore let all Believers that
would have sure establishment, sound comfort, lasting Peace, and true and sweet
assurance of the love of God, and of their interest in Christ, etc. take heed
of flying unto Revelations, Visions or Voices from Heaven to assure them of
their Salvation, and of the love of God, and of their interest in Christ, etc.
If you who are advantaged to consult H story, please to do it, you will find
upon Record, that where one has been mistaken about searching his own heart,
and trying his ways, and observing the frame and temper of his own spirit,
many hundreds have been eternally deceived and deluded by Voices, Visions,
Apparitions, Revelations, 2 These. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.
and strange impulses and strong impressions, especially among the Romanists;
and within these few years, have not many hundreds in this Nation fallen under
the same woeful delusions, who are all for crying up a Light within, and a
Christ within, etc. And this you are seriously and Conscientiously to observe
in opposition to the Pap^sts, who boldly and stoutly affirm, That assurance of
a man's Salvation can be had by no other means than by extraordinary Revelation:
Witness the Council of Trent, who have long since said, That if any man say
that he knows he shall certainly persevere, or infallibly be assured of his
Election, except he have this by special Revelation, let him be Anathema.
Without all peradventure God will one day cross and curse such a wicked Council
that curses, that Anathematizeth his people for asserting and maintaining that
that may certainly be obtained in this life, as I have sufficiently proved by
ten Arguments in my Treatise called Heaven on Earth, from page 1. to page 26. I
think there is a great truth in that confession of Faith that says, that
infallible Assurance does not so belong to the essence of Faith, 1 John 5.13.
Isa. 50.10. Mark 9 24. 1 Cor. 2.12. 1 John 4.13, 14. Heb. 6.11, 12. Ephesians.
3.17, 18, 19. 2 Pet. 1.10.
but that a true Believer may wait long, and confl^ct with many difficulties
before he be partaker of it; yea, being enabled by the Spirit to know the
things which are freely given him of God, he may without any extraordinary
revelation, in the right use of ordinary means, attain thereunto; and therefore
it is the duty of every one to give all diligence to make his Calling and
Election sure. But,

The Eleventh Maxim or Consideration.
Zion comparable to fine Gold, Lam. 4.2.
that have not a clear and full Assurance of their interest in Christ, nor of
the saving work of God upon their Souls, who yet are able to plead many
probabilities of Grace, and of an interest in Christ. Now doubtless
probabilities of Grace and of an interest in Christ may serve to keep off fears
and doubts, and darkness, and sadness, and all rash and peremptory conclusions
against a man's own Soul, and his everlasting welfare, and may contribute very
much to the keeping up of a great deal of peace, comfort and quietness in his
Soul. The probable grounds that thou have Grace, and that God has begun to work
powerfully, and savingly upon thee, are mercies more worth than ten thousand
Worlds; will you please seriously and frequently to dwell upon these ten
particulars.

communion with God in sorrow and tears. Hos. 12.4. Isa. 38.3. Psalm. 51.17.
A man may have communion wi h God in a heart humbling, a heart melting, and a
heart abasing way, when he has not communion with God in a heart reviving, a
heart cheering, and a heart comforting way. It Is a very great mistake among many
weak tender spirited Christians, to think that they have no communion with God
in duties, except they meet with God embracing and kissing, cheering and
comforting up their Souls: And O that all such Christians would remember this
once for all, viz. That a Christian may have as real communion with God in a
heart humbling way, as he can have in a heart comforting way; John 20.11-19.
a Christian may have as choice communion with God when his eyes are full of
tears, as he can have when his heart is full of joy; when a godly man upon his
dying bed was asked which were his most joyful days (either those before his
Conversion, or those since his Conversion) upon which he cried out, O give me
my mourning days again, Give me my mourning days again, for they were my
joyfullest days. Many times a poor Christian has never more joy in his heart
than when his eyes are full of tears. But,

Secondly, Though many poor weak doubting trembling 'Twas a famous saying of
Austins, he loves not Christ at all, that loves not Christ above all.
yet they dare say that they would love the Lord Jesus Christ with all their
hearts, and with all their Souls, and they dare say, that if it were in their
power, they would even shed tears of blood because they cannot love Christ,
both as they would and as they should. Blessed Bradford would sit and weep at
Dinner till the tears fell on his Trencher, because he could love God no more.
So the poor doubting trembling Christian mourns and laments because he can love
Christ no more. A man may love Gold, and yet not have it, but no man loves God
but he is sure to have God, says Augustine. A good man once cried out, I had
rather have one Christ, than a thousand Worlds.

Thirdly, Though many poor weak doubting trembling say that they prize the
least dram of Grace above all the gold and silver of the Indies; Cardan says,
that every precious stone has an egregious virtue in it. The same we may say
of every saving Grace.
were all the world a lump of gold, and in their hands to dispose of it, they
would give it for Grace, yea for a little Grace. Now certainly no man can thus
highly prize Grace but he that has Grace. No man sees the worth and luster of
Grace; no man sees a beauty and excellency in Grace, nor no man can value Grace
above the gold of Ophir, but he whose heart has been changed, and whose eyes
has been opened by the Spirit of Grace. B^t,

Lazarus, Luke 16.
be full of sores and full of wants, and live and dye in rags, and after all be
carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, than with Dives, every day to fare
sumptuously, and be clothed gloriously, and perish eternally. Though they are
poor, and wicked men Rich, though they are debased, and wicked men exalted,
though they are empty, and wicked men full, though they are low, and wicked men
high, though they enjoy nothing, and wicked men enjoy every thing, yet they
would not for as many worlds as there be men in the world, change conditions
with them. But,

Eccles. 7.20. And because no man can say I have made my heart clean, 1 John
3.6, 8, 9, 10.
I am pure from my sin, Prove. 20.9. And because in many things we offend all,
James 3.2. And because if we say We have no sin we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8. yet they dare say that they would not
willingly, wilfully, wickedly, resolutely, maliciously and habitually sin
against the Lord to gain the whole World, though they dare not say they don't
sin, yet they dare say, if they might have their choice, they would never
dishonor God more, nor Crucify the Lord of glory more, nor grieve the Spirit
of Grace more, nor wound Conscience more, nor cloud the face of God more, nor
darken their evidences for Heaven more, nor interrupt their communion with God
more, etc. But,

Sixthly, Though poor doubting staggering trembling Cant. 5.10. Deuteronomy. 26.17.
Psalm. 73.25. Phil. 3.6, 7, 8.
they had infinitely rather choose God and Christ and the Spirit, and grace and
holiness, and everlasting happiness than the contrary. Look as Rachel cried out
Give me Water or I dye; So these poor hearts are still crying out, O Lord give
me thy self, or I dye; Give me thy Christ, or I dye; Give me thy Spirit and
Grace, or I dye; Give me pardon of sin, or I dye; Lift up the light of thy
Countenance upon me, or I dye; Bring me under the bond of the Covenant, or I
dye; O Lord let all these things be done, or I am undone, and that for ever;
Lord let the men of this World take the World, and divide it among themselves,
let me but enjoy thy self, thy Christ, thy love, and I shall say my Lot is
fallen to me in a pleasant place, and verily I have a goodly heritage, Psalm.
16.5, 6. But,

Seventhly, Though poor doubting staggering trembling Acts 11.23. Psalm. 15.4.
Psalm. 16.3. Lam. 4.2. 1 Thessalonians. 1.2, 3. Heb. 11.38.
and highly honor, and greatly prize the Graces of the Spirit which they see
sparkling and shining in the hearts and lives and lips of other Saints, And
they dare say that there are no men in all the world that are so precious, so
lovely, so worthy and so honorable in their eyes, or so high in their esteems
as those who have the Image of God, of Christ, of holiness most clearly, fairly
and fully stamped upon them. But,

Psalm. 65.3. Gal. 5.14.
yet they dare say, that when the Lord is pleased (now and then by his Spirit,
Power, Word, Grace, etc.) to help them, though it be but a little, against
their sins, to help them in any measure to subdue their sins, or to assist them
to bring any one sin or another to an under, or to arm them against any
temptations, occasions or provocations to sin, there are no such times or
seasons of joy, comfort, delight, refreshing, and content to their Souls as
these are. The language of their Souls in such a day as this is, is this, O
that it might be always thus with us! O that every day we might lead Captivity
Captive! O that every day we might have our lusts at an under! O that every day
we might triumph over the old man! O that every day one lust or another might
fall before the power, the Spirit, the presence, the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ. But,

Psalm. 4.3. Psalm. 66.19, 20. Psalm. 138.3. Lam. 3.55, 56, 57, 58.
so much earnings of the Sermons they hear, or of the Prayers they make, or of
the Scriptures they read, or of the communion of Saints that they enjoy, as
others do; yet they dare say that they would not for all the World cast off
Praying or Hearing, or Reading, or the Communion of Saints, and give up
themselves to the ways of sin and Satan and the World. But,

John 20.^8.
yet they are willing to make a resignation of themselves up to him as their
King; they are willing to resign up their hearts and lives to the Government of
Jesus Christ; though they cannot find comfort, yet they will oppose sin; though
they cannot comprehend Christ, yet they will not willingly offend Christ;
though they cannot see their own propriety in Christ, yet they desire nothing
more than that Christ may claim a propriety in them; though they cannot see
Christ as a friend, yet they can look upon sin as an enemy; though they cannot
close with the Promises, yet they will close with the Precepts; though they
cannot close with the Privileges of a Christian, yet they will close with the
Services of a Christian; though they cannot share in the comforts of a
Christian, yet they will side with the duties of a Chr^stian; though they
cannot clear up their interest in Christ, yet they are willing to yield
subjection to Christ; though they want strength to throw themselves into the
arms of Christ to save them, yet they will cast themselves at the feet of
Christ to serve him; though they want the light of comfort and consolation, yet
they will walk in the light of commands and directions, Isa. 50.10.

All men will grant that these ten things are strong probabilit es of Grace,
but give me leave to say that they are without all controversy, most sure,
sound, solid and infallible evidences of true Grace, and of an interest in
Christ and Salvation; and therefore all those poor doubting staggering and
trembling Christians that find all these, or any of these ten things in their
own Souls, they ought for ever to bless the Lord, and speak well of his Name
upon these accounts. And therefore O my Soul, be thou much in adoring and
admiring of free and infinite Grace, that has wrought all these things in thee
and for thee.

But now dear hearts that this eleventh particular concerning probabilities of
Grace may the better stick upon you, and be the more seriously minded and
weighed by you, I beseech you often to ponder upon these six following things.

Jude 6.
and therefore for you to have a probability of enjoying for ever the presence
of God, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. Isa. 33.14.
Christ, the glorious Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect in
Heaven, is a mercy more worth than ten thousand worlds; you have deserved to
dwell with a devouring fire, and to lie for ever under those flames and
torments that are easless, endless, and remediless; Psalm. 16. ult.
and therefore for you to have a probability of satiating and delighting your
souls in that fullness of joy, and in those everlasting pleasures that be at
Gods right hand, is Grace, yea glorious Grace upon the Throne, etc. But,



for the very probabilities of Grace. He dyed desperately, who dyed with this
desperate saying in his month, Spes and fortuna valete, Farewell life and hope
together. Despair is Satan's masterpiece, it carries men headlong to Hell, as
the Devils did the herd of Swine into the deep.
Spira being in a deep despair for renouncing of those Doctrines of the Gospel,
which he had once stoutly professed said, That he would willingly suffer the most
exquisite tortures of Hell fire for the space of ten thousand years, upon
condition he might be well assured to be released afterward. He further added
in that hellish and horrible fit, that his dear wife and children (for whose
sake principally he turned away from the Gospel, to embrace this present world)
appeared now to him as Hangmen, Hags and torturers. A despairing Soul is Magor
Missabib, a terror to himself, his heart a Hell of horror, his Conscience an
Aceldama, a Field of black Blood: So that as Augustine describes such a one
flying from the Field to the City, from the City to his house, from his house
to his Chamber, from his Chamber to his bed, etc. So that he can rest no where,
but is as if infernal Devils in fearful shapes were still following of him, and
still terrifying and tormenting his distressed and perplexed Soul. Now
doubtless such poor souls would have given ten thousand worlds (had they so
many in their hands to give) and that for the very probabilities of Grace; and
how many tempted, deserted, clouded, wounded, and benighted Souls are there,
who would think it a Heaven on this side Heaven, if they could but see
probabilities of Grace in their Souls? O therefore let not the probabilities of
Grace be a small thing in your eyes, but bow the knee, and let the High Praises
of God be found in your mouths, even for probabilities of Grace. But,

Fourthly, Consider that Sa^an is a very deadly enemy to Let not any think
(says Luther) the Devil is ^ow dead no nor yet asleep, for as he that keeps
Israel, so he tha^ hates Israel never slumbreth or sleeps.
O how does he storm and take on against every probability of Grace and mercy
that God vouchsafes to his people for their comfort and encouragement! Satan is
an old experienced enemy, almost of six thousand years standing, and he very
well knows that probabilities of grace will certainly arm a Christian against
many temptations, and sweetly support him under many afflictions, and
exceedingly heighten and raise his resolutions; he knows that probabilities of
grace will turn crosses into Crowns, storms into calms, and Winter nights into
Summer days; Satan knows that probabilities of grace will make every bitter
sweet, and every sweet seven times more sweet; and therefore his spirit rises
and swells against every probability of grace. Now the greater Satan's rage is
against the probabilities of grace, the more thankful we should be for the
probabilities grace; it is good to move and act cross to him, who in all his
actings loves to act cross to the glory of God, and the good of our Souls. But,



Exodus 32.30. 1 Samuel 9.6. 1 Kings 20.31. 1 Timothy 2.25.
as you may easily see by comparing the Scriptures in the Margent together:
Scripture peradventures ought to keep down despair, and raise our hopes and our
hearts to know that God is favorable, and that sin is pardonable, and that
mercy is attainable, and that Hell is avoidable, is no small comfort to a poor
doubting trembling Christian. And as there is a great deal of grace and mercy
in Scripture peradventures; so there is a great deal of grace and favor in
Scripture may-be's, as you may see by comparing these Scriptures in the Margent
together. Now if Scripture-peradventures, 1 Samuel 14 6. 2 Samuel 16.12. 2 Kings
19.4. Isa. 37 4. Ezekiel. 14 11. Amos 5 15. Zeph. 2 3. Dan. 4.27.
and Scripture may-be's afford so much support, relief and comfort to your
souls as indeed they do, then doubtless probabilities of grace, of an interest
in Christ, of going to Heaven, and of being saved, ought very much to support,
relieve, cheer, and comfort the hearts of all those that have such
probabilities. A gracious soul may say when he is lowest and weakest, Well,
though I dare not say that I have Grace, yet I have a peradventure for it; and
though I dare not, I cannot say I have an interest in Christ, yet if I have a
may-be for it, I ought to bear up bravely and comfortably against all fears and
doubts; yea and to take the comfort, and the sweet of all those blessed
probabilities of grace, of an interest in Christ, and of being saved, and of
all the peradventures and may-be's that are scattered up and down in the Book
of God, and with Hannah, to walk up and down without a sad countenance, 1 Samuel
1.18.

The Twelfth Maxim or Consideration.
TWelfthly, Consider that it is a Christians greatest Wisdom There are some
particular times and seasons in which it is no way safe nor convenient for a
Christian to enter upon the trial of his Spiritual estate. Times of desertion
and temptation, are rather times and seasons for mourning, watching, restling
and seeking of God, than for judging and determining of our conditions.
As first, when the body is greatly distempered. 2. When the Soul is greatly
tempted by Satan, or sadly deserted by God. 3. When the Conscience is so deeply
wounded by some great falls, as that the Soul is filled with exceeding great
fear, terror and horror; it is with many poor Christians in this case, as it
has been with some who have been so struck with the fear and horror of death
before the Judge, that though they were good Scholars and able to read any
thing, yet fear and horror has so surprised them, that when their lives have
been at stake, and the Book has been given them to read, they have not been
able to read one line, one word. So many of the precious servants of Christ,
when they have been under wounds of Conscience, and when they have been filled
with fears, terrors and horrors, they have not been able to look up to Heaven,
nor read their evidences, nor turn to the breasts of the Promises, Psalm. 40.12.
Psalm. 77. Psalm. 88. Job 23.8, 9.
nor call to mind their former experiences, nor behold the least glimpse of
Heavens glories. No man in his wits, if he were to weigh gold, would weigh it
in the midst of high winds, great storms and horrible tempests, which would so
hurry the balance up and down, this way and that, that it would be impossible
for him to weigh his gold exactly. Now the trial of our spiritual estates is
like the weighing of gold, Job 31.6. Dan. 5.27.
for we are all to weigh our selves by the balance of the Sanctuary. God
himself will one day weigh us by that balance, and if we hold weight when he
comes to weigh us, we are safe and happy for ever: But when he comes to weigh
us in the balance of the Sanctuary, if we shall then be found too light, it
had been good for us we had never been born; when Belshazzar saw the
handwriting upon the wall, his countenance was changed, Verses 5, 6.
and his thoughts troubled, and the joints of his loins were loosed, and his
knees smote one against another; but what was all this to an everlasting
separation from God, and to those endless, easless, and remediless torments
that such must endure, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9, 10.
who when they are weighed in the balance, shall be found too light? A man
that would weigh gold to a grain, The candle will never burn clear whilst there
is a thief in it, sin indulged in the conscience, is like Jonah in the ship,
which causes such a tempest, that the Conscience is like a troubled Sea, whose
waters cannot rest, or it is like a more in the eye, which causes a perpetual
trouble while it is there.
must weigh it in a quiet still place: And so a man that would make an exact
trial of his spiritual estate, he must take his Soul when it is most serious,
quiet, still, and composed; he must take his heart when it is in the best
frame, and most disposed to solemn and weighty work. There are some times which
are very unapt for a gracious person to sit as Judge upon his Spiritual estate,
and to pass sentence upon his own Soul. The best Christians under Heaven do
meet with diverse inward and outward changes, sometimes the light shines so
clear that they can see things as they are, but at other times all is dark and
cloudy, and tempestuous, and then they are apt to judge themselves by feeling
and new representations, and not according to the truth. O Sirs, remember this
once for all, that times of inward or outward distresses are best for Praying,
and worst for judging. If a man will at such times pass sentence on himself, or
his estate as a Judge, he will certainly judge unrighteous judgment, for then the
Soul is not it self, and is very apt and prone to take Satan's work for his own,
and to side with him against it self, yea, and then usually it will see
nothing, it will think of nothing, it will dwell upon nothing but what makes
against it self. 4. When God exercises a man with some exceeding severe and
unusual Providence, when God steps out of his ordinary way of Dispensations in
his dealings with a man: When God sets a man up before all the world as a mark
to shoot at, as he did Job. Now a poor Christian is ready to doubt and
conclude, Job 7.20. c. 16.12
Surely the Lord has no regard of me, he has no entire love for me, his heart
is not certainly toward me, seeing all these sore trials make so much against
me; but here the poor Christian is mistaken, as Jacob once was, Gen 42.36. And
Jacob their Father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved of my children, Joseph
is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away, all these things are
against me. Genesis 45.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
But Jacob was out, for all those things made for him, and for the preservation
of the visible Church of God in the World. Certainly all the afflictions that
befall the people of God, Rev. 3.19. Heb. 12.5, 6.
are but his love tokens. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten, and therefore
those Christians are miserably mistaken that take them for testimonies of his
wrath, and effects of his disfavour. O Sirs! what can be more absurd,
displeasing, and provoking, than for a Christian to make that an Argument of
Gods hatred, that he intends for an instance of his love? and ye^ Christians
are apt thus to act. It is observable the Apostle reckons affliction amongst
Gods honoraries and tokens of respect, Judge. 6.12, 13. Exodus 17.7. Phil. 1.29.
For to you it is given (says he) not only to believe, but also to suffer. Which
(says Father Latymer) is the greatest promotion that God gives in this world.
Job 7.17, 18.
Job (when he was himself) could not but admire at it, that God should make
such an account of man, and that he should so magnify him, and dignify him, as
to think him worthy of a rod, a whiping; as to think him worth a melting, Prove.
1.32. Psalm. 73.5. Eccles. 9.1, 2.
and trying every morning, yea, every moment. It Is certain that great prosperity
and worldly glory are no sure tokens of Gods love, and it is as certain that
great troubles and afflictions are no sure marks of Gods hatred, and yet many
poor Christians, when the waters of affliction rise high, and are ready to
overflow them, O how apt are they to conclude that God hates them, and will
revenge himself upon them, and that they have nothing of God or Christ, or the
Spirit, or Grace in them? Or, 5. Lam. 1.16.
When the Spirit the Comforter stands afar off, and witholds those special
influences, without which, in a common ordinary way, a Christian cannot
divinely, heartily, clearly and impartially transact with God in order to his
own peace, comfort and settlement. Or, 6. When either a Christians evidences
are not at hand, or else they are so soiled, darkened, blotted and obscured, as
that he is not able to read them. Psalm. 88. Job 33.10. It is an old saying that
Melancholia est vehiculum Daemonum. In the German proverb, Luther says it goes
for current, Caput Melancholicum diaboli Balneum, The melancholy head is the
Devils bathing place.
Or, 7. When a Christian is extremely oppressed with melancholy. Melancholy is a
dark and dusky humor, which disturbs both Soul and body, and the cure of it
belongs rather to the Physician than to the Divine. It is a most pestilent
humor where it abounds, one calls it Balneum Diaboli, the Devils Bath; it is a
humor that unfits a man for all sorts of services, but especially those that
concern his soul, his spiritual estate, his everlasting condition. The
Melancholy person tyres the Physician, grieves the Minister, wounds Relations,
and makes sport for the Devil. There are 5 sorts of persons that the Devil
makes his Ass to ride in triumph upon, viz. the ignorant person, the
unbelieving person, the proud person, the hypocritical person, and the
Melancholy person. Melancholy is a disease that works strange passions, strange
imaginations, and strange conclusions. It unmans a man, it makes a man call
good evil, and evil good, sweet bitter, and bitter sweet, light darkness, and
darkness light. The distemper of the body oftentimes causes distemper of soul,
for the Soul follows the temper of the body. A Melancholy spirit is a dumb
spirit, you can get nothing out of him, Mat. 9.28, 29. It is no more wonder to
see a Melancholy man doubt and question his spiritual condition, than it is to
see a child cry when he is beaten, or to hear a sick man groan, or to hear a
drowning man call out for a boat. You may silence a Melancholy man, when you
are not able to comfort him. Whilst Nebuchadnezzar was under the power of a
deep Melancholy, he could not tell whether he was a man or a Beast. Melancholy
is the mother of fears, doubts, disputes, and discomforts.
and a deaf spirit, you can get nothing into him. Now of all the evil spirits
we read of in the Gospel, the dumb and the deaf were the worst; darkness,
sadness, solitariness, heaviness, mourning, etc. are the only sweet desirable
and delightful companions of melancholy persons. Melancholy makes every sweet
bitter, and every bitter seven times more bitter: the melancholy person is
marvellously prone to bid sleep farewell, and joy farewell, and meat farewell, and
friends farewell, and Ordinances farewell, and duties farewell, and Promises
farewell, and Ministers farewell, and his Calling farewell, and it is well if he be
not even ready to bid God farewell too. Melancholy persons are like Idols that
have eyes but see not, and tongues but speak not, and ears but hear not.
Melancholy turns truths into Fables, and fables into truths; it turns fancies
into realities, and realities into fancies. Melancholy is a fire that burns
inwards, and is hard to quench. Now if a Christian be under the power of
natural or accidental Melancholy, his work is not now to be a trying his
estate, or a casting up of his accounts to see what he is worth for another
world, but to use all such ways and means as God has prepared in a natural
way for the cure of Melancholy; for as the Soul is not cured by natural causes,
so the body is not cured by spiritual Remedies. Now in the seven cases last
mentioned, a Christians work lies rather in mourning, self-judging,
self-loathing, self-abhorring, and in repenting and reforming, and in fresh and
frequent exercises of Faith on the Lord Jesus, on his Blood, on his Promises,
and on his free rich sovereign and glorious Grace, that is displayed and
offered in the Gospel, and in a patient waiting upon the Lord in the use of all
holy and heavenly helps for deliverance out of his present straits, t^yals and
exercises, then in falling upon that great work of casting up his spiritual
accounts, and of searching into the Records of glory, to see whether his name
be Registered in the Book of Life or no. O Sirs, when poor Christians are
bewildered, their proper work is to cast themselves upon the Promises, to trust
in the name of the Lord, Isa. 50.10. Job 13.15.
and to stay themselves upon their God. Job in a cloudy stormy day, resolves to
trust ^n the Lord, though he should slay him; and so must you: And O that this
rule were more seriously minded, and effectually observed by all doubting,
trembling, and staggering Christians. But,

The Thirteenth Maxim or Consideration.
The grand Rule by which we must try and judge of our spiritual and eternal
estates, is the word of God, Isa. 8.20. in this Scripture the Prophet plainly
shows whither we must go with our doubts, fears, scruples, questions, and with
whom we must consult, and of whom we must take advice, and that is the Law and
the testimony.
or Hypocrites, by those things which the Scripture never makes a Character of
an unsound Christian, or of an Hypocrite, or of Hypocrisy. Mark, as you are to
receive no comfort, but what is backed with clear Scripture, nor no evidences
for the goodness and happiness of your spiritual estate and condition, but such
as are backed with clear Scriptures; so you are to receive, you are to admit of
no Arguments, nor pleas, nor reasonings, to prove your self an Hypocrite, or
unsound, or that you have no Grace, or that your spiritual estate and condition
is not good, but such Arguments pleas, and reasonings, as are backed with clear
Scriptures. Now tell me O thou weak doubting staggering trembling Christian, if
thou can, where are those clear Scriptures that proves wandering thoughts in
Duty, or that proves narrowness or straitness of Spirit in a duty, to be
characters of an Hypocrite, or of hypocrisy, or of one that is unsound? tell me
O thou sighing Christian, if thou can, where are those clear Scriptures that
proves the want of a good memory for the best things, or the want of those
gifts or abilities that many Christians have, to Pray, to speak, to discourse,
to open Scripture, or to dispute for the concernments of Christ and his
Kingdom, to be characters of an Hypocrite or of hypocrisy, or of one that is
unsound? Tell me O thou distressed Christian if thou can, where are those
clear Scriptures that will justify thee to conclude that thou art an Hypocrite,
because thou art without the present evidence of thy sincerity? Are there not
many of the precious sons and daughters of Zion comparable to fine gold, Isa.
50.10. 1 John 5.13. Genesis 44.
Lam. 4.2. who have true Grace and sincerity in their hearts, though for the
present it be hid from their eyes? Joseph's Brethren had their money in their
sacks, though they did not see it, nor know it till they came to their Inn and
opened them. So many of the dear children of God have sincerity in their
hearts, though for the present they do not see it nor know it. O Sirs! it is
Christ's work, not Graces, to evidence it self so clearly and fully to our eyes,
as to enable us to own it; it is one thing for the Spirit of God to work Grace in
the Soul, and another thing for the Spirit to shine upon his own work; now till
the Spirit shines upon his own work, the Soul is in the dark, 1 Cor. 2.12.
the Graces of the Spirit are best seen in the light of the Spirit, as we see
the Sun best by his own light: It Is good for doubting Christians when they are
in the dark, to hold fast this conclusion, viz. that they may be upright,
though at present they are not able to see their uprightness. Now though this
will not bring in a full Tide of comfort into their Souls, yet it will keep
them from despair, and it will support and uphold their hearts, till the
Spirit, who is a Messenger of a thousand, shall show them their uprightness.
Tell me O thou mourning Christian if thou can, where are those clear
Scriptures that proves deadness, dullness, and indisposedness in duty (though it
be sadly lamented, bewailed and mourned over, and much striven against, yea
though it be the great grief and burden of the Soul) to be characters of
Hypocrites, or of hypocrisy, or of one that is unsound? Tell me O thou
disquieted Christian if thou can, where are those clear Scriptures that
proves the want of those enlargements, ravishments, joys, comforts, In all
Soul cases, God expects we should consult his word, and cleave to his word,
without warping or turning aside either to the right hand or to the left, John
12.48. That book that shall try you at last, and that shall save you or damn
you in the great day, is the only book by which you must make a judgment of
your present and future estates. Clemens of Alexandria, speaking of the Word,
says, it is the touchstone of truth and falsehood.
peace or assurance that some others have, to be characters of Hypocrites or
hypocrisy, or of one that is unsound? and yet upon the account of the above
mentioned things on the one hand, and under a sensible want of the things last
cited on the other hand, how exceeding apt and prone are many poor weak
doubting trembling Christians, confidently and peremptorily to conclude
themselves to be Hypocrites, and to be unsound, and that they have not a dram
of Grace, nor no saving interest in Christ at all. O Sirs! remember this once
for all, that as you must never admit of any Arguments, Pleas, or Reasonings
for the comfort peace and refreshment of your souls, but such as are attended
with the evidence of clear Scripture; but such as are backed with pregnant
Scriptures: So you must never admit of any Pleas, Arguments or Reasonings, to
trouble, vex, perplex, and disquiet the peace of your souls, but such as are
attended with clear Scripture evidence, but such as are well backed with
Canonical Scripture. Now if this choice Rule were but wisely observed, and
carefully, frequently, and conscientiously practiced by many weak doubting
trembling Christians, how would it set them at liberty from their fears,
doubts, and misgivings of heart; how would it knock off all their chains, and
wipe all tears from their eyes, and remove that sadness that lies like a load
upon their hearts, and how soon would it bring them into a condition of peace,
comfort, quietness, and settlement. O Sirs! every working and appearance of
hypocrisy, does not presently prove the person in whom it is to be an
Hypocrite. A man may be hypocritical either 1. Really. Or 2. In Opinion and
fancy, many of the dear children of God are very apt and prone many times both
to suspect and falsely charge the true estate of their souls. A child in a
distemper may question the inheritance which is entailed on him, etc. But
remember this, if thy heart be upright, all comfort is thy portion, for as our
distrustful fears do not prejudice the reality of the estate of grace. So our
frequent suspicions that we are hypocrites, does not cut us off from the title
and right of promised comforts. Christians must carefully distinguish between
the presence of hypocrisy, and the predominancy of hypocrisy. In the most
upright hearts that are in the world, there is more or less hypocrisy remaining
in them: All the Saints that ever were in the World, Romans 7.22, 23. Heb. 12.15.
have found more or less of this root of bitterness springing up in them; it is
not the presence of hypocrisy, but the reign of hypocrisy that damns the soul;
that hypocrisy that is discerned, resisted, opposed, and mourned over, will
never make a Christian miserable. Where the standing frame and general bent of
a man's heart is upright, there the presence of hypocrisy cannot denominate a
man an hypocrite. All men must stand and fall for ever according to the
standing frame and general bent of their hearts; if the standing frame and
general bent of their hearts be sincere, they are happy for ever; but if the
standing frame and general bent of their hearts be hypocritical, they are
miserable for ever. But,

The Fourteenth Maxim or Consideration.
FOurteenthly, Consider you must never judge your selves Psalm. 7^.15.
the whole body of them that fear the Lord, to be unsound, and to be a pack of
notorious hypocrites; he that shall judge himself unsound or an hypocrite,
because his thoughts and imaginations are, that he is not sincere, Isa. 55.7,
8, 9.
for because he is thus and thus tempted, or because he is at particular times
and in particular cases thus and thus worsted and captivated by sin,
(notwithstanding all the resistance that he is able to make against it, and
notwithstanding his hatred of it, and his loathing and judging of himself for
it) or because he is thus and thus afflicted in his Family, Jacob, Joseph, Job,
David, Heman, Paul, and those worthies in the 11th. of the Hebre^s, have been
as much afflicted as thou have been; now for thee to conclude that thou art not
beloved, because thou have been thus afflicted, this is to conclude against all
those worthies, of whom this world was not worthy, Heb. 11.38.
or in his Relations, or in his own person; or because he is thus and thus
d^stracted in Prayer, and straightened in Prayer; or because he is sometimes
troubled with sad, hard, hideous, and blasphemous thoughts of God; he does in
so judging, judge and condemn the whole Generation of the Righteous, for there
are none of them but first or last, more or less, have been exercised even as
he is, or as he has been exercised: Who dare judge his neighbor, his brother,
his friend, an hypocrite, because the hand of the Lord has been various ways
lifted up against him, or because Satan has been let loose to play with his
grand battery upon him? Now if thou dare not judge thy neighbor an hypocrite
upon these accounts, how dare thou to judge thy self an hypocrite upon the
very same accounts? When thy neighbor, thy brother, thy friend is thus and
thus afflicted, tempted, distressed, etc. thou can tell them that this has
been the common lot of the People of God in all the Ages of the World; thou
can tell them that no man knows love or hatred by these things; and that all
things come alike to all; Eccles. 9.1, 2, 3. Isa. 1.25. chap. 27.9. Heb. 12.10,
11. James 5.10, 11.
thou can tell them that the most choicest Saints have been most afflicted,
tempted, clouded, and distressed; thou can tell them that all shall end well,
that all shall issue well. Remember the patience of Job, and consider the end
that the Lord made with him. Thou can tell them that thou have got that good
by afflictions, temptations, cloudings, distresses that thou would not
exchange for ten thousand worlds. Now if Christians when they are afflicted,
tempted, clouded, distressed, would be but as kind, favorable, and merciful to
themselves as they are to others in the same condition, how we^l would it be
with them, how soon would they get out of the snare. O Sirs, if th^s rule were
but prudently considered, and seriously practiced, how would the fears, doubts,
and darknesses of many poor weak doubting staggering and trembling Christians
vanish, and what peace, comfort, and settlement would they quickly find. O
Sirs, we must never stand to that judgment which we pass upon our Spiritual
estates, which is irrational, or without sufficient ground from Scripture, or
which would be to condemn the Generation of the just; we may safely appeal from
that sentence of our judgment which acts it self in times of passion, or
violent temptation, as he did from Alexander drunk, to Alexander sober, etc. We
must not unjustly vex our own hearts, and dash out our integrity, when the
sentence that we pass upon our selves is rather of imagination than of reason.
When a man thinks, and thinks again and again that his heart is not sincere
with God, though many (if not all) evidences of sincerity appear in him, and
when he cannot produce any one inherently distinguishing ground of an hypocrite
in himself, why this is but an imaginary judgment, and utte^ly unreasonable,
for this is to condemn the innocent without cause. O Sirs! that soul will never
be settled in peace and comfort, which gives way to his own imaginations and
passions, and which has a conceit that every sinful thought, or violent
temptation, or more durable conflict with an inward corruption, or the
resurrection of some old sin, or frequent distractions in Religious duties, or
particular falls or flips into this or that sin, cannot stand with grace,
cannot stand with uprightness, cannot stand with singleness and soundness of
heart; O that you would for ever remember this, viz. That where a man has
either no ground at all, or those that he has are false, he should never so
settle on them, and yield and entertain them, as to question his estate for
them, or for them to shut the door of comfort against his own Soul. But,

The Fifteenth Maxim or Consideration.
FIfteenthly, Consider in judging of your selves, and your a great deal of
grace makes but a very little show. A little gold ring upon an Alablaster hand,
makes a more glorious show than a very great Ring upon a leprous hand; the
Application is easy.
A little water in a long narrow mouthed glass seems to be a great deal, when
ten times, yea twenty times as much in a large Cistern is hardly discernable;
the application is easy. A little Sugar will serve well enough for sweet
Wines, but much more is requisite to sweeten that Wine that is sharp and harsh.
A little grace will make a very glorious show in such men and women whose very
natural tempers are sweet, soft, gentle, meek, affable, courteous; when a great
deal of Grace is hardly discernable in those men and women whose very natural
tempers are cross, crooked, choleric, fierce, passionate, ruff and unhewen. As
a good man said of an eminent light now in Heaven, That he had Grace enough for
ten men, but scarce enough for himself, his natural temper was so bad, which he
would himself often lament and bewail, saying to his friends, That he had such
a cross crooked nature, that if God had not given him grace none would have
been able to have lived one day quietly with him. A sincere Christian may have
more roughness of nature, and more sturdiness of passions than is in many a
moral man; he that has more Christianity, may have less Morality, as there is
more perfection of animal and sensitive faculties in some bruits than in some
men. It Is an old experienced truth, that those sins are with the greatest pains,
labor, travel and difficulty subdued and mortified, which our natural tempers,
complexions and constitutions do most strongly incline and dispose us to, and
were but those lusts subdued and brought under, it would be no difficult thing
to bring all other sins to an under; when Goliath was slain, the Philistims
fled; when a General in an Army falls, 1 Samuel 17.51, 52.
the common Soldiers are quickly routed. So it is here, get but the sins of your
natural tempers, complexions and constitutions under your feet, and you will
quickly ride in a holy triumph over the rest. When Justice is effectually done
upon your constitution sins, 2 Samuel 18.14. ult.
other sins will not be long lived, thrust but a dart through the heart of
Absalom, and a complete conquest will follow. Now before I close up this
particular, let me advise you frequently to consider, that you can never make a
true, a right, a serious judgment of your selves, or of your spiritual estates
and conditions, without a prudent eye upon your natural tempers, complexions,
and constitutions, granting to your selves such indulgence and grains of
allowance upon the account of your natural tempers, as will stand with
sincerity and the Covenant of Grace. But,

The Sixteenth Maxim or Consideration.
SIxteenthly, Consider, If you cannot, if you dare not say Mark 4.26, 27, 28.
yet do not say that you have no Grace, for the being of Grace in the soul is
one thing, and the seeing of Grace in the Soul is another thing. A man may have
Grace, and yet not know that he has Grace, he may have a seed of God in him,
and yet not see it; 1 John 5.13.
he may believe, and yet not believe that he does believe; the child lives
before it knows that it lives. If you cannot say that your Graces are true, yet
do not say they are counterfeit, lest you bear false witness against the real
work of the Spirit in you. There are none so apt to question the truth of their
Grace as those are that are truly gracious; though Satan cannot hinder the holy
Spirit from working true grace in the Soul, 1 John 4.4. Psalm. 77.
yet he will do all he can to fill the Soul with fears and doubts and
jealousies about the truth of that grace that the holy Spirit has wrought in
it. When did you ever know the Devil to tempt an Hypocrite to believe that his
Graces were not true, and that certainly he had not the root of the matter in
him; if you cannot say that you have an interest in Christ, yet do not say that
you have no interest in Christ, for a man may have an interest in Christ, and
yet not see his interest in Christ, not know his interest in Christ; there are
many precious Christians that walk in darkness, who yet have an interest in
that Jesus that is all Light, Life, Isa. 50.10.
and love; if you cannot say that your pardon is sealed in the Court of your
own Conscience, yet do not say that it is not sealed in the Court of Heaven, for
many a Christian has his pardon sealed in the Court of Heaven, Psalm. 51.
before it is sealed in the Court of his own Conscience. A Pardon sealed in the
Court of Conscience, Rev. 2.17.
is that new name and white stone which God does not give to every one at first
Conversion; God will take his own time to Seal up every Christians Pardon in
his bosom. If you cannot say that your name is written in the Book of life,
yet do not say that it is not written in the Book of life; the Disciples names
were first written in Heaven before Christ bid them rejoice, Luke 10.20.
because their names were written in Heaven. A man may have his name written in
Heaven, and yet it may be a long while before God may tell him that his name is
written in Heaven. I you cannot say that the precious Promises are yours, yet
do not say that they are childrens Bread, and such dainties that your Soul
shall never taste of; it is not every precious Christian that has an interest in
the Promises, Psalm. 77. Psalm. 88. 1 Pet. 1.4.
that can run and read his interest in the Promises. If you cannot say that the
heavenly inheritance is yours, yet do not say that it is not yours, do not say it
shall never be yours. A Christian may have a good title to the heavenly
inheritance, and yet not be able to make good his title, to clear up his title;
as a child in the arms or in the Cradle, may be heir to a Crown, a Kingdom, and
yet he is not able to make good his title. If you cannot say that you have
Assurance, yet do not say that you shall never have Assurance, for a man may
want Assurance one year, and have it the next; one Month, and have it another;
Luke 19.1-10. Acts 16.29-35. Romans 11.33.
one week, and have it another; one day, and have it another; yea, one hour,
and have it another. If you cannot say that you shall certainly go to Heaven,
yet do not say that you shall undoubtedly go to Hell, for who made you one of
the Privy Counselors of Heaven, who acquainted you with the secret decrees of
God, etc. Now were this Rule but thoroughly minded, and conscientiously
practiced, O how well would it go with many tempted, troubled, bewildered, and
clouded Christians! O how would Satan be disappointed, and poor souls quieted,
composed, and refreshed. But,

The seventeenth Maxim or Consideration.
SEventeenthly, When ever you cast your eye upon your Jer. 3.12, 14, 22. Hos.
14.4. Isa. 43.22. to 26. chapter 57.16, 17, 18, 19. Every thing which is a ground
of grief or sorrow to the people of God, is not a sufficient ground of
questioning their integrity, or the goodness and happiness of their spiritual
estates and conditions. If upon every slip, failing and infirmity, a Christian
should question all that ever was wrought in him, and done by God upon him, his
life will certainly be made up of fears and doubts, and he will never attain to
any settled peace, comfort, or assurance or be able to live that life of joy,
praise, and thankfulness that the Gospel calls for.
yet he will not withdraw his love from her, or deny his relation to her. No
more will God toward his weak miscarrying ones, as you may evidently see by
comparing the Scriptures in the Margent together. Doubtless there are many dear
Christians whose troubles of Conscience about their spiritual and eternal
estates, arises from their looking upon God, and dealing with God in a Covenant
of Works. Are there not many precious Christians, who when they fall before
temptations, and are worsted by their corruptions, that are ready to question
all, and throw up all as lost, and peremptorily to conclude against their own
Souls, that all is naught, very naught, stark naught, and that they are
Hypocrites, and that God will never own such as they are, nor never accept of
such as they are, nor never delight in such as they are, nor never have any
thing to do with such as they are, and all this because they do not a right
understand the Covenant of Grace, and think that they have to deal with God in
a Covenant of Works. Though many Christians do freely and readily acknowledge
that there is a Covenant of Grace, yet upon the least stirring of any
corruption, or the least conquest that is made upon them by the violence of any
temptation, they are so full of fears, faintings, reasonings, diffidences, and
despondencies, etc. And they carry it so weakly and unworthily toward the
Lord, as if there were no Covenant of Grace at all, or as if they had wholly
and only to deal with God in a Covenant of works. Now what a high dishonor is
this to the free, rich, infinite, sovereign, and glorious Grace of God, which
so sparkles and shines in the Covenant of Grace, and which tells us that our
eternal estates shall never be judged by a Covenant of Works, and that the want
of an absolute perfection shall never damn a believing Soul, and that the
obedience that God requires at our hands, is not a Legal, but Evangelical? O
that all those dear Christians who are so apt to be dejected and overwhelmed
upon the account of the prevalency of such and such corruptions, and because
they fail in keeping Covenant with God, and in walking in a Covenant Relation
with God, I say, O that all these would frequently and seriously consider of
these three things!

Psalm. 89.30. to 35. 2 Samuel 23.5. (while Christ lies at the bottom of the
Covenant, it cannot be utterly broken) As among men there be some trespasses
against some particular clauses in Covenants, which though they be violated,
yet the whole Covenant is not forfeited; it is so here, every jar, every
miscarriage does not break the Marriage-Covenant; no more does every sin, every
miscarriage break the Covenant between God and the Soul. B^t,

Isa. 54. Isa. 7.8, 9, 10. Jer. 31.33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
Mark, that man sincerely obeyes and sincerely walks in Covenant with God, who
sincerely, who heartily, who ordinarily desires, labors, and endeavors to
obey the Law of God, the will of God, and to walk in Covenant with God. Mark,
particular actions do not denominate any estate, it is the course of actions
which does denominate a man's walking in Covenant with God, or his not walking
in Covenant with God; if his course of actions be sinful, he walks not in
Covenant with God; but if his course of actions be holy and gracious, he walks
in Covenant with God. Though the needle of the Seamans Compass may jog this
way, and that way, yet the bent of the needle will still be Northward; so
though a Christian in Covenant with God may have his particular sinful
joggings, this way or that way, yet the bent of his heart will still be to walk
in Covenant with God. But,

Thirdly, Consider that infirmities, aberrations of weakness, viz. That they do
frequently and principally arise from the subtilty and sudden power of Satan's
temptations. 2. 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Romans 7.15, 16, 19, 23, 24.
That the frame of their spirits is against the evil that they do. 3. Their
daily cries, tears, and complaints, speaks it out to be an infirmity, they are
in this particular like a lost sheep, or a lost child, or a lost friend. 4.
Though they do fall, yet they rise again, though they do step or wander out of
the way, yet they do return into the right way again. 5. When they do fall,
there is a vast difference, a mighty difference between their falls, and the
falls of wicked men that are not in Covenant with God, and that first, in
respect of willingness. 2. In respect of choice. 3. In respect of affection. 4.
In respect of course. 5. In respect of quietness. 6. In respect of continuance.
Mark, When wicked men fall, when men out of Covenant with God fall, then they
fall willingly, they fall out of choice, they fall out of affection to fall,
they fall in a course, they fall, and they are quiet under their falls; they
fall, and continue to fall, Isa. 55.12.
to morrow shall be as to day. But persons in Covenant with God, though they do
fall, yet they do not fall, nor cannot fall as they do that are out of Covenant
with God. For first, There is in all such persons an habitual purpose to keep
Covenant with God. 2. An habitual desire to keep Covenant with God. 3. An
habitual resolution to keep Covenant with God. 4. An habitual endeavor to keep
Covenant with God. Now where it is thus, there that man is certainly in Covenant
with God, and that man walks in Covenant with God, he is under a Covenant of
Grace, his sins are pardoned, and therefore they shall never be his ruin. Isa.
63.17.
Doubtless many precious Christians have charged and condemned themselves for
those things that the great God will never charge them with, nor condemn them
for. Blessed Bradford wrote himself an Hypocrite, a painted Sepulcher, but
doubtless God will never bring in such a charge against him. O Sirs, the
stirrings of sin, and the workings of sin, and the prevalency of sin, for
particular acts will stand with the Covenant of Grace, though not with the
Covenant of Works. You may not by any means conclude that you are not in a
Covenant of Grace, because such and such corruptions stirs in you, or because
such or such weaknesses now and then breaks forth and discovers themselves,
either in your lips or lives: Did Christians but study the Covenant of grace
more, and understand better than they do the difference between the Covenant of
grace and the Covenant of works, how would their fears and doubts about their
spiritual and eternal estates vanish, as the clouds before the Sun when it
shines in its greatest strength and glory, etc.

'Twas the saying of an eminent Minister on his deathbed, That he had much
peace and quietness, not so much from a greater measure of grace than other
Christians had, or from any immediate witness of the spirit, but because he had
a more clear understanding of the Covenant of grace than many others, having
studied it, and Preached it so many years as he had done. Doubtless had
Christians a more clear and a more full understanding of the Covenant of grace,
they would live more holily, serviceably, humbly, fru^tfully, comfortably and
sweetly than they do, and they would dye more willingly, readily, and
cheerfully than many (may I not say than most) Christians use to do. But,

The Eighteenth Maxim or Consideration.
EIghteenthly and lastly, That trouble, grief, and sorrow Hos. 5.14, 15. chap.
6.1, 2, 3. Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. Psalm. 51. Hos. 14.1, 2. Psalm. 25.11.
grief, and sorrow, drives to God, as is evident by the Scriptures in the
Margent; Suppose thou have so and so sinned, yet it is a false inference that
therefore thou should be discouraged, and let thy hopes sink, and thy heart
faint, as if there were no help, no hope, no comfort for thee in thy God.

Quest. But when is a man's trouble or sorrow for sin sinful?

Answ. 1. When it keeps Christ and the Soul asunder. 2. When it keeps the Soul
and the Promises asunder. 3. When it unfits a man for the duties of his place
and calling wherein the providence of God has stated him. 4. When it unfits a
man for the duties of Religion, either private or public. 5. When it takes off
the sweet and comfort of all outward comforts and enjoyments, and renders all
our mercies like the white of an Egg, that has no taste or savor in it. 6. When
it weakens, wastes or destroys the outward man, all godly sorrow is a friend to
the Soul, and no enemy to the body.

And thus much for those divine Maxims, Considerations, and Rules that are
seriously to be minded and observed in order to the clearing up a man's Interest
in Christ, and his title to all the glory of another world. Certainly these
Eighteen Maxims, Considerations, or Rules (if God shall please powerfully to
set in with them) are of singular use for the clearing up of the saving work of
God upon poor souls. And therefore it highly concerns Christians seriously to
ponder upon them, as Mary did upon the sayings of the Angel in her heart. Now
these things being premised, I shall come in the next Chapter to lay down some
infallible evidences of saving Grace. Luke 2.19.


CHAP. II.
Containing many choice, precious, and infallible Evidences of true saving
grace, upon which a Christian may safely and securely, comfortably and
confidently, rest and adventure the weight of his precious and immortal Soul,
and by which he may certainly know that it shall go well with him for ever; and
that he has a real saving interest in Christ, and shall be everlastingly
happy, when he shall be here no more, etc.



infallible evidence of the truth of Grace in a man's Soul; Isa. 28.15, 18. Isa.
30.22. Hos. 14.8. Romans 7.22, 23, 24.
the first saving work of the Spirit upon the soul, is the dividing between sin
and the soul, it is a making an utter breacl betwixt sin and the soul, it is a
dissolving of that old League that has been between the sinner and his sin. The
first work of the Spirit, is to make a man look upon sin as an enemy and to
deal with sin as an enemy, to hate it as an enemy, to loath it as an enemy, to
fear it as an enemy, and to arm against it as an enemy. When the holy spirit
takes possession of the Soul, from that day forward the soul looks upon sin
with as evil, and as envious an eye as Saul looked on David when the evil
spirit was upon him. O, says Saul, that I were but once well rid of this
David; and O (says the gracious Soul) that I were but once well rid of this
proud heart, this hard heart, this unbelieving heart, this unclean heart, this
froward heart, this earthly heart of mine, etc. Genesis 26.35.
Look as the daughters of Heth even made Rebeccah weary of her life, so
corruptions within makes the gracious soul even weary of his life. Many a day
have I sought death with tears (said blessed Cowper) not out of impatience,
distrust, or perturbation, Restraining grace does only suppress and abate the
acts of sin, it does never alter the disposition and will of a man as to sin.
You may chain up a Lion, but you cannot change the nature of a Lion.
but because I am weary of sin, and fearful to fall into it. Look as when
Christ has won the will, he has won the man: So when sin has lost the will,
it has lost the man. The will is the heart; My Son give me thy heart, is, My
Son give me thy will; the will is the Fort-Royal of the Soul, it is that strong
hold that stands out stoutest, and longest against all the Assaults of Heaven;
when the will is won all is won, the Castle is won, the heart is won; the man
is won when the will is won. A man's judgment and reason may say, I ought t^
^^rn from sin, and his Conscience may say, I must turn from sin, or it will be
bitterness in the end, and yet the work not done, nor the Soul won; but when
the heart says, the will says, I will turn from sin, then the work is done,
and the man is won. Where reason says these lusts ought to be subdued, and the
Conscience says these lusts must be subdued, and the Will says these lusts
shall be subdued, ( Psalm. 65.3. As for our transgressions, thou sha^t purge
them away) there is a saving work upon the Soul. When the will ceases to sin,
as Ephraim said to his Idols, Get you hence, what have I any more to do with
you, then the work of God is begun in power upon the Soul.

A universal willingness to be rid of all sin, speaks the heart to be sound and
sincere with God; the enmity that Grace works in the heart against sin, is
against the whole kind, it is against all sin, as well profitable and pleasurable
sins, as disparaging and disgracing sins; and as well against small sins as
against great sins; true Grace strikes at root and branch, at head and members,
at father and son. A true Israelite would not have one Canaanite left in the
Holy Land, he would have every Egyptian drowned in the Red Sea of Christ's
blood, Psalm. 119.104. I hate every false way, Psalm. 139. ult. Search me O Lord,
and see if there be any wicked [way] in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.
Saving Grace makes a man as willing to leave his lusts, as a Slave is willing
to leave his Gally, or a Prisoner his Dungeon, or a Thief his Bolts, or a
Beggar his rags. But now take a man that is in his natural condition, and he is
as unwilling to part with his sins, as Abraham was to turn Hagar and Ishmael
out of doors. Ambrose reports of one Theotimus, that having a disease upon his
body, the Physician told him, That except he did abstain from intemperance,
drunkenness, uncleanness, etc. he was like to lose his eyes; his heart was so
desperately set upon his lusts, that he answered, Vale lumen amicum, Farewell
sweet Light then, he had rather lose his eyes, than leave his sins. So they in
Micha 6.6, 7. do make very large offers for a dispensation to live in their
sins, They offer Calves of a year old, they offer thousands of Rams, and ten
thousand Rivers of Oil; yea, they offer their first born for their
^^ansgressions, the fruit of their bodies for the sin of their souls. Sinners
hearts are so glued to their lusts, that they will rather part with their
nearest, dearest, and choicest enjoyments, than part with their sins; yea, when
they are put hard to it, they will rather part with God, Christ, and all the
glory of another world, than they will part with some base bosom lust; witness
that young man in the Gospel, who went away sorrowful, because he had great
possessions, Matthew. 19.21, 22. Look as a man leaves his Wife and Children, Genesis
21.11. Matthew. 19 21, 22. 2 Samuel 3.15, 16. Augustine in his youth (before his
Conversion) prayed thus, I said indeed with my lips, Lord give, and yet in my
heart I was too willing to give longer day, and could have said, Lord, pray not
yet, I was even afraid lest thou should hear me too soon, and too soon heal
and subdue my corruption for me. Aug. Con.
his Country, Estate, and Trade, with tears in his eyes, and sorrow in his
heart; so does an unregenerate man leave his lusts, with tears in his eyes, and
sorrow in his heart. Very observable is the story of Phaltiel, David had
Married Michol, Saul injuriously gave her to another; when David came to the
Crown, and was able to speak a word of command, he sends for his wife Michol,
her Husband dares not but obey, he brings her on her journey, and then, not
without great reluctance of spirit, takes his leave of her: But what was
Phaltiel weary of his Wife that he now forsakes her? O no, he was forced to it,
and though she was gone, yet he cast many a sad thought after her, and never
leaves looking till he sees her as far as Bahurim, weeping and bemoaning her
absence. And just thus it is with carnal and unregenerate men, who though for
fear, or some other reasons, they shake hands with their sins, yet they have
many a longing heart after them, they part, but it is upon a force; they part,
and yet they are very loath to part asunder. Look as the Merchant throws away
his goods in a storm, because he cannot keep them; so carnal ^en in times of
sickness and distress, or in times of horror and terror of Conscience, or when
death (the King of terrors) knocks at their doors, or when they see Hell gaping
to devour them, and God as a terrible Judge standing ready to pass an eternal
doom upon them, then they are willing to cast overboard their usury, their
drunkenness, their Swearing, their Cursing, their Lying, their Flesh-pleasing,
etc. but not out of any hatred to their lusts, but out of love to themselves,
and out of fear of being damned, etc. for could they but enjoy their sins and
Heaven too, sin and they would never part. But now, were there no danger, no
wrath, no hell, no damnation, no separation from God attending sin, yet a
gracious Soul would be heartily willing to part with all sin, and to be rid of
all sin, upon the account of the vile nature of sin, upon the account of the
defiling and polluting nature of sin; of all things in the World, sin is the
most defiling thing, it makes us red with guilt, and black with filth, it is
compared to a menstruous cloth, Isa. 30.22. which of all unclean things in the
Law was the most unclean, as some observe; and upon this very account a
gracious soul would be willingly rid of it.

Pharaoh in a fit, in a fright, when Thunder, and Hail, and Frogs, and Flies
were upon him, was then willing to let Israel go, but when his fright was over,
and the Judgments removed, he grew prouder and harder than before. So many men,
when they are a little Sermon-sick, or under some smart pangs of Conscience, or
under some startling or amazing Judgments, O then they will be willing to let
Israel go, then they will be willing to let drunkenness go, and pride go, and
uncleanness go, and worldliness go, etc. but when their sickness is over, and
the pangs of Conscience abated, and Judgments removed, O then they return with
the Dog to his vomit, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
and with the Sow to the wallowing in the Mire again. There was a man well
known to a Minister in this City, who in the time of his sickness was so
terrified in his Conscience for his sins, that he made the very bed to shake
upon which he lay, and cried out all night long, I am damned, I am damned, I am
damned; and this man in the days of his outward and inward distresses, made
many and great protestations of amendment of life, if God would be pleased to
recover him; in a little while he did recover, and being recovered, he was as
bad, and as wicked, if not worse than he was before. So in the time of the
great sweat in King Edwards days, as long as the heat of the Plague lasted,
all sorts and ranks of people were still a crying out, Peccavi; Mercy good
Lord, Mercy, Mercy, Mercy! Then Lords and Ladies, and other persons of quality
cried out to the Ministers, For Gods sake tell us what we shall do to avoid the
Wrath of God, take these bags, pay so much to such a one whom I have deceived,
and so much restore unto another, whom in bargaining I overreached; O give so
much to the Poor, and give so much to such and such Pious uses. But after the
sickness was over, they were just the same men that they were before. Men in
time of trouble are very ready to cry out, Arise and save us, Jer. 2.27. And
with them, Deliver us this time, Judges 10.15. And with the Samaritans, who
when God had sent Lions among them, enquired after the manner of his Worship, 2
King's 17.25, 26. And yet after all this to remain as vile and wicked as they
did, Jer. 2.20. For of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy bands,
and thou saidest, I will not transgress, when upon every high hill, and under
every green tree thou wandredst, playing the Harlot. A wicked man's willingness
to be rid of his sins is transient, not constant, it is like the morning Cloud,
and the early dew that passes away, Hos. 6.4. Hos. 11.7. Psalm. 78.34, 37, 57.
Hosea 7.16.
The Jews were a very unstable people, a people bent to backsliding, a people
that would often start aside like a deceitful Bow. Sometimes when the Judgments
of God were heavy upon them, or when they were under the reign of some good
Kings, then down went their Groves, their Altars, their Idols, and their High
places; but soon after you shall have them as much set upon Idolatry as before;
sometimes they were willing to be rid of their Idols, and at other times they
were mad to go a whoring after their Idols. But now a godly man (when he is
himself) he is never unwilling to be rid of his sins, yea, to be rid of all his
sins, the fixed, standing, and abiding disposition and bent of a godly man's
Soul, of a godly man's will, is to be rid of every sin; and thrice happy is that
man that is habitually under such a choice and blessed frame.

Thirdly, A transcendent willingness, a superlative willingness, wallow in any
sin; he had rather live without the least sin, than to have liberty to live in
the greatest, or the most fleshpleasing sin. It Is certain that sin is more
afflictive to a gracious Soul, than all the losses, crosses, troubles, and
trials that he meets with in the World. 2 Samuel 24.10.
David cries not perii, but peccavi; not, I am undone, but, I have done
foolishly. He does not cry, Take away the pestilence, but take away the
iniquity of thy servant. Dan. 9.5.
Nor Daniel cries not out, O we are sadly reproached, we are greatly
distressed, we are woefully oppressed; Hos. 14.2.
but, We have rebelled. And the Church cries not out, Take away our Captivity,
but take away all iniquity; it is not take away our chains, but take away our
sins; it is not take away our afflictions, but take away our pollutions; it is
not take away all our enemies lives, but take away the lives of all our lusts.
2 Cor. 11.16. ult.
And so Paul cries not out of his reproaches, or persecutors, or bonds, or
chains, or stripes, or perils, Romans 7.23.
or prisons (he rather glories in these). But he cries out of a Law in his
Members, rebelling against the Law of his mind, and bringing of him into
Captivity to the Law of sin, which is in his Members. Paul does not cry out, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from all my sorrows and
sufferings; Verse 24.
But O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death. A
sincere heart (when he is himself) had much rather be rid of his sins than of
his sufferings; yea of the least sins, than of the greatest sufferings. 'Twas a
sweet saying of Bernard, I had rather (says he) that God should better my
heart, than remove his hand; I had rather that God should continue my strokes
than my sins. And the same noble spirit was working bravely in Job, when he was
under the heavy hand of God, See Job 7.20, 21.
Job 34.31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me;
if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

But now graceless men are much more willing to be rid of their affl^ctions,
See Exodus 10.17.
than to be rid of their sins, witness Pharaoh, who cries out, take away the
Frogs, Exodus 8.8. Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Entreat
the Lord that he may take away the Frogs from me, and from my people, and I
will let the people go, that they may do Sacrifice unto the Lord. It Is not
entreat the Lord, that he would take away this proud heart, or this hard heart,
or this besotted heart, or this blind mind, or this perverse will, or this
benumbed Conscience that is in me and my people, but entreat the Lord that he
may take away the Frogs from me and my people. A graceless heart is more
abundantly willing to be freed from punishment the effect of sin, than it is
willing to be freed from sin, the cause of punishment. A gracious heart sees
more filthiness in sin than in Frogs, and had rather be rid of his sins, than
of all the Frogs or Toads that be in the World. See what a sad spirit was upon
the children of Israel, in that Numb. 21.6, 7. Heb. Burning Serpents, thus they
are called, from the effect of their biting, which caused a mortal burning, and
consequently such an excessive thirst as killed them.
And the Lord sent Fiery Serpents among the people, and they bite the people,
and much people of Israel dyed. Therefore the people came to Moses, and said,
We have sinned, for we have spoken against the Lord, and against thee, pray
unto the Lord that he take away the Serpents from us. Now mark, in the fifth
verse you have them murmuring against God, and Moses, and divine dispensations,
and nauseating of the Wheat of Heaven as light meat, because they came lightly
by it; they distrust the Providence of God, they let fly at God, their spirit
swells against the holy one of Israel, and they scorn, deride, revile, and
contumeliously and despitefully speak against Moses; and though they had often
smarted for these sins, yet they are at them again; upon this God sends an Army
of Fiery Serpents among them, and they bite and devour many of them. And now
they run to Moses (who but a little before they had despised) and are very
importunate with him to pray to the Lord to take away the Serpents from them.
They do not desire Moses to improve his interest in Heaven, that God would take
away their proud hearts, their distrustful hearts, their murmuring hearts, etc.
but that God would take away the Serpents; they were much more desirous to be
rid of their Serpents, than they were to be rid of their sins. So those in Jer.
30.15. Why cryest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable, for the
multitude of thine iniquity; because thy sins were increased, I have done these
things unto thee. They do not cry out of their sins, but they cry out of their
afflictions. Why cryest thou for thine affliction? unsound hearts are more
ready and willing to be rid of their afflictions, than they are willing to have
their Souls bettered, or their lives mended, or their lusts subdued by them.

Pilate was unwilling to condemn Jesus, witness his seeking to release him, and
his washing his hands, and his pleading his innocence, etc. Matthew. 27.17, 18,
22, 23, 24. but yet the prevailing part of his will carried him forth to
deliver up Jesus to be scourged and Crucified, v. 26. So Herod was unwilling to
behead John Baptist, witness that word, The King was exceeding sorry, Mark
6.26. But yet the prevailing part of his will carried him forth to cut off
John's head, v. 27. whose head was more worth than Herod's Kingdom. So Darius
was very unwilling to cast Daniel into the Lions Den, witness his being sore
displeased with himself, and witness his setting his heart on Daniel to deliver
him, and witness his great unquietness of spirit, for he could neither eat nor
drink, nor sleep, the night after he was cast into the Lions Den; and witness
his great joy at Daniels safety, Dan. 6.14, 18, 19, 20. All which did clearly
argue a very great unwillingness that Daniel should suffer, and yet the
prevailing part of Darius his will carried him forth to sacrifice Daniel to the
Lions; yea to that which was worse, viz. the lusts of his enemies, v. 16, 17.
By all these instances, it is most evident that the prevalent part of a wicked
man's will, stands most strongly byafs'd toward sin. But now the prevalent part
of a Christians will, is to be rid of sin: If the Lord should say to a gracious
Christian, Ask what thou will, O Christian, and it shall be granted to thee;
the Answer would be, Lord rid me of my sins, Lord take away mine iniquities,
Lord mortify my corruptions, Lord whoever lives, let these lust dye, Lord drown
these Egyptians in the Sea of thy Sons blood, who have so violently and
unweariedly pursued after the Blood of my precious Soul; Lord kill and crucify
all these sinful evils, that have killed and Crucified the Lord of life and
glory. Psalm. 5.2, 7.
Lord wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. Lord
purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean; wash me and I shall be whiter than
Snow: Lord, carnal reason, and flesh and blood, would fain have such and such
pleasurable sins, and such and such profitable sins indulged and spared, but
Lord, the earnest, the ardent desires of my soul are, that I may be rid of
them, and that Justice to the height may be done upon them. Lord be but the
death of my sins, and my soul shall say, My lot is fallen in a pleasant place,
and verily I have a goodly heritage. Lord cleanse me but from all filthiness,
both of flesh and spirit, and I shall cry H^sanna to thee, Matthew. 21.9. Psalm.
16.6. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Lord let me but out live my lusts, and follow them to the Grave before others
follow me to my Grave, and I shall say it is enough. And thus every gracious
Soul is more willing to be rid of his sins, than he is to keep his sins. A
Porter cannot be more willing to be rid of his burden, nor a sick man to be rid
of his disease, nor a Beggar of his nasty louzy rags, nor a Prisoner of his
chains, than a gracious Soul is willing to be rid of his lusts, etc.

Fourthly, That Soul that does not (nor, through Grace The evil that I do, Romans
7.15.
I allow not. So Psalm. 119.1, 3. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, that
walk in the Law of the Lord, they also do no iniquity; that is, they allow not
themselves in the practice of any iniquity. Blessed souls live not in the
service of sin, they live not in an ordinary practice of any iniquity. 1 John
3.9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, for his seed remains in
him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. He that has the seed of God,
the seed of Grace and Regeneration in him, he cannot allow himself in away of
sin, he cannot give himself over to a voluntary serving of sin, he cannot make
a Trade of sin. So Prove. 16.17. The highway of the upripht is to depart from
evil, (that is) it is the ordinary, usual, constant course of an upright man to
depart from ev^l. An honest Traveller may step out of the Kings Highway into a
house, a Wood, a Close, but his work, his business is to go on in the Kings
Highway. So the business, the work of an upright man is to depart from evil;
it is possible for an upright man to step into a sinful path, or to touch upon
sinful facts; but his main way, his principal work and business, is to depart
from iniquity: As a Be may light upon a Thistle, but her work is to be
gathering at Flowers; or as a Sheep may slip into the dirt, but its work is to
be grasing on the Mountains, or in the Meadows. Certainly there is no man in
the world so abominable wicked, but that he may now and then (when he is in a
good mood, or when he is under distress of Conscience, or bleeding under a
smarting rod, or beholding the handwriting upon the Wall, or under a sentence
of death) depart from evil; but this is not his course, this is not his
business, this is not his work, this is not his highway. Thieves do but now and
then step into the Kings Highway to take a purse, they do not keep the Kings
Highway. But now the upright man's Highway, his common and ordinary course, is
to depart from evil, and therefore he cannot allow himself liberty to walk in
an evil way. Titus 2.11, 12. For the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has
appeared to all men, (without distinction of Nations, Sex, Age, or condition)
teaching us, that denying ungodlyness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World. Under the name of
ungodliness, he compriseth all the breaches of the first Table; and under the
name of worldly lusts, he compriseth all inordinate desires against the second
Table; and those three words, soberly, righteously, and godly, have a threefold
reference; the first to our selves, the second to our neighbor, and the third
to God. We must live soberly in respect of our selves, righteously in respect
of our neighbors, and godly in respect of God. And this is the sum of a
Christians whole duty. Now if the Grace of God which brings Salvation,
teaches Saints to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, then certainly Saints
that are taught by that Grace, cannot live, nor allow themselves in ungodliness
or worldly lusts; without all peradventure Heaven is for that man, and that man
is for Heaven that can appeal to Heaven, that he allows not himself in the
practice of any known sin. Thus David did, Search me O Lord (says he) and know
my heart, Psalm. 13^.24.
try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me. It Is a
most sure sign, that sin has not gained a man's heart nor consent, but
committed a rape upon his Soul; when he allows not himself in it, but cries out
bitterly to God against it, as Paul did, Romans 7. If the ravished Virgin under
the Law cried out, she was guiltless, Deuteronomy. 22.25, 26, 27. Certainly such as
cry out of their sins, and that would not for all the world allow themselves in
a way of sin, such are guiltless before the Lord. That which a Christian does
not allow himself in, that he does not do in divine account, etc.

But now the whole Trade, the whole life of formal and carnal Christians, is
nothing else but one continued web of wickedness; there is no wicked
unregenerate person in the world, but lives in the daily practice of some known
sin or other; but allows himself in some Trade or way of wickedness or other,
as you may evidently see by comparing of these following Scriptures together,
Prove. 1.20. to 33. Jer. 5.3. Jer. 44.16, 17, 18, 19. Jer. 9.3, 4, 5, 6. Jer.
7.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Psalm. 50.16, 17. Isa. 66. 3. Matthew. 7.23.
Romans 6.12, 13, 19. Romans 8.5. Luke 13.27. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Phil. 4.19. Titus 3.3.
2 Pet. 2.14. Sin is a sinners absolute work, it is his main work, and the
sinner is besides himself, besides his Calling (as it were) when he is besides
his sin.

Fifthly, He that conflicts most with heart-sins, and is most Psalm. 19.12.
Psalm. 119.113. I hate vain thoughts. Psalm. 30.6, 7. Isa. 64.7.
and that laments and mourns most over secret sins, invisible sins, sins that
lie most hid and remote from the eyes of the World, he is certainly a gracious
soul; Grace in truth, and grace in power, will rise and conflict, and make head
against the most inward and secret vanities of the Soul, as against secret
self-love, and secret hardness of heart, Isa. 63.17. and secret unbelief, Mark
9.24. and secret carnal confidence, and secret hypocrisy, and secret envy, and
secret malice, and secret vainglory, and secret fretting and murmuring, and
secret lustings, and secret runnings out of the Soul after the meat that
perishes, and secret pride; hence Hezekiah humbles himself for the pride of
his heart; 2 Chronicles. 32.25. 2 Samuel 24.10. Psalm. 42.11.
and so David, he humbles himself for the pride of his heart in numbering of the
people. And how does the same Prophet chide himself for sinful dejection of
spirit, Psalm. 73.22.
Why art thou cast down O my Soul, and why art thou disquited in me? And how
does he at another time be-fool himself, and be-beast himself, for his secret
grudging and fretting at the prosperity of the wicked. So foolish was I and
ignorant, I was as a beast before thee. And so Paul was most affected and
afflicted with a law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind;
Inward pollutions and defilements did sit closest and sadest upon his spirits.
And the same Apostle in that 2 Cor. 7.1. is for keeping down the filthiness of
the spirit, as well as the filthiness of the flesh; he is for inward cleansing,
as well as for outward cleansing. Romans 7.22, 23, 24.
Having therefore these Promises, (dearly beloved) let as cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God: So Mr. Bradford was a man that had attained to so great and eminent a
height of holiness, that Doctor Tailor (the Martyr) calls him, That Saint of
God John Bradford; and yet O how sadly does he bewail his secret hypocrisy.
True Grace makes opposition as well against the being of sin in a man's nature,
Col. 3.5.
as against the breakings out of sin in a man's life. True Grace will make head
against the corruptions of the heart, as well as against the excursions of the
feet; it is as willing and desirous to be rid of a polluted heart, as it is
willing and desirous to be rid of a polluted hand. It would fain have, not only
sinful acts, but also sinful dispositions; and not only irregular actions, but
also inordinate affections mortified and subdued. O friends! heart-sins are
root-sins, they are the springs that set all the wheels a going, the Fountain
that sets all the streams a running, the fire that sets the Furnace a smoking,
the Bellows that sets the fire a burning. Certainly a proud heart has more of
Satan in it than a proud look, and a wanton heart is more vile than a wanton
eye, and a murtherous or adulterous heart, is worse than a murtherous or
adulterous act, etc. And therefore true grace makes head against heart-sins,
against spiritual sins, against the most inward secret sins, against those very
sins that lie not within the reach of reason, or the Sword of the Magistrate,
or the piercing eye of the most knowing or observing man in the World, but are
only obvious to an omniscient eye. But now carnal men, as they make little of
outward sins, so they make nothing of heart-sins, of spiritual sins. If they
are not drunkards, nor swearers, Matt. 19.16-27.
nor extortioners, nor whoremasters, nor cursers, nor cheaters, nor oppressors,
nor liars, nor persecutors; if they are good negative Christians, then they
think themselves very good Saints, and in a very fair way for heaven, and that
no man can say Black is their eye; when their hearts are as full of evil
thoughts, and secret lusts, as Ignorance, Atheism, unbelief, pride, envy,
discontent, anger, formality, hypocrisy, indifferency, lukewarmness, deadness
and hardness, etc. as the Sun is full of light, or as Hell is full of darkness.
Restraining grace, common grace, only makes head against gross enormities,
against palpable vanities, as you may see in the Scribes and Pharisees; but
saving grace makes head against heart-sins, against spiritual sins. Common
grace is all for washing the outside, but Saving grace is for washing the
inside as well as the outside. Common grace is only for washing the feet and
the head, but Saving grace is for washing both feet, head, and heart. Look as
in a dark night we can only see those stars that are of the greatest magnitude;
Matthew. 23. John 13.9, 10.
so by the starlight of natural Conscience, the natural man can only see those
sins that are more great and gross. Natural convictions can reach no further
than natural light, but spiritual convictions reach to the most inward, secret,
spiritual, and undiscernable sins. Certainly that is a sincere heart, a heart
more worth than gold, that smites a man for inward sins as well as for outward
sins; for sins done in a corner, as well as for sins acted upon the house top;
for spiritual sins as well as for fleshly sins; for sins against the Soul, as
well as for sins against the body; for sins committed in a Closet, as well as
for sins committed on the most public Stage. Certainly that trouble and grief
that springs from heart-sins, from spiritual sins, from secret sins, bears a
more immediate relation to the holiness of God, who only observes them, and is
offended by them, and so is a most sure and infallible evidence of saving
Grace, and of the work of the spirit in power upon the Soul. When open
commissions do humble and abase the heart, and secret inclinations to sin do
even break and burst the heart asunder, then the heart is certainly sincere
with God. A Christian will readily grant that his God is a good God, and that
Jesus Christ is the chiefest of ten thousand, and that the Gospel is a glorious
Gospel, and that the Promises are precious Promises, and that the Ordinances
are blessed Ordinances, and that the lively communion of Saints is the Sweetest
communion in all the world. But yet he will say, I have such a proud heart,
such a hard heart, such a flight heart, such a carnal heart, etc. and I am so
vexed and molested with sinful motions, and with sinful imaginations, and with
sinful inclinations, and with Atheistical risings, and with private murmurings,
and with secret unbelievings, and that in despite of all my conflictings, and
strivings, and prayings, and mournings, and sighings, and groanings, and
complainings; that I am oftentimes even weary of my life: And if this does not
speak out Christ within, and grace within, and the Spirit within such a Soul, I
know nothing. O friends! remember this once for all, viz. That the main Battle,
the main warfare of a Christian lies not in the open field, it lies not in
visible skirmishes, but his main quarrels and conflicts are most within, and
his worst and greatest enemies are them of his own house, they are them of his
own heart. A little grace at first conversion, may reform an ill life; but it
must be a great deal of grace that must reform an ill heart. A little grace may
make a man victorious over outward gross sins, but it must be a great deal of
grace that must make a man victorious over inward sins, secret sins, spiritual
sins, heart-sins, yea, a through conquest of these sins will hold a man play
all his days. But,

nature of sin, 2 Cor. 7.1. I have read of the Ermin, that she will rather dye
than be got into the dirt to defile her beautiful skin. And rather than Joseph
will defile his beautiful soul by defiling his Masters bed, he will to a dirty
Dungeon. He had rather that the Irons should enter into his Soul, Psalm. 105.18.
than that sin should enter into his Conscience: He had rather that his chains
should eat into his flesh, than that sin should pollute his soul. Isa. 59.1, 2.
Amos 3.6. Acts 5.39.
because of that vileness and filthiness that is in sin; he certainly has a
principle of Grace, a seed of God in him. He who refrains from sin, and whose
heart rises more against sin, because of the purity of the Law which forbids
sin, then because of the severity of the Law which condemns sin, is certainly
under the power of renewing Grace, of saving Grace. Psalm. 119.140. Thy word is
very pure, therefore thy servant loves it: it is only pure Grace that can
enable a man to love the Word for its purity. The Apostle to set forth the
formidable evil that is in sin, expresses it thus, Romans 7.13. That sin might
appear to be sin. He could find nothing more evil and odious to express it by
than it self. Sin is so great an evil, that it cannot have a worse Epithet
given it. Paul can call it no worse than by its own name, sinful sin. Had the
Apostle said that sin might appear to be a snare, a Serpent, a Viper, a Toad, a
Plague, a Devil, a Hell, etc. he had said much, but yet not enough to set forth
the transcendent evil that is in sin, and therefore he calls it sinful sin. All
other evils are but outward, they only reach the name, the body, the estate,
the life, but sin is an inward evil, a spiritual evil, an evil that reaches the
precious and immortal Soul, and therefore is the greatest evil. Death puts an
end to all other troubles, viz. poverty, sickness, disgrace, scorn, contempt,
crosses, losses, etc. but sin is so great an evil, that death it self cannot
put an end to it, Eternity it self shall never put a stop, a period to this
evil of evils. All outward evils can never make a man the subject of Gods wrath
and hatred. A man may be poor, and yet precious in the eyes of God, he may be
greatly abhorred by the World, and yet highly honored by God; he may be
debased by men, and yet exalted by God. But now sin is so great an evil, that
it subjects the sinners Soul to the wrath and hatred of God; all other evils do
but strike at a man's present well-being, but sin strikes at a man's eternal
well-being; all other evils can never hinder a man's communion with God, a man
may have communion with God in poverty, in sickness, in Prison, in Banishment;
but sin is so great an evil, that it interrupts communion with God, it cuts off
communion with God. All outward evils are Gods creatures, Is there any evil in
the City that the Lord has not done. But sin is the Devils creature, it is a
brat of his own begetting, yea, it is worse than the Devil, it is that which has
turned glorious Angels into infernal Devils. All other evils do not fight
against the greatest good, but sin is that grand evil that fights against the
greatest good, it fights against the being of God, the essence of God, the
glory of God. Peccatum est Dei-cidium, sin is a killing of God, it is a
murdering of God; Sin is a universal evil, it is all evil, it is nothing but
evil, there is not one drop, one spark of good to be found in any sin; but now
in all outward evils, there is some good, there is some good in poverty, in
sickness, in war, in death, but there is not the least good in sin, sin is the
sole object of Gods hatred, he hates nothing but sin, he is angry with nothing
but sin, he has forbid nothing but sin, he has revealed his wrath from heaven
against nothing but sin, so great an evil is sin. Sin is that grand evil that
has Midwiv'd all other evils into the world. 'Twas sin that drowned the old
world with water, 'twas sin that destroyed Sodom with fire and Brimstone,
Judges 5.8. Psalm. 107.34. Deuteronomy. 28.21.
'twas sin that laid Jerusalem on heaps, 'twas sin that has Midwiv'd Sword,
Famine, and Pestilence into the World, 'twas sin that laid the Foundation of
Hell, that laid the cornerstone in that land of darkness, for before sin there
was no Hell. 'Twas sin that Crucified the Lord of glory. Now O how great must
that evil be that has ushered in all these great evils into the World. Romans 8.7.
Sin is enmity against God, God has no enemy in the World but sin, and those
whom sin has made him; Sin has set all the World against the Lord of glory;
it is sin that has turned men into incarnate Devils, and that has drawn them out
to fight against God, and Christ, and their own Souls, and the things of their
everlasting peace. Now when a man looks upon sin as the greatest evil in the
world, and his heart rises and is enraged against it, because of the vile,
filthy, odious and heinous nature of it; it is a clear evidence that such a man
has the Divine nature in him, take that one instance for all, Psalm. 19.12, 13.
Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins. But why does David pray thus, So
(says he) shall I be innocent from the great transgression. Mark, he does not
pray thus, Lord keep me from presumptuous sins, that so I may be free from
troubles without, and from terrors within, or from Hell beneath; but Lord keep
me from presumptuous sins, that so I may be innocent from the great
transgression. He does not say, so shall I be free from the great correction,
but so shall I be free from the great transgression. That's a heart worth gold,
that is more sensible and more affected with the evil that is in sin, than with
the evil that comes by sin. Aug. Epist. 144.
'Twas a weighty saying of Austin, That man (says he) which fears Hell, he
does not fear to sin, but fears to burn; but that man fears to sin, that fears
sin as he would fear Hell. Common Grace never works a man thus to fear sin, but
renewing grace does. Common convictions carry the Soul out to look more on the
evil that comes by sin, than on the evil that is in sin; and hence it comes to
pass, that Souls under common convictions, are more affected and afflicted at
the fear of Hell, and dread of wrath and damnation, than they are affected or
afflicted at the vileness, odiousness, and heinous nature of sin. When an
unsanctified person is angry with sin, and chides sin, and falls out with sin;
and makes some head against sin, it is either because it has cracked his credit,
or clouded his honor, or hindered his profit, or imbittered his pleasure, or
provoked his friends, or incensed the Magistrate, or enraged his Conscience, or
exposed him to shame, disgrace, or contempt here, and Hell hereafter. B^t never
because a holy God is dishonored, a righteous Law transgressed, a blessed
Savior frequently Crucified, or the blessed Spirit greatly grieved. The child
will not touch the Coal because it will burn him, and the prudent man will not
touch the Coal because it will s^^t him. A gracious heart rises against sin
because of its defiling and polluting nature, but an unsanctified heart rises
against sin because of its burning and damning nature. A sanctified person
hates sin, because it pollutes his soul, but an unsanctified person hates it
because it destroys his soul. A sanctified person loathes sin, and abhors sin,
because it fights against Gods holiness; but an unsanctified person loathes it,
and abhors it, because it provokes and stirs up Gods Justice. A sanctified
person detests sin, because of the Hell that is in sin; but an unsanctified
person detests sin, because of the Hell that follows sin, etc. But,

The contrariety to sin which is in a real Christian, arises from an inward
gracious nature which is opposite to the whole species or kind of sin, as
contrarieties of nature are to the whole kind. As light is contrary to all
darkness, and fire to all water. So that this contrariety to sin arising from
the inward man, is universal to all sin, etc.
nor will not, upon no terms in the World, admit of any Truce or
Reconcilliation with sin, there is Christ and Grace formed in the heart. The
War between a gracious heart and sin, is like the War between Rehoboam and
Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14.30. There was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their
days. The Oracle said to the Cirrheans (Noctes diesque belli gerendum), they
could not be happy unless they waged war night and day; no more can we, except
we perpetually fight against our lusts. O friends! A gracious heart that is
weary of sin, will certainly and habitually fall a striving against it, Gal.
5.17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh,
for these two are contrary the one to the other. Now contraries are naturally
expulsive each of other: Such a pair as a Jacob and an Esau; such Twins as an
Isaac and an Ishmael, cannot lie quietly together in the same womb; no nor live
quietly together in the same house, but there will be a mutual prosecuting and
persecuting each of other. Fire and Water may as well agree in the same Vessel;
as grace and sin in the same heart. True Grace has a real repugnancy and
contrariety to all sin; and remember this once for all, that saving Grace is
not contrary to sin because it is open and manifest, nor to sin because it is
private and secret, nor to sin because it is of this or that consequence, but
to sin as sin, whether public or private, because both the one and the other
are contrary to the Law of God, the will of God, the glory of God, the nature
of God, the designs of God, etc. As it is with true light, though it be but a
beam, yet it is universally opposite to all darkness; or as it is with heat,
though there be but one degree of it, yet it is opposite to all cold. So true
Grace, it is opposite to all sin, it cannot comply with any known sin. Look as
sin and Grace were never born together, and as sin and Grace shall never dye
together, so sin and Grace can never be reconciled together. There is a natural
contrariety between sin and Grace, and therefore you can never reconcile them
in the heart. The opposition that Grace makes against sin, is inward as well as
outward, it is against sin wheresoever it is. Nothing will satisfy a gracious
soul but the destruction of sin, Romans 6.6. Knowing this, that our old man is
Crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin. The Greek word (...), that is here rendered destroyed,
signifies weakened, and the strength of it broken, and made idle, fruitless, and
uneffectual. So Psalm. 51.2. Wash me thoroughly (or multiply to wash me, or play
the Fuller upon me) from mine iniquity. (David looked upon his sin, his stain,
to be so inveterate, so ingrained, that it would hardly be ever gotten out till
the cloth were almost rubbed to pieces) and cleanse me from my sin. David was as
desirous to be cleansed of the Leprosy of sin, as ever any poor Leper was
willing to be cleansed of his Leprosy under the Law; And so ver. 7. Purge me
with Hyssop and I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow. All
the Sacrifices of expiation of sin in the old Law, were done by blood, and that
blood was sprinkled upon the people by a bunch of Hyssop, so called from the
Hebrew word Ezob, by reason of the nearness of the sound. In the legal
sprinklings made with Hyssop, was shadowed out the washing away of sin through
the blood of Christ. Rev. 1.14. Job 9.30.
The Brides garments are made white in the blood of the lamb, and not by any
washings in Snow water: When a gracious Soul looks upon sin, he cries out, Lord
raze it, raze it down to the ground, Lord let not one stone be left upon
another. In every gracious Soul, there is such a detestation and such an
indignation against sin, that neither Mountains of Gold, nor Rocks of Pearl,
nor honor, nor applause, nor favor on the one hand, nor frowns nor threats,
nor neglects, nor scorns, nor contempt on the other hand, (...) win the Soul
over to sin, or make the Soul one with sin. Look how it was between the Lord
and Amalek, so it is between a gracious soul and his sins. Now if you turn to
that Exodus 17.16. you shall find how it was between the Lord and Amalek,
Because the Lord has sworn, that the Lord will have war with Amalek from
Generation to Generation; Or as the Hebrew has it, The hand upon the throne of
the Lord, Gods hand is la^d upon his own Throne, as swearing to root out
Amalek; or because Amaleks hand is lifted up against Gods Throne, that is the
Church, (so called in Jer. 4.21. and Crown of Glory, Isa. 62.3.) therefore God
will have perpetual wars with Amalek. God could as soon be reconciled to
Amalek, as a gracious Christian can be reconciled to his sins. Others sense the
words thus, that Moses had a solemn Oath (as it were laying his hand upon Gods
Throne) for asseveration and assurance, that he and the people will have an
irreconcilable war with the posterity of Amalek. And so every gracious soul is
resolved to make an irreconcilable war with sin. But now where there is only
common Grace, there a man deals by his sins as David did by his son Absalom,
banish him his Court for a time, and afterward receive him into full favor,
and court him as much or more than before. An unsound heart may fall out with
his sin, and be very angry with its sin, for the consequence of it, for the
shame it brings upon his person, for the blot it leaves upon his name, and for
the stinging guilt and convulsion fits which it causes in his Conscience, and
yet this very person be in a very close and strict league with sin, and his
heart inwardly and strongly adhering unto sin. But a gracious heart will be
still a restraining of sin, a curbing of sin, a crossing of sin, a making head
against sin, and a withstanding it in all its workings. Anger may be
reconciled, but hatred cannot.

Ezekiel. 16.61, 63. Ephesians. 2.7, 6, 7.
there certainly is a saving work of God upon that man's soul. As when they
produce more Soul-loathing, Soul-humiliation, Self-judging; Self-abasement,
Self-abhorring; or when they fill the Soul with a great (...) admiration of the
freeness and riches of Grace, or when they keep down pride, and prevent the
despising of others, or produce holy shame, or when they make the blood of
Christ more precious and dear to the Soul, or when they engage a Christian so
much the more to watch and pray, and pray and watch, that he may either be kept
from the hour of temptation, or in the hour of temptation, or when every fall
makes sin more bitter to the soul than ever, and Christ more sweet to the Soul
than ever, and all the means of Grace more delightful to the Soul than ever,
and heaven more desirable to the Soul than ever; or when sin is made the
prevention of sin, or when sin through the overruling hand of Grace is made an
occasion of more Grace; as that good man said, As I get hurt by my Graces, So I
get good by my sins. You know all the falls and knocks, and blows, that
children get that are learning to go, do but make them cleave the closer and
hang the faster upon the Nurses skirts, or about the Mothers neck. So when all
a Christians falls do but work him to cleave the closer, and hang the faster
upon the strength of Christ, and to be still a drawing more and more virtue and
power from Christ; then is the prevalency of sin made serviceable to holy and
gracious ends; and where God ordinarily thus works, there is certainly a work
of God in power upon that Soul, 2 Cor. 7.11. For behold, this self same thing
that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea,
what clearing of your selves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what
vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge, in all things you have
approved your selves to be clear in this matter (this Scripture I have fully
opened in my eighth sign of godly sorrow, in this book, and to that I refer
you). The Mother by suffering the child to get one fall, keeps the child from
many a fall, and so 'twas with these Corinthians. Adams fall was an inlet to
abundance of grace; and his unrighteousness did usher into the world the most
glorious Righteousness of Jesus Christ. Hezekiah falls, and by his fall, 2 Chronicles. 32.25, 26, 31.
God gives him a clearer and fuller sight of his own heart than ever he had
before in all his days. Sin is no gainer, but a loser by every fall of the
Saints. God does, and will, by the overruling hand of his grace, make the very
miscarriages of his people to be glorious inlets to more eminent degrees of
Grace and holiness. God has a great Revenue of glory from the very infirmities
of the Saints; and the Saints have a great Revenue of comfort from their very
miscarriages, by the wise, powerful, overruling, and sanctifying hand of God.
God is that powerful, that skilful Physician, that can make an Antidote, and
Sovereign remedy of sin, that is the most deadly poison in all the World. God
does and will make the very sins of his people to further the Salvation of his
people, according to that golden promise Romans 8.28. God never suffers his
people to fall into any sin, but out of a design to break the neck and back of
that sin they fall into: God suffered David to fall into those two great sins
of Murder and Adultery, but by these very falls he broke the very back of those
sins, for we never read that ever he fell into those sins the second time. And
so God suffered Peter to deny him once, but by that sore fall God broke the
neck of that very sin, for we never read that ever he denied Christ any more at
the voice of a Damsel; yea, it is very observable, that Peter's courage and
boldness for the truth, received a very high advance by those deep wounds that
he had formerly given them, when he denied the Lord that bought him. After his
sore falls, for courage and boldness he carries the Bell from all the Apostles,
as you may see in Acts 4.12. It is the nature of true Grace to gather strength
by every wound. Grace gathers strength by contraries, as Fire does when it is
compassed about with coldness by an Antiper stasis. By all a Ch istians falls
his graces grow brighter and stronger. At the long run, a Christian by all his
falls loses nothing but his dross, his chaff, his scum, his filth. Now he that
finds his sins thus overruled for the good of his soul, he is certainly a
gracious Soul. O Sirs! remember this for ever, viz. That the oftener an
Hypocrite, or a Formalist falls, the more ground and strength his sins get upon
him, and so will continue to do, till all that Grace and goodness which he
seemed to have had, be quite extinguished. But,

Ninthly, Where a bare naked command of God is commonly, Genesis 39.9.
and sin against the Lord, there is certainly a principle of Grace in that man's
heart. That is a great word of David, Psalm. 119.161. My heart stands in awe
of thy word. When a naked command from God does so overawe the heart, as that
it dares not sin against God, then doubtless the heart is sincere with God. A
child does not stand in more awe of the rod, nor a servant of a beating, nor a
Favorite of his Princes frowns, than a real Christian (when he is himself)
stands in awe of the Word. So Psalm. 119.11. Thy Word have I hid within my
heart, that I might not sin against thee. When a man hides the Word in his
heart as a Treasure, that he may not lose it, and as a Rule that he may not
transgress it, then his heart is indeed right with God. When the Law of God in
a man's heart, arms him against the lusts of his heart and life, then doubtless
his heart is sound with God. So Psalm. 17.4. By the words of thy lips, I have
kept me from the paths of the destroyer; or as some read the words, According
to the command and charge of thy words, I have kept me from the sinful ways,
manners, behaviors, etc. of the destroyer, or the cruel man. Matthew. 28.18, 19,
20. Acts 10.41, 42.
Christ commanded his Apostles to make him known to the World, and to Preach
the everlasting Gospel, and to make known those Mysteries and Riches of Grace
that were hid in former Ages. The Jewish Authority threatens them and commands
them not to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus, Acts 4.17, 18. But
the command of Christ carries it with the Apostles against all their
threatenings and commands, verse 19.20. But Peter and John answered and said
unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more
then unto God, judge ye; For we cannot but speak the things which we have heard
and seen. When the commands of Authority run counter-cross to the commands of
God, the commands of God must be obeyed, though the greatest Au^hority under
Heaven should be displeased and enraged. God never gave the greatest Authority
in the world, any Authority to act contrary to his commands. Disobedience to
unlawful commands, is no disobedience. Woe to him that obeyes the commands of
men in opposition to the commands of God, 1 Cor. 9.16. For though I preach the
Gospel, I have nothing to glory of; For necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe is
unto me if I Preach not the Gospel. Now it is infinitely better to fall under
the displeasure of men, than to fall under the woes of God. The Jews under a
pretense of their Authority, command the Apostles not to Preach Jesus to the
people; but the commands of Christ carry it with the Apostles against all their
contrary commands. The Apostles (who were like to Bottles of new Wine, that
must either vent or burst) knew very well that 'twas not obedience to men's
commands that could excuse their disobedience to Gods commands. So in that
third of Daniel, the commands of the great God carried it with the three
Children against all the dreadful threatenings, proud boasting^, and Idolatrous
commands of King Nebuchadnezzar. Certainly the commands of sin are of all
commands the vilest commands, they are all illegal, sin has no ground, no
reason to command our souls; Sin is but a Usurper, a Traitor, and therefore h^s
no Authority over us. All sins commands are purely sinful, they are plain and
notorious rebellions against the Laws of Christ, the life of Christ, and
against the Crown, Honor, and Dignity of Jesus. All sins ^ommands are
grievous, burdensome, and painful commands; of all yoaks, none so heavy as
that which sin lays upon the sinner; hence sin is compared to a talent of
Lead, Zach. 5.7. to show the weightiness and burthensomness of it; and hence
it is that sinners are said to weary themselves in committing iniquity, Jer.
9.5. And hence it is that wicked men are laid to travel with iniquity, Psalm.
7.14. to show what anxious pain and trouble they have in bringing about their
wickedness. Behold he travelleth with iniquity; or as the Hebrew has it, he
shall travel, or he continually travelleth, he takes as great pains to go to
Hell, as a traveling woman does to be delivered. Wicked men are as laborious,
and as restless and unquiet in the practice of wickedness, Prove. 4.14, 15, 16.
as a woman in labor is when the pangs of Travel are upon her. Sugared poisons
go down pleasantly, O but when they are down, they gall, and gnaw, and gripe
the very heart strings asunder, it is so with sin. Lastly, the commands of sin
are extremely unreasonable, what an unreasonable thing is it to command a man
to run into the fire, or to drown himself in the water, or to strangle himself,
etc. Now all the commands of sin tend directly and intentionally to the
burning, drowning, strangling, and destroying of the sinner. All sins commands
tend to the dishonor of God, the breach of his righteous Laws, and the
damnation of the precious and immortal Soul. Now where the commands of God do
commonly carry it, against all the commands of sin, there the Soul is certainly
sincere with Go^. That we owe perfect obedience to Gods will, to Gods commands,
is evident enough several ways, and in particular from the universal obedience
of all Creatures, I mean those which are without reason, sense, or life, for
they inviolably observe his commands, Isa. 48.13. Mine hand has laid the
Foundations of the earth, and my right hand has spann'd the Heavens; when I
call to them they stand up together, as prepared to execute his commands. The
insensible parts of the world are so compliant with his will, as to contradict
their proper natures to serve his glory. Fire descends from Heaven at his
command, Genesis 19.24. 2 Kings 1.10, 11, 12. And the fluid Sea stands up at his
command, Exodus 14.22. Now what a sad thing is it that Christians should at any
time prove disloyal and rebellious, when all inferior Creatures do with one
consent serve and glorify the great God. But, etc.

Where do you read in all the Scriptures, of any one Hypocrite that ever made
Conscien^e of shunning and avoiding the appearances of sin.
ev^dences the truth and reality of Grace in the Soul. Certainly that man is a
true Nathaniel that makes it his business his work, to abstain from all
appearances of evil. An Hypocrite loves the appearance of good more than
goodness it self, and a sincere Christian hates the very appearance of evil, as
well as the evil it self. He who hates a person, loathes his very picture. A
wicked man may abstain from broad-fac'd evils, but commonly he is very bold and
ventrous upon appearing evils. O what vain Apologies do many make in these
days for long hair, gaudy Apparel, Antic Fashions, Spotted Faces, Naked
Breasts, Wanton Behaviors, Effeminate Dalliances, and a thousand other
suspicious practices and vanities. But now a man that is truly gracious, he
makes Conscience, not only of shunning real gross, known evils, but also of
shunning the very likeness of evil. His heart does not only rise against real
sins, but he is very shy of that which looks like sin. When Joseph's Mistress
took hold of him and said, Lie with me, he left his garment in her hand and
fled, and got him out, Genesis 39.12. Joseph would not be found in the company of
his impudent brazen-faced Mistress, that could so barely and basely, so boldly
and frequently, solicit him to defile his Masters bed, and to damn two Souls
at once, her own and his, that so he might avoid the very appearance of evil,
the very suspicion of sin. By wanton touches and dalliance, mental Adultery is
often committed, and therefore Joseph flies, as being unwilling to touch her,
or to be touched by her. 1 Cor. 9.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
And so Paul refused the using his liberty in taking a lawful maintenance for
his labors, lest a sinister interpretation of covetousness and mercenary
affection should have been put upon it by his Adversaries. And so the same
Apostle would needs have Titus and two others chosen by the Church, to join
with him in carrying the benevolence of the Church of Macedonia to Jerusalem,
because he was very careful to avoid all suspicion of dealing ill in that
business, 2 Cor. 8.20, 21. Avoiding this, that no man should blame us, in this
abundance that is Ministered by us: Providing for honest things, not only before
the Lord, but also before men. So Daniel would not defile himself with the
portion of the Kings meat (that is, say some, Dan. 1.^.
he would not defile his Conscience by eating such unclean meats as were
forbidden under the Law, for the Babilonians did eat of diverse meats, as of
Swine, Hares, etc. and of sundry sorts of Fishes and Fowls which were forbidden
by God unto the children of Israel, Levit. 11. Deuteronomy. 14) nor with the wine
which he drank (but in the Hebrew the plural number is used, of his drinks,
whence some gather, that the King drank diverse sorts of Wines, which were also
set before Daniel and his companions), therefore he requested of the Prince of
the Eunuchs, that he might not defile himself. Daniels living at a full Table,
and his feeding upon Kingly dainties, might have been, not only a means to
ensnare him, and drown him in the sensualities of the Court, but it would have
carried with it also too great a show of Daniels conformity to the Courts
manners and customs, and have been too great an appearance of Daniels
forgetfulness of the sore and miserable calamities and matchless miseries of
the captive Church, who sat sighing and groaning and mourning in her cruel
bondage, and had none to comfort her, or speak peace unto her; and therefore
Daniel purposed in his heart (or set it upon his heart, or laid it upon his
heart, as the Hebrew may be read) that he would not defile himself with the
portion of the Kings meat, etc. that so he might avoid all shows or suspicion
of evil. It Is very observable, that in the Law of the Nazarite (who did for a
time special, consecrate himself to God, that besides his not coming to the
dead, and suffering his hair to grow.) 'Twas ordained of God that he should
abstain from these six things. 1. From Wine and strong drink. 2. From the
Vinegar of Wine or strong drink. 3. From any Liquor of Grapes, though it were
but the water wherein they were steeped. 4. From the green or moist Grape. 5.
From the dried Grape or Raisin. 6. From the husk or kernel of them, Number. 6.3,
4. Had the Nazarite eaten but the skin of the Grape or Raisin, he had broken
the Law. Now hereby the Lord would teach us, that those that separate
themselves from the world, to be in a special manner serviceable to the Lord,
they must avoid not only that which is plain sin, downright sin, or such sins
that men may run and read, but also that they must shun and be shy of the very
appearances of sin. It was good counsel that Liv^a gave her husband Augustus,
Dio in vita.
It behooves thee (said she) not only not to do wrong, but not to seem to do
so, etc. We must shun and be shy of the very show and shadow of sin, if either
we tender our credit abroad, or our comfort at home, walking in the power of
holiness lies much in shunning the very appearance of sin. The Primitive
Christians would not endure that any Christian should look toward Jerusalem
praying, because they would avoid the least show of Judaism. And indeed there
are great reasons why every Christian should avoid whatever may have the
suspicion of sin; and this will be evident, if you please but seriously to
consider of these eight following particulars.

These. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil. God requires us not only to
abstain from all apparent sins, but also from all appearance of sin; we must do
nothing which has a show or shadow of sin; it is duty to abstain from whatever
is of an ill show, or an ill report. And so God commands us to hate the garment
spotted with the flesh, Jude 23. Saints must abhor every thing that carries
with it but a savor or suspicion of uncleanness. Hence that saying of the
Jews, Remove thy self from filthiness, and from all that which has a show of
it. See Drusius praeterit, in 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
The Apostle alludes to legal uncleanness, which was contracted by touching the
houses, the vessels, or the garments of unclean persons, Levit. 15. Christians
must not only hate uncleanness, but they must hate every thing that looks like
it, or that has the least communion with it. So in that Deuteronomy. 12.30. Take heed
to thy self that thou be not snared, by following of them, after that they be
destroyed from before thee, and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying,
how did these Nations serve their gods? even so will I do likewise. God does
not only command his people to abstain from gross Idolatry, but he also
commands them to take heed of all those ways and means, and enquiries that
might tend to draw them to Idolatry, or that might carry with them the least
show or appearance of Idolatry. It Is observable in the Law, that God commanded
his people not only that they should Worship no Idol, but that they should
demolish all the Monuments of them, and that they should make no Covenant, nor
have any affinity with those who Worshipped them; and all to avoid the very
shows of Idolatry, and to prevent his people from being drawn by those means to
commit Idolatry with them. And so Exodus 23.7. Keep thee far from a false
matter. Every good man must stand aloof off, he must keep at a distance both
from the occasions of sin, and from the appearance of sin. So Prove. 5.8. Remove
thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house. He that is
farthest from fire, is safest from burning, and he that is most remote from the
water, is in least danger of drowning. It is no small wickedness to approach
near the door of wickedness; he who approaches near the door of a Whores house,
Prove. 22 14. and chapter 23.27.
is already in the door of whoredom. It argues too much mind to be in the
house, for any one knowingly, willingly, to come near the door of it. O how
should a man dread the coming into that house, where he must needs either
perish, or else overcome? Certainly it is infinite better not to be in danger of
perishing, than being in danger not to perish. So Hosea 4.15. Though thou
Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend, and come not ye unto Gilgal,
neither go ye up to Beth-aven, nor swear the Lord lives. Gilgal was once the
Key of Canaan, situate between Jordan and Jericho, famous for sundry services
there performed to God, as might be easily showed by many instances; but now
Gilgal was basely abused to Idol-Worship; and hence it is that God charges them
not to come near it, that so they might avoid both the show and danger of
Idolatry; and it is upon the same account that God charges them not to go up to
Beth-aven. By these Scriptures it is evident that God would have his people to
abstain from all shows and appearances of sin. But, etc.

Secondly, The holiness of God, and the honor of God, God is so essentially
holy, so unmixedly holy, so universally holy, so eminently, so transcendently
holy, so superlatively holy, so originally, radically, and fundamentally holy;
he is so Independantly holy, so unchangably, so constantly, and so exemplarily
holy, that he cannot but hate and abhor the very appearance of evil. Look as
apparent sins stir up the judicial anger of God against sinners, so the
appearance of sin stirs up the Fatherly anger of God against Saints. A gracious
heart knows, That God is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.13. and
therefore he keeps at a distance from the appearance of iniquity, of all men in
the world none honor God at so high a rate as those that keep most aloof off
from the appearance of evil. Many by their apparent evils have lived God, and
Christ, and the Gospel, and their Profession, and precious Ordinances, into
disgrace, scorn, and contempt; and O that we would all make it our great
business, by abstaining from all appearance of evil, to live God, and Christ,
and the Gospel, and our Profession, and precious Ordinances, into a greater
credit, praise, and honor than ever. He keeps farthest off from dishonouring
God, that keeps farthest off from the appearance of sin. But, etc.

Joseph been toying, and playing, and sporting with his Mistress in a wanton
manner, how soon might he have wrapped himself up in the guilt of his Mistresses
burning Lusts. He that would not tempt nor entice others to sin, must keep off
from the very appearance of sin. Certainly there is not the holiest man in the
World, but has sins enough of his own to sad him, though not to sink him; to
humble him, though not to damn him; to abase him, though not to deject him; and
therefore how much does it concern the best men in the World to abstain from
the very appearance of sin, that so they may not bring upon themselves the
guilt and burden of other men's sins. It Is very well observed by some, that a
more grievous punishment is reserved for them which cause others to sin, than
for them which sin by their occasion; thus the Serpent was punished more than
Eve, 2 Kings 9.30-ult. compared with 1 Kings 22.34, to ^9.
and Eve more than Adam. And so Jezabel who tempted and provoked Ahab to sin,
was punished with a far greater and sorer punishment or Judgment than Ahab
himself was. To sin (says one) has not so much perdition in it, as to make
others to sin; and therefore as you would never draw others to sin, keep off
from all appearance of sin; O that all Superiors, Inferiors, and equals,
would lay this counsel to heart. But,

Fourthly, The keeping off from all appearances of evil, Prove. 22.1. A good
Name is rather to be chosen than great Riches, and loving favor rather than
Silver and Gold. So Eccles. 7.1. A good name is better than precious Ointment,
the one being but a persume of the Nostrils, the other a perfume of the heart.
It Is observable the Princely Preacher does not say, A great Name is better than
Precious Ointments, but a good Name is better than precious Ointments.
Ointments are here named, because in those Eastern parts they were laid up in
the Kings Treasury, even among his most precious things, Isa. 39.2. And
Hezekiah was glad of them, and showed him the house of his precious things, the
Silver, and the Gold, and the Spices, Exodus 30 22-23. Exodus 28.41. 1 Samuel
16.13. Psalm. 89.20. Heb. 1.9. Isa. 61.3. Amos 6 6. Esth. 2.12. Psalm. 23.5. Luke
7.46. Psalm. 92.10. Deuteronomy. 33.24. Prove. 21.20.
and the precious Ointments, etc. Precious Aromatical Ointments were things
greatly in use and esteem amongst the Israelites, and a special part of their
Treasures, as is evident by the Scriptures in the Margent. And yet a good Name
(which has its Foundation in virtue, and in a holy, innocent, blameless,
harmless, and exemplary life) is better than those most precious Ointments. And
it is observable that the initial letter of the Hebrew word (...) Tob, that is
here rendered Good, is bigger than ordinary, to show the more than ordinary
excellency of a good name and fame amongst men. 'Twas good counsel the Moralist
gave, when he said, whatsoever commodity you lose, be sure yet to preserve that
Jewel of a good Name. A good renown is better than a golden girdle, say some.
And a man's eye and his good Name, can bear no jests, say others. And if I may
but keep a good Name, I have wealth enough, said the Naturalist. O friends! as
ever you would keep a good Name, keep off from the very appearance of evil, for
the very appearance of evil will both Eclipse and wound a man's name and his
Conscience at once. Certainly a man were better not to live, than to outlive
his good Name. A man's good Name is like a piece of white Paper, which if once
blotted, will very hardly be got out again, so as to leave no Print of it
behind; it is like a fair structure long time a rearing, but quickly ruined; or
like a Merchants estate, long a getting, but lost in a moment. And therefore
how much does it concern every Christian to keep his Name as he would keep his
life, and this he can never do, except he keeps off from the appearance of
evil. It Is his Name only that shall be kept green and flourishing, like the Rod
of Aaron, that was laid up in the Tabernacle, who keeps off from the appearance
of evil. He takes the best and the wisest course under heaven to preserve his
good Name in the World, and to maintain the peace of his Conscience, who is
most studious and industrious to abstain from all appearances of evil. But, etc.

indifferent nature, I must deny my own liberty, 1 Cor. 8.11, 12, 13. chap.
10.25, 28.
(as I must) rather than grieve or offend, or wound the Conscience of a weak
Brother for whom Christ has dyed. O how much more then I must I shun the very
resemblance of sin, considering how wonderful apt weak Christians are to be
offended, and stumbled, when they see others so bold as to venture upon the
appearance of evil. Alexanders Macedonians having offended him, laid by their
Arms, put on mourning Apparel, and came running in Troops to his Tent, where,
for almost three days together, they remained with loud cries and tears, to
testify their remorse for offending him; and shall we make nothing of offending
those weak Christians that are the price of Christ's blood, and the travel of
his soul, the Lord forbid.

Besides, our venturing upon the appearance of evil, may prove a great
temptation to weak Christians, not only to venture upon seeming evils, but also
to venture upon real evils; doubtless many weak Christians have been drawn to
apparent evils, by observing others to venture upon the appearance of evil.
It Is commonly seen, that when strong Christians will adventure upon appearing
evils, weak Christians will be emboldned thereby to commit real evils, 1 Cor.
8.8, 9, 10. But meat commends us not to God, for neither if we eat are we the
better, neither if we eat not are we the worse. But take heed lest by any means
this liberty of yours become a stumbling block to them that are weak. For if
any man see thee which have knowledge, sit at meat in the Idols Temple, shall
not the Conscience of him which is weak, be emboldned to eat those things which
are offered to Idols? When the weak shall see men of knowledge communicating
with Idolaters in their Feasts, their Consciences will be emboldned and
confirmed in their old Superstition about those Idols, which they were
beginning to leave, returning now a fresh to a more reverent esteem and service
of them than ever, etc. O friends, as you would not offend the weak, as you
would not tempt the weak, keep off from all shows and appearances of evil, etc.
But,

1 Thessalonians. 4.12. Jude 22.
so we should walk compassionately toward those that are without. Of some have
compassion, making a difference. Jer. 9.1.
Did not Jeremy wish that his head were waters, and his eyes a Fountain of
tears, that he might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of his
people? Did not Samuel mourn for Saul? 1 Samuel 15.25. Luke 19.10. Luke 10.30-35.
Phil. 3.20. Levit. 19.17. 1 Samuel 17.34. Genesis 31.40.
Did not Christ weep over Jerusalem? Did not the compassionate Samaritan bind
up his wounds, pouring in Oil and Wine, who fell among Thieves in his going
from Jerusalem to Jericho. Did not Paul weep over those that were enemies of
the Cross of Christ: Yea, shall we show pity and compassion to an Ox or an Ass
that is fallen into a Ditch. Nay, shall David rather venture upon a Lion than
lose a Lamb? Shall Jacob rather endure heat by day, and cold by night, than
neglect his Flock? Shall Moses fight with odds, rather than the Cattle shall
perish with thirst. Nay, shall Xenocrates a Heathen, show compassion to a poor
Sparrow, that being scared and pursued by a Hawk, flew into his bosom for
succor, etc. And shall not we have that compassion on poor sinners precious
and immortal Souls, as to abstain from the appearance of sin, which may more
ways than one prove so exceeding prejudicial to them, etc.

Jer. ^^.50.
Wicked men are wonderful prone to watch for the Saints haltings; Christians are
lights upon a high Hill; yea, they are Stars in the Firmament of the Church,
and therefore every man's eye is upon them, and if wicked men can but discern
the least indecency, the least appearance of any excentrick, or irregular
motion, O how readily will they let fly against God, and the Gospel; against
Religion, and against all that have a Profession of Religion upon them. Now the
honor of God, and the credit of the Gospel, should be so dear and precious in
the eyes of every Christian, that he should rather choose to dye, than to
venture upon the least apparition of sin, whereby the honor of God may be
clouded, or the credit of the Gospel impeached or eclipsed; or the Soul of a
poor sinner endangered or worsned; both the least sin, and the least appearance
of sin must be avoided and prevented, the Cockatrice must be crushed in the
Egg, else it will soon become a Serpent; the very thought of sin, if not
thought on, will break out into action, action into custom, custom into
habit, and then both body and Soul are in the ready way of being irrecoverably
lost. Camerarius tells us a sad story of two Brothers, who walking out in the
evening, and seeing the Element full of bright spangling Stars, one of them
being a Grasier, wished that he had as many Oxen as there were Stars in the
Firmament; then said the other Brother, If I had a Pasture as big as all the
World, where would you keep the Oxen? he answered, In your Pasture: What said
the other, whether I would or no? Yes said his Brother. The matter was very
light, 'twas but a little evil, or an appearing evil, but it fell out very
heavily, for presently they fell to words, and then drew one upon another, and
in the close killed one another. O friends, as you love the lives of sinners,
and as you love the Souls of sinners, keep off from all appearance of evil. But,

Seventhly, Other precious Saints have abstained from all Joseph, Paul, Daniel,
etc. but Augustine, who retracted even Ironies because they had the appearance
of evil. And so the Primitive Christians would not let up Lights and Bays at
their doors, though for this they were persecuted as enemies to the Emperor,
Tertullian.
because the Temple, and the doors of Idolaters were wont to be thus garnished.
2 Samuel 24.21, 22, 23, 24.
And so David refused to take the Threshing floor, and Threshing instruments,
and Oxen, etc. of Araunah as a gift, but would needs buy them at a price, and
this he did, partly out of a Divine nobleness, and partly to avoid the very
show of Covetousness. Now why has God left all these famous Presidents upon
Record, but on purpose to encourage his Saints in all Ages, to abstain from all
appearing evils, as well as from all apparent evils. Certainly God looks that
we should so eye the best, the highest, the worthyest, and the exactest
examples, as that we should make it our great business and work to come up to
them, and to imitate them to the life. O friends! the examples last cited
should be very awakening, very persuading, very convincing, and very
encouraging; because in them you may see that though abstinence from the
appearance of evil be a difficult thing, yet it is a possible thing. Shall we
love to look upon the Pictures of our friends, and shall we not much more love
to look upon the holy examples of those eminent Saints that had the lively
picture of Grace, and the lovely Image of Christ fairly stamped upon their
hearts and lives. It Is both our Mercy and our duty to eye the examples, and to
follow the footsteps of those Christians that have been most eminent in Grace,
as you may plainly see by comparing of these Scriptures together, Prove. 2.20.
Heb. 6.12. 1 These. 1.6. Phil. 4.9. 2 Timothy 3.10, 11, 12. Heb. 12.1. Phil. 3.17.
1 Cor. 11.1. Titus 2.7. He that would fain write a fair hand, had need have his
eye often upon his Copy; and he that would fain abstain from all appearance of
evil, he had need often to eye the gracious examples of such who have made
Conscience of abstaining from appearing evils as well as from apparent evils.
But,

D^mocrit^^ plucked out his own eyes to avoid the danger of uncleanness.
Socrates speaks of two young men that flang away their Belts, when being in
an Idol-Temple, the lustrating water fell upon them, detesting, says the
Historian, the garment spotted by the Flesh. Alexander would not see the woman
after whom he might have lusted. Scipio Africanus warring in Spain, took New-
Carthage by storm, Aure victor.
at which time a beautiful and noble Virgin fled to him for succor to preserve
her Chastity, he being four and twenty years old, (and so in the heat of youth)
hearing of it, would not suffer her to come into his sight, for fear of a
temptation, but caused her to be restored in safety to her Father. So when
Dem^sthenes the Orator, was asked an excessive sum of money to behold the
beautiful Lais, he answered, He would not buy repentance so dear, neither was
he so ill a Merchant as to sell eternals for temporals. Nor Caesar would not
search Pompeyes Cabinet, lest he should find new matters of revenge. Memorable
is the story of the children of Samos^ta, that would not touch their Ball, but
burnt it, because it had touched the Toe of a wicked Heretical Bishop, as they
were tossing and playing with it. Now shall some refined Heathens, shall
civilized Pagans abstain from the appearance of evil, from occasions and
temptations to sin? and shall real Christians fall short of them? Shall blind
nature do more than Grace? Shall men fallen in the first Adam, do more than
those that are raised and enlivened by the second Adam? But to prevent all
mistakes, let me add, though many Heathens have abstained from the appearance
of some evil, yet they have not abstained from the appearance of all evil;
neither have they abstained from the appearance of any evil out of a hatred of
evil; nor from any principles of saving light, or life, or love; nor out of any
regard to any Royal Law of God; nor out of any regard to the honor or glory of
God, but either out of vainglory, and popular applause, the Pole-stars by
which they steered all their actions, or out of Hypocrisy, which set a tincture
and Die upon all their actions; what Writer has more golden Sentences than
Seneca, against the contempt of Gold, yet (if Tacitus, and others of his
contemporaries may be credited) none more rich, none more covetous than he, as
if out of design he had persuaded others to cast away their money, that he
himself might come and gather it up again, etc. And thus you see that there are
very great reasons why every Christian should avoid the very show, suspicion,
or appearance of evil, etc. But,

Psalm. 18.26.
his most prevalent sins, etc. he has certainly a saving work, a powerful work
of God upon his Soul. True Grace will make a man stand stoutly and steadfastly
on Gods side, and work the heart to take part with him, against the most
darling sins, though they be as right hands or as right eyes. True Grace will
lay hands upon a man's most beloved lusts, and cry out to Heaven, Lord Crucify
them, Crucify them, down with them, down with them even to the ground. Lord do
Justice, do signal Justice, do speedy Justice, do exemplary Justice upon this
Head-lust, this Master-sin. Lord hew down root and branch, let the very stumps
of this Dagon be broken all in pieces. Lord curse this wild Fig Tree, that
never more Fruit may grow thereon. Certainly God and Christ is set up highest
in that man's heart, who bends most of his thoughts, strength, and endeavors
against his constitution sins, against the sins of his Place, Calling,
condition and complexion. It Is very observable, that the Jews, after they had
been in the Babilonish Furnace for Idolatry, they ever hated and feared that
sin as much as the burnt child dreads the Fire; yea, they would dye any death
rather than admit an Idol. Josephus tells us how stoutly they opposed Pilate
and Petronius, that would have set up Caesar's Statue in their Temples, offering
their throats to the Swords of the Soldiers, rather than they would endure
that Idol in Gods house. O when once the heart of a Christian comes thus to be
set against all his Golden and Silver Idols, then we may safely say, Behold a
true Israelite in whom there is no guile. He that finds his lusts, his bosom,
his darling lusts, begin to fall before him, (...). 6.1^.
as H^m^^ once begun to fall before Mor^eoai; he may safely and confidently
conclude that he is of the seed of the Jews, and that the seed of God abides
in him. 1 John 3.9.
(But having discoursed so largely as I have concerning bosom sins, darl^ng
lusts, head-corruptions, in my other writings, I need say no more at this time)
And thus you see that there are Eleven particulars in regard of sin, and a
Christians act^ngs about it, that speaks out a true saving work of Grace to be
in the Souls of the Saints. But, etc.

Secondly, Where the constant, ordinary, standing, and Psalm. 119.112. Psalm.
40.8. Psalm. 39.1. Psalm. 101.3. 2 Cor. 1.12. Psalm. 119 4, 5, 20. 2 Chronicles. 19.3.
2 Chro. 30.18, 19 Neh. 1.11. Isa. 26.8, 9.
I have inclined my heart to keep thy Statutes always, even to the end. Verse
38. Stablish thy Word unto thy Servant, who is devoted to thy fear. Verse 44.
So shall I keep thy Law continually, for ever and ever. Verse 45. And I will
walk at liberty, for I seek thy Precepts. Acts 24.16. And herein do I exercise
my self, to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward
men. Heb. 13.18. Pray for us, for we trust we have a good Conscience, in all
things willing to live honestly. Gracious Souls do strongly affect that which
they cannot easily effect, Psalm. 119.57. Thou art my Portion O Lord, I have
said that I would keep thy words. Some read this Verse thus, Lord I have said,
my portion shall be to keep thy words. Holy David was fully determined and
resolved in himself, to keep Gods Royal Law, in spite of the World, the flesh,
and the Devil. And so Barnabas exhorted the D^sciples, that with purpose of
heart they would cleave unto the Lord, Acts 11.23. As if all piety and truth of
Grace consisted in Gracious purposes of heart. Certainly when the bent of a
man's mind, and the settled purpose of a man's Soul, and the unfeigned desires of
his heart, are for God, for Grace, for holiness, in heart, in life, then the
estate and condition of that man is safe and happy. It Is very observable, that
that great Apostle Paul, Though the Needle or the Seamans Compass may jog this
way and that way, yet the bent of the Needle w^ll still be Northward. So though
a Christian may have his particular sinful joggings, this way or that way, yet
the bent of his heart will still be God-wards. Una actio non denominat.
in his spiritual conflict, lays a very great stress upon these things,
witness Romans 7. ver. 16. If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto
the Law that it is good. So Verse 18. For to will is present with me. So Verse
19. For the good that I would, I do not, but the evil which I would not, that I
do. So Verse 21, 22. I find then a Law, that when I would do good, evil is
present with me. For I delight in the Law of God after the inward man. So Verse
25. So then with the mind I my self serve the Law of God. Certainly, the truth,
the lise, and power of Grace, of Holiness, of Regeneration, is not so much seen
in our actions, as in the renewing and sanctifying of our minds and wills,
according to that Romans 12.2. Be ye transformed (or Metamorphosed, as the Greek
has it) by the renewing of your mind. No man is to judge of the soundness or
sincerity of his Spirit by some particular acts, but by the constant frame and
bent of his Spirit, and by his general conversation in this world; If
particular actions might determine whether a man had Grace or no Grace, whether
he were in Christ or not in Christ; whether he were a Saint or not a Saint;
whether he were sincere or unsound, we should many times conclude, that those
had no Grace who indeed have, and that they were not in Christ who indeed are,
and that they are no Saints who indeed are, and that they are not sincere, who
certainly are true Nathaniels. The best Saints have had their extravagant
motions, and have very foully and sadly miscarried as to particular actions,
(even then when the constant course and bent of their spirits have been
God-wards and Christ-wards, and Holiness-wards, and Heaven-wards, etc) witness
David's Murder and Adultery. Noah's Drunkenness, Lots Incest, Joseph's Swearing,
Jobs Cursing, Jonahs Vexing, Peter's Denying, and Thomas his not believing. Such
twinklings do and will accompany the highest and fairest stars. As he who foots
it best may be found sometimes all along, and the neatest person may sometimes
slip into a slow. He that cannot endure to see a spot upon his Clothes, may yet
sometimes fall into a Quagmire. So the holiest and exactest Christians may
sometimes be surprised with many infirmities and unevennesses, and sad
miscarriages. Certainly particular sinnings are compatible with a gracious
frame, though none are with a glorious condition. Though no darkness, no clouds
can be mixed with the Sun in Heaven, yet both may be in the Air which is
enlightened below. Our best estate on earth is mixed, and not absolute. Glory
annihilates all sinful practices, but Grace only weakens them; the most sincere
Christian is but an imperfect Christian, and has daily cause to mourn over his
infirmities, as well as he has cause to bless God for his Graces and mercies.
Well Sirs! Look as every particular stain does not blemish the universal
fineness of the Cloth, so neither does this or that particular fact disprove
and deny the general bent of the heart; particulars may not decide the estate
either way, it is true, a man by a particular sinning is denominated Guilty, but
by no one particular can a man's Estate be challenged, either for good or bad.
He that shall judge of a Christians estate by particular acts, though notorious
bad, will certainly condemn the Generation of the Righteous. We must always
distinguish betwixt some single good actions, and a series of good actions.
Mere particular actions do not conclude (either way) the estate of the Soul, an
hypocrite may do some good act, and an upright person may do some sinful act. A
man must give in Judgment for, or against himself according as the habitual
purpose and temper of his heart stands, etc.
It is not this or that particular good action, but a continued course of holy
Actions that denominates us holy. Certa^nly, as there is no man so holy, but
sometimes he falls into this or that particular sin; So there is no man so
wicked, but sometimes he falls in with this or that particular duty, witness
Pharaoh, who in a fit desires Moses and Aaron to pray for him; and witness
Balaam, who in a good mood desires to dye the death of the Righteous; and
witness Saul, who under a pang condemns himself, and justifies David. And so
witness Ahabs humbling of himself, and Nineveh's repenting, and Foelix his
trembling, and Herod's hearing of John Baptist gladly. Now look as every sin
which a godly man falls into (through infirmity) does not presently denominate
him ungodly, so neither will a few good actions done by a wicked man prove him
godly. It Is what the course and tenor of the life is, that must be most
diligently and wisely observed, for every man is as his course is; if his
course be holy, the man is so; if his course be wicked, the man is wicked.
There is a Maxim in Logic, viz. that no general Rule can be stablished upon a
particular instance; and there is another Maxim in Logic, viz. that no
particular instance can overthrow a general Rule. So here, as no man can safely
and groundedly conclude from no better Promises than from some few particular
actions (though in themselves materially and substantially good) that his heart
is therefore sincere; It Is not a pang of the Soul, nor a mood, nor a fit of an
Ague, nor a flash of Lightning nor a man's being as the morning dew, but his
habitual purpose, resolution and inclination to good, that evidences the man to
be really good. Psalm. 119.20. My soul breaks for the longing that it has
unto thy Judgments at all times, etc. A sheep may slip into a slow as soon as a
Swine; and an Apple Tree may have a fit of barrenness, as well as a Crab-tree.
But the sheep loves not to wallow in the Mire as the swine does. And though the
Apple Tree be barren one year, yet it brings forth fruit the next.
so on the contrary, no man ought to conclude, because of some gross particular
sinful actions, and extravagant motions, that his heart is unfound. O Sirs! we
are not to make a Judgment of our states and conditions by some particular
actions, whether they are good or evil, but we are to make a Judgment of our
states and conditions, by the general frame, bent, and disposition of our
hearts, and by the constant tenor of our lives. It Is certain, that God
accounts every wicked man guilty of all those sins, wickednesses, and vanities,
which the settled purpose, desire, bent, bias, and frame of his Soul inclined
him to, though he does not actually commit them, Matthew. 5.28. He that looks
on a Woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery already with her in his
heart. A man may commit Adultery, and yet not touch a Woman. There are many
thousands that dye of the wound in the eye. So 1 John 3.15. Whosoever hates
his Brother is a Murderer. A man may commit Murder, and yet not kill a man,
yea he may commit Murder and yet not touch a man. Prove. 23.7. For as he
thinks in his heart, so is he. The man is as his mind is. God esteems of
wicked men according to their hearts, and not according to their words. So it is
as certain that the Lord accounts every godly man to do all that good, that the
settled purpose, frame, bent, biass, and unfeigned desires of his Soul inclines
him to, 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted. So Heb.
11.17. By Faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac, and he that had
received the Promises, offered up his only Son; that is, in disposition and
full purpose of heart, and willingness of mind, which God accepted for the
deed; a true intent is in Gods account as a real act. So David had a purpose, a
mind, a will to build God a house, and for this God commends him, 1 Kings 8.18.
And the Lord said unto David my Father, whereas it was in thy heart to build a
house unto my Name, thou did well that it was in thy heart; yea, God rewards
him for it, as if he had actually done it, and tells him in his ear that he
would build him an house, 2 Samuel 7.27. So when that servant that owed his Lord
ten thousand Talents, had showed his readiness and willingness, and
resolvedness to pay all. Lord have patience with me, and I will pay thee all,
Matthew. 18.26. (a thing as impossible for him to do, as it is for us to keep the
whole Law, and not to fail in one point; but his desires, his mind, his will,
his purposes was to do it) well, and what does his Lord do? why his Lord had
compassion on him, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt, v. 27. his Lord
took this for full and current payment, he accepted of the will for the deed.
So when Zacheus had unfeignedly professed his purpose and willingness to make
restitution, Christ presently replies, This day is Salvation come to thy house,
Luke 19.9. Certainly the Lord accounts that Soul a true Believer, and a blessed
Soul, that unfeignedly desires to believe, witness that Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are
they which do hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be filled.
And it is as certain that the Lord accounts that sinner a true penitent, that
does unfeignedly desire, purpose, and resolve to repent, to break off his sins,
and to turn to the Lord, as you may see in that great instance of the Prodigal,
Luke 15.18, 19, 20. I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto him,
Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to
be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired Servants. And he arose and came
to his Father; But when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had
compassion, and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed him. As Soon as ever the
Prodigal did but purpose and resolve to repent, and return to his Father, the
compassions of his Father are kindled and turned toward him, and he does not
go, but runs and falls on his neck, and in stead of kicking and killing, there
is nothing but kissing and embracing a returning Prodigal. God always sets a
higher value upon our dispositions, than upon our actions, 2 Cor. 8.10. 1 Cor.
9.17. 1 Pet. 5.2. Exodus 25.2. Philemon 14
and in our best services he esteems more of our wills, than he does of our
deeds, as is evident by the Scriptures in the Margent. Every good man is as
good in the eye and account of God, as the ordinary frame and bent of his
Spirit speaks him to be. Every man is as holy, as humble, as heavenly, as
spiritual, as gracious, as serious, as sincere, as fruitful, as faithful, as
watchful, etc. as the settled purposes, desires, resolutions, and endeavors of
his Soul speaks him to be. Hence Noah is said to be a just man, and perfect or
upright in his Generation, Genesis 6.9. And hence Job is said to be a perfect and
an upright man, one that feared God and eschewed evil, Job 1.1.8. And hence
David is said to be a man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13, 14. And to fulfill
all his wills, Acts 13.22. here the Greek word (...), is wills, to note the
universality, and sincerity of his obedience. And hence Zacharias and Elizabeth
are said to be both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of God blameless, Luke 1.5, 6. Hence the Church is said to be all
fair, Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair my love, and there is no spot in thee. And
hence those hundred forty and four thousand Saints that had their Fathers Name
written in their Foreheads, Rev. 14.1. are said to be without fault, v. 5. And
in their mouth was found no guile, for they are without fault before the Throne
of God. God in the Covenant of Grace, and upon the credit of his Sons blood,
and for the glory of his Free Grace and favor, is graciously pleased to accept
of his people, and to approve of his people, and to delight in his people, and
to interpret his people, according to the common bent, frame, disposition,
resolution, unfeigned desires, and constant endeavors of their Souls. But, etc.



Quest. But how shall we know whether our obedience be the obedience of Faith
or no? how may a man discern when his obedience springs from Faith?

Answ. You may certainly know whether your obedience be the obedience of Faith
or no, by these following particulars.

First, That obedience that springs from Faith, is a full obedience, David did
look upon his universal obedience as a special testimony of his uprightness,
Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy
Commandments. Mark! the Psalmist does not say, When I obey all thy
Commandments, then shall I not be ashamed; but, When I have a respect to all
thy Commandments, then shall I not be ashamed. Now a respect to all Gods
Commandments, notes an inward awe and reverential eye toward every duty that
God requires. The rule is good and true, Quicquid propter deum fit, equaliter
fit, he who does serve and obey God for Gods sake, will equally obey all that
God commands him. No one Command is unjust or unreasonable to him^ whose heart
is upright in obedience, etc. Seneca describing a virtuous man, (Epist. 120.)
says of him, that he is Idem semper, et in omni actu par sibi. Bacharti from
^achar, the word notes a careful and diligent choice, upon good trial and proof.
The words according to the Hebrew, may be read thus, Then shall I not blush
when my eye is to all thy Commandments. Now you know the Traveller has his eye
toward the place whither he is going, and though he be short of it, yet he is
still a putting on, and pressing forwards all he can to reach it. So when the
eye of a Saint is to all the Commands of God, and he is still a pressing
forwards toward full obedience, such a Soul shall never be put to the blush;
such a Soul shall never be ashamed in the great day of our Lord Jesus. So Acts
13.22. I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which
shall fulfill all my will. (...). all my wills, to note the sincerity and
universality of his obedience. So Acts 24.16. And herein do I exercise my self,
to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men. So
Heb. 13.18. We trust we have a good Conscience, in all things willing to live
honestly. That obedience that springs from Faith, does neither dispute Divine
Commands, nor divide Divine Commands one from another. Zacharias and Elizabeth
were both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances
of the Lord blameless, Luke 1.5, 6. That obedience that springs from Faith, is
a full obedience, a universal obedience; It is universal in respect of the
subject, the whole man, and it is universal in respect of the object, the whole
Law. Mark! he who obeyes sincerely, obeyes universally, though not in regard of
practice (which is impossible) yet 1. In regard of his will and desires, his
will and desire is to obey all, Romans 7.18. For to will is present with me.
Psalm. 119.5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes. 2. In respect
of election or choice, he chooses to obey all. Psalm. 119.173. Let thine hand
help me, for I have chosen thy Precepts. The word here rendered chosen,
signifies to choose upon trial and examination, I have chosen thy Precepts
before all, and above all other things. I have chosen thy Precepts for my
chiefest good, and for my only treasure. I have chosen thy Precepts to own
them, to follow them, and to obey them. 3. In respect of approbation, he
approves of all the Commands of God, as holy, just, and good; he highly
approves of those Royal Commands that he cannot perfectly obey, Romans 7.12.
Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment holy, just, and good. And Verse
16. I consent unto the Law that it is good; He assents to the Commands of God
as holy, and he consents to them as good. 4. In respect of affection, he loves
all the Commands of God, he dearly loves those very Commands that he cannot
obey, Psalm. 119.97. O how I love thy Law! Such a pang of love he felt, as could
not otherwise be vented, but by this pathetical exclamation, O how love I thy
Law! Verse 113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love. Verse 163. I hate
and abhor lying, but thy Law do I love. Verse 119. Thou put away all the
wicked of the earth like dross, therefore I love thy testimonies. Verse 127.
Therefore I love thy Commandments above Gold, yea above fine Gold. Verse 159.
Consider how I love thy Precepts. Verse 167. My Soul has kept thy testimonies,
and I love them exceedingly. 5. In respect of valuation or esteem, he highly
values all the Commands of God, he highly prizes all the Commands of God, as
you may see by comparing these Scriptures together, Psalm. 119.72, 127, 128.
Psalm. 19.8, 9, 10, 11. Job 23.12. 6. In respect of his purpose and resolution,
he purposes and resolves, by divine assistance, to obey all, to keep all, Psalm.
119.106. I have sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
Judgments. Psalm. 17.3. I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. 7. In
respect of his inclination, he has an habitual inclination in him to keep all
the Commands of God, 1 Kings 8.57, 58. 2 Chronicles. 30.17, 18, 19, 20. Psalm.
119.112. I have inclined my heart to perform thy Statutes always, even to the
end. 8. In respect of endeavors, they endeavor to keep all, Psalm. 119.59. I
turned my feet unto thy testimonies. There is no man that obeyes God truly, who
does not endeavor to obey God fully, and thus you see in what respects that
obedience that flows from Faith, is a full obedience, a universal obedience. A
child of God obeyes all the commands of God in respect of his sincere desires,
purposes, resolutions, and endeavors; and this God accepts in Christ for
perfect and complete obedience. This is the glory of the Covenant of Grace,
that God accepts and esteems of sincere obedience as perfect obedience. Such
who sincerely endeavor to keep the whole Law of God, they do keep the whole
Law of God in an evangelical sense, though not in a legal sense. In the work of
Conversion, Ezekiel. 11.19, 20.
God infuseth all Grace together, and writes not one particular Law in the
hearts of his children, but the whole Law, which is a universal Principle,
inclining the Soul impartially to all. The gracious Soul sincerely falls in
with every command of God (so far as he knows it), without prejudice or
partiality, he dares not pick and choose what commands to obey, and what to
reject, as Hypocrites do; he has an eye to see, an ear to hear, and a heart to
obey the first Table as well as the second, and the second as well as the
first; He does not adhere to the first, and neglect the second, as Hypocrites
do; neither does he adhere to the second, and contemn the first, as profane
men do. All Saul's, Jebues, Judas's, Demas's, Scribes, Pharisees, and
temporaries, Matthew. 23.23.
they are still partial in their obedience, for while they yield obedience to
some commands, they live in the habitual breach of other Commands. Jehu
boastingly calls out, 2 Kings 10.29, 30.
Come see my zeal for the Lord of Hosts. But if Jehosaphat had gone a little
further, he might have seen his Calves too, contrary to Gods Commands. Herod
heard John Baptist gladly, and did many things; but if John will be close and
plain with him, Mark 6.
he shall then first lose his liberty, and then his head for his labor. A
sincere Christian loves all the known Commands of God, and prises all the
Commands of God, and sees a Divine Image, Majesty, and Authority stamped upon
all the Commands of God: And therefore the main bent and disposition of his
Soul, ^s to obey all, and to be subject to all the Commands of God. Let me in a
few particulars open this great truth a little more fully to you. And therefore
take me thus.

John 6.60.
then he cries out Durus sermo, it is a hard saying, who can bear it? this is a
hard Commandment, who can obey it? When Religion is attended with freedom,
honor, and safety; when Religion is attended with Riches, Pleasures, and
Applause, then unsound hearts will put forwards; but when these part, then they
bid Religion farewell. As you see in the young man in the Gospel, Matthew. 19.20.
to 25.
who was willing to follow Christ, so long as he might be no loser in following
of him; but when it came to this, that he must part with his Riches, or with
Christ, then he falls off, and went away sorrowful, because he had great
possessions. But now a sincere Christian will obey even the most chargable and
costly Commands of God, as you may see in that little book of Martyrs, tenth
and eleventh Chapters of the Hebrews; and as you may see in the three Children
in Daniel, in the Disciples, Matthew. 19 27.
in the Primitive Christians, and in the Martyrs in the Marian days. But,

Father, a Master, a Magistrate, a Minister. Remember this for ever, every one
is that really that he is relatively. Many make a great Profession, and are
under a great Name, and have great parts and gifts, and can discourse rarely
well on any subject, whose houses are not Bethels, but Bethavens, not little
Temples, but little Hells. One, writing of the Italian women, says that they
were Angels in the streets, Saints in the Church, and Devils in their houses;
this is very applicable to many high Professors this day, who are very forward
in the general Duties of Religion, and yet make little Conscience of relative
duties; but he whose obedience springs from Faith, he will make Conscience of
relative commands as well as of absolute commands: Whatever Command has the
stamp of God, the Authority of Heaven upon it, though it seem never so small,
he dares not disobey it; if he sees a beam of divine Majesty sitting upon the
face of any Command, he will submit to it; you know men will not refuse a penny
if the Kings stamp be upon it, so if the Authority of God be stamped upon the
least Command, a sound Christian will yield subjection to it, as well as the
greatest. Mark, if a man make no Conscience of relative Commands, though his
general conversation as a Christian be never so admirable, yet he has great
cause to suspect himself and his estate, and that his heart is not right in the
sight of God. Acts 8.21.
O that you would seriously consider! that relative and domestical Graces and
duties do more demonstrate true piety and godliness than public duties, than
general duties do; for Pride, Vainglory, Self Ends, and a hundred other
outward, carnal considerations, may put a man upon the general duties of
Religion, as you may see by the Scriptures in the Margent, Isa. 58.1, 2, 3, 4,
5. Hos. 5.14. Zech. 7.4, 5, 6, 7.
and as you may see in the Scribes and Pharisees throughout the New Testament;
but it argues both truth and strength of Grace to be diligent and conscientious
in the discharge of relative duties, and this is the true reason why the
Apostles in their Epistles, do so frequently, so earnestly, and so strongly, by
variety of motives press Christians to the performance of those relative duties
that lie upon their hands. But,

Luke 16.19-29. Matt. 25.24-31.
Dives was no^ cast into Hell for oppressing Lazarus, but for not showing mercy
to Lazarus: He was not damned because he took any thing from him, but because
he gave nothing to him. The evil servant did not riot out his Talent, but
omitted the improvement of it, for which he was cast into outer darkness Nor
those Reprobates in the same Chapter did not rob the poor Saints, but omitted
the relieving of them, which was their ruin. Deuteronomy. 23.3, 4.
Moab and Ammon were banished the Sanctuary to the tenth Generation, for a mere
omission, because they met not Gods Israel in the Wilderness with bread and
water. Look as the omission of good diet breeds diseases, so the omission of
Religious duties will either make work for Repentance, Luke 18.11.
or for Hell, or for the Physician of Souls. Mark, there is many a man's
Religion lies merely in negatives, he is no Swearer, no Drunkard, no Adulterer,
no Oppressor, no Defrauder, etc. A formal Professors obedience to Divine
Commands, does principally lie in negatives, he considers not so much what the
Command requires, as what it prohibits, and he pleases himself rather in
abstaining from evil, than in doing of good; in being outwardly reformed, than
in being inwardly renewed; he thinks it enough that he turns from sin, though
he makes no Conscience of turning to God: If you ask him concerning affirmative
Commands, there you will find him speechless. Ask him, art thou holy? art thou
humble? art thou heavenly? art thou sincere? art thou a Believer? do thou set
up God as the great object o thy fear? do thou love God with a superlative
love? is the Sabbath of the Lord a delight unto thee? etc. Now here you strike
him dumb, he looks upon the neglect of these things as no sins, Isa. 8.13.
Psalm. 18.1. Isa. 58.1^
because they are not such scandalous sins as the others are. Remember Sirs,
sinful omissions many times leads to sinful commissions, as you may see in the
Angels tha^ fell from Heaven to Hell; and as you may see in Adam, who fell from
his highest glory, into a woeful gulf of sin and misery. But,

Fourthly, If your obedience spring from Faith, then you intra, and an extra,
one part of Christ's Law binds the Flesh, and another part binds the Spirit,
Thou shall do no Murder, Matthew. 5.21.22. Verse 27, 28.
there is the letter of the Command. Thou shall not be angry with thy Brother
without a cause, there is the Spirit of the Command. Thou shall not commit
Adultery, there is the letter of the Command: Thou shall not look upon a Woman
to lust after her, there is the Spirit of the Command. The Pharisees of old did
not look to the Spirit^ality of the Law, but only to the Letter of the Law;
they rested wholly upon an outward conformity to the Law, when their hearts
were full of Hellish lusts, they were all for the outside of the Law, they
regarded not the inside of the Law; they were all for washing of Platters and
Cups, and for beautifying of Tombs, like an Adulteress, Matthew. 23.23. Phil.
3.6. Romans 7.9. Could a man come up to all affirmative and negative Precepts in
his outward conversation; yet if he were not spiritual in all these, his
obedience would be but as a body without a Soul. The Pharisees rise high in
their outward obedience, and yet Christ clearly and fully convinces them, that
they were wretched Adulterers and Murderers, though they were not guilty of any
such outward crimes, etc.
whose care is to paint, and set a fair face upon a foul matter; they were all
for paying Tithe of Mint and Annise and Cummin; but they regarded not the
inside of the Law, they omitted the weightier matters of the Law, viz.
Judgment, Mercy, and Faith. While Paul walked by the letter of the Command, he
was blameless in his own account; but when he came to walk by the Spirit of the
Command, then sin revived, and he dyed. Friends, there are the more general
duties of Religion, as Hearing, Praying, Reading, Receiving, Fasting,
Repeating, Discoursing, etc. Now these all lie in the very letter of the
Command, and there are the more inward and spiritual duties of Religion, as the
exercise of Faith, fear, love, hope, joy, patience, contentation, humble
submission, and choosing of God, and cleaving to God, and delighting in God, and
admiring of God, and exalting of God, and following hard after God, and holy
Meditation, and Self-examination, etc. Now all these lie in the very spirit of
the Command. Now in the exercise of these more spiritual duties, our fellowship
and communion with God mainly lies. In the more general duties of Religion, an
hypocrite may manifest the excellency of his gifts, but in the more spiritual
duties of Religion, a sincere Christian does manifest, both the excellency and
efficacy of grace. Mark, an unsound heart looks no further than to the bare
letter of the command, to bare hearing, and bare praying, and bare preaching,
and bare fasting, and bare giving, and bare receiving, and bare suffering; he
looks no further than to that part of the command which only binds the flesh,
or outward man; and if he does but observe that in the gross, he thinks he has
done mavelous well; like a melancholy man that matters not what melody and
harmony he makes, so he does but touch the strings of the instrument: But now,
a found, a sincere Christian, he looks to the Spirit of the command; and if he
does not come up to that, in sincere desires, in gracious purposes, in fixed
resolutions, and in cordial endeavors, he can have no peace, no rest, no
quiet, no comfort. O Sirs! as ever you would see God, and enjoy God another
day, you must labor, not only to obey the letter of the command, but also to
bring your hearts to the sincere obedience of the Spirit of the command. This
is a very close, piercing, distinguishing and discovering sign. But,

Cain offer sacrifice? Genesis 4.5.
and yet God had no respect to him, nor to his offering, because his sacrifice
was not offered up in a right manner, his offering was not offered up by a hand
of faith; he offered his offering, but because he did not offer himself as an
offering to God, his offering was rejected by God. A work may be materially
good, Luther.
that is not formally and eventually good, and this was Cain's curse. How
frequently did God command the Jews to pray? Isa. 1.15.
and yet he plainly tells them, When you spread forth your hands, I will hide
mine eyes from you; yea, when you make many prayers, I will not hear. He
commanded them to sacrifice, and yet he says, To what purpose is the multitude
of your sacrifices? Verse 11.
and all because they did not manage their prayers, nor sacrifices, in a right
manner; their hands were full of blood, and their hearts were full of sins, and
their lives were full of lewdness; and therefore all their services were vain
oblations, yea, an abomination to God. An unfound heart looks no further than
to the substance of the command; if he has heard, and prayed, and fasted, and
read, and repeated, and given alms, and received the Lord's Supper, he strokes
himself, and blesses himself, and hugs himself, and thinks all is well, and so
he looks no further: But now a sound sincere Christian, he looks to the
circumstance as well as the substance, to the manner as well as to the matter
of the command; when he prays, he labors to pray fervently, earnestly, Jam.
5.17, 18.
he labors to get his heart into his prayers; when he hears, he will hear with
attention and intention of spirit; when he walks, Mich. 6.8. 1 Pet. 2.12. and
3.1, 2, 3. 1 These. 2.10. 2 Cor. 1.12, Psalm. 110.3.
he endeavors to walk wisely, humbly, faithfully, fruitfully, circumspectly,
exemplarily, winningly, convincingly, blamelesly; when he obeys, he desires and
endeavors to obey freely, willingly, cheerfully. O Sirs! if we pray, and pray
not fervently; if we hear, and hear not fruitfully; if we obey, and obey not
willingly; if we show mercy, Isa. 58.13.
and do it not cheerfully; if we sanctify the Sabbath, and not with delight,
all is worth nothing, all will come to nothing. Mark, there are some
circumstances accessory, some necessary, some wherein the being, and some
wherein the well being of a duty does consist; and if you abstract these from
them, the duty is worth nothing; take away fervency and humility from prayer,
take away faithfulness and fruitfulness from hearing, and take away willingness
and delight from obedience, and all will be worth nothing. God regards not only
the matter, but the manner. Criton the Papist could say, That God loved better
Adverbs than Nouns, not to pray only, but to pray well; Non bonum sed been
agere, Not to do good, but to do it well, is the great wisdom of a Christian;
what is the Sun without light, or the fountain without water, or the body
without the soul, or wood without fire, or a bullet without a gun, or a Ship
without a rudder? no more are words in prayer, without the spirit of prayer.
God looks more at the manner, than at the matter of your prayers. And let thus
much suffice to confirm the first particular. But,

Ps. 119.4, 5. Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently; O that
my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes! Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the
testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them. Mat. 5.18. For verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth
pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be
fulfilled. John 10.35. If he called them Gods, unto whom the word of God came,
and the Scripture cannot be broken. Chap. 12.48. He that rejects me, and
receives not my words, has one that judges him; the word that I have spoken,
the same shall judge him in the last day. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17, All Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, f^r reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the m^n of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Now the reasons why that
obedience that springs from faith, is an obedience that is only grounded upon
the Word of God; the Commands of God, are these five.

Isa. 33.22. For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is
our King, James 4.12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to
destroy; who art thou that judge another? Now by the Laws of this Lord and
Lawgiver, we must square all our actions. Look, as it would be very absurd in
a servant to do that work which he thinks meet, and not what his Master
commands; so it is as absurd for men to think, that God will accept of this or
that at their hands, when they cannot plead his superscription and authority for
what they do. God will one day say to such, Who has required this at your
hands? Isa. 1.12.
O Sirs! you must lay the command of God as a foundation for what you do, or
else all your buildings, though never so glorious, will certainly totter and
fall; in all you do, you must be able to say, Thus says the Lord; or else
after you have done your best, you may be undone for ever. But,

Secondly, God's promise and blessing is only annexed to Gal. 4.28. Heb. 6.17.
therefore we are called children of the promise, and heirs of the promise. The
children of God in all their obedience, should still keep an eye upon the
command of God, and the promise of God, as ever they would run the race that is
set before them, Heb. 12.1. But,

Thirdly, Our obedience must be grounded and bottomed Col. 2.20, 21, 22.
The Apostle condemns those things which had a show of humility and great
mortification, because they were not bottomed upon a divine command; and Christ
condemned many practices of the Scribes and Pharisees, because they were not
bottomed upon a divine command. As you may see by comparing the 6, 15. and 23.
Chapters of Matthew together. But,

Fourthly, Our obedience must be bottomed upon a divine under all the
afflictions, Psalm. 44 9 -- ult. Ezekiel. 28.12, 22.
oppositions, temptations, persecutions and discouragements that we meet with
in the ways of the Lord, and in doing the work of the Lord. All the Messages
that the Prophets delivered, were still grounded upon a divine command, Acts
4.19, 20. and 5.29.
Thus says the Lord; and this steeled their spirits in the work of the Lord,
this made them resolute and undaunted in the midst of all the afflictions and
oppositions that they met with: And so 'twas a word of command that raised the
spirits, and encouraged the hearts of the Apostles in the work of the Lord, in
the face of all the oppositions, threatenings and buffetings that they met with
from the civil powers. You know Absalom lays his bloody command upon his
servants, as their highest encouragement to that bloody work of killing his
brother Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.28. Now Absalom had commanded his servants, (his
Assasines) saying, Mark ye now when Amnons heart is merry with wine, and when I
say unto you, smite Amnon, then kill him, fear not: have not I commanded you?
be courageous, and be valiant; or sons of valor, as the Hebrew runs. And so a
Christian must lay the command of God before him, as his highest encouragement
to do what God requires of him, etc.

Jeroboam and his Princes, Isa. 29.13, 14. Mat. 15.1 to 10. Mark 7.8 to 10.
Hos. 5.11, 12.
to worship the Calves at Dan and Bethel; and for this the wrath of the Lord
fell heavy upon them. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment, because he
willingly walked after the commandment. And sometimes their obedience is
bottomed upon the examples of men, sometimes their obedience is bottomed upon
the examples of their forefathers and ancestors, Jer. 44, 17, 18, etc. Joh.
7.48, 49.
Jer. 10.3. The customs of the people are vain, etc. and sometimes upon the
examples of great men. This was that which the Pharisees objected against
believing on Christ; Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on
him? but this people who knows not the Law are cursed. And sometimes they
bottom their obedience upon the example of the multitude. This was Demetrius
his argument against Paul, Acts 19.26, 27.
on the behalf of Diana, that all Asia and the world did worship her; and
therefore the doctrine of Paul, that they be no Gods which are made with hands
was falfe, and not to be suffered. This has always been, and is still the
common plea of many, We do but as the most do; and sure a great many eyes can
see more than one or two: And hereupon they exclaim against others for their
singularity, because they will not do as the rest of their neighbors do. But,

Thirdly, That obedience that springs from faith, is a growing Jacob's ladder,
Rev. 2.19. I know thy work, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy
patience, and thy works; and the last to be more than the first. The Angel of
the Church of Thyatira, It Is not every believers happiness always to make a
progress in grace. Solomon and Asa, and others, run retrograde. Saints have
their winter seasons; they have their decaying times, and withering times, as
well as their thriving times, their flourishing times, Rev. 2.4.
is commended, First, for his love. 2. For his charity. 3. For his faith. And,
4. For his patience: And in the general course of his life, he daily became
more excellent; for his latter works were more than the first, that is, they
were more manifest proofs of his constancy, and more worthy of praise than the
first. This faithful Pastor is commended for his holy progress in grace and
holiness. So Paul, Phil. 3.12. Not as though I had already attained, either
were already perfect; but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for
which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Ver. 13. Brethren, I count not my
self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting those things
which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before. Ver.
14. I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus. The Greek word (...), does emphatically import, a pressing, with
an eager pursuit after the mark: It is the same word that signifies to
persecute, because the earnestness of his spirit in pressing toward the mark,
now is the same that it was in the persecution of those that pressed toward the
mark before. Look, as good runners, when they come near unto the mark, stretch
out their heads, and hands, and whole bodies, to take hold of them that run
with them, or of the mark that is before them; so he in his whole race so
labored unto that which was before, as if he were still stretching out his
arms to take hold of it. If such a man might have his choice, he would be the
most humble, the most holy, the most heavenly, the most mortified, the most
patient, the most contented, the most thankful, the most fruitful, the most
active, the most zealous, and the most self-denying Christian in the world; 1
Pet. 1.15, 16. Mat. 5.
if he might have his choice, he would be holy as God is holy, and perfect as
his heavenly father is perfect; he would do the will of God on earth, as those
Princes of glory, the Angels, do it now in heaven, viz. freely, readily,
cheerfully, delightfully, universally, reverentially, and unweariedly, etc. if
he might have his choice, Eccl. 9.10.
he would exercise every grace, and perform every duty, with all his might; he
sees so much excellency and beauty in God and Christ, that he cannot be at rest
till he be swallowed up in the enjoyment of them; he sees so much excellency in
grace, that nothing but perfection of grace will satisfy him; he makes
perfection not only his utmost end, but he also labors after perfection with
his utmost strength and endeavors. When God is made the one of a man's desires,
the one of a man's affections, the one of a man's life and comfort, then will he
be the one of a man's endeavors too. That obedience that springs from faith
(when it is not wintertime with a Christian) is a fruitful obedience, it is an
abounding obedience, it is a progressive obedience. Look, as the mercy and
favor of God to a believer, is not stinted nor limited, so the obedience of a
believer to God is not stinted or limited; but now the obedience of hypocrites
is always stinted and limited; this command they will obey, but not that; this
duty they will do, but not that; this work they will attend, but not that, etc.

obedience, and not a legal, servil, and forced obedience, Psalm. 110.3. Thy
people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness;
in the Hebrew, it is willingness in the plural number, to show their exceeding
great willingnesses, Psalm. 27.8. When thou saidest, seek ye my face, my heart
said unto thee, thy face Lord will I seek. By face is meant, 1. God himself,
Exodus 20.3. Before my face; that is, before me. 2. His favor, Jer. 18.17. I
will show them the back, and not the face, in the day of their calamity. Now,
no sooner had God given forth a word of command, for the Psalmist to seek
himself, and to seek his favor, but presently his heart did echo to that
command; Thy face Lord will I seek. So Jer. 3.22. Return ye backsliding
children, and I will heal your backslidings; behold, we come unto thee, for
thou art the Lord our God. Every gracious soul has the duplicate of God's Law
in his heart, and is willingly cast into the mould of his Word, Romans 6.17. Ye
have obeyed from the heart, the form of doctrine that has been delivered to
you, or whereto you were delivered (as the words may be read) They did not only
obey, but they obeyed from the heart, their hearts were in their obedience,
Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O my God! yea, thy Law is within my
heart, Col. 1.12. Phil. 1.8. Jer. 31.33.
or in the midst of my bowels, as the Hebrew runs; these note the tenderest
affections. There is the counterpane of the Law written, yea, printed upon
every gracious heart; a godly man will live and dye with the Law of God stamped
upon his heart. O ^eata Apocalypsis (said that Martyr, catching up the
Revelation that was cast into the same fire with him to be burnt) O Blessed
Revelation! how happy am I to be burned with thee in my hands? It was Christ's
meat and drink to do his Father's will; and the same mind is in all the Saints,
John 4. Phil 2.5. Romans 7.22.
as was in Christ Jesus: They delight in the Law of God after the inward man.
True obedience flows from principles of heartiness and love within, and not
from by and base respects and ends, that are carnal and worldly. It is
observable, that John's obedience was as ample and as large as God's command, 2
King. 10.30. And the Lord said unto Jehu, because thou have done well in
executing that which is right in mine eyes, and have done unto the house of
Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of the fourth
generation, shall sit on the throne of Israel. And yet because his heart was
not in his obedience, and because he did not purely act for God, but for
himself, that he might bring about his own designs, he met with a revenge
instead of a reward; as you may see in that, Hos. 1.4. And the Lord, said unto
him, call his name Jezreel, for yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood
of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu. Jehu's heart was not in his obedience, he
had a dispensatory conscience; for though he rooted out Baals worship, yet the
golden Calves must still continue: He destroyed Idolaters, but not Idolatry;
and this carnal policy brought down vengeance and misery upon him and his
posterity. Artaxerxes goes far, Ezra 7.23. Whatsoever is commanded by the God
of heaven, let it be diligently done. To what a highth does this Heathen Prince
rise? He will do anything for God, he will do every thing for God that he
requires. But mark, what is that which moves him to it? Is it love to God? is
it delight in God? O no! all his obedience proceeded from nothing but fear of
wrath and vengeance, as is evident in the latter part of the verse; For why
should there be wrath upon the Realm of the King, and of his Sons? Or, as the
Hebrew runs, Why should there be boiling or foaming anger, great indignation?
As it is rendered and made the utmost degree of divine displeasure, in that
Deuteronomy. 29.28. Some read these words, Against the Realm of the King and his Sons,
as distinct one from another, and not depending one upon another, thus; Against
the Realm, the King and his Sons; and this reading the Original will bear: And
this reading shows, That as the King feared God's wrath against himself, so
also against his Realm and Children; and accordingly he was the more studious
and careful to escape it; blind nature was afraid of divine wrath, ^zek. 26.25,
26, 27.
and therefore was the more sedulous to prevent it. O, but now a true child of
God, he has the Law of God written, not only in his understanding, but also in
his heart and affections; and this is that which makes his obedience to be
pleasing and delightful to him; so that if he might be free from the
injunctions and directions of the Word (with the servant in the Law) he would
not value such a liberty; Exodus 21.4, 5, 6, etc.
he would not swear, nor lie, nor be drunk, nor whore, nor dissemble, nor
cheat, nor run into all excess of riot if he might, because in his soul he has
a principle of grace, and an inward contrariety and antipathy against it; Eccl.
9.2.
he would not cease to hear, to read, to pray, to meditate if he might, because
his soul takes a delight and sweet complacency in these things; there is a
principle within him agreeable to the precept without him, which makes all
religious performances to be easy and pleasurable to him. Look, as the eye
delights in seeing, and the ear in hearing, so a gracious heart (except when
it is under a cloud of dissertion, or in the School of temptation, or under some
grievous tormenting afflictions, or sadly worsted by some prevalent corruption)
delights in obeying: Actions of nature, you know, are actions of delight; and
so are all those actions that spring from a new nature, a divine nature, etc.

Fifthly, That obedience that springs from faith, is a transforming 2 Cor.
3.18. Romans 12.1, 2.
from unrighteousness to righteousness, from earthly-mindedness, to
heavenly-mindedness, from pride to humility, from hypocrisy to sincerity, etc.
Such as please themselves with this, That they are no changlings, and that they
are whatever they were, Acts 8.13.
these are still in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. That
obedience of the Romans, Romans 16.19.
which was said to have come abroad unto all men, was an exemplary obedience,
and a transforming obedience. Certainly, Gospel-obedience is a grace of much
worth, and of great force upon the whole man; for when it is once wrought in
the heart, it works a conformity to all God's holy will. But having spoken
more largely of this in my other writings, let this touch here suffice, etc.

Sixthly, That obedience that springs from faith, is a constant for in many
things we offend all. Ja^. 3.2. Eccl. 7.20. Prove. 20 9. 1 Kings 8.46. 1 John
1.8. Psalm. 17.3.
There is not a just man upon the earth, that does good and sins not: Who
can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? There is no man that
sins not; If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us.) etc. But in respect of a Christians sincere desires, bent of will,
purpose of heart, resolution of soul, and faithful endeavors, Psalm. 119.20. My
soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all times.
Ver. 112. I have inclined my heart to keep thy Statutes always, even to the end.
Ver. 33. Teach me, O Lord! the way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it unto
the end. Job 17.9. The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean
hands, shall be stronger and stronger. So Isa. 40.29, 30, 31. Job 2.3. Mark,
the renewed man has at all times a desire to fear the name of the Lord, Neh.
1.11. A will to live honestly at all times. Heb. 13.18. And it has some
endeavors and exercise of Spirit, to keep always a conscience void of offense
toward God and men, Acts 24.16. The Israelites in their marches toward the
holy Land, were many times interrupted by diverse enemies; but yet they advanced
in their course, as soon as they could get rid of their enemies: So though the
believer be many times interrupted in the course of his obedience, by many
fierce temptations, and strange working of corruptions; yet after the
temptation is over, the believer returns to the course of obedienc^ with
greater forwardness, 2 Cor. 7.1.
and with redoubled strength and courage, and in the end perfects his course of
holiness in the fear of the Lord. Mark, the appearing motion, and walking of an
unregenerate man in a way of righteousness and holiness, is but artificial from
the engine of hypocrisy, and self-interest, like the flying of Ar^hitus his
artificial Dove; and therefore having no inward principle of life, it en^^^eth
not; but the motion and walking of a man, renewed by grace in ways of holiness
and righteousness, is like the natural living motion of birds, it continues as
long as life continues, and as every thing in motion, the nearer it comes to
the center, the more swiftly it moves: So the nearer the believer, through time
to his rest in heaven, the more propense he is in all his motions toward God;
he forge is the things that are behind, and reaches forth unto those things
that are before. Phil. 3.13.
That obedience that springs from faith, is a fixed and resolved obedience,
like David's worthies, it will break through an host of Philistines, through an
Army of difficulties, impediments and discouragements, that it may be found
doing the will of God. To make this a little more clearly and fully out,
observe with me these few things.

First, No contrary commands of men, shall take this man off from his obedience
to the commands of God, Acts 4.19. Chap. 5.29. etc.

Secondly, No stream of evil examples, no current of corrupt times, shall bear
them down in ways of obedience, Josh. 24.15. I and my household will serve the
Lord, though all Israel should serve Idols. And Noah was upright with God, and
walked with God in his generation, when the whole world was overspread with
violence, and all flesh had corrupted their ways, Genesis 6.9. Chap. 7.1.

Thirdly, No worldly profit or advantage shall bribe this man from his
obedience, Heb. 11.8. Abraham will obey and follow God, though he forsakes all
the benefits and contentments of his native Country, and of his Father's
house, not knowing where his lot should fall, etc.

Fourthly, No carnal disputes or reasonings with flesh and blood shall dissuade
him from his obedience, Heb. 11.7. Noah might have raised many objections
against that strange attempt of building an Ark, a work of an hundred and
twenty years continuance; but Noah waves all disputes, and falls upon building
of the Ark, according to the command of God. So Paul, as soon as he was
converted, he was commanded by God to preach to the Gentiles; he might have
made abundance of objections against that service, but instead of objecting, he
falls closs to his Master's work, and never consults with flesh and blood, Gal.
1.15, 16, 17.

Fifthly, No flood of natural affection shall hinder them in the way of their
obedience. When God commanded Abraham to offer up Isaac as a Burnt-Offering, he
goes about it readily, and never acquaints Sarah with it, lest she should have
hindered him in his obedience, and he goes three days journey to effect it,
Genesis 22. compared with Heb. 11.17, 18, 19. When God commands, Abraham will not
stick at it, though it be to offer up a Son, a natural Son, and not an adopted
son; an only Son, and not one of many; a Son of the Freewoman, and not of the
Bondwoman; a Son of his old age; a Son of the Promise; a Son in whom all the
Nations of the earth should be blessed; a Son of his love and delight; a Son
that made the good old man laugh and be merry; ( Isaac signifies laughter) a
Son that was grown up to some years, witness the Wood of the Burnt offering
that he laid upon him, Genesis 22.6, 7. And this was the commendation of Levi, By
Urim and Thummim, some understand sincerity of life, and soundness of doctrine.
Deuteronomy. 33.8, 9. And of Levi he said, let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy
holy one, (Urim and Thummim, signify light and perfection according to their
best derivation in the Hebrew tongue, and they are here put in the plural
number, lights and perfections, to note the plenty as well as the excellency of
divine Graces) whom thou did prove at Massah, and with whom thou did strive
at the waters of Meribah. Who said unto his Father and to his Mother, I have
not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his Brethren, nor knew his own
children. This relates to that Heroical fact of the Levites, Exodus 32.26.29.
when at the commandment of Moses they slew their Idolatrous Brethren that had
Worshipped the Golden Calf, not sparing those that were most nearest allied to
them, but did execute Gods Judgments upon Parents, Brethren and Children, as if
they had been mere strangers to them: the Levites were so impartial in Gods
cause, as not to acknowledge either Father or Mother, Brother or Children
against his Command. Natural affections are strong, but supernatural obedience
is stronger. Some have well observed that the Married Martyrs, who were Parents
of many children (as Rogers, Watts, Guest, Rawlins, etc.) suffered with most
alacrity.

Sixthly, No terrors, no threats, no reproaches, no affl^ctions, Psalm. 44.16.
to 21. Acts 20.23, 24. Acts 21.12, 13. and chap. 24.14. Dan. 3.14 -- 19. Rev.
12.11. This is most evident in the Histories of the ten Persecutions, and in
all other Histories, both of a former and a later date, etc.

Physicians observe a difference 'twixt the natural and preter-natural heat in
men's bodies; the preter-natural heat, which arises from distemper, may be more
for the present, but as it exceeds for measure, so it abates for time, because
the natural heat is a more equal and moderate, and durable heat, every part
has an equal share, and it is not extreme, and yet it continues. Thus it is
with Hypocrites and upright persons in the matter of obedience. The hypocrite
may (in a kind of preter-natural heat) in a hot fit, in a present heat, fall
upon hearing, and reading, and praying, and reforming of his Family, and upon
leaving of this sin and that; and upon casting off this vain company and that,
and upon associating of himself with this good company and that. B^t this hot
fit does not last, the cold fit takes him again, and then he shakes hands with
all his duties, and loses all his good inclinations, and lays aside all his
warm resolutions. Job 27.8, 9. Hosea 6.4. Psalm. 78.36, 37.
Will the Hypocrite pray always? Ephraims goodness was as a morning Cloud,
which soon vanishes, and as the early dew which is soon dried up by the
Sunbeams; they were both false and fickle, unsteady and unstable; constant
only in inconstancy; their hearts were never right with God, for they were not
steadfast in his Covenant. There are four times wherein an Hypocrite may express
a great readiness and forwardness to Religious duties.

First, When he is under terrors and distress of Conscience; O how for a little
ease! a little rest! a little quiet!

Hos. 5.15. So Pharaoh and Ahab, etc.
In their affliction they will seek me early. Isa. 26.16. Lord in trouble have
they visited thee, they poured out a Prayer when thy chastening was upon them.
Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them, then they sought him. It is a reproach to some,
No Penny, No Paternoster. And it is a shame to others, No Plague, no
Paternoster; no punishment, no Prayer, etc.

Matthew. 13.5, 6.

2 Chronicles. 24.2, 17-23.
O now they keep close duties! Joash did that which was right in the sight of
the Lord all the days of Jehoiada the Priest; but when Jehoiada was dead,
Joash serves Groves and Idols, and turns a deaf ear to those Prophets that
testified against him, and gives Zechariah the Son of Jehoiada his Pasport out
of the World, for inveighing against his evil manners, and the wicked courses
of his Princes and People. Whilst the good Judges lived, the Israelites kept
close to the service of God, Judges 2.7. And the people served the Lord all the
days of Joshua, and all the days of the Elders that outlived Joshuah, who had
seen all the great works of the Lord that he did for Israel. Judges 17.6. Chap.
21.25.
But when the good Judges were dead, the Israelites did what was right in their
own eyes, every man's lust was his Law. Whilst Moses was present, there was no
talking of a Golden Calf, but no sooner was his back turned, but the Israelites
make a Golden Calf, and worship it when they had done, Exodus 32.1-9. etc.

But now mark, that obedience that springs from Faith, that is a constant
obedience, that is constant in opposition to fits and starts, and imports the
course and bent of a Christians life, which is always to walk with God, to
cleave to God, to follow God, and to obey God. But,

Seventhly and lastly, That obedience that springs from What are they? Answ.
They are these nine.

First, To testify our thankfulness to the Lord for all his Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3,
4. Psalm. 116.12. etc.

Secondly, To recover the Image of God again to the Adam lost the Image of God
by his disobedience. Now this Image of God we recover again in Christ our
second Adam; but so, as that the more enlightened, the more holy, the more
humble, the more heavenly, the more righteous, the more gracious, and the more
obedient we are, Ephesians. 4.24.
the more we recover of this Image of God, which consists in knowledge,
righteousness, and true holiness. Now says the Believer, my intent is to
recover that precious Image of God which I lost in the first Adam, and
therefore do I labor to come up to the highest pitches of obedience, because
the higher I rise in my obedience, the more I shall recover of the lost Image
of God; I know that I lost this Image by partaking of the disobedience and
pollution of the first Adam; and I know that I have recovered in part the same
Image, by partaking of the obedience and holiness of the second Adam: And I yet
further know, that the more holy and obedient I am, the more I shall be like to
that God, that is holiness it self, and the more I shall recover of that
blessed Image, which consists in perfect holiness.

Thirdly, not for the justification of their persons, for that Cor. 1.30. Col.
2.10. But for the testification of their justifying Faith, according to that of
the Apostle, Jam. 2.17, 18, 26. etc.

John 2.6* He that says he abides in him, Matthew. 11.28, 29.
ought himself also to walk even as he walked. Now says the Believer, O how
holy, how humble, how heavenly, how meek, how compassionate, how zealous, how
exemplary, how convincing, how winning, how obedient was he, when in this
World! and therefore O my Soul! look to it, that thou make it thy business,
thy work, thy Heaven, to ^mitate the Lord Jesus to the utmost that thou art
able to ^each too.

Pet. 1.5 -- 11.

viz. their being married to Christ, and clothed with his Righteousness; yet
the Communion which the Saints have with God through the Spirit, has much
dependence upon a Saints walking, and upon his obedience: So that if a Saint
shall dare to walk carnally and loosly, Jer. 3.14. Isa. 49.1, 2.
though he shall not break the Marriage-knot, and lose his union, yet he will
by such sinful practices grieve the Spirit, and lose his communion with God.
But on the other hand, when a Believer walks spiritually, graciously,
obedientially, O what sweet communion! what delightful communion! what high
communion! what commodious communion! what Soul-satisfying, Soul-ravishing,
Soul-filling, Soul-contenting communion with God does he then enjoy! When the
Child walks wisely, and obedientially before his Father, what sweet and
delightful converses and communion is there between the Father and the Child?
but if the child walk foolishly, stubbornly, rebelliously, disobediently, the
prudent Father will carry it severely, strangely, frowningly, and at a
distance, though his heart be still full of love to, his child; and though he
will not disinherit him, yet he wont be familiar with him. The application is
easy, etc.

Seventhly, To keep down the body, and to bring it into Cor. 9.27. But I keep
under my body, and bring it into subjection. By spiritual exercises the Apostle
d d subdue his flesh to the obedience and discipline of the spirit; in former
times they had several exercises, as wrestling, and running for the prize. Now,
such as were slow, pursie, unweildy, and lazy, were cashiered; they would not
admit such to be of their society or company, who wrestled and run for the
prize: Them that were admitted to those exercises, kept their bodies at an
under, and did not pamper their bodies with dainties and delicates. To these
the Apostle alludes, of idleness there comes no goodness; when the spirit is
not acting in that which is good, that the flesh may be kept under, the flesh
will take an advantage to be very active in those things that are evil, that
the spirit may be kept under; the flesh is like an unruly beast, which through
rest, idleness, and high feeding, grows wild and masterless. Now, the only way
to tame this beast, is to work him hard; so the way of ways to keep the body
under, is to keep up the soul as much as may be, in the full exercise of
holiness and obedience; such as have most pampered their bodies, Deuteronomy. 32.13,
14, 15, 16, 17. Jer. 5.7, 8, etc. Rev. 3 16, 17, 18.
have been the greatest enemies to their own souls; and how many are there this
day, that pamper their bodies, but starve their souls? that adorn their bodies,
but defiles their soul? that trick and trim up their bodies with gold, and
silver, and silks, whilst their souls are naked of all grace, holiness and
goodness? like the Laodiceans of old. The body it self, if you set too high a
price upon it, will make a cheap soul; a man may be as happy in Russet, as in
Tissue; and he is certainly an unhappy man, whose outside is his best side; our
bodies are but dirt handsomely tempered, and artificially formed; we derive our
pedigree from the dust, and are a kin to clay; and therefore we need not
scruple the keeping of it under by holy exercises, and by all ways of
Gospel-obedience, etc.

Pet. 2.12, 15. Chap. 3.13, 16. 2. To the profit, advantage and encouragement
of the Saints. The strict exact walking Christian, provokes the slight loose
Christian to mend his manners, and to order his steps and conversation aright;
and the lively active Christian, puts the dull, heavy, sluggish Christian to a
blush, and spurs and quickens him up to a more lively walking with God; and the
warm, flaming, zealous, burning Christian, puts heat and warmth into the cold,
formal, frozen Christian; and the free, liberal, bountiful Christian, provokes
others to be free, noble, and liberal, for the supply of the necessities of the
Saints, 2 Cor. 9.1, 2. Chap. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 19, 20, etc.

Romans 14.7, 8. Phil. 1.20, 21.
the primary end, the universal end, the Sea to which all a Christians actions,
like so many Rivers, move and bend: It Is true, many poor, low, mean, base ends,
may creep into a Christians performances; but here mark, 1. They are
disallowed. 2. They are loathed and abhorred. 3. They are resisted and striven
against. 4. They are lamented and mourned over. 5. The gracious soul would
willingly be rid of them; if a Christian might have his choice, he would never
be troubled with any base end any more. Beloved, you must always distinguish
between a man's settled and his suggested ends; a man's settled end may be one
things, and his suggested end another thing. Now for ever remember this; That
the great God always makes a judgment of men according to their settled ends,
according to the universal frame of their spirits, and not according to those
ends that may be suggested to them, by the world, the flesh, or the devil. It
is in this case, as it may be with a man that shoots at a mark, he aims aright
at the mark, but his elbow may meet with a jog, which may carry the arrow quite
another way than what he intended; or as it is with a man that is sailing to
such a Haven, or to such a Harbor, he steers a right course by his Compass,
but the winds blowing contrary, and the Sea running high, he is forced into
such a creek, or such a Harbor, which he never intended, etc.

Is it requisite for the clearing of the sincerity of our hearts, that we have
a continual eye to the glory of God in every action we do?

First, Adam mist it in his innocence; no wonder then if we often miss it in
our sinful state and condition. But,

Secondly, There is an habitual inclination in us in every of his end upon his
spirit, but he is there by virtue of his first intention: So here, though in
every particular there be not an intention of spirit to level this or that
action to the glory of God, yet it is the main drift and habitual scope of a
man's spirit, that Gods glory may be the end of all his actions.







Fourthly, A gracious heart is an uniform heart. Ubiquity Psalm. 119.112. 1 John
3.9. Hosea 6 4.
principles of grace and holiness, are lasting, yea, everlasting; they are not
like the morning cloud, nor the early dew. A gracious soul will be steady and
fixed in his principles, in the worst times, in the worst places, and under
variety of dispensations; let times and places be what they will, he will not
dishonor his God, nor blemish his profession, nor wound his conscience to
preserve his safety, or to secure his liberty. An upright man is a right man:
So (...) Jashar is rendered by the Septuagint, Judge. 17.6. He is one that will
not be bowed or bent by the sinful customs or examples of the times and places
where he lives. Genesis 6.9.
Abraham was righteous in Chaldea, and Noah was perfect in his generation,
though it was the worst in the world; and Lot was just in Sodom, Job 1.
and Job was upright in the Land of Uzz, which was a place of much profaneness
and superstition; and Nehemiah was courageous and zealous in Damasco, and
Daniel was holy, yea, eminently and exemplarily holy in Babylon. The several
generations wherein these holy men lived, were wholly devoted to wickedness and
superstition, and yet these precious, gracious souls had wholly devoted
themselves to the Lord and his service: Psalm. 119.20.
So David, My soul breaks for the longing it has to thy judgments at all
times! Let the times be never so dangerous, licentious, superstitious,
idolatrous or erroneous, yet David's heart was strongly carried forth to Gods
judgments; that is, to his Word (for under this title, Judgments, you are to
understand the whole Word of God.) So there were some in Sardis that were of
the same spirit, with the worthies last mentioned, Rev. 3.4. Thou have a few
names, even in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and they shall
walk with me in white, for they are worthy. Psalm. 119.1, 2, 3.
In polluting times pure hearts will keep themselves pure; a holy heart will
keep himself undefiled, even in defiling times, Rev. 14.4. These are they which
were not defiled with women; when others are besmeared all over, Dan. 3.17, 18,
19, 20.
he will keep his garments white and clean. The three Children, or rather the
three Champions, were so highly resolved to keep themselves pure from the
abominations of their day, that it was neither Nebuchadnezzars music that
would flatter them, nor his fiery furnace that could scare them from their God,
or from their Duty, or from their Religion. Let the times never so often turn,
you shall find that he that is really holy, he will be holy under every turn;
no turns shall turn him out of a way of holiness, Job. 17.9. The righteous
shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands, shall be stronger and
stronger. The Laurel keeps its freshness and greeness in the Winter season; a
gracious soul is semper idem, let the wind, Psalm. 125.1.
and the world and the times, turn which way they will, a gracious soul for the
main, will still be the same; he is like mount Zion which cannot be removed,
Job 27.5, 6. Till I die, I will not remove my integrity from me; my
righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not reproach
me so long as I live. A gracious heart is (in some measure) like the heart of
God, without variableness or shadow of changing. That Christian that is not for
substance, Jam. 1.17.
the same that once he was, was never what he ought to be. A gracious heart is
firm and fixed for God and godliness, both in prosperity and in adversity; take
him among the good or among the bad, take him in storms or calms, in Winter
nights or in Summer days, take him among friends or foes, take him at bed or
board, take him in health or sickness, take him in an Ordinance or out of an
Ordinance, take him in his work or take him at his recreations, take him in his
commerce or in his converse, take him living or take him dying, and you shall
still find that the bias of his soul is still God-wards, Christwards,
Holiness-wards, and Heaven-wards. A gracious man will stand his ground, Josh.
24.15. Psalm. 112.7. Mal. 3.6. The poor Heathen could say, that change of place
causes not any change of mind, etc. Calum non ani^^^ (...) qui tr^^ ^a^e
c^rrunt Horat. l. 1. ep. 11.
and hold his own in all changes, his heart being fixed upon an unchangable
God. The Philosophers good man is (Tetra-gonos) four-sqaure; cast him where you
will, like a Dye, he falls always square and sure: So cast a gracious man
where you will, and into what company you will, and into what condition you
will, yet still he falls sure and square for God and godliness. Let the times
be never so sad, nor never so bad, yet a gracious soul will keep his hold; he
will let all go, he will let every thing go, before he will let his God go, or
his Religion go, or his integrity go. A gracious Christian is like gold. Now,
cast gold into the fire, or into the water; cast it upon the dunghill, or into
the kennel; cast it among the poor, or among the rich; among the religious, or
among the superstitious, etc. yet still it is gold, still it retains its purity
and excellency: So cast a gracious Christian (who is the only golden Christian
in the world) into what condition you will, and into what company you will, yet
still he will retain his purity, his innocence Lapidaries tell us of the
Chelydonian stone, that it will retain its virtue and luster, no longer than it
is enclosed in gold: A fit emblem of an hypocrite, who is only good while he is
enclosed in golden prosperity, safety and felicity. An unsound Christian like
green timber shrinks, Mat. 13.6.
when the Sun of persecution shines hot upon him. The heat of fiery trials,
cools the courage of an unsound Christian. If you put water into a Tub, it will
have the shape of the Tub that you put it into; or if you put water into a
glass, it will have the shape of the glass you put it into. This is the very
picture of an unsound heart; but a sincere Christian is like a massy vessel of
gold, that keeps its own shape and figure, at all times, in all places, and in
all companies; unsound hearts, they will be righteous among the righteous, and
licentious among the licentious; they will be as the company is amongst which
they are cast; with the good they will be good, and with the bad they will be
bad; with the zealous they will be zealous, and with the superstitious they
will be superstitious; and with the lukewarm they will be lukewarm; they are
for all times and tides, they are for any turn that will serve their turn, they
are for any Mode that will bring either profit or pleasure to them; they are
like Alcibiades, of whom it was said, that he was (^^^nium horarum homo) a man
for all times; for he could swagger it at Athens, and take any pains at Thebes;
he could live most sparingly at Lacidaemon, and bib among the Thracians, and
hunt among the Persians; they are like the Chamelion, ready to change their hue
with every one they converse with; they are like Polypus, that resembles every
stone that it sticks to; or they are like the Buskins anciently used in
Tragedies, Lucian.
that would serve either leg alike; they are as fit for one society as another;
or like the Players that used them, such as acting Princely parts, wear royal
apparel, keep state, and demean themselves gravely and soberly, Sen. ep. 76,
etc.
so long as they are in public view upon the Stage; but when they have done
acting, are no sooner off the stage, but they pass presently into another
habit, and retain neither Princely behavior nor apparel, but are most
beggarly, base and debauched, either in private among themselves, or among
their companions like themselves. Unsound hearts can accommodate themselves to
the times, and comply with them what ever they be; with Proteus they will
transform themselves into all shapes, as the times change so will they; what
the times favor, that they will favor; what the times commend, that they will
commend; what the times cry up and admire, that they will cry up and admire;
and what the times frown upon and condemn, that they will frown upon and
condemn. Look as curious and well-drawn Pictures seem to turn their eyes every
way, and to smile upon every one that looks upon them; so these can turn with
the times, they can look as the times look, and smile as the times smile, they
can say with the times, and sail with the times; sometimes they can act one
part, and sometimes another part, as the times require; if the times require a
large profession, they can make it; if the times be speak them to leave their
Religion at the Church door, they can leave it. But now, a sincere Christian,
he will labor to be so much the more gracious, by how much the more the times
are licentious. A sincere Christian is like gold; if you cast it into the fire,
it will not waste; if you throw it into the water, it will not rust, it will
retain its own purity and excellency, wherever you dispose of it. But

Heb. 12.1.
inclination, and calling, etc. There is some one sinful quality that is more
predominant in the heart of man, Paceatum in delitiis. Aug.
than any other; there is some one Dalilah, some one darling sin that a man is
more apt to play withal, and to hug in own bosom, than any other; there is
usually some one sin that is favorite, some one sin which the heart is most
fond of, and which the bias of the soul does most naturally and strongly
incline toward. Pliny writes of some families, that had privy marks on their
bodies, peculiar to those of that line; and so every man has as it were his
privy sin, which is most justly and peculiarly called his; as in a ground that
lies untilled amongst the great variety of weeds, there is usually some master
weed, one among the rest that is rifer and ranker than all the rest: And as it
is in the body of man, that although in some degree or other, more or less,
there be a mixture of all the four elements, not any of them wholly wanting,
yet there is some one of them predominant that gives the denomination; in
regard whereof some are said to be of a sanguine, some of a phlegmatic, some
of a chollerick, and some of a melancholic constitution. Now thus it is in the
souls of men; though there be a general mixture and medly of all evil and
corrupt qualities, yet is there some one usually that is paramount, more
powerful and prevalent, that swayeth and shows forth it self more eminently,
and more evidently than any other of them do; and from this therefore, more
frequently and apparently discovering it self, is the denomination wont to be
given, whereby some are styled ambitious, some lascivious, some envious, some
malicious, some haughty, some hasty, and the like; or as in every man's body
there is a seed and principle of death, yet some are more prone to die of a
Fever than of a Dropsy, and others are more prone to die of a Dropsy than of
a Fever, etc. So though original sin has spread it self over all our noble and
ignoble parts, yet every man has his particular inclinations, to one kind of
sin rather than another; and this may properly be called a man's own sin, his
own evil way. Now mark, a gracious heart makes most head, most opposition
against his darling sin, against his complexion sin, against those sins that
were once as dear to him as his right hand, or as his right eye, or as Dalilah
was to Sampson. Herodias to Herod, Isaac to Abraham, and Joseph to Jacob, Psalm.
18.23. I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from mine iniqu^ty:
That is, from my darling sin, whereunto I was most inclined and addicted; what
this bosom sin was that he kept himself from, In that, 1 Samuel 21.2, 8. he tells
three or four round lies, and the like he did in that, 1 Samuel 27.8, 10.
is hard to say: Some suppose his darling sin was lying, dissembling, for it is
certain he often fell into this sin, Psalm. 119.29. Remove from me the way of
lying; others suppose it to be some secret iniquity, which was only known to
God and his own conscience; others say it was uncleanness, and that therefore
he prayed, that God would turn away his eyes from beholding vanity, Psalm.
119.37. Others juge it to be that sin of disloyalty which Saul and his
Courtiers falsely charged upon him: Well, be it this or that, it is enough for
our purpose, that his heart did rise against that very sin, that either by
custom or complexion, or some strong inclination, he was most naturally apt,
ready and prone to fall into. This is the laying of the ax to the root of the
Tree; and by this practice David gives a clear proof of the integrity of his
heart. Jer. 17.1, 2. Hos. 2.^. Isa. 31.6, 7. and 44.9. etc.
Idolatry was the darling sin of the people of Israel; they called their Idols
delectable or desirable things; they did dearly affect, and greatly delight in
their Idols: But when the Lord in the day of his power, wrought savingly and
gloriously upon their hearts, Oh! how did their hatred and indignation against
their Idols rise? as you may see, Isa. 30.22. Ye shall defile also the covering
of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy moiten images of gold;
thou shall cast them away as a menstrous cloth, thou sha^t say unto it, get
thee hence. They were so delighted and enamou^ed with their Idols, that they
would lavish gold out of the bag (or they waste or spend riotously, as the
Hebrew runs) that they might richly deck them up, Isa. 46.6. After the return
of the Jews out of Babylon, they so hated and abhorted Idols, that in the times
of the Romans, they chose rather to die, than to suffer the Eagle, which was
the imperial arms to be set up in their Temple.
and set them forth in the greatest glory and bravery. O, but when the Lord
should make a glorious turn upon their spirits, then they should readily and
roundly deface, defile and disgrace their Idols, then they should hate and
abhor them, then they should so detest and loath them, that in a holy
indignation, they should cast them away as a menstrous cloth, and say unto
them, get ye hence, pack, be gone, I will never have any more to do with you.
And so in that, Isa. 2.20. In that day (that is, in the day of his people,
verse. 17.) A man shall cast his idols of silver, and h^s idols of gold, which
they made, each one for himself to worship, to the Moles and to the Bats: In
the day when God should exalt himself in the souls of his people, and before
the eyes of his people, they should express such disdain and indignation
against their Idols, that they should not take only those made of Trees and
Stones, but even their most precious and costly Idols; those that were made of
silver and gold, and cast them to the Moles and to the Bats; that is, they
should cast them into such blind holes, and into such dark, filthy, nasty and
dusty corners, as Moles make under ground, and as Bats roust in: So when
Christ, and grace, and holiness comes to be set up in men's hearts and lives,
then all their darling sins, their bosom lusts, which are their Idols of
silver, and their Idols of gold, these are with a holy indignation cast to the
Moles and to the Bats, they are so loathed, abhorred, abandoned and cashiered,
that they desire they may be for ever buried in oblivion, and never see the
light more. Idols were Ephraim's bosom sin, Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joined (or
glewed, as the word signifies) to Idols, let him alone. But when the dew of
grace fell upon Ephraim, as it did, in Chap. 14.5, 6, 7. Then says Ephraim,
What have I any more to do with Idols? ver. 8. Now Ephraim loathes his Idols as
much or more than before he loved them, he now abandons and abominates them;
though before he was as closly glewed to them as the wanton is glewed to his
Dalilah, or as the enchanter is glewed to the Devil, from whom by no means he
is able to stir; (as the words in the fountain imports) When it was the day of
the Lords power upon Ephraim, then Ephraim cries out, What have I any more to
do with Idols? O, I have had to do with them too long, and too much already: O,
how does my foul now rise against them? how do I detest and abhor them? Deuteronomy.
13.6, 7, 8, 9.
Surely I will never have more to do with them. The Scripture tells us, That if
father, or mother, or brother, or sister, or kinsman, or friend, should go
about to draw a man from God, his hand should be first upon him, to put him to
death. Now, bosom sins, complexion sins, they seek to draw a man's heart from
God; and therefore a gracious soul cannot but rise up against them, Genesis 27.41.
and do his best to stone them, and to be the death of them. The days of
mourning for my father are at hand (says bloody Esau) then will I slay my
brother Jacob; ('it is a bloody speech of a vindictive spirit, whom nothing would
satisfy but innocent blood) So says the gracious soul, The days of mourning
for the death of my dear Savior, are now at hand, and therefore I will slay my
bosom lusts, my constitution sins; now will I be revenged on them for all the
dishonours that they have done to God, and for all the wounds that they have
made in my conscience, and for all the mercies that they have imbittered, and
for all the favors that they have prevented, and for all the afflictions that
they have procured, and for all the duties that they have hindered. Judge. 16.28.
Sampson pleads hard with God, that he might be avenged on the Philistines for
his two eyes; and so does the gracious soul plead hard with God, that he may be
avenged on his bosom lusts, on his complexion sins, which have put out his two
eyes, which have so blinded him that he has not for a long time been able to
see God, or Christ, or the things that belong to his external, internal or
eternal peace. The next of kin in the Law, was always the avenger of blood,
and to him it appertained to hunt after the murderer, to bring upon his head
the innocent blood that he had shed; if therefore we will show our selves
brethren or sisters of Christ, or any thing of kin unto him, we must even be
the avengers of his blood upon bosom sins, upon complexion sins; for, for them
as well as others was his blood shed. O Sirs! what bosom sin is there so sweet
or profitable that is worth a burning in hell for, or worth a shutting out of
heaven for? surely none. This a gracious soul seriously weighs, and accordingly
he sets himself against the Toad in his bosom, against his darling sins,
against his complexion sins. But now, unsound hearts are very favorable to
bosom sins, to complexion sins; they say of them as Lot of Zoar, Genesis 19.20.
Is it not a little one? and my soul shall live. And as David once said
concerning Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.5. Deal gently for my sake with the young man,
even with Absalom; beware that none touch the young man Absalom, Ver. 12. And
the King said, is the young man Absalom safe? Ver. 29. An unsound heart is as
fond of his bosom sins, 2 King. 5.18.
of his complexion sins as Jacob was of his Benjamin, or as Jeha was of his
calves, or as Naaman was of his Idol Rimmon, or as Judas was of bearing the
bag, or as Herod was of his Herodias, Acts 19.
or as Demetrius was of his Diana, or as the Pharisees were of devouring widows
houses, Mat. 23.
and of having the uppermost seats in the Synagogues, and of being saluted in
the market places, with those glorious titles, Rabbi, Rabbi. The besotted
sinner is most engaged to his bosom sins, his complexion sins, and therefore
it is as bitter a thing as death for him to part with them; Mich. 6.6, 7.
he had rather part with burnt-offerings and calves of a year old; he had
rather part with thousands of Rams, and with ten thousand Rivers of oil; yea,
he had rather part with his firstborn, than with his bosom sin; Job 20.12, 13.
he is ready to give the fruit of his body, for the sin of his soul. Let God
frown or smile, stroke or strike, lift up or cast down, promise or threaten,
yet he will hide and hold fast his bosom sin; let God set life and death,
heaven and hell, glory and misery before him, yet will he not part with his
bosom sins; let God wound his conscience, blow upon his estate, leave a blot
upon his name, crack his credit, afflict his body, Jer. 20.3, 4.
write death upon his relations, and be a Magor-missabib, a terror to his soul,
yet will he not let go his darling sins. An unsound heart will rather let God
go, and Christ go, and heaven go, and all go than he will let his darling lusts
go: But now a sound Christian, a throuhgout Christian, he sets himself most
against the Dalilah in his bosom, against the Benjamin, the son, the sin of his
right hand. A sincere Christian looks upon bosom sins, upon complexion sins as
the most God-provoking sins; there are no sins so provoking to Gods jealousies
and justice, as bosom sins; he looks upon bosom sins, complexion sins, a the
most dangerous sins; he looks upon bosom sins, complexion sins, as the worst
thing in all the world; he looks upon bosom sins, complexion sins, as more ugly
and horrid than the devil himself, or than hell it self; he looks upon bosom
sins as the great make-bates between God and his soul, and between his
conscience and his comfort; Isa. 59.1, 2. Lamen. 3.8, 44.
he looks upon bosom sins as those enemies that have provoked God often to turn
a deaf ear to all his prayers; he looks upon his bosom sins as so many Judas's
that have often betrayed him into the hands of the devil; he looks upon his
bosom sins as the waters of Marah, that has imbittered all his mercies; he
looks upon his bosom sins as the only things that have often clouded the face
of God; he looks upon his bosom sins as dead flies in the box of precious
ointment that spoils all, and accordingly with all his might he sets himself
against them. 1. He fights most against these. 2. He weeps most over these. 3.
He watches and a^ms most against these. 4. He prays most against these. 5. He
resolves most against these. And 6. He lays the axe of repentance most to
these, etc.

But pray Sir, before you close up this Chapter, lay down some sure and
infallible evidences of the goodness, graciousness and happiness of their
estates and conditions, who are but weak in grace, who are but babes of grace,
that so they may have their portion, satisfaction, support and consolation as
well as others.

Ans. I shall endeavor to do it, and therefore thus.

1 Pet. 2.3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19 Mat. 7.8. Psalm. 42.1, 2. Psalm. 63.1. etc.
and to fear the Lord, and to serve the Lord, he does really obey the Lord, and
fear the Lord, and serve the Lord. It is the first step to grace, for a man to
see his heart void of grace; and it is the first degree of grace, for a man to
desire grace. Mark, all true desires of grace, have the very nature and truth
of grace in them. As there is true fire in a spark, as well as in a flame, and
true water in a drop, as well as in a stream, and true light in a beam, as well
as in the Sun, and true gold in the very filings of gold, as well as in the
whole wedge of gold; the least of any thing partakes of the nature of the
whole. Isa. 55.1, 2. and 65. 1. John 7.37.
True desires of grace argues a state of grace and salvation, Psalm. 38.9. Lord
thou know all my desire, my groanings is not hid from thee. Mat. 5.6.
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall
be filled; or as the Greek runs (after the participle of the present tense)
they that are hungering and thirsting; intimating, that where ever this is the
present disposition of men's souls, they are blessed, Rev. 22.17. And let him
that is a thirst come; and whosoever will, let him take the water of life
freely. Augustine. Where there are sincere desires of grace, there are the seeds
of grace, the conception of grace, the buds of grace.
Sincere desires of grace are those holy seeds, those divine beginnings of
grace in the soul, out of which grace springs and grows up to its measure and
perfection. O Sirs! look as no man can sincerely seek God in vain, so no man
can sincerely desire grace in vain. A man may love gold, yet not have it; but
no man loves God, but is sure to have him. Wealth a man may desire, and yet be
never the nearer for it; but grace no man ever sincerely desired and missed it:
And why? it is God that has wrought this desire in the heart, and he will
never frustrate the desire that himself has there wrought; let no man say, I
have no faith, no repentance, no love, no fear of God, no sanctifying, no
saving grace in me. Does he see a want of those things in himself? yes, that is
it which so grieves him, that he cannot love God, stand in awe of him, trust in
his mercy, repent of sin as he should; yea, but does he seriously and
unfeignedly desire to do thus? yes, he desires it above all things in the
world, and would be willing (as it were) to buy even with a whole world the
least measure, or dram, or drop only of such grace. Now let me ask him, who is
it that has wrought this desire in him? Not the Devil, for he would rather
quench it than kindle it in him; not his own corruption, for that is naturally
averse to every thing that is good, it must needs then be the work of the
Spirit of God, who works in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure,
and who pronounces all them blessed that thus desire after grace. Kemnitius,
Ursini Catechis.
When I have a good desire, says one, though it does scarcely show it self in
some little slender sigh, I must be assured that the Spirit of God is present,
and works his good work. Wicked men do not desire the grace of the holy
Spirit, whereby they may resist sin, and therefore they are justly deprived of
it; for he that earnestly desires the holy Ghost has it already, because this
desire of the spirit cannot be but from the Spirit. Taffnies Book of the marks
of Gods children.
Our faith, says another, may be so small and weak, as it does not yet bring
forth fruits that may be lively felt in us; but if they which feel themselves
in such an estate, desire to have these feelings (namely of God's favor and
love) if they ask them of God's hands by prayer, this desire and prayer are
testimonies that the Spirit of God is in them, and that they have faith
already; for is such a desire a fruit of the flesh or of the Spirit? it is of
the holy Spirit, who brings it forth only in such as he dwells in, etc. Then
those holy desires and prayers being the motions of the holy Ghost in us, are
testimonies of our faith, although they seem to us small and weak. As the woman
that feels the moving of a child in her body, though very weak, assures her
self that she has conceived, and that she goes with a live child: So if we
have these motions, these holy affections and desires before mentioned, let us
not doubt but that we have the holy Ghost (who is the Author of them) dwelling
in us, and consequently that we have also faith. Again, says the same Author.
1. If thou have begun to hate and fly sin; 2. If thou feel that thou art
displeased at thine infirmities and corruptions; 3. If having offended God,
thou find a grief and a sorrow for it; 4. If thou desire to abstain from
sin; 5. If thou avoidest the occasions of sin; 6. If thou do thy endeavors
against sin; 7. If thou prayest to God to give thee grace, all these holy
affections proceeding from none other than from the Spirit of God, Phil. 2.13.
2 Cor. 8.10, 12.
ought to be as so many pledges and testimonies that he is in thee. It is as
impossible for us naturally to do the least good, or to desire the least grace,
as it is for a Toad to spit Cordials. Sincere desires after God, and Christ, and
Grace, is sometimes the all that the people of God find in themselves. This was
all that Nehemiah could say of himself, and the rest of his brethren, Neh.
1.11. That they did desire to fear God's name. And so the Church, Isa. 26.8.
The desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thy holiness.
And verse. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night. So the Spouse,
Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. So David, Psalm. 27.4. Psalm. 42.1, 2. Psalm. 63.1. They must
needs be sure of grace that have an unfeigned desire of it. This is a Maxim
that we must live and die with, viz. That no man can truly desire grace, but he
that has already grace; certainly he that desires grace, has grace to desire
it. It is an infallible sign, that that man has already some measure of grace
that does seriously desire to have it; he would never seriously desire to fear
God, who stands not in some awe of him already; nor he would never seriously
desire to love God, who has not in him some love to God already; nor he would
never seriously desire to believe, who has not in him some faith already; nor
he would never seriously desire to repent, that has not repented already; nor
he would never seriously desire sanctifying grace, whose heart in some measure
is not already sanctified by the spirit of grace. It is the very essence of
righteousness, says one of the Ancients, for a man to be willing to be
righteous. Angustine, Pars magna bonitatis, est vell^ fieri bo^um. Sen. Ep. 34.
And the poor Heathen could say, It is a principal part of goodness, for a man
to be willing to be good. It is natural for every one to desire his own natural
good, but to desire spiritual grace, holiness, sound sanctification, faith
unfeigned, the true fear of God, serious repentance, etc. is more than ever any
natural man did or can do. No man did ever desire to eat which had not eaten
before, nor no man did ever desire to believe, that did not believe before; all
true desires after faith spring from faith as the root of them. Certainly
wicked men don't, nor cannot so much as desire saving grace, Job 21.14. Isa.
53.2. and that,

First, Because grace is above the reach of nature, 1 Cor. But the natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. The
water rises no higher than the springs from whence it came; so natural men can
ascend no higher than nature: Spiritual things can neither be discerned nor
desired, but by those that are anointed with the eye salve of the Spirit. The
natural man is dark and blind, and he sees no beauty nor excellency in grace,
that he should desire it, or be in love with it. Man in his natural estate is
without, Ephesians. 2.12. There are five withou ts, 1. Without Christ, 2. Without the
Church, 3. Without the Promise, 4. Without hope, 5. Without God in the world.
Now every natural man being under these five withouts, how is it possible that
he should have any serious desires after grace? Such is the corruption of our
nature, that if you propound any divine good to it, it is entertained as fire
by water, or wet wood with hissing; propound any evil, then it is like fire to
straw, it is like the foolish Satyr that made have to kiss the fire, it is like
that unctious matter which Naturalists say sucks and snatches the fire to it
with which it is consumed. Romans 8.7.
The contrariety and enmity that is in every natural man's heart, against God,
and Christ, and grace, and holiness, may sufficiently satisfy us, that the
natural man is a mere stranger to serious and sincere desires after God, or
Christ, or grace, or the great things that belong to his everlasting peace.
Such sincere and serious desires as these, Oh, that Christ were mine, Oh, that
I were married to his person, Oh, that I were clothed with his righteousness,
Oh, that my soul were adorned with his grace, Oh, that I was filled with his
Spirit, Oh, that he would be my King to rule me, and my Prophet to teach and
instruct me, and my Priest to make an atonement for me; Oh, that I might enjoy
choice and high communion with him, Oh, that I might sin no more against him,
Oh, that I may do nothing unworthy of him, Oh, that after death I might live
for ever in the enjoyments of him, etc. I say such serious and sincere desires
are not to be found in the natural man's breast.

The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, Romans 8.7. Fire cannot desire
water, nor water fire, because they are contrary, one expelling the other; for
either the water will quench the fire, or else the fire will lick up the water:
So here, nature would have a man love himself, and seek himself, and exalt
himself; but grace will have a man love God, and seek God, and exalt God, etc.
Take nature when it is most adorned, enriched, raised, elevated, etc. yet then
you shall find it at enmity with God and grace. Ergo, etc.

Thirdly, Because grace is not only above nature, and See my Treatise on
holiness, page 64, 65, 66.
Look as a glorified estate would be a hell to every wicked person, ( Coelum
est altera gehenna damnatorum, says one of the Ancients; Heaven is another
hell to the damned) so would a gracious estate also. Grace puts a man to take
up the Cross of Christ, to deny his natural self, his sinful self, his
religious self, his relative self, and to give up a man's self to the strictest
and exactest ways of God, and to crucify his lusts, and to pull out his right
eye, and to cut off his right hand, etc. And oh! what hard work is this, yea
what a hell is this to nature? etc.

Fourthly, Wicked men don't, nor cannot so much as truly and seriously desire
saving grace; witness their daily withstanding Prove. 1.20. -- ult. Chap. 8.1.
-- 12. Ezekiel. 24.13. Mat. 23.37. Luke 19.41, 42, etc.

Fifthly, Wicked men don't, nor cannot, so much as truly Genesis 6.3. Isa. 63.10.
Act. 7.55. Ephesians. 4.30.

Sixthly, Wicked men don't, nor cannot truly and seriously Genesis 3.15. Psalm.
34.21. Psalm. 44.10. Job 31.29. Amos 5.10, etc. I have read of a desperate
wretch, that when he came to die, he gave good portions to all his children but
one, and to him he would give but twelve pence; and being asked the reason of
it, he made answer, he was a Puritan; I have heard him say, said his wretched
father, That he had a promise to live on; let us now see whether a promise will
maintain him or no. Certainly, wherever there are true serious desires after
grace, there is a dear love to those upon whose hearts the work of grace is
past. Now by these short hints, it is evident enough, that wicked men don't, nor
cannot sincerely, seriously desire grace; certainly such that are poor in
spirit, and that mourn for their spiritual defects, and that hunger and thirst
after grace and holiness, after a righteousness imparted and a righteousness
imputed, must confess themselves to be in a blessed estate, and consequently in
a state of grace; (for what true happiness is there out of it?) or else they
must contradict our Savior, and charge truth it self with untruth, who has
pronounced them blessed that are so qualified, so affected. Were this well
weighed and seriously considered of, how would it comfort, refresh, support and
stay up many a troubled soul? and what a wellspring of life would this be to
many a wounded spirit? Doubtless the greatest part of a Saints perfection in
this life (witness Paul's own ingenious confession after fourteen years
conversion, Romans 7.15, 18, 19, 21, 22.
say some; and who ever went beyond him? and how exceedingly do most fall short
of him?) consists rather in will than in work, and in desire and endeavor
more than in deed. There is so much good in good desires, that it is the main
that the godly have to speak of, and to reckon of; make an inventory of a
Christians estate, and search every room, if you find not these you find
nothing; and if you set these down in the inventory, you set down even all he
is worth for another world. Daniel is called a man of desires, and so is every
gracious man, a man wholly made up of gracious desires. Dan. 10 11.
Mark, God makes a judgment upon the sons of men, according as their desires
stand; he that desires to steal, he is a Thief in the account of God; and he
that desires to commit adultery, he is an adulterer in the account of God; and
he that desires to oppress, he is an oppressor in the account of God; and he
that desires to deceive, he is a deceiver in the account of God; and he that
desires to persecute, he is a persecutor in the account of God; and he that
desires to profane the Sabbaths of God, he is a prophaner of the Sabbaths of
God in the account of God, etc. Look, as every wicked man is as bad in the
account of God, as his desires are bad; so every godly man is as good in the
account of God, as his desires are good; he that sincerely desires to believe,
he does believe in the account of God. Mr. Perkins in his grain of mustard seed.
The desire (says one) to believe in the want of faith, is faith; though as
yet there want firm and lively grace, yet art thou not altogether void of
grace; if thou can desire it, thy desire is the seed, conception or bud of
what thou want. Now is the Springtime of the ingraffed Word or immortal
seed cast into the furrows of thy heart, wait but a while, using the means, and
thou shall see that leaves, blossoms and fruits will shortly follow, etc.
Another says, Ursin.
Faith in the most holy is not perfect, nevertheless, whosoever feels in his
heart an earnest desire to believe, and a striving against his doubts, he both
may and must assure himself, that he is endued with true faith. And he that
sincerely desires to repent, Mr. Fox.
he does repent in the account of God. Holy Bradford writing to Mr. Jo.
Careless, says, Thy sins are undoubtedly pardoned, etc. for God has given
thee a penitent and believing heart; that is, a heart which desires to repent
and believe, Let thy desires be before God, and he which sees in secret, shall
reward thee openly; thy desire is thy prayer, and if thy desire be continual,
thy prayer is continual, etc.
for such a one is taken of him (he accepting the will for the deed) for a
penitent and believing heart indeed. And he that sincerely desires to mortify
sin, he does mortify sin in the account of God; and he that sincerely desires
to walk with God, he does walk with God in the account of God; and he that
sincerely desires to honor God, he does honor God in the account of God; and
he that sincerely desires to deny himself, he does deny himself in the account
of God; and he that sincerely desires to be weaned from the world, he is weaned
from the world in the account of God; and he that sincerely desires to be
conformable to God, he is comformab^e to God in the account of God; and he that
desires to grow in grace, he does grow in grace in the account of God; and he
that sincerely desires to improve mercies, he does improve mercies in the
account of God; and he that sincerely desires to glorify God in the hour of
his visitation, he does glorify God in the hour of his visitation in the
account of God. A gracious man may make a better judgment of his estate by his
sincere desires, than he can by his duties; and so a wicked man may make a
better judgment of his estate by his desires, than he can by his words or
works. I have been the larger upon this ev^dence, because of its great
usefulness to weak believers. But,

viz. faith for faiths sake, and love for loves sake, and humility for
humilities sake, and uprightness for uprightness sake, and meekness for
meekness sake, and holy fear for holy fears sake, and hope for hopes sake, and
holiness for holiness sake, and self-denial for self-denials sake, etc. but he
that has true grace. Mark, no man can sincerely and seriously desire grace, for
the inward beauty, glory and excellency of grace, Psalm. 45.13. 2 Cor. 3.18.
but he that has true grace. The Kings daughter is all glorious within, though
within is not all her glory; grace differs nothing from glory but in name,
grace is glory in the bud, and glory is grace at the full; grace is glory
militant, and glory is grace triumphant; grace has an inward glory upon it,
which none can see and love, but such as have grace in their own hearts: Wicked
men can see no beauty, no glory, no excellency in grace, why they should desire
it, or be taken with it; Isa. 53.1, 2, 3, 4.
and no wonder, for they could see no beauty, nor excellency, nor glory, nor
form, nor comeliness in Christ the fountain of grace, why they should desire
him, and be taken with him. Though next to Christ grace is the most lovely and
desirable thing in all the world, yet none can desire it for its own loveliness
and desirableness, but such as have a seed of God in them; though grace be a
pearl of price, though it be a jewel more worth than the gold of Ophir, though
it be a beam of God, a spark of glory, a branch of the divine nature; yet
carnal hearts can see no glory nor excellency in it, that they should desire
it. If carnal eyes were but opened to see the excellency of grace, Mirabiles
sui excitaret amores, it would ravish the soul in desires after it; but graces
beauty and glory is inward, and so it is not discerned but with spiritual eyes.
Plato was wont to say, if moral virtues could be seen with bodily eyes, they
would stir up in the heart extraordinary flames of admiration and love. 1 Cor.
2.14 -- ult.
I might say much more of grace; Grace, 1. Puts an excellency, it puts a luster
and beauty upon men's persons. Prove. 12.26. 1 Pet. 34, 5, etc.
The righteous is more excellent than his neighbor; and pray what makes him so
but grace? Dan. 11.2^.
Wisdom makes a man's face to shine; riches, and honors, and dignities, and
royal ornaments, and costly fare, and noble attendants, don't put an excellency
and glory upon man; witness Antiochus, Saul, Haman, Herod, Dives, etc. but
saving grace does; the graces of the Spirit are that chain of pearl that adorns
Christ's Bride. 2. Grace puts an excellency upon all a man's duties; By faith
Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain; faith put an
excellency upon Abels sacrifice. 3. Grace puts an excellency upon all a man's
natural and acquired excellencies; it puts an excellency upon beauty, honor,
riches, name, arts, parts, gifts. Now, how excellent and glorious must that be,
that puts an excellency upon all our excellencies? 4. Grace makes a man
conformable to God and Christ. 5. 1 John 4.17. 1 John 1.1, 2. 2 Cor. 13.14.
Zech. 3.7. Mal. 2.2. Prove. 2.11, 12.
Grace fits a man for communion and fellowship with Father, Son and Spirit. 6.
Grace fits a man for the choicest services. 7. Grace turns all things into a
blessing. 8. Grace fills the soul with all spiritual excellencies. 9. Grace
preserves a Christian from the worst of evils, viz. sin. 10. Grace sweetens
death, it makes the King of terrors to be the King of desires. 11. Grace
renders a man acceptable to God, and that is the height of a Christians
ambition in this world, 2 Cor. 5.9. Wherefore we labor ((...), we are
ambitious) that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him. The
Apostles made it their ambition to get acceptance in heaven: riches, and
honors and gifts, and arts, and parts, etc. may commend us to men; but it is
only grace that commends us to God, and that renders us lovely in his eyes. 12.
Grace will eternalize your names, grace will perfume and embalm your names,
Heb. 11.2. By faith the Elders obtained a good report. Ver. 39. And these all
having obtained a good report through faith received not the promise. Nothing
raises a man's name and fame in the wo^ld like grace. A man may obtain a great
report without grace, nothing below grace will perpetuate a man's name. Acts 6
5, 3.
The seven Deacons that the Church chose were gracious men, Act. 10.1, 2, 3, 4,
22.
and they were men of good report, they were men well witnessed unto, well
testified of, as the Greek word imports. Act. 9.10, 20. compared with Chap.
22.12.
Cornelius was a gracious man, and he was a man of good report among all the
Nation of the Jews. Ananias was a gracious man, and he was a man of a good
report. Gaius and Demetrius, they were both gracious men, and they were men of
good report, witness that third Epistle of John. How renowned was Abraham for
his faith? and Moses for his meekness? and Jacob for his plain-heartedness? and
Job for his uprightness? and David for his zeal? and Joshua for his courage?
Heb. 11.4. Psalm. 112.6. Prove. 10.7.
Holy Abel has been dead above this five thousand years, and yet his name is
as fresh and fragrant as a Rose, to this very day. Grace will make your names
immortal; The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance: The memory of the
just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. Wicked men many times
outlive their names, but the names of just men outlive them; when a gracious
man dies, he leaves his name as a sweet and as a lasting scent behind him, his
fame shall live when he is dead. According to the Hebrew the words may be read
thus; The memory of the just shall be for a blessing; the very remembering of
the just shall bring a blessing upon them that remember them. When a gracious
man dies, as he carries a good conscience with him, so he leaves a perfumed
name behind him. Grace is the image of God, the delight of God, the honor of
God, the glory of God; grace is the purchase of Christ, and the birth of the
Spirit, and the pledge of glory; grace is the joy of Angels, the glory of man,
and the wonder of the world; what is the body without the soul? what is the
cabinet without the jewels? what is the Sun without light? what is the fountain
without water? what is Paradise without the Tree of Life? what is Heaven without
Christ? That Is a soul without grace. Now every gracious soul sees a real,
internal excellency, beauty and glory in grace, and accordingly it is carried
out in its desires after it; it sees such an innate excellency, beauty and
glory in that faith, wisdom, humility, meekness, patience, zeal, self-denial,
heavenly-mindedness, uprightness, etc. that sparkles and shines in such and
such Saints, that it many times strives with God in a corner, even to sweat and
tears, that it may be bedecked and enriched with those singular graces that are
so shining in others. O, that I had the wisdom of such a Christian, and the
faith of such a Christian, and the love of such a Christian, and the humility
of such a Christian, and the meekness of such a Christian, and the zeal of such
a Christian, and the integrity of such a Christian, etc. O, that my soul was
but in their case! I don't covet their riches but their graces: Oh, that I had
but those graces! Oh, that I had much of those graces, that sparkles and shines
in the hearts and lives of such and such Christians! I see a beauty and glory
upon Sun, Moon and Stars, yea upon the whole Creation, but what is that to that
beauty and glory that I see stamped upon grace? And this fires his heart with
desires after grace. But,

Eighthly, No man can sincerely desire all grace, every 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Vain men, when they are under some outward or inward distresses, may to serve
their present turns, desire (in a cold, formal, customary way) patience, or
contentation, or meekness, or hope, or faith, etc. but they don't, nor cannot,
whilst they are wicked, whilst they are in their natural estate, Act. 8.19. to
25.
whilst they are in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, sincerely
desire every grace, especially those particular graces that are most opposite
to their master sin, to their darling lusts, to their constitution sins, to
their complexion sins, to those particular lusts that are to them as dear as
their right eyes or right hands. Austin before his conversion, he was much
given to whoredom, and he would often pray, Lord, give me continency, but not
yet; Lord, give me continency, but not yet; he was afraid lest God should have
heard him to soon, as himself confesses. Wicked men would be very sorry if God
should take them at their words, and in good earnest answer the cold and lazy
desires of their souls: If when the drunkard in a good mood should desire
sobriety, God should take him at his word, he would be very angry; or if when
the unclean person should desire chastity, continency, God should answer his
desires, he would not be very well pleased; if when the covetous person, should
(under some pangs of conscience) desire a free, a charitable, a noble, generous
spirit, God should take him at his word, he would be sorely displeased. The
same may be said of all other sorts of sinners; but now a real Christian,
though he be never so weak, yet he seriously desires every grace, he is for
every link of the golden chain of graces, he finds in his own heart, sins that
are contrary to every grace, and therefore he desires every grace, that he may
make head against every sin; and he finds his heart and life so attended and
surrounded with all sorts and kinds of temptations, that he earnestly,
seriously, and frequently desires the presence and assistance of every grace,
that so he may be temptation-proof, yea, victorious over every temptation; and
he sees and feels the need of every grace, to fill up every place, station and
condition wherein the Lord has set him, and therefore he begs hard for every
grace; and he sees a beauty, and a glory, and an excellency upon every grace,
and therefore he desires every grace as well as any one single grace, which no
hypocrite or profane person in the world does. But,

Joh. 1.1, 3, 4 and 2.6. Mat. 11.29, 30.
No man can truly desire grace, that he may enjoy communion and fellowship with
the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, and that he may be made comformable to
Christ, and that he may be serviceable and useful to the interest of Christ,
and that he may walk even as Christ walked, Psalm. 119.32. 1 John 5.4, 5. Romans
14.7, 8. Phil. 1.20.
in the exercise of every grace, and that he may be rid of his sins, yea all
his sins, especially his special sins; and that he may run the ways of God's
commands more easily, more readily, more delightfully, more resolutely, more
patiently, more unweariedly, and more zealously; and that he may be made
victorious over the world, the flesh, and the devil; and that he may so live,
as to be a praise, a name, an honor, and a glory to Christ; and that after
all, and by all, he may be prepared and fitted for an eternal fruition and
enjoyment of Christ, but he that has true grace in his soul. Now, every weak
believer is able to appeal to God, that he desires grace for gracious ends and
purposes, as for the ends last cited, and others of the like nature with them.
Wicked men may in a fit desire grace, Act. 8.18, 19, 20.
as Simon Magus did desire the holy Ghost to get money by it, or when they are
under some pangs of conscience, they may desire grace to be rid of their
horrors and terrors, or when they are upon a dying bed they may desire so much
grace as may keep them out of hell, and bring them to heaven; but in all this
they look no further than self, they are far from desiring of grace for
gracious ends and purposes. There is nothing in all the world that the great
God so much regards as man; All these things have my hands made, but to this
man will I look, Isa. 66.2. Nothing in man so much as the heart; My son, give
me thy heart. That is the Mount Sion which God loves above all the dwellings
of Jacob, and nothing in the heart, so much as the aim and end of it. Let a
man's profession be never so glorious, let him be never so abundant in the
performance of duties, let his desires after this and that good thing be never
so strong, yet if his ends be wrong, all his pretentions and performances are
but beautiful abominations. Did David pray three times aday? Mark 12.40. Luke
18.12. Mat. 6.2. Luke 11.42. Mat. 23.
so did the Pharisees. Did David and Daniel fast? so did the Pharisees, and
that twice in the week. Did Cornelius give alms? so did the Pharisees. Did
Abraham pay tithes? so did the Pharisees, they tythed their very Mint and Rue,
but their ends being wrong, their time was lost, and their pains was lost, and
their duties was lost, and their alms was lost, and their souls was lost, and
that for ever. God writes a nothing upon all those services wherein men's ends
are not right, Jer. 32.23. But,

Tenthly, No man can sincerely desire and earnestly endeavor Phil. 3.12, 13,
14, 15, 16, etc.
yet he has the top of grace, the perfection of grace in his sincere aims, in
his sincere desires, and in his earnest and constant endeavors; and if the
weakest Saint might have his desires, his mind, his wish, his will, his choice,
he would never sin more, he would never dishonor Jesus Christ more, he would
never grieve the spirit of grace more, he would yield unsinning obedience, he
would obey in this lower world, as the Angels, and as the spirits of just men
made perfect do obey in that upper world; Heb. 12.22, 23. Luke 17.5.
the weakest Christian has his eye to the highest round in Jacob's ladder, and
fain he would be at the top of it; and Oh, how sweet is every Providence, and
every Ordinance, and every duty, and every mercy, and every opportunity, that
helps his soul more Christ-wards, and heaven-wards, and holiness-wards! sincere
desires, and serious endeavors to grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. 1 Pet. 2.2. 1 John 5.13. 1 John 3.9.
is an infallible evidence of the truth of grace. Look, as a man may have grace
and not know it, so a man may grow in grace and yet not discern it. As in the
lopping of a Tree there seems to be a kind of diminution and destruction, yet
the end and issue of it is better growth; and as the weakening of the body by
Physic seems to tend to death, yet it produces better health and more
strength; and as the Ball by falling downward rises upward, and water in pipes
descends that it may ascend, so the Christians spiritual growth, when seemingly
dead and declining, and to stand at a stay, is still carried on by the hidden
method of God to increase; for every true Christian is a member of a thriving
body, in which there is no Atrophy, but a continual issuing of spirits from the
head; The righteous shall flourish like the Palm tree, Psalm. 92.12, 13, 14. The
Palm tree never loses his leaf or fruit, Pliny. Grace grows not alike in all
Saints; in the parable, some brought forth thirty, some sixty, and some a
hundred fold.
so that life being wrought by the spirit of life never dies, but is always
upon the growing hand (except in the dark winter night of desertion and
temptations) ripening and increasing even in the midst of all ordinary troubles
and trials. The Apostle tells us, that the whole body of Christ (whereof every
true Christian is a limb) is so compact together in it self, and so firmly
fastened with certain spiritual nerves and ligaments to the head, that from it
there is by them conveyed to each part a continual supply of spiritual grace,
both sufficient to furnish it, and to further the growth of it. Let me give a
little further light into this particular, by this similitude: A man is bound
for the East Indies, and shapeth his course thitherward, but by the way is put
often off by cross winds to the Westward; he is by contrary winds compelled to
put into diverse Harbors, and to make some stay by the way there, either to
shift off stormy weather, or to take in fresh water, or to stop a leak, or to
get some fresh provisions; and yet all this while we truly say, he is going on
in his way in his voyage, because his settled purpose and constant resolution is
to make to his Port, his Haven whither he is bound, and all these seeming lets
shall help forward his voyage. It is so in spiritual things, for our very
growth in grace consists much in sincere desires, in fixed resolutions, and in
faithful endeavors to grow in grace. Aristot. Rhet. l. 1. c. 11. Seneca l. 2.
c. 27. Phil. 3.13.
Aristotle makes it the mark of a good man, that he studieth how he may grow
better than he is, not contenting himself with any degree or measure of
goodness. And another Heathen observes, that the earnest desire of what men
would have, makes them forgetful of what they have. I forget what is past
(says the Apostle) and press on to what is before. Their eye is more upon what
they want, than upon what they have. It is with good Christians in this case,
as it is with rich worldlings; that like men in a race, have their eye on those
that be before them, not on those that come after them, they are ever eying
those that seem to outstrip and out-go them in wealth, and think they have
nothing, and that they are but poor men, so long as they come short of such and
such, who are rich and great in the world: And so it is with many precious
Christians, they have still their eye fixed upon those whose examples they
either read of, or whose courses and graces they are eyewitnesses of; and
hereupon they think that they have no grace, or else that they make no progress
in grace, at least worth speaking of, so long as they come behind and fall
short of such and such, who are very eminent, or most eminent in grace and
holiness; and upon this account it is, that they make such sore complaints of
their spiritual wants, and of their slow progress in grace and holiness, and
that they can hardly perceive but that they stand still at a stay. Now mark,
these sad complaints of theirs, and their serious desires to grow in grace, is
a sure and infallible evidence of the truth of grace in them; yea it is a sure
argument that they love grace as it is grace, that they love grace for grace
sake, which none can do but such as have grace. It Is a sure sign that he was
never truly good, that desires not to be better (ille non est bonus qui non
vult esse melior) yea, he has very great cause to fear, that his heart is
naught, very naught, if not stark naught, that desires not to be as good as
the best, to be as gracious as he that is most gracious, and to be as holy as
he that is most holy. Well Sirs, this will be found an everlasting truth, viz.
That no man can sincerely desire, and habitually endeavor after the highest
pitches of grace, but he that has true grace.

Eleventhly, No man can always desire grace, but he that Isa. 26.7, 8, 9.
Cant. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 106.3.
constant desires after grace, speaks out a state of grace, Psalm. 119.20. My
soul breaks for the longs that it has unto thy judgments at all times.
Pliny speaks of a golden vine which never withers. All gracious desires are
such golden desires as never wither: Take a Christian when you will, and where
you will, and among whom you will, and in what condition you will, and still
you shall find his heart full of gracious desires. Number. 23.10.
O, that I had grace! O, that I had much grace! etc. Balaam in a fit, in a good
mood, desires to die the death of the righteous, but his desires were fleeting
and flashy, they were transient, not permanent. Some poor sinners, Dan. 5.6.
when they are in a good mood, or under some distress of conscience, or under
some grievous trials, or when they see the handwriting upon the wall; and when
death, which is the King of terrors, and the terror of Kings knocks at their
doors; O! then they cry out, O, that we had grace! O, what shall we do for
grace! O, send to such a Minister, and to such a Christian, whom we have hated,
scorned, reproached and opposed, and desire them to be earnest with God, Hos.
6.4. Psalm. 78.37. Psalm. 5.9.
that he would give us grace, for now we see, that without grace there is no
escaping of hell, nor no coming to heaven. But all these desires of theirs are
but like the morning cloud, or the early dew that quickly passes away: But now
if you look upon the weak Christian, as you shall commonly find a tear in his
eye, a sigh in his breast, and a complaint in his mouth; so you shall always
find desires in his heart after grace, O, that I had grace! O, that I had much
grace! O, that I did but excel in grace! O, that I had as much grace as such a
Christian! O that I had a greater exercise of grace! Psalm. 42.1, 2, 3. Psalm.
63.1, 2, 3, 8.
Whatever outward or inward changes may attend a Christian in this world, yet
you shall still find him full of holy desires, and breathings, and hankerings,
and longings after God, and Christ, and grace, and holiness; O, that I had more
of these! O, when shall I have more of these! O, that God would cut me short in
any thing, yea in every thing, rather than cut me short in these things, that
the desires of my soul are so much running after! These desires of theirs may
further be set forth by a spring between a couple of hills; the spring will
always run through those lets that stop it, or else it will run over those
lets, for it cannot cease running if it be a living spring; so the desires of a
gracious soul will still be running after God, and Christ, and grace, etc. The
good desires of bad men after God, and Christ, and grace, and holiness, are
like water in a Cistern, that quickly runs out; but the desires of a godly man
after God, Christ, grace, holiness, are like water in a fountain that is still
a running. An unsound Christian is never good at all times, he is only good by
fits, and starts, and turns sometimes when he is Sermon-sick, or under a
smarting rod, or a gauled conscience, or when he is under some heavy cross, or
sad loss; O, then he will be good! O, then he will have God, and he will have
Christ, and he will have grace, and he will have heaven; but this good frame,
this good temper of his is not lasting, it is not abiding, it is like a vapor
that quickly vanishes, or like a windmill that goes as long as the wind fills
the sails, but no longer. These are like Sigismund the Emperor, who when he was
sick, would be very godly; but when he was well, none more wicked. But,

Twelfthly, No man can sincerely desire to abound and does most expose him and
incline him to, but he that has true grace, but he whose heart is sincere with
God, Psalm. 18.23. I was upright before him, and I kept my self from mine
iniquity. If passion be a sincere Christians head-lust, then his desires run
most out for meekness; if pride, then his desires are most for humility; if
earthliness, then his desires are most for heavenly-mindedness; if unbelief,
then his desire, Luke 17.5.
are most for faith; you shall then find him with the Disciples, crying out,
Lord, increase our faith. But now, though a wicked man's heart rise against
every grace, yet it rises most strongly against those particular graces which
are most opposite and contrary to those particular lusts which are a wicked
man's bosom lusts, Mat. 26.8, 9.
his darling sins, etc. Hence the covetous heart rises and swells most against
liberality, as you see in Judas, Rev. 3.15, 16, 17. Luke 19.
What need this waste? Flesh and blood looks upon all as lost that is laid out
upon Christ, his servants and services. And the lukewarm Christians heart
rises and swells most against zeal and fervency; and the griping Userers heart
rises and swells most against restitution; Job 21.14, 15.
and the adulterers heart rises and swells most against purity, chastity,
continency; and the ignorant man's heart rises and swells most against light and
knowledge; Eccles. 7.10.
the ignorant man is willing to go to hell in the dark, and ready, and bold
enough to conclude, that we never had such sad and bad times as we have had,
since there has been so much preaching, and so much hearing, and so much
fasting, and so much praying, and so much light and knowledge in the world. But
now it is quite otherwise with a true child of God, Romans 7.22, 23.
for his heart rises and swells most against the Toad or Toads that are in his
own bosom; and the daily and earnest desires of his soul are, that God would
make him eminent in every grace, yea that God would make him most eminent in
those particular graces which are most opposite and contrary to those
particular lusts and corruptions which more peculiarly, more especially he has
cause to call his iniquity, Psalm. 49.5.
or the iniquities of his heart, and of his heels. Look, as we have some dirt,
more or less, that will still cleave to our heels whilst we are in a dirty
world; so there is some defilements and pollutions that will still be cleaving
to all our duties, services, ways and walkings in this world, which we may
well call the iniquity of our heels. Now a gracious heart rises most against
these, etc.

Thirteenthly, No man can truly love grace in another, but 1 John 3.10.
No man can love a Saint as a Saint, but he that is a real Saint; no man can
love holiness in another, but he that has holiness in his own soul; no man can
love a good man for goodness sake, but he that is really good; We know that we
have passed from death to life, 1 John 3.14. This Text you have opened in the
first Maxim of this Book.
because we love the brethren. Sincere love to the brethren is a most evident
sign of a Christians being already passed or translated from death to life;
that is, from a state of nature into a state of grace; such a poor soul that
dares not say that he has grace in his own heart, yet dares say before the
Lord, that he loves, delights, and takes pleasure to see the holy graces of the
Spirit sparkling and shining in the hearts, lives and lips of other Saints,
secretly wishing in himself that his soul were but in their case; and that
dares say before the Lord, Psalm. 15.1, 4. Psalm. 16.3. He that loves his brother
(says Augustine) better knows his love wherewith he loves, than his* brother
whom he loves.
that there are no men in all the world that are so precious, so lovely, so
comely, so excellent, and so honorable in his account, in his eye, as those
that have the Image of God, of Christ, of grace, of holiness most clearly, most
fairly, and most fully stamped upon them. When a poor Christian can rejoice in
every light, in every Sun that out-shines his own; when he sees wisdom and
knowledge shining in one Saint, and faith and love shining in another Saint,
and humility and lowliness shining in another Saint, and meekness and
uprightness shining in another Saint, and zeal and courage shining in another
Saint, and patience and constancy shining in another, and then can make his
retreat to his closet, admiring and blessing of the Lord for the various graces
of his Spirit shining in his children, and be frequent and earnest with God,
that those very graces might shine as so many Suns in his soul; doubtless such
a poor soul has true grace, and is happy, and will be happy to all eternity. In
Tertullian's time, the Heathen would point out the Christians by this mark, See
how they love one another. Now to prevent mistakes, I shall show you the
several properties of sincere love to the Saints.

John 5.1. Every one that loves him that begat, 1 John 4.7.
loves him also that is begotten of him. A soul that truly loves, loves the
father for his own sake, and the children for the fathers sake. If the Image of
God be the lodestone that draws out our love to the Saints, then our love is
real to them; he that does not love the Saints as Saints, he that does not love
them under a spiritual notion he has no true affection to them. Naturally we
hate God, Genesis 3.15. 1 John 3.12.
because he is a holy God, and his Law because it is an holy Law, and his
people because they are a holy people. It Is only the Spirit of God that can
enable a man to love a Saint for the image of God that is in him; many there
are which love Christians for their goods, not for their good; they love them
for the money that is in their purses, but not for the grace that is in their
hearts; many like the Bohemian Cur, fawn upon a good suit. Love to the Saints
for the Image of God stamped upon them, is a flower that does not grow in
natures garden. No man can love grace in another man's heart, but he that has
grace in his own; men do not more naturally love their parents, Prove. 29.10.
Ezekiel. 25.15.
and love their children, and love themselves, than they do naturally hate the
image of God upon his people and ways. I have read of one who was so lusty and
quarrelsom, that he was ready to fight with his own image so often as he saw it
in a glass. O! how many are there in these days, that are still a quarrelling
and fighting with the image of God wherever they see it? True love is for what
of the divine nature, for what of Christ and grace shines in a man; it is one
thing to love a godly man, and anther thing to love him for godliness: Many
love godly men as they are Politicians, or Potent, or Learned, or of a sweet
nature, or affable, or related, or as they have been kind to them; but all this
is but natural love, but to love them because they are spiritually lovely,
because of the seed of God in them, because they are all glorious within, John
1.3.9. Psalm. 45.13.
is to love them as becomes Saints, it is to love them at a higher and nobler
rate, than any hypocrite in the world can reach too. The Wasps fly about the
Tradesman's shop, not out of love to him, but the honey and fruit that is
there. But,

Secondly, True love to the Saints is appretiating; a gracious Psalm. 15.4. He
honors them that fear the Lord; Psalm. 119.119. Psalm. 1.4.
he looks upon the wicked as lumber, but upon the Saints as jewels; he looks
upon the wicked as dross, but upon the Saints as the gold of Ophir; he looks
upon the wicked as chaff, but upon the Saints as wheat; 1 John 12.
he looks upon the Saints as sons, but upon the wicked as slaves; Heb. 1. ult.
he looks upon the Saints as heirs of salvation, but upon the wicked as heirs
of damnation. Gracious souls do not value persons by their great Places,
Offices, Names, Professions, Arts, Parts, Gifts, gay Clothes, gold Chains,
Honors, Riches, but by what they are worth for another world. As the great
God, so gracious souls look not how rational men are, but how religious; not
how great, but how gracious; not how high, but how holy, Psalm. 16.3.
and accordingly they value them. My goodness extends not to thee, but to the
Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent in whom is all my delight.
Prove. 12.26.
The righteous is more excellent than his neighbor. It Is grace that
differences one man from another, and that exalts one man above another. A
gracious man, though never so poor, and low, and contemptible in the world, is
a better man than his wicked neighbor (though he be never so great or rich in
the world) in the eye, account, and esteem of God, Angels and Saints, there is
no man to the gracious man: The Sun does not more excel and outshine the
Stars, than a righteous man does excel and outshine his unrighteous neighbor.
Prove. 28.6.
Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, than he that is perverse
in his ways, though he be rich. A gracious man prefers a holy Job upon the
dunghill, before a wicked Ahab upon the Throne: he sets a higher price upon a
gracious Lazarus, though clothed with rags and full of sores, Luke 16.
than upon a rich and wretched Dives, though he be clothed gloriously, and
fares sumptiously every day. This is, and this must be for a lamentation, Psalm.
45.13. Wicked men may highly prize and admire a the common gifts of the Saints,
as Pharaoh admired at the wisdom of Joseph, and Nebuchadnezzar admired at the
wisdom of Daniel; but they never prize nor admire at their graces. Every one
that does evil, hates the light, Joh. 3.20.
that this poor, blind, mad, besotted world rates and values men according to
their worldly interest, greatness, glory and grandeur; but gracious souls, they
rate and value men by their graces, by their inward excellencies, and by what
they are worth for eternity; in the eye of a gracious man; there is no wife to
a gracious wife, no child to a gracious child, no friend to a gracious friend,
no neighbor to a gracious neighbor, no Magistrate to a gracious Magistrate,
no Minister to a gracious Minister, no Master to a gracious Master, nor no
servant to a gracious servant; internal excellencies carries it with a gracious
man, before all external glories. The Jews say, that those seventy souls that
went with Jacob into Egypt, were as much worth as all the seventy Nations in
the world: Doubtless, seventy gracious persons in the esteem and judgment of
those that are gracious, are more worth than a whole world, yea than seventy
worlds of graceless persons. Well Sirs, remember this; No man can truly prize,
and highly value grace in another, but he that has grace in his own heart.
Some prize Christians for their wit, others prize them for their wealth; some
prize them for their birth and breeding, others prize them for their beauty and
worldly glory; some prize them for the great things that have been done by
them, others prize them for the good things that they have received from them;
some prize them for their Eagles eyes, others prize them for their silver
tongues, and others prize them for their golden parts; but he that is truly
gracious, he prizes them for the grace of God that is in them, he sets the
highest value upon No unregenerate person has a love to all the Saints; for
though he seems to love some, yet he loathes others; he is guilty of sinful
partiality, having the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons.
They seem to love the rich, and despise the poor, James 2.
etc. But,

Thirdly, True love to the Saints is universal to one Christian as well as
another, to all as well as any, to poor Lazarus as well as to rich Alraham, to
a despised Job as well as to an admired David, to an afflicted Joseph as well
as to a raised Jacob, to a despised Disciple as well as to an exalted Apostle,
Ephesians. 1.15. Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and
love unto all the Saints. Col. 1.4. Since we heard of your faith in Christ
Jesus, and of the love which ye have to all the Saints. Faith in Christ Jesus
makes love to all the Saints; therefore they go commonly coupled in Paul's
Epistles. It was the glory of the Ephesians and Colossians, that their faith
and love reached to all the Saints; their love was not a narrow love, a love
confined to some particular Saints, but it was universal to all Saints, Phil.
4.21. Salute every Saint in Christ Jesus; the meanest as well as the ^ichest,
the weakest as well as the strongest, the lowest as well as the highest, and
those that have many infirmities as well as those that have fewer infirmities,
Ephesians. 1.21, 22, 23 1 Pet. 2.17.
and those that have but mean parts and gifts, as well as those that have the
strongest parts, and the most raised gifts. All Saints have the same Spirit,
the same Jesus, the same Faith, etc. they are all fellow members,
fellow-travellers, fellow soldiers, fellow-Citizens, fellow-heirs, and
therefore must they all be loved with a sincere and cordial love: Love is set
upon the brotherhood, upon the whole fraternity of Believers, and not here and
there upon one. Divine love casts an eye of favor upon grace in rags, upon a
dunghill, in a dungeon, a den, a prison, a fiery-furnace; Psalm. 16.3.
grace is as lovely in the illiterate as in the greatest Scholar, in the
servant as in the Master, in the maid as in the Mistress, in the child as in the
Father, in the subject as in the Prince, in the buyer as in the seller, etc.
Look, as all our delight must be in the Saints, so our delight must be in all
the Saints. It Is sad and sinful to contemn our poor brethren; and yet this was
the very case of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.21, 22.
for they in their love feasts carried it so unequally, that one was hungry, to
wit, the poor; and another was drunken, to wit, the rich: And this made the
Apostle put that question to them; What? have ye not houses to eat and drink
in? or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them that have not? or put them
to shame that have nothing? And the Apostle James does very roundly reprove and
condemn that partial love that was generally among the Jews in his days, Iam
2.1, 2, 3 4. My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord
of glory, with respect of persons; for if there come unto your assembly, a man
with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile
raiment, and ye have respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and say
unto him, sit thou here in a good place, and say to the poor, stand thou there,
or sit here under my footstool; are ye not then partial in your selves, and are
become judges of evil thoughts? Not that the Apostle does simply or absolutely
prohibit a civil differencing of men in place from others; for it cannot be
denied but that there is a holy and warrantable respect of persons, in respect
of their age, callings, gifts, graces and greatness in the world; but when the
rich man's wealth is more regarded than the poor man's godliness; and when men
carry it so to the rich, as to cast scorn, contempt, disgrace and
discouragement upon the godly poor. They that respect a rich man that has but a
little grace, before a poor man that is rich in grace, are worthy of blame. All
true born sons love to see the image and picture of their father, though hung
in never so poor a frame, and in never so mean a cottage: So the true born sons
of God, they love to see the image of God, the picture of God upon the poorest
Saints. It Is sad to prefer a worldly luster before heavenly grace, a gold ring
before a rich faith, a chain of gold before a chain of grace. Non ex personis
fidem, sed ex fide personas. Tertul.
Ver. 5. Hearken my beloved brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this
world, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom? It is a vile thing, says one
of the Ancients, to have the faith of Christ in respect of persons. We do not
judge of faith by persons, but of persons by faith. It Is the great wisdom of a
Christian, not to judge of men by their outward, but by their inwards; not by
their externals, but by their internals; not by what they are worth for this
world, but by what they are worth for that other world. The poorest Saints are
God's portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. They are his pleasant portion, Jer. 12.10. They are
his peculiar treasure, Exodus 19.5. They are his jewels, Mal. 3.17. They are the
apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8. They are his glory, Isa. 4.5. They are the crown
of his glory and royal diadem, Isa. 62.3. and therefore it is a dangerous thing
to flight them, to disown them, to look frowningly upon them, or to carry it
unworthily toward them. Pompey told his Cornelia, It is no praise to thee to
have loved (Pompeium Magnum) Pompey the Great, but if thou love (Pompeium
miserum) Pompey the miserable, thou shall be a pattern for imitation to all
posterity: So I say, it is no great matter to love those that are rich and
pious, great and gracious, high and holy; but to love the poor Saints of God in
their lowest and most miserable condition, when they have not a rag to cover
them, nor a crust to refresh them, nor a fire to warm them, nor a friend to
stand by them, nor a penny to help them; this is praiseworthy, this speaks our
much of God, of Christ, of grace within. Romanus the Martyr, who was born of
noble Parentage entreated his persecutors, that they would not favor him for
his Nobility; For it is not (said he) the blood of my Ancecestors, but my
Christian faith that makes me Noble. It Is not race, nor place, but grace that
makes a man truly noble; without a peradventure, he that loves one Saint for
the image of God that is upon him, he cannot but fall in love with every Saint
that bears the lovely image of the Father upon him; he cannot but love a Saint
in rags as well as a Saint in robes, a Saint upon the dunghill as well as a
Saint upon the throne; usually those Christians that have least of the world,
have most of Christ; commonly those Christians that have least of the world,
have most of heaven in their hearts, houses and lives. But,

Fourthly, True love to the Saints will extend to those that are most remote in
respect of place, Romans 5.26.
as well as to those that Macedonia and Achaia made a contribution for the poor
Saints at Jerusalem. 3 John 5.
The Saints of Macedonia and Achaia did freely and cheerfully contribute to the
poor Saints at Jerusalem, whose faces probably they had never seen. And Gaius
is commended for his love to strangers. A gracious man that has an estate, a
treasury, an inheritance, he is like a common fountain that freely gives out to
strangers as well as to near neighbors. A great fire will warm those that sit
far from it, as well as those that sit near unto it: So sincere love will extend
and stretch out it self to those Saints that are most remote; gracious souls do
dearly love and highly value those Saints whose faces they have never seen, nor
are like to see in this world, and from whose hands they have not received the
least civility; and all upon the serious reports that they have had of the
grace of God that has been sparkling and shining in them, Romans 12.9. 1 Pet.
1.22. 1 John 3.18.
whose habitations are at a great distance from them. A sincere love, an
unfeigned love, a hearty love will be running out toward those that live most
remote from us, if we do but understand that God is in them and with them of
truth. But,

Psalm. 16.3. My goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in
the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight. Psalm. 45.19.
There are Saints, and there are excellent Saints. The Hebrew word that is here
rendered excellent, signifies magnificent ones, noble ones, glorious ones,
wonderful ones. O Sirs! there are some Saints that are magnificent in grace,
noble in grace, glorious in grace, wonderful in grace. Now this is certain, if
grace be the true reason why we love any, then the more excellent, the more
magnificent any are in grace, Psalm. 15.4.
the more highly we shall prize them, and the more dearly we shall love them,
and the more abundantly in our hearts we shall honor them. Look, as grace
rises higher and higher in the same person, so we shall rise higher and higher
in our love to the same person; Dan. 9.23. John 21.20.
Daniel was greatly beloved, and John was singularly beloved; and why? but
because they were more eminently gracious than others were. Where there is most
grace, there God is most honored, and there Christ is most exalted, and there
the Spirit is best pleased, and there Religion is most adorned, and there Satan
is most dethroned, and there the world is most conquered, and there sin is most
subdued, and there duties are most exactly performed; and therefore, there the
gracious soul cannot but love best and most. There are some that seem to love
such and such godly men, whose judgments are weak and light, little, and parts
low, and grace small; who yet look with a squint eye, an envious eye upon every
Sun that outshines their own, upon every ones graces and excellencies that are
more sparkling than their own. Though pride and envy have received their
deaths-wound at the souls first conversion, yet they are not quite slain in a
believer; there is an aptness even in real Saints, Luke 7.16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, 23.
to grudge and repine at those gifts, graces and excellencies in others that
outshine their own. John's disciples muttered and murmured, because Christ had
more followers and admirers than John; and that spirit that lived in John's
disciples, is still alive to this very day. This is, and this must be for a
lamentation. Well Sirs, look as the fairest day has its clouds, the finest
linen its spots, the richest jewels their flaws, the sweetest fruits their
worms; so when many precious Christians are not themselves, when they are in an
hour of temptation, when their corruptions are up, and their graces down, they
may and too often do, Number. 11.29.
envy and repine at those graces, excellencies and abilities that do over-cast,
cloud, Heb. 12.15.
darken and outshine their own. The best of men are but men at the best, and
there is still those bitter roots of pride, vainglory, self-love, envy, etc.
remaining in them, that occasions their hearts to rise and swell, yea sometimes
to cast disgrace upon those excellencies in others that themselves want: As
that great man that could not write his own name, Eusebius speaks of him, in
his Ecclesiastical Hist^ry, etc.
and yet called the liberal Arts, A public Poison and Pestilence. This
spiritual disease is mostly to be found among Christians that are got into some
of the highest forms in Christianity; take your ordinary common Christians, and
they commonly rejoice most where they see most grace: And so do your Christians
in a higher form too, when they come to themselves, and to make up their
accounts, and have wept over those cursed roots of bitterness that are so apt
to be sprouting out. Now, there is no greater argument that our grace is true,
and that we do love others for grace sake, than our loving them best that have
most grace, though they have but little of the world. A pearl is rich if found
on a dunghill, though it may glister more when set in a ring of gold; so many a
poor believer is rich in grace, and precious, and glorious in the eye of
Christ, and should be so in ours, though like Job he sits upon a dunghill;
though in the eyes of the world he may seem to glister most, when adorned with
riches, honor and outward pomp. If grace be the true reason why we love any
person, then the more grace that person has, the more we shall love him. A
godly man loves all that are godly, but he loves them most, that excel most in
the power, purity and practice of godliness, etc. But,

John 13.1. and 15.12. etc.
1 Cor. 13.8. Love never fails, Heb. 13.1. Let brotherly love continue. It Is
a love like that of Christ's, who loved his to the end. 1 John 4.16. He that
dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him. Our love to our brother must
not only lodge with us a night and away, but we must dwell in brotherly love.
Look, as our love must be sincere without hypocrisy, so it must be constant
without deficiency; that love was never true that is not constant; true love
like the pulse, will still be beating, it will still be working and running out
to the person beloved; true love will not fawn upon a Christian when high, and
frown upon him when low; it will not kiss him upon the throne, and kick him
upon the dunghill. The grounds and causes of their love are constant, viz. God's
commands, their spiritual relations, and the truth of grace in their souls; and
therefore their love cannot but be constant. Prove. 17.17. Christian friendship
makes such a knot, that great Alexander cannot cut, etc.
A friend (says Solomon) loves at all times, and a brother is born for
adversity. Euripides hit it, when he said, That a faithful friend in adversity,
is better than a calm Sea to a weather-beaten Mariner. He that truly loves,
will love in adversity as well as in prosperity, in storms as well as in calms,
in winter nights as well as in Summer days; he that sincerely loves the
Saints, he will love them as well when men frown upon them, as when they smile
upon them; as well when men strike them, as when they stroke them; as well when
men cast them down, as when they lift them up; as well when men cry, Crucify
them, crucify them, as when they cry Hosanna, Hosanna, to them. Consalvus (a
Spanish Bishop and Inquisitor) wondered how the Christians had that
Commandment, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, so indelibly printed
in their hearts, that no torture could blot it out, and make them confess and
betray one another, or cease from loving one another. Hieron.
I have read of one Ursinus a Christian Physician, who being to suffer
Martyrdom for the Gospel of Christ, began to waver and faint; which when
Vitalis a holy man saw, he stepped to him, and though he knew it would cost him
his life, yet he thus comforted and encouraged him, saying, What, have ye been
heretofore so industrious to preserve men's bodies, and will you now shrink at
the saving of your own soul? Be courageous, fear not, etc. For which faithful
counsel, he also was condemned to death, and suffered accordingly. Ruth 1.
A true friend is neither known in prosperity, nor hid in adversity. True love
is like that of Ruth's to Naomi, that of Jonathan's to David, permanent and
constant. Job 6.15, 16.
Many there be whose love to the Saints is like Job's brooks, which in the
Winter, when men have no need of them, overflows with tenders of service, and
shows of love; but when the season is hot and dry, and the poor thirsty
traveller stands in most need of water to refresh him, then the brooks are
quite dried up. They are like the Swallow, that will stay by you in the Summer
of prosperity, but fly from you in the Winter of adversity. It is observed by
Josephus of the Samaritans, Joseph Anti. lib. 11. p. 286.
that when ever the Jews affairs prospered, they would be their friends, and
profess much love to them; yea, they would vaunt of their alliance, saying,
That they were near akin, and of the race of Ephraim and Manasses the sons of
Joseph: But when the Jews were in trouble and affliction, and brought to an
under, then they would not own them, Lib. 11. p. 272. Lib. 12. p. 304. Lib. 13.
p. 322, 323. etc.
nor have any thing to do with them; yea, then they would set themselves with
all their ^ight against them, as the same Historian tells us. This age is full
of such Samaritans; yet certainly, such as truly love, they will always love;
such as truly love the people of God, they will love them to the end. In the
primitive times it was very much taken notice of by the very Heathen, that in
the depth of misery, when fathers and mothers forsook their children,
Christians (otherwise strangers) stuck closs one to another, their love of
Religion, and one of another, proved firmer than that of nature. They seem to
take away the Sun out of the world (said the Orator) who take away friendship
from the life of man; for we do not more need fire and water, than constant
friendship. Though wicked men may pretend great love to the Saints, yet their
love is not constant; Genesis 31.24, 29. and 33 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Dan. 6.
God sometimes indeed overrules their spirits with a very strong hand, as he
did Laban's and Esau's, or as he overruled the spirits of the Lions to
preserve Daniel, and of the Ravens to feed Elijah; but so soon as that
overruling providence is over, they are as they were before. God for a time
gave the Israelites favor in the eyes of the Egyptians, but before and after
they were their utter enemies. But now a gracious soul, he loves the Saints at
all times, his love to them is constant. But,

Mic. 6.6, 7. Phil. 3.18, 19. Mat. 19.16. to 25. Psalm. 2.21.
but such as are first taken out of the world by grace. There is no man on
earth whose heart is void and empty of grace, but sets a higher value and price
upon his lusts, or upon his relations, or upon his honors, or riches, or
pleasures, or upon this or that worldly enjoyment, than he does upon grace, or
the fountain of grace; yea, how many thousands are there that set a higher
price or value upon a Hound, a Hawk, a Horse, a Harlot, a good Trade, a fair
Estate, a rich inheritance, yea upon the very toys and trifles of this world,
than they do upon God, or Christ, or grace? 'Twas never yet known in the world,
that ever God sent such a man to hell, who prized grace above heaven it self,
who had rather have grace and holiness without heaven, than heaven it self
without grace and holiness.

that he would not change his condition with the vain, carnal, formal and
profane men of the world, for ten thousand worlds; that man is certainly for
heaven, and heaven is certainly for that man: we may be very highly, and
groundedly confident, that God will never cast that man to hell among devils
and damned spirits at the great day, who in his day of life would not choose to
be in the condition of the men of the world, for as many worlds as there be men
in the world. Look, as none meet in heaven, but such as are like to like in
their renewed natures, principles and practices; so none meet in hell but such
as are like to like in their old natures, Deuteronomy. 22.10. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17,
18.
principles and practices. That God that would not suffer an Ox to be yoked
with an Ass in this world; nor a Believer with an Infidel; will never suffer
such to be yoked with devils and damned reprobates in that lower world, who
would not to gain many worlds be willingly yoked with wicked men in this world;
certainly they shall never be a Christians companions in that other world,
whose society and company, and whose wickedness and baseness have been a grief,
a torment, a hell to him in this world, Psalm. 119.53, 136. Jer. 9.1, 2. Ezekiel.
9.4, 6. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. When Mrs. Katherine Brettergh was upon her dying bed,
and most grievously assaulted by temptations; in the midst of her sore
conflicts, this was no small support and comfort to her, That surely God would
not send her to hell to live for ever among such wicked persons, whose company
and whose sin was a burden to her in this world, etc. But,

Sixteenthly, James 3.2. Eccles. 7.20. Prove. 20.7. Joh. 1.1, 8.
That soul that dares not say that he does not (For in many things we offend
all; and there is not a just man upon the earth that does good and sins
not; and who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? And if
we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us) yet
can say in uprightness before the Lord, that he would not willingly,
resolutely, maliciously, wilfully, wickedly and hab tually sin against the Lord
to gain a world; that soul that don't nor will not through grace assisting, Psalm.
119.1, 3. 1 John 3.9.
allow himself or indulge himself in a course of sin, or in a trade of (...) in
the common practice of any known sin, that soul is certainly a gracious soul.
Romans 7.15.
The evil that I do I allow not. It Is one thing for a man to sin, it is an other
thing for a man to allow himself in sin; it is one thing for a godly man to step
into a sin, Psalm. 139 24.
and it is another thing to keep the road of sin. Search me and try me, and see
if there be any way of wickedness in me (or as the Hebrew runs, Any way of
pain, or of grief, or of provocation) that is, any course of sin that is
grievous or provoking to the eyes of divine glory. A real Saint can neither
allow of sin, nor wallow in sin, nor be transformed into the image of sin, nor
mix it self with sin. It Is possible for a sincere Christian to step into a
sinful path, or to touch upon sinful facts, Gal. 6.1. Prove. 16.17.
and now and then in an hour of temptation, to slide, to trip, and to be
overtaken unawares; but his main way, his principle work, is to depart from
iniquity. As a true traveller may now and then step a few steps out of his way,
who yet for the main keeps his way, keeps the road; or as a Be may now and
then light upon a thistle, but her main work is to be gathering at the flowers;
or as a Sheep may now and then slip into the dirt, or into a slow, but its main
work is to be grazing upon the mountains. Certainly, O soul, if sin be now thy
greatest burden, it shall never hereafter prove thy eternal bane. God never yet
sent any man to hell for sin, to whom sin has commonly been the greatest hell
in this world. God has but one hell, and that is for those to whom sin has been
commonly a heaven in this world. That man that hates sin, and that daily enters
his protest against sin, that man shall never be made miserable by sin. Sin in
a wicked man is like poison in a serpent; it is in its natural place, it is
delightful to a sinner; but sin in a Saint is like poison in a man's body, it
is offensive, and the heart rises against it, and is carried forth to the use
of all divine Antidotes whereby it may be expelled and destroyed; nothing will
satisfy a gracious soul, but the heart blood of his lusts. Now, he shall never
be damned for his sins, whose heart is set upon killing his sins.

Seventeenthly, Such a poor soul that dares not say, that God is his God; or
that Christ is his Redeemer, or that he has a work of grace upon his heart; yet
can say with some integrity of heart before the Lord, that if God and Christ,
grace and glory, holiness and happiness were offered to him on the one hand,
and all the honors, pleasures, profits, delights, and carnal contents of the
world were offered him on the other hand, he had infinitely rather ten thousand
thousand times choose God and Christ, grace and glory, holiness and happiness,
than the contrary. Certainly such a soul has true grace in him, and a saving
work past upon him; for none can freely, seriously, habitually, resolutely,
choose God and Christ, grace and glory, holiness and happiness, as their (summum
bonum) chiefest good, but such who are really good. 1 John 4.19. Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7,
8, 9. and 26.17, 18, 19.
Look, as our love to God is but an effect of his love to us; We love him
because he first loved us; so our choosing of God for our God, is but an effect
of God's choosing us for his people; we choose him because he first chose us:
Such, who in their serious choice, set up God and Christ above all other
persons and things, such God will certainly make happy and blessed for ever.
God never did, nor never will, reject those, or damn those, who really choose
him for their God, and for their great all. The greatest part of the world
choose their lusts rather than God, and the creatures rather than Christ; Luke
12.21.
they choose rather to be great than gracious, to be rich in this world than to
be rich toward God, to be outwardly happy than to be inwardly holy, Mat. 10.42.
to have a heaven on earth than to have a heaven after death, and so they
miscarry for ever. That soul that with Mary has chosen the better part, that
soul with Mary shall be happy for ever; every man must stand or fall for ever
as his choice has been. But,

Eighteeenthly, Can thou truly say in the presence of Psalm. 139.23, 24.
that thou have given up thy heart and life to the rule, authority and
government of Jesus Christ? and that thou have chosen him to be thy Sovereign
Lord and King, and art truly willing to submit to his dominion, as the only
precious and righteous government, and as the only holy and heavenly, swee^ and
pleasant; profitable and comfortable, safe and best dominion in all the world,
and to resign up thy heart, thy will, thy affections, thy life, thy all, really
to Christ, wholly to Christ, Isa. 26.13.
and only to Christ? Can thou, O poor soul! look up to heaven, and truly say,
O dear Lord Jesus! other Lords, viz. the world, the flesh and the devil, have
had dominion too long over me; but now these Lords I do heartily renounce, Isa.
33.22.
I do utterly renounce, I do for ever renounce, and do give up my self to thee
as my only Lord, beseeching thee to rule and reign over me for ever and ever: O
Lord! though sin rages, and Satan roars, and the world sometimes frowns, and
sometimes fawns; yet I am resolved to own thee as my only Lord, and to serve
thee as my only Lord; and my greatest fear (by divine assistance) shall be of
offending thee, and my chiefest care shall be to please thee, and my only joy
shall be to be a praise, a name, and an honor to thee. O Lord, I can appeal to
thee in the sincerity of my heart, Psalm. 65.3. Romans 7.23.
that though I have many invincible sins, weaknesses and infirmities that hang
upon me; and though I am often worsted by my sins, and overcome in an hour of
temptation, yet thou that know all thoughts and hearts, thou do know that
I have given up my heart and life to the obedience of Jesus Christ, and do
daily give them up to his rule and government; and it is the earnest desire of
my soul, above all things in this world, that Jesus Christ may still set up his
Laws in my heart, and exercise his dominion over me. Now certainly, there is
not the weakest Christian in all the world, but can venture himself upon such
an appeal to God as this is; and without all peradventure, where such a frame
and temper of spirit is, there the dominion of Jesus Christ is set up; and
where the dominion of Christ is set up, there sin has no dominion; for the
dominion of sin, and the dominion of Christ are inconsistent, and therefore
such a soul is happy, and will be happy to all eternity. But,

Cant. 8.5. Acts 11.21, 22, 23 Psalm. 71.16. Isa. 61.10.
Nineteenthly, That man that will venture his soul upon Christ, and that will
lean upon Christ, and cleave to Christ with full purpose of heart, and that
will cleave to his blood, and cleave to his righteousness, and cleave to his
merits and satisfaction, in the face of all fears, doubts, disputes, cavils and
objections; and though it cannot clear its title to Christ, yet will stay and
hang it self upon Christ for life and happiness; that man is certainly a
Believer, and will be everlastingly saved. Though he slay me, yet will I trust
in him; Job 13.15.
if I must die, I will die at his feet, and in the midst of death expect a
better life; Mat. 15.22 to 28
that man acts faith to purpose that can love a frowning God, and hang upon an
angry God, and follow hard after a withdrawing God, Psalm. 63.1, 8.
yea and trust in a killing God, as here. Job had his Feverish sits, and his
impatient slips, and yet he kept up his heroical resolution to lean upon the
Lord, whilst he had but one minute to live; and this speaks out not only the
truth, but also the strength of Job's faith in the midst of his extraordinary
combats; when the soul is peremptorily and habitually resolved to cleave to the
person of Christ, and to cleave to the merits of Christ, Genesis 2.24. Ruth 1.14,
15, 16, 17. Est. 4.16.
and to cleave to the transactions of Christ with the Father, for the salvation
of sinners (as the wife cleaves to her husband, or as the child cleaves to the
father, or as Ruth cleaved to Naomi, or as the Ivy cleaves to the Oak) with an
If I perish, I perish, then it is safe, then it is happy, then it is out of the
danger of hell, then it is within the Suburbs of heaven. God never did, nor
never will cast such a man to hell, whose soul is drawn forth to a secret
resting, saying, leaning and relying alone upon Christ, for the obtaining of
all that good, and all that glory that he has purchased, and his father has
promised. But,

Lastly, That man that makes it his principle care, his James; Cleanse your
hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double minded. And that of the
Prophet Jeremiah; James 4.8. Jer. 4.14.
O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved. Man
must labor after a clean inside, as well as a clean outside; the conversation
must not be only unspotted before the world, but the heart also must be
unspotted before God; the heart is as capable of inward defilements as the body
is of outward defilements. 2 Cor. 7.1.
O Sirs! though heart-defilement is least taken notice of, yet heart-defilement
is the worst defilement, and the most dangerous defilement in the world;
heart-defilement is spiritual defilement, Ephesians. 6.12. Vide ^^za.
and spiritual defilement is the defilement of devils, which of all defilement
is the most hateful, odious and pernicious defilement. The hypocrites only care
is to keep his life from defilement, but the sincere Christians care is mainly
to keep his heart from defilement; for he very well knows, that if he can but
keep his heart clean, he shall with more ease keep his life clean; if the
fountain be kept pure, the streams will run pure: The heart is the spring of
all actions, and therefore every action is as the spring is from whence it
flows; if the spring be good, the action is good that flows from it; if the
spring be evil, the action is evil that flows from it. M^^. 2.35.
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things;
and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil
things. Certainly, the great work of a Christian lies with his heart; the
reformation of the heart is the highest and choicest part of reformation, Prove
23.26.
because it is the reformation of the noblest part of man, and is that which
God looks most after: The reformation of the heart, is indeed the heart of
reformation; there is nothing reformed to purpose, till the heart be reformed;
if the heart be naught, all is naught; if that be very naught, all is very
naught; if that be stark naught, all is stark naught; but if that be reformed,
all is reformed. A gracious man's watch is mainly about his heart; Create in me
a clean heart, Psalm. 51.10. Psalm. 86.11. Psalm. 119.36. Psalm. 119 80. Psalm.
27.8. See Psalm. 119.2. Acts 8 37. Heb. 8.10. Jer. 31 33.
O God, and renew a right spirit within me; Unite my heart to fear thy name.
Incline my heart unto thy testimonies. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes,
that I be not ashamed. When thou saidest, seek my face, my heart answered, Thy
face Lord will I seek. Psalm. 119.10. With my whole heart have I sought thee.
Ver. 11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee.
Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness. Romans 1.9.
The heart of man is the fountain of life or death, and therefore sin in the
heart, in some respects, is worse and more dangerous than sin in the life; and
hence it is that the sincere Christian doubles his guard about his heart. Luther
hit it, when he said, I more fear what is within me, than what comes from
without; the storms and winds without do never move the earth, it is only
vapors within that causes earthquakes, as Philosophers observe. Mat.
23.25-30.
Hypocrites (as our Savior testifies) are all for the outside, they wash the
platters and the cups, and beautify the tombs like an adulteress, whose care
is to paint and set a fair face upon a foul matter; but now a sincere
Christian, Psalm. 50.23.
though he has a special respect to the well-ordering of his life, yet his main
business and work is about his heart; O, that this ignorant heart were but more
enlightened! O, that this proud heart were but more humble! O that this profane
heart were but more holy! O, that this earthly heart were but more heavenly! O,
that this unbelieving heart were but more believing! O, that this passionate
heart were but more meek! O, that this carnal heart were but more spiritual! O
that this lukewarm heart were but more zealous for God, and Christ, and the
Gospel, and the great concernments of eternity! O, that this slight heart were
but more serious! O, that this dull heart were but more quickened! O, that this
dead heart were but more enlivened! etc. The highest and hardest work of a
Christian lies with his heart. Mark, common light, common conviction,
education, enforcement of conscience, principles of common honesty and
morality, the eye of man, the fear of man, the examples of man, the laws of
man, and the rewards of man, with a hundred other things, may be very prevalent
to reform the life, to regulate the outward conversation, and to keep that in
some due decorum; and yet all these things will be found too weak, too low to
change the heart, to reform the heart, to mend the heart, to purify the heart.
Acts 15.9.
To this great work there are principles of a higher nature required, Purifying
their hearts by faith. It Is not a guard of moral virtues, but a guard of saving
graces that can keep the heart in order; to reform the heart, to keep the heart
in a gracious frame, is one of the best and hardest works in the world, Prove.
4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life.
The Text is about matter of life and death. The words are mandatory, for all
counsels in Scripture carry in them the force of a command. In the words you
have two things observable, 1. A duty enjoined, Keep thy heart with all
diligence. 2. The reason or motive enforcing it, For out of it are the issues
of life. In the duty there are two things considerable, 1. Here is the subject
matter, the thing that is to be done, and that is, Keep thy heart. This duty is
charged upon all, in peremptory and undispensable terms. 2. Here is the manner
how it must be done, and that is, With all diligence.

Keep. The Hebrew word (...) Natsar to keep, has various significations, but
the main is to keep in safe custody; we should keep our hearts as under lock
and key, that they may be always at hand when the Lord shall call for them,
etc.

Thy heart. By the heart the we are not to understand that particular vital
member of the body, that in common speech we call the heart. Heart is not here
taken properly for that noble part of the body, which Philosophers call the
primum vivens, etc. ultimum moriens, the first that lives, and the last that
dies. But by heart in a metaphor, the Scripture sometimes understands some
particular noble faculty of the soul; sometimes the heart is put for the
understanding, Romans 1.21. Their foolish heart was darkened, that is, their
understanding was darkened; sometimes it is put for the will and affections, Mat.
22.37. So Prove. 23.26. Deuteronomy. 10.12.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind; that is, with thy will, and with all thy affections. The
will is the chiefest power of the soul, as the heart is the principal part of
the body; Mat. 8.
and it commands all the affections as the Centurion did his servants; Job 27.6.
sometimes it is put for the conscience, 1 John 3.20. If our heart condemn us,
God is greater ^han our heart, and knows all things; that is, if our
conscience condemn us justly, then our case must be assuredly sad, because God
knows much more by us than we know by our selves, and can charge us with many
sins that conscience is not privy to; Psalm. 19 12.
sometimes it is put for the memory, Psalm. 119.11. Thy word have I hid in my
heart; that is, in my memory. So Luke 2.19. But here it is taken comprehensively
for the whole soul, with all its powers, noble faculties and endowments,
together with their several operations; all which are to be watched over.

With all diligence; or as the Hebrew runs, With all keeping. Shamar signifies,
Cato, Cicero, Seneca, Socrates, and others, have laid down excellent rules for
the government of the outward man; but n one for the government of the heart.
to keep with watch and ward. A Christian is to keep a perpetual guard about
his heart. A Lapide notes, that the Hebrew word is borrowed from military
affairs. We should keep our hearts as soldiers keep a Garrison, with watch and
ward. Lavater jumps with him, and tells us, that the word Shamar is taken from
a besieged Garrison, begirt by many enemies without, and in danger of being
betrayed by treacherous Citizens within; in which danger the soldiers upon pain
of death are commanded to watch. Junius reads the word thus, Keep thy heart;
Supra omnem custodiam, above all keeping. So Hierom reads, Prae omni custodia,
above all keeping keep thy heart; that is, keep, keep, watch, watch, etc. So
Rhodolphus reads it, Prae omni custodia; and so we read it in the Margin of our
Bibles. And the Syriack reads it in the same manner that our English does. Cum
omni cautione, with all caution and wariness we are to keep our hearts. O, what
guards and double guards! O, what watches, and double watches should men put
upon their hearts! These words keeping, keep, import both a universal
watchfulness over the heart, and a diligent watchfulness over the heart, and a
constant watchfulness over the heart; and thrice happy are those persons who
keep such a watch upon their hearts. A man is to keep his eye, and keep his
mouth, and keep his feet; but above all keeping, he is to keep his heart. It Is
a duty incumbent upon every Christian to keep his own heart; Keep thy heart,
Thy self; thou may make another thy Park-keeper, or thy Housekeeper, or thy
Shopkeeper, or thy Cash-keeper, or thy Horse-keeper, or thy Nurse-keeper; but
thou must be thy own Heart-keeper. Keep thy heart with all diligence; some
understand this of all kind of watchfulness. The Hebrew word is applied to
several sorts of keeping. As,

Genesis 39.21, 22, 23 So Job 7.12.
where dangerous Fellons or Malefactors are to be looked to, that they don't
break away, 1 King. 20.39. Keep this man; so Joseph was made the Keeper of the
prison. The Hebrew word is the same with that, in Prove. 4.23. Now, O ^ow
diligent! how vigilant are men in looking after their prisoners? even so should
we be in looking after our hearts, etc.

Hab. 2.1.
or City, or Castle, in time of war. So it is used in that, Hab. 2.1. Now, what
strong guards, what watchful guards do men keep up at such a time? A gracious
heart is Christ's Fort-royal. Now, against this Fort Satan will employ the
utmost of his strength, art and craft; and therefore how highly does it concern
every Christian to keep a strong guard, a constant guard about his heart. But,

Ezekiel. 44.8, 15, 16, etc. The Temple, and all the vessels of the Temple were to
be kept pure, and clean, and sweet. Our hearts are the Temples of God, the
Temples of the holy Ghost; and therefore we should always keep a strong and
diligent guard about them, that nothing may pass in or out, that may be either
displeasing, provoking or grieving to them. But,

Job 10.12. Thy visitation has preserved (here is Shamar) my life. Now with
what care, with what diligence, with what labor, with what watchfulness do men
labor to preserve their natural lives? what a guard, what a watch do men daily
set about their lives; the same they should set about their hearts. But,

Fifthly, Men should keep their hearts, as they keep a rich All our spiritual
riches are in our hearts. A good man may say with Bias, omnia mea mecum parto,
all my goods I carry about with me.
what chains are made use of? Our hearts are jewels more worth than all the
Kingdoms, Crowns and Scepters of this world. There are few men that know how to
value a God, a Christ, a Gospel, a Covenant of grace, a Heaven, or their own
hearts, as they should. What are mountains of gold, and rocks of pearl, to the
heart, the soul of man? The heart is that pearl of price for which a man should
venture his all, and lay down his all. O then! what a guard, what a watch
should a man continually keep upon his heart? The heart is Camera omnipotentis
Regis, the presence chamber of the King of heaven; and upon this account it
becomes a Christian always to keep a guard upon his heart; he keeps his heart
best who keeps it as his choicest treasure, etc. But,

Sixthly, Men should keep their hearts, as a fond father

Seventhly, Men should keep their hearts, as Lovers keep

Eighthly, A man should keep his heart as a man keeps his house, when he is
afraid and in danger of being robbed by thieves in the night. O! how wakeful,
and watchful, and active will a man now be? but what is a man's house to his
heart? A man's heart is in ten thousand times more danger than his house, and
accordingly his guard should be most about his heart. But,

Cant. 4. ult.

Nathaniel, a man that has a work of God past in power upon his soul; yea that
man whose sincere desires, and whose gracious purposes, and fixed resolutions,
and faithful endeavors is to guard and watch his heart, according to the
particulars we have now hinted; that man without a peradventure is a gracious
man, and one that has the root of the matter in him, and shall be happy to all
eternity. Look, as no man can hear as he would and should, nor pray as he would
and should, nor believe as he would and should, nor repent as he would and
should, nor walk as he would and should; so no man can keep his heart as he
would and should: but if a man makes it his great business and work to keep his
heart, to watch his heart, to reform his heart, to better his heart, he is
accepted of God, and shall be blessed for-ever. It Is one of the greatest and
cleerest evidences of grace, for a man to make it his greatest business, work
and concernment in this world, to keep his heart always in a gracious frame,
Cant. 5.2. 2 Kings 22.19. 2 Chronicles. 32.26. James 5.11. Eccles. 5.1, 2. Col. 3.1,
2. 2 Cor. 7.11.
to keep his heart always in a wakeful frame, in a watchful frame, in a tender
frame, in a believing frame, in a repenting frame, in an humble frame, in a
patient frame, in a serious frame, in a heavenly frame, and in a jealous frame;
for the more gracious the heart is, the more suspicious it will be. Satan has a
strong party, a numerous party, an old party, a subtle party in all our hearts;
and therefore it highly concerns us to watch our hearts with a holy jealousy:
O Sirs! God has never said, Above all keepings keep your Shops, or above all
keepings keep your Estates, or above all keepings keep your Flocks, or above
all keepings keep your Bags, or above all keepings keep your Friends, or above
all keepings keep your Bodies, or above all keepings keep your Names, or above
all keepings keep your Conversations; but he has said, above all keepings keep
your hearts. Look, Fron. lib. 2.
as the heart is the fountain of natural life, and if it fail life fails; and
therefore it is strongly secured with ribs about it, it is guarded in a castle
of flesh and bones; so is the soul the fountain of spiritual life, 2 Cor. 7.1.
1 These. 5.13. etc.
and runs invisibly through all the body. Fountains were to be kept pure by the
Roman Laws of the twelve Tables; and the heart that is the spring and fountain
of all actions, is to be kept pure by the Laws of the great God. Men keep the
heart principally from hurt, because every wound there is mortal. O, that men
were as wise for their souls! God's eye is mainly upon the heart. The heart
well guarded and watched, keeps all in security. Alexander was safe while
Antipater kept the watch; so all within that little world Man, will be safe
while the heart is strongly guarded. The heart is the fountain, the root, the
storehouse, the primum mobile, the great wheel that sets all a going; and
therefore above all keepings keep your hearts. It Is a foolish thing to watch
the outworks, and leave the Fort-Royal without a guard; so it is a foolish thing
to watch the outworks, the eye, the ear, the tongue, the hand, the feet
(though these must all be watched) and to leave the heart, which is a Christians
Fort-Royal, without a guard.

Omnia si perdas, animam servare memento.
If all things else must needs be lost,
Yet save thy soul what e're it cost.
He that makes it his business to watch, and weep, and sigh, and groan most
over his own heart, he doubtless is in a gracious estate; he that makes it his
work, his daily work, his greatest work, 3 John 2.
his work of works, to keep a continual guard upon his heart, he certainly is
in a blessed estate; he that lamentingly cries out, O, that my soul did but
prosper as my body! O, that my inward man were but in as good a frame as my
outward man! O, that this proud heart were but more humble! O, that this hard
heart were but more softened! O, that this carnal heart were but more spiritual!
O, that this earthly heart were but more heavenly! O, that this unbelieving
heart were but more believing! O, that this passionate heart were but more
meek! O, that this slight heart were but more sericus! O, that this blind heart
were but more enlightened! O, that this dull heart were but more quickened! O, my
heart, my heart! when will thou be better? O, my God, my God! when shall my
heart be better? O, bring it into a gracious frame, and for ever keep it in a
gracious frame! He that thus lamentingly cries out of his heart, he certainly
has an honest heart, and will be happy for ever. O Lord, my memory is weak, and
my utterance is bad, and my understanding is dark, and my gifts are low, and my
affections are flat, and my temptations are strong, Psa. 39 22, 23, 24
and my corruptions are prevalent; but thou who art the great heart searcher,
thou know that I would fain have my heart in a better temper; I had rather
have my heart brought into a gracious frame, and kept in a gracious frame, than
to have all the riches of the Indies, than to be an Emperor, yea than to be
King over all the earth. If it be indeed thus with thee, thou art blessed, and
shall be blessed for ever, 2 Cor. 8.12. For if there be first a willing mind, it
is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not
(I know the Apostle speaks this in point of alms, but it is applicable to the
case in hand, and to a hundred other cases.) God measures his people not by
their works, but by their wills; if their wills be to be more holy, humble,
heavenly, and to have their hearts always in a most gracious frame, then they
are accepted of God; for every good man is as good in the eye of God, in the
judgment of God, and in the account of God, as he would be. Not long before
famous Mr. Banes died, some friends that were with him in his Library (which
was an excellent one) fell a commending of it; I, says he, there stand my
books, but the Lord knows that for many years lost past, I have studied my
heart more than Books. O, no Minister to him, no Scholar to him who studies his
heart more than his books; nor no Christian to him who studies his heart more
than his day-books, or more than his Shop-books, or that studies his heart more
than his counting house, or that studies his heart more than a good bargain,
etc. That man is for heaven, and heaven is for that man, who makes it his
greatest business in this world to watch his heart, to guard his heart; the
hypopocrite looks most to externals, but the sincere Christian looks most to
internals; the hypocrites main watch is about his lips, but a sincere
Christians main watch is about his heart; the hypocrites main work lies without
doors, but the sincere Christians main work lies within doors. All know that
know any thing, that both nature and grace begin at the heart, but art begins
at the face. A painter does not begin a picture at the heart; a picture has
but a face, but an outside. And as nature begins at the heart, but art at the
face; so grace begins at the heart, but hypocrisy at the face, at the outside
of Religion. Every man is that really that he is inwardly. Romans 2.28, 29.
He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is
outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly; and circumcision
is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not
of men but of God. Certainly, that man that makes it his great business to
watch his heart, and to keep his heart always in a gracious frame, that man is
a gracious man. It Is true, our hearts are like our watches, seldom got to go
well; and when they do go well, how hard a work is it to keep them going well?
The motions of our watches are not constant; sometimes they go faster, and
sometimes they go slower, and often they stand in need of mending. Though in
these and many other respects, our hearts are like our watches, yet if we make
it our grand work to keep a constant guard upon our hearts, and our main design
in this world to have our hearts brought and kept in a gracious frame, our
spiritual estate is good, and we shall be happy for ever, etc.

In my other Writings there are variety of special evidences, which the
Christian Reader (if he please, and if need require) may make use of, in order
to the further clearing up of his gracious estate; and therefore let these
twenty suffice at this time. And thus much for this Chapter, etc.

CHAP. III.
Now in this Chapter I shall treat of sound, saving repentance, of repentance
unto Life; yea, of that Evangelical repentance that has the precious Promises
of remission of sin and salvation running out unto it. My purpose at this time
is not to handle the doctrine of Repentance at large, but only to speak so far
of it as may speak it out to be evidential of the goodness and happiness of a
Christians spiritual and eternal condition.

NOw before I come to open my self more particularly, give me leave to premise
this in the general, viz. That there is a repentance that does accompany
salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10. For godly sorrow works repentance to salvation not to
be repented of, but the sorrow of the world works death. Jer. 4.14. O
Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved. Acts
11.18. When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God,
saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. Mat.
18.3. And Jesus said, verily I say unto you, except you be converted and become
as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Acts 3.19.
Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when
the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

Having premised thus much in the general, give me now leave to say, That there
are three parts of true, sound, saving repentance, unto all which forgiveness
of sin is promised: And the

Cor. 7.10. and sometimes a contrite spirit, Isa. 66.2. and sometimes a broken
and contrite heart, Psalm. 51.17. and sometimes the afflicting of our souls,
Levit. 16.29. and sometimes the humbling of the heart, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Lamen.
3.20. and sometimes a mourning, Zech. 12.10. and sometimes a weeping, Mark
14.72. All repenting sinners are mourning sinners. David repents and waters his
couch with his tears, Psalm. 6.6. Hezekiah repents and humbles himself for the
pride of his heart, 2 Chronicles. 32.26. Ephraim repents, and Ephraim bemoans
himself and smites upon his thigh, and is even confounded, Jer. 31.18, 19. Mary
Magdalen repents, and weeps, and washes Christ's feet with her tears, Luke 7.38.
The Corinthians repented, and they were made sorry after a godly manner, 2 Cor.
7.9. Repentance in the Hebrew is called Nacham, an irking of the soul; and in
Greek Metamelia, after grief; and Metanoia, after wit; and in the Latin,
Poenitentia. All which do import, that contrition or sorrow for sin, is one
part of true repentance. O! the sighs, the groans, the sobs, the tears, that
are to be found among repenting sinners, Luth. Tom. 3.457.
etc. Luther hit the Mark, when he said, What are all the Palaces of the world,
to a contrite heart; yea, heaven and earth, seeing it is the seat of divine
Majesty?

Zech. 12.11. In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo, Zech. 13.1. In that day there
shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness, Jer. 31.18. I have surely heard Ephraim
bemoaning of himself, etc. Ver. 20. I will surely have mercy on him; or as the
Hebrew has it, I will having mercy, have mercy on him. As soon as Ephraims
heart is troubled for his sins, Gods bowels are troubled for Ephraim; as soon
as Ephraim, like a penitent child, falls a weeping at God's foot, God like a
tender indulgent father falls a bemoaning of Ephraim. Ephraim could not refrain
from tears, and God could not refrain from opening his bowels of mercy toward
him. So Isa. 57.15. And how can the contrite heart be indeed revived and
cheered without forgiveness of sins, without a pardon in the bosom? Melancthon
makes mention of a godly woman, who having upon her deathbed been in much
conflict, and afterward much comforted, brake out into these words: Now, and
not till now, did I understand the meaning of these words, Thy sins are
forgiven. There is no comfort to that which arises from the sense of
forgiveness, Isa. 40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God;
speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her iniquities are
pardoned. And why is the mourning soul pronounced the blessed soul, ( Mat. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted) but because the
mourning soul is the pardoned soul?

But what is that sorrow or mourning for sin, that is a part of true
repentance? The resolution of this question is very necessary for the
preventing of all soul-deceits and mistakes, and for the quieting, settling and
satisfying of souls truly penitent; and therefore I shall give these eight
following Answers to it.

First, It is a sorrow or grief that is spiritual, that is supernatural; Ezekiel.
36.25, 26. Godly sorrow is a gift from God, Job 23.16. God makes my heart soft.
No hand but a divine hand can make the heart soft and tender under the sight
and sense of sin. Nature may easily work a man to mourn, and melt, and weep,
under worldly losses, crosses and miseries, as it did David's men, 1 Samuel 30.4.
But it must be grace, it must be a supernatural principle that must work the
heart to mourn for sin.

Peter's sorrow was godly, but Judas his sorrow was worldly; Peter mourns over
the evil of sin, but Judas mourns over the evil of punishment. David mourns
over his sin, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
sight, Psalm. 51.4. And so 2 Samuel 24.10. And David's heart smote him after he
had numbered the people; and David said unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in
that I have done, and now I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy
servant, for I have done foolishly. David does not cry out, take away the
threatened famine, but take away the iniquity of thy servant; nor he does not
cry out, take away the enemies of thy servant, but take away the iniquity of
thy servant; nor he does not say, take away the pestilence from the Land, but
take away the iniquity of thy servant. But now when Pharaoh was under
judgments, he never cries to the Lord to take away his sins, his pride, his
hardness, his obdurateness, his envy, his malice, his hatred, etc. but he cries
out, take away the judgment, take away the judgment, take away the frogs, take
away the lice, take away the caterpillars, etc. But under all these dreadful
and amazing judgments that he was under, such a word as this never fell from
his lips, take away my sin, O Lord, take away my sins; thy judgments do
terrify me, but my sins will damn me, and therefore what ever becomes of my
life, kingdom and crown, take away my sins and save my soul. David saw sin to
be a greater evil, than flying before his enemies, or than famine or pestilence
was; and therefore he desires rather to be rid of his sins, than to be rid of
the punishment that was due to his sin; but Pharaoh saw no such evil in sin,
and therefore he cries out, take away the plague, take away the plague. And Job
upon the dunghill cries out, I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou
preserver of men? Job Job 7.20.
does not cry out, O, I have lost all my substance, I am bereaved of all my
children, I am set as naked upon the dunghill as ever I was born; my friends
reproach me, my wife tempts me to curse my God, which is ten thousand times
worse than to curse my self; Satan persecutes me, and God has not only forsaken
me, but is also become a severe enemy to me, etc. Job cries out of his sin, and
not of his sufferings; a deep sense of his sins swallows up as it were, all
sense of his sufferings.

And so that great Apostle Paul does not cry out, O wretched man that I am,
that bonds attend me in every place, and that I have neither house nor home to
go to, and that I am despised, scorned, reproached and persecuted, and that I
am accounted factious, seditious, rebellious, erroneous, and that I am looked
upon as the offscouring of the world, etc. O no, but he cries out of his sin;
O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans
7.23, 24.

So the Prophet Micah, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned, Micah 7.9. Though of all burdens the indignation of the Lord be the
greatest burden, yet divine indignation is but a light burden in comparison of
sin. A gracious soul can better stand under the burden of God's indignation for
sin, than it can stand under the burden of sin it self, which has kindled that
indignation, etc.

Thirdly, Godly sorrow is a great sorrow, it is a superlative mourning, like the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo, and a bitterness, as one is
in for his firstborn, Zech. 12.10, 11. And so the Church, My bowels are
troubled within me, mine heart is turned within me; for I have grievously
re^elled, Lamen. 1.20. And David watered his couch with his tears, Psalm. 6.6.
And Mary Magdalen wept much, as Well as she loved much, Luke 7. And Peter went
out and wept bitterly, Mat. 26. ult. Clement observes, that all the time that
Peter lived after this great fall, he would every night, when he heard the cock
crow, fall upon his knees and weep bitterly. Hosea 7.14.
Look, as shallow brooks make the greatest noise, so hypocrites and formalists
may howl, and roar, and cry, and make more noise than the true penitent; but
yet the sorrow of a true penitent is more inward, secret, solid, still and
deep. As you know the deepest Rivers run most silently, and make least noise,
so the deepest sorrow makes least noise. The mourning of repenting souls, Ezekiel.
7.16. Isa. 51.20. Isa. 59.11.
under the apprehensions of their sins, is like the mourning of Doves; but the
mourning of wicked men under the apprehension of their sins, is like the
bellowing of Bulls, and roaring of Bears.

heart may mourn for great sins, that make great wounds in his conscience and
credit, and that leave a great blot upon his name, or that waste or rot his
body, or destroy his estate, or that expose him to public scorn and shame,
etc. Prove. 5.8-14. but for sins of omission, for wandering thoughts, idle words,
deadness, coldness, slightness in religious duties and services, unbelief,
secret pride, self-confidence, and a thousand more such gnats as these he can
swallow without any remorse.

But now godly sorrow is of a general extent, it mourns as well for small sins
as for great. David's heart smote him, as well for cutting off the lap of Readiness
garment, as it did for killing of Uriah with the sword. A gracious soul weeps
over many sins, that none can charge upon him but God and his own conscience,
Psalm. 19.12. O cleanse thou me from secret faults.

Yea, let me say that godly sorrow and grief extends not only to a man's own
sins, but also to the sins of others as well as his own, Ezekiel. 9.4, 5. And this
you may see also in David, Psalm. 119.53, 136, 158. And in Jeremiah, Jer. 9.1,
2, 3. And in Paul, Phil. 3.18. And in Lot, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. And if you please to
turn to my Treatise on Holiness, you may see seven special arguments for this
their practice, Page 139 to page 145. and therefore a touch in this place may
suffice.

Fifthly, Godly sorrow is a lasting sorrow, it is a durable David's sins were
always before him, Psalm. 51.3. though his Absalom nor his Bathsheba were not
ever before him. Godly sorrow will every day follow sin hard at hells. Look, as
a wicked man (in respect of his desire and will to sin) would sin for ever, if
he should live for ever; so I may say, if a godly man should live for ever, he
would sorrow for ever. After Paul had been converted many years (some think
fourteen) you shall find him a mourning and lamenting over his sins, Romans 7. An
ingenious child will never cease mourning, till he ceases from offending an
indulgent father. Though sin and godly sorrow were never born together, yet
whilst a believer lives in this world, they must live together. And indeed holy
joy and godly sorrow are no ways inconsistent, Psalm. 2.11. yea, a godly man's
eyes are always fullest of tears, when his heart is fullest of holy joy, etc.
A man may go joying and mourning to his grave, yea to heaven at the same time.

But now the sorrow, the grief of wicked men for sin, it is like a morning
cloud, or the early dew, or the crackling of thorns under a pot, or a Post that
quickly passes by, or a dream that soon vanishes, or like a tale that is
told, etc. their sorrowful hearts and mournful eyes soon dry up together. As
you may see in Esau, Ahab, Pharaoh and Judas; but the streams of godly sorrow
will last and run, as long as sin hangs upon us, and dwells in us, 1 Cor. 15.9.
I am the least of the Apostles, that am not meet to be called an Apostle,
because I persecuted the Church of God. Psalm. 25.7. Remember not the sins of my
youth, nor my transgressions. David prays to the Lord, not only to forgive
but also to forget, both the sins of his youth, and the sins of his age. David
remembered all his faults, both of former and of later times. David was well in
years when he defiled himself with Bathsheba; and this he remembers and mourns
over, Psalm. 51. And it is very observable, that God charged his people for to
remember old sins, Deuteronomy. 9.7. Remember and forget not how thou provokedst the
Lord thy God to wrath in the wilderness. Repentance is a grace, and must have
its daily operation as well as other graces, witness the very covenant of grace
it self, Ezekiel. 16.62, 63. I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou
shall know that I am the Lord, that thou may remember and be confounded, and
never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward
thee for all that thou have done. Certainly a true penitent can no more
satisfy himself with one act of repentance, than he can satisfy himself with
one act of faith, or or with one act of hope, or with one act of love, or with
one act of humility, or with one act of patience, or with one act of
self-denial. Godly sorrow is a Gospel Grace that will live and last as well and
as long as other graces, it is a spring that in this life can never be drawn dry.

Sixthly, Godly sorrow is a divorcing sorrow, it divorces It is an excellent
saying of Austin, He does truly bewail the sins he has committed, who never
commits the sins he has bewailed.
there is a strong firm league between every sinner and his sin, Isa. 28.15,
18. but when godly sorrow enters, it dissolves that league, it separates
between a sinner and his sin, it sets the soul at an everlasting distance from
sin. The union between the root and the branches, the foundation and the
building, the head and the members, the father and the child, the husband and
the wife, the body and the soul are all near, very near unions; yet that
between a sinner and his sin seems to be a nearer union. Observable is the
story of Phaltiel. 2 Samuel 3.14, 15, 16.
You know when David had married Michol, Saul injuriously gave her to another;
but when David came to the crown, and sent forth his Royal commands that his
wife should be brought to him, her husband dares not but obey, brings her on
her journey, and then not without great reluctance of spirit, takes his leave
of her. But what was Phaltiel weary of his wife, that he now forsakes her? O
no, he was enforced, and though she was gone, yet he had many a sad thought
about parting with her, and he never leaves looking till he sees her as far as
Baharim, weeping and bemoaning her absence. Just thus stands the heart of every
unregenerate man toward his sins, as Phaltiel's heart stood toward his wife.
But when the springs of godly sorrow rise in the soul, the league, the
friendship, the union that was between the sinner and his sins, comes to be
dissolved and broken in pieces, Hosea 14.8. All godly sorrow sets the heart
against sin; he that divinely mourns over sin, cannot live in a course of sin;
when of all bitters God makes sin to be the greatest bitter to the soul, then
the soul bids an everlasting farewell to sin; now the soul in good earnest bids
adieu to sin for ever. O Sirs!
this is a most certain Maxim (to live and die with) that either a man's sins
will make an end of his mourning, or else his mourning will make an end of his
sin; for he that holds on sinning, will certainly leave off mourning (no man
can make a trade of sin, and yet keep his heart in a mourning frame) but he
that holds on mourning for sin, will certainly leave off the trade of sin, holy
grief for sin, will sooner or later break off all leagues and friendships with
sin. Isa. 59.1, 2.
As sin makes a separation between God and a man's soul, so godly sorrow makes
a separation between a man's soul and his sin. All holy mournings over sin,
will by degrees issue in the wasting and weakening of the strength and power of
sin, nothing below the death and destruction of sin will satisfy that soul
that truly mourns over sin.

But now, though you may find an unsound heart sometimes a lamenting over his
sins, yet you shall never find him a leaving off his sins. Pharaoh lamented
over his sin, crying out, I have sinned, Exodus 9.27. and 10.16.
the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. And again, Then Pharaoh
called for Moses and for Aaron in haste, and he said, I have sinned against the
Lord your God, and against you. But though you find him here lamenting and
complaining over his sin, yet you never find him leaving or forsaking of his
sin. So Saul could cry out, he had sinned, but yet he still continued in his
sin; he acknowledged that he did evil in persecuting of David, and yet he still
held on persecuting of him. An unsound heart mourns over sin, and yet he holds
on in a course of sin; he sins and mourns, and mourns and sins, and commonly
all his mourning for sin does but the more imbolden him in a way of sin; but
the gracious soul says with Job, Job 34.32.
If I have done iniquity, I will do it no more. He laments over sin and leaves
it, he confesses it and forsakes it, and he is as willing to forgo it, as he is
willing that God should forgive it.

Zech. 12.10. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn
for him, as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him,
as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. Look, as all legal sorrow
flows from a legal faith, as you may see in Ahab's and the Ninevites, so all
Evangelical sorrow flows from an Evangelical faith; They shall look upon him
whom they have pierced, and mourn. All gracious mourning flows from looking,
from believing; nothing breaks the heart of a sinner like a look of faith; all
tears of godly sorrow drop from the eye of faith; godly sorrow rises and falls,
as faith rises and falls; faith and godly sorrow are like the fountain and the
flood, which rise and fall together. The more a man is able by faith to look
upon a pierced Christ, the more his heart will mourn over all the dishonours
that he has done to Christ; the more deep and wide the wounds are that faith
shows me in the heart and sides of Christ, the more my heart will be wounded
for sining against Christ.

Again, godly sorrow is not an enemy, but a friend to holy joy. I have read of
a holy man, who lying upon his sick bed, and being asked which were his
joyfullest days that ever he had, cried out, O give me my mourning days, give
me my mourning days again, for they were the joyfullest days that ever I had.
The higher the springs of godly sorrow rise, the higher the tides of holy joy
rise; his graces will flourish most, who Evangelically mourns most. Grace
always thrives best in that garden (that heart) that is watered most with the
tears of godly sorrow. He that grieves most for sin, will rejoice most in God;
and he that rejoices most in God, will grieve most for sin.

Again, the more a man apprehends of the love of God, and of the love of
Christ; and the more a man tastes and is assured of the love of the Father, and
of the love of the Son, the more that person will grieve and mourn, that he has
offended, provoked and grieved such a Father, and such a Son. Remember this, as
a man's assurance of peace and reconciliation with God rises, so his grief for
sin rises; the more clear and certain evidences a man has of the love and
favor of God to his soul, the more that man will grieve and mourn for sinning
against such a God. There is nothing that thaws and melts the heart, that
softens and breaks the heart, like the warm beams of divine love; as you may
see in the case of Mary Magdalen, Luke 7. she loved much, and she wept much,
for much was forgiven her; a sight of the free grace and love of Christ toward
her, in an act of forgiveness, broke her heart all in pieces. A man cannot stand
under the shinings of divine love with a frozen heart, nor yet with dry eyes;
the more a man sees of the love of Christ, and the more a man tastes and enjoys
of the love of Christ, the more that man will grieve and mourn for all the
dishonours that he has done to Christ. The more an ingenious child sees, and
tastes, and enjoys of his fathers love, the more he grieves and mourns that
ever he should offend such a father, or provoke such a father, who has been so
loving and indulgent toward him. Injuries done to a friend cut deep, and the
more near, and dear, and beloved a man's friend is to him, the more a man is
afflicted and troubled for any wrongs or injuries that are done to him; and
just so it is between God and a gracious soul.

The free love and favor of God, and his unspeakable goodness and mercy
manifested in Jesus Christ to poor sinners, is the very spring and fountain of
all Evangelical sorrow; nothing breaks the heart of a poor sinner like the
sight of God's free love in a Redeemer. A man cannot seriously look upon the
firstness, the freeness, the greatness, the unchangeableness, the
everlastingness, and the matchlessness of God's free favor and love in Christ,
with a hard heart, or with dry eyes, Ezekiel. 36.31. compared with verse. 25, 26.
O! who is there that has but one spark of ingenuity, that can read over that
heartbreaking Scripture with dry eyes? Isa. 43.22, 23, 24. See Isa. 57.17, 18,
19.
But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou have been weary of me, O
Israel; thou have not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt offerings,
neither have thou honored me with thy sacrifices, I have not caused thee to
serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense; thou have bought me no
sweet cane with money, neither have thou filled me with the fat of thy
sacrifices, but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me
with thine iniquities, Now a man would think, after all this horrid abuse put
upon God, this would certainly follow: Therefore I will plague and punish thee,
therefore my wrath shall smoke against thee, therefore my soul shall abhor
thee, therefore I will shut up my loving kindness in displeasure against thee,
therefore I will show no more mercy toward thee, therefore I will hide my face
for ever from thee, therefore I will take vengeance on thee, therefore I will
rain hell out of heaven upon thee, etc. O! but read and wonder, read and
admire, read and stand amazed and astonished, read and refrain from tears if
thou can, ver. 25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for
mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. The Prophets expression in that,
Zech. 12.10. is very observable; They shall look upon him whom they have
pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one that mourns for his only son.
Now it is observable in a fathers mourning for an only son, there is nothing but
pure love, sincere love, hearty love; but in a sons mourning for his father,
there may be and often is a great deal of self-love, self-respect, because the
child may run and read in his father's death, his own loss, his own ruin, his
own undoing; but in the father's mourning for an only son, a man may run and
read the integrity, purity, and ingenuity of the father's love; and it is only
such a love as this as sets the soul a mourning and a lamenting over a
crucified Christ. The thoughts and fears of wrath, of hell, and of
condemnation, works unsound hearts to mourn; but it is the sight of a bleeding,
dying Savior that sets ingenious, gracious souls a mourning.

Eighthly and lastly, Godly sorrow, grief or mourning, 2 Cor. 7.11.
and they are these seven.

First, What carefulness or study; (...). 1. Concomitant of godly sorrow.
the word notes the serious intention of the mind, and the diligence and
dexterity of the soul in shunning and avoiding sin, and arming of the soul
against all occasions and temptations thereunto. The great care of the
repenting soul is to leave all sin, to shake off all sin, to avoid all sin, and
to weaken, and subdue, and bring under all sin. O! the care, the caution, the
circumspection, the vigilance, the strivings and the strugglings of the
repenting soul against temptations and corruptions.

2. Concomitant of godly sorrow.
Secondly, Yea what clearing of your selves, (...), Apology or defense; which is
not done either by denying of sin, or by excusing of sin committed, but by
confession of sin, As the child makes his defense and apology to his father,
not by denying or defending his faults, but by confessing and disclaiming of
them; so does the penitent soul carry it toward God.
and disliking of sin, and bewailing of sin, and by walking quite cross and
contrary to the sin confessed, disliked and bewailed; as Zacheus did, Luke
19.8. and as the Jailor did, Acts 16.33. The true penitent has no ways to clear
himself, but by arraigning, judging and condemning of himself, 1 Cor. 11.31.
For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. When men judge
themselves, and condemn themselves, God is prevented, and the Devil defeated,
as having nothing to say against them but what they have said before;
when men acknowledge their sins, and aggravate their sins, and pass the
sentence of condemnation upon themselves for their sins, they shall find their
acquittance from them fairly drawn in the blood of Christ. Repentance for sin
takes off the guilt of sin, and sin bewailed is as if it had never been
committed; and this becomes the soul's Apology, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22.

3. Concomitant of godly sorrow.
Thirdly, Yea what indignation or stomach, (...), wrath unto grief; it notes the
very rising of the stomach with rage, and a being angry unto fretting, fuming
and sickness. Again, it notes the very height of anger and rage. The true
penitent is not so exceeding angry with himself for any thing, as he is angry
with himself for his sins. Indignation here imports the turning of all the
passions of the soul wholly against sin. There are no men in the world so hot
and angry against themselves for their sins, Isa. 2.20.
as penitents are; witness those that polluted the Idols that they had
perfumed, Isa. 30.22. witness David, Psalm. 73.22. witness Ephraim, Hosea 14.8.
and witness Paul, Romans 7.22, 23. There are none that fret, and fume, and chafe
at themselves for sin, as penitent souls do; there are none that loath
themselves, that abhor themselves, and that are weary of themselves, upon the
account of their sins, like penitent souls. It Is not this thing, nor that, nor
this enemy, nor that, nor this party, nor that, nor this design, nor that; but
sin that is the main, the grand object of a penitents hatred, scorn, wrath,
rage, reproach, disgrace and contempt, etc. He that would be angry and sin not,
must be angry at nothing but sin. If some men would but spend more of their
anger and indignation against their sins, they would not be so angry as they
are with their brethren, that in disputable things differ from them.

Fourthly, Yea what fear of God's displeasure, 4. Concomitant of godly sorrow.
and of doing any more so wickedly before the Lord. Penitent souls are of all
souls the most trembling souls, the most timorous souls, Prove. 28.14. Blessed
is the man that fears always. The penitent Christian has still a jealous eye
upon his own heart, words and ways; he is very apt to suspect a snake under
every flower, and to fear a snare in every creature-comfort. The burnt child
dreads the fire; he that has been once stung hates a snake, he that has been in
danger of drowning, trembles at the thoughts of going by water; and he that has
once broke his leg, rides and walks with a fear of diligence and vigilance all
his life after. I have read of the Dove, that she is afraid of every feather
that has grown upon a Hawk; the very sight of any of the Hawks feathers,
brings as much terror upon her, as if she saw the Hawk her self; such a native
dread is (it seems) implanted in her, that it detests and abhors the very sight
of any such feather. In every penitent God implants such a holy fear, such a
filial fear, such a reverential fear, such a fear of diligence and vigilance,
that the penitent Christians heart rises, detests and abhors, not only gross
sins, but the least motions, inclinations and temptations to sin. They that
have paid dear for past guilt, that have known what an aching heart, a wounded
conscience, and a bleeding soul means, that have experienced what the frowns of
God, the threatenings of God, and the wrath of God means, will certainly beware
of sin, watch and war against it, and fear to fall into it.

5. Concomitant of godly sorrow.
Fifthly, Yea what vehement desire, (...), it signifies such a desire of
fervency, that can admit of no delay; it notes such a desire as produces
diligence, activity, and industry. The true penitent is full of fervent and
vehement desires to be rid of his sins; Rachel was never more vehement and
fervent in her desires after children, nor David after the water of the well
Bethlehem, nor the hunted Heart after the waterbrooks, nor the betrothed Virgin
for her marriage day, nor the Apprentice for his freedom, nor the Captive for
his ransom, nor the Soldier for the conquest, nor the sick Man for his cure,
nor the condemned Man for his pardon, than the true penitent is vehement and
fervent in his desires to have his lusts subdued, Romans 7.22, 23, 24
mortified and destroyed. Many a day have I sought death with tears (said
blessed Cowper) not out of distrust, impatience or perturbation, but because I
am weary of sin, and fearful of falling into it. If you ask the penitent, why
do you hear, pray, read, and apply your self so seriously, so frequently, so
unweariedly, and so constantly to all sin-subduing administrations? he will
tell you, it is out of a vehement and fervent desire that he has to he rid of
his sins. If you ask him again, why he is so much in complaining against sin,
in mourning over sin, and in warring against sin? etc. he will tell you, out of
a vehement and earnest desire that he has to be fully and finally delivered
from sin.

6. Concomitant of godly sorrow.
Sixthly, Yea what zeal. Zeal is an extreme heat of all the affections set
against sin, and working strongly toward God. David's zeal did eat up his sin
as well as himself. And Paul was as zealous in propagating the Gospel, as he
had been furious in persecuting of it. Many men's zeal is hot and burning, when
scorns and reproaches are cast upon them; but the penitent man's zeal is most
hot and burning, when Religion is scorned, Saints persecuted, truth endangered,
and the great and dreadful name of God blasphemed, etc. The zeal of a true
penitent will carry him on in a course of godliness, and in a course of
mortification, in spite of all the diversions and oppositions that the world,
the flesh, and the devil can make. Holy zeal is a fire that will make its way
through all things, that stands between God and the soul. The true penitent is
unchangably resolved to be hid of his sins what ever it cost him; who ever
escapes, who ever lives, he is fully determined his lusts shall die for it;
only remember this, though zeal should eat up our sins, yet it must not eat up
our wisdom, no more than policy should eat up our zeal.

Seventhly, Yea what revenge. The true penitent revenges himself upon himself
for his sins, 7. Concomitant of godly sorrow.
not by whips and scourges as the Papists do; 1 Cor. 9.27. A penitent sinner
loathes the very scars of his sins after they are healed, Nazian.
but by buffetting the flesh, and bringing it into subjection by fasting and
prayer, and by crossing of his lusts, and loading of them with chains, and by
di^^ding the sword of mortification against them, and by withholding from them
that fuel that might feed them, and by the use of all other holy exercises,
whereby the old man, the body of sin and death may be subdued to the obedience
and discipline of the Spirit of God. Holy revenge will show it self by
contradicting of corrupt self, and by a severe chastising and punishing of all
those instruments that have been servants to the flesh; as you may see by the
daughters of Israel in dedicating their looking-glasses, by which they had
offended, Exodus 38.8.
to the service of the Sanctuary; Acts 19.19.
and as you may see by the Ephesians burning of their costly and curious books
before all men; Luke 7.
and by M^ry Magdalens wiping of Christ's feet with her hair, wherewith
formerly her fond and foolish lovers were enticed and entangled. And the same
spirit you may see working in Zacheus, Luke 19.8, 9. and in the Jailor, Acts
16.23, 24, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34. And so blessed Cranmer thrust his right hand
first into the fire, that being the hand by which he subscribed the Popish
Articles, revengfully crying out, This unworthy right hand, this unworthy right
hand, as long as he could speak. The common language of holy revenge is this;
Lord, pour out all thy wrath, and all thy fierce anger, and all thy fiery
indignation, upon this lust, and that lust; Lord, bend thy bow, and shoot all
the arrows of thy displeasure, into the very heart of my strong corruptions;
Lord, when will thou rain hell out of heaven upon this proud heart, this
unbelieving heart, this unclean heart, this worldly heart, this froward heart,
this treacherous heart of mine, etc. I have read of Hannibal, that when he saw
a pit full of the blood of his enemies, he cried out with much content and
delight, O, beautiful sight! So when a penitent Christian sees his spiritual
enemies, his strong corruptions, all in a goar blood. O! how delightfully and
rejoycingly does he cry out, O, beautiful sight! O, blessed sight, that ever I
have seen! Exodus 15.
When the children of Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the Seashore, then
they sang a song of praise; the Application is easy. O Sirs! let no man
deceive his own immortal soul; for it is most certain, that repentance to life
has all these lively companions attending of it. Sound repentance, and the
companions of it, are born together, and will live and continue together till
the penitent soul changes earth for heaven, grace for glory. And let thus much
suffice for the first part of true repentance, etc.

The second part of true repentance lies in confession of sin, which flows out
of a contrite heart; I mean, not a bare, formal, empty confession (such as is
common amongst the worst of sinners, as that we are all sinners, and stand in
need of a Savior, God help us, God be merciful unto us, etc.) but of such a
confession of sin as arises from a true sight and full sense of sin, and from
the due apprehensions of a righteous Law that is transgressed, and a holy God
that is provoked, etc. When tongue and heart goes together, when the tongue
speaks out of the abundance of the heart, when the tongue is the faithful
interpreter of the heart, freely, ingenuously and humbly acknowledging
iniquity, transgression and sin; and the penitent judging himself worthy of
death, of wrath, of hell, and unworthy of the least mercy and favor from God,
etc.

Now such a confession as this is you shall find in repenting sinners; and if
you look again, you shall find those persons so confessing to be under the
capacity of the promise of the forgiveness of their sins, etc.

First, You shall find repenting sinners confessing their Ezra 9.6. O my God, I
am ashamed and blush to lift up my face unto thee, my God; for our iniquities
are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up unto the heavens.
Repenting sinners confess their sins, etc.
Ver. 10. And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? for we have
forsaken thy commandments, etc. Psalm. 51.3. I acknowledge my transgressions,
and my sin is ever before me. Ver. 4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned,
and done this evil in thy sight, Dan. 9.4, 5. I prayed unto the Lord my God,
and made my confession, and said, O Lord, the great and dreadful God, etc. We
have sinned and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled,
even by departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments, etc. Ver. 8. O
Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day. Luke 15.18. I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him,
father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee. Ver. 19. And am no more
worthy to be called thy son, etc. 1 Cor. 15.9. For I am the least of all the
Apostles, that am not meet to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the
Church of God, 1 Timothy 1.13. Who was before a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and
injurious, etc. Isa. 53.6. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned
every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.
I might easily produce a hundred other Scriptures to prove that repenting
sinners are confessing sinners, but let these suffice, etc.

Secondly, If you please to cast your eyes upon other Scriptures, you shall
find these penitent confessing sinners to be expressly under the promises of the
forgiveness of sins, Confessing penitents are under the promises of
forgiveness, etc. Turn to that, Job 33.27, 28. and ponder upon it. Prove. 28.13.
He that covers his sins, shall not prosper; but he that confesses and
forsakes, shall have mercy. etc.
1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins. Psalm. 22.5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not
hid; I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and then forgavest
the iniquity of my sin, Se^ah. Levit. 26.40, 41, 42. If they shall confess
their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass which
then trespassed against me, and that also they have walked contrary unto me;
and that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the
land of their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they
then accept of the punishment of their iniquity: This will I remember my
covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with
Abraham will I remember. Jer. 3.12, 13. Return thou backsliding Israel, says
the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful,
says the Lord; only acknowledge thine iniquity. And observable is that prayer
of Solomon, 1 King. 8.47-50. If they shall bethink themselves, and repent and
make supplications to thee, saying, we have sinned, and have done perversely, we
have committed wickedness; then hear thou their prayer, and forgive thy people
that have sinned against thee.

But what are the properties or qualifications of true penitential confession
of sin?



Nehemiah, Ezra, Job, David, Daniel, Paul, Acts 26.10, 11. Ezra 9.9. Neh. 9.
Daniel 9. Psalm. 5. Job 49.4, 5.
etc. were free and voluntary in the confession of their sins, as all know that
have but read the Scripture. The true penitent confesses his sins with much
candor, ingenuity and freedom of spirit; he is as free in his confession of
sin, as he has been free in the commission of sin; his confessions are like
water which runs out of a spring with a voluntary freeness, but the confessions
of wicked men are like water that is forced out of a still with fire; their
confessions are forced and extracted merely from sense of pain and smart, or
from fear of punishments, etc. Pharaoh never confessed his sin till God brought
him to the rack, Exodus 10.16. 1 Samuel 15.24. Number. 22.23-35. Mat. 27.3, 4, 5.
nor Saul till he was in danger of losing his Crown and Kingdom, nor Balaam
till he sees the Angel stand with his drawn sword ready to slay him, nor Judas
till horror of conscience and the pangs of hell had surprised him, and taken
fast hold on him. Wicked men cast out their sins by confession, as Mariners do
their wares in a storm, wishing for them again in a calm; the confessions of
wicked men are commonly extorted or squeezed out, either by some outward
trouble, or by some inward distress; but penitential confession is free and
ingenuous, arising from an inward detestation of sin, and from the contrariety
of the heart to sin; and therefore were there no rod, no rack, ho wrath, no
hell, the true penitent would very freely and readily confess his sins; when
God is most free in bestowing of mercies, then are they most free in confessing
their iniquities, Hos. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. Look, as that is the best wine that flows
from the grape with least pressing, and as that is the best honey which drops
from the honeycomb without crushing; so those are the best confessions that
flow, that drop freely, voluntarily from the soul, etc.

Secondly, True penitential confession is full as well as free. Lam. 1.18, 19.
God loves neither halting nor mincing confessions. These undid the Pharisee,
Luke 18.11. As penitential confessions are not extorted, so they are not
straightened; sin must be confessed in its particular species and parts, all known
sins must be confessed fully, plainly, particularly, as you may see by turning to
these Scriptures, Lev. 26.40, 41, 42. and 19.21. Judge. 10.10. Psalm. 51. 1 Samuel
12.19. 1 Timothy 1.13. Acts 26.10, 11. Dan. 9.5, 6, 7, 8-17. Lev. 16.21, 22, etc.
Some there be that deny their sins with the Harlot, Prove. 30.20. Such is the
way of an adulterous woman, she eats and wipeth her mouth, and says, I have
done no wickedness. And others there be that father their sins on others, as
Adam did, Genesis 3.12. and as Eve did, ver. 13. and as Aaron did, Exodus 32.22.
and as Saul did, 1 Samuel 15.22. And many there are that hide their wickedness,
that conceal their wickedness, as that proud Pharisee did, Luke 18.11, 12. That
expression of the Prophet Hosea, Hosea 10.13.
You have plowed wickedness, is rendered by the Septuagint, You have concealed
wickedness, and indeed there is nothing more common to a wicked heart, than to
keep closs his sin, than to cover and hide his transgressions. And certainly,
this is that sore disease, that our first parents were sick to death of, almost
six thousand years ago; and therefore it is no wonder if we are all infected
with it. Job 31.33. We are but flesh and blood says one, it is my nature says
a second, I cannot help it says a third, I am not the first says a fourth,
'twas bad company drew me says a fifth, if it be a sin I am sorry for it says
a sixth, if it be naught I cry God mercy says a seventh. And thus wicked men
are as hypocritical in their confessions as they are in their professions, etc.
Man by nature is a vain glorious creature, apt to boast and brag of the sins
that he is free of, but unwilling to confess the sins that he is guilty of.
There are no men so prone to conceal their own wickedness, as those that are
most forward to proclaim their own goodness. There are many that are not
ashamed to act sin, who yet are ashamed to confess sin; but certainly of all
shame, that is the most shameful shame, that leads a man to hide his sins. But
now the true penitent he makes conscience of confessing small sins as well as
great sins, secret sins as well as open sins, Psalm. 90.8 Psalm. 19.12. David
confesses not only his great sins of murder and adultery, but he confesses also
his self-revenge intended against Nabal, and of his knife being so near Saul's
throat, when he cut off the lap of Readiness garment. A true Penitent is much in
confessing and lamenting over that secret pride, that secret fleshliness, that
secret worldliness, that secret hypocrisy, that secret vain glory, etc. that
is only obvious to God and his own soul. But it is quite otherwise with wicked
men; for they confess their grosser sins, but never observe their lesser sins;
they confess their open sins, but never lay open their secret sins. Cain
confesses his murdering of his brother, but never confesses his secret enmity
that put him upon washing his hands in his brother's blood. Pharaoh confesses
his oppression of the children of Israel, but he does not confess the pride of
his heart, nor the hardness of his heart. Judas confesses his betraying of
innocent blood, but he never confesses his covetousness, that put him upon
betraying of the Lord of glory. And others have confessed their Apostasy, who
have never confessed their hypocrisy that has led them to Apostasy, etc. Well,
this is certain, that those little sins, those secret sins, that never break a
sinners sleep, do often break a believers heart.

lip in it. Psalm. 51.31. Jer. 18.19, 20. Isa. 26.8, 9. Ezra 9.6. Psalm. 38.4.
Job 42.6 Luke 18.13.
The penitent man's confession springs from inward impressions of grace upon
his soul, he heels what he confesses, and his affections go along with his
confessions. The poor Publican smote upon his breast and confessed. Look, as
the sick man opens his disease to his Physician, feelingly, affectionately; and
as the Client opens his case to his Lawyer, feelingly, affectionately; so the
penitent opens his case, his heart to God, feelingly, affectionately; cold,
careless, verbal, formal, customary confessions are no small abominations in
the eye of God, Jer. 12.2. Such men's confessions will be their condemnations at
last, their tongues will one day cut their throats; though confession to men is
a work of the voice, yet confession to God must be the voice of the heart.
Sometimes the heart alone is sufficient without the voice, as you may see in
Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.13, 14, 15. but the voice is never sufficient without the
heart, as you may see in that, Isa. 29.13. Such who make confession of sin to
be only a lip-labor, such instead of offering the calves of their lips (as the
Prophet requires, Hosea 14.2.) do but offer the lips of calves.
Heart-confessions (without words) shall be effectual with God, and carry the
day in heaven, when all formal, verbal confessions, though they are never so
eloquent or excellent, shall be cast as dung in sinners faces, Isa. 1.12-16.
Mary Magdalen weeps, and sighs, and sobs, Luke 7.38.
but speaks never a word; and yet by her heart-confessions she carries it with
Christ, as is evident by his answer to her, Luke 7.48. H^ said unto her, thy
sins are forgiven thee. Penitent souls confess sin feelingly, but wicked men's
confessions make no impressions upon them, their confessions run through them
as wate^ runs through a pipe, without leaving any impression at al upon the
pipe. Wicked men do no more taste nor relish the evil of sin, the poison of
sin, the bitterness of sin in any of their confessions, than the pipe does
taste or relish the water that runs through it. Such who confess sin formally,
or rhetorically, and yet love sin dearly, heartily, shall never get good by
their confessions; certainly such confessions will never reach the heart of
God, that do not reach our own hearts; nor such confessions will never affect
the heart of God, that do not first affect our own hearts. Such as speak very
ill of sin with their tongues, and yet secretly wish well to sin in their
hearts, will be found at last, of all men the most miserablest. But,

Ezra 10.3.
so it is distinct and not confused. The true penitent has his particular and
special bills of indictment, he knows his sins of omission, and his sins of
commission; he remembers the sins that he has most rejoiced and delighted in,
he cannot forget the sins that have had most of his eye, his ear, his head, his
hand, his heart; the bypath in which he has most walked, and the
transgressions by which God has been most dishonored, his conscience most
wounded, and his corrupt nature most pleased and gratified, Psalm. 51.3.
are always before him. An implicit confession is almost as bad as an
implicit faith; wicked men c^mmonly confess their sins by wholesale, we are
all sinners; but the true penitent confesses his sins by retail. Though it
cant't be denied but that in some cases a general confession may be penitent,
Luke 18.13.
as you see in the Publican, God be merciful to me a sinner; yet it must be
granted, that a true penitent cannot content nor satisfy himself with a general
confession. And therefore David confesses his particular sins of adultery and
bloud-guiltiness, 1 Timothy 1.13.
and Paul particularizeth his sins of blasphemy, and persecution, and
injuriousness against the Saints. And more you have of this in that, Act.
26.10, 11. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the Saints did I
shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief Priests; and when
they were put to death, I gave my voice against them; and I punished them often
in every Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad
against them, I persecuted them even unto strange Cities. So Judge. 10.10. And
the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, saying, we have sinned against
thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also served Balaam. We have
sinned, there is their general confession; we have forsaken our God, and also
served Balaam, there is their distinct and particular confession, both of their
Apostasy and Idolatry. And so 1 Samuel 12.19. And all the people said unto
Samuel, pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God, that we dye not, for we
have added unto all our sins this evil, to ask us a King. They were
discontented with that government that the Lord had set over them, and they
would need; be governed by a King, after the mode of other Nations; and this
sin they confess distinctly and particularly before the Lord and Samuel. And so
David in that, 1 Chronicles. 21.17. And David said unto God, is it not I that
commanded the people to be numbered? even I it is that have sinned and done evil
indeed; but as for these sheep, what have they done? Thus that princely Prophet
confesses that particular sin that he then lay under the guilt of. And so
Zacheus makes a particular confession, he does as it were point with his finger
at that wrong and injustice that he had been guilty of; Behold Lord, half my
goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man, by false
accusation, I restore him fourfold. Thus you see that true penitents make a
particular confession of their right eye sins, and of their right hand sins;
and indeed, what is confession of sin, but a setting our sins in order before
the Lord? and how can this be done but by a distinct and particular enumeration
of them? But to prevent mistakes, this must be taken with a grain of salt, this
must be understood with this limitation; we are to confess our sins distinctly,
particularly, so far as we know them, so far as we are acquainted with them.
There are many thousand sins which we commit, that we know not to be sins, and
there are many thousand sins committed by us, that cannot be remembered by us.
Now certainly it is impossible for us to recount or confess those sins that we
know not, that we remember not; so that our particular confessions can only
reach to known sins, so far as we can call them to mind; for indeed our
particular acts of sin are innumerable, they are more in number than the hairs
of our head; and indeed, we are as well able to tell the stairs of heaven, and
to number the sands of the Sea, and to recount all the sparing mercies, the
pitying mercies, the preventing mercies, the succouring mercies, the supporting
mercies, and the delivering mercies of God, as we are able to tell, to number,
to recount, the individual particular acts of sin that we are guilty of; yet so
far as the knowledge and memory of a penitent Christian reaches, so far his
confession reaches. But now, wicked men confess sin in the general, in the
lump; as Tharaoh, I have sinned; and their con^essions are commonly confused,
and at random. When and where do you find wicked men confessing their sins
distinctly or particularly before God or man? this is none of the least of
their miseries, that they have not a clear, distinct, particular view of their
own corruptions and abominations. But,

Psalm. 32.5. Levit. 16.21.
by confessing not only the kinds and acts (so far as he knows and remembers
them) but the circumstances of them also. There are (sometimes) some
circumstances that may somewhat lessen a penitent man's sins; now these he
readily and easily passes over, but then there are other circumstances which do
exceedingly heighten and aggravate his sins, and that makes them more heinous
and dangerous; and these he carefully and faithfully acknowledges. The
penitential confessions recorded in the old and new Testament, are full of
exaggerating expressions, as is evident in these instances. Ezra at once
heightens and aggravates their sins by this circumstance, that they had been
committed against manifold experiments that they had had, both of the severity,
and also of the mercy of the Lord, Ezra 9. and so does Nehemiah also, Neh. 9.
The like instance you have in Daniel, Chap. 9. 5, 6. We have sinned, and have
committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by
departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments: neither have we hearkened
unto thy servants the Prophets which spoke in thy Name, to our Kings, our
Princes and our Fathers, and to all the people of the Land. In these words you
have seven circumstances that Daniel uses in confessing of his and the peoples
sins, and all to heighten and to aggravate them. First, We have sinned.
Secondly, We have committed iniquity. Thirdly, We have done wickedly. Fourthly,
We have rebelled against thee. Fifthly, We have departed from thy percepts.
Sixthly, We have not hearkened unto thy servants. Seventhly, Nor our Princes,
nor all the people of the Land. These seven aggravations which Daniel reckons
up in his confession, are worthy of our most serious consideration. The same
spirit you may find working in Peter, Mark 14.72. When he thought thereon be
wept; or nearer the Original; When he cast all these things one upon another,
he wept. Ah wretch! that ever I was born, that ever I should deny the Lord that
bought me; that ever I should deny him who has, not only externally, but also
internally called me; that ever I should deny him that made me an Apostle, that
fed me at his table, that beautified me with his grace, and that in the Mount
showed me some glimpses of his glory; that ever I should deny him who has
brought me out of a state of death and wrath, into a state of life and love;
that ever I should deny him that has been the best, the wisest, the holiest,
the tenderest, the faithfullest, and the noblest Master that ever man served.
Ah, wretch that I am! he forewarned me of this sin beforehand, that I might be
not only cautioned but armed against it, and yet I denied him; I promised him
beforehand, that I would never deny him, that I would never forsake him, that I
would never turn my back upon him, and yet like a base coward, I have denied
the captain of my salvation; yea, this very night, and no longer ago, did I say
again and again, that I would not deny him, and yet now, even now, I have most
shamefully denied him; yea, I told him, that though all others, should deny
him, yet would not I deny him, and yet in all the world there is not such
another to be found, that has so sadly, so desperately denied him, as I have
denied him, and that before a silly Maid; nay, more beast that I am to my
denying of him. I have added a most incredible lie, saying, I know not the man,
when there was not a man in all the world that I was so well acquainted with as
I was with Christ, feeding constantly at his table, There was scarce any Jew,
which knew not Christ by sight, he being very famous for the many miracles that
were wrote by him.
and drinking constantly of his cup, and living constantly upon his purse, and
waiting constantly upon his person, and being a constant eyewitness of all the
famous miracles that were wrought by him; nay, yet more monster that I am, I
did not only lie, but I also bound that lie with an hideous Oath, I did not
only say that I knew not the man, but I also swore I knew not the man; nay, yet
more than all this, I did not only basely deny him, I did not only tell an
incredible lie against my own light and conscience, I did not only bind a
fearful lie with a hideous oath, but I also fell a cursing and damning of my
self, for so much the Greek word (...) imports; I wished that the curse, the
wrath or vengeance of God might fall upon me if I knew the man, I wished my self
separated from the presence and glory of God if I knew the man: And woe and alas
to me, all this I did when my Lord and Master was near me, yea when he was upon
his trial; yea, and yet more, when all the world had forsaken him, yea, and yet
more, when I had the greatest and loudest call that ever I had to have stood by
him, and to have given my testimony for him! And thus Peter casting up all
these circumstances and aggravations together, and meditating seriously on
them, he went out and wept bitterly. Another famous instance of this you have
in Paul, Act. 26.10, 11. In these two verses the Apostle lays down no less
than eight aggravations of his sins, and all to greaten and heighten them, that
his soul might be the more ashamed and humbled in him, etc.

viz. Saints; that they were not sinners but Saints, that they were not
drunkards, swearers; adulterers, murderers, oppressors, Sabbath Breakers, but
Saints; Saints by calling, Saints by their high and holy calling, Saints by
profession, Saints by a Gospel-conversation. The Saints have I cast into prison.

Nazareth. O! it is dreadful to persecute men merely for professing of Christ,
and yet this I did; though their profession and practice went together, though
they lived as they professed, though I had nothing against them, but in the
matters of their God, yet upon that very single account did I persecute them.

Thirdly, If it had been but one, or two, or three, or five, many of the Saints
did I cast into prison. I have been a cruel ravening wolf, that have sucked the
blood not of a few, but of many of the precious lambs of Christ; I have neither
spared nor pitied any sex, but have broken into every house, haling and
dragging both men and women to prison, Act. 8.3. As for Saul, he made havoc of
the Church, entering into every house, and haling men and women, committed them
to prison.

Fourthly, Though he had cast them into prison, yet if he Joseph had, Act. 9.1,
2.
and as others have had, and as himself once had when he begot Onesimus in his
bonds, Philemon v. 10. and when Onesiphorus often refreshed him, and was not
ashamed of his chain, 2 Timothy 1.16, etc. or as the primitive Christians had, the
matter had not been so great. O, but I kept them closs prisoners; Many of the
Saints did I shut up in prison. I shut them up from friends, from relations,
and from all comfortable accommodations; and thus he further aggravates his sin.

Fifthly, If he had rested there, if he had proceeded no But I gave my voice
against them to put them to death. My heart and my hand was not only against
them, but my tongue also; if I could not kill them with my hand, I was ready
and willing to kill them with my tongue; if the casting voice fell upon me, I
would be sure to give it against them; I never wanted a word to do them a
mischief; if they wanted a word, instead of a knife to cut their throats, I
would be sure to lend them one.

Sixthly, He rises yet higher; for he does not only severely Italian, who first
made his enemy deny God, and then stabbed him, and so at once murdered both
body and soul. As there is no love to soul love, so there is no cruelty to soul
cruelty; and as there is no mischief to soul mischief, so there is no murder to
soul murder, and yet in this murder had Paul a hand. It Is sad to compel a man
to bear a burden beyond his strength, to lie in chains, to forsake his own
country, etc. but it is infinitely more sad, to compel a man to sin, to the
least sin; but saddest of all to compel a man to blaspheme, And yet this I did,
s^yes Paul, etc.

And I was exceedingly mad against them. He was mad with rage and wrath, he was
exceedingly mad with passion and fury against the dear Saints of God; mad men
think madly, and mad men speak madly, and mad men act madly against those they
are mad with; and so did he against the Saints. The Alcoran says, That God
created the Angels of light, and the Devils of the flame. Certainly, as God's
children are children of the light, so Satan's children are furious children,
wrathful children, children of the flame, children of madness; and such a one
was Paul, etc.

I did persecute them to strange Cities; them I did not kill I did scatter, I
forced them to leave both house and home; them whom God had joined together, I
put asunder; I made the husband run one way, and the wife and children another
way, and all of them glad to hide their heads in a corner. And thus you see,
that true penitents in the confession of their sins, do cloth their sins with
the highest aggravations imaginable. A penitent in his confession of sin cries
out, O! the sparing mercies, the preventing mercies, the succouring mercies,
the supporting mercies, the renewed mercies, the delivering mercies that I have
with a high hand sinned against. O, that clear light! O, that free love! O,
that Gospel grace! O, those bowels of mercy that I have sinned against! O, the
fatherly corrections, the dreadful warnings, the high resolutions, the serious
protestations, the frequent vows and promises that I have desperately sinned
against! O, the checks of conscience, the rebukes of conscience, the lashes of
conscience, the wounds of conscience, and the frequent motions of the spirit,
and strivings of the spirit, that I have sinned against! etc. But now wicked
men confess their sins slightly, carelessly, triflingly; they are careful and
skilful to hide their sins, to cloak their sins, and to extenuate and lessen
their sins; and with the unjust Steward, for an hundred to set down fifty. Luke
16.6.
All wicked men do commonly flatter themselves, that either their sins are not
sins when indeed they are, or that they are not great and grievous sins when
indeed they are, or that they are not so great and grievous as other men's sins
are when indeed they are more grievous and heinous than other men's sins are, so
far are they from aggravating of their sins; the truth is, wicked men are so
far from aggravating of their sins, that they are still extenuating of them,
and that by fathering of them, sometimes upon their constitutions, sometimes
upon bad company, sometimes upon their callings, sometimes upon Satan, and
sometimes upon chance, as they call it, etc. But no more of this, enough is as
good as a feast.

Sixthly, The true penitent confesses his sins humbly, sorrowfully. Benhadad's
servants) and with tears in his eyes; his confessions savor of contrition of
heart, and not of ostentation of spirit; contrition of heart, Levit. 23.27.28.
and confusion of face, is the common result of a penitential confession. David
waters his couch with his tears, ( Psalm. 6.6. and he mingles his meat with his
tears ( Psalm. 42.3.) and Ezra and Daniel confess their sins with wet eyes and
blushing cheeks. Confession without contrition, Ezra 9. Dan. 9.
neither pleases God nor profits man; confession is the language of the
tongue, contrition is the language of the heart, and God looks for both. Luke
18.13.
The Publican does not only confess his sins, but he smites also upon his
breast, as a man full of grief and sorrow; lying in the dust, and renting of
garments, and putting on sackcloath and ashes were of old required of those
that confessed their iniquities. The spirit of repentance is a spirit of
mourning. Penitential confessions are commonly attended with grief in the
heart, Compare these Scriptures together, Psalm. 51.17. Isa. 61.1. and 57.15 Job
16.20. Psalm. 119.136. Jer. 9.1. Jer. 31.18, 19.
and with shame in the face, Psalm. 38.18. For I will declare mine iniquity, I
will be sorry for my sin. He tells you not only that he will declare his
iniquity, but he tells you also, that he will be sorry for his sin. The same
spirit you may find working in Jacob, Hosea 12.4. yea, he had power over the
Angel and prevailed, he wept and made supplication unto him. The people of God
in the day of their confession, do not only say we have sinned, but they also
draw water and pour it out before the Lord in token of contrition, 1 Samuel 7.6.
Every sin is as a sword in a penitent man's bosom, and therefore whilst
confessions are in his mouth, you shall mostly find, either tears in his eyes,
or sorrow in his heart. And indeed, true confession of sin is many times rather
a voice of mourning, than a voice of words; sometimes a penitent man's eyes
will in some sort tell what his tongue can in no sort utter; many times the
penitent is better at weeping than he is at speaking, Psalm. 39.12. Hold not thy
peace at my tears. Tears have a voice (as well as blood has) and are very
prevalent Orators with God, Psalm. 6.8. The Lord has heard the voice of my
weeping. Penitent tears are undeniable Ambassadors, and they never return from
the throne of grace without an answer of grace. Tears are a kind of silent
prayers, which though they say nothing, yet they obtain pardon, they prevail
for mercy, and they carry the day with God, as you may see in that great and
clear instance of Peter; he said nothing, he confessed nothing that we read of,
but went out and wept bitterly, and obtained mercy. That prescription that God
gave to the Leper in the Law, is worthy of your most serious consideration;
it is in that, Levit. 13.45. And the Leper in whom the plague is, his clothes
shall be rent, and his bead bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper
lip, and shall cry, unclean, unclean. In these words the Leper stands charged
with four things; 1. To go in rent or torn garments, to note that there must be
brokenness and sorrow of heart joined with confession of sin. 2. To go
bare-headed, and that partly that men might not mistake him, but mainly to show
his humility under his present misery. 3. To put a covering upon his upper lip.
(Some read it, upon his Mouchaches) The Jews in their mournings used this
Ceremony among the rest, of covering their chin, mouth, Mouchaches, all under
the nose. Now the use of this Ceremony in the Leper, was partly to preserve
others from being infected by his loathsome breath, and partly to show that God
takes no pleasure nor delight in the breathings, the prayers of spiritual
Lepers, of wicked men. God loves not to hear good words drop from an ill mouth,
and partly to note that shame that must be mingled with his sorrow. 4. Twice to
proclaim his own uncleanness, unclean, unclean. And thus you see that there was
to be a closs connection between the Lepers confession and his contrition; and
thus it is with the true penitent; he does not only cry out, unclean, unclean,
but he also rents and tears his garments, that is, he joins contrition to his
confession.

But to prevent mistakes, and that I may not shoot an arrow, instead of giving
a cordial, to the weak and weary soul; let me only give you this short hint,
viz. That when the true penitent cannot pour out his soul in heart-melting
confessions before the Lord, yet then he can mourn over his own hardness of
heart; when he is at worst he can grieve that he cannot grieve, and mourn that
he cannot mourn, and melt that he cannot melt, and break that he cannot break;
and he can bless God for every rod, and every stroke, and every word, and every
work, and every Ordinance, and every frown, and every reproof, and every cross,
and every comfort, that has the least tendency to the melting and mollifying of
his soul. The true penitent always sets a very high price and value upon a
broken heart, though he has not the happiness always to have his heart broken.
I know that sometimes the penitent soul is so shut up, that if he might have
all the world he cannot mourn, he can only sit down, and sigh, and groan; nay,
if all the joys and delights of heaven were to be bought for one single tear,
he cannot shed it; and yet all this time he can grieve that he cannot grieve for
sin, and he can be sorry that he cannot be sorry for sin; and without all
peradventure this is in a measure true godly Gospel-sorrow for sin, etc.

But now wicked men confess their sins, but they never grieve for their sins;
they confess their sins, but they are not ashamed of their sins, Compare these
Scriptures together, Jer. 6.15. and 8.12. Zeph. 3.5. Isa. 3.9. Isa. 42.23. Heb.
6.6. Caligula used to say of himself, that he loved nothing better in himself,
than that he could not be asham^d, etc. Aug. confess. lib. 2. cap. 3.
they confess their sins, but they cannot blush for their sins. Though men of
good names, and of good natures, would be ashamed to be found doing of base
things, things that are below them, that are not worthy of them, yet the
generality of sinners are so bold and base, so ignorant, arrogant and impudent,
so frontless and graceless, etc. that they are no ways ashamed, no not of
those very sins that has put Christ to an open shame; yea, that has put the Sun
and Moon to a blush. Most sinners in these days have brows of brass, and
whores foreheads that cannot blush; they are so far from being ashamed of their
sins, that they think it a shame and disgrace not to sin, not to swear, and
whore, and curse, and be drunk, and profane Sabbaths, and despise Ordinances;
yea, there are many that are so far from being ashamed of their abominations,
that they even glory in them, like those in that, Phil. 3.19. They show their
sins as Sodom, they make both a sport of acting, and a jest of confessing their
sins. Thus Austin confesses that it was sometimes with himself, before the
Lord wrought upon him; I was stricken with such blindness, as that I thought it
a shame unto me to be less vile and wicked than my companions whom I heard
boast of their leudness, and glory so much the more, by how much they were the
more filthy; therefore (says he) lest I should be of no account, I was the
more vicious; and when I could not otherwise match others, I would feign that I
had done those things which I never did, lest I should seem so much the more
abject, by how much I was the more innocent; and so much the more vile, by how
much I was the more chaste. But for a close remember this, The true penitent
knows, that the more God has been displeased with the blackness of sin, the
better he will be pleased with the blushing of the sinner; and therefore he
cannot but blush when either he looks upon sin within him, or God above him. But,

Seventhly, Penitential confession it is believing and fiducial, Hosea 14.^.
though not always with a strong faith; it is not like the confession of a
Malefactor to the Judge, but like the confession of a child to his father, or
like the confession of a sick man to his Physician. As a penitent man has one
eye of sorrow upon his sin, so he has another eye of hope upon pardoning grace.
Thus David, Psalm. 51.
though he had sinned greatly, yet he hangs upon free mercy, and begs his
pardon believingly. Thus Daniel, Dan. 9.9.
To the Lord our God belongs mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him. Thus Sechaniah, Ezra 10.2. Ezra 10.2.
And Sechaniah the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam, answered and said
unto Ezra, we have trespassed against our God, and have taken strange wives of
the people of the Land, yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing.
If it were not for hope the heart would break; there was hope among them that
Israel would repent, and there was hope among them that God would have mercy
upon their repentance. And the same spirit was working in the Prodigal; I will
arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, father, I have sinned against
heaven and before thee. Luke 18.18.
Though he was a Prodigal, yet he would go to God as to a father, who knew how
to pity and forgive the mourning and repenting child. When confessions of sin
are mingled with hopes of mercy, and the soul draws near to God as a father,
then the heart breaks most, and melts and mourns most. That confession of sin
that is not mixed with some hope of pardon, and with some faith in the mercy of
God is not penitential but desperate. Cain in some sort confesses, Genesis 4.16.
but then he flies into the Land of Nod, and there he falls a building and
planting, partly in contempt of the dreadful doom God had past upon him, and
partly to drown the noise of his conscience, and despairing of ever obtaining
pardon in this world, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2.
or enjoying a house not made with hands in another world. Judas likewise
confesses his most heinous sin; I have sinned in betraying innocent blood; but
having no hope of pardon, Mat. 27.3, 4.
no faith in that innocent blood he had shed, he goes out and hangs himself.
Judas had no faith to mingle with his confession, he confesses despairingly not
believingly, and so goes forth and strangles himself. Since Adam fell in
paradise, there has not been one wicked man in the world (continuing in that
state) that has ever mixed faith with his sorrows, believing with his
confessing; it is only the penitent man that confesses sin believingly, and
that is pardoned graciously, The confessing penitent reasons thus with God;
Lord, though I am a sinful creature, yet thou art a merciful God; though I am
unworthy of mercy, yet thou forgivest sins freely; though my sins reach as high
as heaven, yet thy mercies teach above the heavens; I am here ready and willing
to accuse and condemn my self, and therefore be thou as ready and as willing to
absolve me, and forgive me. O Lord, though my sins are very many, yet thy
mercies are exceeding more; though I have multiplied my sins, yet thou can
multiply thy pardons; though I am a sinner, a very great sinner, yet there is
mercy with thee, that thou may be feared and loved, served and trusted; and
therefore in the face of all my sins, provocations and unworthiness, I will
look up for mercy, and wait for mercy. But,

Psalm. 51.10.
is attended with serious desires and earnest endeavors of reformation;
therefore forsaking of sin is annexed to confession of sin, Prove. 28.13. He that
covers his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and forsakes them
shall have mercy. Confession of sin must be joined with confusion of sin, or
all is lost; God will never cross the book, he will never draw the red lines of
Christ's blood over the black lines of our transgressions, except confessing
and forsaking go hand in hand. He that does not ^orsake his sin, as well as
confess it, forsakes the benefit of his confession. And indeed, there is no
real confession of sin, where there is no real forsaking of sin; it is not
enough for us to confess the sins we have committed, but we must peremptorily
resolve against the committing again the sins we have confessed; we must desire
as freely to forgo our sins, as we do desire God to forgive us our sins.
Confession of sin is a spiritual vomit; now you know, a man that is burdened in
his stomach, is heartily willing to be rid of that ^oad on his stomach that
does oppress nature; and so a man that is real in his confession of sin, is as
heartily willing to be rid of his sin, that lies as a lo^d upon his conscience,
as any sick man can be heartily willing to be rid of that load that lies upon
his stomach. The penitential confessor does as heartily desire to be delivered
from the power of his sins, as he does desire to be delivered from the sting
and punishment of his sins. This is observable in the confession of good
Sechaniah, Ezra 10.2, 3. We have trespassed against our God, and taken strange
wives of the people of the Land: Now therefore let us make a covenant with our
God to put away all the wives, and such as are born of them, according to the
counsel of my Lord, and those that tremble at the commandment of our God, and
let it be done according to the Law. And this was the former practice of the
children of Israel, who joined reformation with their confession, as you may
see in that, Judge. 10.15. We have sinned. Ver. 16. And they put away the
strange Gods from among them, and served the Lord, and his soul was grieved for
the misery of Israel. That, Job. 34.31, 32. is observable; Surely it is meet to
be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more; that
which I see not teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. And
the same spirit you may find working in those that were once given up to
sorcery and witchcraft, Act. 18. And many that believed came and confessed, and
showed their deeds. Ver. 19. Many also of them which used curious arts, brought
their books together, and burned them before all men. Penitential confession
leaves a holy awe and dread on the soul, to take heed of committing sins
confessed. Though a godly man may (in an hour of temptation, or in a day of
desertion, or in a season of God's withholding the gracious influences of
heaven from falling upon his soul) commit a sin which he has seriously confessed
and sadly bewailed, yet he retains in his course and practice, such a holy fear
and awe upon his heart, as in some measure proves armor of proof against
future commissions of sin. But now wicked men are very ready, bold, and
venturous to commit the same sins they have confessed, as you may see in Saul,
one while you shall have him confessing his sinful injuries against David with
tears; and soon after you shall find him pursuing of him in the wilderness of
Zaph with three thousand chosen men at his heels. Compare 1 Samuel 24.16, 17.
with Chap. 26.2, 3, 4 Exodus 9 27, 34.
The same evil spirit was predominant in Pharaoh, one day you shall have him
confessing his sin, and promising to let Israel go, and the next day you shall
find his heart hardened, and he peremptorily resolved that Israel shall not go.
And so the Harlot made the confession of her sin, Prove. 7.14.
to be but a provocation to more sin. The wicked sometimes confess their sins,
but they never forsake their sins; 2 Pet. 2. ult.
after confe^sion they commonly return with the dog to his vomit; as Fulgentius
Fulgent. de Rem. peccat. l. 1. c. 12.
has worthily observed. Many (says he) being pricked in conscience, confess
that they have done ill, and yet put no end to their ill deeds; they humbly
accuse themselves in God's sight of the sins which oppress them, and yet with a
perverse heart rebelliously heap up those sins whereof they accuse themselves.
The very pardon which they beg with mournful-sighs, they impede with their
wicked actions; they ask help of the Physician, and still minister matter to
the disease, thus in vain endeavoring to appease him with penitent words, whom
they go on to provoke by an impenitent course. Well remember this, real
confession of sin is always attended with real endeavors of turning from sin.
Look, as the Patient lays open his diseases to the Physician for this very
purpose, that he may be cured and healed; so the penitent soul confesses his
sins to the Physician of souls on purpose to be cured and healed. The daily
language of the penitent soul is this; Lord, when will thou heal the maladies
of my soul? when will thou heal my un^elief, and heal my pride, and heal my
vain glory, and heal my hypocrisy, and heal my impurity, and heal my hard
heartedness, and heal my carnalness, and heal my worldliness, and heal my
selfishness? etc. Lord, I do as earnestly beg grace to heal my soul, as I do
mercy to pardon my soul. And let thus much suffice for the second part of true
Evangelical repentance.

The third part of true Repentance^ lies in turning from all sin to God. That
great and precious promise of forgiveness of sin is made over to repenting and
^^^^ning from sin; all who truly repent of their sins, and turn from their
sins, shall receive the forgiveness of their sins; pardon of sin is for that
man, and that man is for pardon of sin, who truly repents and returns from his
sin. Four things speak out this, etc.

First, Scripture exhortations to repent, that so our sins Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent
and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be
your ruin. Acts 2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of your sins. Acts 3.19. Repent and be
converted, that your sins may be blotted out, etc.

Secondly, Express promises that our sins shall be forgiven Chron. 7.14. If my
people shall turn from their evil way, then will I forgive their sin. Prove.
28.13. Whose confesses and f^rsaketh his sin, shall find mercy. Ezekiel. 18.21.
If the wicked will turn from all his sins which he has committed, and do that
which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. Ver. 22. All
his transgressions which he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto
him.

Thirdly, A most certain assurance of the forgiveness of Isa. 1.16, 17, 18.
Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings, cease to do evil,
learn to do well: Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord; though
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be re^
like crimson, they shall be as wool.

Fourthly, Express records and instances of forgiveness Sam. 12.13. And David
said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord; and Nathan said to David, the
Lord has also put away thy sin. Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. I have surely heard
Ephraim bemoaning himself; turn thou me, and I shall be turned, etc. Surely
after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I was instructed, I s^ote
upon my thigh, I was ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the
reproach of my youth. Is Ephraim my dear son? ^s he a pleasant child? for since
I spoke against him, I do remember him still; therefore my bowels are troubled
for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. Luke 7.38. And she
stood at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears,
and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet and anointed
them with ointment. Ver. 47. Wherefore I say, her sins which were many are
forgiven. Chap. 15.18, 19, 20. I will arise and go to my father, and will say
to him, father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy son* And he arose and came to his father; but when he
was yet a great way off; his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and
fell upon his neck and kissed him.

But what are the properties or qualifications of that right turning from sin,
which brings poor sinners within the compass of the promise of forgiveness of
sins? Now to this great question I shall give these four following Answers.

First Answer.
Joel 2.12. Turn ye, even to me, with all your heart. 2 Chronicles. 6.38. If they
return to thee with all their heart, and with all their soul. Ver. 39. Then
hear thou from the heavens their prayer and their supplication, and forgive
their sins. Deuteronomy. 30.10. If thou turn unto the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, and with all thy soul, etc. Jer. 3.10. And yet for all this, her
treacherous sister Judah has not turned unto me with her whole heart, but
feignedly, says the Lord. Chap. 24.7. And I will give them an heart to know
me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God;
for they shall return unto me with their whole heart. Wicked men are serious
and cordial in their sinning, and they must be as serious and cordial in their
returning, or they are lost and undone for ever. The true penitent turns from
sin with his heart, with all his heart, and with all his soul; he is turned in
good earnest from his sins, whose heart is turned from his sins; if the heart
turns not, all is naught, all is stark naught; he that turns from sin, but not
with his heart, turns but feignedly, partially, hypocritically, deceifully. God
is a just and a jealous God, and he will never endure corrivals or copartners
in the throne, the heart of man; a holy God will never divide with an unholy
Devil. The true God is a righteous God, and he will never share his glory with
another; the true God must be served truly, heartily, he loves neither halting
nor halving. Such as divide the rooms of their souls betwixt God and sin, God
and Satan, God and the world, that swear by God and Malcham, that sometimes
pray devoutly, and at other times curse most hideously; that halt betwixt God
and Baal, are mere Heteroclites in Religion, and such whom God abhors. When a
man's heart gives a bill of divorce to his sins, when his heart breaks the
league with sin, when his heart casts it off, and casts it out as an abominable
thing, then the heart is turned from sin really, effectually, etc. If
notwithstanding all the professions that a man makes against his sins, his
heart still loves them, and delights in them, and he will still retain them,
and welcome them, and cleave to them, and make provision for them, etc. his
repentance is feigned and not real, etc. But,

The second Answer.
Secondly, A true penitential turning is an universal turning, Ezekiel. 18.30.
Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions. Ver. 31. Cast away
from you all your transgressions. 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness both of flesh and spirit. Psalm. 119.101. I have refrained my
feet from every evil way. Ver. 128. I hate every false way. Ezekiel. 14.6.
Therefore say unto the house of Israel, thus says the Lord God, repent and
turn your selves from your idols, and turn away your faces from all your
abominations. Chap. 18.28. Because he considers and turns away from all his
transgressions that he has committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die.
True repentance is a turning from all sin, without any reservation or
exception; he never truly repented of any sin, whose heart is not turned
against every sin. The true penitent casts off all the rags of old Adam, he
throws down every stone of the old building, he will not leave a horn nor a
hoof behind. That which Nehemiah speaks of himself in that, Neh. 13.7, 8. is
very observable to our purpose. And I came to Jerusalem and understood of the
evil that Eliashib did for Tobiah, in preparing him a chamber in the courts of
the house of God, and it grieved me sore (but he rests not there, but goes
further) therefore I cast forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out of the
chamber. What should Tobiah do with a chamber? therefore he not only outs
Tobiah, but outgoes all his stuff too. Thus the true penitent, when he
considers all the evil that sin has done, how it has taken up not only one
chamber, but every chamber in the soul, and how it has for many years quite
shut out God, and Christ, and the Spirit, and every thing that is good; he is
grieved sore, and so falls upon the outging of every lust, being highly
resolved that neither Satan nor any of his retinue shall ever find the least
entertainment in his soul any more. Such as are resolved against turning from
any sin, are horrible profane; such as turn from some sins, but close with
others, are hideous hypocrites; such as turn from one sin to another, or change
their sins as men do their fashions, are most sadly blinded, and desperately
deluded by Satan; but such as turn not from some sins, but from every sin, are
sincerely penitent. And certainly there are very great reasons why the true
penitent does turn, and must turn from sin universally. As,

James 1.26. If any man seem to be religious and bridle not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is in vain. This at first sight may
seem to be a hard saying, One stab at the heart kills, one act of treason makes
a Traitor, one spark of fire sets the house on fire, one flaw in a diamond
spoils the price of it, one puddle if we wallow in it, will defile us, one head
of garlic will poison a Leopard, say the Naturalists.
that for one fault, for one fault in the tongue, all a man's Religion should be
counted vain, and yet this you see the holy Ghost does peremptorily conclude.
Let a man make never so glorious a profession of Religion, yet if he gives
himself liberty to live in the practice of any known lust, yea though it be but
in a sin of the tongue, his Religion is in vain, and that one lust will
separate him from God for ever. If a Wife be never so officious to her Husband
in many things, and though she gives him content several ways, yet if she
entertains any other Lover into his bed besides himself, it will alienate his
affections from her, and for ever separate him from her. The application is
easy. To turn from one sin to another, is but to be tossed from one hand of
the Devil to another; it is but with Benhadad, to recover of one disease and
die of another, it is but to take pains to go to hell. If a Ship spring three
leaks, and only two be stopped, the third will sink the Ship; or if a man have
two grievous wounds in his body, and take order only to cure one, that which is
neglected will certainly kill him: It Is so here, if a man that has diverse lusts
fighting against the life of his precious soul, shall only mortify and slay
some of them, the rest will certainly destroy him, and all his pains in
subduing some of them will be lost. I have read of a devout man, who had
amongst many other virtues, the gift of healing, unto whom diverse made resort
for cure; among the rest, one Chromatius being sick sent for him, being come he
told him of his sickness, and desired that he might have the benefit of cure as
others had before him: I cannot do it (said the devout person) till thou have
beaten all the Idols and Images in thy house to pieces. O, that shall be done,
said Chromatius, here take my keys, and where you find any Images let them be
defaced, which was done accordingly; to prayer went the holy man, but no cure
was wrought. O, says Chromatius, I am as sick as ever, O, I am very weak and
sick: It cannot be otherwise, replied the holy man, nor can I help it; for
certainly there is one Idol more in your house undiscovered, and that must be
defaced too. True, says Chromatius, there is so indeed, there is one all of
beaten gold, it cost 200 l. I would fain have saved it; but here take my keys
again, you shall find it locked up fast in my chest, take it and break it in
pieces; which done, the holy man prayed, and Chromatius was healed. The moral
of this story is this: We are all spiritually sick, full of wounds and
putrified sores; Christ our spiritual Physician tells us, that if we will be
cured, we must break off our sins by repentance. Now this we are willing to do
in part, but not in whole; we would fain keep one Dalilah, one darling beloved
sin, but it must not be, there must not be one sin unrepented of; we must
repent as well for our Achans as our Absaloms, our Rimmons as our Mammons, our
David's as our Goliahs, our covert as well as our open sins, our loved as well
as our loathed lusts, our heart abominations as well as our gross
transgressions, our Babe iniquities as well as our Giant-like provocations; our
repentance must be universal, or 'twill be to no purpose.

Herod turned from many evils, but would not turn from his Herodias, Mark 6.18,
19, 20
and that was his ruin. Judas his life was as fair and as free from spots and
blots, as the lives of any of the Apostles, no scandalous sin was to be found
upon him, only that golden Devil covetousness was his sin, and his everlasting
ruin; his Apostleship, Preaching, working of Miracles, hearing of Christ, and
conversing with him, etc. was to no purpose, because of that Serpent he kept in
his bosom, which at last stung him to death. If a man lives in the practice of
any known sin, the union between sin and his soul is not dissolved; and if that
union be not dissolved, Christ and his soul was never united, and therefore
such a person can never be saved. Saul spared Agag and the Witch of Endor, whom
he should have destroyed, and so lost his Crown, his Kingdom, and his Soul,
which was saddest of all. Gideon had seventy sons, Judge. 8.13.
and but one bastard, and yet that one bastard destroyed all the rest. The
Jewish Rabbis report, that the same night that Israel departed out of Egypt
toward Canaan, all the Idols and idolatrous Temples in Egypt, by lightning and
earthquakes were broken down: So when a man truly repents, all the Idols that
were set up in his soul, are cast down. But,

James, Chap. 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, He who prevaricates
with God as to any one particular commandment of his, his heart is naught,
stark naught, and he is guilty of all: he has no real regard to any of the
commandments of God, that has not a regard to all the commandments of God,
etc.
and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all; the bond of all is broken, the
authority of all is slighted, and that evil disposition, that sinful frame of
heart, that works a man to venture upon the breach of one command, would make
him venture upon the breach of any command, were it not for some infirmity of
nature, or because his purse will not hold out to maintain it, or for shame, or
loss, or because of the eye of friends, or the sword of the Magistrate, or for
some sinister respects; and might the breach of any other of the commands of
God serve his turn, and advance his ends, he stands as strongly pressed in spirit
to transgress them all, as to transgress any one of them. He that gives himself
liberty to live in the breach of any one command of God, is qualified with a
disposition of heart to break them all; every single sin contains virtually all
sin in it. He that allows himself a liberty to live in the breach of any one
particular Law of God, he casts contempt and scorn upon the authority that made
the whole Law, and upon this account breaks it all. And the Apostle gives the
reason of it in Verse 11. For he that said, do not commit adultery, said also,
do not kill; now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become
a transgressor of the Law. Not that he is guilty of all distributively, but
collectively; for the Law is copulative, there is a chain of duties, and these
are all so linked one to another, that you cannot break one link of the chain,
but you break the whole chain. All the precepts of the Law are as it were a
string of pearls strung by the authority of God; now break this string in any
place, and all the pearls fall to the ground. No man can live in the breach of
any known command of God, but he wrongs every command of God; and this at last
he shall find to his cost, without sound repentance on his side, and pardoning
grace on God's. But,

Thirdly, One sin never goes alone, Cain's anger is seconded Genesis 4.6, 8.
Ahab's covetousness is attended with bloody cruelty, and Jeroboam's rebellion
with idolatry, and Judas his thievery with treason. I might give instances of
this in Adam and Eve, and in Lot, Abraham, Noah, Jacob, Joseph, 1 King. 12.
Job, David, Sol^mon and Peter, etc. but a touch on this string is enough; one
sin commonly disposes the heart to another sin, a small sin many times draws
the heart to a greater, and one great sin draws the heart to another great sin,
and that to a greater, till at last the soul comes to be drowned in all excess.
Augustine relates this story of Manicheus, who being tormented with Flies,
Exposit. in Evang. S. John, Tract. cap. 1. tom.
was of opinion that the Devil made them and not God; why then, said one that
stood by, ^f the Devil made Flies, then the Devil made Worms and not God, for
they are living creatures as well as Flies; true said he, the Devil did make
Worms: But said the other, if the Devil did make Worms, then he did make Birds,
Beasts, and Man; he granted all. And thus says that old Father by denying God
in the Fly, he came to deny God in Man; and so consequently the whole Creation.
And thus yielding to lesser sins, draws the soul to the comm ssion of greater,
yea often to the greatest of all. I have both heard and read a story of a young
man, who being often tempted by the Devil and his own wicked heart, to commit
three sins, viz. to kill his father, to lie with his mother, and to be drunk;
the two former his heart would not yield to, as being things abhorrent to the
light and law of nature, and therefore to free himself from the temptation, he
yielded to the last and least; but when he was drunk, he killed his father and
ravished his mother: Thus these two abominable sins, Murder and Incest were
ushered in by one that was not of so deep a dye. There is something in sin,
like the radical virtue that is in the seed of Herbs and Plants; the seed is
but a small inconsiderable thing in it self, yet let it be but cast into the
ground, and there rest quietly a time, and it will take root, and grow up to a
great stock, and bring forth many flourishing branches, like the grain of
mustard seed, Mat. 13.31, 32. which though it be the least of seeds, yet being
cast into the ground, grows up to be the greatest among herbs, and becomes a
Tree, so that the birds of the Air come and lodge in the branches thereof.
Satan will be sure to nest himself, to lodge himself in the least sins (as
birdsnest and lodge themselves in the smallest branches of a Tree) and there he
will hatch all manner of wickedness. A sinful motion, if it be not rejected,
will procure consent, and consent will break forth into act, and one act will
procure another act, until the multiplying of acts have begot a habit, and that
habit has choakt and stifled conscience, and when once conscience is stifled
and benumbed, it will be ready upon all occasions to lay the soul open, and to
prostrate it to the basest and worst of sins. O! there is a prodigious evil in
the least of sins, it will quickly multiply it self into all manner of evils;
unless sin be cut off in the first motion, it will proceed to action, and from
action to delectation, and from delight to custom, and from custom to a habit;
and so the soul will be in eminent danger of being undone for ever. A little
thief put in at the window, may open the doors for stronger and greater to come
in, that may take away both life and treasure at once. A little wedge makes way
for a greater, and so do little sins make way for greater. Satan and our own
hearts will be modest at first, and therefore they are often in a combination,
first to draw us to lesser sins, and then to greater, and so from sins less
obnoxious to sins more scandalous, till we come to be ^bominable to God,
hateful to others, and a terror to our selves. Such as live in one sin, God
will in justice give over to other sins. The Gentiles gave up themselves to
idolatry, Romans 1.23. And God gave them up to uncleanness, ver. 24. It Is
impossible for any man to take one sin into his bosom, and to shut all others
out; he that lives but in the allowance of himself in one sin, will find that
sin at last to shut the door of heaven against him; and therefore the true
penitent turns from sin universally.

Fourthly, The reasons of turning from sin, are universally As in a Harp to
make the music good and harmonious, it is not enough that all the strings be
right tuned except one; one string that jars, will spoil the sweetest music.
The application is easy, etc.
for God has forbid every sin as well as this or that particular sin; there is
the same authority forbidding or commanding in all; and if the authority of God
awes a man from one sin, it will awe him from all. There is one and the same
Lawgiver in respect of all the commandments; he that gave one commandment
gave also another, therefore he that observes one commandment gave in
obedience unto God, whose commandment it is, will observe all, because all are
his commandments; and he that slights one commandment is guilty of all,
because he does contemn the authority and will of him that gave them all; even
in those commands which he does observe, he has no respect to the will and
authority of him that gave them. Therefore there is no obedience toward God,
where there is not an uniform endeavor to please God, as well in one thing as
in another. The same God that has inhibited one sinful act, has inhibited
every sinful act; and therefore he that out of conscience and respect to God's
will, and word, and authority; turns from any one sin, or abhors any one sin,
he will out of conscience of the same will, and word, and authority, turn from
every sin, and abhor every sin, because the same God in his word has alike
forbidden all. O Si^s! how is it possible for a man truly to repent of this or
that sin, because it is contrary to the Law, will and authority of God, but he
must needs repent of whatsoever he knows to be contrary to the Law, will and
authority of God. He that turns from any one sin because it is a transgression
of the holy and righteous Law of God, he will turn from every sin upon the same
account; he that turns from any one sin, because it is a dishonor to God, a
reproach to Christ, a grief to the Spirit, a wound to Religion, etc. will upon
the same grounds turn from every sin; he that turns from any one sin, because
of the curse, the threatenings, the judgments, the wrath, the hell that hangs
(as it were) over the head of that sin; he will turn from every sin, because
the curse, the threatenings, the judgments, the wrath, the hell, that hangs over
the head of that one sin, hangs over the head of every sin. By these hints it is
most evident, that the reasons of turning from sin are universally binding to a
penitent soul; and therefore he turns not from some sins only, but from every
sin; he says not to one, but to all his Idols, Get you hence, for what have I
any more to do with you.

Fifthly, One sin allowed, wallowed and tumbled in, is Moses came within the
sight of Canaan, but for one sin, viz. not sanctifying God's name at the water
of Meribah, he was shut out; for him to be so near the holy Land, Exodus 22.
and yet so far off from entering into it, was doubtless of all strokes the
hardest that ever he felt. In the Law, Levit. 13.
the Leper that had the spot of leprosy in any one part of his body, was
accounted a Leper, although all the rest of his body were sound and whole, and
accordingly he was to be shut up, and shut out from the society and company of
the people of God; so one sin, one leprous spot, allowed and beloved, will for
ever shut a man out from the glorious presence of God, Christ, the Spirit,
Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect; one sin wallowed in, will as
certainly deprive a man of the blessed vision of God, and of all the treasures,
pleasures and delights that be at God's right hand, as a thousand. It was a
sore vexation to King Lysimachus, that he should lose his earthly kingdom for
one draught of water. O Sirs! 'twill be an everlasting vexation to such, who
for one lust shall at last lose not an earthly, but a heavenly kingdom. One sin
stripped the fallen Angels of all their glory; and one sin stripped our first
parents of all their dignity and excellency. Genesis 3.4, 5.
Satan by one loud lie to Adam and Eve made fruitless all that God had preached
to them immediately before. Job ^0.13.
To turn from some sins, but not from all, is gross hypocrisy; one sin set up
in the love and service of it, will keep Christ out of his throne; it speaks
sin to be rampant, and Satan to be victorious; and what can be the issue of
these things, but ruin and damnation? Romans 6.16.
One fly in the box of precious ointment, spoils the whole box; one thief may
rob a man of all his treasure, one disease may deprive a man of all his health,
one strong wind may blow down and blow away all a man's comforts, and so one
sin delighted and wallowed in, will make a man miserable for ever. Though this
or that particular sin be very pleasant to the flesh, and delightful to the
fancy, yet he is the wisest man, and he is the best man, and the only blessed man
in all the world, that keeps furthest from it; and therefore the true penitent
turns not merely from this or that sin, but from every sin.

1 These. 5.23.
and over all the members of the body, Psalm. 45.13. The Kings daughter is all
glorious within, her clothing is of wrought gold. In regeneration there is
infused the habits or principles of all grace, Mat. 13.33.
which like a divine leaven spreads it self over the whole man. Look, as
Absalom's beauty was spread all over him, 2 Samuel 24.25.
even from the crown of his head to the soals of his feet; so grace spreads it
self over every faculty of the soul, and over every member of the body. Look,
as Solomon's Temple was all glorious both within and without; so that grace
which a man receives at first conversion, makes him all glorious both within
and without. John 1.16.
Look, as Adam's sin spread it self over the whole man, so that grace which we
receive from the second Adam, spreads it self over the whole man. And as that
grace which was in Christ, did diffuse and spread it self over all of Christ;
so that grace which is in the true penitent, does diffuse and spread it self
all over the penitent. Now, look as heaven is contrary to all of hell, and as
light is contrary to all darkness, and heat to all cold; so that divine, that
noble, that universal principle of grace, which God at first conversion infuses
into the penitents soul, is contrary to all sin; and therefore the penitent
turns from all sin. But,

1 John 1.9.
we must be so faithful and just as to turn from all our sins. The plaster
must be as broad as the sore, and the tent as long and as deep as the wound. It
argues horrid hypocrisy, damnable folly, and wonderful impudency, for a man to
beg the pardon of those very sins that he is resolved never to forsake. Look,
as he that has any one sin forgiven, has all sins forgiven; so he that has
sincerely turned from any one sin, he has turned from every sin; and he that
has not repented him of all known sin, he has not yet sincerely repented of
any known sin, nor as yet experienced the sweetness of forgiveness of sin. He
that will not renounce those sins that he would have God to remit, shall be
sure to have a hell (of guilt) in his conscience. Of all fools there is none to
him, that is very importunate with God to forgive those sins, which he is
resolved beforehand to commit; for what Prince (in his wits) will pardon his
treasons that is resolved to continue a Traitor? or what Judge will forgive his
thievery, that is peremptorily determined to continue a thief? or what Husband
will pardon his Wife that is resolved to defile his bed with other Lovers? Such
as continue in the practice of those very sins, which they beg a pardon of,
shall certainly go without their pardon. Pardon of sin is for that man, and
that man is for pardon of sin, that is as truly willing to forsake his sins as
he is to receive the pardon of his sins. Who would not look upon that man as a
mad man, who should earnestly beg his pardon, and yet before his pardon is
sealed, should afresh cut purses, and murder persons before the eyes of the
Judge? The pardoned soul is the repenting soul, and the repenting soul is the
pardoned soul, Psalm. 32.2. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guil. He that begs pardon of sin, and
is resolved against turning from sin, shall find no more sweetness in that
grand promise of pardon, Prove. 28.13. than devils or damned spirits do. Look as
one sin unforgiven, will as certainly undo and damn a man as a thousand; so one
sin unforsaken, will as certainly undo and damn a man as a thousand. The true
penitent is as willing to turn from all his sins, as he is willing that God
should pardon all his sins. But,

Eighthly and lastly, There is in every penitent a sincere Psalm. 97.10. Ye that
love the Lord hate evil. Prove. 8.13. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil. True
hatred is to the whole kind. Arist.
Amos 5.15. Hate the evil and love the good. Psalm. 119.104. Through thy
precepts I get understanding, therefore I hate every false way. Ver. 128.
Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right, and I
hate every false way. Ver. 113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love.
Ver. 163. I hate and abhor lying, but thy Law do I love. True hatred is
universal, it is of the whole kind; he who hates a toad because it is a toad,
hates every toad; he that hates a serpent because it is a serpent, hates every
serpent; he that hates a wolf because it is a wolf, hates every wolf; he that
hates a man because he is holy, hates every man that is holy; and so he that
hates sin because it is sin, hates every sin, and therefore he cannot but turn
from it, and labor to be the death and ruin of it. Holy hatred is an
implacable and an irreconcilable affection; you shall as soon reconcile God and
Satan together, Christ and Antichrist together, heaven and hell together, as
you shall be able to reconcile a penitent soul and his sin together. A true
penitent looks upon every sin as contrary to the Law of God, the nature of God,
the being of God, the glory of God, and accordingly his heart rises against it;
he looks upon every sin as poison, as the vomit of a dog, as the mire of the
street, as the Pliny says, that the very trees with touching of it, would
become barren.
menstrous cloth, which of all things in the Law was most unclean, defiling and
polluting; and this turns his heart against every sin, he looks upon every sin
as having a hand in apprehending, betraying, binding, scourging, condemning and
murdering of his Lord and Master Jesus Christ; and this works him not only to
refrain from sin, but to forsake it, and not only to forsake it, but also to
abhor it, and to loath it more than hell it self. The penitent soul will do all
he can to be the death of every sin that has had a hand in the death of his
Lord and Master; he looks upon the sins of his body, to be the tormentors of
Christ's body, and the sins of his soul, to be the tormentors of Christ's soul,
to be those that made his soul heavy to the death, and that caused the
withdrawings of his father's love from him, and that forced him in the anguish
of his soul to cry out, Mat. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. And this raises up in him a
universal hatred of sin; and a universal hatred of sin always issues in a
universal turning from sin. Now these eight arguments do sufficiently prove,
that a true penitential turning is a universal turning; a turning not from some
sins, but from all sins.

But some may be ready to object John 6.60.
who shall then be saved? for if a man repents not unless he turns from every
sin, then there is not a man to be found in all the world that repents; for
there is not a man in all the world that turns from every sin, that forsakes
every sin, etc. 1 King. 8.46. For there is no man that sins not. Prove. 20.9.
Who can say, Job 9.30, 31. Psalm. 130.3. 2 Chronicles. 6.36. Job 14.4. Psalm. 51.5.
Ponder upon these Scriptures, etc.
I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin: It is a question that
implies a strong denial. Who can say it, and say it truly, that he is pure from
his sin? surely none. He that shall say that he has made his heart clean, and
that he is pure from his sin, sins in so saying; and commonly there are none
more unclean than those that say, they have made their hearts clean, nor none
more impure than they that say they are pure from their sin, Eccl. 7.20. For
there is not a just man upon the earth, that does good and sins not. These
words in their absolute sense, are a full testimony of the imperfection of our
inherent righteousness in this life, and that even justified persons come very
short of that exact and perfect obedience which the Law requires, James 3.2.
For in many things we offend all, or (as the Greek has it) we stumble all. It Is
a metaphor taken from Travelers walking on stony or slippery ground, who are
very apt to stumble or slide. This Apostle was worthily called James the just,
and yet he numbers himself among the rest of the sanctified ones, that in many
things offended all. The Apostle does not say, in many things they offend all,
but in many things we offend all. We that have more gifts than others, we that
have more grace than others, we that have more assurance than others, we that
have more experiences than others, we that have more preservatives to keep us
from sin than others, even we in many things offend all; nor the Apostle does
not say, in some things we offend all, but in many things we offend all; the
Apostle speaking not of the singular individual acts of sin, but of the diverse
sorts of sin; nor the Apostle does not say, in many things we may offend all,
but in many things we do offend all, 1 John 1.8. If we say that we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. The Apostle does not say, if
thou say thou have no sin thou deceivest thy self, as if he spoke to some
particular person only, but if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves; nor
the Apostle does not say, if ye say ye have no sin ye deceive your selves, as
if he intended weak or ordinary Christians alone, but if we say we have no sin
we deceive our selves, we Apostles, we that in all grace, and in all holiness,
and in all spiritual enjoyments exceed and excel all others, even we sin as
well as others. He that is so ignorant and so impudent, so saucy and so silly,
as to say he has no sin, sins in saying so, and has no sincerity, no integrity,
nor no ingenuity in him. Ver. 10. If we say we have not sinned, we make him a
liar, and his word is not in us. As much as in us lies we make God a liar, if
we say we have not sinned; he that says he has no sin, he does no sin, he does
by consequence charge God with falsehood, who has frequently told us in that
word of grace that cannot deceive us, that all men are sinners, and that they
have all gone astray, and that they all need pardoning and purging grace, and
that upon these very accounts he sent his beloved Son to lay down his dearest
life, Isa. 53.3. Romans 10.23. and 5.12, etc.
and to make himself an offering for sin. Now from these Scriptures these two
things are most evident; First, that sinful qualities do remain in the most
sanctified persons. Secondly, that these sinful qualities are sometimes very
prevalent over the most sanctified persons; and therefore I shall answer the
objection thus, viz. That a true penitential turning from all sin, consists in
these six things.

Psalm. 119.104, 128. as that which is most contrary to all goodness and
happiness.

Secondly, In the wills detestation and hatred of all sin. Romans 7.15, 19, 21,
23. Isa. 30.20. Thou shall cast them away as a menstrous cloth, thou shall say
unto it, get thee hence. Hosea 14.8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any
more with Idols. When the will stands upon such terms of defiance with all sin,
as that it will never enter into a league of friendship with any sin, then is
the soul turned from every sin; When the will is set upon avenging it self upon
all sin, and upon daily endeavors to mortify and crucify all sin, then is
the penitent turned from all his sins; when those sins that were once to the
will, as Dalilah to Sampson, are now to the will as Tamar to Amnon, then is the
soul turned from sin with a witness.

Thirdly, In the judgments turning away from all sin, by Romans 7.15. For that
which I do, I allow not; for what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that
do I. O, says the judgment of a Christian, sin is the greatest evil in all the
world, it is the only thing that God abhors, and that brought Jesus Christ to
the Cross, that damns souls, that shuts heaven, and that has laid the
foundations of hell. O, it is the pricking thorn in my eye, the deadly arrow in
my side, the two-edged sword that has wounded my conscience, and slain my
comforts, and separated between God and my soul. O, it is that which has
hindered my prayers, and imbittered my mercies, and put a sting into all my
crosses, and therefore I cannot but disapprove of it, and disallow of it, and
condemn it to death, yea to hell, from whence it came. I thus preach, and thus
think (says Chrysostom) that it is more bitter to sin against Christ, than to
suffer the torments of hell. Plutarch reports of Marcus Cato, that he never
declared his opinion in any matter in the Senate, but he would close it with
this passage; Methinks still Carthage should be destroyed. So when ever a
penitent looks upon his sins in his judgment, he is still saying, Methinks
these sins should be destroyed, methinks this pride, this unbelief, this
earthly-mindedness, this hypocrisy, this vain glory, etc. should be destroyed.

The true penitent holds up his purposes and resolutions to keep off from sin,
and to keep closs with God, though he be not able in every thing, and at all
times, to make good his purposes and resolutions, etc.
Psalm. 17.3. I have purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. The general
purpose and resolution of my heart is not to transgress; though particular
failings may attend me, yet my resolutions and purposes are firmly fixed against
evil, Psalm. 39.1. I said I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my
tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked are before me.
David highly resolves so to bridle and muzzle up his mouth, that he would not
break out into any impatient or unbeseeming speeches, that might give the
wicked any advantage to reproach Religion, or to blaspheme the holy One of
Israel, etc. Anselme was a man of a holy resolution; I had rather, says he, go
to hell pure from sin, than to heaven polluted with that filth. And says
another, I will rather leap into a bonfire, than wilfully to sin against God.
When Valens the Emperor threatened Basil with imprisonment, banishment, death;
Threaten, says he, your Boys with such fray-bugs, and your purple Gallants,
that give themselves to their pleasures; I am resolved neither menaces nor
flatteries shall silence me, or draw me to betray a good cause, or a good
conscience, etc.

Romans 7.22, 23. Now where God sees this frame of spirit, there he will
certainly pardon the failings, and pass by the imperfections of his people; and
he will spare them as a man spares his son that serves him, Mal. 3.17. Now
you know, when a prudent, tender, indulgent father sees his child to fail and
come short in that which he enjoins him to do, yet knowing that his desires and
endeavors is to please him and serve him, he will not be harsh, rigid; sour
or severe toward him, but will spare him and exercise much tenderness and
indulgence toward him; and will God, will God whose mercies reach above the
heavens, and whose compassions are infinite, and whose love is like himself,
carry it worse toward his children, than men do carry it toward theirs?
surely no. God's fatherly indulgence accepts of the will for the work, Heb.
13.18. 2 Cor. 8.12. As a father will accept in his child the desire for the
deed, and if there be a blemish in his child, he will pity it, and cast a
mantle of love over it. A sick man is not more desirous to be rid of all his
diseases, nor a prisoner to be freed from all his bolts and chains, than the
true penitent is desirous to be rid of all his sins, etc.

Sixthly and lastly, In the ordinary declining, shunning, These. 5.22. Abstain
from all appearance of evil, is a Law that is very precious in a penitent man's
eye, See Jude 23. Exodus 23.7. Prove. 22.3. and 27.12. Prove. 5.8.
and commonly lies warm upon a penitent man's heart, so that take him in his
ordinary course, and you shall find him very ready to shun, and be shie of the
very appearances of sin, of the very shows and shadows of sin. Job made a
covenant with his eyes, Job 31.1. and Joseph would not hearken to his bold
tempting Mistress to lie by her, or to be with her, Genesis 39.10. and David when
himself would not sit with vain persons, Psalm. 26.3, 4, 5. 2 Samuel 24.20 -- ult
and at another time he refused to take the threshing floor, Oxen and threshing
instruments of Araunah as a gift, but would buy them, because he would avoid
the very show of covetousness, as some conceive. Austin being often ensnared in
uncleanness in his younger days (before his conversion) he was exceeding
careful to avoid all occasions of it afterward. Now a true penitential turning
from all sin, lies in these six things, and therefore you had need look about
you; for if there be any one way of wickedness wherein you walk, and which you
are resolved you will not forsake, you are no true penitents, and you will
certainly lose your souls, and all the great and glorious things of another
world.

The third Answer.
2 Chronicles, 7.15.
As it is total in respect of the act, so it is final in respect of the time.
True repentance takes an everlasting farewell, an everlasting adieu of sin; it
says with the Spouse, Cant. 5.3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it
on? I have found the smart of sin, I have put off the garments of the old man,
the rags of old Adam, and how shall I put them on again? The burnt child will
dread the fire. The man that has smarted for Suretyship, will by no means be
persuaded to come again into bonds, though you urge him to it never so
frequently, never so strongly, never so rhetorically, yet he will tell you he
has smarted for it, he has paid dear for it, and therefore you must excuse him;
he is peremptorily resolved, nay he has seriously vowed against it; and though
he be never so much entreated, and by variety of arguments importuned, yet
still he remains inexorable. A Christian that has truly repented, is so
sensible of the freeness and sweetness of the grace of God on the one hand, and
of the weight of sin and wrath of God on the other hand, that he is highly
resolved never to have any more to do with Idols, Psalm. 40.12. Hos. 14.8.
never to meddle more with those burning coals. True repentance is a continued
act, a repentance never to be repented of. The true penitent is every day a
turning further and further from sin, and nearer and nearer to God. There is
nothing that fetches so many tears from a penitent man's eyes, nor so many
sighs and groans from a penitent man's heart as this, that he can get no
further off from sin, and that he can get no nearer nor no closser to God.
Repentance for sin, and a willing continuance in sin, cannot consist in the
same subject. A sincere penitent makes as much conscience of repenting daily,
as he does of believing daily, and he can as easily content himself with one
act of faith, or love, or fear, or hope, or joy, or obedience, as he can
content himself with one act of repentance. My sins are ever before me. Psalm.
51.3.
This is the voice of every true penitent; Oh, that I might sin no more! Oh,
that I might never dishonor God more! Oh, that I might never walk contrary to
Jesus Christ more! Oh, that I might never grieve the spirit of grace more. To
sin is common to man, 1 John 1.8, 10. and 5.19. Isa. 28.15, 18. Psalm. 139.24.
Romans 7.22, 23.
yea to the best man in all the world, but to continue in a course of sin, is
only proper to a wicked man. To err and fail that is humane, but to maintain a
league or friendship with sin, that is diabolical. Though a true penitent dares
not continue in a trade, a path of sin, whilst he lives in this world, yet sin
will continue in him whilst he continues in this world; though sin and grace
were not born together, and though sin and grace shall never die together, yet
whilst a penitent man lives in this world they must live together. It Is one
thing for sin to continue in us, and it is another thing for us to continue in
sin. The Apostle having closed the fifth Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans,
in the triumph of Gospel grace; That as sin has reigned unto death, so grace
might reign through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord,
Romans 6.1, 2.
begins the next with a prevention of the abuse of this grace; What shall we
say then? shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid. How shall
we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? To live in sin, in the face
of Gospel Grace is most unreasonable, and to a gracious and ingenious nature
impossible; the very question implies a kind of impossibility. Such as were
once dead in sin, and now by Gospel Grace are dead to sin, such can no longer
continue in sin. Look, as it is not the mere falling into the water that drowns
a man, but his lying and continuing in it; so it is not a mere falling into sin
that damns a man, that drowns a man, that everlastingly undoes a man, but his
living in it, his continuing in it. It is bad to sin, but it is infinitely worse
to continue in sin. The first best is not to sin, the next best is not to
continue in sin, no not for an hour, as Paul speaks in another case ( Gal.
2.5.) To whom we gave place by subjection, no not for an hour. Certainly to
argue from Gospel-mercy to sinful liberty, is the Devil's Logic. The more a
man lives in the sight of Gospel Grace, the more sin will be discountenanced,
resisted, hated, and totally displaced. A man may as truly assert, that the Sea
burns, or that the fire cools, or that the Sun darkens the Air, as he may
assert that the sight, sense, or sweet of Gospel Grace will breed security or
carnality, looseness or wickedness, in a gracious heart. The true penitent never
ceases repenting, till he ceases living; he goes to heaven with the joyful
tears of repentance in his eyes; he knows that his whole life is but a day of
sowing tears, that he may at last reap everlasting joys. True repentance makes
a final and everlasting separation between sin and the soul; it makes such an
absolute and complete divorce between sin and the soul, and casts them so far
asunder, that no power nor policy can ever bring them to meet as lovers
together. The true penitent looks upon sin as an enemy, and deals with it, as
Amnon dealt with Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.15. And Amnon hated her exceedingly, so that
the hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater than the love wherewith he had
loved her; and Amnon said unto her, arise, be gone. And just thus does the
penitent soul carry it toward sin. He that truly repents, so turns from his
sins, that he never returns to the bondage and service of his sins any more,
Isa. 1.16. Psalm. 85.8.
Isa. 30.22. Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver,
and the ornament of thy molten images of gold; thou shall cast them away as a
menstrous cloth; thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence.

But now the repentance of hypocrites is not constant but inconstant, it is not
steadfast but unstedfast, it is not permanent but transient, it is quickly on, as
quickly off; Come, say they, in that, Hosea 6.1. and let us return unto the
Lord. But ver. 4. O Ephraim! what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I
do unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it
goes away. The hypocrites repentance is like Jonah's Gourd, which came up in a
night, and perished in a night, Jonah 4.10. An hypocrites repentance springs
from mutable grounds, causes, considerations and circumstances; and therefore
it is compared to a deceitful bow, Hosea 7.16. it is as variable as the wind. An
hypocrite is only constant in inconstancy, Psalm. 78.8. whose spirit was not
steadfast with God, Ver. 37. Neither were they steadfast in his Covenant, etc. An
hypocrite puts off his sins in the day of adversity (as he does his garments
when he goes to bed) with an intent to put them on again in the morning of
profperity, Ver. 34, 35, 36. When he slew them then they sought him, and they
returned and enquired early after God; and they remembered that God was their
Rock, and the high God their Redeemer: Nevertheless they did flatter him with
their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues. In the language of the
blessed Scripture, he is a dog that returns to his vomit again, and such a dog
was Judas; and he is a swine that returns to the wallowing in the mire again,
and such a swine was Demas; 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
and such dogs and swine are all hypocrites. It is an extraordinary vanity in
some men to lay aside their sins for a time, but with a purpose to return to
them again; as they fable it of the Serpent that lays aside his poison when
he goes to drink, and when he has drank, he returns to it again. It is a sad
and sore evil, when men say to their lusts, as Abraham said to his servants,
Abide you here, and I will go and worship, and return again unto you, Genesis
22.5. doubtless such souls are as far off from sound repentance, as light is
from darkness, or as hell is from heaven, etc.

But in what respects is true penitential turning from sin, such a turning from
sin, as never to return to sin any more? In what respects is the penitents
turning from sin, a continued and steadfast turning from sin, etc.

Sol. This is a very sober, serious, weighty question,

Negatively, It is not such a turning from sin as never to King. 8.46. For
there is no man that sins not. Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my heart
clean? I am pure from my sin? Prove. 24.16. A just man falls seven times, and
rises again. Eccl. 7.20. For there is not a just man upon the earth that does
good, and sins not. Luke 17.4. If he trespass against thee seven times in a
day, and seven times in a day turn again unto thee, saying, I repent, thou
shall forgive him. Mat. 18.21, 22. Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how
often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him, till seven times? Jesus
says unto him, I say not unto thee, until seven times, but until seventy times
seven. James 3.2. For in many things we offend all; or we stumble all, as the
Greek has it. 1 John 1.8. If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us. Ver. 10. If we say we have not sinned, we make him a
liar, and his word is not in us. And what did the continual burnt-offering
which was to be made day by day import, but a daily sinning, and expiating of
it? etc. Number. 28.3. Such is the universal corruption of humane nature, that the
souls of the best, of the purest, and of the holiest men in the world, do from
day to day, yea from moment to moment, contract some filth and uncleanness. The
choicest Saints can never acquit themselves from sins of infirmity, such as do
inevitably and inseparably cleave unto the best of men, especially considering
the state and condition wherein they are, carrying still about them corrupt
flesh and blood. Methodius compares the inbred corruptions of man's heart to a
wild Fig Tree, growing upon the wall of some goodly Temple or stately Palace,
whereof although the main trunk of the stem be broke off, and stump of the root
be plucked up, yet the fibrous strings of it piercing into the joints of the
stone work, will not be utterly extracted, but will be ever and anon shooting
and sprouting out, until the whole frame of the building be dissolved, and the
stone work thereof be disjoynted and pulled in pieces.

Mat. 26.40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45.
and yet they slept again and again. The prophet Jonah was a holy man, and yet
he relapsed into passion and discontent with God again and again; he was
discontent with the work God set him about, therefore he flies to Tarshish,
Jonah 1.2, 3. and sorrows for it, and confesses that they that trust upon
lying vanities forsake their own mercies, Chap. 2.8. and yet when God had
showed mercy to Niniveh, he was exceedingly discontented with God again, Jonah
4.1. But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry. And when the
Lord, who might have sent him to his grave, or a frowned him to hell, reasons
lovingly, sweetly and mildly with him to take him off from his passion, Chap.
4.3, 4. and provides for him in his extremity; yet upon a very small occasion,
viz. the taking away of a Gourd or shrub (which God did to convince him of his
folly and waspishness of spirit) he breaks out again into the same passion, or
worse, as if he had never seen the evil of it, or been humbled for it, Jonah
4.8, 9. I am greatly angry, or I do well to be angry, even unto death. And that
is very considerable that Job speaks concerning his friends, Job 19.3. These
ten times have ye reproached me, yet are ye not ashamed. It is a sin to
reproach any man, it is a greater to reproach a godly man; but yet greater to
reproach a godly man under sad and sore afflictions; but yet greatest of all to
reproach a godly man under his sufferings, often, frequently; yet says Job,
These ten times have ye reproached me; and yet Job's friends were not only
godly, but eminently godly. By this sad instance it is evident, that gracious
men, yea that men eminently gracious, may fall into the same sin again and
again, yea ten times, that is often. Though Christ told his disciples that his
kingdom was not of this world, John 18.36. Mat. 18.1, 2, 3, 4. Mark 9 34. Luke
9.46. and 22.24, 26.
yet at three several times their pride and ambitious humor put them upon
striving for pre-eminence and worldly greatness. King Jehoshaphat, though he
was a godly man, yet he joins affinity with that non such wicked Ahab, for
which he was smartly reproved by the Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. And Jehu went out
to meet him, and said to King Jehoshaphat, should thou help the ungodly, and
love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from the Lord. Now
though this gracious Prince was thus reproved and saved, even by a miracle of
mercy, 2 Chronicles. 18.1, 2, 3, 30, 31. compared; yet soon after he falls into the
same sin again, and joins himself with Ahaziah King of Israel, who did very
wickedly, 2 Chronicles. 20.35, 36. and for which he is severely reproved in verse
37. Then Eliezer the son of Dodavan of Mareshah, prophesied against
Jehoshaphat, saying, because thou have joined thy self with Ahaziah, the Lord
has broken thy works, and the Ships were broken that they were not able to go
to Tarshish. Let was twice overcome with wine, etc. and Abraham, though the
father of the faithful, yet falls once and again into the same sin, Genesis 12.11,
12, Mat. 26. Gal. 2.11, 12, 13
13. compared with Chap. 20, 1, 2, 3, 4, 13. Peter falls once and again into
the same sin, and John twice worshipped the Angel, and Sampson (who is by the
Spirit of the Lord numbered amongst those Worthies of whom this world was not
worthy, Heb. 11.32, 33, 38.) fell again and again into the same gross sin, as
is evident in the 14, 15, and 16. Chapters of the book of Judges. And the
Church confesses, that their backslidings are many, Jer. 14.7. By all which
it is most evident, that good men may fall again and again into the same sin;
and no wonder, for though their repentance be never so sincere and sound, yet
their graces are but weak, and their mortification but imperfect in this life,
and therefore it is possible for a gracious soul to fall again and again into
the same sin; if the fire be not wholly put out, who will think it impossible,
that it should catch and burn again and again?

I readily grant, that the Lord has graciously promised to heal the
backslidings of his people (Hosea 14.4. and so Jer. 3.22. See Jer. 3.1, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 12, 14.
Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings; behold we
come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God.) But I can no where find in all
the Scriptures, that God has engaged himself by any particular promise or
promises, that Christians truly converted, truly penitent, shall never fall
again and again into the same sins, after their conversion. I cannot find in
all the book of God, where God has engaged himself to give such strength or
power against this sin or that, as that a Christian shall be for ever (in this
life) put out of all possibility of falling again and again into the same sins.
No person on earth can show such a promise, that when a Christian has been thus
or thus troubled, grieved, humbled or melted for his sins, that then God will
assuredly preserve him from ever falling into the same sins again. The sight of
such a promise under God's own hand, would be as life from the dead to all real
Christians, who fear nothing more than the sin of backsliding. Certainly, there
is no such power or infinite virtue in the greatest horrors or terrors,
troubles or sorrows that the soul can be under for sin, nor in the fullest,
sweetest or choicest discoveries of God's rich grace and free love to the soul,
as for ever to fence and secure the soul from relapsing into the same sin again
and again. Though grace be a glorious creature, yet it is but a creature; grace
is but a created habit, that may be prevailed against by Satan's temptations,
and by the strong, secret, and subtle workings of sin in our hearts. But this
must be carefully minded and remembered, that though the Saints may and do
sometimes relapse, yet they do not relapse in such a manner as wicked men do
relapse. For,

First, They do not relapse voluntarily, but involuntarily.

Secondly, They do not relapse out of choice, as wicked Isa. 66.3.

Thirdly, They don't relapse out of any delight that they

Fourthly, They don't relapse out of any settled purpose or Jer. 2.25. All the
relapses of a Saint, are against the settled bent, bias and resolution of his
soul.

Egypt.





But secondly, I answer affirmatively, That notwithstanding all this, yet a
true penitential turning from sin, is a continued and steadfast turning from
sin, and that in these five respects.

Psalm. 39.1. I said I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my
tongue; I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me. See
my Treatise on holiness, page 507, 508, 509.
David resolves to lay a Law of restraint upon his tongue, and to clap a muzzle
upon his mouth, whilst he was in the presence of the wicked, who did lie at the
catch to ensnare him, and trapan him; come health, come sickness, come honor,
come reproach, come poverty, come plenty, come liberty, come restraint, come
life, come death, the true penitent is fixed in his purpose and resolution not
to sin. Jerome writes of a brave woman, that being upon the wrack, told her
persecutors, that they might do their worst, for she was firmly resolved rather
to dye than lie.

Secondly, In respect of his babitual desires, which are, Psalm. 119.133. Order
my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. David's
great desire is that he may walk as in a frame, that he may walk by line and
rule, exactly, accurately; and that though sin did dwell in him, that yet it
might not reign in him; and though it did rebel in him, that yet it might not
have dominion over him; he would have his sins to be like those beasts in
Daniel, whose dominion was taken away, though their lives were prolonged for a
season and a time, Chap. 7.12. Psalm. 119.10. O, let me not wander from thy
commandments. Ver. 36. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to
covetousness. Under the name of covetousness, all manner of viciousness is to
be understood, that being the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10.

Thirdly, In respect of his habitual endeavors, which still Psalm. 119.11. Thy
word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. He hides the
word in his heart as a treasure, that he might not lose it, and as a rule, that
he might not transgress against it. The Law of God kept closs in the heart, is
the best armor of proof against evil lusts. David locks up the Law of God in
his heart, as in a chest or cabinet, to secure him against Satan's ambushes and
assaults on the one hand, and to preserve him from sin on the other hand. So
Psalm. 18.23. I have kept my self from mine iniquity.

Fourthly, In respect of his habitual hatred of sin. Although Psalm. 119.1^^.
Therefore I hate every false way. Ver. 113. I hate va^^ ^^oughts. Ver. 163. I
hate and abhor lying. So Romans 7.15. The evil that I hate, that I do. A penitent
heart usually rises and swells against the toad in the bosom. Some say, that
there is such a native dread and terror of the Hawk implanted in the Dove, that
she is afraid of every feather, and that she detests and abhors the very sight
of any feather that has grown upon a Hawk; so there is such a detestation and
abhorrency of sin divinely implanted in every penitent man's heart, that he
cannot but hate every thing that looks like it, or that belongs to it, or that
comes from it.

Gal. 5.17. Isa. 26.7. The way of the just is uprightness, Prove. 16.17. The
highway of the upright is to depart from evil. It is as common and ordinary
for upright persons to depart from evil, as it is for Passengers to keep the
King's highways. Though an upright man, through mistake or weakness of grace,
or violence of temptation, may step out of a way of holiness, yet walking in a
way of wickedness, cannot be charged upon him, Psalm. 139.23, 24. Search me, O
God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any
wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. You know the path and
practice of penitent Zacheus, of penitent Paul, and of the penitent Jailer, was
quite contrary to those ways of wickedness, that they had formerly walked in.

The fourth Answer.
Act. 26.18. Sound repentance is not only a ceasing from doing evil, but also a
learning to do well, Isa. 1.16, 17. Repentance and turning to God are joined
together, as being one and the same thing, Act. 26.20. The Prodigals repenting,
was his returning to his Father, Luke 15.17. When he came (...) himself, he
said, I will arise and go to my father, and say father* (...) ^ave sinned
against heaven and before thee, etc. The Hebrew word for repentance is from
(...) Shob, which signifies to return; implying, a going back from what a man
had done; it notes a returning or converting from one thing to another, as from
sin to God, from evil to good, from hell to heaven. The common call of sinners
to repentance, is to turn from sin, and to return to God, Isa. 55.7. Let the
wicked forsake his way, Consult these Scriptures, Isa. 44.22. Isa. 19.22. Isa.
59.20. Hosea 3.5. Hosea 6.1. Hosea 14.1.
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, etc.
Jer. 1.4. If thou will return, O Israel, says the Lord, return unto me; and if
thou will put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shall thou not
remove. And so Chap. 18.11. Return ye now every one from his evil way, and make
your way and your doings good. 1 Pet. 2.25. For ye were as sheep going astray,
but are now returned unto the shepherd and bishop of your souls. It Is not
enough for a sinner to forsake his sins, but he must also return to the Lord.
The true penitent subjects his heart to the power of divine grace, and his life
to the blessed will and word of God. Look, as negative goodness can never
satisfy a penitent soul, so negative goodness can never save an impenitent
soul. It is not enough, O man, that thou art not thus and thus bad, but thou
must be thus and thus good, or thou will be miserable for ever, Ezekiel. 18.21.
But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep
all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live,
he shall not die. Negative righteousness and holiness, is no righteousness, no
holiness in the account of God. Luke 18.5. Mat. 20.13, 14.
It was not the Pharisees negative righteousness, nor his comparative goodness,
that could prevent his being rejected of God, or his being shut out of heaven,
or his being turned into hell. It is not enough that the Tree bears no ill
fruit, but it must bring forth good fruit, else it must be cut down and cast
into the fire; that Tree that is not for fruit, is for the fire; Mat. 7.19.
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit (says Christ) is hewn down and
cast into the fire. Heaven at last will be found too holy, and too hot, to hold
such as please themselves, as satisfy themselves with a negative
righteousness. All that negative righteousness and holiness can do, is only to
help a man to one of the coolest chambers and easiest beds in hell. True
repentance brings the heart and life, not only off from sin, but on to God too;
it takes a man not only off from the ways of death, but it engages him to walk
in the paths of life, Psalm. 119.3. They do no iniquity, Nazianzene speaking of
true repentance, very aptly compares the soul to a pair of writing tables, out
of which must be washed whatsoever was written with sin, and instead thereof
the writing of grace must be writupon the soul, both being necessary to true
repentance. Jer. 31.19. Job. 40.4, 5. Jer. 4.1.
they walk in his ways. Prove. 13.14. The Law of the wise is a fountain of
life, to depart from the snares of death. Prove. 15.24. The way of life is above
to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath. Psalm. 34.14. Depart from
evil and do good. We read in Scripture of God's returning to us, as well as of
our returning to God; in both there is repentance: When God returns to us, he
repents of the evil of punishment that he has brought upon us; and when we
return to God, we repent of the evil of sin which we have committed against
him. The true penitent, does not only sadly smite upon his thigh, and say, what
have I done, but he also speedily faces about, and cries out, I will do so no
more. When God calls for true repentance, it is with an if thou will return, O
Israel, return unto me. And when the people of God do provoke and encourage one
another to repentance, Hosea 6.1.
it is with a come let us return unto the Lord. Repentance unto life, is not a
turning from sin to sin, nor it is not a turning from profaneness to civility,
nor it is not a turning from civility to formality; but it is a turning from
darkness to light, Acts 26.18.
it is a turning from the ways of iniquity into the ways of piety, it is a
turning from sin to God. In this respect Israel's repentance was very
defective; witness that sad complaint of the Prophet ( Hosea 7.16.) They return
(that is, they make a show of repentance) but not to the most High. So they in
that, Joel 2.12. have the half turn, but returned not to the Lord with all
their hearts. So Jehu went far, and gave many a half turn, but never turned to
the most High, and that was his ruin at last. Such a repentance as brings the
soul never the nearer to God, is a repentance never the near; but that
repentance that brings the soul nearer to God, is a repentance never to be
repented of. And let thus much suffice, to have spoken concerning that
Evangelical Repentance, that has the precious promises of remission of sin and
salvation running out unto it, etc.

CHAP. IV.
Several have observed to my hand, It Is better that a hundred hypocrites should
perish, than that one poor Christian should want his portion. Cotton on the
Covenant, page 78.
how far an Hypocrite may go; but my design in this Chapter, is to show how far
an Hypocrite cannot go. Many have discovered at large, what an Hypocrite can
do; but my scope in this Chapter, is to show what an Hypocrite cannot do. Some
have showed what an Hypocrite is, and I shall now show what he is not. Some
have showed the several rounds in Jacob's Ladder, that an Hypocrite may climb
up to; but my business and work in this Chapter, is to show you the several
rounds in Jacob's Ladder, that no Hypocrite under heaven can climb up to.

FIrst, An Hypocrites inside is never answerable to his outside; Mat. 23.25,
26, 27 Luke 11.39.
and his outside another thing; an Hypocrite is outwardly clean, but inwardly
unclean; he is outwardly glorious, but inwardly inglorious. Hypocrites are like
Apothecaries gally pots, having without the title of some excellent
Preservative, but within they are full of some deadly poison; they are like the
Egyptian Temples, that were beautiful without, but within there was nothing to
be found but Serpents and Crocodiles, and other venomous creatures. Hypocrites
trade more for a good name, than for a good heart; for a good report, than for
a good conscience; they are like Fiddlers, more careful in tuning their
Instruments, than in watching their spirits. Erasmi ^^milia.
Hypocrites are like white silver, but they draw black lines; they have a
seeming sanctified outside, but stuffed within with malice, worldliness, pride,
envy, etc. Like window cushions, made up of velvet and richly embroydered, but
stuffed within with hay. An Hypocrite may offer sacrifice with Cain, and fast
with Jezabel; and humble himself with Ahab, and lament with the tears of Esau;
and kiss Christ with Judas, and follow Christ with Demas; and offer fair for
the holy Ghost with Simon Magus, Acts 8.23.
and yet for all this his inside as bad as any of theirs. An Hypocrite is a
Cato without, and a Nero within; a Jacob without, and an Esau within; a David
without, and a Saul within; a Peter without, and a Judas within; a Saint
without, and a Satan within; an Angel without, and a Devil within. Romans 2.28,
29.
An Hypocrit is a Jew outwardly, but an Atheist, a Pagan, Lucian.
a Turk inwardly. I have read of certain Images, which on the outside were
covered with gold and pearl, resembling Jupiter and Neptune, but within were
nothing but spiders and cobwebs; a fit resemblance of Hypocrites. Hypocrisy is
but an outside, like cloth of Arras, fair and beautiful without; but if you
look to the inside, you shall find nothing but rags and ends. That Monk hit it,
that said, To be a Monk in outward show was easy, but to be a Monk in inward
reality was hard. To be a Christian in outward show is easy, but to be a
Christian inwardly and really is very hard. An Hypocrites inside never ecco's
or answers to his outside; his inside is vicious, and his outside is Religious:
But let all such hypocrites know, that dissembled sanctity is double iniquity,
and accordingly at last they shall be dealt with, Mat. 24.5. But,

Job 20.12, 13, 14
which as a sweet morsel he rowls under his tongue, and will not spit it out;
every Hypocrite tollerates some evil or other in himself, and takes liberty to
transgress. An Hypocrite will make hard shift to daub up his conscience, and to
secure himself from the checks thereof. After once the bag was committed to
Judas his custody, after once he was chosen into that sweet office, he quickly
put conscience out of office, It was a strange conceit of the Cerinthians and
those Caini or Cainiani as they are called by some that honored Judas the
Traitor, as some divine and superhumane power, and called his treason a blessed
piece of service, and that he knowing how much the death of Christ would profit
mankind, did therefore betray him to death to save the race of men, and to do a
thing pleasing to God. Irenaeus, Aug. de haeresi.
and never left stealing and licking his fingers, whilst there was any money in
his bag to finger. Herod knew much, and heard John Baptist, and had some
temporary affections, and did many good things, Mark 6.20. But yet, 1. He kept
Herodias his brother's wife, Mark 6.17. 2. He took away the life of John the
Baptist, Mark 6.27. 3. He sets Jesus Christ at naught, and rejected him, Luke
23.11. As fair as Herod seemed to carry it, yet he lived in a known notorious
sin, and unjustly murdered the messenger of God, and mocked and rejected Jesus
Christ as a vile person. Some sin or other always reigns without control, in
an hypocritical heart. As they say of Witches, that they have one familiar or
another that still sucks them. An Hypocrite always reserves one nest-egg or
another in his heart or life, for Satan to sit and brood on. Jehu did many
brave things, but yet he kept up the worship of his golden calves. Naaman
promises high, but yet he is for bowing in the house of Rimmon. The Pharisees
were very devout, but yet they loved the praises of men, and the uppermost
seats in the Synagogues. There is never an hypocrite in the world, but will do
what he can to save the life of his sin, though it be with the loss of his
soul. O Sirs! Satan can be contented that Hypocrites should yield to God in
many things, provided they will be but true to him in some one thing; for he
very well knows, that one sin lived in, and allowed, gives him as much
advantage against the soul, as more. Satan can hold a man fast enough by one
sin, as the Fowler can hold the bird fast enough by one claw; Satan knows, that
one sin lived in and allowed, will mar all a man's sweetest duties and
services; as one dead fly will mar the whole box of precious ointment, and as
one jarring string will bring the sweetest music out of tune. It Is said of
Naaman the Syrian, Eccl. 10.1.
that he was a valiant man, and a victorious man, and an honorable man, 2
King. 5.1.
and a great favorite with his Prince, but a Leper: So it may be said of many
Hypocrites, they have such and such excellencies, and they perform such and
such glorious duties, but they live and allow themselves in this or that sin,
Mat. 7.21, 22, 23.
and that marrs the beauty of all their services. Satan knows, that one sin
lived in and allowed, will as certainly damn a man, as many; as one disease,
one ulcerous part, may as certainly kill a man, as many. Satan knows, that one
sin lived in and allowed, Lev. 31.
will render a man as unclean in the eye of God as many. If the Leper in the
Law had the spot of leprosy in any one part of his body, he was accounted a
Leper, although all the rest of his body were sound and whole: So he who has
the spot of the leprosy of sin allowed in any one part of his soul, he is a
spiritual Leper in the eye of God, he is unclean, though in other parts he may
not be unclean. The Schoolmen say, that if a sow do but wallow in one miry or
dirty hole, she is filthy; and certainly, that soul that does but wallow in any
one sin, he is filthy in the eye of God. Satan knows, Heb. 13.4. It is most
true that the Heathen man says, Qui habet unium vitium shabet omnia; he that
has any one vice ( viz. reigning) has all others with it. Seneca de benef. l.
5. c. 15.
that one sin lived in and allowed, will as effectually keep Christ and the
soul asunder, as many; as one stone in the pipe will as effectually keep out
the water, as many. Satan knows, that one sin lived in and allowed, will make
way for many; as one thief can open the door to let in many more. Satan knows,
that one sin lived in and allowed, will as certainly shut the soul out of
heaven, as many; one enemy may shut the door upon a man as well as many: and
what difference is there between that man that is shut out of heaven for living
in many sins, and he that is shut out of heaven for l^ving but in one sin? One
sin lived in and allowed, will arm conscience against a man, as well as many:
If there be but one crack in the honey glass, there the wasp will be buzzing.
One sin allowed and countenanced, will spoil the music of conscience; one sin
lived in and allowed, will make death as terrible and as formidable to the
soul, as many; one handwriting upon the wall made King Nebuchadnezzar's
countenance to change, Dan. 5.5, 6.
and his thoughts to be troubled, and the joints of his loins to be loosed, and
his knees to be dashed one against another. Now all this Satan knows, and
therefore he labors mightily to engage Hypocrites to live in the allowance of
some one sin. O Sirs! remember that as one hole in a Ship will sink it, and as
one stab at the heart will kill a man, and as one glass of poison will poison a
man, and as one act of Treason will make a man a Traitor; so one sin lived in
and allowed, will damn a man for ever; one wound strikes Goliath dead, as well
as three and twenty did Caesar; one Dalilah will do Sampson as much mischief,
Suetonius.
as all the Philistines; one wheel broken, spoils all the whole clock; one
vein's bleeding will let out all the vitals, as well as more; one bitter herb
will spoil all the pottage; Genesis 3. 1 Samuel 14.33. Josh. 7. Jonah 1.
by eating one apple, Adam lost Paradise; one lick of honey endangered
Jonathan's life; one Achan was a trouble to all Israel; one Jonah was lading
too heavy for a whole Ship: So one sin lived in and allowed, is enough to make
a man miserable for ever. One millstone will sink a man to the bottom of the Sea
as well as a hundred; so one sin lived in and indulged, will sink a man to the
bottom of hell as well as a hundred. I have read of a great Roman Captain, who
as he was riding in his triumphant Chariot through Rome, had his eyes never off
of a Curtizan that walked along the street, which made one say, Behold ho^ this
great Captain that has conquered such and such Armies, is himself conquered by
one silly woman! There is never an Hypocrite in the world, but lies under the
conquest of one base lust or another, but lives under the reign and dominion of
one sin or another. That soul that can in sincerity of heart appeal to a
heart-searching God, that it is otherwise with him ( viz. That he does not live
nor allow himself in any one sinful way or practice) that soul, I dare assure
in the Lord's name, is no hypocrite, Psalm. 139, 23, 24.

Thirdly, As an Hypocrites heart is never thoroughly subdued to a willingness to
part with every lust, so neither is his heart thoroughly subdued to a
willingness to perform all known duties; sometimes he is all for public
duties, but makes no conscience of closet-duties, or of family duties;
sometimes he is all for the duties of the first Table, but makes no conscience
of the duties of the second Table; and sometimes he is all for the duties of
the second Table, but makes no conscience of the duties of the first Table; if
he obeyes one command, he willingly lives in the neglect of another; if he does
one duty, he will be sure to cast off another; as he is not willing to fall out
with every sin, so he is not willing to fall in with every duty. An Hypocrites
obedience is always partial, it is never universal, he still baulks or boggles
with those commands that cross his lusts. The Pharisees fasted, Mat. 23.23.
Chap. 6.
prayed, gave alms, and paid tithes: O, but they omitted the weightier matters
of the Law, judgment, mercy and faith, and they were unnatural to parents, and
under a p^etence of praying, Mat. 15.4, 5, 6.
they made a prey of widows houses; under a pretense of piety, they exercised
the greatest covetousness, unrighteousness and cruelty, and that upon widows,
who are (usually the greatest objects of pity and charity; they made no bones
of robbing the widow, under a pretense of honoring of God: So Judas, under a
pretense of laying up for the poor, robbed the poor; he pretended to lay up for
the poor, John 12.6. After some men have made a long and high profession, some
one beloved lust or other, which they would never let go, parts Christ and them
for ever.
but he intended only to lay up for himself, and to provide against a rainy
day; it is probable that he had no great mind to stay long with his Lord, and
therefore he was resolved to make the best market he could for himself. Judas
being willing to set up for himself, under a cloak of holiness, he practices
the greatest unfaithfulness. Though the Eagle soars high, yet still her eye is
upon her prey; so though Judas did soar high in profession, yet his eye was
still upon his prey, upon his bags; and so he might have it, he cared not who
went without it; so he might be rich, he did not care though his Lord and his
retinue grew never so poor. Judas under all his shows of sanctity, had not so
much as common honesty in him; counterfeit holiness is often made a stalking
horse to much unrighteousness; but certainly it were better, with the
Philosopher, to have honesty without Religion, than to have Religion without
honesty. An Hypocrite may exercise himself in some outward, easy, ordinary
duties of Religion; but when shall you see an Hypocrite laying the ax to the
root of the Tree, or a searching and trying his own heart, or severely judging
his bosom sins, or humbly mourning and lamenting over secret corruptions, or
doubling his guards about his own soul, or rejoicing in the graces, services or
excellencies of others, or striving or pressing after the highest pitches of
grace, holiness and communion with God, or endeavoring more to cast out the
beam out of his own eye, than the mote out of his brother's eye, or to be more
severe against his own sins, than against the sins of others? Alas! an
Hypocrite is so far from practicing these duties, that he thinks them either
superfluous or impossible. An Hypocrites obedience is always a limited and
stinted obedience; it is either limited to such commands which are most suitable
to his ease, safety, honor, profit, pleasure, etc. or else it is limited to
the outward part of the command, and never extends it self to the inward and
spiritual part of the command; as you may see in the Scribes and Pharisees;
their obedience was all outward, they had no regard at all to the inward and
spiritual part of any command; as is evident in that high charge that Christ
gives in against them, Mat. 5. They did not murder, they did not commit
adultery, they had an eye to the outward part of the command; but Christ
charges them with unjust and adulterous thoughts, unchaste glances,
contemplative wickedness, speculative uncleanness, etc. they having no regard
at all to the inward and spiritual part of any command; common grace looks only
to some particular duties, but saving grace looks to all. Renewing grace comes
off to positives as well as negatives, Isa. 1.16, 17. Tit. 2.11, 12, 13.
it teaches us to cease to do evil, and it learns us also to do good; it
teaches us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and also to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world. These words contain the
sum of a Christians duty, to live soberly toward our selves, righteously
toward our neighbors, and godly toward God, is true godliness indeed, and
the whole duty of man. There is never an Hypocrite in the world, that can
sincerely appeal to God, and say, Lord, Psalm. 119.6. Luke 1.5, 6. Acts 13.22.
thou know that my heart is subdued to a willingness to perform all known
duties; I would willingly do the best I can to observe all thy royal Laws:
Lord, I unfeignedly desire, and really endeavor to have an eye upon every
command of thine, and to live up to every command of thine; and it is the real
grief of my heart, and the daily burden of my soul, when I violate any of thy
blessed Laws. He that can in uprightness thus appeal to God, shall never
miscarry in that other world. But,

1 John 2.16.
and sacrifices himself unto; an Hypocrite's ends are corrupt and selfish. God
may possibly be at the higher end of his work, but self is at the further end;
for he that was never truly cast out of himself, John 6.26. Mat. 6.1, 5, 16.
Gal. 4.17. Isa. 58.3. Mal. 3.14. zech. 7.5, 6, 7. Genesis 34.21, 22
can have no higher end than himself. An Hypocrite is all for his own glory, he
acts for himself, and from himself; so I may have the profit, the credit, the
glory, the applause, come of God's glory what will; this is the language of an
unsound heart. An Hypocrite will seem to be very godly when he can make a gain
of godliness, he will seem to be very holy when holiness is the way to outward
greatness and happiness; but this religious wickedness will double damn the
Hypocrite at last. Selfends are the operative ingredients in all an Hypocrite
does, self is the chief Engine, self is the great wheel that sets all an
hypocrites wheels a going. When hypocrites take up Religion, Romans 16.18. Phil.
3.19.
it is only to serve their own turns, to bring about their own carnal ends; they
serve not the Lord, but their own bellies; they use Religion only as a stream
to turn about their own Mill, and the more neatly to effect their own carnal
projects. Simon Magus will needs be baptized, and he is very desirous to have
power to give the holy Ghost to others; but his aim being only to get a name,
Acts 8.21.
and to get money, Peter tells him to his face, that his heart was not right in
the sight of God. No man can go higher than his principles, and therefore an
hypocrite having no higher principles than himself, all he does must needs be
terminated in himself. Look, as all the Rivers that come from the Sea, do
return back again to the Sea from whence they come, so all those duties which
arise from a man's self, must needs center in a man's self. An hypocrite always
makes himself the end of all his service; but let such hypocrites know, that
though their profession be never so glorious, and their duties never so
abundant, yet their ends being selfish and carnal, all their pretentions and
performances are but beautiful abominations in the sight of God. An hypocrite
has always a squint eye, and squint eyed aims, and squint eyed ends in all he
does. Numb. 22, 23. Chapters. 2 Pet. 2.15. 2 King. 10.
Balaam spoke very religiously, and he multiplied Altars and sacrifices; but
the thing he had in his eye was the wages of unrighteousness. Jehu destroyed
bloody Ahab's house, he executed the vengeance of God upon that wicked family;
he readily, 1 King. 21. Jonah 3.
resolutely and effectually destroyed all the worshippers of Baal, but his ends
were to secure the Kingdom to him and his. Ahab and the Ninivites fasted in
sackcloth, but it was merely that they might not feel the heavy judgments that
they feared would overtake them. The Jews in Babylon fasted and mourned, Zech.
7.5, 6.
and mourned and fasted seventy years, but it was more to get off their chains
than their sins, it was more to be rid of their captivity than it was to be rid
of their iniquity. Look, as the Eagle has an eye upon her prey when she flies
highest, so these Jews in all their fasting, praying, mourning, they had only
an eye to their own ease, deliverance, freedom, etc. in all their Religious
duties they were acted from evil principles, and carried on by self-respects;
and therefore Daniel denies, that in all that seventy years captivity they had
prayed to any purpose. All this is come upon us, Dan. 9.13.
yet made we not our prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turn from
our iniquities and understand thy truth. It is the end that dignifies or
debaseth the action, that rectifies it or adulterates it, that sets a crown of
honor, or a crown of shame upon the head of it. He that commonly, habitually,
in all his duties and services, proposes to himself no higher ends than the
praises of men, or rewards of men, or the stopping the mouth of natural
conscience, or only to avoid a smarting rod, or merely to secure himself from
wrath to come, he is an hypocrite. The ends of a man's actions are always a
great discovery either of sincerity or hypocrisy. Look, as great gifts, not
sweetened with sincerity, are no ornaments to us; so great infirmities not
sowred with hypocrisy, are no great deformities to us. An hypocrites ends are
always below God, they are always below glorifying of God, exalting of God,
walking with God, and enjoying communion with God. An hypocrite in all he does,
still proposes to himself some poor, mean, ignoble self-end or other.

But now mark, a sincere Christian, if he prays, or hears, or gives, Psalm.
115.1. 1 These. 2.6.
or fasts, or repents, or obeys, etc. God's glory is the main end of all; the
glory of God is his highest end, his ultimate end. A sincere Christian can be
content to be trampled upon and vilified, so God's name be glorified; the bent
of such a heart is for God and his glory; Rev. 4.9, 10, 11.
nothing but sincerity can carry a soul so high, as in all acts natural, civil
and religious, to intend God's glory. A sincere Christian ascribes the praise
of all to God, Romans 14.7, 8.
he sets the crown on Christ's head alone, he will set God upon the throne, and
make all things else his servants, or his footstool; all must bow the knee to
God, or be trodden in the dirt; he will love nothing, he will embrace nothing
but what sets God higher, or brings God nearer to his heart. The glory of God
is the mark, the white, that the sincere, Christian has in his eye. The sincere
Christian lives not to himself, 1 Cor. 10. ult. Rev. 12.11.
but to him who lives for ever; he lives not to his own will, or lusts, or
greatness, or glory in this world, but he lives to his glory, whose glory is
dearer to him than his own Life. Look, as bright shining golden vessels do not
retain the beams of the Sun which they receive, but reflect them back again
upon the Sun; so the sincere Christian return and reflects back again upon the
Sun of righteousness, the praise and glory of all the gifts, graces and virtues
that they have received from him. The daily language of sincere souls is this;
1 Chronicles. 29, 10, 18. Romans 13.7.
Non nobis Domine, non nobis Domine; Not unto us Lord, not unto us Lord, but to
thy name be all the glory. A sincere Christian makes conscience of giving men
their dues; how much more then does he make conscience of giving God his due.
Psalm. 96.7, 8.
Now glory is God's due, and God stands upon nothing more than that we g^ve him
the glory due unto his name, Propter te Domine propter te, was once and is
still every sincere Christians Motto.
as you may see in Psalm. 29.1, 2. There are three gives in those two verses;
Give unto the Lord, give unto the Lord, give unto the Lord the glory that is
due unto his name. Glory i^ God's right, and he stands upon his right, and this
the sincere Christian knows, and therefore he gives him his right, he gives him
the honor and the glory that is due unto his name. But pray do not mistake me,
I do not say that such as are really sincere, do actually eye the glory of
Christ in all their actions: Oh, no, this is a happiness desirable on earth,
but shall never be attained till we come to heaven. By and base ends and aims
will be still ready to creep into the best hearts; but all sincere hearts sigh
and groan under them, they complain to God of them, and they cry out for
justice, justice upon them, and it is the earnest desires and daily endeavors
of their souls to be rid of them; and therefore they shall not be imputed to
them, nor keep good things from them: But now take a sincere Ch^istian in his
ordinary, usual and habitual course, and you shall find that his aims and ends
in all his actions and undertakings are to glorify God, to exalt God, and to
lift up God in the world. If the Hypocrite did in good earnest aim at the glory
of God in what he does, then the glory of God would swallow up all his by aims
and carn^l ends, as Aarons rod swallowed up the Magicians rods. Look, as the
Sun puts out the light of the fire, Exodus 7.10, 11, 12.
so the glory of God (where it is aimed at) will put out and consume all by and
base ends. This is most certain, that which is a man's great end, that will
work out all other ends; he that sets up the glory of God as his chief end,
will find that his chief end will by degrees eat out all low and base ends.
Look, Genesis 41.4.
as Pharaoh's lean kin^ ate up the fat, so the glory of God will eat up all
those fat and worldly ends that crowd in upon the soul in religious work. Where
the glory of God is kept up as a man's greatest end, there all by and base ends
will be kept at an under. By what has been said, it is most evident, that an
Hypocrite in all his transactions looks at himself, and designs the advance and
advantage of himself. An Hypocrite is as well able to make a world, and to
unmake himself, as he is able to make the glory of God, the exaltation of God
his highest end, his utmost aim in what he does. But,

Fifthly, No Hypocrite can live wholly and only upon the righteousness of
Christ, the satisfaction of Christ, the merits of Christ for justification and
salvation. The hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees prayed and fasted, Mat. 6.
Luke 18.11, 12. ponder upon that Rev. 3.16, 17, 18.
and kept the Sabbath, and gave alms, etc. and in this legal righteousness
they rested and trusted. Upon the performance of these and such like duties
they laid the weight of their souls, and the stress of their salvation, and so
perished for ever. An Hypocrite rests upon what he does, and never looks so
high as the righteousness of Christ; he looks upon his duties as so much good
moneys laid out for heaven; he weaves a web of righteousness to cloth himself
withal, he never looks out for a more glorious righteousness to be justified by
than his own, and so puts a slight upon the righteousness of Christ, Romans 10.3.
For they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness
of God. The first step to salvation is to renounce our own righteousness, the
next step is to embrace the righteousness of Christ which is freely offered to
sinners i^ the Gospel; but these things the Hypocrite minds not, regards not:
The righteousness of an Hypocrite is not only imperfect, but impure, a rag, a
filthy rag; and therefore he that rests upon such a righteousness, Isa. 64.6.
must needs miscarry to all eternity. O Sirs! who will say that that man needs
a Savior, that can fly to heaven upon the wings of his own duties and
services? If a man's duties can pacify an infinite wrath, and satisfy an
infinite justice, then farewell Christ, and welcome duties. He that will rest
upon his own righteousness for life and justification, must needs sit down on
this side salvation; he that rests upon his duties, and that rests upon a gift
of knowledge, a gift of utterance, a gift of memory, or a gift of prayer,
though he may come near to heaven, and bid fair for heaven, yet he will never
be able to get into heaven. Now, how sad is it for a man to lose himself and
his soul in a wilderness of duties, when he is upon the borders, yea the very
brink of the holy Land; he that rests upon any thing in him, or done by him as
a means to procure the favor of God, or the salvation of his soul, will put
such a cheat upon himself as will undo him for ever. Non-submission to the
righteousness of Christ, keeps Christ and the hypocrite asunder; Christ will
never love nor like to put the fine, clean, Rev. ^9.7, 8.
white linen of his own righteousness upon the old garment, the old rags of an
hypocrites duties; Mar. 9.16, 17.
neither will Christ ever delight to put his new wine into such old bottles. An
hypocrites confidence in his own righteousness, Prove. 21.27.
turns his righteousness into filthiness. But now a sincere Christian, he
renounces his own righteousness, he renounces all confidence in the flesh,
Phil. 3.3.
he looks upon his own righteousness as dung, yea as dogs meat (as some
interpret the word (...), in that, (...) dicuntur quasi (...). Vide Bezam, vide
a Lapide.
Phil. 3.8.) he will say no more to his duties, to the works of his hands, ye
are my Gods, Hos. 14.3. When they look upon the holiness of Gods nature, the
righteousness of his government, the severity of his Law, the terror of his
wrath, they see an absolute and indispensable necessity of a more glorious
righteousness than their own to appear before God in. A sincere Christian sets
the highest price and value upon the righteousness of Christ, Psalm. 71.16. I
will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only. Mark, the Emphasis
doubled, of thine, and thine only; a sincere Christian is convinced of the
nature, worth and excellency of the righteousness of Christ, and therefore he
cries out, I will make mention of thy righteousness, of thine only. The costly
cloak (of Alcisthenes) which Dionisius sold to the Carthaginians for an hundred
Talents, was indeed a mean and beggarly rag in a sincere Christian's eye, to
that embroidered mantle of righteousness that Christ puts upon his. A sincere
Christian rejoices in the righteousness of Christ above all, Isa. 61.10. I will
greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he has
clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me with the role of
righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride
adorneth her self with her jewels. It is matter of joy, Knolls Hist.
and a sign of great favor from the great Turk, when a rich garment is cast
upon any that comes into his presence: O then! what matter of joy must it be to
a sincere Christian, Isa. 28.16.
to have the rich and royal garment of Christ's righteousness cast upon him? A
sincere Christian rests on the righteousness of Christ, as on a sure
foundation, Isa. 45.24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness
and strength. It was a very sweet and golden expression of one, when he thought
himself to be at the point of death; I confess, said he, I am not worthy, I
have no merits of mine own to obtain heaven by; Guliel. Abb^s in vita Bern.
lib. 1. cap. 12.
but my Lord had a double right thereunto, an hereditary right as a son, and a
meritorious right as a sacrifice; he was contented with the one right himse f,
the other right he has given unto me, by the virtue of which gift I do rightly
lay claim unto it, and am not confounded. A sincere Christian looks upon the
righteousness of Christ as that which renders him most splendid and glorious in
the eyes of God, Phil. 3.9. And ^e found in him not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ the righteousness which is of God by faith. The Church, says Marlorat,
which puts on Christ and his righteousness, is m re illustrious than the Air is
by the Sun. A sincere Christian looks upon the righteousness of Christ as his
only security against wrath to come; 1 These. 1. ult.
wrath to come is the greatest wrath, wrath to come is the purest wrath, wrath
to come is infinite wrath, wrath to come is everlasting wrath: Now the sincere
Christian he knows no way under heaven to secure himself from wrath to come,
but by putting on the robe of Christ's righteousness. The story tells us (if we
may believe it) that Pilate being called to Rome to give an account unto the
Empeperor for some misgovernment and maladministration, Romans 13.14.
he put on the seamless coat of Christ, and all the time he had that coat upon
his back, Caesar's fury was abated. There is nothing that can abate the wrath
and fury of a sin-revenging God, but the seamless coat of Christ's
righteousness. Well, for a close remember this, There is never an hypocrite in
the world that is more pleased, satisfied, delighted and content^d with the
righteousness of Christ, than with his own, etc. Though an hypocrite may be
much in duties, yet he never lives above his duties; he works for life, and he
rests in his work, and this proves his mortal wound. But,

Sixthly, An Hypocrite never embraces a whole Christ, he can never take up his
full and everlasting rest, satisfaction in the enjoyment of Christ alone. No
hypocrite did ever long and mourn after the enjoyment of Christ, as the best
thing in all the world; no hypocrite did ever prize Christ for a sanctifier as
well as a Savior; no hypocrite did ever look upon Christ, or long for Christ
to deliver him from the power of his sins, as much, or as well as to deliver
him from wrath to come; no hypocrite can really love the person of Christ, or
take satisfaction in the person of Christ, 1 These. 1.10.
the rays and beam^ of Christ's glory has never warmed his heart; he never knew
what bosom communion with Christ meant. An hypocrite may love to be healed by
Ch is it, and to be pa^doned by Christ, and to be saved by Christ, etc. but he
can never take any complacency in the person of Christ, his heart never
seriously works after union with Christ. The love of a sincere Christian runs
much out to the person of Christ, heaven it self without Christ, Cant. 5.10.
Phil. 1.21. and 3.7, 8, 9, 10.
would be to such a soul but a poor thing, a low thing, a little thing, an
uncomfortable thing, an empty thing; it is the person of Christ that is the
sparkling Diamond in the ring of glory. No hypocrite in the world is sincerely
willing to receive Christ in all his Offices, and to close with him upon Gospel
terms. 1 John 11, 13. Mat. 16.24.
The terms upon which God offers Christ in the Gospel, are these, viz. That we
shall accept of a whole Christ with a whole heart. Now mark, a whole Christ
includes all his Offices, and a whole heart includes all our faculties: Christ
as Mediator is King, Priest and Prophet, and so God the Father in the Gospel
offers him. Salvation was too great and too glorious a work to be perfected and
completed by any one Office of Christ. Christ as a Prophet instructs us, and
as a Priest he redeems us, and intercedes for us, and as a King he sanctifies
and saves us. The Apostle hit it when he said, He is made to us of God, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption. Consider Christ as our Prophet,
and so he is made wisdom to us; 1 Cor. 1.30.
consider him as our Priest, and so he is made righteousness and redemption to
us; consider him as our King, and so he is made sanctification and holiness to
us. An hypocrite may be willing to embrace Christ as a Priest to save him from
wrath, from the curse, from hell, from everlasting burning, but he is never
sincerely willing to embrace Christ as a Prophet to teach and instruct him, and
as a King to rule and reign over him; many hypocrites may be willing to receive
a Christ Jesus, that are not willing to receive a Lord Jesus; they may be
willing to embrace a saving Christ, but they are not willing to embrace a
ruling Christ, a commanding Christ. Luke 19 27.
This man shall not rule over us. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou that killest the
Prophets, how often would I have gathered thy children together, Mat. 23.37.
Psalm. 2.2, 3. John 5.40. John 1.11. Isa. 8 14. 1 Pet. 2.7, 8.
even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? And ye
will not come to me that ye might have life. He came to his own, and his own
received him not. An hypocrite is willing to receive Christ in one office, but
not in every office; and this is that stumbling stone at which hypocrites
stumble and fall, and are broken in pieces. Certainly Christ is as lovely and
as comely ^s desirable, and delightful as eminent, and excellent in one office
as he is in another, and therefore it is a just and righteous thing with God,
that hypocrites that will not receive him in every office, 1 Cor. 1.1^.
should have no benefit by any one of his offices. Christ and his offices may
be distinguished, but Christ and his offices can never be divided; whilst many
have been a laboring to divide one office of Christ from another, they have
wholly stripped themselves of any advantage or benefit by Christ. Hypocrites love
to share with Christ in his happiness, but they don't love to share with Christ
in his holiness; they are willing to be redeemed by Christ, but they are not
cordially willing to submit to the Laws and Government of Christ; they are
willing to be saved by his blood, but they are not willing to submit to his
Scepter. Hypocrites love the privileges of the Gospel, but they don't love the
services of the Gospel, especially those that are most inward and spiritual.
But now a sincere Christian he owns Christ in all his offices, 1 John 12. Mat.
2.6. Heb. 7.21, 26. Acts 3.22. John 12.46.
he receives Christ in all his offices, and he closes with Christ in all his
offices, he accepts of him not only as a Christ Jesus, but also as a Lord
Jesus; he embraces him not only as a saving Christ, but also as a ruling
Christ. The Colossians received him as Christ Jesus the Lord, Col. 2.6.
they received a Lord Christ as well as a saving Christ, they received Christ
as a King upon his throne, 2 Cor. 4.5.
as well as a sacrifice upon his Cross. God the Father in the Gospel tenders a
whole Christ; We preach Christ Jesus the Lord, Acts 5.31.
and accordingly a sincere Christian receives a whole Christ, he receives
Christ Jesus the Lord; he says with Thomas, My Lord, and my God; John 20.28.
he takes Christ for his wisdom as well as for his righteousness, and he takes
him for his sanctification as well as for his redemption. An hypocrite is all
for a saving Christ, for a sin-pardoning Christ, for a soul-glorifying Christ,
but regards not a ruling Christ, a reigning Christ, a commanding Christ, a
sanctifying Christ, and this at last will prove his damning sin, John 3.19, 20.
But,

Seventhly, An Hypocrite cannot mourn for sin as sin, nor Number. 22.
Merely to refrain from sin, for so Balaam did, even then when he was tempted
to it. 2. To hate sin is not merely to confess sin, Exodus 10.16. Mat. 27.4.
for so Pharaoh and Judas did. 3. To hate sin is not merely to be afraid to
sin, for this may be where the hatred of sin is not. 4. To hate sin is not
merely to mourn because of the dreadful effects and fruits that sin may
produce, for so Ahab did, and the Ninivites did, etc. He that sears sin for
hell, Augustine.
fears not to sin but to burn, but he hates sin indeed whosoever hates sin as hell
it self. It was a saying of one of the Ancients, Anselm.
That if hell and sin were before him, he would rather fall into hell than fall
into sin; here was a true hatred of sin indeed. An hypocrite may be troubled
for sin, as it blots his name, and wounds his conscience, and brings a scourge,
and destroys his soul, and shuts him out of heaven, and throws him to hell, but
he is never troubled for sin, he never mourns for sin, he never hates sin
because it is contrary to the nature of God, the being of God, the Law of God,
the glory of God, the design of God, or because of the evil that is in the
nature of sin, or because of the defiling and polluting power of sin. True
hatred of sin is universal; it is of the whole kind; he who hates a toad because
it is a toad, hates every toad; and he who hates a man because he is holy,
hates every holy man; and so he who hates sin because it is sin, (...), Arist.
Rhet. lib. 2.
hates every sin, Psalm. 119.128. I hate every false way. (True hatred is ever
against the whole kind of a thing) Every sincere Christian has in him a
general hatred of every false way, and dares not allow himself in the least
sin; What I do I allow not. Romans 7.15.
Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is evil. The Greek word (...) is very significant;
Chrysostom.
the simple Verb imports extreme detestation, which is aggravated by the
composition; Romans 2.21.
the word signifies to hate evil as hell it self. Though an hypocrite may hate
some sins; Thou abhorrest Idols, yet that is out of some peculiar and
particular indisposition to a particular sin; Doctor Sibs in his souls conflict
makes the hatred of sin the surest and never failing character of a good soul,
page 340.
but this hatred of th^s or that particular sin, arises not from an inward
nature or gracious principle, as it does in him that is a sincere Christian;
and the reason is this, because that contrariety to sin which is in a real
Christian arising from this inward gracious nature, is to the whole species or
kind of sin, and is irreconcilable to any sin whatsoever. As contrarieties of
nature are to the whole kind, as light is contrary to all darkness, and fire to
all water; so this contrariety to sin arising from the inward man, is universal
to all sin. Though a sincere Christian has not a universal victory over all
sin, yet there is in him a universal contrariety to all sin. Victory argues
strength, contrariety argues nature. Hence it is that an hypocrite may hate one
sin, and love another, because there is not a gracious nature in him which
would be contrary to all. The inward nature of a Christian is to be judged by
the universal contrariety of his inward man to all sin. Now this universal
contrariety to all sin, will beget a unive^sal conflict with all sin. O Sirs!
remember this, A universal contrariety to sin, can be found in no man but he
that is sincere; and this universal contrariety to sin argues an inward nature
of grace, and this is that which differences a real Christian from an
hypocrite, who may oppose some sins out of other principles and reasons. An
hypocrite may be angry with this sin and that, which brings the smarting rod,
and wounds his conscience, and disturbs his peace, and imbitters his mercies,
and strangles his comforts, and that lays him open to wrath, and that brings
him even to the gates of hell, but he can never hate sin as sin. An hypocrite
he hates some sins, but likes others, he loathes some but loves others, he
opposes some but practices others; like the Angel of the Church of Ephesus,
that hated the deeds of the Nicolaitans, but loved luke-warmness. Rev. 2.5, 6.
Many men detest theft that love covetousness, abhor whoredom that like
irrereligiousness, etc. There is no hypocrite under heaven, that can truly say,
I hate every false way; but a sincere Christian he hates all sinful ways, but
his own first and most; 1 Kings 5.18.
an upright heart leaves no nest-egg for Satan to sit on, but the hypocrite
always does. Mark, in true hatred there are six things observable.

First, True hatred includes an extreme detestation; every Thou shall cast them
away as a menstrous cloth, Isa 30.22.
thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence. Chap. 2.20.
In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which
they made each one for himself to worship, to the Moles and to the Bats. Their
detestation should be so great, that they should cast their most costly idols
of silver and gold, into the most dark, nasty, dusty corners; to testify the
sincerity of their conversion to God, they should hate and abhor, abandon and
abolish their gold and silver idols which they valued above all others.

Secondly, True hatred includes an earnest separation. He 2 Cor. 5.4.
For we that are in this tabernacle do groan being burdened. A sincere
Christian finds no burden to lay so heavy and weighty upon his spirit as sin,
and therefore he groans to be delivered from it. In the Law, Deuteronomy. 24.3.
he that hated his Wife did sue out a bill of divorce from her. He that truly
hates sin, puts in many a bill into the Court of Heaven, that he may be for
ever divorced from his sin.

Thirdly, True hatred includes an irreconcilable alienation. men may be made
friends, Lawyers often fall out at the Bar, but are very well agreed when they
meet at the Tavern.
but if two men hate each other, all friendship is everlastingly broken betwixt
them. A man may be angry with sin, and yet made friends with sin again; but if
once he comes to hate his sin, then all friendship with sin is everlastingly
broken. When Christ and the soul comes to be really one, then sin and the soul
comes to be everlastingly two, etc.

Gal. 5.17. Romans 7.22, 23.
Though sin and grace were not born together, and though sin and grace shall
never die together; yet whilst a believer lives in this world, they must live
together; and whilst sin and grace do cohabit together, they will still be
opposing and conflicting one with another. That man that truly hates sin, will
everlastingly conflict with sin, he will die fighting against his sins as one
of the Dukes of Venice died fighting against his enemies with his weapons in
his hand. Well Christians, remember this, Though to be kept from sin brings
most peace and comfort to us, yet for us to oppose sin, and for God to pardon
sin, that brings most glory to God, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9.

Saul hated David, 1 Samuel 26.19, 20. 1 Samuel 23.23. Est. 5.14.
and sought his life; he hunted him up and down as a Partridge in the
mountains, he left no stone unturned, nor no means unattempted, whereby he
might revenge himself upon David. Haman hated Mordecai, and nothing would
satisfy him but to bring him to a shameful death, to see him hanged on a
gallows fifty cubits high (which was designed says Lyra, to put Mordecai to
the greater shame, for he hanging h^gh every one might see him and point to
him.) Now when there was but one night betwixt Mordecai and a shameful death,
divine providence opportunely struck in and saved him from Haman's malice, and
caused the mischief which he had plotted against Mordecai, suddenly to fall
upon his own pate; for he who was highly feasted with the King one day, 2 Samuel
13.22, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
was made a feast for crows the next day. Absalom hated Amnon and killed him.
Julian the Apostate hated the Christians with a deadly hatred, he put many
thousands of them to death, and threatened and vowed that at his return from
fighting against the Persians he would put all the Christians in his Empire to
the sword, but God prevented him, by cutting him off in that expedition. A
Christian that hates sin, cannot be satisfied but in the death and destruction
of it; in all his duties the language of his soul is, Lord, let my sins be
destroyed, whoever escapes let not my sins escape the hand of thy revenging
justice: And in all Ordinances the language of his soul is, O Lord! when shall
my sins be subdued and mortified, when shall my cursed corruptions be brought
to an under? yea, when shall they all be drowned in the Red Sea of my Saviors
blood, etc.

Sixthly, True hatred includes an impartial aversation, Israel with Amalek)
thou will have war for ever? Exodus 17.16.
what is that which thou will be avenged of, and daily do endeavor the
mortifying and crucifying of? what is that which thou set thy heart against
in the comprehensive latitude thereof, whether great or little, open or secret?
if it be sin, if it be thy sins, if it be all thy sins, then assuredly here is
a true hatred of sin, and assuredly here is a most distinguishing character of
a child of God, of a sound conversion, and of a saving change. It was not wont
to be thus with thee, nor is this findable in any hypocrite, Judge. 14.3, 7.
or in any unconverted person upon the face of the earth; 2 Samuel 13.15.
sin was once to thee as Dalilah to Sampson, but now it is to thee as Tamar to
Amnon; Job 20.12, 13.
once it was a sweet morsel which thou heldst fast and would not let it go,
Isa. 30.22.
but now it is the menstruous cloth which thou castest away, Hos. 14.8.
saying, Get thee hence: Now with Ephraim thou cryest out, What have I to do
any more with Idols? O, if it be indeed thus with thee, then thou have cause
for ever to be much in blessing and in admiring of the Lord for his
distinguishing grace and favor toward thee. O Sirs! the world is full of
baits, snares and temptations, but whilst the hatred of sin burns in your
breasts, you may cast up your caps, and throw the Gantlet to the world, the
flesh and the devil. Well, remember this for ever, There are three things an
hypocrite can never do. 1. He can never mourn for sin as sin. 2. He can never
mourn for the sins of others as well as his own. Moses, Lot, David, Jeremiah,
Paul, and those in that, Ezekiel. 9.4, 6. mourned for others sins as well as their
own; but Pharaoh, Ahab, Judas, Demas, Simon Magus never did. 3. He can never
hate sin as sin. But,

1 Cor. 8.1, 2. John 7.49. and 9.34.
or a poor esteem of himself; no hypocrite loves to lessen himself to greaten
Christ, to debase himself to exalt Christ; no hypocrite loves to be out-shin'd,
all hypocrites love to write an I (not a Christ) upon what they do. The
Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, Luke 18.11, 12 Monday and Thursday
were the Pharisees. fasting days, because Moses went up to the Mount on a
Thursday, and came down on a Monday, says Drusius.
God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this Publican; I fast twice in the week, I give tithes
of all that I possess. All hypocrites stand not only upon their comparisons,
but also upon the disparisons; I am not as this Publican. All hypocrites stand
much upon their negative righteousness, and their comparative goodness. There
is no hypocrite in the world, but sets down his penny for a pound, and always
prizes himself above the Market, 2 Kings 10.15, 16. And when he was departed
thence, he lighted on Jehonadab the son of Rechab, coming to meet him, and he
saluted him, and said to him, Is thine heart right as my heart is with thy
heart? and Jehonadab answered, it is; if it be, give me thine hand, and be gave
him his hand, and he took him up to him into his chariot; and he said, come
with me, and see my zeal for the Lord. Comets make a greater blaze than fixed
Stars; Come see my zeal for the Lord. Jehu his words were for the Lord, but his
project was for the kingdom. The Actor in the Comedy said with his mouth, O
coelum (O heaven) but with his finger he pointed to the earth. Lapidaries tell
us of a stone called the Chelydonian stone, that it will retain its virtue no
longer than it is enclosed in gold; a fit emblem of an hypocrite, of a Jehu.
John 12.43.
Jehu made a great blaze, but he was but a Comet. An hypocrite always loves
the praise of men more than the praise of God, he loves more to be honored by
men than to be honored by God. John 5.44.
How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor which comes from God only. Nothing below that power which raised Christ
from the grave, can make an hypocrite purely nothing in his own eyes. An
hypocrite is always a great thing in his own eyes, Accius the Poet, though he
were a Dwarf, yet would be pictured tall of stature. The application to the
hypocrite is easy.
and when he is nothing, a great nothing in others eyes, he cannot bear it. An
hypocrite cannot endure to be out-shin'd in gifts, in graces, in experiences, in
duties, in communion with God, in spiritual enjoyments. An hypocrites heart is
full of pride, when his deportment is most humble; he always thinks best of
himself and worst of others, he looks upon his own vices as graces, and he
looks upon other men's graces as vices, or at least, as no true current coin. A
proud spirit will cast disgrace upon that excellency that himself wants,
Eusebius Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 13.
as Licinius who was joined with Galerius in the Empire, he was so ignorant
that he was not able to write his own name; he was a bitter enemy to learning,
and as Eusebius reports of him, he called the liberal Arts a public poison and
pestilence. The emptiest barrels makes the loudest sound, the worst metal the
greatest noise, and the lightest ears of corn hold their heads highest. An
hypocrite may well lay his hand upon his heart, and say, is it not so with me?
is it not just so with me?

But now sincere Ch^istians, they are men of another spirit, of another temper,
of another mettle, of another mind, their hearts lie low, when their gifts, and
graces, and spiritual enjoyments are high. Abraham is but dust and ashes in his
own eyes. Genesis 18.27.
The higher any man is in his communion with God, the more low that man will be
in his own eyes: Dust and ashes are poor, base, vile, worthless things, and
such a thing as these was Abraham in his own eyes. So Jacob was a plain man,
Genesis 32.10.
an upright man; and lo, what a low esteem had he of himself, I am not worthy
of the least of all the mercies which thou have showed unto thy servant, etc.
In the Hebrew it is, I am little before thy mercies; for the Hebrews have no
comparative, Genesis 31. from ver. 38. to 41. The least mercy, says Jacob, is
more worth than I, and more weighty than I
and therefore they are wont to express this by a positive and a preposition.
When Jacob had to do with Laban, he pleads his merits, but when he has to do
with God, he pleads nothing but grace, setting a very low esteem upon himself;
he looks upon himself as less than the least of mercies, and as worse than the
worst of creatures; the least of my mercies are greater than I deserve, and the
greatest of my troubles are less than I deserve, says Jacob. The language of a
plain hearted Jacob is this; O Lord, I might with Job have been stripped of all
my comforts and enjoyments at a clap, and set upon a dunghill, I might with
Lazarus have been begging my bread from door to door, Lam. 5.9.
or I might have been getting my bread with the peril of my life, because of
the sword of the wilderness, or I might have been with Dives in hell, a crying
out for a drop of water to cool my tongue. A sincere Christian cannot tell how
to speak good enough of God, Luke 16.24.
nor ill enough of himself. Agur was one of the wisest and holiest men on
earth, and see how greatly he debases himself; Prove. 30.1, 2.
Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a
man. Agur had seen Ithiel (God with me) and Ucal (God almighty) and this made
him so vile and base in his own eyes; this made him villifie, yea nullify
himself to the utmost. Job was a non-such in regard of those perfections and
^grees of grace, of integrity, of sanctity, that he had attained to beyond any
other Saints in the World, in his time and day.
You know, no man ever received a fairer or a more valuable certificate under
the hand of God, or the broad Seal of heaven for his being a soul famous in
uprightness and holiness than Job^ as you may see, Job 1.8. And the Lord said
unto Satan, have thou con^^^^ed my servant Job, than there is none like him in
the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God and escheweth
evil. Job was high in worth, and humble in heart, Job 42.5, 6. I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine ^^e sees thee; I abhor my self in
dust and ashes. This expression is the deepest act of abhorrency; abhorrency
strictly taken, is hatred wound up to the height. I abhor my self. The Hebrew
word that is rendered abhor, signifies to reject, to disdain, to contemn, to
cast off. Ah, says Job, I abhor my self, I reject my self, I disdain my self,
I cast off my self, I have a very vile and base esteem of my self. David was a
man of great integrity, a man after Gods own heart, and yet he looks upon
himself as a Flea; 1 King. 15.5.
and what is more contemptible than (...) looks upon himself as a Flea, so he
looks upon himself as a worm; 1 Samuel 26.20
I am a worm and no man. The Hebrew word (...) Tolagnath, Psalm. 22.6.
that is here rendered a worm, signifies a very little worm which breeds in
scarlet, a worm that is so li^^l^ (...) that a man can hardly perceive it. A
worm is the most despicable creature in the world, trampled under foot by man
and beasts; he who was in God's eye a man after his own heart, is in his own
eye but a despicable worm, A sincere Christian is a little, little nothing in
his own eyes.

So Paul who had been caught up into the th^^d heav^^, Chrysostom.
(...) learned his divinity among the Angels, as one speaks; and had such
glorious Revelations as could not be uttered, yet he accounts himself less than
the least of all Saints, Eph^* ^.8^ Unto me who am less than the least of all
Saints. Vide Es^ius, ^^^^m, etc.
The Greek is (...) comparative made of a superlative, less than the least
(...) Saints is a double diminutive, and signifies lesser than the least, if
lesser might be, (not that any thing can be less than the least) Paul's
rhetoric does not cross Aristotle's Philosophy, the original word being a
double dimin^tive; his meaning is, that he was as little as could be, therefore
he put himself down so little, as could not be less than the least. Here you
have the greatest Apostle descending down to the lowest step of humility; great
Paul is least of Saints, 1 Timothy 1.15.
last of the Apostles, and greatest of sinners.

So Peter, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord; Luke 5.8. (...).
or as the Greek runs, A man, a sinner, a very mixture and compound of dirt and
sin, a mere bundle of vice and vanity, of folly and iniquity. So Luther, I have
no other name than sinner, sinner is my name, sinner is my surname, this is the
name by which I shall be always known; I have sinned, I do sin, I shall sin in
infinitum, says Luther speaking vilely and basely of himself. Lord, I am hell,
and thou art heaven, said blessed Hooper, I am a most hypocrital wretch, not
worthy that the earth should bear me, said blessed Bradford. Thus you see by
these several instances, that sincere Christians do as it were take a holy
pleasure and delight to debase, humble and villifie themselves. But this is a
work hypocrites are mere strangers to; there is not an hypocrite under heaven
that loves to debase himself, or that makes it his duty conscientiously to
villifie and lessen himself, that Christ may be set up above all. Augustine.
Humility is a grace hardly attained unto. Many (says one) can more easily
give all they have to the poor, than themselves become poor in spirit. But,

Job 27. ver. 8. For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained,
when God shall take away his soul? Ver. 10. Will he delight himself in the
Almighty? Will he always call upon God? Or, as the Hebrew runs, Will he in
every time call upon God? It may be he may formally call on God in time of
prosperity; but can he seriously do it in time of adversity? Sometimes when the
rod is upon them, then they will pour out a prayer to God; Isa, 26.16.
In their affliction they will seek me earthly. When he slew them, then they
sought him, and they returned and enquired after God. Hos. 5. ult. Psalm. 78, 34.
But this was not the standing frame of their hearts. Ver. 36. Nevertheless,
they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their
tongues. Ver. 47. For their heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant. When Pharaoh was upon the wrack, he could roar out a
confession, Exo. 10.16, 17. Ver. 19.20.
and earnestly cry out for a prayer; but when the judgment was removed, Pharaoh
was as proud, and hard, and blind as ever. 1 King. 1.50, 51
When Adonijah was in danger of death, then he could hang on the horns of the
Altar. When Ahab was threatened with utter desolation, then he could fast and
lie in sackcloth; and so did the Minivites: Jonah 3.
But all this was but like Ephraim and Judah's goodness, that as a morning
cloud, and as the early dew passes away. Will the hypocrite always, or in
every time call upon God? will the hypocrite call upon God as often as
providence calls him to call upon God? will he call upon God as often as
judgments call him to call upon God? will he call upon God as often as
conscience calls him to call upon God? will he call upon God as often as it is
his duty to call upon God? will he call upon God as often as others call upon
him to call upon God? Oh no. The hypocrite will not always call upon God, he
will not persevere in prayer, he will not hold on, nor hold out in prayer, he
is short spirited, he cannot always pray and not faint, or shrink back as
sluggards do in work, or cowards in war, as the original word in Luke imports.
Luke 18.1. (...).
An hypocrite for want of an inward principle, can neither delight in God, nor
always call upon God. If God comes not at his call, if he opens not as soon as
he knocks, he is out of patience, and ready to say with that proud profane
Prince; Behold, this evil is of the Lord, and what should I wait for him any
longer? 2 Kings 6:33.
If any hypocrite obtains the mercy he desires, then he will throw off prayer;
as he said, Take away the net, the fish is caught; if he obtains not the mercy,
then he will grow weary of his duty. Thou have been weary of me, O Israel. Mal.
1.13. Isa. 43.22.
Prayer is too hard and too high a work for an unsound heart to hold on in;
prayer is heart-work, and that proves heavy work to him. The soul of prayer
lies in the pouring out of the soul before God, and this is a work that an
hypocrite has no skill in. 1 Samuel 1.15.
It was a profane and blasphemous speech of that Atheistical wretch, that told
God he was no common beggar, he never troubled him before with prayer, Hill.
Mic. p. 376.
and if he would but hear him that time, he would never trouble him again: Even
such a spirit and such principles lie lurking in every hypocrites breast.
Doubtless he hit it who said; How can thou expect that God should hear thee,
Cyprian de oratione Dominica. Psalm. 116.1, 2. Genesis 32.24, to ver. 29. Hos.
12.3, 4. Mat. 15.22. to ver. 28.
when thou will not hear thy self? or that God should give thee a return in
prayer, when thou art not mindful what thou ask in prayer? But now a sincere
Christian he will go on in prayer, speed or not speed; if he prevails he will
love prayer the better all his days, if he don't for the present prevail, he
will be so much the more importunate with God in prayer: It Is as natural for a
bird to live without Air, and for a fish to live without water, and for a man
to live without food, as it is for a sincere heart to live without prayer. O,
says Chrysostom, it is more bitter than death to be spoiled of prayer. Dan. 6.
Prayer is porta coeli clavis paradisi, the seat of heaven, a key to let us into
paradise.
And hereupon (as he observes) Daniel chose rather to run the hazard of his
life, than to lose or give over his private prayers. Prayer is the key of
heaven, and a sincere Christian loves much to be a handling of that key, though
he should dye for it. As that Emperor said, Oportet Imperatorem stantem mori,
It behooves an Emperor to dye standing: So may I say, Oportet Christianum mori
praecantem, It behooves a Christian to dye praying. An hypocrite will never hold
out to the end; let but outward encouragements fail him, and his heart will
quickly fail him in a way of duty. Hypocrites are like blazing Stars, which so
long as they are fed with vapors, shine as if they were fixed Stars; but let
the vapors dry up, and presently they vanish and disappear; let but the eye,
the ear, the applause of men fail the hypocrite, and he will be ready to throw
up all. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. 2 Timothy 4.10.
If an hypocrite cannot make some gain of his godliness, some profit of his
profession, some advantage of his Religion, he will be ready with Demas, to
turn his back upon all religious duties and services. Look, as a lame horse,
when he is heated will go well enough, but when he cools will halt down right;
even so an hypocrite, though for a time he may go on fairly in his way, yet in
the end he will halt down right, and bid farewell (if not defiance) to all
religious duties and services: Profit and applause are usually the baits that
hypocrites bite at, and if they miss these baits, then farewell profession,
farewell Religion, farewell all. John 6.66. From that time many of his Disciples
went back and walked no more with him. Many hypocrites who had given up their
names to Christ, and who for a time had been followers of Christ, at last
deserted him and turned their back^ for ever upon him, Mat. 13.5. Some fall
upon stony places, where they had not much earth (not much care to receive, not
much understanding to apprehend, not much faith to believe, not much will to
obey, or not much love to retain it) and forthwith they sprung up, because they
had no deepness of earth. Ver: 6. And when the Sun was up they were scorched,
and because they had no root they withered away. This second ground goes beyond
the former; For 1. It receives the seed. 2. Incontinently: 3. With joy. 4. It
brings up the seed sown, it sprung up to sundry degrees. 1. To external
obedience and reformation in many things. 2. To an outward profession. 3. To a
kind of faith; but when the Sun of persecution beat hot upon them they withered
and fell away, not all at once, but by little and little, as a leaf loses his
greeness and flourish, and withers by degrees. In the Palatinate, when the Sun
of persecution began to scorch them, scarce one Professor of twenty stood out,
but fell to Popery as fast as leaves in Autumn. The Crystal looks like pearl
till it comes to the hammering; so an hypocrite looks like a Christian, and in
many things acts like a Christian, till he comes to be hammered by sufferings,
by persecutions, and then he discovers himself in his colors; and with
Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. Hos. 5.2.
he makes shipwreck of faith and a good conscience. In suffering times
hypocrites labor mightily to put out that light which shines in their bosoms,
and when they have quenched that light, then farewell faith, farewell profession,
farewell a good conscience, farewell all. The wolf, though he often dissembles,
and clossly hides his nature, yet he cannot always do so; for at one time or
other he will show himself to be a Wolf: So though an hypocrite may carry it
clossly for a time, yet he will one time or other discover himself to be an
hypocrite. It is reported of the waters of Nilus, that having run many hundred
of miles a pure and clear water, when it comes near the Mediterranean Sea, it
begins to grow brackish and salt, and at last it falls into the Sea and loses
its name. Sooner or later this will be the case of all hypocrites, they will not
retain their spiritual fairness, clearness and sweetness long, but by degrees
will grow brackish and salt, and lose their names, and all that seeming
goodness and sweetness that once seemed to be in them.

But now a sincere Christian he will hold on, and hold out in the ways of the
Lord in the want of all outward encouragements, and in the face of all
multiplied discouragements. When the eye of men, the favor of men, the bounty
of men, and all other encouragement from men fails, yet then a sincere
Christian will hold up, and hold on in his work and way. Job 17.9.
The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall be
stronger and stronger. The righteous man shall go on in a way of righteouss to
the end, no multiplied calamities or miseries shall ever work him to decline
the way of righteousness. From this way a sincere Christian will never be
withdrawn, either by any hopes or advantages on the one hand, or by any fears
or dangers on the other: Sincere Christians have not taken up Religion on such
slight grounds, as to be either flattered or frighted out of it; sincere
Christians reckon upon afflictions, Joh. 16. ult. Acts 14.22. 2 Timothy 4.8.
temptations, crosses, losses, reproaches on the one hand, and they reckon upon
a crown of life, a crown of righteousness, a crown of glory on the other hand,
Jer. 6.16.
and hereupon they set up their staff, fully resolving never to depart from the
good old way wherein they have found rest to their souls. Sincere Christians
take Christ and his ways for better for worse, for richer for poorer, in
prosperity and adversity, they resolve to stand or fall, to suffer and reign,
to live and die with him. When all outward encouragements from God shall fail,
yet a sincere Christian will keep closs to his God, and closs to his duty. Heb.
3.17, 18.
Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines,
the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the
flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herds in the
stalls; yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salva^ion.
When all necessary and delightful mercies fail, yet he will not fail in his
duty; though God withold his blessings, yet he will not withold his service
in the want of a livelihood, he will be lively in his duty; when he has
nothing to subsist by, yet then he will live upon his God, and joy in his God,
and keep closs to this God. Though war and want come, yet he will not be
wanting in his duty. Mark, there are three things in a sincere Christian that
will strongly incline him to keep closs to the Lord, and closs to his ways in
the want of all outward encouragements, 2 Cor. 5.14. Phil. 4.12, 13. Romans 14.7,
8.
and in the face of all outward discouragements: And the first is a forcible
principle, Divine Love; the second, is a mighty aid, the Spirit of God; and the
third is a high aim; the Glory of God. Look, as Ruth kept closs to her mother
in the want of all outward encouragements, and in the face of all outward
discouragements; And Ruth Ruth 1.16, 17.
said, whither thou go I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge; and
nothing but death shall part thee and (...). So says a sincere Christian, I
will take my lot with Christ were ever it falls; I will keep closs to the Lord,
and closs to my duty in the want of all outward encouragements, and in the face
of all outward discouragements. Though outward encouragements be sometimes as a
side wind, or as oil, or as chariot wheels, means to move a Christian to go on
more sweetly, easily and comfortably in the ways of God, yet when this wind
shall fail, and these chariot wheels shall be knocked off, a sincere Christian
will keep closs to the Lord and his ways. All this is come upon us; Psalm.
44.17, 18
yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant;
our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy ways.
But what do they mean by saying, All this is come upon us? Why that you may see
in the foregoing part of the Psalm. Thou have cast us off, and put us to shame,
Verse. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. The Jews sold Christ for thirty peace, and the
Romans sold thirty of them for a penny, as Josephus relates.
and go not forth with our armies; thou make us turn back from the enemy,
and they which hate us spoil for themselves; thou have given us like sheep
appointed for meat, and have scattered us among the heathen; thou sellest thy
people for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by their price; thou make
us a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that are round
about us; thou make us a byword among the heathen, a shaking of the head
among the people. Antiochus Epiphanes looked upon the Jews Religion as
superstition; his wrath and rage was exceeding great, both against the Jews,
and against their Religion; he practiced all manner of cruelty upon the
miserable Jews, but yet there was a remnant among them, who were faithful to
the Lord, and to his Covenant, and to his Laws, and to his ways, even to the
death; though in the time of the Maccabees many revolted to Paganism, yet some
maintained their constancy and integrity to the last. That is a great word of
the Prophet Micah. Mich. 4.5.
For all people will walk every one in the name of his God, and we will walk in
the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. This absolute and peremptory
resolution to be really the Lord's, and for ever the Lord's, is of the essence
of true conversion. It Is not the world's flatteries that can bribe off a
sincere Christian from the ways of God; nor it is not the worlds frowns that
can beat off a sincere Christian from the ways of God: But an hypocrite will
never, an hypocrite can never hold it out to the end; his ground-tackle will
never hold when the storm beats strong upon him. An hypocrite is hot at hand,
but soon tires and gives in. But,

Mat. 15 8.^ Mark 7.6.
An hypocrite is heartless in all he does, Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them, then
they sought him; and they returned and enquired early after God. The Fox when
caught in a gin, looks pitifully, but it is only to get out. They worshipped
the Lord as the Indians do the devil, that he may do them no hurt.
Ver. 36. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied
unto him with their tongues. Ver. 37. For their heart was not right with him,
neither were they stedf^st in his Covenant. All lip-labor is but lost labor:
When men's hearts are not in their devotion, their devotion is mere
dissimulation. These hypocrites sought God, and enquired early after God, but
it was still with old hearts, which are no hearts in the account of God: They
made lip work of it, and head-work of it, but their hearts not being in their
work, all was lost, their seeking lost, their enquiring lost, their God lost,
their souls lost, and eternity lost, Hos. 7.14. And they have not cried unto m^
with their hearts, when they howled upon their beds. When men's hearts are not
in their prayers, all their praying is but as an hideous howling in the account
of God. As dogs, bruit beasts, and Indians do, when they are hunger-bit.
The cry of the heart is the only cry that God likes, loves and looks for; he
accepts of no cry, he delights in no cry, he rewards no cry but the cry of the
heart. Hypocrites are heartless in their cries, and therefore they cry and
howl, and howl and cry, and all to no purpose; they cry and murmur, and they
howl and repine; they cry and blaspheme, and they howl and rebel; and therefore
they meet with nothing from heaven but frowns, and blows, and disappointments,
Isa. 29.13. Wherefore the Lord said, for as much as this people draw near me
with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their
heart far from me. Ezekiel. 33.31. And they come unto thee as the people comes,
and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will
not do them: for with their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes
after their covetousness. Though this people flocked to the Prophet in troops,
as men and women do to places of pleasure; and though they carried it before
the Prophet, as if they were Saints, as if they were the people of God, as if
they were affected with what they heard, as if they were resolved to live out
what the Prophet should make out to them, yet their hearts run after their
covetousness. Though these hypocrites professed much love and kindness to the
Prophet, and paid him home with smooth words, and seemed to be much affected,
delighted, ravished and taken with his person, voice and doctrine; yet they
made no conscience of bringing their hearts into their duties. An hypocrite may
look at some outward, easy, ordinary duties of Religion, but he never makes
conscience of bringing his heart into any duties of Religion. When did you ever
see an hypocrite a searching of his heart, or sitting in judgment upon the
corruptions of his soul, or lamenting and mourning over the vileness and
wickedness of his spirit? It Is only the sincere Christian that is affected,
afflicted and wounded with the corruptions of his heart. When one told
(blessed) Bradford, that he did all out of hypocrisy; because he would have
the people applaud him: He answered, It is true, the seeds of hypocrisy and
vain glory are in thee and me too, and will be in us as long as we live in this
world; but I thank God it is that I mourn under and strive against. How
seriously and deeply did good Hezekiah humble himself for the pride of his
heart; 2 Chronicles. 32.25
out of the eater came meat, out of his pride he gat humility.

O Sirs! A sincere Christian makes it his great business to get his heart into
all his Religious duties and services, to get his heart into every way and work
of God. 2 Chronicles. 17.6. Psalm. 86.12.
Jehoshaphats heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord. So David, I Will
praise thee, 2 Chronicles. 22.9. Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. It is reported, that when
the Tyrant Trajane commanded Ignatius to be ripped and unbowelled, they found
Jesus Christ written upon his heart in characters of gold; here was a heart
worth gold. That Is the golden Christian indeed, whose heart is writ upon all
his duties and services.
O Lord, with all my heart. And so Psalm. 119.7. I will praise thee with
uprightness of heart. Ver. 10. With my whole heart have I sought thee. So
Jehoshaphat he sought the Lord with all his heart, Isa. 26.8. The desire of our
soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. Verse. 9. With my soul have
I desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee
early. Lamen. 3.41. Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the
heavens. Romans 1.9. For God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the
Gospel of his Son. Paul's very spirit, his very soul was in his service. Phil.
3.3. For we are the circumcision which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice
in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. Romans 7.22. I delight in
the Law of God after the inward man. Ver. 25. With the mind I my self serve the
Law of God. A sincere Christian is always best when his heart is in his work;
and when he cannot get his heart into his duties! Oh, how does he sigh, and
groan, and complain, and mourn at the foot of God? Lord! my tongue has been at
work, and my head has been at work, and my parts have been at work, and my eyes
and hands have been at work, but where has my heart been this day? Oh, it is
and must be for a sore and sad lamentation, that I have had so little of my
heart in that service that I have tendered to thee! This is the daily language
of an upright heart. But now all the work of an hypocrite, is to get his golden
parts into his duties, and his silver tongue into his duties, and his nimble
head into his duties; but he never makes conscience of getting his heart into
his duties. If any beasts sacrificed by Heathens (who ever looked narrowly into
the intrails) was found without heart, this was held ominous, and construed as
very prodigious to the person for whom it was offered, as it fell out in the
case of Julian. Hypocrites are always heartless in all the sacrifices they
offer to God, and this will one day prove ominous and prodigious to them. But,

Eleventhly, An hypocrite never performs religious duties Vide Isa. 1.10, to
16.
as you may see in that, Isa. 1.15. When you spread forth your hands to heaven,
I will hide my eyes; and when you make many prayers, when you abound in duty,
adding prayer to prayer (as the Hebrew runs) I will not hear, your hands are
full of blood. These were unsanctified ones; their practices were new, Mat. 6.
chap. 23 Luke 18.
but their hearts were old still. The same you may see in the Scribes and
Pharisees, who fasted, prayed, and gave alms, but their hearts were not
changed, renewed, sanctified, nor principled from above; and this proved their
eternal bane. Nicodemus was a man of great note, name, John 3.4. No man can
understand spiritual mysteries by carnal reason.
and fame among the Pharisees, and he fasted, and prayed, and gave alms, and
paid tithes, etc. and yet a mere stranger to the new birth; Regeneration was a
paradox to him. How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second
time into his mothers womb and be born? This great Doctor was so great a Dunce,
that he understood no more of the doctrine of Regeneration, than a mere child
does the darkest precepts of Astronomy. 1 Cor. 2.14.
Look, as water can rise no higher than the spring from whence it came, so the
natural man can rise no higher than nature. An hypocrite may know much, and
pray much, and hear much, and fast much, and give much, and obey much, and all
to no purpose, because he never manages any thing he does in a right manner; he
never carries on his work from inward principles of faith, fervency, life,
love, delight, etc. Will the hypocrite delight himself in the Almighty? Ans.
No, he cannot delight himself in the Almighty. Job 27.10. Job speaks of the
hypocrite, as is evident, ver. 8.
1. To delight in God is one of the highest acts of grace; and how can an
hypocrite put forth one of the highest acts of grace, who has no grace? An
hypocrite may know much of God, and talk much of God, and make a great
profession of God, and be verbally thankful to God; but he can never love God,
nor trust in God, nor delight in God, nor take up his rest in God, etc. 2. An
hypocrite knows not God, and how then can he delight in that God whom he does
not know? An hypocrite has no inward, saving, transforming, experimental,
affectionate, practical knowledge of God; and therefore he can never take any
pleasure or delight in God. 3. There is no sutableness between an hypocrite and
God, and how then can an hypocrite delight himself in God? There is the
greatest contrariety imaginable 'twixt God and an hypocrite. God is light, and
the hypocrite is darkness; 2 Cor. 6.15, 16
God is holiness, and he filthiness; God is righteousness, and he
unrighteousness; God is fullness, and he emptiness. Now what complacency can
there be where there is such an utter contrariety. 4. Every hypocrites heart is
full of enmity against God, and how then can he delight himself in God? The
carnal mind is enmity against God, Romans 8.7. To delight in God, is
Christianorum propria virtus, says Hierom.
for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. The best part
of an hypocrite is not only averse, but utterly adverse to God and all
goodness. The Eagle (says the Philosopher) has a continual enmity with the
Dragon and the Serpent. And so an hypocrites heart is still full of enmity
against the Lord; and therefore he can never delight himself in the Lord. 5.
The stream, cream, and strength of an hypocrites delight runs out to himself,
and to this lust or that, to this relation or that, to this creature-comfort or
that, to this worldly enjoyment or that, or else to arts, parts, gifts,
privileges, etc. and therefore how can he delight himself in the Almighty? An
Hypocrite always terminates his delight in something on this side God, Christ
and Heaven. Look, as the Apricock-tree, though it leans against the wall, yet
it is fast rooted in the earth; so though an hypocrite may lean toward God,
and toward Christ, and toward heaven, yet his delight is still rooted fast in
one creature-comfort or another, etc. Mark 6.
God nor Christ is never the adequate object of an hypocrites delight. An
hypocrite is never principled to delight himself in a holy God, neither can he
cordially, divinely, habitually, delight himself in holy duties. An hypocrite
may reform many evil things, and he may do many good duties, and yet all this
while it is only his practices, but not his heart or principles that are
changed and altered. Mark, though an hypocrite has nothing in him which is
essential to a Christian as a Christian, yet he may be the complete resemblance
of a Christian in all those things which are not essential to him. An hypocrite
in all the externals of Religion, may be the complete picture of a sincere
Christian; but then if you look to his principles, and the manner of his
managing of holy duties, there you will find him lame and defective, and as
much unlike a sincere Christian, 1 Samuel 19.13, 16.
as ever Michal's Image was unlike to David; and this will prove the great
crack, the great break-neck of hypocrites at last.

O Sirs! It is considerable, that outward motives and natural principles have
carried many Heathens to do many great and glorious things in the world. Did
not Sisera do as great things as Gideon? the difference did only lie here, that
the great things which Gideon did, he did from more spiritual principles and
raised considerations, than any Sisera was acted by. Heb. 11.
And did not Diogenes trample under his feet the great and glorious things of
this world, as well as Moses? The difference did only ly in this, that Moses
trampled under his feet the gay and gallant things of this world, from inward
gracious principles, viz. faith, love, etc. and from high and glorious
considerations, viz. heaven, the glory of God, etc. whereas Diogenes did only
trample upon them from poor low prineiples, and from mere outward, carnal,
external considerations, The favor of men, the eye of men, the commendations
of men, the applause of men, and a great name among men, were golden apples,
great things among the Philosophers. The application is easy.

Mark, A sincere Christian, he looks to the manner as well as to the matter of
his duties, he acts and performs duties, not only from strength of parts and
acquired qualifications but from strength of grace and infused habits; Romans
11.24. Ezekiel. 36.25. Jer. 31.33. Romans 3.5. 2 Cor. 5.19. 2 Pet. 1.4. Ephesians. 3.17. 2
Cor. 13.5.
he acts from God and for God, he acts from a new heart, he acts from the Law
written in his heart, he acts from the love of God shed abroad in his heart, he
acts from the divine nature communicated to him, he acts from the spirits
in-dwelling in his heart, he acts from the fear of God establishing his heart.
These be the springs and principles of a sincere Christians spiritual life and
actions; and where they act and bear rule, it is no wonder if such motions and
performances as the world may admire but not imitate. Saul's life (after his
conversion) was a kind of constant miracle; 2. Cor. 11.
so much he did, and so much he suffered, and so much he denied himself, that
if he lived in these days, his life would be a miracle; but yet if we consider
the principles that he was acted by, the great wonder will be, not that he did
so much, but that he did no more; Gal. 2.20.
For, says he, Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for
me. Fox Acts and Monum.
It was a great saying of blessed Bradford, That he could not leave a duty till
he had found communion with Christ in the duty, till he had brought his heart
into a duty-frame; he could not leave confession till he had found his heart
touched, broken and humbled for sin, nor petition till he had found his heart
taken with the beauties of the things desired, and carried out after them; nor
could he leave thanksgiving till he had found his spirit enlarged and his soul
quickened in the return of praises. And it was a great saying of another, that
he could never be quiet till he found God in every duty, Nunquam abs te absque
te ^ecedo Bern. Meditat.
and enjoyed communion with God in every prayer. O Lord (said he) I never come
to thee but by thee, I never go from thee without thee. A sincere Christian
that is taken with Christ above all, cannot be satisfied nor contented with
duties or ordinances, without he enjoyes Christ in them, who is the life, soul
and substance of them. But now hypocrites they do duties, but all they do is
from common principles, from natural principles, and from an unsanctified
heart, and that marrs all. Remigius a Judge of Lorraigne tells this story, That
the Devil in those parts did use to give money to Witches, Preston's four
Treatises.
which did appear to be good coin; it seemed to be current at first, but being
laid up a while, it then appeared to be nothing but leaves. Hypocrites they
make a great profession, and are much in the outward actions of Religion; they
make a very fair show, they hear, they read, they pray, they fast, they sing
Psalms, and they give alms: But these duties being not managed from a principle
of divine love, nor from a principle of spiritual life, nor from a sanctified
frame of heart, turn all into leaves, they are all lost, and the Authors of
them cast and undone for ever and ever. But,

Twelfthly, No hypocrite in the world loves the Word, Luther said he would not
live in Paradise if he might without the Word, but with the Word he could live
in hell it self.
a clean Word, Psalm. 119.140. Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant
loves it. There are no hearts but men after God's own heart, that can love the
Word, and delight in the Word, and embrace the Word for its holiness, purity
and spirituality; witness Paul, Romans 7.12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the
Commandment holy, and just, and good. Well and what then? why says he, Ver.
22. I delight in the Law of God after the inward man. But is this all? No says
he, Ver. 25. With the mind I my self serve the Law of God. Holy Paul delights
in the Law as holy, and serves the Law as holy, just, and good. A sincere heart
is the only heart that is taken with the Word for its spirituality, purity and
heavenly beauty. None can joy in the Word as it is a holy Word, nor none can
taste any sweetness in the Word as it is a pure Word, but sincere Christians,
Psalm. 19.8, 9, 10. The statutes of the Lord are right rejoicing the heart.
These several Titles, Law, Statutes, Testimony, Commandments, Judgments, are
used promiscuously for the whole Word of God, commonly distinguished into Law
and Gospel.
The commandments of the Lord is pure enlightening the eyes. The fear of the
Lord is clean (that is, the doctrine of the Word that teaches the true fear of
God) enduring for ever. The judgments of the Lord are true and righteous
altogether; more to be desired are they than gold, yea than much fine gold,
sweeter also than honey and the honey comb; or as the Hebrew has it, Sweeter
than the droppings of honey combs. The Word of God, as it is a pure Word, a
spiritual Word, a clean Word, a holy Word; so it rejoices a sincere heart, and
so it is sweeter than the very droppings of honey combs. The Word, as it is a
pure Word, a holy Word, is more sweet to a sincere Christian than those drops
which drop immediately and naturally without any force or art, which is counted
the purest and sweetest honey. There is no profit, nor pleasure, nor joy to
that which the purity of the World yields to a sincere heart, Psalm. 119.48. My
hands will I lift up to thy commandments which I have loved. Sometimes the
lifting up of hands betokens admiration; when men are astonished and ravished
they lift up their hands. I will lift up my hands to thy commandments; that
is, I will admire the goodness, spiritualness, holiness, righteousness, purity
and excellency of thy commandments. Luther would not take all the world for
one leaf of the Bible, he took such sweet pleasure and excellent delight in it.
Rabbi Chiia in the Jerusalem Talmud says, That in his account all the world is
not of equal value with one word out of the Law. Mr. Fox.
The Martyrs would have given a load of Hay for a few Chapters of the Bible in
English: Some of them gave five marks for a Bible, they were so delighted and
taken with the Word, as it was a holy Word, a pure Word, a spiritual Word.
Dolphins (they say) love music; and so do sincere Christians love the music
of the Word. It Is upon record, that Mary spent the third part of her time in
reading the Word, she was so affected and delighted with the holiness and
purity of it. King Edward the sixth being about to lay hold on something that
was above the reach of his short arm, one that stood by espying a boss'd Bible
lying on the Table, offered to lay that under his feet to heighten him; Sir
John Hayward in vita.
but the good young King disliked the motion, and instead of treading it under
his feet, he laid it to his heart, to express the joy and delight that he took
in the holy Word.

But now never did any hypocrite, since there was one in the world, ever love
God as a holy God, or love his people as a holy people, or love his ways as
holy ways, or love his word as a holy word. There is no hypocrite in the world
that can truly say with David, Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant
loves it. Saul could never say so, nor Ahab could never say so, nor Herod
could never say so, nor Judas could never say so, nor Demas could never say so,
nor Simon Magus could never say so, nor the Scribes and Pharisees could never
say so, nor the Stony ground could never say so, nor Isaiah's hypocrites could
never say so. It Is true, Isa. 58.
some of these did rejoice in the Word, and delight in the Word, but not as it
was a holy Word, a pure Word, for then they would have rejoiced and delighted
themselves in the whole Word of God, every part of God's Word being pure and
holy. Hypocrites are sometimes affected and delighted with the Word, as it is
dressed up with fine high notions (which are but mysterious nothings) they are
taken with the Word as it is clothed with arts, parts, and elegancy of phrase;
they are pleased with the Word as it is apparelled with a spruce wit, or with
silken expressions, or with some delicate elocution, Ezekiel. 33.32. So thou art
to them as a very lovely song, of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play
well on an instrument; or as the Hebrew may be read, Thou art as one that
breaks jests. These hypocrites looked upon the solemnity and Majesty of the Word
but as a dry jest; the Prophet being eloquent, and having a pleasing delivery,
they were much taken with it, and it was as sweet and delightful to them as a
fit of music; but they were not at all taken or delighted with the
spirituality, purity and holiness of the Word, as is evident in ver. 31. And
they come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit before thee as my
people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them; for with their
mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their covetousness. It
was a very smart reproof of Chrysostom Chrysostom.
to his Hearers; This is that (says he) which is like to undo your souls, you
hear your Ministers as so many minstrels to please the ear, not to pierce the
conscience. Augustine confesses, that the delight which he took before his
conversion in Saint Ambroses Sermons, was more for the eloquence of the words,
than the substance of the matter. Hypocrites are taken more with the wit,
eloquence of speech, action, quickness of fancy, smoothness of style, neatness
of expression, and rareness of notion, than they are with the spirituality,
purity and holiness of the Word, which they either hear or read. These
hypocrites are like those children, who are more taken with the fine flowers
that are strewed about the dish, than they are with the meat that is in the
dish, and that are more taken with the red weeds and blew bottles that grow in
the field, than they are with the good corn that grows there. But now, look as
the prudent Farmer is taken more with a few handfuls of sound corn, than he is
with all the gay weeds that be in the field; so a sincere Christian is more
taken with a few sound truths in a Sermon, than he is taken with all the strong
lines, and high strains and flourishes of wit; or than he is taken with some
new coined phrases, or some quaint expressions, or some seraphical notions,
with which a Sermon may be decked or dressed up. Some are taken with the Word as
the profession of it brings in customers into their Shops, and keeps up their
credits in the world; others are taken with the Word, as it seems to tickle
their ears and please their fancies: Some are affected with Sermons, because of
the elegancy of the style, delicacy of the words, smoothness of the language,
and gracefulness of the delivery. And these deal by Sermons as many do by their
Nosegays that are made up of many picked (sweet) flowers, who after they have
smelt to them a while, cast them into a corner, and never mind them more; so
these after they have commended a Sermon, after they have highly applauded a
Sermon, they cast away the Sermon, they smell to the Sermon (if I may so speak)
and say it is sweet, it is sweet, and presently they throw it by as a Nosegay
that is withered, and of no further use. But now a sincere heart savours the
Word, and relishes the Word, and is affected and taken with the Word, as it is
a holy Word, a spiritual Word, a pure Word, which the most refined hypocrite
under heaven never was affected or taken with, nor can be, whilst hypocrisy
keeps the throne in his soul. But,

Thirteenthly and lastly, An hypocrite cannot endure to be John 3.20.
A soul-searching Ministry is to an hypocrite a tormenting Ministry, that is no
man for his money that will never let his conscience alone; he knows he is like
a velvet saddle, velvet without and straw within; he knows he is like a whited
supulcher, Mat. 23.27, 28.
glorious without, and dead bones within; and therefore his heart rises and
swells against such a man, and such a Ministry, that is all for the anatomizing
and laying of him open to himself, and to the world. But now look, as pure gold
fears neither fire nor furnace, neither test nor touchstone, neither one
balance nor another; so a sincere heart dares venture it self upon trial, yea
upon the very trial of God himself, Psalm. 139.23. Search me, O God, and know my
heart, try me and know my thoughts. A sincere Christian prays his friends to
search him, and he prays soul-searching Ministers to search him; but above
all, he begs hard of God to search him; See Job 31.5, 6
Search me, O God. The Hebrew word (...) is Imperat Kal; he commands God to
search him. The original word signifies a strict, curious, diligent search. A
sincere Christian is very willing and desirous that God should thoroughly search
him, that God should search into every corner and cranny of his heart, Psalm.
26.2. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me, try my reins and my heart. Every word
here has its weight; Examine me, O Lord. The Hebrew word (...) signifi^s to
melt, and so to try, which makes the most intrinsecal and e^act discovery. O
Lord, let my heart and reins be melted, that it may be known what metal they
are made of, whether gold or tin; Prove me. The Hebrew word (...) signifies to
view, as when a man gets upon some high Tower or Hill to see all from thence.
Mount aloft, O Lord, take the high Tower, take the Hill, that thou may see
what is in me; try me and know my thoughts. The Hebrew word (...) is from (...)
Nasah, which properly signifies to take away, and is applied to Abraham's taking
away of his son. Genesis 22.1.
Lord, says the Prophet, if upon searching and examining of me, thou shall
find any sin, any creature, any comfort, any enjoyment, that lies in thy room,
take it away, that thou may be all in all to me. A sincere Christian knows
that God never brings a pair of scales to weigh his graces, but only a
touchstone to try the truth of his graces; he knows if his gold, his grace, be
true, Mat. 12.20.
though it be never so little, it will pass for current with God, and therefore
he is free to venture upon the clossest search of God. A false evidence is the
fruit of a slight and superficial search.
Now, look as Bankrupts care not for casting up their accounts, because they
know all is naught, very naught, yea stark naught with them: So hypocrites,
they care not to come to the trial, to the test, because they know all is
naught, yea worse than naught with them; they have no mind to cast up their
spiritual estates, because at the foot of the account they must be put to read
their neck verse, undone, undone: And therefore, as old deformed women cannot
endure to look into the looking-glass, lest their wrinckles and deformity
should be discovered; so hypocrites cannot endure to look into the glass of the
Gospel, lest their deformities, impieties and wickednesses should be discovered
and detected. I have read of the Elephant, how unwilling he is to go into the
water; but when he is forced into it, he puddles it, lest by the cleerness of
the stream he should discern his own deformity: So hypocrites, they are very
unwilling to look into their own hearts, or into the clear streams of
Scriptures, lest their souls deformity and ugliness should appear to their own
terror and amazement. O Sirs! look, as it is a hopeful evidence that the
Clyents cause is good, when he is ready and willing to enter upon a trial; and
as it is a hopeful sign that a man's gold is true gold, when he is willing to
bring it to the touchstone; and that a man thrives when he is willing to cast
up his Books: So it is a hopeful evidence that a Christian is sincere with God,
when he is ready and willing to venture upon the trial of God, Gal. 6.4, 5.
when he is willing to cast up his Books, his accounts, that he may see what he
is worth for another world. Augustine Aug. in Psalm. 33. Concl. 2.
speaks of an acute person, who was wont to say that he prized that little time
which he constantly set apart every d^y for the examination of his conscience,
far more than all the other part of the day which he spent in his voluminous
controversies. Of all the duties of Religion an hypocrite dreads most that of
self-examination, and that of venturing himself upon the search and trial of
God. Well, for a close, Though an hypocrite may deceive all the world, Job
34.21, 22. 2 Chronicles. 16 9. Prove. 5.21. and 15.3. Ambros. offic. l. 1 c. 14.
like that counterfeit Alexander in Josephus his story, yet Augustus will not
be deceived; the great God will not be deceived, for his eyes are quick and
piercing into all things, persons and places. Look, as the eyes of a well drawn
picture are fastened on thee which way soever thou turnest; so are the eyes of
the Lord fastened on thee, O hypocrite, which way soever thou turnest. 'Twas a
worthy saying of one, If thou can not hide thy self from the Sun, which is
God's Minister of light, how impossible will it be to hide thy self from him
whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun? The eye of God many
times is very terrible to an hypocrite, which makes him very shie of venturing
upon the trial of God: No hypocrite since the world stood, did ever love or
delight to be searched and tried by God. And thus I have showed you the several
rounds or steps in Jacob's Ladder, which no hypocrite under heaven can (whilst
he remains an hypocrite) climb up to. And so much for this Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Now in this fifth and last Chapter, I shall lay down some Propositions and
Directions, that so you may see what a sober use and improvement Christians
ought to make of their evidences for Heaven; and how in the use of gracious
evidences they ought to live above their gracious evidences, and how to exalt
and lift up Christ above all their graces, evidences and performances.

Though our graces like Gideon's Army, are but a handful in comparison of our
sins, which like the Midianites are innumerable, yet a handful of grace is to
be owned in the midst of an Host of sins.
though it be mixed and mingled with many weaknesses and infirmities: Sin is
Satan's work, and grace is Christ's work; and therefore Christ's work ought to
be eyed and owned, though it be mingled with much of Satan's work. That
Christian is much clouded and benighted, who has two eyes to behold his sins,
but never an eye to see his graces. Christ gets no glory, nor the soul gets no
good, when a Christian is still a poring upon his sins. How can that Christian
prize a little grace, and bless God for a little grace, and improve a little
grace, who will not own a little grace because it is mingled with many weaknesses?
Shall the Husbandman own a little wheat when mingled with a great deal of
chaff? 1 Samuel 21.13, 14.
shall the Goldsmith own a little filings of gold when mingled with a great
deal of dust? and shall not a Christian own a little grace when mingled with a
great many failings? David had a great many infirmities, yet he owns his
uprightness, Psalm. 18.23. I was upright before him. And Job Job 3.
had a great many weaknesses, yet he owns his integrity, Job. 27.5. Till I die
I will not remove my integrity from me. Ver. 6. My righteousness I hold fast,
and will not let it go, my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. The
Spouse was sensible of her blackness, yet owns her comeliness, Cant. 1.5. I am
black, but comely. So Cant. 5.2. I sleep, but my heart waketh. Jeremiah was a
man of many failings, yet he owns his hope in God, Jer. 17.17. Jer. 20.14 --
ult.
Thou art my hope in the day of evil: The poor man in the Gospel was very
sensible of the sad relics and remains of unbelief that was in him, and yet
with a holy boldness and confidence he pleads his faith, Mark 9.24. Lord, I
believe, help my unbelief. Peter miscarried sadly, Mat. 26.69 -- ult
and yet he owns his love to Christ, Joh. 21.15. Lord, thou know that I love
thee. Ver. 16. Lord, thou know that I love thee. Ver. 17. Lord, thou know
all things, thou know that I love thee. Paul had his infirmities and
weaknesses hanging upon him, witness that 7th of the Romans; and yet how
frequently and boldly does he own the grace of God that was in him, throughout
his Epistles. Nothing keeps grace more at an under, than men's not owning of a
little grace, because it is mingled with many infirmities. The best way to be
greatly good, is to own a little, little good, though in the midst of much
evil. But,

The second Proposition is this. It is your wisdom, and Of thine own (says
David) have we given thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.14:
but should be ready to say, these are the jewels of glory with which God has
bespangled my soul, 1 Cor. 4.7. What have thou that thou have not received?
What gift? what grace? what experience? what evidence have thou that thou have
not received? All the light, and all the life, and all the love, and all the
joy, and all the fear, and all the faith, and all the hope, and all the
patience, and all the humility, etc. that thou have, with all the evidences
that arise from discovery of those graces, are all grace gifts, they are all
from above. Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, Jam. 1.17.
and comes down from the father of lights. Look, as all light flows from the
Sun, and all water from the Sea, so all temporal, spiritual and eternal good
flows from heaven. All your graces, and the greatest excellencies that are in
you, do as much depend upon God and Christ, as the light does upon the Sun, or
as the Rivers do upon the Sea, Joh. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 87.7.
or as the branches do upon the root. All my springs are in thee; all the
springs of comfort that I have communicated to my soul, and all the springs of
grace that I have to quicken me, and to evidence the goodness and happiness of
my spiritual estate and condition to me, they are all in thee. When a Christian
looks upon his wisdom and knowledge, it concerns him to say, Here is wisdom and
knowledge, I but it is from above; here is some weak love working toward
Christ, but it is from above; here is joy, and comfort, and peace, etc. but these
are all such flowers of Paradise as never grew in natures garden. Now when a
Christian looks thus upon all those costly Diamonds of grace, of glory, with
which his soul is bedeckt, he keeps low, though his graces and gracious
evidences are high. Where this Rule is neglected, the soul will be endangered
of being swelled and pufft.

It was a great saying of a very worthy man that is now with God, viz, Mr. Fox.
That as he often got much good by his sins, so he often got much hurt by his
graces. Dear hearts, when you look upon the stream, remember the fountain; when
you look upon the flower, remember the root; when you look upon the Stars,
remember the Sun; and when ever you look upon your graces, then be sure to
remember Christ the fountain of grace, else Satan will certainly be too hard
for you: Satan is so subtle, so artificial, and so critical, that he can make
your very graces to serve him against your graces conquering joy by joy, sorrow
by sorrow, humility by humility, fear by fear, and love by love; if you don't
look upon all your graces as streams flowing from the fountain above, and as
fruits growing upon the Tree of life that is in the midst of the Paradise of
God. Therefore when one of your eyes is fixed upon your graces, let the other be
always fixed upon Christ the fountain of grace. 1 John 16.
Of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. Here they eye their
graces, and the fountain of grace together. So Paul, I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20.
who loved me and gave himself for me. Paul eyes Christ and his graces
together; so Peter eyes Christ and his graces together. Lord, John 21.15.
thou know that I love thee. So those Worthies of whom this world was not
worthy, they eye Christ and their graces together. Heb. 12.2.
Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith. 2 Cor. 5.17.
Though grace be a new creature, a noble creature, a beautiful creature, an
excellent creature, yet grace is but a creature, Col. 1.17. Phil. 4.12, 13.
Cant. 4. ult.
and such a creature that is strengthened, maintained, cherished and upheld in
your souls, in life and power, in beauty and glory, by nothing below the
spiritual, internal and glorious operations of Christ, Col. 1.10. That ye might
walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work,
and increasing in the knowledge of God. Ver. 11. Strengthened with all might
according to his glorious power, unto all patience and long-suffering with
joyfulness. Now when ever you look upon grace as a lovely, beautiful creature,
O then remember that might and glorious power of Christ, by which this creature
is preserved and strengthened. Christians, your graces are holy and heavenly
plants of Christ's own setting and watering, and will you mind the plants more
than that noble hand that set them? It Is Christ alone that can cause the
desires of his people to bud, and their graces to blossom, Isa. 58.11. and
35.6, 7.
and their souls to be like a watered garden, green and flourishing; and
therefore let the eye of your souls be firstly, mostly and chiefly fixed upon
Christ. But,

The third Proposition is this. When you look upon your graces, as weak and
worthless evidences of your interest in Christ, and of that eternal happiness
and blessedness that comes by Christ. The works of grace (says my Author)
which consists in those divine qualities of holiness and righteousness, Grotius
in Romans 8.16.
etc. Gal. 5.22, ^^. is a sure Mark, a blessed character, whereby men may know
whose children they are; even as the Spartans or Lacedaemonians of old are said
to know what stock and lineage they were of, by a mark that was made upon their
bodies by the head of a Lance or Speer. I readily grant, that you must not
trust in your graces, nor make a Savior of your graces; but yet you ought to
look upon your graces, as so many signs and testimonies of the love and favor
of God to your souls. What certainty can there be of Election, Remission of
sin, Justification or Glorification, if there be not a certainty of your
Sanctification and Renovation; if that persuasion that is in you ahout your
grace or sanctification be false, then that persuasion that is in you
concerning remission of sin, predestination, justification and eternal
salvation is false: This highly concerns all them to consider, that would not
be miserable in both worlds. I know many cry up Revelations, Impressions,
Visions (yea the visions of their own hearts) and speak lightly and slightly of
the graces of the Spirit, of sanctification, of holiness, as evidences of the
goodness and happiness of a Christians condition. There were some in James his
time, who cried up faith, James 2.18.
and union, and communion with Christ, but were destitute of good works. Well,
what says the Apostle? Show me thy faith without thy works, Ver. 26.
and I will show thee my faith by my works; for as the body without the spirit
is dead, so faith without works is dead. Look, as the body without the spirit
(or without breath, as the Greek word (...) primarily signifies) is dead; so
that faith that is without works, which are as it were the breathings of a
lively faith, is a dead faith. Though it be faith that justifies the man, yet
it is works that justifies a man's faith to be right and real, saving and
justifying. So there were some in John's time, viz. the Gnostics, who talked
high of fellowship and communion with Christ, and yet walked in darkness; they
lived in all impurity, and yet would make the world believe that they were the
only people who knew God, and had fellowship with God, but John tells us they
were liars. 2 Cor. 6.14.
If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and
do not the truth. What fellowship has light with darkness? Such walk in
darkness, who promise to themselves the future vision of God's face, whilst
they go on in the wilful breach of God's royal Laws. Such who say they know
him, and are swallowed up in the enjoyments of him, and yet in the course of
their live^ walk contrary to him, such are liars. He that says I know him; 1
John 2.4.
and keeps not his commandments is a liar. Sanctification and justification
are both of them benefits of the Covenant of grace, and therefore to evidence
the one by the other, Jer. 33.8, 9. Heb. 8.10, 12.
can be no turning aside to the covenant of works: You may run and read in the
Covenant of grace, that he that is justified is also sanctified, and that he
that is sanctified is also justified and therefore, why may not he that knows
himself to be really sanctified upon that very ground, safely and boldly
conclude, that he is certainly justified. O Sirs! the same spirit that
wit^esses to a Christian his justification; can shine upon his graces, 1 Cor.
2.12. 1 John 4.13, 14.
and witness to him his sanctification as well as his justification; and
without all controversy, it is as much the office of the Spirit to witness to a
man his sanctification, as it is to witness to him his justification. But you
will say, Sir, pray what should be the reasons why many men have, and why some
do still cry down marks and signs, and deny sanctification to be an evidence of
men's justification, etc. and speak disgracefully of this practice that is now
under consideration? I conjecture the Reasons may be such as follow.

First, Many Professors take up in a great name, and in a 1 These. 5.23. John
3.3, 5. 2 Cor. 5.17. Acts 26.28.
though they have never past the pangs of the new birth, though they have never
experienced what it is to be a new creature, a throughout Christian. And hence
it comes to pass, that they make head against this way of evidencing the
goodness and happiness of a man's condition, by inward gracious qualifications.
Of all men these are most apt to outrun the truth, and to run from one extreme
to another, and to be only constant in inconstancy. But,

viz. luke-warmness, dead-heartedness, formality, indifferency, Apostasy,
blindness, hardness, and to strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, 2
These. 2.10, 11, 12.
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
Now, is it any wonder to see such men quarrel, and wrangle, and rail against
the way and method of evidencing the goodness and happiness of a man's spiritual
condition, by inherent gracious qualifications? But,

Isa. 57. ult. Psalm. 50.16.
or comfort, or the promises, or Christ, or heaven, to take God's name into
their lips, seeing they secretly hate to be reformed. There are many fair
Professors that are foul sinners, and that have much of God, and Christ, and
heaven, and holiness in their lips, when they have nothing but sin and hell in
their hearts and lives. These men's conversions shame their profession, and
therefore they cry out against sanctification as a sure and blessed evidence of
a man's justification: Such sinners as live in a course of sin, that make a
Trade of sin, 1 These. 2.12.
that indulge their sins, that take up arms in defense of sin, that make
provision for sin, that make a sport of sin, that take pleasure in sin, and
that have set their hearts upon their sins; such sinners cannot but look upon
the witness of sanctification, as the handwriting upon the wall, Dan. 5.5, 6.
But,

Fourthly, There are many who are great strangers to It Is sad to be a stranger
at home, and to be least acquainted with a man's own heart. Aristotle.
to evidence the lawfulness of this practice that is under our present
consideration. And hence it comes to pass that they cry down marks and signs,
and deny sanctification to be a sure and blessed evidence of men's
justification. Ignorant sane improb^^ omnis; ignorance is the source of all sin,
the very wellspring from which all wickedness does issue. It Is said of
knowledge, non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem.
Ignorance inslaves a soul to Satan, it lets in sin by Troops, locks them up in
the heart, shuts out the means of recovery, and so plasters up a man's eyes,
that he cannot see the things that belongs to his own or to others internal or
eternal peace. The Scripture sets ignorant persons below the Ox and the Ass.
Did men either see the deformity of sin, Isa. 1.3.
or the beauty and excellency of holiness, they would never delight in the one,
nor cry down the other. Peter 2 Pet. 2.12.
tells you of some that speak evil of the things that they understood not, they
did reprehend that which they could not comprehend. Ignorance is a breeding
sin, a mother sin, all sins are seminally in ignorance; ignorance is the mother
of all the mistakes, and of all the misrule in the world. Christ told the
Sadduces, Mat. 22.29.
That they did err not knowing the Scriptures; and so I may say many err in
crying down such signs and evidences of grace which are bottomed upon
Scripture, because they are ignorant of what the Scripture says in the case.
But,

Fifthly, The generality of Christians are but Lambs, Isa. 40.11. 2 Pet. 2.2,
3. 1 John 2.1.
the springs of grace runs low in them, their fears frequently overtop their
faith, and their strong passions and corruptions do often raise such a dust and
smoke in their souls, that (...) they might have all the world, yea if their
salvation lay upon it, they were not able to discern the least measure of grace
in their own souls. A little grace is next to none, small things are hardly
discerned; he had need to have a clear light and good eyes, that is to discern
a hair, a mote, or an atome. A little grace is not discoverable but by a
shining light from above. There are none so full of fears, and doubts, and
questions, and disputes, about the truth of their faith in Christ, and the
sincerity of their love to Christ, as those that least believe and least love.
The Kingdom of God in most Christians, Mark 4.30, 31, 32.
is but as a grain of mustard seed, which is the least of all seeds; and
therefore* it is no wonder they see it not. The root of the matter in most
Christians is but small, and that small root is often covered over with many
sinful infirmities and weaknesses, and therefore we are not to look upon it as
a strange thing, if we see such Christians not sensible of the root of the
matter that is in them. Weak habits put forth such faint actions (and with so
much interruption) that it is not an easy thing to discern whether they are
the products of special or of common grace. Now most Christians having but
small measures of grace, holiness and sanctification in them; and these small
measures being much obscured and buried under the prevalency of fears, doubts
and unmortified lusts, can speak but weakly and darkly for them; and upon this
ground they are not fond of bringing in this witness of sanctification to speak
for them. In civil Courts men are not ambitious to bring such witnesses to the
Bar, as can witness but weakly and faintly in their case. It Is so here.

Psalm. 77. Psalm. 88.
whereby he may keep them in a low, dark, unsettled and uncomfortable
condition. When once a poor soul is brought over to Christ, how does the Devil
bestir himself to keep such a soul so under fears, doubts and bondage, as that
it may not in the least have an eye to any thing that may have a proper
tendency to its comfort, joy, assurance, peace or quiet. The Devil will do all
he can to furnish such (as ar^ ^egotten again by the resurrection of Christ
from the dead) with all sorts of deadly weapons one of his Armoury to fight
against those Arguments and evidences which make for the peace and comfort of
their own souls. He that shall look seriously and impartially upon the subtle,
close, strong, 2 Samuel 2.19.
and rhetorical arguings of many distressed Christians (above their own natural
parts) against the peace, rest, comfort, and settlement of their own souls, may
safely conclude, that a hand of Joab, a hand of Satan, yea a strong hand of
Satan, has been with them. He that shall please to read the life of Francis
Spira (though he be no great Philosopher) yet he may easily discern with what
subtilty and wonderful. 2 Cor. 11.14.
Sophistry Satan help^ him to argue against the pardonableness of his sins, and
the possibility of his salvation. Satan knows how to transform himself into an
Angel of light; Satan does not always appear in one and the same fashion; but
he appears in as many several shapes, fashions and changes, as Proteus did
among the Poets: To deceive some, he has assumed a lightsom body, as if he were
an Angel of heaven* as if he had been a holy one, clothed with the brightness
of celestial glory. To deceive others, he has appeared as an Angel of light,
suggesting such things to them, and injecting such things into them, under fair
and specious shows and pretenses of Religion, Piety, Zeal and Holiness, which
have had a direct tendency to the dishonor of God, the wounding of Christ, the
grieving of the Spirit, the clouding or denying their evidences for heaven, the
strangling of their hopes, and the death of all their comforts and joy. But,

Seventhly and lastly, Some Christians live under high enjoyments Romans 5.5.
Psalm. 63.2, 3, 4.
God is every day a filling their souls with life, light, love, glory and
liberty; Mat. 17.4.
Christ every day takes them up into the Mount, and makes such discoveries of
himself and his glory to them, that they are ready frequently to cry out, Bonum
est esse hic, Dan. 9.22, 23 Cant. 2.6.
It is good to be here Christ often whispers them in the ear with an, O man, O
woman, greatly beloved; Christ's left hand is every day under their heads, and
his right hand does embrace them; they sit down every day under his shadow with
great delight, and his fruit is sweet unto their taste; he makes out every day
such sweet and clear manifestations of his admirable favor to their hearts,
Psalm 63.2, 3, 4, 5.
that their souls are daily satisfied as with marrow and fatness. There are
some precious Christians (I say not all, Cant. 8.
I say not most) who live daily under singular glances of divine glory, and who
are daily under the sensible embracements of God, and who daily lie in the
bosom of the Father, Cant. 1.13.
and who every night have Christ as a bundle of myrrh lying betwixt their
breasts. Now these choice souls who live daily in the glorious manifestations
of the Spirit, and enjoy a little heaven on this side heaven, these many times
are so taken up with their high communion with God, with their spiritual
enjoyments, and with their tastes of the glory of that other world, that they
do not much mind such evidences as we have had under our consideration. And
thus much for the Reasons, why some cry down Scripture marks, signs and
evidences of grace, of holiness, of sanctification; and why others don't much
mind them, or take any great notice of them. But,

Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith; Psalm. 4.4. Vide
Chrysostom on the words. Gal. 6.3, 4. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19.
prove your own selves. The precept is doubled, to teach us to redouble our
diligence in this most needful, but much neglected duty of self-examination.
The final trial of our eternal estates, does immediately and solely belong to
the Court of heaven, but the disquisitive part belongs to us. Here are two
emphatical words in the Greek; First, (...), examine your selves. The word in
the general signifies to take an experimental knowledge of any thing, that is
either uncertain, unknown or hidden; most men are great strangers to God, to
Christ, to Scripture, and to themselves, and therefore says the Apostle,
Examine your selves. Now if there were not sure marks and infallible signs
whereby men may certainly know what their present estate is, and how it is like
to go with them in another world, the redoubled commnad of the Apostle would be
in vain. The second Greek word is (...), prove your selves. The original word
signifies a severe and diligent inquisition into our selves, so as to have a
full experience of what is in us. Doubtless the Apostle would never call again
and again upon us, to try and examine our selves whether we be in the faith, if
it were not lawful to come to the knowledge of our faith, or of our being in
the state of faithful Christians in a discursive way, arguing from the effect
to the cause. So in that, 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather brethren, give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure. The Greek word translated
give diligence, is very emphatical, (...).
it signifies to do a thing not in an overly, lazy, careless way, but to do a
thing with industry, vigilance and unweariedness of spirit. Now it is granted
on all hands, that election cannot be made more sure in respect of God or it
self, but only in respect of us, that we may be more persuaded of it. Election
cannot be made more sure than it is already, for those whom God has elected
shall be certainly glorified, but we must make it sure on our parts; Romans
8.29.30.
that is, we must labor to have a real bottom and grounded assurance that we
are elected by God in his eternal decree, to obtain life and glory by Jesus
Christ. There is a double certainty, 1. There is certitudo objecti, a certainty
of the object; so our election is sure with God, for with him both it and all
things are unchangable. 2. There is certitudo subjecti, the certainty of the
subject; and so we must make our election sure to our selves in our own hearts
and consciences. Now the means whereby we are to come to this assurance, is by
adding grace to grace, and by causing those several graces to abound in us.
This is the way of ways to make all sure to us. Now by these Scriptures it is
most evident, that we stand engaged to make our election sure by holy signs and
marks. But,

The fifth Proposition is this. That other precious Saints that are now
triumphing in glory, have pleaded their interest in God's love, and their hopes
of a better life from graces inherent. Grace in the working of it, is often
compared to life. Now, look as natural life is discerned by the actions
thereof, as by so many signs, so also is supernatural life.
I Will only point at some of those Scriptures among many others, that clearly
speak out this truth; the first Epistle of John, James 2.17 -- ult. Job. 23.10,
11, 12. and the whole 31. Chapter of Job, Psalm. 119.6. Isa. 38.2, 3. Neh. 1.
ult. and 13.14, etc. Now all these Scriptures do evidently prove, that the
precious servants of the Lord did take their graces for precious signs and
testimonies of God's love, of their interest in Christ, and thereby received
much comfort, peace and satisfaction. And truly, to deny the fruit growing upon
the Tree to be an evidence that the Tree is alive, is to me as unreasonable as
it is absurd: Certainly it is one thing to judge by our graces, and another
thing to trust in our graces, to make a Savior of our graces. There is a great
deal of difference betwixt declaring and deserving Christians, they may
doubtless look to their graces as evidences of their part in Christ and
salvation (and the clearer and stronger they are, the greater will be their
comfort and assurance) but not as causes. No man advanced free grace like Paul;
no man debased his own righteousness like Paul, he counted it but dung and
dross; and no man exalted the righteousness of Christ like Paul, Phil. 3.6, 7,
8, 9
and yet by this way of signs he gathered much comfort and assurance, 2 Timothy,
4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. How plainly, how
fully does he here conclude his right to the crown of life, from his fighting a
good fight, his finishing his course (in a way of grace and holiness) and his
keeping the faith. (...) is boasting; they boasted in the testimony of their
consciences. O the quiet and tranquillity that arises from the testimony of a
man's sincerity, both in heart and life.
By this great instance you may clearly see, that a Christian may greatly exalt
Christ, lift up free grace, tread upon his own righteousness (as to
justification) and at the very same time take comfort in his graces, and in his
gracious actings. So in that, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony
of a good conscience, that in godly sincerity we have had our conversation in
the world. His joy was founded on the testimony of his conscience; but from
what did his conscience testify? from his sincere conversation. Again, take
that memorable instance of Job, God hid his face from him, the arrows of the
Almighty stuck fast in him, Satan was let loose upon him, the wife of his bosom
proved a tempter to him, a tormenter of him; his most inward acquaintance
deserted him, reproached him, and condemned him as an hypocrite; God writ
bitter things against him, and made him to possess the iniquities of his youth,
all was clouded above him, and he stripped of all the outward comforts that did
once surround him; so that he had nothing left to stay him, to refresh him, to
support him, and to be a comfort and joy to him, Job 1.8. and 2.3.
but the sense of his integrity, and the evidence he had of his own
uprightness, his own righteousness, Job. 27.5. Till I die I will not remove my
integrity from me. Ver. 6. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it
go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. Job was under great
afflictions, sore temptations, and deep desertions; now that which was his
cordial, his bulwark in those sad times, was the sense and feeling of his own
uprightness, his own righteousness; the sense and feeling of the grace of God
in him, kept him from fainting and sinking under all his troubles. So 1 John
2.3. Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments, etc. In
these words two things are observable; First, that where there is a true
knowledge of Christ, there is an observation of his commandments. Secondly,
that by this observation of his royal Law, we may know that our knowledge is
sound and sincere. He speaks not of a legal, but of an evangelical keeping of
his commandments. A conscionable and serious endeavor to walk in a holy
course of life, according to God's will revealed in his Word, is a most certain
mark or evidence that we have a saving knowledge of God, and that we are his
children, and heirs of glory. Such who sincerely desire, and unfeignedly
purpose, and firmly resolve, and faithfully endeavor to keep the commandments
of God; these do keep the commandments of God evangelically and acceptably in
the eye of God, the account of God. So ver. 6. He that says he abides in him,
ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked. Here you may observe two
things; First, that by faith we are implanted into Christ. Secondly, that we
discover our implantation into Christ by our imitation of Christ. Such as plead
for sanctification a an evidence of justification, don't make their graces
causes of their implantation into Christ, or of their justification before the
throne of Christ, but they make them testimonies and witnesses to declare the
truth of their real implantation into Christ, and of their being justified
before the throne of Christ. So 1 John 3.14. We know we are translated from
death to life, because we love the brethren. The Apostle makes this a great
sign of godliness to love another godly man for godliness sake; and the more
godly he is, the more to love him and to delight in him. Now mark, this love of
our brethren is not a cause of our translation from death to life (for the very
word translated, supposes such a grace, such a favor of God as is without us)
but a sign of our translation from death to life. But of this I have said
enough already; as you may see if you will but read from page 189. to page 200.
of this Book. But,

The most ordinary and safe way of coming to assurance, is the discoursive way
in which a believer from the fruits and effects of grace infers he has the
habit, and from the habit concludes his j^stification and adoption; and as this
is a way least subject to delusion, so it is also most suited to a rational
creature, whose way of acting is by discourse and argumentation.
The sixth Proposition is this. There are many scores of precious promises made
over to them that believe, to them that trust in the Lord, to them that set him
up as the great object of their fear, to them that love him, to them that
delight in him, to them that obey him, to them that walk with him, to them that
thirst after him, to them that suffer for him, to them that follow after him,
etc. Now, all these scores of promises are made for the support, comfort and
encouragement of all such Christians whose souls are bespangled with grace. But
now if we may not lawfully come to the knowledge of our faith, love, fear,
delight, obedience, etc. in a discoursive way, arguing from the effect to the
cause. What support, what comfort, what advantage shall a sincere Christian
have by all those scores of promissory places of Scripture? Doubtless all those
scores of promises would be as so many Suns without light, as so many springs
without water, as so many breasts without milk, and as so many bodies without
souls, to all gracious Christians, were it not lawful for them to form up such
a practical syllogism as this is, viz. The Scripture does plainly and fully
declare, that he that believes, fears, loves, obeys, etc. is blessed, and
shall be happy for ever. But I am such a one that does believe, fear, love,
obey, etc. therefore I am blessed, and shall be happy for ever. Now although it
must be granted that the major of this Proposition is Scripture, yet the
assumption is from experience, and therefore a godly man being assisted therein
by the holy Ghost, may safely draw the conclusion as undeniable. O that you
would seriously consider, how little would be the difference (should you shut
out this discoursive way) betwixt a man and a beast, if a man should assent to
a thing unknown through an instinct and impression, and should to one who asks
him a reason of his persuasion, be able to return no other answer but this; I
am persuaded because I am persuaded. But,

The seventh Proposition is this. That the Scripture gives

The eighth Proposition is this. Without the light of the Romans 9.2.
the efficient cause of this knowledge, is the Spirit illustrating our graces
and making them visible, and so helping us to conclude from them, 1 Cor. 2.12.
Now we have received not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of
God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. Our
graces, our sanctification, as well as our election, vocation, justification
and glorification, are freely given to us of God; and the Spirit of God is
given as well to discover the one as the other to us. Mark, the things freely
given us may be received by us, and yet the receipt of them not known to us;
therefore the Spirit for our further consolation does (as it were) put his hand
and seal to our receipts, Ephesians. 4.30.
whence he is said to seal us up unto the day of redemption. The graces of the
Spirit are a real earnest of the Spirit, yet they are not always an evidential
earnest; therefore an earnest is often superadded to our graces. For ever
remember these few hints; 1. That it is the work of the Spirit to plant grace
in the soul. 2. That it is the work of the Spirit to act and exercise the
graces that he has planted there. 3. That it is the work of the Spirit to shine
upon those graces that he has planted in the soul, and to cause the soul to see
and feel what he has wrote. 4. That it is the work of the Spirit to raise
springs of comfort and joy in the soul, upon the discovery of that grace which
he has wrote in the soul. O Christians, till the Spirit of the Lord shine upon
your graces, Job 33.
you will still be in the dark. It Is only God's own Interpreter that must show
a man his righteousness. When the holy Ghost shines upon a Christians graces,
then a Christian finds the springs of comfort to rise in his soul, and then he
finds the greatest serenity and calmness in his spirit. O Sirs! no man can by
any natural light or evidence in him, come to be assured of the grace wrought
in his soul. Look, as no man can see the Sun but in the light of the Sun; so no
man can see the graces of the Spirit but in the light of the Spirit. 1 John
5.13.
A man may have grace, and not see it; he may be in a state of grace and not
know it; as the child lives in the womb but don't perceive it, is heir to a
crown but don't know it. Isa. 50.10. Romans 8.13.
O! till the Spirit shines upon his own work, a child of light may walk in
darkness and see no light. Look, as no man can subdue his sins but by the power
of the Spirit; so no man can see his graces but in the light of the Spirit. The
confidence that a believer has of the truth of grace wrought in him, springs
more from the Spirits removing his slavish fears, and answering his doubts, and
shining upon his graces, and supporting his soul, than it does from that
excellency and beauty of grace which shines in him. A man may read the promises
over and over a thousand times, and yet never be affected, delighted or taken
with them, till the Spirit of the Lord set them home upon his soul. And a man
may read the threatenings over and over a thousand times, and yet never startle
nor tremble, though he knows himself guilty of those very sins against which
the threatenings are denounced, till the Spirit of the Lord sets home the
threatenings in power upon his conscience; and then every threatening will be
like the handwriting upon the wall, which will cause his countenance to be
changed, and his thoughts to be troubled, Dan. 5.6, 7.
and his joints to be loosed, and his knees to be dashed one against another.
It is just so in the matter of our graces, and gracious evidences, till the
holy Spirit shine upon them, till in the light of the Spirit we come to see
them, they will not be witnessing, comforting and refreshing to us; and therefore
let not the pious Reader think, that by the strength of his natural light he
shall ever attain to know the certainty of that grace which is in his soul, but
let him rather beg hard of God for his holy Spirit, and that his Spirit may
shine upon that good work which he has begun in him, that so he may be
persuaded, assured and comforted. Without the light of the Spirit, the work of
the Spirit cannot be seen, no more than a book written in the fairest hand or
print, can be seen without light to see it or read it by. But,

The ninth Proposition is this. Sincere Christians may safely Most Christians
by experience find that their assurance and joy rises and falls as grace and
holiness, and as the evidences of grace and holiness rise and fall in their
souls.
delight and take comfort in those graces, or in those divine qualities, which
in the light of the Spirit they see and know are wrote in their souls. I don't
say that a Christian should build the comfort of his justification upon his
graces, or that he should rest on his graces, or trust to his graces, or make a
Savior of his graces, for this would be such a piece of Pharisaical Popery, as
is justly to be detested and abhorred by all that love Christ, or are looking
toward heaven: But this I say, a Christian may make several uses of his
graces, he may safly look upon his graces as so many evidences of Christ's
dwelling in him, and he may look upon his graces as so many heavenly bracelets,
or as so many love tokens from God in which he may safely rejoice. The gracious
evidences that I have laid down in this Treatise, are blessed symptoms of
salvation, and therefore to rejoice in them, can be no transgression of any
royal Law of heaven. He that can experimentally subscribe to any of the
gracious evidences that are laid down in this Book, has such a fair certificate
to show for heaven, that no wicked man or hypocrite under heaven has the like
to show; and why such a man should not rejoice in such a certificate, I cannot
at present see. I may and ought to rejoice in the works of Creation: O! how
much more then ought I to rejoice in the work of Renovation, in the work of
sanctification, which does so infinitely transcend the work of Creation? I may
and ought to rejoice in my natural life, health, strength, beauty; and why then
should I not rejoice in grace and holiness, which is the life, health, strength
and beauty of my soul? Cant. 4.9.
Christ delights in the graces of his people. Thou have ravished my heart, (or
thou have behearted me, as the Hebrew runs) my sister, my spouse; thou have
ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, (or with one glance of thine eyes, as
some read it) with one chain of thy neck. The eye of faith, say some; the eye
of love, say others: The chain of obedience, say some; the chain of spiritual
graces, say others, ravished Christ's heart; the one eye of faith, the one
chain of obedience, unhearted Christ, wounded Christ; this one eye, this one
chain robbed Christ of his heart, and laid the Spouse in the room of it. Now,
shall Christ's heart be ravished with his childrens graces, and shall not their
hearts be ravished and delighted with those very graces that ravish Christ's
own heart? I may, yea I ought to rejoice in the graces of others; 1 These. 1, ^,
3, 4, 5. 2 These. 1.3, 4.
and why then not in my own? I may, yea I ought to rejoice in others outward
mercies, and in my own outward mercies. O! how much more then ought I to
rejoice in the saving and distinguishing graces of the Spirit, especially when
I consider, that the least dram of grace is more worth than ten thousand
thousand worlds, Hab. 3.18. Gal. 6.14. Phil. 3.3.
as every awakened conscience will tell you when they come to dye. Mark,
firstly, mostly and chiefly a Christian is to rejoice in God and Christ; but
secondarily and subordinately he may rejoice in those graces, and in those
gracious evidences that God has given into his soul: Firstly, mostly and
chiefly a Wife is to rejoice in the person of her Husband, but secondarily,
subordinately she may rejoice in the bracelets, in the earrings, in the
jewels, in the gold chains that are given her by her Husband. But,

The tenth Proposition is this, viz. That that assurance that 1 Cor. 13.12.
Phil. 3.12, 13, 14.
or spiritual agonies. Our knowledge of God, of Christ, of our selves, and of
the blessed Scripture, which is the Rule of trial, is imperfect in this life.
And how then can our assurance be perfect? David, a man eminent in grace and
holiness, had his up-hills and his down-hills, his Summer days and his Winter
nights. Psalm 73.25. Psalm. 42.5, 11.
Now you shall have him upon the Mountains singing and saying, The Lord is my
portion; and presently you shall have him in the Valleys, sighing and saying,
Wh^ art thou cast down, O my soul; why art thou disquieted within me? Job 3.
Psalm. 77. Psalm. 88.
The same is evident in Job, Heman and Asaph. Such an assurance as shall
exclude all fears, doubts, conflicts, agonies, i^ very desirable on earth, but
shall never be obtained till we come to heaven. The grievous assaults of Satan,
the power of unbelief, and the prevalency of other corruptions in a Christians
heart, may be such as may shake (I don't say overturn) that assurance which a
Christian may gather from the sight and evidence of his graces in the light of
the spirit. Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts as well against the spirit as it is a spirit of consolation,
as it lusts against the spirit as it is a spirit of sanctification; and
therefore such an assurance as shall exclude all sorts and degrees of fears and
doubts, Doubting is not a virtue, as the Papists would make us believe, but
it is a fruit of the flesh, and a thing most contrary and opposite to the nature
of faith, Jam. 1.5. Mat. 21.21. and 13.31. And therefore Christians should pray
hard to be rid of their doubts.
is not attainable in this life; whilst we are in this old world we shall have
water with our wine, gall with our honey, and some clouds with our brightest
Sun-shiny days, etc. Most Christians think, that as long as they have any
doubtings they have no assurance; but they consider not that there are many
degrees of infalible certainty, below a perfect or an undoubting certainty:
Doubtless some darkness, more or less, will overspread the face of every
Christians soul, and unbelief in one degree or another will be making head
against their faith; and hypocrisy in one degree or another will be making
head against sincerity, and pride in one degree or another will be making head
against humility, and passion in one degree or another will be making head
against meekness, and earthly-mindedness in one degree or another will be
making head against heavenly-mindedness, etc. yet as long as a Christian has
the sight of his graces or his gracious evidences, he may and ought to walk in
much peace, comfort and joy. Such Christians as are resolved to lie down in
sorrow, till they have attained to a perfect assurance, must resolve to lie
down in sorrow till they come to lay down their heads in the dust. Our graces
are imperfect, and therefore that assurance that arises from the sight and
evidence of them, must needs be imperfect; 1 These. 3.10.
perfect signs of grace can never spring from imperfect grace. Now, if this
were seriously apprehended, studied and minded by many weak Christians, they
would not at every turn call their spiritual estates into question as they do,
because they find some seeds and stirrings of pride, hypocrisy, vainglory,
and other sinful humors and passions working in them. But,

viz. When all your signs and evidences of the happiness and blessedness of
your condition fails you, and are so clouded, obscured, darkened and blotted,
that you cannot read them, that you cannot take any comfort from them, then it
highly concerns you to keep up high, and precious, and honorable thoughts of
God, of Christ, of his word, and of his ways in your souls. Psalm. 97.2. Cant.
5.6, 7.
When Christ was withdrawn from his Spouse, and when the watchmen that went
about the City had smote her and wounded her, and when the keepers of the walls
had took away her vail from her, yet then she keeps up in heart very high,
precious and honorable thoughts of Christ, Ver. 10. My beloved is white and
ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand. Ver. 16. His mouth is most sweet, and
he is altogether lovely; or his mouth is sweetnesses, and he is altogether
desirablenesses, or all of him is desires, or he is wholly desirable. Here she
breaks off her praises in a general Elogy, which no words can express enough.
Alas! says the Spouse, I want words to express how sweet, how lovely, how
comely, how desirable, how eminent, and how excellent Christ is in my eye, and
to my soul; Hag. 2.8.
he is the desire of all Nations (de jure) and all that is perfect in heaven or
earth, is but a dim shadow of his excellency and glory. Where Christ is there
is heaven; heaven it self in the Spouse's eyes, without Christ, would be but a
low little thing. The Spouse looks upon Christ as the sparkling Diamond in the
ring of glory. So David when he was woefully clouded and benighted, when all was
dark within him, and dark about him, and dark over him, Psalm. 73. Verily I have
cleansed my heart in vain, See Psalm. 77. and Psalm. 88. 1 Samuel 30.6.
and washed my hands in innocence. Ver. 21. My heart was grieved, and I was
pricked in my reins. Ver. 22. I was as a beast before thee; or I was as a great
beast, or as many beasts in one, as the Hebrew word Behemoth imports. Ver. 26.
My flesh and my heart fails; that is, my outward man and my inward man
fails me. And yet mark, at this very time, when the Psalmist was thus
overcast, he keeps up in him very high, precious and honorable thoughts of
God, Ver. 1. Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.
Ver. 23. Nevertheless, I am continually with thee, thou have holden me by my
right hand. Ver. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward
receive me to glory. Ver. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none
upon earth that I desire besides thee. Ver. 26. God is the strength (or rock)
of my heart, and my portion for ever. Ver. 28. It is good for me to draw near
to God. So the Church in that, Micah 7. When God had hid his face from her.
Ver. 7. When she sat in darkness. Ver. 8. When she was under the indignation
of the Lord. Ver. 9. When the righteous man was perished, and there was none
upright among men. Ver. 2. And when her enemies rejoiced, insulted and
triumphed over her. Ver. 8. and ver. 10. Yet now, even now, she keeps up in her
soul very high, precious and honorable thoughts of the Lord. Ver. 7. My God
will hear me. Ver. 8. When I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the
Lord shall be a light unto me. Ver. 9. He will bring me forth to the light, and
I shall behold his righteousness. I might give you twenty more instances, but
enough is as good as a feast. Dear Christians, when your graces are not
transparent, when your evidences for heaven are blotted, and when the face of
God is clouded, O then keep up in your hearts high, precious and honorable
thoughts of God and Christ, and of his Word and ways, Acts 27.20.
etc. When your Sun of righteousness is set in a cloud, when great darkness is
upon your spirits, when all Moonlight, and Starlight of your graces and
gracious evidences fails you, Psalm. 22.3.
yet then say with David, Thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of
Israel; and with Ezra, Thou have punished me less than mine iniquities deserve;
Ezra 9.13. Neh. 9.33.
and with Nehemiah, Howbeit, thou art just in all that is brought upon us, for
thou have done right, but we have done wickedly; and with the Church, The Lord
is righteous. Lam. 1.18.
In the darkest night, and under your deepest soul-distresses, say, Well, if I
perish, if I should miscarry for ever, yet I will maintain and keep up in my
heart high, and precious, and honorable thoughts of God and Christ: Say, well,
though my graces are obscured, and my evidences for heaven are blurred and
soyled, yet I shall to my last breath, say the Lord is good, and his Word is
good, and his ways are good; yea, though he should slay me, yet I will trust
in him, Job 13.15.
and entertain noble and glorious thoughts of him. This is the way of ways to
have your graces cleared and strengthened, your evidences brightned, your
comforts restored, and your assurance confirmed. But,

The twelfth Proposition is this, viz. That it is the great Ophir, yea more
worth than ten thousand thousand worlds; Ephesians. 4.30. Psalm. 51.11, 12
and therefore every gracious Christian should be mavelous careful, that he
does not by wilful omissions or sinful commissions, cloud, dim or darken the
least character of grace; such as blot or lose their evidences for heaven, they
lose the comfort of their lives in this world. Satan's masterpiece is first to
work Christians to blot and blur their evidences for glory, by committing this
or that heinous sin; and then his next work is to rob them of their evidences
for glory, that so though at the long run they may get safe to heaven, that yet
Jacob like they may go halting and mourning to their graves. Satan knows, that
whilst a Christians evidences are bright and shining, a Christian is
temptation-proof. Satan may tempt him, but he cannot conquer him; he may assault
him, but he cannot vanquish him. Satan knows, that whilst a Christians evidences
for heaven are bright and shining, no afflictions can sink him, nor no
opposition shake him, nor no persecution discourage him, nor no outward wants
perplex him; and therefore he will use all his power and policy, all his arts,
crafts and parts, to draw poor Christians to blot and blur their evidences for
glory. Satan knows, that a man may lose one friend, and easily get another,
lose his Trade in one place, and soon get a Trade in another place; lose health
and get it, lose an estate and get an estate, etc. But if he loses his
evidences for heaven, he knows it will cost him many a prayer, and many a sigh,
and many a groan, and many a tear, and many a sad complaint, before he recovers
his lost evidences; and therefore his grand design is to plunder a Christian of
his evidences for heaven. O Sirs! keep but your evidences for heaven always
bright and shining, and then heavy afflictions will be light, and long
afflictions will be short, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18.
and bitter afflictions will be sweet; and then every evidence fainly written
in your hearts, will be a living comfort to you in a dying hour. When the
tokens of death are upon your bodies, and you shall see the lively characters
of grace shining in your souls, Luke 2.29.
you will then cry out with old Simeon, Lord, now let thy servant depart in
peace; and with the Spouse, Make have my beloved, Cant. 8. ult.
and be like to a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the mountains of spices; Rev.
22.20. Phil. 1.23.
and with the Bride, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; and with Paul, I desire to
be dissolved and to be with Christ. When a man's evidences for heaven are
either lost or blotted and blur'd, then he will be ready to cry out wi^h David,
O spare me yet a little, that I may recover strength before I go hence and be
seen no more; Isa. 38.3.
and with Hezekiah, to turn his face to the wall and weep. There are four
things that above all others a Christian should labor to keep; 1. Christ. 2.
His own heart. 3. The Word. 4. His evidences for heaven, bright and shining.
But,

viz. It is the high concernment of every Christian, either when he is in the
dark, or when his graces shine brightest, and when his evidences for heaven are
clearest, and his springs of comfort rise highest, then to have his heart and
the eye of his faith most firmly fixed upon these three royal Forts, or these
five Cities or refuge. It must be granted, that though our graces are our best
jewels, yet they are imperfect, and do not give out their full luster; they are
like the Moon, which when it shines brightest has her dark spots; and
therefore a Christian had need have his eye, his heart fixed upon the five
following royal Forts. You know in time of War there are the outworks, and
there are the royal Forts: Now, when the Soldiers are beaten out of their
outworks, they retire to the royal Forts, and there they are safe, and then
they cast up their caps and bid defiance to their proudest enemies. Now, our
graces and our gracious evidences, they are our outworks; and from these we
may be beaten in a day of desertion and temptation, etc. Now if we make our
retreat to the five following royal Forts, we may in a holy sense cast up our
caps, and bid defiance to an host of Devils, yea to all the powers of darkness.

Qu. But Sir, Pray let us know which are these Royal Forts.

Ans. They are these three that follow.

The first is the free, rich, infinite, sovereign and glorious Genesis 6.8. Exodus
19.5. Ephesians 1.5, 6, 7. 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 15, 16. The grace of our Lord was
exceeding abundant. The original word is (...), was over full, redundant, more
than enough, more than might serve the turn for him, who was the greatest of
sinners.
By free grace you are to understand the gracious good will or favor of God,
whereby he is pleased of his own free love to choose and accept of some in
Christ for his own, This we call first grace, because it is the fountain of all
other grace, and the springs from whence they flow; and it is therefore called
grace, because it makes a man gracious with God. Now mark, there have been many
Christians who have had no assurance of the love of God, no sight of their
interest in Christ, no sealing of the spirit, nor no one clear evidence of
grace, that they durst rest the weight of their souls upon; nor no one promise
in the whole Book of God that they durst apply or rest upon, who yet daily
casting or rolling themselves, their souls, and their everlasting concernments,
upon the infinite, free, rich and sovereign grace of God in Christ, have found
some tolerable peace, comfort and refreshment in such a practice all their
days. A Christian may lose the sight of his graces, and the evidences of his
gracious estate; he may be so much in the dark, he may be so much benighted and
bewildered in his spirit, that there may be no way under heaven left to him to
enjoy peace, comfort, rest, quiet, settlement or contentment, but by casting or
rolling of his soul upon the free, rich, infinite and sovereign grace of God in
Christ; and here casting anchor, the poor bewildered, deserted, tempted, Isa.
50.10.
tossed soul may be safe and at rest. The free love and favor of God will be a
lamp to the soul in the darkest night, Psalm. 4.6. Socrates prized the Kings
countenance above his coin. What is then the countenance of a God, to a
gracious soul?
it will be a sweet lump that will sweeten the bitterest cup, it will be a
singular cordial against all faintings, it will be armor of proof against all
temptations, it will be an everlasting arm to you under all afflictions, it
will be a Sun and a shield to you in every condition, Psalm. 80.3. Cause thy
face to shine, and we shall be saved. Divine favor is that pearl of price that
is most desirable, Dan. 9.17. The Lord make his face to shine upon his
sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lords sake. Numb. 6.24. The Lord make his
face to shine upon you, and be gracious to you. Psalm. 67.1. God be merciful to
you, and bless you, and cause his face to shine upon you. Job 2.4.
Life is a very desirable thing, skin for skin, yea all that a man has will he
give for his life; and yet the loving kindness of God is better than life,
Psalm. 63. Thy loving kindness is better than life. The Hebrew word is Chajim,
lives; to note that the loving kindness of God is better than many lives, yea
than all lives, and the revenues of life, put many lives together, put all
lives together; and yet there is more excellency in the least discovery of
divine love than in them all. Many a man has been weary of his life, but who
have ever been weary of divine love? Dear Christians, are your graces or
gracious evidences shining and sparkling? O then solace your selves mostly in
the free love and favor of God; for in his free favor lies the life of your
souls, the life of your graces, the life of your comforts, yea in his free
favor your all is bound up. If your graces or evidences are so clouded and
darkened, that you are in a stormy day beat out of your outworks: O now run to
the free grace and favor of God, as to your Royal Fort, as to your strong
Tower, as to your City of Refuge, where you may be safe and happy for ever. In
such a day ponder much upon these Scriptures, Hos. 14.4. I will heal their
backsliding, I will love them freely. God's love is a free love, having no
motive or foundation but within it self; all the links of the golden chain of
salvation are made up of free grace. The people of God are freely loved, Deuteronomy.
7.6, 7, 8. and freely chosen, John 15.16, 19. Ephesians. 1.4. and freely accepted,
Ephesians. 1.6. and freely adopted, Ephesians. 1.5. Gal. 4.5, 6. and freely reconciled, 2
Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. and freely justified, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by
his grace; and freely saved, Ephesians. 2.5. By grace ye are saved. Ver. 8. For by
grace are ye saved. Tit. 3.5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done,
but according to his mercy he saved us. Thus you see, that all the golden
rounds in Jacob's Ladder that reaches from heaven to earth, are all made up of
free grace. Free Grace is the foundation of all spiritual and eternal mercies;
free grace is the solid bottom and foundation of all a Christians comfort in
this world. Were we to measure the love of God to us by our fruitfulness,
holiness, humbleness, spiritualness, heavenly-mindedness, or gracious carriages
toward him, how would our hope, our confidence, every hour, Romans 4.16.
yea every moment in every hour be staggered, if not vanquished? B^t all is of
grace, of free grace, that the promise might be sure, and that our salvation
might be safe. O Sirs! it is free grace that will strengthen you in all your
duties, and that will sweeten all your mercie^, Romans 8.33, 34, 35, 36.
and that will support you under all your changes, and that will arm you
against all temptations, and answer all objections, and take off all Satan's
accusations, that may be cast in to disturb the peace and quiet of your souls;
and therefore, whether your graces or gracious evidences do shine or are
clouded, yet still have your recourse to the free grace of God, as to your
first Royal Fort, your first City of Refuge; and still cry out, Grace, grace.
When your gracious evidences are clearest and fullest, it then concerns you to
look upon free grace as your choicest and safest City of Refuge. But,

The second Royal Fort that Christians should have their eyes, Imputed
righteousness seem^ to be prefigured by the skins wherewith the Lord after the
full clothed our first parents. The bodies of the beasts were for sacrifice,
and the skins to put them in mind, that their own righteousness was like the
fig leaves imperfect, and that therefore they must be justified another way*
whether their graces or gracious evidences sparkle and shine, or are clouded
and obscured, is the Mediatory righteousness of Christ. Beloved, there is a
twofold righteousness in Christ. First, there is his essential and personal
righteousness as God: Now this essential personal righteousness of Christ
cannot be imputed to us. But then there is, Secondly, his Mediatory
righteousness, that is that righteousness which he wrought for us as Mediator,
whereby he did subject himself to the preceptt, to the penalties, commands and
curses, answering both Gods vindictive and rewarding justice. This is
communicated to us, and made ours: by virtue of which we stand recti in curia,
justified in God's sight. The Mediatory righteousness of Christ is the matter
of our justification. Now this Mediatory righteousness of Christ includes,
First, the habitual holiness of his person in the absence of all sin, and in
the rich and plentiful presence of all holy and requisite qualities. Secondly,
the actual holiness of his life and death by obedience. By his active obedience
he perfectly fulfilled the commands of the Law, and by his passive obedience,
his voluntary sufferings, he satisfied the penalty and commination of the Law
for transgressions. Mark, that perfect satisfaction to divine justice in
whatsoever it requires, either in way of punishing for sin, or obedience to the
Law, made by the Lord Jesus Christ, God and Man, the Mediator of the new
Covenant, Osiander was of opinion, that men were justified by the essential
righteousness of Christ as God, which opinion is largely confuted by Calvin in
his Institutions.
as a common head representing all those whom the Father has given to him, and
made over unto them that believe in him. This is that righteousness that is
imputed to us in justification. No other righteousness can justify us before
the throne of God. Look, as Christ was made sin for us only by imputation, so
we are made righteous only by the imputation of his righteousness to us; as the
Scripture clearly evidences, 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us,
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Jer.
23.6. The Lord our righteousness. (A soul truly sensible of his own
unrighteousness, would not have this sentence, The Lord our righteousness,
blotted out of the Bible for ten thousand thousand worlds.) 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ
Jesus is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, etc. And pray, how is
Christ made righteousness to the believer? Not by way of infusion, but
imputation; not by putting righteousness into him, but by putting a
righteousness upon him, even his own righteousness; by the imputing his merit,
his satisfaction, his obedience unto them, through which they are accepted as
righteous unto eternal life, Romans 5.19. As by one man's disobedience many were
made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. Christ's
righteousness is his in respect of inhesion, but it is ours in respect of
imputation; his righteousness is his personally, but ours meritoriously. Look,
as there is a true and real union between us and Christ, so there is a real
imputation of Christ's righteousness to us. And a gracious soul triumphs more
in the righteousness of Christ imputed, than he would have done if he could
have stood in the righteousness in which he was created. This is the crowning
comfort to a sensible and understanding soul, that he stands righteous before a
judgment seat, in that full, exact, perfect, complete, matchless, spotless,
pearless, and most acceptable righteousness of Christ which is imputed to him.
The righteousness of Christ is therefore called the righteousness of God, Romans
3.21, 22. Romans 10.3. Phil. 3.9.
because it is it which God has designed, and which God does accept for us in
our justification, and for and in which he does acquit and pronounce us
righteous before his seat of justice. Luthers great fear was, that when he was
dead this glorious doctrine of free justification by the righteousness of
Christ would be sent packing out of the world.
That we are freely justified by the righteousness of Christ imputed to us, is
the very Basis, foundation and state of Christian Religion, whereby it is
distinguished from all other Religions whatsoever. Jews, Turks, Pagans and
Papists explode an imputed righteousness, yea Papists jeer it, calling it a
putative righteousness. Well Sirs, remember this once for all, viz. That the
Mediatory righteousness of Christ is the life of your souls, and will afford
you these most admirable comforts.

First, In this righteousness there is enough to satisfy the Ezekiel. 16.62, 63.
But,

Secondly, This Mediatory righteousness of Christ takes Isa. 53. Col. 2.12, 13,
14, 15.
here are my sins of omission, and here are my sins of commission, but the
righteousness of Christ has answered for them all; here are my sins against
the Law, and here are my sins against the Gospel, and here are my sins against
the offers of grace, the tenders of grace, the strivings of grace, the bowels
of grace, but the righteousness of Christ has answered for them all. When a
cordial was offered to one that was sick; O (said he) the cordial of cordials
which I daily take is this; The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our
sins. O Sirs! 1 John 1.7.
it would be high blasphemy for any to imagine that there should be more
demerit in sin, Romans 8.1, 33, 34, 35.
in any sin, in all sin, to condemn a believer, than there is merit in Christ's
righteousness to absolve him, to justify him. But,

And to her was granted (that is to the Lambs wife) that she should be arrayed
in fine linen, Rev. 19.8.
clean and white; for the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints, or the
righteousnesses or justifications of Saints; (...).
for the Greek is plural. Some by righteousnesses understand the righteousness
of Christ imputed, and the righteousness of Christ imparted; but I rather close
with those who say it is an Hebraism, the plural righteousnesses, noting that
most perfect, complete, absolute righteousness which Christ is pleased to put
upon his people. Upon the account of this righteousness of Christ, the Church
is said to be without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27.
and to be all fair. Thou art all fair my love, Cant. 4.7. Col. 2.10.
there is no spot in thee. And to be complete. And ye are complete in him,
which is the head of all principality and power. Rev. 14.5.
And to be without fault. They are without fault before the throne of God. And
so Col. 1.21. And to present us holy, and unblamable, and unreprovable in the
sight of God. But,

That was a rare speech of Luther, Ips^ videret ubi anima mea mansura sit, qui
pro ea sic solicitus fuit ut vitam pro ea posuerit, let him see to it where my
soul shall rest, who took so much care for it, as that he laid down his life
for it.
and the sufferings of Christ, as your Mediator and Surety; and say, O Christ,
thou art my sin in being made sin for me, and thou art my curse in being made a
curse for me; or rather I am thy sin, and thou art my righteousness, I am thy
curse, and thou art my blessing, I am thy death and thou art my life; I am the
wrath of God to thee, and thou art the love of God to me, I am thy hell, and
thou art my heaven. O Sirs! if you think of your sins and of God's wrath, if
you think of your guiltiness and of God's justice, your hearts will fail you
and sink into despair; if you don't think of Christ, if you don't rest and stay
your souls upon the Mediatory righteousness of Christ. But,

Fifthly and lastly, The righteousness of Christ is the best Heb. 12.28. 1 Pet.
1.3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4.
for riches that corrupt not, for an inheritance that fades not away, and for
an house not made with hands, but one eternal in the heavens. The righteousness
of Christ is your life, your joy, your comfort, your crown, your confidence,
your heaven, your all; and therefore whether your graces or gracious evidences
do sparkle and shine, or are clouded or blotted, yet still keep a fixed eye and
an awakned heart upon the Mediatory righteousness of Jesus Christ, for that is
the righteousness by which you may happily live, comfortably die, and boldly
appear before a Judgment Seat. But,

The third Royal Fort, that Christians should have their Deuteronomy. 4.23. Isa. 55.3.
and 54.7, 8, 9, 10. Jer. 31.31. Psalm. 50.5, etc. Hos. 14.4. Tit. 3.6. Ephesians. 1.5,
6, 7. Chap. 2.5 7, 8. Romans 9.18, 23. Jer. 32.38, 39, 40, 41. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26,
27.
wherein he undertakes both for himself and for fallen man, and wherein he
engages himself to make fallen man everlastingly happy. All mankind had been
eternally lost, and God had lost all the glory of his mercy for ever, had he
not of his own free grace and mercy made such an agreement with sinful man.
This Covenant is called a Covenant of grace, because it flows from the mere
grace and mercy of God. There was nothing out of God, nor nothing in God, but
his mere mercy and grace that moved him to enter into Covenant with poor
sinners. In the Covenant of grace there are two things considerable, First, the
Covenant that God makes for himself to us, which consists of these Branches; 1.
That he will be our God. 2. That he will give us a new heart, a new spirit. 3.
That he will not turn away his face from us from doing of us good. 4. That he
will put his fear into our hearts. 5. That he will cleanse us from all our
filthiness, and from all our Idols. 6. That he will rejoice over us to do us
good. Secondly, here is the Covenant which God does make for us to himself,
which consists in these things; 1. That we shall be his people. 2. That we
shall fear him for ever. 3. That we shall walk in his Statutes, keep his
Judgments and do them. 4. That we shall not depart from him. Upon many accounts
I may not enlarge on these things; but by these short hints it is evident, that
the Covenant of grace is an entire Covenant made by God, both for himself and
for us. O Sirs! in the Covenant of grace God stands engaged to give whatsoever
he requires.

1 Chronicles. 28.9.
First, He requires us to know him, and he has engaged himself that we shall
know him, Jer. 24.7. I will give them a heart to know me, that I am the Lord.
And Jer. 31.34. They shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest
of them, Heb. 8.11. But,

Psalm. 62.8. Isa. 26.4. 2 Chronicles. 20.20. And he has engaged himself that his
people shall trust in him, Zeph. 3.12. I will leave in the midst of thee an
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord. But,

Deuteronomy. 6.13. Chap. 8.6. And he has engaged himself that they shall fear him,
Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart
from me. Hos. 3.5. They shall fear the Lord and his goodness. But,

Deuteronomy. 11.1. Psalm. 31.23. O love the Lord, all ye his Saints. And he has
promised and engaged himself, that his people shall love him, Deuteronomy. 30.6. The
Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the
Lord thy God with all thine heart and with all thy soul. But,

Fifthly, The Lord frequently commands his people to Psalm. 50.15. 1 These. 5.17.
etc. And he has promised and engaged himself to pour upon them a spirit of
prayer, Zech. 12.10. I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplications. But,

Sixthly, The Lord frequently commands his people to repent, Hos. 14.1. Ezekiel.
14.6. Chap. 18.30. Acts 17.30. Acts 26.20. And he has promised and engaged
himself, that they shall repent and turn from their evil ways, Acts 5.30. Acts
11.18. 2 Timothy 2.25. Isa. 30.22. Jer. 24.7. But,

Seventhly, The Lord has commanded his people to obey Jer. 24.7. And he has
promised and engaged himself, that his people shall obey him, and walk in his
Statutes, Ezekiel. 36.27. And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them. So Ezekiel.
11.19, 20. Chap 37.23, 24. But,

Eighthly, The Lord commands his people to mourn for Isa. 22.12. Joel 2.12. Jam.
4.10. And he has promised and engaged himself to give them a mourning frame,
Zech. 12.10. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall
mourn for him, as one that mourns for an only son. Ezekiel. 7.16. They shall be
on the mountains as the Doves of the valleys, all of them mourning every one
for his iniquity. But,

Ninthly, The Lord commands his people to grow in grace, Pet. 3.18. etc. And he
has promised and engaged himself, that they shall grow in grace, Psalm. 92.12,
13, 14. The righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree (which is always green
and flourishing) he shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. The Cedar of all Trees
is most durable, and shoots up highest. Those that be planted in the house of
the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God; they shall still bring forth
fruit in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing. See Hos. 14.5, 6, 7. Mal.
4.2. etc. But,

Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign in your mortal body. And he has promised and
engaged himself, that sin shall not reign in them, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not
have dominion over you. Jer. 33.8. And I will cleanse them from all their
iniquity. Ezekiel. 36.25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall
be clean from all your filthiness; and from all your Idols will I cleanse you.
Mich. 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities. But,

Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord hate evil. Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is
evil. And the Lord has promised and engaged himself to give them such a frame
of spirit, Ezekiel. 36.13. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your
doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight for
your iniquities, and for your abominations. Ezekiel. 6.9. And they that escape of
you shall remember me among the Nations whither they shall be carried captives,
because I am broken with their whorish heart, which has departed from me, and
with their eyes which go a whoring after their Idols, and they shall loath
themselves for the evils which they have committed in all their abominations.
Ezekiel. 20.43. And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your doings
wherein you have been defiled, and ye shall loath your selves in your own
sight, for all your evils that ye have committed. But,

Cor. 15.58. Rev. 2.10. Luke 18.1. And the Lord has promised and engaged
himself, that they shall persevere, Job 17.9. The righteous shall hold on his
way, 2 Samuel 3.1.
and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger. Isa. 40.31. They
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with
wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not
faint. Thus you see by an induction of twelve particulars, that what ever God
requires of his people, he stands engaged by the Covenant of grace to give to
his people, to do for his people.

Now mark, the Covenant of grace (...) ^onfirmed to us in the surest and most
glorious wa^ ^^at can be imagined. Genesis 17.7. Heb. 13.20. Psalm. 89.28. 2 Samuel
23.5.
The Covenant of grace is so ^^^ongly ratified, that there can be no nulling of
it* ^o^*

First, It Is confirmed to us by his Word. I will be your Now, Jer. 33.38. 2
Cor. 1.20.
all the promises of God in htm are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God
by us; that is, they are stable and firm, as the Hebrew word signifies. They
will eat their way over all Alps of opposition. In the new Covenant God neither
makes nor fulfils any promises of salvation, but in Christ and by Christ.

Secondly, God has ratified the Covenant of grace by his Genesis 22.16. Heb. 6.19.
but surely his oath must put all out of question; there is no room for unbelief
now God has sworn to it; had there been a greater God, he would have sworn by
him. But,

Thirdly, God has ratified it by the death of his Son. A Gal. 3.15. Heb. 9.15,
26.
is in force and cannot then be disannulled. The Covenant of grace is a
Testamentary Covenant, which by the death of the Testator is so settled, that
there is no altering of it. But,

Fourthly and lastly, The Covenant of grace is ratified Esth. 8.
God has set his seals to the Covenant of grace, his broad seal in the
Sacraments, and his privy seal in the witness of his Spirit, and therefore it is
sure and cannot be reverst, etc.

Now, when ever you look upon your graces or gracious evidences with one eye,
be sure you look upon the Covenant of grace, your last royal Fort with the
other eye. The whole hing of a man's comfort and happiness hangs upon the Cove^
of grace. The Covenant of grace is the Saints original title to (...) it is a
Saints best and brightest evidence for life and salvation. ^^re was an eternal
design (an eternal plot, if I may so speak) be^^^ God the father and the Lord
Jesus Christ; a bargain, a Covenant ^^de between the Father and the Son, for
the salvation of his chosen (...); and by this patient and tenure of grace, all
Saints have title to heaven, etc. Dear Christians, many times your gracious
evidences are so blotted and blur'd that you cannot read them. O then, turn to
the Covenant of grace; when other evidences fail you, the Covenant of grace
will be a glorious standing evidence to you; it is upon the score of the
Covenant that you must challenge an interest in all the glory of another world.
The Covenant of grace is the great Charter, the Magna Charta of all your
spiritual privileges and immunities. Now in this great Charter the Lord
declares, That sincerity shall go for perfection: Luke 1.5, 6. Acts 13.22. 2 Chronicles 3^.^8, 19, 20.
In this great Charter the Lord has declared, That he judges his people by the
standing bent and frame of their hearts, and not by what they are, under some
pangs of passion, or in an hour of temptation. In this great Charter the Lord
declares, That his eye is more upon his peoples inward disposition, than it is
upon their outward actions; and that his eye is more upon their will, 2 Cor.
8.12. Phil. 2.13.
than it is upon their work. In this great Charter, the Covenant of grace, the
Lord has declared, That he will not forsake his people, nor cast off his
people, Ponder much upon Jer. 31.31, to 38.
because of those failings and weaknesses that may and do attend them, 1 Samuel
12.22. For the Lord will not forsake his people for his great name sake:
because it has pleased the Lord to make you his people. He chose you for his
love, and he still loves you for his choice. God will rather pity his people
under their weakness, than he will reject them for their weakness. The Covenant
of grace that God has made with his people, is as the Covenant that a man
makes with his Wife. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, says the Lord. Hos.
2.19, 20. Jer. 3.13.
Turn O back-s^iding children, says the Lord, for I am married unto you. Now,
a man will never reject his Wife, he will never cast off his Wife for those
common weaknesses and infirmities that daily attends her; no more will the Lord
cast off his people, because of the infirmities that daily hang upon them. In
this great Charter, the Covenant of grace, the Lord declares, that he will
require no more than he gives; and that he will give what he requires, and that
he will accept what he gives; and what can a God say more? and what can a
gracious soul desire more?

O Sirs! when all is cloudy over head, and all dark within doors, when a
Christians graces are not transparent, when his evidences for heaven are soiled
and blotted, and when neither heart nor house are as they should be, it is good
then to turn to the Covenant grace, and to dwell upon the Covenant of grace.
Thus David did, 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has
made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure: for this
is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow. Let me
give a little light into the words.

Although my house be not so with God.] Though David in the main had a good
heart, yet he had but a wicked house. Absalom had slain his Brother, rebelled
against his Father, and lay with his Fathers Concubines. And Amnon had
defloured his Sister, etc. Now David under a deep sense of all this wickedness,
and of his own personal unworthiness, sadly sighs it out, Although my house be
not so with God, etc. though I have not walked so exactly and perfectly as I
should have done, though neither I nor my house have walked answerable to those
great mercies and singular kindnesses of God that have been extended to us.

Yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant.] The word everlasting has
two acceptations; it does denote, 1. Sometimes a long duration, Vide Isa. 55.3.
Genesis 17.7. Psalm. 105.9, 10 Isa. 61.8. Heb. 13.20.
in which respect the old Covenant cl^athed with figures and ceremonies is
called everlasting, because it was to endure, and did endure a long time. ^.
Sometimes it denotes a perpetual duration, a duration which shall last for
ever. In this respect the Covenant of grace is everlasting, it shall never
cease, never be broken, nor never be alte^ed. Now, the Covenant of grace is an
everlasting Covenant in a twofold respect.

Ex part soederantis, in respect of God, who will never break Covenant with
his people, but is their God, and will be their God for ever and ever, Psalm.
48.14. For this God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide even
unto death: I and after death too; for this is not to be taken exclusive; he
will never leave his people, nor forsake his people, Heb. 13.5, 6.

Ex part confoederatorum, in respect of the people of God who are brought into
Covenant, and shall continue in Covenant for ever and ever. You have both these
expressed in that excellent Scripture, Jer. 32.40. I will make an everlasting
covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good; but I
will put my fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from me. Seriously
dwell upon the place; it shows that the Covenant is everlasting on God's part,
and also on our part: On God's part, I will never turn away from them to do
them good; and on our part, They shall never depart from me. How so? I will put
my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me (even that fear
spoken of in ver. 39. That they may fear me for ever.)

Ordered in all things.] O! what head can conceive, or what tongue can express
that infinite counsel, wisdom, love, care and tenderness that the blessed God
has expressed in ordering the Covenant of grace, so as it may most and best suit
to all the wants, and straits, and necessities, and miseries, and desires, and
longings of poor sinners souls. The Covenant of grace is so well ordered by the
unsearchable wisdom of God, that you may find in it remedies to cure all your
diseases, and cordials to comfort you against all your faintings, Isa. 40.28.
Psalm. 147.5.
and a spiritual armoury to arm you against all your enemies, viz. the world,
the flesh, and the devil. Do thou, O distressed sinner, want a loving God, a
compassionate God, a reconciled God, a sin pardoning God? here thou may find
him in the Covenant of grace. Do thou want a Christ to counsel thee by his
wisdom, and to cloth thee with his righteousness, and to adorn thee with his
grace? here thou may find him in a Covenant of grace. Do thou want the
Spirit to enlighten thee, to teach thee, to convince thee, to awaken thee, to
lead thee, to cleanse thee, to cheer thee, and to seal thee up to the day of
redemption? Ephesians. 1.13.
here thou may find him in a Covenant of grace. Do thou want grace, or
peace, or rest, or quiet, or content, or comfort, or satisfaction? here thou
may find it in a Covenant of grace. God has laid into the Covenant of grace,
as into a common store, all those things that sinners or Saints can either beg
or need. Look, as that is a well ordered Commonwealth where there are no
wholesome Laws wanting to govern a people, and where there are no wholesome
remedies wanting to relieve a people; so that must needs be a well ordered
Covenant, where there is nothing wanting to govern poor souls, or to relieve
poor souls, or to save poor souls; and such a Covenant is the Covenant of grace.

And sure, the Covenant of grace is a sure Covenant, Jer. 31.31, 33, 35, 36,
37. Psalm. 19.7. Rev. 3.14. Isa. 54.10.
Deuteronomy. 7.9. The Lord thy God he is God, the faithful God (or the God of Amen)
which keeps Covenant with them that love him. Psalm. 89.33. My Covenant will I
not break (Hebrew, I will not profane) nor alter the thing that is gone out of
my lips. All God's precepts, all God's predictions, all God's menaces, and all
God's promises, are the issue of a most just, faithful and righteous will. God
can neither dye nor lie, Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God that
cannot lie promised before the world began. There are three things that God
cannot do; 1. He cannot dye. Nor, 2. He cannot lie. Nor, 3. He cannot deny himself,
Josh. 23.14. And behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth; and ye
know in all your hearts, and in all your souls, that not one thing has failed
of all the good things which the Lord your God spoke concerning you, all are
come to pass unto you, and not one thing has failed thereof. O Sirs! the
Covenant of grace is bottomed upon God's everlasting love, John 13.1.
upon Gods unchangable love, upon God's free love; whom God loves once he loves
for ever. Jer. 31.3.
I have loved thee with an everlasting love. God can as well cease to be, as he
can cease to love those whom he has taken into Covenant with himself. And as
the Covenant of grace is bottomed upon God's everlasting love, so it is bottomed
upon Gods immutable counsel, Heb. 6.17.
God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the
immutability of his counsel confirmed it by an oath. And as the Covenant of
grace is bottomed upon the immutable counsel of God, so it is bottomed upon the
free purpose of God, 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure; that is,
the decree and purpose of God's election stands firm and sure. Now, the purpose
of God's election is compared to a foundation, because it is that upon which
all our happiness and blessedness is built and bottomed, and because as a
foundation it abides firm and sure. And as the Covenant of grace is bottomed
upon the free purpose of God, so it is bottomed upon the glorious power of God.
The power of God is an infinite power, Isa. 33.11. Isa. 41.2. Mal. 4.1. 1 Cor.
1.25.
it is a supreme power, a power that overtops the power of all mortals: What Is
the stubble to the flames, the chaff to the whirlwind? no more is all created
power to the power of God. The weakness of God is stronger than men; and did
not Pharaoh find it so? and Haman find it so? and Sennacherib find it so? and
Nebuchadnezzar find it so? and Belshazzar find it so? and Herod find it so? In
all the ages of the world the power of God has bore down all before it; the
power of God is an independent power, a matchless power, an incomparable power,
an enduring power, an eternal power. And as the Covenant of grace is bottomed
upon the power of God, Heb. 6.17, 18 Psalm. 89.34, 35.
so it is bottomed upon the oath of God, Luke 1.72. To perform the mercy
promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant. Ver. 73. The oath
which he swear to our father Abraham. To think that God will break his oath, or
be perjured, is an intolerable blasphemy. Once more give me leave to say, the
Covenant of grace is bottomed not only upon the oath of God, but also upon the
precious blood of Christ. The blood of Christ is called the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. Mat. 26.28. This is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins: Heb. 9.15. And for
this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death, for
the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first Testament, they
which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. Ver. 17. A
Testament is of force after men are dead. It is called a Covenant and a
Testament. 1. A Covenant in respect of God, and a Testament in respect of
Christ. 2. A Covenant in respect of the manner of agreement, and a Testament in
respect of the manner of confirming. Jesus Christ died as a Testator, and by
his death confirmed the Testamentary gift before made of Life and Salvation.
Now, the Covenant of grace being thus gloriously bottomed as you se^, it must
roundly and undeniably follow, that the Covenant of grace is a sure Covenant.

For this is all my salvation and all my desire.] i. e. This is the great
ground of all my hope concerning my salvation, and of all the happiness and
blessedness which I look for in another world. This everlasting Covenant, this
sure Covenant, is the great Charter of Charters that I have to show for eternal
bliss. David was drawing near to his eternal home, and whether his graces and
gracious evidences for heavens happiness were bright and shining, or blotted
and clouded, I shall not at this time stand to enquire; it is enough that he
stays his soul upon the Covenant of grace, and that he comforts and solaces
his soul in the Covenant of grace. And, O that all Christians, when their
graces and gracious evidences are either clouded or blotted, or else sparkling
and shining, that they would frequently eye these three royal Forts, viz. 1.
The free grace and favor of God. 2. The Mediatory righteousness of Christ. 3.
The Covenant of grace. Now, that I may the more effectually prevail with you to
look upon these royal Forts, and to delight in these royal Forts, and to prize
these royal Forts, and to improve these royal Forts. Give me leave to offer
these three things briefly to your consideration.

First, Our best graces and performances are not commensurate Psalm. 143.2. Job.
14.3, 4. Romans 3.20.
would not be safety and defense unto him; for what a deal of pride have we
mixed with a little humility? and what a deal of passion have we mixed with a
little meekness? and what a deal of hypocrisy have we mixed with a little
sincerity? and what a deal of earthly-mindedness have we mixed with a little
heavenly-mindedness? and what a deal of unbelief have we mixed with a little
faith? O Sirs! in the great business of your access to God, and of your
acceptance with God, Romans 3.20, to ver. 27. Phil. 3.8, 9, 10.
and of your reconciliation to God, and of your justification before God. It Is
best, safest and noblest, to bottom your faith, hope and expectation,
infinitely rather upon imputed righteousness than inherent righteousness, upon
what Christ has done for you, than upon what he has done in you. Inherent
righteousness is stained, imperfect, impure; but imputed righteousness is pure
and perfect; if there were any stain, or any imperfection in that, it could not
justify us, it could not save us, it could not secure us from wrath to come.
Such evidences as are not fetched from any thing in us, nor from any things done
by us, but are fetched by faith from our free justification, and from Christ's
full satisfaction which he has wrought for us, will be found the most full,
the most sweet, the most refreshing, the most comforting, and the most
satisfying evidences. Christ is all fair, all perfect, all pure, and therefore
let him be most in your eye, and most upon your hearts; but here take heed,
that you don't look upon your graces, or your gracious evidences, as poor, low,
weak, contemptible things (as too many do) for the least of them is more worth
than heaven and earth, and they may yield you much comfort, much support, much
refreshing, and much satisfaction; though they cannot yield you that full
comfort, nor that full satisfaction as Christ himself can yield, as Christ's
satisfaction can yield, as free justification can yield. Though children and
friends cannot yield to a Wife that full comfort, content, delight and
satisfaction as her Husband does, yet they may yield her much comfort, much
content, much delight, much satisfaction. The application is easy. But,

Secondly, Consider, That Christian that has free grace,

Thirdly, Trusting in our own duties, and resting on our spiritual, Isa. 58.1,
2, 3. Zech. 7.5, 6.
dangerous and unperceivable sin, which the nature of man is exceedingly prone
unto. The Pharisees were mightily given up to trust in their own righteousness,
to rest on their own righteousness, Mat. 6. chap. 23 Luke 18.
and to boast and glory in their own righteousness; and this proved their
mortal disease, their damning sin: trusting in their own righteousness had so
besotted and benumbed them, that they had no mind, no heart to open the gates
of their souls, that the King of glory might enter in. And this was that which
undid the Jews, Romans 10.3. For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and
going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves
to the righteousness of God. And it is observable, the Apostle uses an
emphatical word of a Jew, Romans 2.17. Thou restest in the Law, Look as there is
nothing more pleasing to Christ, than the renouncing of all confidence in our
own duties and righteousness; so there is nothing more provoking to Christ,
than the setting up of our own duties and righteousness. This is a secret
Imposthume that kills thousands.
(...), thou art secure in the Law, as in some admirable privilege and signal
testimony of Gods love. This was Bernards temptation, when being assisted in
duty he could stroke his own head with been fecisti Bernarde; O Bernard, this
was gallantly done, now cheer up thy self. It was the saying of a precious
Saint, That he was more afraid of his duties than of his sins, for the one made
him often proud, and the other made him always humble. It was good counsel
Luther gave, Cavendum est non solum a peccatis, sed a bonis operibus; We must
take heed not only of our sins, but of our good works. Duties can never have
too much diligence used about them, nor too little confidence placed in them;
they are good helps, but bad Saviors; it is necessary we do them, but it is
dangerous to rely upon them. If the devil cannot dissuade us from performing
Religious duties, then his next work will be to persuade us all he can to rely
upon them to make Saviors of them, because this will as much gratify Satan,
and as certainly ruin our souls, as if we had wholly neglected them. O man,
thine own righteousness rested in, will as certainly and eternally undo thee as
the greatest and foulest enormities. This soul-sickness is that spiritual
Idolatry that will undo thee, for thou make thy self a Savior, and thy
duties a Savior, and say of thy duties, as they did of the golden Calf;
These are the gods that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. Open wickedness,
open idolatry slayes her thousands, but secret idolatry, a secret resting upon
duties slayes her ten thousands; multitudes bleed inward by this disease, and
die for ever. Open profaneness is the broad dirty way that leads to hell, but
Religious duties rested in, is as sure a way, though a cleaner way to hell;
profane persons and formal Professors, shall meet at last in one hell. Ah
Christians! don't make Religious duties your money, lest you and your money
perish together. The Phoenix gathers sweet odoriferous sticks in Arabia
together, and then blows them with her wings and burns with them: So do many
shining Professors burn themselves with their own duties and services. You know
in Noah's flood, all that were not in the Ark, though they climb up the tallest
Trees, and the highest Mountains and Hills, yet were drowned: So let men climb
up to the highest duties, yet if they be not housed in Christ, and in his
righteousness, they will be as certainly damned, as the men in the old world
were certainly drowned. Adam and all his posterity was to be saved by doing; Do
this and live. And hence it is natural to all the sons and daughters of Adam to
rest on duties, and to look for life and happiness in a way of doing; but if
salvation were to be had by doing, what need of a Savior? Well, remember this
once for all, such as rest on duties, such as rest on their own righteousness,
or on any thing on this side Christ, such shall find them as weak as the
Assyrian, or as Jareb, they cannot heal them, they cannot cure them of their
wounds: Hos. 5.13.
When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound, then went Ephraim to
the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb, yet could they not heal him, nor cure him
of his wound. Duties are to Satan as the Ark of God was to the Philistines; he
trembles to see a soul diligent in the use of them, and yet not daring to rely
on them but on Christ; but when he can draw poor souls to confide in their
duties, and to rest on their duties, then he has his design, then he claps his
hands for joy, then he cries out, Ah, ah, so would I have it. There is no sin
that does so formally and immediately oppose Christ, and reject Christ, and
provoke Christ, as this of resting upon self-righteousness; and therefore above
all, pray against this, and watch against this, and weep over this. There is no
man in his wits that has a precious lading, that will dare to adventure it in
a cracked and broken vessel; so there is no Christian in his wits that will dare
to adventure the everlasting safety of his soul upon the leaking vessels and
bottoms of his own holiness or services. O Sirs! your duties cannot satisfy
the Justice of God, they cannot satisfy the Law of God; your present duties
cannot satisfy for your former sins and rents that be behind. A man that pays
his Rent honestly every year, does not thereby satisfy for the old Rent not
paid in ten or twenty years before. Thy new obedience, O Christian, is too weak
to satisfy for old debts, and therefore roll thy self on Christ, and Christ
alone for life and for salvation. Bellarmine could say after all his disputes
for relying on works, on Saints and Angels, Tutius est, etc. The safest way is
to rely on Jesus Christ. Now, let all these things work you to renounce your
own righteousness, and to take sanctuary alone in the pure, perfect, and most
glorious righteousness of Jesus Christ, and in the free grace of God. Austin.
Paul is called by one the best child of grace in the world; Ephesians. 3.8.
for whatsoever he was, or had, or did, he ascribes all to free grace; he was
the chiefest of the Apostles, and yet less than the least of all Saints; he was
very eminent in grace, and yet what he was, he was by grace. By the grace of
God I am what I am. He lived, yet not he, but Christ lived in him. 1 Cor.
15.10. Gal. 2.20. 1 Cor. 15.10. Phil. 4.13.
He labored more abundantly than they all, yet not he, but the grace of God
which was with him. He was able to do all things, but still through Christ that
strengthened him. O, that these three last things might work you to be more in
love with free grace than ever, and to be more in love with the righteousness
of Christ than ever, and to be more in love with the Covenant of grace than
ever. But,

and the more comfort, and the more assurance, and the more settlement, and the
more of the witness of the spirit of Adoption, such a person will certainly
attain unto. That Spirit which is the earnest of our inheritance, and which
seals us up to an holy assurance, is an holy Spirit; Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
he is frequently called the holy Spirit. Cast me not away from thy presence,
and take not thy holy Spirit from me. Psalm. 51.11. Isa. 63.10. Ephesians. 4.30. 1
These. 4.8.
But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit. And grieve not the holy Spirit of
God whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. H^ therefore that
despises, despises not man but God, who has also given unto us his holy
Spirit. To make a man holy, is more than to create a world, it is a work too
high, and too hard for Angels or men; it becomes none, and it can be done by
none but by the holy Spirit. Sanctification is the Spirits personal operation;
it is the great work of the Spirit to shape, 2 These. 2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2.
form and fashion the new creature holiness in all the vessels of glory. The
Spirit is the root of all holiness, and therefore the several parts of holiness
are called the fruits of the Spirit. Holiness is the very picture of God; Gal.
5.22.
and certainly no hand can carve that excellent picture but the Spirit of God.
Holiness is the Divine nature, and none can impart that to man but the Spirit;
the Spirit is the great principle of holiness. Now, the more grace, the more
holiness any man has, the more he is the delight of the Spirit; and the more
the Spirit will delight to witness his Sonship, his Saintship, and his Heirship
unto him. Scripture and experience will tell you, that commonly men of greatest
holiness have been men of greatest assurance. This is certain, the more
holiness the more assurance; for so the precious promises runs, Isa. 32.17. The
work of righteousness shall be peace (to wit, peace of conscience, Romans 5.1.)
and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. Inherent
righteousness (for of that he speaks, as is evident by the 15. and 16. verses
of the same Chapter) is the highway to assurance and peace. So Psalm. 50. ult.
To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God;
that is, declare my self to be his Savior, say some; say others, I will give
him a prospect of heaven here, and a full fruition of heaven hereafter; say
others, I will cause him to see and know that he shall be saved. So John 14.21.
He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he
that loves me shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and manifest
my self unto him. Ver. 23. If any man love me, he will keep my words, and my
father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with him.
Holy Christians shall have most of the spiritual presence of Christ, and of the
singular manifestations of the love of Christ to their souls. The great reason
of reasons why the springs of comfort, of joy, of inward peace, and of
assurance, rises no higher in many Christians souls, is because the springs of
grace and holiness rises no higher in their souls. Had Christians more grace,
and more holiness in their hearts and lives, God would quickly bring down more
of heaven and assurance into their souls. There is a blessed assurance (as I
have told you before) which arises from the discovery of grace in the soul.
Now, the more ample, large and full the matter of our assurance is, the more
ample, large and full must our assurance be. Methinks the connection of these
four verses in Titus 2.11, 12, 13, 14. shows this, When grace that appears to
us, teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, etc. See what follows,
then we are most likely to look for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And that prayer of the Apostle for his
Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.16, 17, 18
speaks as loudly in the case, That God would grant them to be strengthened by
the Spirit, etc. to be rooted and grounded in love. And what then? That ye may
comprehend with all Saints, the length and breadth of the love of God. Suppose
in health or sickness, living or dying, a man should labor to support, comfort
and cheer up his spirit, in the thoughts or meditations of his eternal election
and free justification. And suppose that at that very time the Spirit of God,
his own conscience, ^ These. 2.13, 14.
a faithful Minister, or an experienced Christian should tell him, That if he
be really justified, he is really sanctified. Now, if this man should say, What
do you tell me of sanctification, or I know not whether I am sanctified or no,
or I look not to sanctification, I mind not holiness, I regard not the fruits
of the Spirit; will not the holy Spirit, will not an enlightened conscience,
will not a faithful Minister, will not an experienced Christian reply, Then
certainly thou art not elected, thou art not justified, for it is a truth as
clear as the Sun, a truth that will admit of no dispute, viz. Rom 8.1, 13, 29,
30.
That none are eternally elected and freely justified, but they are sanctified;
and that they that are not sanctified, are not justified. Mark, there is a
closs connection of sanctification with justification in the promises of the
Covenant; sanctification and justification go hand in hand, they come forth
like twins out of the womb of free grace; as you may see in these remarkable
Scriptures, Jer. 33.8. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 37.
I will cleanse them from all their iniquity whereby they have sinned against
me, and I will pardon all their iniquities whereby they have sinned, and
whereby they have transgressed against me; Here you see them both expressed
together in the same deed, I will cleanse them from all their iniquity; there
is our sanctification promised. And I will pardon all their iniquities; there
is justification promised, So Mich. 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities, and
thou will c^st all their sins into the depths of the Sea. Here you find
justification and sanctification again in the promise. He will subdue our
iniquities; This is sanctifying. And he will cast all their sins into the
depths of the Sea; This is justifying. Heb. 8.10. I will put my Laws into their
minds, and write them in their hearts (there is the promise of sanctification)
V^r. 12. And I will be merciful to their unrighteousness and their sins, and
their iniquities will I remember no more; (There is the promise of
justification. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins; (There is our justification promised.) And to cleanse us
from a^l unrighteousness; (There is the promise of sanctification. Ezekiel. 36.25.
From all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you; (There is
the promise of sanctification) Ver. 29. I will also save you from all your
uncleanness; (There is the promise of justification) 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified. Justification and
sanctification are inseparable companions; distinguished they must be, but
divided they can never be; where sin is pardoned, the gift of sanctity is still
conferred. It Is weakness, it is wickedness for a man to conclude that he is in
an elected and justified estate when he has nothing, when he has not the least
thing to evidence himself to be in a sanctified estate: Both justification and
sanctification have a necessary respect to the salvation of all those that
shall go to heaven. He that will go to heaven must be sanctified, and he that
will go to heaven must be justified. No man can go to heaven without both; no
man can go to heaven unless he be justified, Romans 8.30. Whom he called, them
also he justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. None are
justified but such as are called, and none are glorified but such as are
justified. And as no man can go to heaven but he that is justified, so no man
can go to heaven but he that is sanctified, John 3.5. Jesus answered and said
unto him, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he
cannot see the kingdom of God. Ver. 5. Jesus answered, verily, verily, I say
unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God. See my Treatise on Holiness.
Heb. 12.14. And holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. By these
Scriptures it is evident, that there is an absolute necessity both of
sanctification and justification in reference to salvation. Now, as
sanctification and justification are linkt together; so the more clear, the
more full, the more evident, and the more eminent a man's sanctification is, the
more clear, the more full, the more evident and the more eminent will the
evidences of his justification be. The greatest evidences of our sanctification
carries with them the greatest assurance of our justification, and of our
salvation. But,

puts a luster and beauty upon them. This is most true of faith; faith is a
grace that gives strength and efficacy to all other graces, it is like a silver
thread that runs through a chain of pearl, it has an influence upon all other
graces that are in the soul; faith is as the spring in the watch that moves the
wheels, not a grace stirs till faith sets it at work. What is said of Solomon's
virtuous woman, viz. Prove. 31.15, 27 Heb. 11. Romans 4.3. and 8.24. Zech. 12.10.
That she sets all her Maidens to work, is most true of faith; faith sets all
the graces in the soul at work. We love as we believe, and we obey as we
believe, and we hope as we believe, and we joy as we believe, and we mourn as
we believe, and we repent as we believe; all graces keep time and pace with
faith, etc. Now when your graces are most shining, and your evidences for
heaven are most sparkling, O then, give faith elbow-room, give faith full scope
to exercise it self upon the Lord Jesus. Adams obedience to innocence was not
more pleasing and delightful to God, than the exercise of your faith on the
Lord Jesus will be at such a time pleasing and delightful to him; you are to
look upon all your graces and gracious evidences as your highest encouragement
to a lively, cheerful, 1 John 5.13. Romans 1.17.
and resolute acting of faith upon the person of Christ, the righteousness of
Christ, etc. All a Christians graces, and all his gracious evidences should be
but as a golden bridge, Genesis 45.19, 21, 27.
or as Joseph's wagons, a means to pass his soul over to Christ afresh by a
renewed exercise of faith. When your graces and gracious evidences are most
splendent, then be sure that Christ be found lying as a bundle of myrrh
between your breasts, and all is well, and will be well. Dear Christians, Cant.
1.12.
when your eyes are fixed upon inherent righteousness, Plutarch in the life of
Phocion tells us of a certain gentlewoman of Ionia who showed the wife of
Phocion all the rich jewels and precious stones she had: She answered her
again, all my riches and jewels is my Husbands. This is more applicable to
Christ, etc. The precious stone Opalum (is said) to have the virtue of all
stones; the brightness of the Carbuncle, the purple color of the Amethist, the
amiable greenness of the Emerald; but what are all these to Christ.
and upon your gracious evidences, then let your hearts be firmly fixed upon the
Lord Jesus Christ and his imputed righteousness. Paul's eye was fixed upon his
grace, upon his better part, Romans 7.22. I delight in the Law of God after the
inward man. Ver. 25. And with my mind I serve the Law of God. And yet at the
very same time his heart was set upon Christ, and taken up with Christ. Ver.
25. I thank God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Though Paul had an eye to his
noble part, his better part, his regenerate part; yet at the same time his
heart was taken up with the Lord Jesus Christ as freeing of him from the curse
of the Law, the dominion of sin, the damnatory power of sin, and as translating
of him into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. I thank God through our
Lord Jesus Christ. So in Col. 2.2, 3. You have their eyes fixed upon grace, and
at the same time their hearts fixed upon Christ; That their hearts might be
comforted being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full
assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of
the father and of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. Their eyes were upon grace, but their hearts were taken up with
Christ. So in Phil. 3.8. The Apostle had his eye upon the excellent knowledge
of Christ. But Ver. 9. his heart is taken up with the righteousness of Christ.
That I might be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of
the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which
is of God by faith. Though Paul had his eye upon grace, upon inherent
righteousness; yet in the very presence of his grace his heart was taken up
with Christ, and with his imputed righteousness, as is evident in the Text.
This is your glory Christians, in the presence and sight of all your graces and
gracious evidences, to see the free grace of Christ and his infinite, spotless,
matchless and glorious righteousness to be your surest, sweetest, highest and
choicest comfort and refuge. Look as Rebkekah was more taken with the person of
Isaac than she was with his earrings, Genesis 24.30, 53, 64, 65, 66, 67.
bracelets, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold: So it becomes a Christian in
the presence of his graces and gracious evidences (which are Christ's earrings,
bracelets and jewels) to be* more taken up with Christ than with them. He that
holds not wholly with Christ, does very shamefully neglect Christ. Aut totum
mecum tene, aut totum omit, Grego Nazien.
Christ and his Mediatory righteousness should be more in a Christians eye, and
always lie nearer to a Christians heart, than inherent righteousness. Grace is
a ring of gold, and Christ is the sparkling diamond in that ring. Now, what is
the ring to the sparkling diamond? It Is not safe to pore more upon inherent
righteousness than upon imputed righteousness. It Is not wisdom to have our
thoughts and hearts more taken up with our gracious dispositions and gracious
actings, than with the person of Christ, the righteousness of Christ, the life
of Christ, the death of Christ, the satisfaction of Christ, etc. Dear
Christians, was it Christ, or was it your graces, or your gracious evidences,
or your gracious dispositions, or your gracious actings, that trod the
wine press of your Fathers wrath, that satisfied divine justice, that pacified
divine anger, that did bear the curse, that fulfilled the Law, that brought in
an everlasting righteousness, that discharged your debts, that procured you
pardon, that made your peace, and that brought you into a state of favor and
friendship with God? If you answer (as you must) none but Christ, none but
Christ; O then, let your thoughts and hearts be firstly, mostly, chiefly and
lastly taken up with the Lord Jesus. Though inherent grace be a glorious
creature, yet it is but a creature. Now, when your thoughts and hearts are more
taken up with inherent grace, than they are with Christ the spring and fountain
of all grace; you make an idol of inherent grace, John 1.16. Col. 2.2, 3.
and reflect dishonor upon the Lord Jesus. A Christian may lawfully look upon
his graces and his gracious evidences, and a Christian ought to be much in
blessing and praising of God for his graces and gracious evidences, and a
Christian may safely take comfort in his graces and gracious evidences as they
are the fruits of God's eternal and unchangable love, Isa. 38.3. 2 Cor. 1.12.
but still his work should be to live upon Christ, and to lift up Christ above
all. It Is Christ, it is his Mediatory righteousness, it is free grace that a
Christian ought to make the chief and only ground and bottom of his hope and
comforts. Though good old Jacob did really rejoice in the chariots and wagons
that Joseph had sent to bring him down to Egypt, Genesis 45.26, 27, 28.
yet he did more abundantly rejoice in this, that Joseph was alive, and that
shortly he should see and enjoy Joseph himself. Though a Christian may really
rejoice in his graces and gracious evidences, yet above all he ought to rejoice
in Christ Jesus, to triumph in Christ Jesus, Gal. 6.14. Phil. 3.3. 2 Cor. 2.14.
Col. 3.11.
and to take up in Christ Jesus as in his great all. There is a great aptness
and proness in many (may I not say in most) gracious Christians, to gaze so
much and so long upon their graces, upon their gracious dispositions, upon
their gracious evidences, and upon their gracious actings, that too often they
neglect the exercise of faith upon Christ, upon the promises; they gaze so much
and so long upon what is wrought in them, and done by them, that they forget
their grand work, which is immediate closing with Christ, immediate embracing
of Christ, immediate relying upon Christ, immediate staying, rolling, and
resting upon Christ, for justification and salvation. Now, from these frequent
miscarriages of Christians, some have taken the liberty and boldness very hotly
and peremptorily to cry down the total use of all characters, signs and marks,
the evil of which I have formerly pointed at, and therefore let this touch
suffice here. Grace is excellent, yea very excellent, but Christ is infinitely
more excellent than all your graces, and therefore above all let Christ still
have the pre-eminence. Col. 1.18.
Now, though it must be granted that a Christian may lawfully make use of his
graces and gracious evidences in order to his support, comfort and
encouragement, yet it cannot be denied but that the noblest, purest, highest
and most excellent acts and exercises of faith, Cant. 8.5. Job 13.15. Psalm.
42.5, 11. Isa. 50.10. Mic. 7.7, 8, 9, 10 John 20.27, 28, 29.
are when a Christian closes with Christ, embraces Christ, hangs upon Christ,
and stays himself upon Christ, and upon free and precious promises, when sense
and feeling fails, when joy and comfort fails, and when his gracious evidences
for heaven fails. O now, to turn to Christ, and to turn to the breasts of a
promise, and to live upon Christ, and to hang upon a promise, is the way of
ways to exalt Christ, and to glorify Christ; there is nothing that pleases
Christ, or that delights Christ, or that is such an honor to Christ, as these
pure actings of faith are. Signs and evidences, are most sweet, comfortable and
pleasing to us; but the pure actings of faith are most eyed and valued by
Christ, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 5.3, 4, 5, 6.
and therefore many times Christ draws a curtain between him and the soul, and
causes a Christians Sun to set at noon, and damps his joy, and marrs his peace,
and clouds his evidences for heaven, on purpose to train up his children in the
pure actings of faith. It Is sad when Christians make such immoderate use of
their signs, marks, evidences, as damps and hinders those direct and immediate
acts of faith, whereby they should receive Christ, and apply Christ, and rest
upon Christ alone for pardon, peace, reconciliation, justification and
salvation; he that pores so long and so much upon his graces or gracious
evidences as shall hinder him from the fresh and frequent actings of faith upon
Christ, he casts contempt upon Christ. Christ is an incomparable cordial, he is
worthily called the consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25.
Though the sight of a Christians graces and gracious evidences be very
comfortable and delightful to him, yet the sight of Christ should be ten
thousand times more comfortable and delightful to him. O Sirs! what are the
favorites to the King himself? What are the servants to the Lord they wait on?
what are the friends of the Bridegroom to the Bridegroom himself? what are all
the bracelets and jewels to the Husband that gives them? no more are all a
Christians graces or gracious evidences to the Lord Jesus himself. A Christian
should say to all his gifts, graces, evidences and services, Stand by, make
room for Christ, make room for Christ. Oh! none but Christ; Oh! none to Christ.
Living by signs is most natural, pleasing and comfortable to us, but living by
faith is most honorable to Christ. It is said, the just shall live by his
faith, not by his evidences. Hab. 2.4. Heb. 10.38.
When men pride themselves in their evidences, and when men secretly lean upon
their evidences instead of leaning upon Christ, and when men bottom their hopes
and comforts upon their signs and evidences, when they should be bottoming of
all their hopes and comforts upon Christ; on a sudden Christ withdraws, and the
soul is immediately filled with clouds, fears, doubts, darkness; and all a man's
graces and gracious evidences are eclipsed, and he can see nothing, nor feel
nothing, but deadness, hardness, barrenness, hypocrisy, unbelief, self-love,
guilt, etc. which makes him a Magor-Missabib, a terror to himself. Now the
design of Christ in all this is to train up his people in a life of faith, and
to teach them in the want of their signs and evidences, Col. 3.3, 4. Col. 1.27.
how to live above their signs and evidences upon himself, who is their life,
their hope, their heaven, their happiness, their all. Now Christians, the best
way to prevent these sore soul-distresses, is in the moderate use of your signs
and evidences, to live much in the fresh and frequent actings of faith upon the
Lord Jesus, and in so doing, you will neither grieve Christ, nor provoke Christ
nor wrong your own precious and immortal souls. But,

Sirtorius paid what he promised with fair words, Plutarch. But so does not
God; men may eat their words, but God will not eat his.
and cling fast to such particular promises, that have been comforts, cordials
and supports to many weak, doubting, trembling Christians, who have been
always afraid to say they had grace, or to say that God was their Father, or
Christ their Redeemer, or the Spirit their Sanctifier, or Heaven their
Inheritance, etc. I have read of a woman that was much disquieted in
conscience, even to despair, endeavoring to be her own executioner, but was
comforted by that blessed promise, Isa. 57.15. For thus says the high and
lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and
holy place; with him also that is of an humble and contrite spirit, to revive
the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. And I
have read of another man, who being ready to dye; Lord, says he, I challenge
thee by that promise, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest, and so was comforted. And I have read of
some others that were comforted with that promise, ^^rsin. and Beza.
John 10.29. None shall pluck them out of my fathers hand. And I have read of
another, who having deeply wounded his conscience by subscribing to Popish
errors, was much comforted by that blessed Scripture, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. And I have read of another, Mr.
Bilney the Martyr, Psalm. 51.17. A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou thou will not despise. This promise was a cordial to Bernard on his dying bed, he
dyed with this promise in his mouth. And Austin found so much sweetness in the
same promise, that he caused it to be written on the wall over against his bed
where he lay sick and dyed.
who was much comforted under sore distresses by that promise, Isa. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace (or as the Hebrew runs, Shalom, Shalom, peace,
peace) whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. And many have
gone to heaven triumphantly by the refreshing and comfort that they have found
in these following Scriptures, John 6.37. All that the father gives me shall
come to me, and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Isa. 55.1.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money,
come ye, buy and eat, yea come buy wine and milk without money, and without
price. Ver. 3. Incline your ear and come unto me, hear and your soul shall
live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies
of David. And so Rev. 22.17. And the Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him
that hears say come, and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will let
him take the water of life freely. So Hos. 14.4. I will heal their
backslidings, and love them freely. So Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that
blotteth out thy trangressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy
sins. Isa. 57.18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him; I will lead him
also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners. Ver. 19. I create the
fruit of the lips; peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is
near, says the Lord, and I will heal him. O, these have been comforting
promises, and upholding promises, and refreshing promises, The promises are
pabulum fidei, etc. anima fidei, the food of faith, and the soul of faith.
to many doubting, drooping souls. It Is impossible that such a soul should ever
drop into hell, that can cling fast to any of these promises, that can hang
upon any of these promises, that can rest and lay the weight of their souls
upon Christ in any of these promises: Doubtless relyance upon Christ in these
precious promises has ferried many poor, doubting, trembling souls to heaven.
The promise is the golden Cabinet, and Christ is the costly jewel that is laid
up in it. The promise is the field, and Christ is the pearl of price that is
hid in it; all the promises they point to Christ, they lead to Christ, they
hang upon Christ; 2 Cor. 1.20.
All the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen. In the new Covenant,
God neither makes any promises, nor fulfils any promises of salvation, but in
Christ and through Christ. Now when any fears, or darkness, or doubts, or
disputes arises in your souls about your spiritual estates, Oh! then run to
Christ in the promise, and plead the promise, and hang upon the breasts of the
promise, and let your souls cleave closs to the promise; for this is the way of
ways to have your evidences cleared, your comforts restored, your peace
maintained, your graces strengthened, and your assurance raised and confirmed.

FINIS.
Books Printed and are to be sold by John Hankock, at his Shop over against
Gresham College, in Bishopsgate-street, next to the White Lion at Great St.
Hellins Gate, and at the first Shop in Popes-head-Alley next to Cornhil, at the
Sign of the Three Bibles.
ELeven Books lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the
Gospel at Margarets New-Fish-Street.

1 Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices: Or, Salve for Believers and
Unbelievers sores; being a companion for those that are in Christ, or out of
Christ, that slight or neglect Ordinances, under a pretense of living above
them; that are growing in spirituals, or decaying; that are tempted, or
deserted; afflicted, or opposed; that have assurance, or want it; on 2 Cor.
2.11.

2 Heaven on Earth: Or, A serious Discourse touching a well grounded Assurance
of man's everlasting happiness and blesse^^ess; discovering the nature of
assurance, the possibility of attaining it, the Causes, Springs and Degrees of
it, with the resolution of several weighty Questions on the 8. of the Romans,
32, 33, 34. verses.

3 The unsearchable Riches of Christ: Or, Meat for strong Men, and Milk for
Babes, held forth in two and twenty Sermons, from Ephesians. 3.8. Preached on his
Lecture-nights at Fish-street-hill.

4 His Apples of Gold for young Men and and Women; And A Crown of Glory for Old
men and Women: Or the Happiness of being Good betimes, and the Honor of being
an Old Disciple, clearly and fully discovered, and closely and faithfully
applied. With the young man's objections answered, and the old man's doubts
resolved.

5 A String of Pearls: Or, The best things reserved till last, delivered in a
Sermon Preached in London, June 8. 1657. at the Funeral of (that Triumphant
Saint) Mrs. Mary Blake, late Wife to his worthy Friend Mr. Nicholas Blake,
Merchant.

6 The Mute Christian; with Sovereign Antidotes against the most miserable
Exigents: Or, A Christian; with an Olive-leaf in his mouth, when he is under
the greatest afflictions, the sharpest and sorest trials and troubles, the
saddest and darkest providence and changes: with Answers to diverse Questions
and Objections that are of great importance; all tending to win and work souls
to be still, quiet, calm, and silent, under all changes, that have, or that may
pass upon them in ^his world, etc. Lately printed and dedicated to all
afflicted, distressed, dissatisfied, disquieted, and discomposed Christians
throughout the world.

7 An Ark for all Gods Noah's in a stormy day. Wherein is showed the
transcendent excellency of a Believers portion; on Lament. 3.24.

8 The Crown and Glory of Christianity: Or, Holiness the only way to Happiness,
discovered in 48. Sermons on Heb. 12.14.

9 The Privy Key of Heaven: Or, A Discourse of Closet-Prayer, Twenty Arguments
for it, with the resolution of several Questions, etc.

10. A Heavenly Cordial for all that have had, or have escaped the Plague, etc.

11 Newly published, A Cabinet of choice Jewels; or, a Box of precious
Ointment. Being a plain Discovery of what men are worth for Eternity, and how
it is like to go with them in another World.

There is now in the Press a New Treatise written by Mr. Thomas Brooks, called,
Londons Lamentations: Or, A sober serious discourse concerning the late fiery
dispensation, wherein the procuring causes, and the final causes of that
dreadful dispensation are laid open, with the duties that are incumbent, both
upon those who have been burnt up, and upon those who have escaped those
consuming flames; with thirteen supports, to bear up the hearts of such as have
been sufferers: Here are many great Objections answered, and many weighty
Questions resolved; and variety of Arguments to prove, that a little that the
righteous man has, is better than the riches of the wicked; with several other
points of grand importance, all tending to the cooling, quieting, settling,
refreshing, upholding and comforting of all that have been sufferers by the
late fiery calamity.

The Godly Man's Ark: Or,

City of Refuge, in the day of his distress, discovered in diverse Sermons. The
first of which was Preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Moor.

Whereunto are annexed Mrs. Moors Evidences for Heaven, composed and collected
by her in the time of her health, for her comfort in the time of sickness. By
Edmund Calamy, B. D. and Pastor of the Church at Aldermanbury.

A Book of Short-Writing, the most easy, exact, lineal, and speedy method,
fitted to the meanest capacity: composed by Master Theophilus Metcalf,
Professor of the said Art.

Also a Schoolmaster, explaining the Rules of the said Book, with many new
additions, very useful.

Another Book of Shorthand, by Tho. Cross.

A Copy-book of the newest and most useful Hands, with Rules whereby those that
can read, may quickly learn to write: To which is added, brief directions for
true spelling and Cyphering, and making diverse sorts of Ink.

There is now in the Press, ready to be published, an excellent new Book of Mr.
Ralph Vennings, entitled, Sin the Plague of Plagues; or, Sinful ^on the worst
^f Evils.

All Printed for, and are to be sold by John Hancock at the first Shop in
Popes-Head-Alley in Cornhil, at the sign of the three Bibles, or at his Shop in
Bishops-Gate-Street, near great St. Hellins, over against Gresham-Colledge,
1669.

FINIS.

