THREE SPEECHES Spoken in GVILD-HALL, Concerning His Majesty's refusal of a
Treaty of Peace, and what is to be done thereupon.

Two of them spoken by the Lord Brook, and one by Sir Henry Vane, on Tuesday
the 8. of Novem. 1642.

ALSO, VOTES Of the Houses of PARLIAMENT, made on Monday the 7. of Novem. And
read in Guild Hall on Tuesday the 8. of Novem. 1642.

LONDON: Printed by I. F. for Peter Cole, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Gloye and Lion, near the Royall-Exchange. 1642.

The Lord BROOK his Speech.
MY Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and the rest of the Gentlemen all here assembled,
I am to deliver a Message to you from the Lords and Commons now assembled in
Parliament; but before I shall do that, shall crave leave to excuse something
that has happened: There should have been diverse Lords, and some Gentlemen of
the House of Commons here, far fitter to have done this work, that is now put
upon me, if they could possibly have attended the service, that were appointed
by the House, as the Lord General of the Horse, the Earl of Bedford, and some
other Lords, but you will all conceive, that they being all men employed in the
Army, they could not attend this your service, but they are about your service,
and the good of the Kingdom, which is giving order for your safety, and theirs;
and therefore I hope you will take it in good part, that there is no other
appearance here. Gentlemen, that I have to say to you, in short is this, I
suppose at this time of action, you will not expect long prefacings; if you do,
I am the unfitteast man in the world to do it: I shall therefore shortly
deliver my Message; I doubt not but you have heard some whisperings of an
Accommodation, no doubt of that, and no man that is an honest man, a Religious
man, a Freeman, that loves Religion, and the Kingdom, but would have an
Accommodation, for nothing is more miserable, and nothing is more distracting
then War, but that an Accommodation should come upon terms ignoble, and
disadvantagious, that never was in the thought of either House; and I hope
never will be; And I am to tell you, never shall be: I am at this time to
entreat you, in the name of both the Houses of Parliament, to go on
courageously, and fight, and prepare your selves for that that is at hand; we
hear, the Enemies approach nearer every day, who aim at nothing else, but to
swallow up our Religion, Lives, Liberties, and Estates, and therefore it
becomes you to labor to defend them all. I have more to say, but it is better
said here, they are the Votes of the House of the Lords and Commons, I desire
they should be read unto you, and therein you will fully understand what their
sense is, Monday, 7. November. 1642.
The question being put, Whether a safe Conduct shall be accepted upon these
terms? It past with the Negative.




Lord BROOKS. THat was in the House of Commons, the meaning of this Vote is,
There was a safe Conduct sent by His Majesty, to six persons; two of the House
of Lords, viz. The Earl of Pembroke, and the Earl of Northumberland; and four
of the House of Commons; among these there was one Sir John Evelin of
Wiltshire, the King would not let him have a safe Conduct, because he was one
that was named by him a Traitor the day before, and that was (as is thought)
done on purpose to take him off from being one; therefore the House of Commons
did look upon that, as that he could not have a safe Conduct: This Vote of
theirs was presented to the House of the Lords, and they concurred with it.

Resolved upon the Question;

That this House holds that to be a denial of His Majesty, and a refusal to
grant a Treaty to the Parliament, in excepting against one of the messengers
that was to present a Petition to His Majesty from both Houses to that purpose,
and denying to grant them a safe conduct.

Resolved upon the Question;

That Committees of both Houses shall be appointed to go to the City of London,
to acquaint the Common Hall with all the ways the Parliament has used to
procure a Treaty for a peace, and could not effect it, and to quicken them to a
resolution of defending and maintaining their Liberties, and their Religion,
with their Lives and Fortunes; and that they have appointed a Committee to
prepare a Declaration upon this denial of His Majesty, to admit such members
as were appointed by both House to Present a Petition to His Majesty for a
Treaty, and of His Majesty's expressing his willingness to receive a Petition
from the Rebels in Ireland.


Lord BROOKS. Here is one thing more (Gentlemen) that is worth your taking
notice of, this is so well said, I shall not need to say it over again, only
here in the latter end you see, there is a Committee appointed to come hither
to give you an account of the reasons mooving them on to this action, and to
show you all the ways they have used (if it were possible) to have procured a
Treaty for a peace: Only here is one thing in the end is very remarkable,
which you may very well take notice of, His Majesty will not, but upon terms
altogether unfitting, accept of any Treaty from us, but at the same time is
willing to receive a Petition from the Rebels in Ireland; We are no Rebels,
but dutiful in all we do, they are Rebels and Traitors in the judgment of
all men, and yet he will receive no Petition from us, but He will receive a
Petition from them.


Sir HENRY VANE junior his Speech.
MY Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, and the rest of the Gentlemen here assentbled, it
is not unknown to you, with what difficulties, with what dangers both Houses of
Parliament have a long time conflicted, for to bring the Liberties, and the
Religion, and the welfare of this Kingdom into such a posture, as might give
all the Inhabitants thereof full satisfaction: It is not unknown likewise, how
busy the Enemies of this great work have been, to cast Scandals, to cast false
Aspersions upon the proceedings, upon the carriages of Parliament; They
therefore thought fit (that they might undeceive all persons of the greatest
malice, and of the greatest opposition, of their endeavors) not long since to
frame a Petition, a Petition full of humility, a Petition full of modesty,
whereby they did desire His Majesty, that they might apply themselves to make
Propositions to him, as might effect this great work: This Petition, that it
might be delivered, they thought fit for to name (as this Noble Lord has told
you) six persons, two of the Lords house, and four of the house of Commons; men
that they though altogether without the least scruple, without the least
exceptions, knowing that nothing in the carriage of these perfons could render
them liable to exception, but their duty, and their observance to the Commands
of both houses; when that these persons, the Names of them were sent to his
Majesty, for to have safe Conduct, immediately, I think the very day before,
there came out a Proclamation against one of them, excepting him out of the
grace and favor of his Majesty, (as it is termed) and laying him in the
condition of a Rebel, and of a Traitor against him, for the obedience, and the
observance of that he had performed to the Commands of Parliament: This being
brought to both houses, they looked at it as a business of such great
importance, that if they should suffer any one Member, or any one person, that
through his dutifulness and observing of their Commands, should lie under a
cloud with his Majesty, should not be admited to his presence, but be looked at
in such a condition, as this Proclamation put him in; they looked at it as the
greatest indignity, and the greatest calumny that could befall a Parliament,
and the greatest discouragement that should lie upon all men to stand to a
Parliament, if they should not be defended and protected. Hereupon they
resolved to declare, that the unwillingnesse lay not in them to make peace, but
it lay in that ill Counsel, and that desperate Counsel that has hemmed in
his Majesty, and will not suffer such points, will not suffer such Propositions
as these to take effect with him, but will labor to destroy all the Estates
and Properties, and all that is near and dear to you in this Kingdom; therefore
the house of Commons have thought it fit to acquaint you with these
proceedings, to let you know how careful they are by all good ways, and by
all good means to present their loyalty, and duty to his Majesty, to take care
of themselves, and all that belongs to you; but when they see all will not take
effect, they doubt not but you will ioyn cordially, and ioyn resolutely, with
your purses, with your endeavors, and all that lies in your power, to acquit
your selves like men, to defend your selves, to defend them that have labored
in your work, in your cause, and who are willing to spend their lives and blood
in your service to the utmost man; therefore they desire this of you, that
since they have taken this care, that you will hearken to no Reports that shall
tend to the disparagement of their proceedings; but will unanimously concur, to
defend your selves against that violence and oppression, that is now almost at
your doors; and this is that we have to recommend to you.


The Lord BROOKS his Speech.
GEntlemen I have but one word more to trouble you with; This Noble Gentleman
Sir Henry Vane has expresst so fully all that was in the message, that truly I
should wrong him and my self too, if I should say any more; therefore I shall
now s^eake to you of another thing it ^ is not fit any thing concerns you
should be concealed from you: I came this day to this place, to this house
about another business, I have already communicated to my Lord Mayor, and the
Aldermen, and the Committee, I think it will not be unfit you should know it; I
have the consent of some that understand this business very well to this I now
shall do; Gentlemen the message was this, it was a message from his
Excellency, it is to let you know how near the danger is at hand, that so you
may gird up the loins of your Resolution, and do l^ke men of courage;
Gentlemen, Citizens of London, (better then whom, no man did in that Army we
had abroad) the Enemies, the Foot as we understand are very near Stains, the
horse they are about Kingston, we cannot tell you that all are there, but ^^at
there are both horse and foot too, and it is certain our foot are going to it,
so that the question is now, what is to be done? certainly, this is a certain
truth among all Soldiers, that you mnst keep evil as far off you as you
can, you must not let it come near your doors, you must not think to fight in
the sights, and tears, and eyes, and d'stractions of your wives and children,
but to go out, and meet it valiantly as you have done: God has showed himself
a God of love and mercy, and truly we must give him all the honor of that day,
certainly it is the greatest Victory that ever was gotten: near 2000. (I love
to speak with the least) on their side slain; and I am confident not 100 on
our side, unless you will take in women and children, Carmen and dogs (for
they slew the very dogs and all) if you take in women children and Carmen and
dogs, then they slew about 200. But that a 100 should be slain on one side, and
2000. on the other side, is a very miraculous thing; he that dealt so
wonderfully heretofore, it were to distrust him, if we did not think he would
do so again. Truly he has a people among us exceedingly beloved, and what is
it we fight for? it is for our Religion, for God, for liberty and all, and what
is it they fight for? for their lust, their will, for tyrranny, to make us
slaves, and to overthrow all; Gentlemen, me thinks I see a face, and spy you
ready to do any thing, and the Generals Resolution is, to go out to morrow,
and do as a man of courage and resolution, and never man did like him, for he
was not only General, but Common Soldier, for he led up his own Regiment, and
he led up his own Troop with his own person, and when the left Troops of horse
deceived him, he brought up the right Troops; he himself will go out again and
do again as much as he has done, and all this is for your sakes, for he can be
a freeman, he can be a Gentleman, he can be a great man, go where he will,
therefore it is only for your sakes; he is resolved to go out tomorow, his
forces are weary, his forces are spent, some came but last night into town,
some marched 20 miles march which is a great march (as some that know what it
is can tell) but as weary as they are, he is resolved to go out, but if you
will affect the cause, and join with him, hand and heart and sword, he will
take it for a savor, but if you will not he doubts not but Gideons sword will
do the work alone; I speak not it that I doubt you, but that you would
resolve, that when you here the drums beat, (for it is resolved that the drums
shall beat to morrow, our drums shall beat to lead out our men, and the
Committees drums shall beat to lead out their men) say not (I beseech you) I am
not of the Trained-band, nor this, nor that, but doubt not to go out to work
and fight courageously, and this shall be the day of your deliverance.


FINIS.

