Paradise opened, OR THE SECREETS, MYSTERIES, AND RARITIES Of Divine Love, of
Infinite Wisdom, and of Wonderful Counsel, laid open to Public View.

ALSO The Covenant of Grace, and the high and glorious Transactions of the
Father and the Son in the Covenant of Redemption opened, and improved at large,
with the Resolution of diverse important Questions and Cases concerning both
Covenants.

YOU HAVE FURTHER, Several singular Pleas, that all sincere Christians may
safely and groundedly make to those Ten Scriptures in the Old and New
Testament, that speak of the general Judgment, and of that particular Judgment,
that must certainly pass upon them all after Death.

With some other Points of high Importance, that tend to the Peace, Comfort,
Settlement and Satisfaction of all serious sincere Christians.

To which is added a sober and serious Discourse, about the Favorable, Signal
and Eminent Presence of the Lord with his People in their greatest Troubles,
deepest Distresses, and most deadly Dangers.

Being the Second and Last Part of the Golden Key.

By Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel, at Margarets New-Fishstreet.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultry and at
the Ship and Anchor at the Bridg-foot on Southwark-side, 1675.

To his honored Friends, Sir John More, Knight and Alderman of the City of
London, and to his good Lady, Mary More, his most affectionate Consort.
The Father of all mercies, and the God of all blessings, bless you both with
Grace and Peace here, and Glory hereafter.
Honored Friends:
CHristian Friendship makes such a knot, that great Its the saying of
Euripides, that a faithful Friend is better than a calm Sea to a weather beaten
Mariner.
Alexander cannot cut. It was well observed by Sir Francis Bacon, That old wood
is best to burn, and old Books best to read, and old Friends best to trust. It
was a witty saying of the Duke of Buckingham to Bishop Monton, in Richard the
III. his time, Faithful Friends (says he) are in this age for the most part
gone all in pilgrimage, and their return is uncertain. They seem to take away
the Sun out of the World (said the Heathen Orator) who take away friendship
from the life of men, and we do not more need fire and water then true
Friendship. In this Epistle I shall endeavor so to acquit my self, as becomes
a real Friend, a cordial Friend, a faithful* Friend, and a Soul-friend, as to
your great and everlasting concernments, that it may go well with you for ever
and ever.

Sir, the points that are handled in this following Treatise (and in the first
part) are of as high, choice, necessary, noble, useful and comfortable a
nature, as any that can be treated on by mortal man. The four things which God
minds most and loves most, are, 1. His honor. 2. His worship. 3. His People.
4. His truth. Surely their souls must needs be of a very sad complexion, who
can read the great truths that are here opened and applied, and not, 1. Dearly
love them. 2. Highly prize them. 3. Cordially bless God for them. 4. Seriously
ponder and meditate upon them. 5. And not frequently and diligently study them,
and make a gracious and daily improvement of them.

The Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of Redemption are a rich Armory, out of
which you may furnish your selves with all sorts of spiritual weapons,
wherewith you may encounter Satan's temptations, wiles, devices, methods,
depths, stratagems. Nothing of Satan's Ephesians. 6. 11. 2 Cor. 2. 11. Revel. 2. 24.
can stand before the Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of Redemption, well
understood and well applied.

In the Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of Redemption, 2 Samuel 23. 5. Isa.
54. 9, 10. Jer. 32. 38, 39, 40, 41. Zach. 9. 11. Heb. 13. 20.
that is past betwixt God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, you will find
many rich and rare cordials, which have a strong tendency to preserve all
gracious souls from desponding and fainting, 1. In times of afflictions. 2. In
times of temptations. 3. In times of desertion 4. In times of sufferings for
Christ's sake and the Gospels sake. 5. In times of opposition. 6. And at the
time of death and dissolution; There are no comforts nor cordials that can
reach the souls of Christians in their deep distresses, but such as flow from
these two Covenants, the more it concerns all such Christians to study these
two Covenants, and to be well acquainted with them, that so they may the more
readily have recourse to such cordials, as their present estate and condition
calls for.

In these two Covenants you will find much matter, which has a strong tendency,
1. To inflame your* love to God and Christ, and all in the Covenant of Grace.
Psalm. 116. 1. 9. 16. Psalm 3. 2 Samuel 23. 5. Psalm. 103. 17, 8. Psalm. 111. 5, 9,
17. Genesis 1. 2. 2 Cor. 2. 14. Galat. 6. 14.
2. To strengthen your faith. 3. To raise your hopes. 4. To cheer your souls.
5. To quiet and satisfy your consciences. 6. To engage you to a close and holy
walking with God. 7. To provoke you to triumph in free grace, and in the Lord
Jesus Christ. 8. To sit loose from this world. The riches and Treasures that
are wrapped up in both these Covenants, are so great, so sure, so durable, and so
suitable to all believers, as may well deaden their Revt 12. 1.
hearts, to all the riches and glories of this lower world.

In these two Covenants every sincere Christian will find, 1. A special salve
for every spiritual sore. 2. A special remedy against every spiritual malady.
3. A special plaster against every spiritual wound. 4. A spiritual magazene to
supply all their spiritual wants, and 5. A spiritual shelter under every
spiritual storm. In these two Covenants you will find food to nourish you, a
staff to support you, a guide to lead you, a fire to warm you, and springs of
life to cheer and refresh you.

In this Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of Redemption, 'Twas the saying of
an eminent Saint on his Deathbed, that he had much peace, and quietness not so
much, from a greater measure of grace than other Christians had, or from any
immediate witness of the spirit, but because, he had a more clear understanding
of the Covenant of Grace than many others, having studied it, and preached it so
many years as he had done.
you may clearly see the wisdom, counsel, love and transactions between the
Father and the Son sparkling and shining, there being nothing under Heaven that
contributes more to the peace, comfort, assurance, settlement and satisfaction
of sincere Christians than such a sight, the main reason why so many gracious
souls are so full of fears, doubts, darkness and disputes about their internal
and eternal estates, is because they have no more clear and full understanding
of these two Covenants; and if such Christians would but more seriously buckle
to the study of those two covenants, as they are opened and applied in the
following Treatise, their fears and doubts, etc. would quickly vanish, and they
would have their triumphant songs, their mourning would soon be turned into
rejoicing, and their complaints into Hallelujahs. Neither do I know any thing
in all this world that would contribute more to seriousness, spiritualness,
heavenlyness, humbleness, holiness and fruitfulness, then a right understanding
of these two Covenants, and a Divine improvement of them. There are many choice
Christians, who have always either tears in their eyes, complaints in their
mouths, or sighs in their breasts; and O, that these above all others would
make these two Covenants their daily Companions! Let these few kinds suffice
concerning the following Treatise.

Now, Sir John, I shall crave leave to put you and your Lady a little, in mind
of your deceased and glorified Father. He is a true Friend (says the Smyrnean
Poet of Ponder upon that Deuteronomy. 13. 6. Thy friend which is as thine own soul.
old) who continues the memory of his deceased Friend. When a Friend of
Austin's dyed, he professed he was put into a great straight, whether he
himself should be willing to live or willing to dye: he was unwilling to live,
because one half of himself was dead, yet he was not willing to dye, because
his Friend did partly live in him, though he was dead. Let you and I make the
application as we see cause; your glorified Fathers Name and Memory remains to
this day as fresh and fragant as the Rose of Sharon, among all those that fear
the Lord, and Cant. 2. ^.
had the happiness of inward acquaintance with him. The memory of the just is
blessed, but the name of the wicked shall not; In the Original it is, The
memory of the just Prove. 10. 7. M^moria just (...), So Bat^. (...) benam (...)
servasso, (...), Plant. If I may but keep a good Name, I have wealth e(...),
says the Heathen.
(...) in benedictionem, shall be for a blessing; the very remembering of them
shall bring a blessing to such as do remember them. The Moralists say of Fame,
or of a man's good Name: Omnia si perdas famam servare memento,
Qua semel amissa postea nullus eris.
i. e. Whatsoever commodity you lose, be sure yet to preserve that Heb. 11. 1^,
39. A good renown is better than a golden Girdle, says the French Proverb.
jewel of a good Name. This jewel among others, your honored Father carried
with him to the Grave, yea to Heaven. There is nothing raises a man's Name and
Fame in the World like holiness: The seven Deacons that the Church chose, were
holy men, Act. 6. 5. and they were men of good report, V. 3. They were men well
witnessed unto, well testified off, as the Greek word imports. The Persians
seldom write their Kings Name but in characters of gold, throughout the Old and
New Testament: God has written the Names of just men in golden characters, as I
may speak.
Cornelius was a holy man, Act. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. and he was a man of good report
among all the Nation of the Jews, V. 22. Ananias was a holy man, Act. 9. 10,
20. and he was a man of a good report: Act. 22. 12. Gajus and Demetrius were
both holy men, and of a good report, witness that third Epistle of John. The
Patriarchs and Prophets were holy men, and they were men of a good report, Heb.
11. 1, 2. For by it the Elders obtained a good report, their holiness did
eternalize their Names. The Apostles were holy men, 1 These. 2. 10. and they
were men of good report, 2 Cor. 6. 8. Now certainly it is none of the least of
mercies to be well reputed and reported of: next to a good God, and a good
conscience, a good report, a good name is the noblest blessing. It is no great
matter, if a man be great and rich in the world, to obtain a great report, but
without holiness you can never obtain a good report. Holiness, uprightness,
righteousness, will imbalm your names, it will make them immortal. Psalm 112. 6
The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. Wicked men many times out
live their names, but the names of the righteous out live them. Holy Abel has
been dead above this five thousand years, and yet his name is as fresh and
fragrant as it 1 John 3. 12.
was the first day he was made a Martyr* When a sincere Christian dies, he
leaves his name as a sweet and as a lasting scent behind him, his Fame shall
live when he is dead: This is verified in your precious Father, who is now a
sleep in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.

Now you both very well know, that there was no Christian Friend, that had so
great a room in his heart, in his affections, as I had, and you can easily
guess at the reasons of it; neither can you forget, how frequently, both in his
health, sickness and before his death, he would be pr^ssing of me to be a
Soul-friend to you, and to improve all the interest I had in Heaven for your
internal Mat. 25. 33.
and eternal good, that he might meet you both in that upper world, and that
you might both be found with him, at the right hand of Christ in the great day
of the Lord. I know that your glorified Father, whilst he was on earth, did
lay up many a prayer for you in Heaven. My desire and prayer is, that those
prayers of his may return in mighty power upon both your hearts, and having a
fair opportunity now before me, I shall endeavor to improve it for the
everlasting advantage of both your souls; and therefore let my following
counsel be not only accepted, but carefully, faithfully and diligently followed
by you, that so you may be happy here, and blessed hereafter.

The first word of counsel is this: Let it be the principal care of both of
you, to look after the welfare of your precious and immortal souls. If your
souls are safe, all is safe; if they are well, all is well; but if they are
lost, all Mat. 16. 26. The Soul is a greater mir^cle in man, than all the
miracles wrought amongst men, says Augustine.
is lost, and you lost and undone in both worlds. Christ that only went to the
price of souls, has told us, That one Soul is more worth than all the world.
Chrysostom well observes, That whereas God has given us many other things
double, viz. two eyes to see with, two ears to hear with, two hands to work
with, and two feet to walk with, to the intent that the failing of the one
might be supplied with the other; he has given us but one soul, if that be
lost, have thou (says he) another soul to give in recompense for it? Ah
Friends, Christ left his Fathers bosom and all the glory of Heaven for the good
of souls, he assumed the nature of men for the happyness of the soul of man, he
trod the wine press of Isa. 63. 3. John 17. Luke 23. 34. Math. ^6. 28.
his Fathers wrath for souls, he prayed for souls, he paid for souls, and he
bled out his heart-blood for souls; The soul is the breath of God, the beauty
of man, the wonder of Angels, and the envy of Devils; It Is of an Angelical 1
Pet. 5. 8.
nature, it is a heavenly spark, a celestial plant, and of a Divine offspring.
Again weigh well the (...), the incomparable price, which Christ paid for the
redemption of the soul; what are the riches of the East or West- Indies, the
spoil of the richest Nations, rocks of 1 Pet. 1* 18, 19.
Diamonds, mountains of gold, or the price of Cleopatra's draught, to the price
that Christ laid down for souls? 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. 1 John 1. 4, 12. Heb. 22. 23.
The soul is a spiritual substance, capable of the knowledge of God, of union
with God, of communion with God, and of an eternal fruition of God. There is
nothing can suit the soul below God, nor nothing that can satisfy the soul
without God, nor nothing that can save the soul but God. The soul is so choice,
so high and so noble a piece, that it Divinely scorns all the world in point of
acceptance, justification, satisfaction, dilectation and salvation; Christ
made himself an offering for Heb. 9. 11, 12, 13 14. Cap. 10 10, 14 Ga. 4 4, 5,
6. Heb. 2. 8.
sin, that souls might not be undone by sin; The Lord dyed, that slaves might
live; The Son dyed, that servants might live, The natural Son dyed, that
adopted sons might live; The only begotten Son dyed, that bastards might live;
Yea the Judge dyed, that malefactors might live. Ah Friends, as there was never
sorrow like Isa. 53 3. Gal. 2. 20.
Christ's sorrow, so there was never love like Christ's love, and of all his love
none to that of soul-love, to say much in a little room. The spiritual enemies,
which daily war Ephesians 6. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Heb. ult. Romans 1^. 17. 1 Cor. 11.
23. 27.
against the soul; the glorious Angels, which hourly guard the soul, and the
precious ordinances, which God has appointed as means both to convert, and
nourish the soul. The soul is capable of a Crown of life; Rev. 2. 10. Of a
Crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5 4. Of a Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Of an
incorruptible Crown, 1 Cor. 9. 25. The Crowns of earthly Princes stand as Queen
Elisabeth is said to swin to her Crown through a Sea of sorrow.
a Sophisters cap, on one side of the head. Many may say of their Crowns as
that King said of ^is, O Crown more noble than happy! In the time of Galienus
the Emperor, Anno Christi 260. there were thirty Competitors on foot for the
Roman Crown and Throne, who confounded and destroyed one another. A Princely
Crown is oftentimes the mark for envy and ambition to shoot at: Henry the VI.
was honored with the Crowns of two Kingdoms, France and England, the first was
lost through the faction of his Nobles, the other was twice plucked from his
head. Earthly Crowns have so many cares, fears, vexations and dangers, that
daily attend them that oftentimes they make the heads and hearts of Monarchs
Prove. 27. 4. Does the Crown endure to all generations. Heb. To generation and
generation.
ache, which made Cyrus say, You look upon my Crown and my purple robes, but did
you but know how they were lined with thorns, you would not stoop to take them
up. But the Crowns that immortal souls are capable of, are Crowns without
crosses, they are not attended with care of keeping, or fear of losing; there
are no evil persons, nor evil spirits, that haunt those Crowns. Darius that
great Monarch, fleeing from his enemies, he threw away the Crown of gold from
his head, that he might run the faster: but a sincere Christian 1 Pet. 1. 5.
is in no danger of losing his Crown, 2 Timothy 4. 8. His Crown is laid up in a
safe hand, in an omnipotent hand. Now what do all these things speak out, but
the preciousness and excellency of the soul? Once more, the excellency of the
case or cabinet, viz. the body, intimates a more than ordinary excellency of
this Jewel; the body is of all materials the most excellent; how does David
admire the rare texture and workmanship of his body! I am wonderfully made, I
was curiously wrought in Psalm. 139. 13, 15.
the lowest parts of the earth. When curious workmen have some choice piece in
hand, they perfect it in private, and then bring it forth to the light, for men
to gaze at, so here: The greatest miracle in the World is Man, in whose very
body (how much more in his soul) are miracles enough (betwixt head and feet) to
fill a volume. One complains, that men much wonder at the high Austin. The
Stoic thought, it was better to be a fool in the form of a man, than wise in
the shape of a beast.
mountains of the Earth, the huge waves of the Sea, the deep falls of Rivers,
the vastness of the Ocean, and at the motions of the Stars, etc. but wonder not
at all at their wonderful selves. Galen, a profane Physician and a great
Atheist, writing of the excellent parts of man's body, he could not choose but
sing an Hymn to that God, whosoever he were, that was the Author of so
excellent and admirable a piece of work; he could not but cry out, Now I adore
the God of Nature. Now if the Cabinet be so curiously wrought, what is the
Jewel that is contained in it? O how richly and gloriously is the soul
embroydered! How Divinely inlaid and enameled is that! Princes impress their
images or effigies upon the choicest metals, viz. gold and silver: God has
engraven his own Image with his own hand upon Genesis 1. 26. Dama^cen.
Angels and Men. The soul is the glory of the Creation, a beam of God, a spark
of celestial brightness, a vessel of honor, a bird of Paradise, a habitation
for God. The soul is spiritual in its essence, God breathed it in, God has
invested it with many noble endowments, he has made it a mirror of beauty,
and printed upon it a Genesis 2. 7. Heb. 12 9. Eccles. 12. 7. Zach. 12. 1.
surpassing excellency. The soul is spiritual in its object, it contemplaces
God and Heaven; God is the orb and center where the soul does fix, God is the
Terminus ad quem, the soul moves to him as to his rest: Return to thy rest, O
my soul; this Dove can find no rest but in this heavenly Ark, nothing can fill
the soul but God, nothing can quiet the soul but God, nothing can satisfy the
soul but God, nothing can secure the soul but God, nothing can save the soul
but God: The soul being spiritual God only can be the adequate object of it;
The soul is spiritual in its operations, it being immaterial does not depend
upon the body in its working; the rich and rare endowments, and the noble
operations of the soul speak out the excellency of the soul. The soul (says
one) has Aristotle.
a nature distinct from the body, it moves and operates of it self, though the
body be dead, and has no dependence upon, or coexistence with the body; The
soul has an intrinsecal principle of life and motion, though it be separate
from the body. And does not the immortality of the soul speak out the
excellency of the soul, against that dangerous notion of the souls mortality?
Consult the Scriptures in the margin; and seriously and Luke 23. 43. 1 Thessalonians.
4. ult. Phil. 1. 23. Acts 7. 59.
frequently think of this one argument (among a multitude of arguments that
might be produced, to prove the immortality of the soul) That which is not
capable of killing, is not capable of dying; but the soul is not capable of
killing, ergo. Our Lord Jesus proves the minor proposition, that it is not
capable of killing, Fear not Luke 12. 4.
them them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do.
Therefore the soul not being capable of killing, is not in a possibility of
dying; the essence of the soul is Metaphysical, it has a beginning but no end,
it is Eternal a part post, it runs parallel with Eternity; the soul does not
wax old, it lives for ever, which we cannot affirm of any sublunary created
glory. To conclude this first word of counsel, what Job says of wisdom, I may
fitly apply to the soul; Man knows not the price thereof, Job 28. 13, 16, 17.
it cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx, or the
Saphir, the Gold and Crystal cannot equal it, and the exchange of it shall not
be for Jewels of sine Gold. O my Friends! it is the greatest wisdom, policy,
equity, and Justice, to provide for your precious souls, to secure your
precious souls, for they are Jewels of more worth than ten thousand worlds, all
the honors, riches, greatness, and glory of this world are but chips, toys,
and pibbles to these glorious pearls. But

The second word of counsel is this, as you would be safe here, and saved in
the great day of the Lord; as Act^ 2. 20. ^^ 22. 21. ^ (...)poth. 1. 15. Jo^
13. 15. 2 Cor. 2. 11.
you would be happy here, and blessed hereafter, take up in nothing below a
gracious acquaintance with Christ, a choice acceptance of Christ, a holy
relyance upon Christ, a full resignation of your selves to Christ, and a real
and glorious union with Christ; If you do you are lost and undone in both
worlds.

First, Some take up in a name to live, when they are dead, dead in trespasses
and sins, dead God-wards, and Revel. 3 1. Ephesians. 2. 1.
dead Christ-wards, and dead Heaven-wards, and dead holyness-wards. The
Sadducees derive their name from Zeduchim or Zadducaeus, a just man: But the
worst Men, says the Historian, got the best names. The Alcoran of the Turks
has its name from brightness ( Al in the Arabic, being as much as Kazan in
the Hebrew, to shine or cast forth in brightness) when it is full of darkness
and fraught with falsehoods. It will be but a poor comfort to any, for the world
to commend them as gracious, if

God condemn them as graceless; for the world to commend them as pious, if God
condemn them as impious; for the world to commend them as sincere, if God
condemn them as hypocrites. But

Secondly, Some take up in a form Godliness, when 2 Timoth. 3. 5.
they are strangers to the power, when they deny, yea when they oppose and
persecute the power; such Monsters this Age has abounded with, but their
seeming Acts 13. 45, 50
goodness is but a Religious cheat.

Thirdly, There are some that take up in their Religious Matthew. 9. 22. Luke 18.
12. Cap. 13. 26. Matthew. 6. cap. 23. Luke 36. 15. Ezeck. 33. 31, 32.
duties and services, in their praying, fasting, prophesying, hearing,
receiving; they make a God, a Christ, a Savior of their own duties and
services; this was the undoing and damning sin of the Scribes and Pharisees,
and is the undoing and damning sin of many thousands in our days.

Fourthly, There are many that take up in their common gifts and parts, in a
gift of knowledge, and in a gift Math. ^. 22. Romans 2. 17. 21. 1 Cor. 12. ^eb.
6. 4^5.
of teaching, and in a gift of knowledge, and in a gift of teaching, and in a
gift of utterance, and in a gift of memory, and in a gift of prayer, and this
proves ruinous and destructive to them.

Fifthly, There are many that take up in their riches, Prove. 10. 15. Psalm 73.
19. Matthew. 20. -- 26. Divi^^bus i(...) (...) qui^ (...), Rich men's wealth
proves an hinderance to their happiness. Eccles. 5. 13. James 5. 1, 2.
prosperity and worldly grandeur and glory. Prove. 18. 11. The rich man's wealth
is his strong City; it is hard to have wealth and not trust to it. Mat. 19. 24.
Wealth was never true to those that trusted it. There is an utter uncertainty
in riches, 1 Timoth. 6. 17. A non entity, Prove. 23. 5, 6. An impotency to help
in an evil day, Zephan. 1. 18. An impossibility to stretch to Eternity, unless
it be to destroy the owner for ever: There is nothing more clear in Scripture
and History, than that riches, prosperity, and worldy glory has been commonly
their portion, who never have had a God for their portion. Luke 16. 25. Ric^es
are called think clay, Hal. 2. 6. which will sooner break the back than lighten
the heart.
It was an excellent saying of Lewis of Bavaria, Emperor of Germany: Hujusmodi
comparandae sunt opes, quae cum naufragio simul enatent, Such goods are worth
getting, and owning, as will not sink or wash away, if a shipwreck happen.
Solus sapiens dives, Only the Wise man is the rich man, says the Philosopher.
Another says, Divitiae Austin.
corporales paupertatis plenae sunt, That earthly riches are full of poverty,
they cannot enrich the soul; for oftentimes under silken Apparel there is a
threadbare soul.

He that is rich in conscience sleeps more soundly, than he that is richly
clothed in purple.

No man is rich which cannot carry hence, that which Ambros. lib. 8. Ep. 10.
he has; that which we must leave behind us, is not ours but some others.

The shortest cut to riches is by their contempt; it is Seneca.
great riches not to desire riches, and he has most that covets least. If
there were any happiness in riches, the Gods would not want them, says the
same Author.

When one was a commending the riches and wealth of Merchants: I do not love
that wealth, said a poor Heathen, which hangs upon ropes; for if they break,
the ship miscarrieth, and then where is the Merchants riches?

If I had an Enemy (says one) whom it was lawful Latimer.
to wish evil unto, I would chiefly wish him great store of riches, for then he
should never enjoy quiet.

The Historian observes, that the riches of Cyprus invited Tacitus.
the Romans to hazard many dangerous fights, for the conquering of it.

Earthly riches, says one, are an evil Master, a treacherous Augustine.
Servant, Fathers of flattery, Sons of grief, a cause of fear to those that
have them, and a cause of sorrow to those that want them.

I have read a famous story of Zelimus, Emperor of The Turkish History. The
Poets feigned Pluto to be the God of Riches, and Hell, as if they were
inseparable, Homer.
Constantinople, that after he had taken Egypt, he found a great deal of
treasure there; and the Soldiers coming to him, and asking of him what they
should do with the Citizens of Egypt, for that they had found great Treasure
among them, and had taken their riches? O, says the Emperor, hang them all
up, for they are too rich to be made slaves; and this was all the thanks they
had for the riches they were spoiled off. What more contemptible than a rich
Fool, a golden Beast, as Caligula called his Father in law Syllanius? Not but
that some are great and gracious, rich and righteous; As Abraham, Lot, Job,
David, Hezekiah, etc.

It is said of Shusa in Persia, that it was so rich that the Says Cassiederus.
stones were joined together with gold; and that in it Alexander found seventy
thousand Talents of gold. If you can take this City (says Aristagorus to his
Soldiers) you may vie with Jove himself for riches; the riches of Shufa did
but make the Soldiers the more desperate in their attempt to take it.

By these short hints you may see the folly and vanity of those men, who take
up in their riches. But

Sixthly, Many there are that take up in their own Isa. 64. 6.
righteousness, which at best is but as filthy rags; this Romans 10. 2, 3. Matthew.
5. 20.
was the damning sin of the Jews, and of the Scribes and Pharisees; and is the
undoing sin of many of the Professors of this Age.

Seventhly, Many there are that take up in their external Church privileges,
crying out, the Temple of Jer. 7. 4, 8, 9, 10, 11.
the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, when they have no union nor communion with
the Lord of the Temple. These forget that there will come a day, when the
Children Matthew. 8. 12.
of the Kingdom shall be cast out. It would be very good for such Persons, to
make these five Scriptures their daily companions, Matthew. 22. 10, 12, 13, 14.
Luke 13. 25, 26, 27 28. Romans 2. 28, 29. Gal. 6. 15. Jer. 9. 25, 26. That they
may never dare to take up in their outward Church privileges, which can
neither secure them from hell, nor secure them of heaven. But

Eighthly, Many there be that take up in common convictions: Judas had mighty
convictions of his sin, but Matthew. 27. 4, 5. Numb. 23. and Numb. 24.
they issued in desperation. Balaam was mightily enlightened and convinced, in
so much that he desired to dye the death of the righteous; but under all his
convictions he dyed Christless and graceless. Nebuchadnezzar had great
convictions, yet we do not read that Dan. 4. 3 1, 32
ever he was converted, before he was driven from the society of men* to be a
companion with the beasts of the field; he had strong convictions, 1. by
Daniels interpreting Dan. 4. 31, 32.
of his dream. Dan. 2. 47. 2. He told Daniel, That his God was the God of Gods,
and a Lord of Kings, and a reveiler of secrets; and yet presently he fell into
gross Idolatry, Dan. 3. and strictly commanded to worship the golden Image that
he had set up; and as if he had lost all his former convictions, he was so
swelled up with pride and impudence, as to say to the three Children, when they
Divinely scorned to worship the Image he had set up, What God is there that can
deliver you out of my hand? Verse 15. Saul had great convictions, I have 1 Samuel
26. 21, 25.
sinned, return my son David, I will no more do thee harm, etc. And Saul lift
up his voice and wept; and he said unto David, Thou art more righteous than I,
for thou have 1 Samuel 24. 16, 17, 18, 19.
rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil: But these convictions
issued in no saving change, for after these he lived and died in the height of
his sins. Pharaoh had great convictions: And Pharaoh sent, and called Exodus 9.
27. Cap. 10. 16.
for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned this time: the Lord is
righteous, and I and my people are wicked. And again, Then Pharaoh called for
Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said; I have sinned against the Lord your God,
and against you: But these convictions issued in no reformation, in no sound
conversion, and therefore drowning and damning followed. Cain was under
convictions, but went and built a City, and lost Genes. 4.
his convictions in a crowd of worldly business. Herod and Felix were under
convictions, but they went of, Mark 6. 20. Acts 24. 25.
and never issued in any saving work upon their souls. O how many men and women
have fallen under such deep convictions, that they have day and night cried out
of their sins, and of their lost and undone Estates, and that they should
certainly go to hell, and be damned for ever, so that many good People have
hoped, that these were the pangs of the new birth; and yet either merry
company, or carnal pleasures and delights, or much worldly business, or else
length of time have wrought off all their convictions, and they have grown more
profane and wicked then ever they were before. As water heated, if taken off
the fire, will soon return to Arist^tle.
its natural coldness, yea becomes colder after heating than before, this has
been the case of many under convictions: I shall forbear giving of particular
instances. But

Ninthly, Many take up in an outward change and reformation, they have left
some old courses and sinful practices, which formerly they walked in etc. and
therefore they conclude and hope, that their condition is good, and that all is
well, and shall be for ever well with them; they were wont to swear, whore, be
drunk, profane Sabbaths, reproach Saints, etc. but now they have left all
these practices, and therefore the main work is done, and they are made for
ever. I confess sin is that abominable Jer. 41. 4. Matthew. 1^. 2^.
thing which God hates, and therefore it is a very great mercy to turn from it;
to leave one sin is a greater mercy, than to win the whole world; and it is
certain that he that does not outwardly reform, shall never go to heaven; he
that does not leave his sins he Job 22. 23, 26.
can never be happy here, nor blessed hereafter, and yet it is possible for a
man with Herod to reform many things Mark ^^ 2^. Mat. 26. 20, 21. 22 1 The^s.
5. 23.
and yet be a lost and undone man for ever as he was. Judas was a very reformed
man, but he was never inwardly changed, nor throughout sanctified. The Scribes
and Pharisees were outwardly reformed, but they were not inwardly renewed. A
man may be another man than what once he was, and yet not be a new man, a new
creature. When a sinner is sermon-sick, O! then he will 2 Cor. 5. 17. 2 P^t. 2.
20, 22. D^st. 5. 5, 6, 7, 8.
leave his sins, but when that sickness is off, he returns with the dog to his
vomit, and with the sow to her wallowing in the mire. Sometimes conscience is
like the handwriting upon the wall, it makes the sinners countenance to
change, and his thoughts to be troubled, and the joints of his loins to be
loosed, and his knees to smite one against another; and now the sinner is all
for reforming, and turning over a new leaf, but when these agonies of
conscience are over, the sinner returns to his old courses again, and often
times is twofold more a Child of Hell than before. There was a Matthew. 23. 15.
man in this City, who was given up to the highest wickednesses, on his sick
bed conscience made an Arrest of him, and he was filled with such wonderful,
horror and terror, that he cried out day and night, that he was damned, he
was damned, he was damned; and when he had some small intervals, O what large
promises did he make! what a new man, a reformed man he would be! but when in
time his terrors and sickness wrought off, he was sevenfold worse than before.
Sometimes the awakened Sinner parts with some sins, to make room for others;
and sometimes the Sinner seems to give a Bill of divorce to this sin and that,
but it is only because his bodily strength fails him, or because he wants an
opportunity, or because there is a more strict eye and watch upon him, or
because the sword of the Magistrate is more sharpened against him, or because
James 4. 3.
he wants fuel, he wants a purse to bear it out, or because some Company, or
some Relations, or some Friends lie between him and his sins, so that he must
either tread over them, or else keep from his sins; or because he has deeply
smarted for this sin, and that his name has been blotted, his credit and
reputation stained, Prove. 6. 32, 33, 34, 35.
his Trade decayed, his health empaired, his body wasted, etc. By these short
hints it is evident, that men may attain to some outward reformation, whose
states and hearts were never changed, and who were never taken into marriage
union with Christ. But

Tenthly and lastly, many take up in a party, as of old some cried up Paul as
the only deep Preacher, and others cried up Apollos as the only eloquent
Preacher, and 1 Cor. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13.
many cried up Cephas as the most zealous Preacher; We are for the Church of
England, say some, we are for the baptized People, say others, we are for the
Presbyterian government, cry some, we are for the congregational way, cry
others. I have so much ingenuity and charity, as to judge, that some of all
these several parties and persuasions are really holy and will be eternally
happy, are gracious and will be glorious, are sanctified and will be saved, are
now governed by Christ and will be hereafter glorified with Christ. Judas was
one of Christ's party, Mat. 26. 20. to the 26.
(if I may so speak) and yet he had no part nor portion in Christ. Demas was
one of Paul's party, and yet he 2 Timothy 4. 10.
played the Apostat, and turned an idolatrous Priest at 2 Timothy 1. 15.
Thessalonica, as Dorotheus says; And Phygellus and Hermogenes were of Paul's
party, but were only famous for 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20.
their recidivation and Apostasy. Hymeneus and Alexander were of Paul's party,
but they made shipwreck of faith and a good conscience. The five foolish
Virgins Mat. 25. 1, 2, 12.
were in society with the wise, and were accounted as members of their
association, and yet the door of Heaven was shut against them. Many light,
slight and vain persons went with the Children of Israel out of the Land Exodus
1^. 38. Number. 11. 4.
of Egypt, even a mixed multitude that imbarkt in the same bottom with them, and
yet never arrived at the Land of promise. O my Friends, it is not a man's being
of this party or that, this Church or that, this way or that, this society or
that, that will bring him to Heaven without 1 Pet. 1. 4. He^. 1. 2. 1 John 5.
12.
a spiritual conjunction with Christ; he that would enjoy the Heavenly
inheritance must be espoused to Christ, the heir of all things: For he that
has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son has not life. This
marriage union between Christ and the soul, is set forth to the life throughout
that Book of Solomon's Song^, though the marriage-union between Christ and the
soul, Cant. ^. 16. 1 Cor. 6. 17. Eccl. 11. 6.
be imperceptible to the eye of reason, yet it is real; things in nature work
often insensibly, yet really, we do not see the hand move on the dial, yet it
moves; the Sun exhales and draws up the vapors of the Earth insensibly, yet
really. Now this marriage-union between Christ and the soul includes, and takes
in these following particulars.

First, This marriage-union between Christ and the soul does include and take
in the souls giving a present bill of Divorce to all other lovers, Sin, the
world and Consult these Scriptures: Hosea 14. 8. Isa. 2. 20. Cap. 30. 22. Psalm
45. 10. Exodus 12. 33. Isa. 59. ^o. C. 3. 3.
Satan: Are you seriously and sincerely willing for ever to renounce these, and
be divorced from these? there is no compounding betwixt Christ and them; sin
and your souls must part, or Christ and your souls can never meet; sin and your
souls must be two, or Christ and your souls can never be one; you must in good
earnest fall out with sins, or else you can never in good earnest fall in with
a Savior; the heart must be separated from all other lovers, before Christ
will take the soul into his bed of loves; Christ takes none into marriage-union
with himself, but such as are cordially willing, that all old former leagues
with sin and the world shall be for ever broken and dissolved; your cordial
willingness to part with sin, is your parting with sin in Divine account; you
may as soon bring East and West together, light and darkness together, Heaven
and Hell together, as bring Christ to ^spouse himself to such a soul, as has no
mind, no will, no heart to be divorced from his former lovers; It Is a foolish
thing for any to think of keeping both Christ and their lusts too; it is a vain
thing for any to think of saving the life of his sins, and the life of his soul
too; If sin escape, your soul cannot escape; if thou art not the death of thy
sins, they will be the death and ruin of thy soul. Marriage is a knot or tie,
wherein persons are mutually limited and bound each to other, in a way of
conjugal separation from all others, and this in Scripture is Prove. 2. 17.
called a Covenant. So when any one marries Christ, he does therein discharge
himself in affection and subjection from all that is contrary unto Christ, and
solemnly Covenants, and binds himself to Christ alone, he will have no Savior
and no Lord but Christ, and to him will he cleave for ever, Psalm. 63. 8. Acts
11. 23. But,

Secondly, This marriage-union with Christ does include John 1. 12. Acts 5. 31.
Coloss: 2. 6. Weigh well these Scriptures: Psalm 1^2. 3. Psalm* 5. 5. Hosea 2.
7.
and take in a hearty willingness, to take, to receive the Lord Jesus Christ
for your Savior and Sovereign. Are you willing to consent to the match; it is
not enough that Christ is willing to enter into a marriage-union with us, but
we must be willing also to enter Many can choose Christ as a Refuge to hide them
from danger, and as a Friend to help them in their need, who yet refuse him as
a Husband.
into a marriage-union with him. God will never force a Christ, nor force
salvation upon us, whether we will or no; Many approve of Christ, and cry up
Christ, who yet are not willing to give their consent, that he, and he alone
shall be their Prince and Savior; though knowledge of persons be necessary and
fit, yet it is not sufficient to marriage without consent, for marriage ought
to be a voluntary transaction of persons; in marriage we do in a sort give away
our selves, and elect and make choice for our selves, and therefore consent is
a necessary concurrence to marriage. Now this consent is nothing else but a
free and plain act of the will, accepting of Jesus Christ before all others to
be its Head and Lord, and in the souls choice of him to be its Savior and
Sovereign; Then a man is married to Christ, when he does freely, and
absolutely, and presently receive the Lord Jesus; not, I would have Christ if
it did not prejudice my worldly estate, ease, friends, relations, etc. or
hereafter, I will accept of him when I come to dye, and be in distress, but now
when salvation is offered, now while Christ tenders himself, I now yield up my
heart and life unto him. But,

Thirdly, This marriage union with Christ includes and takes in an universal
and perpetual consent, for all time, and in all states and conditions. There is
(you know) a great difference between a wife and a strumpet, a wife takes her
husband upon all terms, to have, and to hold, for better and for worse, for
richer and for poorer, in sickness and in health, whereas a strumpet is only
for hire and lust, when the purse is emptied, or the body wasted and strength
consumed the harlots love is at an end, so here: That acceptance and consent
which ties the marriage knot between Christ and the soul, must be an unlimited
and indefinite acceptance and consent^, when we take the Lord Jesus Christ
wholly and entirely, without any secret reservations or exceptions; That soul
that will have Christ, must have all Christ, or no Christ, [ For Christ is not
divided.] That soul must entertain 1 Cor. 1. 13. Rev. 14. 4. Psalm. 66. 12.
him to all purposes and intents, he must follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes,
though it should be through fire and water, over mountans and hills, he must
take him with his cup of affliction as well as his cup of consolation, with his
shameful cross as well as his glorious Heb. 2. 3.
crown, with his great sufferings as well as his great salvation, with his
grace as well as his mercy, with his spirit to lead and govern them, as well as
his blood to redeem and justify them, to suffer for him as well as to 2 Timothy
2. 12. Acts 21. 13. Romans 14. 7, 8.
reign with him, to dye for him as well as to live to him. Christianity (like
the wind Caecias) does ever draw clouds and afflictions after it. All that will
live godly in Christ Jesus 2 Timothy 3. 12.
shall suffer persecution, A man may have many faint wishes and cold desires
after godliness, and yet escape persecution, yea he may make some assays and
attempts, as if he would be godly, and yet escape persecution, but when a man
is The common cry of Persecutors has been Christianes ad I c^n^s, within the
first 300. years after Christ, upon the matter all that made a profession of
the Apostles Doctrine, were cruelly murdered.
thoroughly resolved to be Godly, and sets himself in good earnest upon pursuing
after holiness, and living a life of Godlyness, then he must expect to meet
with afflictions and persecutions, who ever escapes, the Godly man shall not
escape persecution in one kind or another, in one degree or another; He that is
peremptorily resolved to live up to holy rules, and to live out holy
principles, must prepare for sufferings; All the Roses of holiness are
surrounded with pricking Briars: The History of the Ten Persecutions, and that
little Book of Martyrs, the 11. of the Hebrews, and Mr. Fox his Acts and
Monuments, with many other Treatises that are extant, do abundantly evidence,
that from age to age, and from one generation to another, they that have been
born after the flesh have persecuted them that has been born after the Gal. 4.
29.
spirit, and that the seed of the Serpent have been still a multiplying of
troubles upon the seed of the Woman; But a Believers future glory and pleasure
will abundantly recompense him for his present pain and ignominy: But such as
will have Christ for their Savior and Sovereign, but still with some proviso
or other, viz. That they may keep such a beloved lust, or enjoy such carnal
pleasures and delights, or raise such an estate for them and theirs, or comply
with the times and such and such great men's humors, or that they may follow
the Lamb only in Sunshine weather, etc. these are still Satan's bondslaves, and
such as Christ can take no pleasure nor delight to espouse himself unto. But,

The third word of Advice and Counsel is this, viz. Put off the old man, and
put on the new: Consult the Scriptures Col. 3. 9, 10. Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. Gal.
6. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 2.
in the margin. You must be new Creatures, or else it had been better you had
been any Creatures than what you are. 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ he
is a n^w Creature, old things are past away, behold all things are become new.
The new Creature includes a new light, a new sight, a new understanding; Now
the soul sees Psalm. 38. 4. Cant. 5. 10.
sin to be the greatest evil, and Christ and holiness to be the chiefest good:
When a man is a new Creature he has Col. 3. 11.
a new judgment and opinion, he looks upon God as his only happyness, and
Christ as his all in all, and upon Prove. 3. 17.
the ways of God as ways of pleasantness. The new man has new cares, new
requests, new desires. O that my Acts 2. 37. Cap. 16. 30.
soul may be saved; O that my interest in Christ may be cleared, O that my
heart may be adorned with grace, O that my whole man may be secured from wrath
to 1 These. 2. ult.
come. The new man is a man of new principles, if you make a serious inspection
into his soul, you shall find a principle of faith, of repentance, of holiness,
of love, Phil. 1. 20. Acts 11. 18. 1 These. 4, 9. Phil. 4. ^1. 1 Cor. 4. 12.
of contentment, of patience, etc. There is not any one spiritual and heavenly
principle respecting salvation, but may be found in the new Creature; The new
man experiences a new combat, and conflict in his soul: The Gal. 5. 17. Romans
7. 2^.
flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit lu^teth against the flesh. I
see another law in my members warring against the law of my mind. The new man
experiences a combat in every faculty; Here is the judgment against the
judgment, and the will against the will, and the affections against the
affections: And the reason is this; because there is flesh and spirit, sin and
grace coexistent and cohabiting in every faculty of the soul, renewing grace is
in every faculty, and remaining corruption is also in every faculty, like Jacob
and Esau st^ugling in the same womb, or like heat and cold in the same water,
and in every part of it: The new man also combats with all sorts of known
sins, whether they be great or small, inward or outward, whether they be the
sins of the heart, or the sins of the life; and besides, the conflict in the
new man is a daily conflict, a constant conflict; The new Creature can never,
the new Creature will never be at peace with sin, sin and the new Creature will
fight it out to the death, the new. Creature will never be brought into a
l^ague of friendship with sin; The new man is a man of a new life and
conversation, always a new life attends a new heart, you see it in Paul, Mary
Magdalen, Zacheus, the Jailer, and all the others that See 1 John 3. 14. 2 Cor.
6. 14. Psalm 120. 5. Psalm 139. ^1. Psalm 42. 4.
are upon Scripture record. The new man has new society, new company, Psalm
119. 63. I am a Companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy
precepts. Psalm 16. 3. My goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints that
are in the Earth, and to the Excellent in whom is all my delight. Holy society
is the only society for persons of holy hearts, and in that society can no
(...) had rather have no Compani^n than a had one.
man delight until God renew his heart by grace. Many men be as the Planet
Mercury, good in conjuction with those that are good, and bad with those that
are bad, these are they that do Virtutis stragulam pudefacere, Put honesty to
an open shame. Clothes and Company do oftentimes tell tales in a mute, but
significant language. Tell me with whom thou go, and I will tell thee what
thou art, says the Spanish proverb. Algerius, an Italian Martyr, had rather be
in prison with Cato, than with Caesar in the Senate House. But to conclude this
word of Counsel, the new man walks by a new rule; As soon as ever God has made
a man, a new creature, he presently sets up a new rule of life to walk* by, and
that is no other but that which God himself sets up for his People to walk by,
and that is his written Word, Isa. 8. 20. To the Law and to the testimony.
Psalm 119. 105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.
Verse 133. Order my steps in thy word. Galat. 6. 16. And as many as walk
according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.
This rule he sets up for all matters of Faith, and for all matters of fact. The
word is like the stone Garamantides, that has drops of Gold within it self,
enriching of every soul that makes it his Rule to walk by. Alexander kept
Homers Iliads in a Cabinet, embroidered with Gold and Pearls; and shall not we
keep the Word in the Cabin^t of our hearts, that it may be always ready at
hand as a Rule for us to walk by? Well Friends, what ever you do forget, be
sure that for ever you remember this, viz. that none can o^ shall be glorious
Creatures, but such as by grace are made new Creatures. But

The fourth word of advice and counsel is this, Labor to be more inwardly
sincere than outwardly glorious. [ The Psalm ^5. 13. Re^. 3. 1. 15, 16, 17.
Kings daughter is all glorious within.] O labor rather to be good than to be
thought to be good, to live than to have a name to live; what ever you let go,
be sure you hold fast your integrity: A man were better to let Friends go,
Relations go, Estate go, Liberty go, ^ife go, and all go, than let his
integrity go. [ God forbid that I should Job 27. 5, 6.
justify you, till I die I will not remove my integrity from me, my
righteousness I will hold fast, and I will not let it go: my heart shall not
reproach me so long as I live.] Job is highly and fully resolved to keep his
integrity close against all assaults of Enemies, or suspicions of Friends. Jobs
integrity was the best Jewel he had in all the world, and this Jewel he was
resolved to keep to his dying day. It was neither good men, nor bad men, nor
devils that should baffle Job out of his integrity; and though they all pulled
and pulled hard at his integrity, yet he would not let it go, he would hold
fast this pearl of price what ever it cost him. The sincere Christian, like
John Baptist, will hold his integrity Mar^ 6.
though he lose his head for it. The very Heathens loved a candid and sincere
spirit, as he that wished that there was a glass in his breast, that all the
world might see what was in his heart. Integrity will be a sword to defend you,
a staff to support you, a star to guide you, and a cordial to cheer you; and
therefore above all gettings get sincerity, and above all keepings keep
sincerity as your crown, your comfort, your life. But

The fifth word of comfort and counsel is this, Be true to the light of your
consciences, and maintain and keep up a constant tenderness in your
consciences; a tender conscience is a mercy more worth than a world: Conscience
is Gods spy in our bosoms, keep this clear and Acts 21. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 12.
tender, and than all is well: Act nothing against the dictates of conscience,
rebel not against the light of conscience: You were better that all the world
should upbraid you and reproach you, than that your consciences should upbraid
you and reproach you: Beware of stifling Job 27. 5, 6.
conscience, and of suppressing the warnings of conscience, lest a warning
conscience prove a gnawing conscience, a tormenting conscience. The blind Man
Mark 8.
in the Gospel, newly recovering his sight, imagined Trees to be Men: And the
Burgundians, as Comines reports, expecting a Battle, supposed long Thistles to
be Lances; thus men under guilt, are apt to conceit every Thistle a Tree, and
every Tree a Man, and every Man a Devil. Take heed of tongue-tyed consciences,
for when God shall unty these strings, and unmuzle your consciences, conscience
will then be heard, and ten consorts of Music shall not drown her clamourous
cries. Hearken to the voice of conscience, obey the voice of conscience, and
when conscience shall whisper you in the ear, and tell you, there is this and
that amiss in the house, in the habit, in the heart, in the life, in the
closet; don't say to conscience, conscience be quiet, be Acts ^^. 24, 25.
still, make no noise now, I will hear thee in a more convenient season. The
Heathen Orator could say: A recia conscientia ne latum quidem unguem
discedendum, (...). in Offi^.
A man may not depart a hairs breadth all his life long from the dictates of a
good conscience. Will not this Heathen one day rise in judgment, against those
who daily crucify the light of their own consciences. But

The sixth word of advice and counsel is this, Mak^ it the great business of
your lives, to make sure such See my Treatise on Assurance, and there you will
find how you may secure something that will go with you beyond the grave.
things as will go with you beyond the grave. Riche^ and honors, and offices,
and all worldly grandeur will not go with us beyond the grave. Saladin a Turkish
Emperor, he was the first of that Nation that conquered Jerusalem, lying at
the point of death after many glorious victories, commanded that a white sheet
should be born before him to his grave, upon the point of a Spear, with this
proclamation: These are the rich spoils which Saladin carries away with him,
of all his triumphs and victories, of all his Riches and Realms that he had,
now nothing at all is left for him, to carry with him but this sheet. It is
with us in this world, as it was in the Jewish fields and vineyards, pluck and
ea^ they might what they would while they were there* but they might not pocket
nor put up ought, to carry with them: Death as a Porter stands at the gate, and
Deuteronomy. 23. 24. 25.
strips men of all their worldly wealth and glory. Athenaeus speaks of one,
that at the hour of death devoured many pieces of gold, and sewed the rest in
his coat, commanding that they should be buried with him. Hermocrates being
loath that any man should enjoy his goods after him, made himself by Will Heir
of his own goods: These muck-worms would fain live still on this side Jordan,
having made their gold their God, they cannot think of parting with it, they
would if possible carry the world out of the world: But what says the Apostle?
[ We brought nothing with us into this world, 1 Timoth. 6. 7.
and it is certain (see how he assevereth and assures it, as if some rich
wretches made question of it) we can carry nothing out] nothing but a winding
sheet. O how should this alarm us! to make sure our calling and election, 2
Pet. 1. 1^. 2 Cor. 5. 17. 2 Sa^. 23. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 5 ^3. 2 Cor. 1. 12.
to make sure our interest in Christ, to make sure our Covenant Relation, to
make sure a work of grace in power upon our souls, to make sure the testimony
of a good conscience, to make sure our Sonship, Gal. 4. 5, 6, 7. Romans 8. 15,
16.
our Saint-ship, our Heir-ship, etc. for these are the only things that will go
with us into another world. In the Marian persecution there was a Woman, who
being convened before Bonner (then Bishop of London) upon (...) Acts and
Monuments.
the trial of Religion, he threatened her that he would take away her Husband
from her: Says she, Christ is my Husband. I will take away thy Child: Christ,
says she, is better to me than ten sons. I will strip thee, says he, of all
thy outward comfort: Yea, but Christ is mine, says she, and you cannot strip
me of him. Assurance that Christ was hers, and that he would go with her beyond
the grave, bore her heart up above the threats Heb. 10. 34.
of being spoiled of all. When a great Lord had showed a sober, serious,
knowing Christian his Riches, his stately Habitation, his pleasant Gardens, his
delightful Walks, his rich Grounds, and his various sorts of pleasure; the
serious Christian turning himself to this great Lord, said: My Lord, you had
need to make sure Christ and Heaven, you had need make sure something, that
will go with you beyond the grave, for else when you die you will be a very
great loser. O my Friends, I must tell you, it highly concerns you to make sure
something that will go with you beyond the grave, or else you will be very
great losers, when you come to die. God having given you an abundance of the
good things, and of the great things of this world, beyond what he has given to
many thousands of others. But

The seventh word of advice and counsel is this, Look upon all the things of
this world, and value all the things of this world now, as you will certainly
look upon 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31.
them and value them when you come to lie upon a sick bed, a dying bed; when a
man is sick in good earnest, and when death knocks at the door in good carnest,
O with what a disdainful eye, with what a weaned eye, with what a scornful eye
does a man then look upon the honors, riches, dignities, and glories of this
world! If men could but thus look upon them now, it would keep them from being
fond of them, from trusting in them, from doting upon them, from being proud of
them, and from venturing a damning, either in getting or in keeping of them. But

The eight word of advice and counsel is this, In all places and companies
carry your soul-preservatives still about you, viz. A holy care, a holy fear, a
holy jealousy, Prove. 4. 23. Cap. 28. 14. Genes. 6. 9. Cap. 39. 9, 10. Psalm
17. 4. Psalm 18. 23. Psalm 39. 1, etc.
a holy watchfulness over your own thoughts, hearts, words, and ways. You know
that in infectious times men and women carry their several preservatives about
them, that they may be kept from the infection of the times. Never were there
more infectious times than now, O the snares, the baits, the infections that
attend us, at all times, in all places, in all companies, in all employments,
and in all enjoyments, so that if we do not carry our soul-preservatives about
us, we shall be in eminent danger of being infected with the pride, ill
customs, and vanities of the times wherein we l^ve. But

The ninth word of advice and counsel is this, Live not at uncertainties as to
your spiritual and eternal estates; See my Box of precious Ointment, in that
Glass you may read the state of your souls.
there are none so miserable as those that are strangers to the state of their
own souls. It is good for a man to know the state of his Flock, the state of
his Family, the state of the Nation, the state of his Body; but above all to
know the state and condition of his own Soul. How many thousands are there that
can give a better account of their Lands, their Lordships, their Riches, their
Crops, their Shops, their Trades, their Merchandise, yea of their Hawks, their
Hounds, their Misses, than they can of the es^ate of their own Souls? O my
Friends, your souls are more worth than ten thousand Matthew. 16. 26.
worlds, and therefore it must be the greatest prudence, and the choicest
policy in the world, to secure their everlasting welfare, and to know how
things stands between God and your souls, what you are worth for Eternity, and
how it is like to go with you in that other world, whilst a Christian lives at
uncertainties as to his spiritual and everlasting estate, as whether he has
grace or no grace, or whether his grace be true or counterfeit, whether he has
an interest in Christ or not, a work in power upon his soul or not, or whether
God loves him or loathes him, whether he will bring him to Heaven or throw him
to H^ll: How can any Christian who lives at so great an uncertainty, delight in
God, rejoice Job 27. 10. Phil. 4. 4. 2 Cor 2. 14. Phil. 1. 23.
ever more, triumph in Christ Jesus, be ready to suffer and desirous to die?
All men love to be at a certainty in all their outward concernments, and yet
how many thousands are there that are at a mavelous uncertainty, as to the
present and future state of their precious and immortal souls. But

The tenth word of advice and counsel is this, Set the highest Scripture
examples and patterns before you of grace and holiness for your Imitation; In
the point of 1 Cor. 4. 16. Genesis 12. Cap. 21. Numb. 12. 3. Joshua 1. Psalm 18.
23.
Faith and Obedience set an Abraham before you; in the point of meekness set a
Moses before you; in the point of courage set a Joshua before you; in the point
of uprightness set a David before you; in the point of zeal set a Phinehas
before you; and in the point of patience set a Job before you; make Christ your
main pattern, [ Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ.] And next to him James
5. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 11. 1.
set the patterns of the choicest Saints before you for your Imitation; the
nearer you come to those blessed copies Precepta decent, exempla mov^nt,
Precepts may instruct, but examples do persuade
that they have-set before you, the more will be your joy and comfort, and the
more God will be honored, Christ exalted, the Spirit pleased, Religion
adorned, the mouths of Sinners stopped, and the hearts of Saints rejoiced: He
that shoots at the Sun, though he shoot far short; yet will shoot higher than
he that aims at a shrub; it is safest, it is best to eye the highest and
worthiest examples. Examples are 1. More awakening than precepts. 2. More
convincing than precepts. Heb. 11. 8.
3. More encouraging than precepts; and that because in them we see that the
exercise of Godliness, though difficult, yet is possible when we see men
subject to like passions with our selve to be so and so mortified, selfdenying,
humble, holy, etc. what should hinder but that it may be so with us also? Such
as begin to work with the needle, look much on their sampler and pattern; it is
so in learning to write, and indeed in learning to live also. Observe the
gracious conversations and carriages of the choicest Saints, keep a fixed eye
upon their wise, prudent, humble, holy, and heavenly deportment; write after
the fairest copy you can find, labor to imitate those Christians that are most
eminent in grace. I shall conclude this head with that of the Heathen: Optimum
est majorum sequi vestigia si recte praecesse Senses.
ri^t, It is best to tread in the steps of those who are gone in a safe and
good way before us. But

The eleventh word of advice and counsel is this, Be much in the most Spiritual
exercises of Religion: There are external excercises, such as hearing, praying,
singing, Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Timoth. 4. 8. Matthew. 6.
receiving, holy conference, etc. Now custom, conviction, education, and a
hundred other external considerations may lead persons to these external
exercises: But then there are the more spiritual exercises of Religion, such as
loving of God, delighting in God, prizing of Christ, compliance with the
motions, counsels, and dictates of the Spirit, living in an exercise of grace,
triumphing in Christ Jesus, setting our affections upon things above,
meditation, self-examination, self-judging, etc. Now the more you live in the
exercise of these more spiritual duties of Religion, the more you glorify God,
the more you evidence the power of grace, and the indwellings of the Spirit;
and the more you difference and distinguish your selves from Hypocrites, and all
unsound Professors, and the better foundation you lay for a bright, strong and
growing assurance. But

The twelfth and last word of advice and counsel I shall give you, is to make a
wise, a seasonable, a sincere, a daily, and a through improvement of all the
Talents that God has entrusted you with. There is a Talent of time, of power,
of riches, of honor, of greatness that some are more entrusted with than
others are, the improvement of these is your great wisdom, and should be your
daily works: You know you are but Stewards, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. ^
and that you must shortly give an account of your Steward-ship: And O that you
may make such a Luke 16. 1, 2, 3, 4.
faithful, and full improvement of all the great Talents that God has entrusted
you with, that you may give up your account at last with joy and not with
grief. Some Princes have wished upon their beds that they had never reigned,
because they have not improved their power for God and his People, but against
God and his People; and some Rich men have wished that they had never been
rich, because they have not improved their riches for the glory of God, nor for
the succor and relief of his suffering Saints. A Beggar upon the way asked
something of a honorable Lady; she gave him six pence, saying: This is more
than ever God gave me. O says the Beggar, Madam you have abundance, and God
has given you all that you have, say not so good Madam. Well (says she) I
speak the truth, for God has not given but lent unto me what I have, that I
may bestow it upon such as thou art: And it is very true indeed, that poor
Christians are Christ's Alms-men, and the Rich are but his Stewards, into whose
hands God has put his moneys, to distribute to them as their necessities
require. It is credibly reported of Mr. Thomas Sutton (the fool Founder (...)
Church History of (...)tain.
of that eminent Hospital commonly known by his name) that he used often to
repair into a private Garden, where he poured forth his prayers unto God, and
amongst other passages was frequently overheard to use this expression: Lord
thou have given me a liberal and large estate, give me also a heart to make
good use of it; which was granted to him accordingly. Riches are a great
blessing, but a heart to use them aright is a far greater blessing. Every Rich
man is not so much a Treasurer as a Steward, whose praise is more how to lay
out well, than to have received much. I know I have transgressed the bounds of
an Epistle, but love to your souls and theirs, into whose hands this Treatise
may fall, must be my Apology.

Sir, If you and your Lady were both my own Children, and my only Children, I
could not give you better, nor more faithful counsel, than what I have given
you in this Epistle, and all out of a sincere, serious, and cordial desire and
design, that both of you may be happy here, and found at Christ's right hand in
the great day of Account, Matthew. 25. 33, 34.

Now the God of all grace fill both your hearts with 1 Pet. 5. 1 Gal. 5. 22, ^.
23. Ephesians. 1. 3.
all the fruits of righteousness, and holiness, and greatly bless you both with
all spiritual blessings in Heavenly places, and make you meet helps to each
other Heavenward, and at last crown you both with ineffable glory in the life
to come.

So I take leave and rest, Your assured Friend, and Souls Servant, Tho. Brooks:

ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 20. r. eminent. p. 10. l. 2r. r. 2. p. 36. margin. r. propter. p.
38. l. 6. Hebrew, r. Hebrews. p. 48. l. 23. the, r. this. p. 64. l. 6. for
Christian, r. Christians. p. 73. l. 9. for works, r. work. l. 21, 22. put in
the margin, Isa. 6. 13. Cap. 8. 18. p. 120. l. 9. for the, r. he. p. 147. l.
37. r. be. p. 155. l. 3. blot out is. p. 166. l 19. blot out to. l. 31. blot
out he. 2. Part. p. 17. l. 11. add as. 2. Part. p. 35. l. 29. r. of f^r or. 2.
Part. p. 37. l. 36. r. he for here. 2. Part. p. 55. l. 34. r. her for their. 2
Part. p. 59. l. 15. all for a. 2. Part. p. 62. l. 1. blot out he. 2. Part. p.
67. l. 27. add the. l. 36. blot out the. 2. Part. p. 70. l. 27. exaltations, r.
exultations. 2. Part. p. 75. l. 18. add up. r. this for the. 2. Part. p. 82. l.
29. blot out the. 2. Part. p. 87. l. 20. for at, r. as 2. Part. p. 109. l. 36.
r. on the growth. 2. Part. p. 146. l. 22. blot out the. 2. Part. p. 122, l. 34.
r. her for their. 2. Part. p. 127. l. 36. prenned, r. pened. 2. Part. p. 130.
l. 8. for flesh, r. flesh. 2. Part. p. 192. l. 28. for giving r. laying. 2.
Part. p. 176. for Reboim r. Zeboim. 2. Part. p. 208. l. 6. r. of Christ. 2.
Part. p. 217. l. 24 bl^t out of. l. 27. add then. 2. Part. p. 219. l. 22. r.
Jer. 14. 8. 2. Part. p. 220. l. 30. blot out but.

In the Catalogue. p. 5. l. 37. for matter. r. nature. p. 6. l. 37. for
declining r. dealing.

A GENERAL EPISTLE TO ALL SUFFERING SAINTS.
To all afflicted and distressed Christians all the world over, especially to
those that are in bonds, for the testimony of Christ, in Bristol; and to those
that are sufferers there; or in any other City, Town, Country or Kingdom
whatsoever; and to all that have been deep sufferers in their Names, Persons,
Estates or Liberties, upon the account of their faithfulness to God, to their
Light, to their Consciences, to their Principles, to their Profession, and to
Christ the King and Head of his Church, and to all that have been long
prisoners to their beds or chambers by reason of age and the common infirmities
that do attend it, or that are under any other afflictive dispensation: And
more particularly to my ancient, dear and honored friend, Mrs. Elizabeth
Drinkwater, who has been many years the Lords prisoner, and upon the matter,
kept wholly from public Ordinances, by reason of her bodily weaknesses and
infirmities; though Ezekiel. 11. 16.
in the want of a greater Sanctuary, God has been a little Sanctuary to her
soul.

Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied
Dear and Honored Friends,
THe ensuing Treatise about the Signal Presence of God with his people, in
their greatest troubles, deepest distresses and most deadly dangers, I present
to the service of all your souls. There has not been any Treatise on this
Subject, that has ever fallen under mine eye; which has been one great reason
to encourage me in this present undertaking. I know several holy and learned
men have written singularly well upon the Gracious Presence of God with his
People, in Ordinances, and in the Worship of his House; but I know none that
have made it their business, their work, to handle this Subject that I have
been discoursing on, though a more excellent, noble, spiritual* seasonable and
necessary S^bject, can ^arely b^ treated on.

There are ten things that I am very well satisfied in, and to me they are
things of great Importance in this present day: And the first is this, viz.

That there is no engagement from God upon any of his people, 1 C^r. ^. 2^.
cap. 7. 23.
therefore to him they must be accountable for their lives, liberties, etc. and
therefore they had need be very wary how they part with them: We must not step
out of our way to take up a Cross. The three Worthies were passive; they did
not rush into the fiery D^^. 2. 2^, 21. 28. What (...) (...)erings ^o many
blind Papist* run themselves into, out of a supe^stitious opi(...) of Merit or
Satisfaction; but under all their Penances they cannot say we ^ear in our
bodies the marks of our Lord Jesu* Christ. Gal. 6. 17.
furnace, but yielded themselves to be cast into the fiery furnace; they did
not stubbornly oppose nor struggle against their enemies, but patiently and
quietly yielded their bodies to the flames: neither did the Prophets or
Apostles step over God's hedge, to make way to their own Sufferings or
Martyrdom. No men may, with the Donatists, destroy themselves, rather than they
would conform to this or that Religion. No man may have a hand in his own
destruction, no man may cut his throat with his own hands to avoid a Prison, a
D^ngeon, a Den, a fiery Furnace. Cyprian tells the Christians in his time, that
were ambitious of Martyrdom; Non est in tua potestate, sed in Dei dignatione
Martyrium. We may not run our selves into prison without a Mittimus from
heaven. If righteousness lead me into prison, a righteous God will stand by me
in prison; and in the issue, give me a gracious, or a glorious deliverance out
of prison. But if I wilfully, causlesly run my self into prison, it will be a
righteous thing with God, to leave me to shift for my self in prison. If God
should meet a man in prison, and say to him as he did ^nce to Elijah, What do
thou here Elijah? 1 King. 19. 9. Here he is secretly taxed for leaving his
station out of too much fear of Jez^bel.
What do thou here, O man? is this a fit place for Truth's Champion? If a man
cannot readily answer, Lord, I have not run my self into a prison (but it is thy
self, it is thy truth, it is thy interest, it is thy honor, it is my conscience,
it is duty that has brought me hither) what confusion would attend him.
Thilus^rius and Theodoret speak of some that would compel men to kill them out
of an affectation of Martyrdom; but this was a mad ambition, but no true zeal.
'Twas an error in Tertullian, to say that afflictions, that sufferings, were
to be sought. No man is to make his own Cross, nor Scourges to whip himself;
nor to cast himself into a suffering state, so long as God has left him a
plain open Act. 9. 23, 24, 25. Joh. ^0. 19, 20.
way to escape suffering without sinning; not but that most men are more apt
and prone to sin themselves out of smart sufferings, than unwarrantably to run
themselves into sufferings; but it is good for every Christian to be upon his
Guard, and not run till God sends him. As a Christian must not sh^n sufferings,
so he must not seek them.

Secondly, that Afflictions, Sufferings, Persecutions, has Mat. 1^. 22. cap.
16. 24. Luke 21. 1^. Joh. 15. 20. Heb. 11. The common cry of Persecutors has
been Christian^ a^ L(...).
Ages of the world; witness the su^ferings of the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, the Primitive Christians, and the Martyrs of a later date: Abel was
persecuted by C^in, 1 John 3. 12. and Isaac by Ishmael, Gal. 4. 29. and Jacob
by ^sau. That seems to be a standing Law; All that will live godly in Christ
Jesus, must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12. A man may have many faint wi^hes
and cold desires after Godliness, and yet escape Persecution; yea, he may make
some es^ays and attempts as if he would be Godly, and yet escape Persecution:
But when a man is th^roughly resolved to be Godly, and sets himself in good
earnest upon pursuing after holiness, upon living a life of holiness, upon
growing up in holiness, then he must expect to meet with afflictions and
persecutions. The History of the Ten Persecutions, and that little Book of
Martyrs, the 11. of the Hebrews, and Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments, with many
other Histories that are extant, do abundantly evidence, that from Age to Age,
and from one Generation to another, they that have been born after the Gal. 4.
29.
Flesh, have persecuted them that have been born after the Spirit; and that the
Seed of the Serpent has been still a multiplying of Genesis 3. 1^.
troubles upon the Seed of the Woman* As there was no way to Paradise, but by a
flaming sword; nor no way to Canaan, but through a howling wilderness, so there
is no way to Heaven, but by the Gates of Hell; there is no way to a glorious
Exaltation, but through a Sea of Tribulation, of Persecution. The way to Act.
14. 21* 2^.
Heaven is not strewed with roses, but f^ll of thorns and bria^s, as those of
whom this world is not worthy have always experienced. Heb. 11.
The Serpentine Brood takes a very great pleasure to be still a representing
the people of God as foolish, hypocritical, precise, proud, schismatical,
seditious, factious, and as persons against Order and Government, against good
Laws and Customs, as distarbers and troublers of the peace. Thus Ahab accounts
Elijah, The troubler of Israel; and Haman laid it to the charge of the 1 King.
18. 17. Es^h. 3. 8. Ez^a 4. 15.
Jews, that they were diso^^dient to the ^ing's Laws; and the adversaries of
the Jews told Artaxerxes the King, that Jerusalem was a rebel^ious City,
hurtful unto Kings and Princes: And the unbelieving Jews at Thessalonica did as
much for the Apostles, they said they were the men that turned the world up
s^le down: So Luther Act. 17. 6.
was called the Trumpet of Rebellion: and Tertul^us calls Paul A pestilent
fellow, and a mover of sedition; (...), A Pesti^ence, A Batch; foolish
Tertul^us mis-took the Antidote for the Poison, cap. 24. 5.
the remedy for the disease. Now if so precious a man as Paul (than whom, says
Chrysostom, the earth never bare a better, since it bore Christ) were accounted
and called a Pest, a Botch, let not us think much if the choicest Saints in our
days are accounted and esteemed as so many Pests and Botches. This is the
reward the ungrateful world gives the servants of Christ, for their zeal and
faithfulness in the cause of Christ: instead of encouraging them, they load
them with ignominious and hateful terms of Rebellion and Turbulency, etc.
laboring thereby to make them odious, and to enrage the people against them;
as the Persecutors of old used to wrap the Christians up in Bears skins and
Lions skins, etc. and then to bait them with Dogs. It is a very great vanity to
think of passing to heaven without suffering; the Saints in all Ages have found
the way thither paved with troubles, and it would be a foolish, childish thing
for any of us to think of finding it otherwise now. Constantine the Great, as
piously as wi^tily, told Ac^sius the Novation, that if he would not take up
with Secrat. H^st. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Persecution, and such like dealing, he must provide him a ladder, and climb
alone to heaven; we must go to heaven some other way than the Saints have done
of old, except we resolve of going thither through much tribulation, Act. 14.
22.

Thirdly, That no person or persons on earth may sinfully shift Moses did; so
Daniel chose rather to be Dan. 6.
cast among Lions, than that his Conscience should be a Lion within him; and
the three Children (or Champions rather) who were cap. 3.
holily wilful, chose rather to burn in the fiery furnace, than to bow to the
Image that the King had set up. He that values peace Ju^as and Spira will
rather sin than suffer, but whoever suffered more on this ^ide hell, than they
suffered.
with God, and peace with Conscience, and the honor of God, and the credit of
Religion, the silencing of sinners, and the rejoicing of the Saints, must choose
to suffer rather than to sin, when storms arise, and troubles and dangers
approach, many begin to consult, not how they may glorify God by suffering,
but how they may provide for their own safety by sinning: Plato knew much of
God, but (as Josephus shows) durst not set it down for fear of the people: And
Lactantius charges the same upon Tully; Thou dare not (says he) undertake
the Patrenage of the truth, for fear of the prison of Socrates: And Augustine
De Ci(...). lib. 6. cap. 10.
does as much for Seneca; he spends a whole Chapter in showing how he held the
truth in unrighteousness; telling us how he reverenced that which he reproved,
did that which he condemned, and worshipped that which he found fault with.
Though these wise men saw the vanity of the Heathenish Deities, and the worship
that was given to them, and looked upon them as utterly unworthy of respect
from wise and sober men, nay, secretly scorned and derided them; yet would they
not openly declare against them, and that for fear of the people who so much
doted upon them: But Daniel's three young Worthies were men of that heavenly
gallant^y, that they peremptorily resolved upon this, that though they should
not be delivered by their God, yet they would not sin against their God, nor so
much as demur, deliberate, or take time to consider whether they should suffer
or sin; 'twas past dispute with them, brave and noble souls that they were. It
is observable that when Paul speaks of his afflictions, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
his sufferings; he calls them light; but when he speaks of his sin, he speaks
of it, as a burden that pressed him down, and made him cry out, O wretched man
that I am; and to cry out again, we groan, being burdened. Moses his choice is
famous, and celebrated Romans 7. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 2, 4.
all the world over; for 'twas not made when he was a child, but when he came
to forty years of age; then he preferred Heb. 11. 25, 26, 27
suffering, not only before sinning, but before all the Honors, Riches and
Pleasures of Egypt; accounting the worst of Christ ( viz. Reproaches) better
than the best of the world. When Eleazar was promised to be saved from torments
and death if he would but make show of yielding, he courageously answered, It 2
Mac. 6. 24.
becomes not our age in any wise to dissemble; whereby many young persons
might think that Eleazar, being four score and ten years old, were now gone to
a strange Religion. Thus also, one of the seven Brethren, in the name of the
rest; We are ready to cap. 7. 2.
die, rather than transgress the laws of our fathers; meaning such Laws as God,
of old, had given to their Fathers, to be observed by them, and by their
Posterity, Age after Age. Polycarpus, Eccl. l. 4. c. 15.
when the Governor promised to let him go free if he would deny Christ,
answered, I have served him four score and six years, and he never hurt me in
any thing; how shall I curse him who has saved me? And the Governor adding
one while promises, another while threatenings Polycarpus thus cuts o^l all, why
do thou make delays? inflict what thou lists. So Galea(...), Gentleman of
great Estate, who suffered Martyrdom at S(...)t-ang(...) a Italy; being much
pressed by his friends to recant, and save his life, he replied, that death was
much more tweet to him with the Testimony of Verity, than life with the least
deny^ of truth. Hooper desired rather to be discharged of his Bishopric, than
yield to certain Ceremonies. A man were better disp^^ase all his Friends, all
his Relations, yea, all the world than to displease his God, and displease his
own Conscience So Cyprian, when Augustine relates the story.
the Emperor, as he was going to execu(...). told him, that he would give him
space to consider whether (...)re not Letter cast in a grain into the fire,
than be so miserably (...)in: to which he replied. In re tam sancta
deliberation (...) There needs no deliberation in this case. The lik^ (...)e
History of France, in the year 1572. presently after (...) and persidious
slaughter and massacre of so man(...) of Protestants by treacherous bloody
Papists, Charles th(...) of France, called the Prince of Conde, and prop(...)
his c(...)ce, either to go to Mass, or to die presently, or to (...)r
per(...)al imprisonment: To which he returned this not^e answer that by God's
help he would never choose the first: and for either of the two latter, he left
it to the King's pleasure and God's Providence. Thus you see that the people of
God have, when put to it, chose rather to suffer than to sin. But

Fourthly, That they shall be sure to suffer with a witness, that Mark 8. 35.
For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; but whosoever There is no loss
but gain, in losing for Christ.
shall lose his life for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall save it. It Is
a very dangerous thing for men to prefer the safety of their natural lives
before the Glory of Christ, the cause of Christ, the Gospel of Christ, and the
Profession of his name. It Is certain that the Glory of Christ ought to be more
dear and precious to us than our very lives: Christ, for our Redemption and
Salvation, freely and readily lays down his life, I lay down my life for Joh.
10. 15.
my sheep; and shall we stand with him for ours, when our call is clear, to lay
them down for his sake and the Gospel's sake. He that shall attempt to save his
life by crossing his light, by shifting off the truth, or by forsaking of
Christ, shall lose it. It Is a gainful loss to suffer for the truth; it is a
lossful gain, by timeserving and base complying with the times, the lusts, the
wills, the humors of the men of this Age (in whom the spirit of Cain and Fsau
works so furiously) to provide for our present safety, security, plenty, peace
and ease, etc. either by denying the truth or by betraying the truth, or by
exchanging the truth, or by forsaking the truth Mat. 10. 39. He that finds
his life shall lose it. This is a strange expression, a riddle to the world, a
seeming contradiction, such as natural reason can never reconcile. He that 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20
finds his life, that is, redeemeth it with the forfeiture of his Faith, with
the shipwreck of his Conscience, makes a loser's bargain; he make^ more haste
than good speed, whilst in running from death as far as he can, he runs to it
as fast as he can: See it in some great instances, when Henry the fourth of
France French History.
had conquered his enemies, he turned Papist, and gave this reason of it, That
he might settle himself in peace and safety; Ravillak, who slew him as he was
riding abroad in his Coach to refresh himself, confessed that the reason why he
stabbed him was because he was of two Religions; as thus, by his sinful
endeavors to save his life he lost it. There was one Philbert Hamli^ in Non
p^test qui pati timet, ejus esse qui p^ssusest. Tertul.
France, having converted a Priest to the profession of the truth, was,
together with the Priest, apprehended, and cast into prison at Bordeaux; but
after a while, the Priest being terrified with the prison, and fear of death,
renounced Christ, and was set at liberty: Whereupon Philbert said unto him, O
unhappy and more than miserable man. is it possible, that to save your life for
a few days, you should so deny the truth? Know therefore, though A Prediction.
you have avoided the Corporal fire, yet your life shall not be prolonged, for
you shall die before me; and you shall not have the honor to die for the cause
of Christ, but you shall be an example to Apostates: And accordingly, as he
went out of the prison, two Gentlemen, that had a former quarrel with him, met
him, and slew him: And thus also, he lo^t his life by endeavoring sinfully to
save it. The Angrognian; that yielded to the Papists, Acts and Monuments, Fol.
885.
and complied with them, that they might sleep quietly in a whole skin, were
more sadly and cruelly l^ndled by the Papists, than those that continued s^out
courageous and resolute for the truth. Under the fourth Persecution there were
some Christians, who for fear of torments and death, denied their faith and
sacrificed to Idols, yet did not their bloody Persecutors spare them; and i^
was observed, that being full of guilt, they went to their deaths with dejected
and ill-favored countenances; so that the very Gentiles took notice of it, and
reproached them as base Apostates, and as such who were worthy to suffer as
evildoers. (...) that was Chaplain to Bishop P^dl^y, refusing to die in
Christ's cause with his Master, said Mass against his Conscience, and soon
after pined away with sorrow and grief. A Smith in King ^dward's the Sixth's
days, called Richard Denton, was a forward Acts and Monuments, third Volume,
page 960.
Professor of Religion; and by his Christian instruction, the happy instrument
of the conversion of a young man to the Faith: afterward, in the Reign of
Queen Mary, this young man was cast in prison for his Religion; who remembering
his old friend, and spiritual father, the Smith (to whom he always carried a
reverend respect for the good he had received by him) sent to know whether he
was imprisoned also; and finding that he was not, desired to speak with him;
and when he came, he asked his advice, whether he thought it best for him to
remain in prison, and whether he would encourage him to burn at a stake for his
Religion: To whom the Smith answered, that his cause was good, and that he
might with comfort suffer for it, but for my part (said the Smith) I cannot
burn: But shortly after, he that could not burn for Religion, by God's just
Judgment, was burned for his Apostasy; for his shop and house being set on
fire, and he overbusie to save his Goods, was burnt in the flames. They that
will not burn for Christ when he calls them to it, shall burn whether they will
or no. He that will not suffer for Christ, shall be sure to suffer worse things
from Christ, than ever he could have suffered for Christ: And therefore Doctor
Tailor the Martyr, hit the nail Ibid. 1382.
when he said, If I shrink from God's truth (said he) I am sure of another
manner of death than Judge Hales had; who being drawn for fear of death, to do
things against his light and Conscience, did afterward drown himself. Cyprian,
in his Sermon De Lapsis, makes mention of diverse, who forsaking the Profession
of their Faith, were given over by God, to be possessed by evil spirits, and so
died fearfully and miserably; making good that word that is more worth than a
world, Joh. 12. 25. He that (...) is here used of excessive and preposterous
love: He that so loves his life, that out of a desire to save it, he denies
me and my Gospel, so this Greek word is used, Mat. 10. 37.
loves his life, shall lose it; and he that hates his life in this world,
shall keep it unto life eternal. A man that is sparing of his life when Christ
calls for it, does take the ready way to lose it; and he that does hazard it
for him at his call, is sure to live eternally. Christ approves of no
followers, who are not resolved on the loss of what is dearest to them; yea,
even of life for his sake; therefore does he mention our life to be hated;
which is not to be understood absolutely, as if it were a sin to love life, as
it is the gift of God, or that they should be weary of it; but comparatively,
that they should not love it more than Christ, his Word, his Worship, his Ways.
He that resolves to save his temporal life upon any terms, he takes the
shortest cut to lose both temporal and eternal life also: ( He that loves his
life, shall lose it:) He that prefers the honor and service of Christ above
his own life, he takes the surest way to preserve both body and soul unto
eternal life; for he that hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto life
eternal. Though life be sweet, and every creature makes much of it, from the
highest Angel to the lowest Worm; yet woe, woe to him that is set upon saving of
it when Christ calls upon him to lay it down for his sake, or the Gospels sake.
No fool to him that thinks to avoid a less danger, by running himself into a
greater danger; who thinks to save his body, by losing his soul; and to save
his temporal life, by losing eternal life. There is no loser to him who by
sinful attempts to save his life, shall lose a better life than ever he can
save. But

Fifthly, Consider, That of old there has been a very great willingness,
readiness, forwardness and resoluteness in the people of God, cheerfully to
suffer for Christ, his Truth, his Gospel, his Worship, his Ways, his
Ordinances, his interest, his honor: Consult the Scriptures in the margin, and
many others of the like import, which all knowing Christians can turn to at
Dan. 2. 16, 17. Romans 8. 36. Psalm. 44. Phil. 2. 17. Act. 20. ^2, 23, 24 cap. 21.
13, etc. Dan. 6. 1 Pet. ^. 16. Act. 5 41. Act. 7. 55, 56. 2 Cor 1. 3, 4. 5.
Acts and M^n. Fol. 857. Medestus Lie^tenant to Julian the Emperor, told him,
that when the Christians suffered they did but deride them; and the torments
(said he) with which Christians are tormented are more terrible to the
tormentors than they are to the tormented.
pleasure. To these I shall add a few examples amongst a multitude of those
blessed souls, who willingly, readily, cheerfully, resolutely, hazarded all for
Christ while they were on earth, and are now a receiving their reward with him
in heaven: Oh, how my heart leapeth for joy (said Mr. Philp^t the Martyr) that
I am so near the apprehension of eternal life; I with my fellows were carried
to the Cole-house, where we do rouse together in the straw as cheerfully (we
thank God) as others do in their beds of Down. Mr. Glover the Martyr wept for
joy of his imprisonment: And Mr. Bradford put off his cap, and thanked the
Lord, when his Keeper's Wife brought him word that he was to be burnt the next
day: and Mr. Tailor fetched a pleasant delightful frisk when he was come near
to the place where he was to suffer: Mr. Rogers. the first that was burnt in
Queen Mary's days, did sing in the flames: Vincentius laughing at ^his
tormentors, said, that death and tortures were to Christians ( socularia and
ludiera) matters of sport and pastime; and he joyed and gloried when he went
upon hot burning Coals, as if he had trod upon Roses. Fire, Sword, Death,
Prison, Famine, are all pleasures, they are all delightful to me, says Bazil;
and in his Oration for Barlaam that famous Martyr, says, that he delighted in
the close prison as in a pleasant green Meadow; and he took pleasure in the
several inventions of tortures, as in several sweet flowers: William Tim.
Martyr, in a letter to a friend of his a little before his death, writes thus;
Now I take my leave of you till we meet in heaven, and hic you after, I have
tarried a great while for you; and seeing you are so long in making ready, I
will tarry no longer for you, you shall find me merrily singing Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of Sabbath* at my journey's end, etc. And when they kindled the
fire at the feet of James Bainham, me thinks, said he, you strew Roses before
me* when the Pre^^ct urged Basil to comply with the Emperor, Socrat. Eccles.
Hist. l. 4. c. 26. Gr.
and threatened him with death if he denied; he gave him th^s resolute and s^out
answer; Thou threatnest me with death (says he) and I would that it would fall
out so well on my side, that I might lay down this carcass of mine in the
Quarrel of Christ, and in de^ence of the truth, who is my Head and Captain: And
when the Pre^^ct pres^ed him to remember himself, and obey the Emperor; he
rejecting all, told him, what I am to day, the same thou shall find me to
morrow.

When Chrysostom was greatly threatened by the cruel Empress and others* he made
this answer: If they keep me poor, I know Christ had not a house to put his
head in: If they silence me, and put me out of the Synagogue; so was that poor
man that confessed Joh. 9. 22, 24. Act. 5. 40. cap. 12. Ephesians. 6. 20. Rev. 1.
Christ, and the Apostles enjoined not to speak in the name of Jesus: If they
cast me into prison, so was Jeremy, St. Peter and St Paul, and many more: If I
am forced to flee my Country, I have that beloved J^hn, and that Atlas-like
Athanasius, for Precedents of the like nature: Or whatsoever else should be
done unto me, I have the holy Martyrs for my fellow sufferers; and I will never
count my life dear unto me, so I may finish my course with joy; but I will, by
God's help* be ever ready with all my heart, to suffer any thing for the name
of Jesus Christ, and for the least jot of his truth.

Neither were they only a few choice persons, who willingly, readily,
cheerfully and resolutely endured Martyrdom in Christ's Cause; but such
multitudes, year after year, month after month, Hier. id Helic. ^.
week after week, and day after day, as that one of the Ancients testifies;
That there was never a day in the year, except the first of January, whereunto
the number of five hundred Martyrs at least might not be ascribed: So many, one
after another, in one Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 8. c. 9.
day suffered, as the Executioner blunted his sword; and with the pains he
took, fainted. That which many of them endured, though to flesh and blood it
seemed intolerable; yet with much patience, excellent cheerfulness, and divine
courage, they endured it. They were not like bears, halled to the stake; but
while Persecutors were sitting on their Judgment-seats, and condemning some
Christians, others leaped in, and professed themselves Christians, and suffered
the uttermost that could be inflicted with Eusebius. l. c. citat.
joyfulness and a kind of pleasantness, singing Psalms as long as their breath
lasted.

Bucer, in an Epistle to Calvin, tells him, that there were some that would
willingly redeem to the Commonwealth the ancient liberty of worshipping Christ
with their very lives. True Grace makes a Christian of a very heroic nature;
Holy Zeal will make a Christian very ready to endure any thing, or to suffer
any thing for Christ, his Worship, his Ways, his Truth.

It is a high vanity for any man to think of getting to heaven without
suffering; in all the Ages of the world, the Saints have found the way to
happiness paved with troubles; and we must not think of finding it strewed with
Rose-buds.

When Paul and Silas were in prison, their hearts were so full Act. 16. 25.
Paul (...) his chain wh^^h he did bear for the Gospel sake, and was as proud of
it, as a woman of her Ornaments, says Chrysostom.
of joy, that they could not hold; but at midnight, when others were sleeping,
they must fall a singing out the Praises of the Most High, they found more
pleasure than pain, more joy than sorrow, more comfort than torment in their
Bonds; the consolations of the spirit rose so high in their souls, that their
prison was turned into a Palace, yea, into a Paradise. Paul was a man that took
a great deal of pleasure in his sufferings for Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 10. Therefore
I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions,
in distresses for Christ's sake: He did not only bear his sufferings patiently,
but cheerfully also; he often sings it sweetly out, I Paul, a prisoner of Jesus
Christ, Co^^s. 4. 3, 10. Romans 16. 7. Ephesians. 6. 20. 2 Timothy 1. 16. etc. not I Paul
an Apostle, nor I Paul wrapped up into the third heaven, nor I Paul that have
more Gifts, Parts and Learning than others; but I Paul a prisoner, to show how
much he rejoiced in his bonds and sufferings for Christ Chrysostom did not hold
Paul so happy for his rappture into Paradise, as he did for his imprisonment
for Christ.

Oh the sweet looks, the sweet words, the sweet hints, the sweet in-comes, the
sweet joggings, the sweet embraces, the sweet influences, the sweet
discoveries, the sweet love letters, the sweet love tokens, and the sweet
comforts that Christians experience in their sufferings for Christ; in all
their troubles and persecutions they may truly say, we have sweet meats to
eat,* and waters of life to drink, and heavenly honey-combs to suck that the
world knows not of: And indeed, when should the torch be lighted, but in a dark
night; and when should the fire be made, but when the weather is cold; and when
should the Cordial be given, but when the Patient is weak; and when should the
God 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4, 5.
of comfort, the God of all kinds of comfort, and the God of all degrees of
comfort, comfort his people, but under their trouble^ and persecutions; for
then comfort is most proper, necessary, seasonable and suitable; and then God
will be sure to pour in the oil of joy into their hearts. But It is not Paena,
but Causa, that commends the sufferer.


Sixthly, consider that there is a great truth in that old Maxim, Non poena,
sed causa facit Martyrem:* It Is not the punishment, but the cause, that makes a
Martyr. Let every man look that his cause be good, its not the blood, but the
cause, that makes a Martyr. It Is no ways meet that I should engage to suffer in
every cause; every cause will no more bear a man out in suffering, than every
shoulder will bear every burden, or than every little River will bear every
Ship that is of the greatest burden; one man suffers as a Murderer, another
suffers as a Thief, another suffers as an Evil-doer, and another suffers as a
busy body in other men's matters; but all such Sufferers are rather
Malefactors* than Christ's Martyrs: Let none of you suffer 1 Pet. 4. 15.
as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busi^ body in other
men's matters: It is but one word in the original, (...), as Bishops in
another's Diocese, as priers into other men's matters, as pragmatical persons
that meddle with other men's concernments, without cause or call. It is not
suffering for evil doing, but suffering 2 Timothy 2. 12.
for well doing that carries the Crown: It is not just, but unjust suffering
that has the recompense of reward annexed to it: It is not 1 Pet. 3. 14. cap.
4. 14.
sufferers for the evil of sin, nor sufferers of the evil of sin; but sufferers
of the evil of punishment, for the avoiding of the evil of sin, whose Mr.
Bradford to all that profess the Gospel in Lancashire.
cause is good. When I consider the cause of my condemnation (said Mr.
Bradford) I cannot but lament, that I do no more rejoice than I do; for it is
for God's verity and truth. So that the Condemnation is not a Condemnation of
Bradford simply, but rather a condemnation of Christ, and of his Truth:
Bradford is nothing but an instrument, in which Christ and his Doctrine is
condemned Christ and the Thieves were in the same Condemnation: Sampson and the
Philistines in the same destruction, by the downfall of the house: Similis
p^na, dissimilis causa, says Augustine* Martyrdom is a Crown, as old Age, if
it be found in a way of righteousness: Though life be a poor little thing to
lay down for that Christ that has done such great things for us, and Isa. 53.
Joh. 14.
that has suffered such grievous things, and that has prepared such glorious
things for us; yet, it is too precious to lay down in any cause, but what is
honorable, just and good Luther professed to Spalatine, that he rejoiced with
all his heart, that God called him to suffer for so Ep. ad Spalat. Fol 287.
good a cause, acknowledging himself unworthy of such a favor. It is the
goodness of a man's cause that makes him divinely merry with the Martyrs, and
to sing in a prison with Paul and Silas: When a man's cause is good, he may
call his sufferings the sufferings of Christ, and Colos. 2. 24. Gal. 6. 17.
his skars and marks; (...), brands and marks of the Lord Jesus. The Jews have
been hated and persecuted for many Ages; first by the Romans, and since by all
other nations, but not for any just or righteous cause, but for their impiety,
obstinacy and contempt of Christ and his Mat 22. 2, to 8. cap. 23. 30, 34, 37,
38.
Gospel, and for killing the Prophets, and stoning them that were sent amongst
them. But gracious persons are endued, not only with reason, but also with
spiritual understanding, and divine wisdom, which makes them well weigh what
they do, and what they suffer: Sincere Christians advisedly endure what they
endure for the faith's sake ( so fight I 1 Cor. 9. ^6.
not as one that beats the air) that is, not as a mad man that fights with
a shadow, not weighing what he does; but as a man of understanding, that does
very well know that I have good cause to do what I do. Persecutors commonly
judge suffering Saints to be no better than Sots, Idiots, Franticks, mad, etc.
not knowing the goodness of the cause for which they suffer, nor the noble ends
which they aim at in suffering, nor the blessed fruits that attend their
sufferings.

But when may a man safely and groundedly conclude that his cause is good, or
that he suffers for well doing, or for a good cause, and as a Christian? Now,
to this question I shall give these following answers.

First, When a man suffers for doing that which Christ commands, 1 Pet. 4. 15,
16.
his cause is good. You know there is nothing in all the Scripture that God
stands more upon than purity of religion, than purity of worship, James 1. 27.
Phil. 3. 3. Joh. 4. 23, 24.
than purity of ordinances, in opposition to all mixtures and corruptions
whatsoever. O sirs, the great God stands upon nothing more in all the world,
than upon purity in his worship. There is nothing that does Mat. 21. 12, 13.
Joh. 2. 15, 16, 17.
so provoke and exasperate God against a people, as mixtures in his worship and
service; and no wonder, for mixtures in his worship are expresly-cross to his
commands, and pollutions in worship do sadly reflect upon the name of God, the
honor of God, the truth of God; and therefore his heart rises against them;
defilements in worship do sorely reflect upon the wisdom of Christ and the
faithfulness of Christ, as if he were not faithful enough nor wise enough, nor
prudent nor Heb. 3. 4, 5, 6.
understanding enough, to order, direct and guide his people in the matters of
his worship; but must be beholding to the wisdom, prudence and care of man, of
vain man, of sinful man, of vile and unworthy man, to complete, perfect and
make up something that was wanting in his worship and service, etc. Now if a
man suffers for owning pure worship and ordinances, for standing for pure
worship and ordinances, and for being found in the practice of pure worship and
ordinances, his cause is good, and he suffers as a Christian. But Secondly,
When a man suffers for refusing, or for not doing that which Christ condemns in
his word, then his cause is good, and he suffers as a Christian, for well
doing. Now, in matters of Divine Worship, God condemns all mixtures, all
inventions and devices of men. The very spirit, life and soul of the Second
Commandment lies in these words; Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven
Image. God abhors that men should mix their Water with his Wine, Levit. 10. 1,
2. Ezekiel. 5. 11, 12. cap. 23. 38, 39. Jer 7. 29, 30. Ezekiel. 8. 17, 18. Rev. 2.
22, 23. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. cap. 12 32. etc.
their Dross with his Gold, their Chaff with his Wheat, etc. When men will
venture to be so hardy and bold with God, as to defile his Worship with their
mixtures, then God is fully resolved to be a swift and terrible witness against
them, as you may clearly see by comparing those notable places of Scripture
together in the Margin; there is no sin that does so greatly incense and
provoke God to Jealousy and Wrath against a People, as mixtures in his
Worship. God can bear with defilements any where, rather than in Worship and
Service. God did bear much, and bear long with the Jews b^ when they had
defiled and corrupted his worship, then God gave them a Bill of Divorce, and
scattered them as Dung among the Nations. Now, when a man suffers for refusing
to worship God with a mixed worship, or with an invented or devised worship,
which Christ in his word does every where condemn; then his cause is good, and
he suffers as a Christian. But

Thirdly, they that stoutly and resolutely assert that the blessed Luke 10. 25,
26.
Scriptures are a sufficient rule to order, guide and direct them in all
matters of worship, they have a good cause; and they that suffer upon this
account, suffer as Christians, for well doing: Such vain men greatly detract
from the sufficiency of the Scripture, who mingle their own or other men's
inventions, with Ezekiel 43 8.
Divine Institutions; and who set their Posts by God's Posts, and their
Thresholds by God's Thresholds. The Precepts and Traditions It is very
remarkable that of old they were to be cut off, that made any thing like the
Institutions and Appointments of God. Exodus 30. 32, 33, 37, 38. And if some
were so served would not the world be in more love, peace, and quietness than
now it is.
of men, with their Inventions and Additions to the worship of God, are styled
Posts and Thresholds, because the Authors of them do lean and stand so much
upon them, and set them in the way to hinder others from the enjoyment of
Temple-privileges unless they will own and comply with them in their way and
mode of worship; but upon all such posts and thresholds that are of men's
setting up in the worship of God, you may run and read folly, weakness,
rottenness and madness; it is only God's Posts, God's Thresholds, God's
Institutions, God's Appointments, that have Wisdom and Holiness, Beauty and
Glory, written upon them: For men to set up their Posts by God's Posts, and to
give their Posts equal Honor and Authority with God's Posts; this is a
defiling of the Worship of God, and a profaning of the name of God, which he
will certainly avenge, for he will admit no rival or Proprietary in the things
of his Worship. O sirs, the blessed Adero plenitudin^^ S^rip^u^arum, Tertul.
La(...) (...) fullness of the Scriptures.
Scriptures are sufficient to direct us fully in every thing that belongs to
the Worship and Service of God, so as that we need not depend upon the wisdom,
prudence, care and authority of any men under heaven to direct us in matters of
Worship, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness: That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works. The Scriptures are sufficient to inform the ignorant, to confute
the erroneous, to reform the vicious, and to guide and direct, support and
comfort, those that are gracious: Here a Lamb may wade, and an Elephant may
swim; here is milk for babes, and meat for strong men; here is comfort for the
afflicted, and succor for the tempted, and ease for the troubled, and light
for the clouded, and enlargement for the straightened, etc. Oh, how full of light,
how full of life, how full of love, how full of sweetness, how full of
goodness, how full of righteousness and holiness, etc. is every Chapter, and
every Verse in every Chapter; yea, and every Line in every Verse. The Rabbis
say, that a mountain of matter hangs upon every word of Scripture, yea, upon
every tittle of Scripture. When the people of God have been in any outward or
inward distresses or troubles, God never sends them to the sh^p of men's
Traditions and No Histories are comp^rable to the Histories o^ the Scripture,
1. For Antiquity, 2. Rarity, 3. Variety, 4. Brevity, 5. Perspicuity* 6.
Harmony, 7. Verity; all which should greatly encourage Christians to a serious
perusal of them.
inventions, but he still sends them to the blessed Scriptures, Isa. 8. 20. To
the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light ((...), no morning) in them: cap. 34. 1^. Seek ye out
of the book of the Lord, and read; ^^ one of th^se shall (...), none shall want
her ma^e; for my mouth, it has commanded, and my spirit, it has gathered
them: And in the New Testament, Christ sends his hearers to the Scriptures;
Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life,
and they are they which testify of me: The Greek word (...), that is here
rendered search, signifies a strict, narrow, curious, diligent search; we must
search the Scripture, as we would search for Gold, or for some Precious Stones,
which we would f^in find; we must search the Scriptures, as Hunters seek and
search out their Game. The Scripture is so perfect a Rule, that the most
specious observances, the most glorious performances, the most exact worship,
is no way acceptable unto God, if not directed in his word. They may have,
(...), Colos. 2. 23.
A show of Wisdom in Will Worship, to the pleasing of men, not to the honor of
God. God gave Moses a pattern for Exodus 25. 9.
the making of the Tabernacle, and David for the Temple and all Heb. 8 5.
things were to be ordered and regulated according to this pattern God has set
us a perfect Rule of Worship in his Word; and no Service pleases him, but what
is according to this Rule: As our Joh. 4. 20, 21. 22.
Savior told the woman of Samaria, concerning the Samaritan Worship at Mount
Gerazim, and the Jewish Worship at Jerusalem; That the Samaritans worshipped
they know not what; the Jews knew what they worshipped, for Salvation was of
the Jews: Why so? because the Jews had God's special direction, and appointment
of God's Word for their Worship and Service, which the Samaritans had not. All
our Worship must be regulated by God's Will, not our own: Non ex arbitrio Deo
servi^ndum, sed ex imperio: Not according to our own fancy, but God's Command
and Prescription. I say, of all humane invented Will Worship of God, as
Tertullian of the Heathen Worship; Ex religione super s^itio compingitur, and
eo irreligiosior, quanto Ethnicus paratior: Men in this are no better than
laboriously superstitious, taking pains to be irreligious. And so the Apostle
sends his hearers to the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, ^^
as to a surer word than that of the Revelation, all which speaks out the
sufficiency of the Scripture, to direct us in all matters of Divine Worship,
and in what ever else may help on the internal and eternal welfare of our
precious and immortal souls.

That which bred the Popish Religion, Superstition, Idolatry, and Pompous
Worship, was men's departing from the word, and not cleaving to the word, as a
sufficient rule to direct them in all matters of worship; and what woeful
mischiefs and miseries have been brought upon the people of the Lord in this
Land, and else where, by men that make not the word the rule of their worship,
but cry up an outward pompous worship, I have no mind to enumerate at this
time: But how will these vain men that accuse the holy Scriptures of
insufficiency, blush, be ashamed, and confounded, when in the great day, the
Lord shall plead the excellency, and vindicate the Sufficiency and Authority of
his blessed Book, in opposition to all the mixtures of men's Traditions with
Divine Institutions? Now, they that suffer for asserting the holy Scriptures to
be a sufficient rule to order, guide and direct them in all matters of worship,
they have a good Cause, and they suffer as Christians, for well doing. But

They that are Assertors of the true God, in opposition to the Idols

Fifthly, They who assert that God will not bear with mixtures Isa. 29. 13, 14.
Mat. 15. 3, 6, 8, 9.
debase the worship and service of God, and makes the worship a vain worship,
as the mixing of water with wine is the debasing of the wine; and the mixing of
Tin with Silver, or Brass with Gold, is debasing of the Silver and Gold; so for
men to mix and mingle their Traditions and Inventions with God's Institutions,
is to debase the worship and service of God, and to detract from the excellency
and glory of it. You know that the Kings and Princes of the world have most
severely punished such, who by their base mixtures, have imbased their Coin.
And assuredly there is a day a coming, when the King of Kings will most
severely punish all such who have imbased his worship and service, by mixing
Humane Inventions and Romish Traditions with his holy Institutions, Rev. 22.
18. For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the Prophecy of
this book; if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the
Plagues that are written in There will come a day, when Jews, Turks and Papists
shall pay dear for adding to the Scriptures.
this book. And no wonder; for what horrible pride, presumption, stoutness and
baseness is it in foolish man, to be so bold with the great God, as to dare to
mix any thing of his own with his worship and service, which, according to
Divine Institution, is so perfect and complete. God will never bear it, to see
men lay their Dirt upon his Gold, and to put their Rags upon his Royal Robes.
Ah Christians, it is best to stand up for holy Ordinances and pure worship, in
opposition to all mixtures whatsoever. Oh, do not touch a polluted worship, do
not plead and contend for a polluted worship, but let Baal plead for Baal; and
though all 1 King. 18. 21. Rev. 13. 3, 4. 6, 17. cap. 14 9, 11.
the world should wander after the Beast, yet do not you wander after the
Beast; and though every forehead should have the mark of the Beast upon it, yet
do you abhor his mark, and whatever else it be that does but smell and savor
of the Beast. It Is a very dangerous thing for any Mortals to be adding to God's
worship and word; there is a horrible curse that hangs over the heads of all
such that add or detract from the blessed Scriptures. If falsifiers of Coin are
liable unto the Civil Curse of the Law, how much more shall the Anathema of
Eternal Damnation be inflicted upon the corrupters of God's word and worship.
To them that add thereto, God will add all the Plagues of this book, (to wit,
the seven last Plagues) and cast them into the lake of sire and brimsion^, Rev.
19.
with the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet. Now they that suffer for
asserting that God will not bear with mixtures in his Worship and Service, but
revenge himself upon the corrupters of his Worship and Service; they have a
good cause, and they suffer as Christians, for well doing. But

Sixthly, They who are hated, scorned, despised, reproached, 1 Pet. 4. 4, 5.
J^de 15. Rev. 3. 4. 1 Cor. 7 23. Gal. 1. 10.
with the times, and with the wills and lasts of men, and with the worship of
the world, and the ways of the world; they have a good cause, and they suffer
as Christians, for well doing: And is not this the very case of the people of
God this day; for would they (or durst they) comply with the times, and with
the wills and lusts of men, and with the worship of the world, and the ways of
the world, they should be white boys; and in lead of prisons, might stand in
Princes Palaces as well as others; and might eat the fat, and drink the sweet,
and live at ease, and grow rich as well as others. But some do not love* that
we should either harp hard or long upon this string; and therefore,

Seventhly, They that are assertors of Christ, of the true Messia, against him
or Gospel Ordinances, Gospel-administrations, they have a good cause; and if
they suffer upon that account, they suffer as Christians, for well doing. The
sufferings of the people of God for the first three hundred years, were clearly
stated for Christ and the Gospel in common. 'Twas the administration of the
Gospel in the whole, and in every part of it, and Gentilism advanced instead
thereof, that brought on a warm Persecution. Seeing serious Christians are for
pure Ordinances, and pure Administrations; and what they have suffered, and do
daily suffer upon that account, all that do not wilfully shut their eyes, may
easily discern. It Is sad when such men's mouths must be stopped, who are
qualified, gifted, graced and called, both by God and 2 Cor. 4 4. Rev. 14. 6.
men, to preach the glorious, the everlasting Gospel: But when the Devil and
his Factors have done their worst, the Gospel will get ground by all the
opposition that is made against it. Among many other Visions that John had, He
saw an Angel fly in the Rev. 14. 7, 8, etc.
midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell
on the earth; and to every Nation, and Rindred, and Tongue, and People; saying
with a loud voice, fear God, and give glory to him, etc. Now mark what next
follows; Another Angel, saying, Babylan is fallen, is fallen; Babylon the Great
is fallen. Now, behold the efficacy and power of Gospel-preaching; let but the
Gospel be sincerely preached, and Babylon must down. The Devil and Dagon must
fall before the Ark of God's Presence; The more wicked men rage, the more the
Gospel spreads, as you may see, Act. 5. 40, 41, 42. cap. 8. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 12.
Act. 11. 19, 20, 21, 26. cap. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 23, 24. Heb. 11. 34, 35, 36 Rev.
2. 10. Act. 16. 23, 24, 25
whatsoever the purposes, projects, pretenses, policies, conspiracies,
combinations, and confederacies, of lewd, superstitious, Atheistical, wicked
wretches be, yet they shall never be able to stop the stream of God's Word, dam
up the Wells of Salvation, or hinder the free passage of the Gospel, no more
than they are able to bind up the Wind in their sists, or stop the Sun from
running its race, or hinder the Clouds from watering the earth. It is true that
the faithful Ministers of the Gospel may, by the instruments of Satan, be
stocked, stoned, sawn asunder, burned with fire* slain with the sword, clapped
up in prison, fettered in chains, plundered, etc yet the Gospel may be, nay is,
in lively operation; a light that cannot be put out, a heat that cannot be
smothered, a power that cannot be broken; for even then, the courageous and
constant sufferings of God's faithful Ministers, and their cheerful and patient
bearing of the Cross, does, as by a lively P^il. 1. 7, 12, 13, 14, 17.
voice, publish and proclaim the truth of the Gospel for which they suffer; and
serves to win many to the Faith of Christ. Paul's bonds fell out to the
furtherance of the Gospel. Paul's Iron chain was more famous and glorious all
the world over, than all the Golden chains in N^ro's Palace. Whatsoever
persecuting Popes, and persecuting Emperors, have attempted against the
Gospel. Sculiet. Annal.
Christ has turned it all to the furtherance of the Gospel. The Popes Bulls,
and the Emperor's Thunderbolts did not amaze and discourage men, but did
exceedingly animate and encourage them to own the Gospel, to embrace the
Gospel, and to stand up in the defense of the Gospel. Caesar sending the
Protestants Confession Scul^e^. Annal. 274.
abroad, to other Christian Princes, as desiring their advice about it,
dispersed and spread it more in all parts than all the Lutheran Preachers could
have done; for which cause L^^ther laughs not a little, at the foolish wisdom
of the Papists, in a certain Epistle of his to the Elector of Saxony. Julian
observing, that the more Ministers and Christians were persecuted, the more
they increased, he gave over Persecution, and spared those whom he could have
wished out of the world: And would it not be the wisdom and the interest of the
Persecutors in our days, to write after Julian's Copy? and if they will not,
then let them remember, that it is the most effectual way under heaven, to
propagate those truths, opinions, ways, principles, and practices, which their
hearts rise and swell against, by laying them in bonds which stand up most
eminently in the defense of those truths, opinions, ways, principles and
practices. The nature of Man is very curious and inquisitive. Men, as men, are
led by common compassion to desire to understand the grounds of men's
sufferings. By this means the sufferings, especially the imprisonment, of the
Apostles, carried the Doctrine of the Gospel to many places where the Apostles
themselves never came, nor perhaps could come; no doubt but the fame of their
suffering went faster and farther too, than they could go. But

Eighthly, They that are Assertors of any one fundamental Act. 24. 14. 1 Cor.
11. 9. 2 Pet. 2. 1. Gal. 5. 20.
truth, in opposition to error and heresy truly so called, have a good cause;
and if they suffer upon that account, they suffer as Christians for well doing.
Such were those Christians that suffered under the Arian Emperors,
Constantius, Valens and others; who suffered for maintaining that Christ was
coessential, coequal and coeternal with the Father: And such were Wickliff,
John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, etc. Are there none this day among us that
suffer in their names, in their estates, in their persons, in their liberties,
for asserting and maintaining the great truths of the Gospel, in opposition to
Socinianism, Arianism, Popery, Will Worship; etc. Are there no Socinian
Atheists among us, who deny with open face the Godhead of Christ, and of the
Holy Ghost; as if Christ were a constituted God, and not of the same substance
with the Father from all. Eternity; not a God by Nature, but by Donation in
time? And though God has raised up several Champions in this his Israel, to
disarm them of all their Subtilties, and to beat them out of all their
Trenches; though they were dug as low as hell, yet, how have they put on Prove.
27. 22.
a brow of brass, and do all they can to bring on a warm Persecution upon their
opposers? But

Ninthly, They that plead for the reduction of all Ordinances, viz. That no
Ordinance, Worship, Government or Discipline is to be held up or maintained in
the Church, but what has the stamp of a Divine Institution upon it. The
worshipping of God in Spirit and in Truth, is that Worship Joh. 4. 23, 24. Rom,
1. 9. Phil. 3. 3.
which God commands, commends, accepts and rewards: And therefore let us make
it our business, our work, our heaven, to keep close to this kind of Worship;
Christ will shortly come in 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10.
flames of fire, and vindicate this kind of Worship against all opposers. Hold
out Faith and Patience a little, and Christ will call all the troublers of his
Church and People into the Valley of Decision; Joel. 3. 14. Isa. 40. 10. Jer.
21. 5. Ezekiel. 32. 2.
and there, with a strong hand, and with an outstretched arm, he will plead
with them, and with all such as have muddied the Waters of his Sanctuary, and
polluted those Silver Streams; and then it will appear whether the outward
ceremonious worshipping of God, or the worshipping him in Spirit and in Truth, be
the true Worship. Judicious Hooker determines, that in God's Service to do that
which we are not to do, is a greater fault, than not to do that which we are
commanded. Amongst other reasons, he gives this to our purpose; because in the
one we seem to charge the Law of God with hardness only, and in the other, with
foolishness and insufficiency; which God gave us as a perfect Rule of his
Worship and Service. But

Tenthly and lastly, They that are Assertors of those precious 10.
Privileges, that are the purchase of the blood of Christ, they have Ephesians. 1.
22, 23. Colos. 1. 18. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
a good cause; and if they suffer upon that account, they suffer as Christians,
for well doing. As for instance,

First, Christ as Mediator, has purchased for himself a Headship Rome or
elsewhere, they have a righteous Cause; and if they suffer upon that account,
they suffer as Christians, for well doing.

Secondly, He has purchased for his People a^ Liberty to serve and worship him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness all Luke 1. 69, 70, 74, 75. Gal. 5.
1.
the days of their life. He has purchased for his People a Liberty from the
Ceremonies of Moses's Law, which were originally the Commands of God himself;
how much more then from all Paganish and Antichristian Ceremonies. The
imposition of traditional Observances and Ceremonies, is to reduce us under the
Jewish Yoke, which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear; Act. 15. 10.
or to impose them as equally obligatory to Conscience, as Divine Commands; or
to impose them as the immediate Worship of God, or as Duties essentially
necessary in order to Salvation, Christians justly abhor, as the Tyranny of
Rome, as the infringment of Christian Liberty, and as a Violation and making
void ^
the Commandment of God; as our Savior told the Pharisees of Mat. 15. 6.
old, That they made the Commandment of God of none effect. The Greek word
(...), signifies to deprive of all Rule and Authority. They had such a
superstitious esteem of their Traditions Ceremonies, etc. that they sought to
shoulder God out of his Throne, to divest and spoil him of his Rule and
Authority, to ungod him, as it were, by making his Commandment void and
invalid. Christ reprehends three things in the Jewish Traditions; Ch^mn^t.
1. That they obtruded outward Cleanness on God, instead of the Purity of the
heart: 2. That by their Humane Traditions, they made void the Worship of God:
3. That they preferred Humane Traditions* before the Divine Precepts; and were
so taken with their Traditions, that they neglected the Divine Precepts; yea,
made them altogether vain, as the Papists, and others that are Popishly
affected, do this day. They that are the most zealous Dr. Fuller S^m.
for the introducing of useless Ceremonies in the Church, are usually the most
negligent to preach the Cautions in using them; and simple people, like
Children in eating of Fish, swallow bones and all to the danger of choking:
Besides, what is observed of horse-hairs, that lying nine days in water, they
turn to Snakes; So some Ceremonies, though dead at first, in continuance of
time quicken, get stings, and may do much mischief; especially in such an Age,
wherein the meddling of some, have justly awakened the Jealousy of all. Now,
whoever shall suffer for asserting of any of the precious Privileges, that are
the Purchase of Christ's Blood; they suffer in a Righteous Cause, they suffer
as Christians, for well doing. And thus you see how a man may know when his
Cause is good, just and righteous; and when he suffers as a Christian, for well
doing. But

Seventhly, Consider, That it is not enough for a man to have a want a clear
Call: Some may suffer for the cause of God, and yet sin in suffering, for want
of a Call. Christ calls not all to suffer; Phil. 1. 29. A Priest might enter
into a Leper's house without danger, because he had a calling from God so to
do: And we may follow God dry-shod through the Red Sea when God gives a Call.
to some it is given, to others it is not given. When a man's Call is clear,
his Peace will be sweet, his courage will be high, and his comforts will be
strong, though his sufferings be never so great, nor never so long. Though it
be a high honor to suffer for the Gospel, yet no man ought to take this honor
upon himself but he that is called of God. Christians must take as much heed
how they espouse a suffering state, as how they shun a suffering state: I am
not to go to prison upon choice, but upon a Call, but upon a Warrant under
God's own hand; though it be an argument of a gracious Spirit, to be always of
a ready and forward mind to suffer for Christ: And when he demands who will go
(...).
with me? who will bear my Cross? cheerfully to answer, I will go Lord, let me
bear it: yet should we take heed, that as we hang not back when he says go; so
that we run not before he sends us, before he calls us.

Quest. But how shall I know when I am called to suffer, when I am called to
lay down Life, Liberty and All, for the Profession of Christ and the Gospel? To
this I answer;

First, When the Truth will sufer, and the Name of God suffer,

Secondly, When the case stands so with us, that we cannot etc. without denying
of Christ or the Gospel, or without concealing this precious Truth or that, or
without turning our backs upon this Ordinance or that, etc. then we are called
to suffer when we cannot preserve our Lives, our Liberties, our Estates,
without denying of Christ, or the Concerns of Christ, in one degree or another,
in one kind or another; then we are called to lay down our Lives, our
Liberties, our Estates, etc. at the feet of Christ, as the Saints and Martyrs
of old have done before us.

Thirdly, when our way is so hedged up with thorns, that we Hos. 2. 6.
that we cannot get out or come off, but we must either sin or suffer; Dan. 3.
17.
then I must, with the three Champions, choose rather to burn than to bow; and
with Daniel to the Lyon's Den, than to omit my duty; and with Moses, choose to
suffer afflictions with Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin, which are but for a
season. I may safely and groundedly conclude, that Christ calls me to suffer,
when I must either sin or suffer: When the case stands thus, then I may be
confident of the singular Presence of God with me, the special blessing of God
upon me, and a gracious or a glorious deliverance out of all my sufferings. But

Fourthly and lastly, When a Christian, to the best of his understanding,

Eighthly, Consider that the Sufferings of the Saints in these days Maccab. 6.
9, 10. cap. 7. 1, 2, 3* 4. Euse^. (...). Hist. (...). 6.
Jews in the days of Antiochus; and on Christians, in the times of the ten
notorious Persecutions under the Roman Emperors; and to those that have been
inflicted upon the Martyrs since: So cruel was the sight of those Tortures
which Persecutors inflicted, as exceeds all expression: Constant Christians had
their flesh ^orn from their backs with Rods, Scourges, Whips and Cords, to as
their bones lay bare; and the raw parts of their bodies were washed with
Vinegar and Salt: They were stretched on Racks, their legs were broken, and so
left miserably to perish: They were goared with sharp pricks under the lowest
parts of their Him. 10. de Romans Anno. Mart. Laddelacerda computeth forty four
several kinds of Torments wherewith the Primitive Christians were tried. Adv.
Sa^r. cap. 128.
nails: their bodies were scraped with thels to death, their backs were fleaed;
their skins were pulled over their heads, from the brow to the chin: Their
noses, lips, ears, hands and feet were cut off; and they, as Sacrifices, cut in
gobbe^s: Their tongues were cut out by the roots, and pulled out of their jaws:
Their eyes were boared, and dug out: Their bodies were rent and pulled in
pieces by strong boughs forced together by instruments, and let loose when the
limbs of the bodies of Martyrs were tied fast unto them: Their limbs were also
pulled to pieces with wild horses: Their brains were knocked out with Fullers
clubs: Their legs were broken in pieces: They were burnt with fire: They were a
long while together parched with hot burning coals: Being hanged by the heels,
and their heads downward, over a soft fire, they were choked with smoke: They
were roasted at the fire, as flesh to be eaten used to be roasted: They were
le^^urely broiled on Grid-irons set over the fire: They were fried in read hot
iron chairs, as in a drying pan, which annoyed the standers by with a stench:
Hot boiling lead was poured down their throats: They clapped fiery plates of
Brass upon the most tender parts of their bodies. A persecuting Tyrant
considering the nature of the Basil in 40. Mar. Co^c. (...) Greg. Nyssen de
iijd. m, Ora^. ^.
Country, that it was terrible cold; and the time of the year, that it was
Winter, and a night wherein the cold extremely increased; and that the North
Wind then blew there; commanded forty Christians to be set slark naked under
the open Air in the midst of the City, to freeze to death: Then when they heard
that charge; with joy, casting away, even their innermost Vestment, they went
on to their death by Cold. They end^^ed the Eccl(...). Hi^i. ^. 5. cap. ^.
violence of Libba^ds, Bears, Wild Boars, and Bulls. Attalus and Alexander were
twice baited with Wild Beasts, to be torn in pieces by them (as Eusebius
rep^rts) Attalus escaping the Bea^ts, was reserved to other torments; to be
burnt to death in an Iron Chair, heated red-fire hot. Macedonius, Theodulus and
Socra. Hist. l. 3. cap. 13.
Tatianus were laid upon a Grid iron, and broiled to death. There were many
Christians together stopped up in Lakes or Caves, Mag. Cent. 4. cap. 3. Ex
Theod^re^^.
artificially made close; which Lakes or Ditches, were filled with a company of
Dormise, kept hungry, to g^aw and feed upon the poor Christians, they being all
the while bound hand and ^oot, that they could not keep of those hunger-starved
creatures which were kept without meat also, purposely that they might fasten
with the more eagerness upon the bodies of those precious Christians. They were
destroyed with hunger, thirst and cold. Such Eusebius. (...). Hist. l. 5. c. 1. l.
8. c. 6, 7, (...). Ni^eph. l. 7. ^. 11, 12.
as were stistled in prisons, they cast to dogs; setting Watchmen night and
day, lest any of them should be buried: And such remainders as were left both
of Beasts and Fire, in part torn, and in part burnt, together with the heads
and bodies of others, they cast out in like manner, unburied; and committed
them some days to the custody of Soldiers. Thus the Barbarous Cruelty of Sce^my
Beauty of Holiness. page 413 414, 415.
Persecutors, extended it self as far as it could, beyond the temporal lives of
the Martyrs. Ecclesiastical Histories tell us that all the Apostles died
violent deaths: Peter was crucified with his heels upwards, Christ was
crucified with his head upwards; but Peter thought this was too great an
honor, for him to be crucified as his Lord; and therefore he chose to be
crucified with his heels upward: And Andrew was crucified by Egeus, King of
Edessa: And James, the Son of Zebedec, was slain by Herod with the Act 12. 2.
Sword. And Philip was crucified at Hierapolis in Asta: And while Bartholomew
was preaching the glad Tidings of Salvation, multitudes sell upon him, and beat
him down with staves, and then crucified him; and after all this, his skin was
fleaed off, and he beheaded: Thomas was slain with a dart at Calununa in India:
And Matthew was slain with a Spear, say some; others say he was run through
with a Sword: And James the Son of Alpheus, (who was called the Just) was
thrown down from off a pinnacle of the Temple; and yet having some life left in
him, he was brained with a Fuller's club. Lebbeus was slain by Agbarus, King of
^dessa. And Paul was beheaded at Rome by Nero. And Simon the Canaanite was
crucified in Egypt, say some; others say that he and Jude were slain in a
tumult of the people. And Mattkias Rev. ^. 9.
was stoned to death. And John was banished into Patmos; and afterward, as
some Histories tell us, he was by that cruel Tyrant Domitian, cast into a tub
of scalding oil, and yet delivered by a Miracle. Thus all these Worthies, of
whom this world was not Heb. 11. 38.
worthy, (except John) died violent deaths; and so through sufferings, entered
into Glory. To conclude; Lactantius says, not Lact. l. 5. c. 13.
only the men among the Christians, and those of stronger years and hearts* but
even our Women, and little Children (says he) have endured all torments, and
been too hard for their tormentors: No rack, no fire could fetch so much as a
groan from them; which the stoutest Thieves and Malefactors among their
Persecutors could not undergo; but they would roar and cry out through
impatience, and disability to endure them. I suppose that more cruel torments
cannot be invented, than of old have been inflicted on Christians: Persecutors
have acknowledged, that they were E^s^b. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. cap. 1.
overcome, and had no more to inflict. Such To^tures and Torments, so
courageously and manfully, have sundry Christians in all Ages suffered; as to
them who only heard thereof, they seemed incredible; and to many who were
eyewitnesses thereof, they seemed so strange, and beyond admiration, as they
thought the Martyrs to be mad, witless and senseless: But the Martyrs had
peace, and rest, and quiet within; and the favorable Presence of God so
shining upon their souls, that they were encouraged and enabled with a holy and
heavenly bravery of Spirit, to bid defyance to their most cruel Persecutors.

Now Christians, if you compare your most cruel Sufferings with the Sufferings
of the Saints of old, how easy and light will they be found to be? What are
mole-hills to mountains, scratches upon the hand to slabs at the heart? no more
are your greatest Sufferings, to those that the Saints have met with in former
Ages And therefore, though men frown upon you, and threaten you with censures,
Imprisonment, Banishment, Confiscation, and all the evil Humane might and
cruelty can do unto you, yet be not moved; but account your selves happy, that
you have any 1 Pet. 4. 14, 15.
opportunity to do or suffer any thing, whereby you may testify that Christ
and his Concerns do lie near your hearts; and whereby you may further his
opposed Interest, and bear witness to his despised truth. But

Ninthly, Consider that the Saints and Martyrs of old have made little
reckoning or account of their Lives, Liberties, Relations or Estates, when they
stood in competition with Christ, or his Truth, Worship. Ways, Ordinances,
Interest; or with their Profession of the Christian Faith, witness that
glorious Testimony Heb. 11. 35. vide Ejtius.
that the Apostle gives of them. They would not accept deliverance; he means
deliverance from death, or preservation of life; this, though offered, they
would not accept, namely, on Persecutors terms or conditions; which was to deny
the Truth of God, or renounce their Faith in him. They scorned deliverance upon
base terms; and would rather die, than deny Christ or his Truth. This phrase,
not accepting deliverance, presupposes that deliverance was offered to them;
otherwise, they could not have rejected it; for their not accepting, was a
rejecting. Their Persecutors offered them deliverance upon their compliance
with their Wills, Lusts. Ways, Worship, etc. This is evident by that which
Nebuchadnezzar said to Daniel's three Champions, when they were accused for not
worshipping his Idol; which was this, If ye be ready to fall down and worship
the Image; he thereby implies Dan. 3. 15.
that they should be spared; for he adds, if you worship not, you shall be
cast into a fiery sin nace: And this is further evident in those to whom the
Apostle has reference, viz. the Maccabees. 2 Mac. 6. 18, to 31
And this was the common practice of the persecuting Emperors in the Ten
Persecutions; and after them, with the Antichristian Persecutors; and more
particularly, with the high Persecutors in Qucen Mary's days: But the
Christians in those several Ages, had such a mighty presence of God with them,
that they chose rather to suffer the worst of deaths, than to preserve their
lives by complying with the Wills, Lusts, Ways and Worship of their
Persecutors. For ever remember this, that the envy and malice of Persecutors is
more against the glorious Truth the Saints profess, than it is against their
persons; for let but Christians relinquish the Truth, deny the Truth, reproach
the Truth, or oppose the Truth, and presently they shall be white Boys, great
Favorites, good Sons of the Church, and what not. That the envy and malice of
Persecutors is more against the Truth, than the Professors of it, is most
evident, in that they persecute strangers whom they never knew before. It is
said of Paul, that if he found any such, he brought them bound: All was Acts 9.
2.
fish that was caught in his net. If Father or Mother, Brother or Sister, Child
or Cousin, profess the Truth, plead for the Truth, stand up for the Truth; men
of persecuting Spirits will prosecute and persecute them to the death: ( The
Brother shall deliver up Mat. 10. 21. Luke 21. 16.
the brother to death, and the father the child; and the children sha. rise up
against their parents, and cause them to be put to death.) Alphonsus Diarius
delivered up his own Brother John at Neoberg, Sleiden lib. 1. 17. Act. and Men.
F^l. 1112. Ibid. 1801.
in Germany into his enemies hands. So Doctor London made Filmer the Martyr's
own Brother witness against him by supplying of him with meat and money, and by
telling of him he should never want. So one Woodman was delivered by his own
Brother, into his enemies hands. And in the Civil Wars of France (not to
mention Hist. of C^une. of Trent, F^l. 647.
that of England) The Sons fought against their Fathers, and Brothers against
Brothers; and even Women took up Arms on both sides, for defense of their
Religion. And Philip, King of Spain, could frequently say, that he had rather
have no Subjects, than Heretics, as he called the Protestants: And out of a
blind bloody zeal, he suffered his eldest Son Charles, to be murdered Hieron.
by the cruel Inquisition, because he seemed to favor the Protestant side.
Truth is a Glorious shining Light, that discovers the ignorance and darkness,
the wickedness and baseness, the unsoundness and hypocrisy, the superstition
and vain conversation of Persecutors; and therefore they cannot endure this
light, they hate this light, and will do all they can to suppress this light,
and Joh. 3. 19.
those that hold out this light to the world. The (...) and Martyrs of old were
as willing to die as to dine. Pliny writing to Trajan (...). 10. Ep. 97. p. 316.
the Emperor, declares to him that such was their Zeal and courage in behalf
of their God, that nothing could stir them from it; neither the Imperious
checks of the potent Emperors, nor the soft language of the eloquent Orators,
could draw them from the Faith; but they steadfastly owned it, and constantly
persevered in the defense of it, and were ready and willing to lay down their
lives for it. When Ignatius was to suffer, it is better for me (says Ignatius.
he) to be a Martyr, than to be a Monarch. 'Twas a notable saying of a French
Martyr, when the rope was about his fellow; Give me (said he) that Golden
Chain, and dub me Knight of that Noble Order. Let (says Ignatius) Fire and
Cross, Invasi^n Eus^b H^st. E^cl. l. 3 c. 36.
of Beasts, breaking of bones, pulling asunder of members, grinding of my whole
body, and what else the Devil can inflict, come, Ibid. l. b. 4. c. 15.
so I may hold Jesus Christ. Lueius thanked him that brought him forth to
su^^er, and said, that he should be free from those evil Masters, and go to
God, a good Father and King. Germanicus, when he was brought forth to be torn
in pieces, and devo^^ed by wild Beasts; (The Governor persuading him to be
mindful of his Youth, that he might be spared) of his own accord, incited the
Beasts against himself. Sanctus being under Tortures for professing Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 2.
himself to be a Christian, unto every question propounded to him, he answered,
I am a Christian; whereby he occasioned his Torments to be continued to death.
Can we think that Saint Laurence would have accepted of deliverance; who, lying
on a red hot Grid-iron, over burning Coals, with an invincible spirit, thus
said to the Tyrants; Turn the side broiled enough, and see what thy burning
fire has done: And being turned, and thoroughly broiled on the other side,
says thus again; Eat that which is broiled, and try whether raw or broiled be
the sweeter. Hyppolytus, when he was tied to wild Horses to be pulled asunder,
thus prayed; Let them rend my limbs, do thou, O Christ, wrap up my soul. To
omit other particulars of the Ancient Martyrs in the Primitive Times; with
whose courageous speeches manifesting a contempt of death, of which Volumes
might be filled; it is indefinitely recorded of many, who were famous for their
Eus^b. Hist. Eccl. ^. 8. cap. 9.
Wealth, Nobility, Glory, Eloquence and Learning; that nevertheless, they
preferred true Piety and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, before all these: And
though they were entreated by many of their Kindred and Friends otherwise; yea,
and by others in great place, and by the Judge himself, that they would take
pity of themselves, their Wives, and Children: Yet would they not be induced
and entreated by so many, and great ones, so to be a^^ected with the love of
this life, as to forbear the Confession of our Savior, and to set light by the
denial of him. Thus you see what little reckoning or account the Christians of
old have made of their Lives, Liberties and Estates, or whatever else was near
or dear unto them, when these things stood in competition with Christ, his
Truth, his Worship, his Ways, his Interest; or with their Profession of the
Christian Faith.

Take a few Instances of a later date. John Huss being at the John Huss.
stake, a Pardon was offered him if he would recant; to which he answered, I am
here ready to suffer death So Hi^rom of Prague; Hierom of Prague
if I had feared the fire (said he) I had not come hither. Francis Camba, a
Martyr, in the Diocese of Millain, being much assailed Francis Camba.
by his Friends and terrified by his Foes, by no means could be overcome; but
gave thanks to God, that he was accounted worthy to suffer a cruel death for
the Testimony of his Son: And such were his expressions of joy in his
sufferings, that his Persecutors caused his tongue to be boared through, that
he might speak no more to the people. Another being offered the King's Pardon,
Mrs. Anne Askew
if she would recant, gave this resolute answer; I came not here to deny my
Lord and Master: By that which she with admirable courage and constancy
endured, she verified that which of old, Julitta spoke concerning their Sex,
viz. We women ought to be as constant as men in Christ's Cause. Another who
suffered Martyrdom Walier Mill.
in Scotland, being solicited to recant, made this reply; Ye shall know that I
will not recant the Truth; for I am Corn, I am no Chaff; I will not be blown
away with the wind, nor burst with the flail; but I will abide both. Another
being the first Mr. John Rogers.
Martyr in Queen Mary's days, being solicited to recant, that so he might save
his life; boldly replied, that which I have preached I will seal with my blood.
Another, when a Pardon was set He^per Bishop of Gloucester.
before him in Box; cried out, If you love my soul, away with it; if you love
my soul, away with it. Another, on the like occasion, Mr. Tho. Hawks, a
Gentleman in Essix.
gave this resolute answer; If I had a hundred bodies, I would suffer them all
to be torn in pieces, rather than abjure or recant. So another spoke to the
like purpose; So long (said he) Bishop Ridley.
as the breath is in my body, I will never deny my Lord Christ, and his known
Truth. Another used such a speech to one that advised Father Latimer.
him to spare himself, as Christ did to Peter on the like occasion; Get thee
behind me Satan. There are a world of other Instances of the like nature, but
enough is as good as a Feast. By all these Instances, you may see that Blessed
Word verified; ( They loved not their lives unto the death.) They were willing
to Rev. 12. 11.
lay down their lives for the Glory of Christ, and for the Truth of Christ: So
that (...), They loved not, is put for (...), they neglected or contemned,
their life; as Brightman has well observed: They slighted, yea, despised their
lives; and rather exposed them to hazard and loss, than to deny Christ, or
their holy Profession. It is a Paraphrase of the constancy of their Faith, even
unto Martyrdom for the name of Christ. But

Tenthly, Consider, That God puts a great deal of honor Phil. 1. 29.
upon suffering Saints, To suffer for Christ is honorable; God will not put
this honor upon every one, he puts this honor only upon those that are
Vessels of Honor; by Grace God makes men 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21.
Vessels of Silver and Vessels of Gold, and then casts them into the fire, to
melt and suffer for his name; and a higher Glory he cannot put upon them on
this side Glory: The Crown of Martyrdom is a Crown, that the Blessed Angels,
those Princes of Glory, are not capable of winning or wearing: And O, who art
thou? and what art thou, O man, that God should set this Crown upon thy head?
Mark at what a rate Peter speaks; ( If ye ^e reproached 1 Pet. 4. 1(...)
for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of ^lory, and of God,
rests upon you; on their part he is evil spoken of but on your part he i^
glorified:) The very suffering condition of the people of God, is at the
present a glorious condition, For the spirit of Glory rests upon them; and
therefore they must needs be glorious, yea, very glorious, upon whom the spirit
of Glory falls, Romans 8. 9, 11. Dan. 3.
and in whom the Spirit of Glory dwells. What a Glorious Mold and Metal were
the three Children made up of, that were cast into the fiery Furnace; and what
a deal of honor and glory did God put upon them in the eyes of all the world.
The Apostles all along accounted their own sufferings, and the sufferings of
the Saints for Christ; to be the highest honor and glory that God could put
upon them in this world, as will be evident by our comparing Heb. 11. 36, 37,
38 2 Cor. 11. 23, to 28 Heb. 10. 32, to 26.
the Scriptures in the Margin together. To suffer for Christ is the greatest
honor and promotion that God gives in this world, said old Father Latimer; and
therefore, when sentence was pronounced against him, he cried out, I thank God
most heartily for this great honor. So Saunders; I am the unmeetest man for
Act. and M^n. 1361. Ibid. 1744.
this high Office, that ever was appointed to it. So Careless the Martyr, this
is such an honor (said he) as the greatest Angel in Heaven, is not permitted
to have; God forgive me mine unthankfulness, etc. John N^y^s took up a Faggot
at the fire, and kissed John N^y^s.
it; Saying, Blessed be the time that ever I was born, to come to this
preferment. So when they had fastened Alice Driver with a Alice Driver.
chain to the stake to be burnt; Never (said she) did Neck-kerchief become me
so well as this Chain. So Balilus the Martyr, when Balilus.
he was to die, requested this favor of his Persecutors, (...). That he might
have his chains b(...)ed with him, as the Ensigns of his honor. What are we,
poor worms, full of vanities and lies Calvin.
(said Calvin) that we should be called to be maintainers of the Truth; for
Su^^erings for Christ are the Ensigns of Heavenly Nobility. To die for Christ
is the greatest promotion that God Philpot.
can bring any in this Vale of Misery unto, said Mr. Philpot the Martyr. A
French Soldier, for his zealous Profession of the reformed Thuan. Hist. l. 11.
Anno 1553.
Religion, was condemned to the fire with others, only he should have the
favor of going to the St^ke without a With; but he desired that he might wear
such a Chain as his fellows did, esteeming this rebuke of Christ more glorious
than the Ensigns of St Michael's Order. 'Twas an excellent saying of
Prudentius; Prudentius.
Their names (says he) that are written in red letters of Blood in the
Churches Calendar, are written in Golden Letters in Christ's Register, the Book
of Life. The Passion-days of the Martyrs were anciently called the Natalitia
salutis, the Birth-days of Salvation, the Daybreak of Eternal Brightness. We
count it a great honor Isa 9 6, 7. Dan. 3. 24, 25. Isa. 43. 2. cap. 63. 9.
to have Princes to be our Companions: Christ, the Prince of Peace; and the
Angels, those Princes of Glory, are our Companions in all our Sufferings: Such
is the honor that God puts upon his Suffering Saints, that nothing shall
hinder him from being their Companion in all their Sufferings, in all their
afflictions, in all their Temptations; and this, believe it, is no small
honor. I have read, how that in the Primitive times, when some Eusebius. Eccles.
Hist l. 5.
good people came to comfort some of the Martyrs that were in Prison, and ready
to suffer, they called them blessed Martyrs: O, no, said they, we are not
worthy of the name of Martyrs: These holy humble hearts thought Martyrdom too
high an honor for them. And Luther writing to those which were condemned to
death, says, the Lord will not do me that honor, after all that bustle I have
made in the world. In the Primitive times they were wont to call Martyrdom by
the name of Corona Martyrii, the Crown of Martyrdom. We read of a Woman-martyr,
who having her Child in her hand, gave it to another, and offered her self to
Martyrdom: Crowns (said she) are to be dealt out this day, and I mean to have
one. You see what high and honorable thoughts the Saints had of their
Sufferings in those days; and O, that all suffering Saints would labor to
write after that noble Copy that they have left upon Record. But

Eleventhly, Consider that suffering Saints do put a great deal Nebuchadnezzar,
a Decree is made, That Every People, Nation and Language Dan. 3. 28, 29.
which speak amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, shall be
cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a Dunghill, etc. Here God's Glory
wonderfully shines out of their Sufferings: Here this poor, blind, Idolatrous
Heathen Prince is forced to confess, that there is no God like Israel's God.
Basil and Tertullian do well observe of the Primitive Martyrs; that diverse of
the Heathen seeing their zeal, courage and constancy, glorified God, and turned
Christians. Religion is that Phoenix which has always revived and flourished
in the ashes of holy men; and Truth has never been so honored: and gloriously
dispersed, as when it has been sealed by the blood of the Saints: This made
Julian to forbear to persecute; non ex clementia, sed invidia, not out of
piety, but envy; because the Church grew so fast, and multiplied as Nazianzen
well observes. We read that some times the Sufferings of one Saint have begot
many to the love of the Truth: We read that Cicilia, a poor Captive Virgin, by
her gracious behavior in her Martyrdom, was the means of converting four
hundred to Christ. Justine Martyr was also converted by observing the cheerful
and gracious Carriage of the Saints in their Sufferings. And so Adrianus seeing
the Martyrs suffer readily and joyfully such grievous torments, asked, why they
would endure such misery when they might (by retracting) free themselves: Upon
which, one of them cited that Text; Eye has not 1. Cor. 2. 9.
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him. Upon the naming of this
Scripture, and seeing of them suffer so willingly, cheerfully and resolutely,
such a Divine Power took hold of his heart, that he was converted, and
afterward became a Martyr. Now God, and Christ, and Truth, and Religion are
never more honored, than when poor souls are soundly converted. Surely the
Crown of Martyrdom, is a Glorious Crown; and every soul won over to God by a
dying Martyr, will be as an Orient Pearl, and Precious Diamond in his Crown, of
far more value than that Adamant found about Charles Duke of Burgundy, slain by
the Switzers, at the Battle of Nantz, sold for twenty thousand Ducats; and
placed, as it is said, in the Pope's Tripple Crown. O, A and. 7. 55, 56, 57.
what fore^asts of Glory, what ravishments of Soul, have many of the Blessed
Martyrs had in their sufferings for Christ. Holy Lord, stay thy hand, I can
bear no more, said one of the Martyrs; like weak eyes, that cannot bear too
great a light. Is it not a high honor to a King to have such Captains and
Champions, as will not yield to their Sovereign's enemies, but stand it out to
the uttermost, till they get the Victory, though it cost them their lives to
get it: yet no mortal King can (as Christ does) put spirit, courage and
strength into a Subject; only we may well conceive and conclude, that such
Valourous Soldiers, as are ready to hazard their lives for their Sovereign,
serve a good Master. Thus do suffering Christians and Martyrs give Persecutors
to understand, that they serve a good Master, and that they highly prize him;
who has done more, and suffered more for them, than their dearest Blood is
worth; and who enables them with courage, constancy and comfort, to endure
whatsoever, for his names sake, can be Romans 8. 37.
inflicted on them; and therein to be (...), More than Conquerors, or above
Conquerors. How can that be, can a man get more than the Victory? The meaning
is, we do over overcome, super superanus; that is, triumph or overcome before
we fight; we are famous and renowned Conquerors, we easily conquer, we 2 Cor.
2. 14.
conquer by those things which are used to conquer us, we beat our enemies with
their own Swords, as Julian sometime said, being confuted by Heathen Learning.
Martyr and Piscator expound it thus, we do more than overcome; that is, we
obtain a Noble, a famous Victory: And is not this a great honor to Christ, the
Heb. 2. 10.
Captain of our Salvation The invincible courage of suffering Christians puts
life and spirit into others. In an Army valorous Leaders much animate the rest
of the Soldiers, and embolden them to follow their Leaders. Now, you know the
Church is an Army with Banners; and suffering Ministers, and suffering Saints
Cant. 6. 4.
are as Leaders; they courageously and victoriously make the onset; and other
Christians, by their pious examples are pricked on to follow them so far as
they are followers of the Lamb. But

Twelfthly, Consider. That all the Sufferings and Persecutions Quisquis volens
detrahit famae meae nolens addit mercedi meae, says Augustine: The more we
suffer with and for Christ, the more Glory we shall have with and from Christ.
Romans 2. 6.
the more Saints are persecuted on earth, the greater shall be their reward in
heaven. Look, as Persecutions do increase a Christian's Grace, so they do
advance a Christian's Glory; in Heaven, the Martyrs shall have the highest
Degree of Glory; for though God does not reward men simply for their Works,
namely for the merit of them, yet he rewards according to their Works; and
proportions the degree or measure thereof, according to the kind of work which
on earth is done* and according to the measure of Grace whereby he enables men
to do it. Now, Martyrdom is the most difficult, the most honorable, and the
most acceptable Work that on earth can be done; and therefore in heaven
Martyrdom shall be crowned with the highest degree of Glory; on this ground,
they who set down the different degrees of Celestial Glory, by the different
Fruits which the good Ground brought forth, some thirty, some sixty, and some a
hundred Mat. 13. 8.
fold; apply the hundred fold, which is the highest and Mat. 19. 27, 28, 29
Keep your eye upon the recompense of reward, as Moses did, Heb. 11. 26. and as
Christ did, cap. 12 2. as Paul did, Romans 8. 18. This will work you, 1. To walk
more holily, humbly thankfully. 2. To live more cheerfully and comfortably. 3.
To suffer more patiently, freely, resolutely. 4. To fight against the world,
the flesh and the devil more stoutly and valiantly. 5. To withstand Temptations
more steadfastly and strongly. 6. To be contented with a little. 7. To leave the
world, Relations and friends more willingly. 8. And to embrace death more
joyfully.
greatest Degree of Glory, to Martyrdom: Doubtless, God's suffering Servants;
and amongst them, especially his Martyrs, shall sit down in the chiefest
Mansions, and in the highest Rooms in the Kingdom of Glory: According to the
Degrees of our sufferings for Christ, will be the degrees of our Glory: What
shall we have, says Peter, (that have suffered so many great and grievo^^
(...)ngs for thy name) that have forsaken all, and followed thee? Veri^y, says
our Savior, every one that has forsaken houses, etc. shall receive a hundred
fold, and shall inherit everlasting life: But ye shall sit upon twelve thrones,
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. A Christian will never repent of all the
hard things that he has suffered for Christ or his Truth, when as every one of
his sufferings shall be a sparkling Jewel to give a luster to his Crown of
Glory. Suffering for Christ and Religion is the most gainful kind of
Merchandise. Christ is so well pleased with the sufferings of his Saints, that
he has engaged himself to make up whatever they lose upon his account; yea, to
repay all with Interest upon Interest, to a hundred times over. Oh, who would
not then turn Spiritual Purchaser. Christ is a noble, a liberal Paymaster; and
no small things can fall from so great a hand as his is: Mat. 5. 10, 11, 12.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the
Kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake; Rejoice,
and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted
they the Prophets, which were before you. Luke 6. 22, 23. Blessed are ye when
men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company; and
shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake:
Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy; for behold your Reward is in heaven;
for in the like manner did their fathers unto the Prophets. They that are now
Excommunicated and Anathematized, as notorious, shameful, and abominable
offenders; they that are now opposed and persecuted by men, shall at last be
owned and crowned by God; yea, and the more Afflictions and Persecutions are
multiplied upon them in this world, the greater shall be their recompense in
another world. The Original words ((...)) in Matthew, and ((...)) in Luke,
signify exceeding great joy, such as men usually express by skipping and
dancing: Let your hearts leap, and let your bodies leap for joy, for great is
your reward in heaven. Act. and Mon. Fol. 613.
A Dutch Martyr feeling the flame to come to his beard; said he, what a small
pain is this, to be compared to the Glory to come. Hellin Stirk, a Scotch
woman, when her Husband was Ibid. 1154.
at the place of Execution, she said to him, Husband rejoice, for we have lived
together many joyful days; but this day, in which we must die, ought to be most
joyful to us both, because we must bave joy for ever; therefore I will not bid
you good night, for we shall suddenly meet within the Kingdom of Heaven. The
subscription of Mrs. Anne Askew to her Confession, was this; Ibid. 1130.
written by me Anne Askew, that neither wishes for death, nor fears his
Might; and as merry as one that is bound toward ^^^ven. Oh how my heart leapeth
for joy (said Mr. Philpot) that I Ibid. 1670.
am so near the apprehension of eternal life! God forgive me mine
unthankfulness and unworthiness of so great Glory; I have so much joy of the
reward prepared for me most wretched sinner, that though I be in a place of
darkness and mourning, yet I cannot lament; but, both night and day, am so
joyful, as though under no Cross at all; yea, in all the days of my life, I was
never so merry, the name of the Lord be praised therefore for ever and ever.
The same Author, in a Letter to the Congregation, says, Ibid. 1663.
Though I tell you that I am in Hell in the judgment of this world, yet
assuredly, I feel in the same the Consolation of Heaven; and this loathsome and
horrible Prison, is as pleasant to me, as the Walks in the Garden in the King's
Bench. Thus you see, that 1 Pet. 1. 8.
suffering Saints have had a Heaven before hand; they have had an exuberancy of
joy, such as no good could match, nor no evil overmatch. Bernard speaking of
Persecutors, says, that they are Bernard.
but his Father's Goldsmiths, who are working to add Pearls to the Saints
Crown. It is to my loss, says Gordius the Martyr, if Gordius.
you abate me any thing of my present Sufferings. Sufferings for Christ are the
Saints greatest Glory ( crudelitas vestra, gloria nostra) your cruelty is our
glory, say they in Tertullian, and the harder we are put to it, the greater
shall be our reward in heaven. Chrysostom hit the nail when he said, if one man
should suffer all Chrysostom.
the sorrows of all the Saints in the world, yet are they not worth one hours
glory in heaven. By the consent of the Schoolmen, The Schoolmen.
all the Martyrs shall appear in the Church-triumphant, bearing the signs of
their Christian wounds about them, as so many speaking testimonies of their
holy courage, that what here they endured in the behalf of their Savior, may
be there an addition to their glory. O Christians, all your Sufferings will
certainly increase your future Glory; every affliction, every Persecution, will
be a grain put into the scale of your heavenly Glory, to make it more weighty
in that day, wherein he will richly reward you for 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18
every tear, for every sigh, for every groan, for every hazard, and for every
hardship that you have met in the way of your duty. For light Afflictions, you
shall have a weight of Glory; and for a few Afflictions, you shall have as many
joys, pleasures, de lights and contents, as there be Stars in Heaven, or Sands
on the Sea shore; and for Momentary Afflictions, you shall have an eternal
Crown of Glory. If you have suffering for suffering with Christ on earth, you
shall have Glory for Glory with Christ in heaven. Ah Christians, your present
sufferings are but the seeds of your future Glory; and the more plentiful you
sow in tears; Psalm. 126. 5, 6.
the more abundant will be your Harvest of Glory. Christ our General, the
Captain of our Salvation, promises a Crown, ( Rev 2. 10) and a Throne, ( cap.
3. 21.) to all his afflicted and persecuted ones; which are the greatest
rewards that a God can give, or that man can crave. It troubled one of the
Martyrs when he was at the s^ake, that he was going to a place, where he should
be for ever a receiving of Wages for a little work. But

Thirteenthly and Lastly, Afflictions, Sufferings, Persecutions, Mat. 13. 2 Timothy 1. 15, 16. 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. 2 Timothy 4. 10, 14, 15, 16. Mat. 13. 20, 21.
glisters: Many there be that glister, and look like Golden Christians; but
when they come to the fire, they prove but dross: he is a Christian more worth
than the Gold of Ophyr, who remains Gold when under fiery Trials. The stony
ground did glister and shine very gloriously, for it received the Word with joy
for a season; but when the Sun of Persecution arose upon it, it fell away. Men
that in times of Liberty and Prosperity embrace the Word, will in times of
Persecution distrust the Word, reject the Word, and turn their backs upon the
Word, if it be not rooted in their Understandings, Judgments, Wills, Affections
and Consciences: Men may court the Word, and complement the Word, and applaud
the Word, and seemingly rejoice in the Word; but they will never suffer
Persecution for the Word, if it be only received into their heads, and not fast
rooted in their hearts: The house built upon the Sands was as lovely, as
comely, as goodly and Mat. 7. 26, 27.
as glorious a house to look upon, as that which was built upon the Rock; but
when the Rain of Affliction descended, and the Floods of Tribulation came, and
the Winds of Persecution blew, and beat upon the house, it fell, and great was
the fall of it. No Professors will be able to stand it out in all Winds and
Weathers, but such as are built upon a Rock; all others will sink, shatter and
fall when the Wind of Persecution blows upon them: As sure as the Rain will
fall, the Floods flow, and the Winds blow, so sure will an unsound heart give
out when trials come; no heart but a sound heart, will hold out bravely when
Su^ferings come; no heart but a sincere heart, will bear the brunt of
Persecution. Dan. 3. 17, 18.
The three Worthies, Shadrach, Mesh^^h and Abednego, would rather burn than
bow, they would rather suffer than sin, which was a^ evident proof of their
sincerity and ingenuity; they would be Non-conformists, though Court, City and
Country cried up Conformity, which was a sure argument of their integrity.
Hypocrites have heart enough for themselves, but none for God. If they see
their Names, Estates or Carnal Interest any way touched, they are all on fire,
and ready to be burnt up with the flames of their own zeal; but they can see
the Name, Truth and Interest of God assaulted and torn in pieces, and never
stir: in their own Concerns, they are as if they were all heart; but in the
cause of Hos. 7. 11.
God, they are as if (with Ephraim) they had no heart at all. O, its sad that
men should have a heart for themselves, and none for God; that they should have
courage in their own cause, and none in his. As the soul is the glory of the
body, so integrity is the glory of the soul. A sincere Christian, with Job,
will rather let Job 27. 5.
all go, than let his integrity go; he will sooner let the blood b^ pressed out
of his veins, and his soul out of his body, than his integrity out of his soul.
O, how bravely did the Primitive Christians Epist. 97. p. 316.
carry themselves as to this Matter. Pliny writing to Trajan, declares to him
that such was their zeal and courage in the behalf of their God, that nothing
could stir them from it; neither the Imperious checks of the Potent Emperors,
nor the soft language of the eloquent Orators, could draw them from the Faith;
but they steadfastly owned it, and constantly persevered in the defense of it:
But now base unsound hearts will exceedingly shuffle and shif^ to shake off
Persecution; witness those false Teachers, Gal. 6. 12. As many as desire to
make a fair show (or, as the Greek has it, to set a good face on it) in the
flesh, they constrain you to be circumcised; only lest they should suffer
Persecution for the Cross of Christ. Mark, at this time the Jews, out of zeal
to their Law, did sorely persecute those that did either preach or practice any
thing contrary to their Law. Now these false teachers set a good face on it, and
make a fair show, as if they were all for carnal Rites and Ceremonies; and they
pressed Circumcision upon the Galatians, but not out of any true affection or
zeal that they did bear to the Law; but only to procure favor on the one hand,
and to avoid and escape the malice and Persecution of the Jews on the other
hand. They that were no Jews, to avoid Persecution, would comply with them that
were; they would seem to be very earnest for Judaism, but not for Christianism,
that so they might escape the fury of the Jews. Unsound hearts will say any
thing, and do any thing, and be any thing, to avoid Persecution, and to
ingratiate themselves with Persecutors. The Samaritans, so long as Joseph.
Hist. lib. 13
the Jewish Religion flourished, and was in honor, caused a Temple to be built
on Mount Garazin, that therein they might not be inferior to the Jews; and
they boasted themselves to be of the Progeny of Joseph, and Worshippers of God
with them: But when they perceived that the Jews were cruelly afflicted and
persecuted by Antiochus Epiphanes, for worshipping of the true God; and fearing
lest they should be handled in the like manner, they changed both their Coat
and their Note; affirming that they were not Israelites, but Sidonians; and
that they had built their Temple not unto God, but unto Jupiter. Thus you see
that times of Affliction and Persecution will distinguish the Precious from the
Jer. 15. 19.
Vile; 'twill difference the counterfeit Professor, from the true. Persecution
is a Christian's Touchstone; it is a Lapis Lydius, that will try what metal
men are made of, whether they be silver or Tin, Gold or Dross, Wheat or Chaff,
shadow or substance, carnal or spiritual, sincere or hypocritical. Nothing
speaks out more soundness and uprightness than keeping close to Christ, his
Worship, Truth and Ways, in a day of warm Persecution. To stand close and fast
to God and his Interest in fiery trials, argues much integrity within. These
thirteen Particulars are so great Truths written with the beams of the Sun,
that no man nor Devil can deny; and therefore I shall make no Apology to the
Persecutors of the day, to execuse my writing of this General Epistle; but
shall beg hard of God, that it may be so owned, and crowned, and blessed from
on high, that it may really and fully answer to all those holy and gracious
aims and ends that the Author had in his eye, and upon his heart, when he writ
it. And thus much for this General Epistle.

Dear Lady, and Sister in the Lord;
I Shall now address my self to you in a few lines, and so conclude. I know you
have for many years been the Lord's Prisoner. Great have been your Trials, and
many have been your Trials, and long have been your Trials; but to all these I
have spoken at large in my Treatise called The mute Christian under the
smarting Rod, which you have in your hand, which you have read, and which God
has greatly blessed, to the support, comfort, quiet and refreshment of your
soul under all your Trials; and therefore I shall say no more as to those
Particulars: But knowing that the many weaknesses that hang upon you, and the
decays of Nature that daily do attend you, seem to point out an approaching
dissolution; I shall at this time give you this one word of Counsel, viz. That
every day you would look upon Death in a Scriptureglass, in a Scripture-dress,
or under a Scripture-notion: That is,

First, Look upon death as that which is best for a believer; Phil. 1. 23. For
I am in a strait betwixt two, having (...). N^c Christus, nec caelum patitur
hyperbolen says one, here it is h^rd to hyperbolice.
a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better: The Greek is
very significant; far, far the better, or far much better, or much more better;
it is a most transcendent expression: Eccles. 7. 1. Better is the day of death,
than the day of ones birth. A Saint's dying day is the daybreak of Eternal
Righteousness. In respect of pleasure, peace, safety, company, glory, a
Believer's dying day is his best day. I have read of one Trophonius, that when
he had built and dedicated that stately Temple at Delphos, he asked of Apollo
(for his recompense) that thing which was best for man: The Oracle wished him
to go home, and within three days he should have it; and within that time he
died. It was an excellent saying of one of the Ancients; That is not a death,
but life, which joins the dying man to Christ; and that is not a life, but
death, which separates a living man from Christ. But

Secondly, Look upon Death as a remedy, as a cure; Vltimus morborum medicus mors
diseases at once; the crazy body and the defiled soul, the aching head and the
unbelieving heart: Death will cure you of all your ails, aches, diseases and
distempers. At Stratford-bow in Queen Mary's days, there was burnt Act. and
Mon. Fol. 1733.
a lame man and a blind man at one stake; the lame man, after he was chained,
casting away his crutch, bad the blind man be of good comfort; for death (says
he) will cure us both, thee of thy blindness, and me of my lameness. And as
Death will cure all your bodily diseases, so it will cure all your soul
distempers also: Death is not Mors hominis, but Mors peccati; not the death of
the man, but the death of his sin. Death will work such a cure, as all your
Duties, Graces, Experiences, Ordinances, Assurances, could never do; for it
will at once free you fully, perfectly and perpetually from all sin; yea, from
all possibility of ever sinning more: Sin was the Midwife that Pecc^tum erat
obstetrix mortis, etc. mors sepu^chrum pec a^i. Ambrose de bono mortis, c. 4
brought death into the World, and death shall be the grave to bury sin; and
why then should a Christian be afraid to die, or unwilling to die, seeing Death
gives him a Writ of ease from infirmities and weaknesses, from all aches and
pains, griefs and gripings, distempers and diseases, both of body and soul:
When Sampson died, the Philistines also died together with him; so when a Saint
dies, his sins die with him: Death came in by sin, and sin goes out by death;
as the worm kills the worm that bred it, so death kills sin that bred it. But

Thirdly, Look upon death as a rest, a full rest; a believer's Rev. 14. 13. Job
3. 13, to 17. 2 These. 1. 7. Micah 2. 10. Jer. 50. 6.
from sin, sorrow, afflictions, temptations, desertions, dissentions,
vexations, oppositions and persecutions. This world was never made to be the
Saints rest: Arise, for this is not your resting place; they are like Noah's
Dove, they can rest no where but in the Ark, and in the Grave. In the grave
(says Job) the weary are at rest: Upon this very ground, some of the most
refined Heathens have accounted Mortality to be a mercy, for they brought their
friends into the World with mournful Obsequies, but carried them out of the
world with all joyful sports and pastimes, because then they conceived they
were at rest, and out of Gunshot. Death brings the Saints to a full-rest, to a
pleasant rest, to a matchless rest, to an eternal rest. But

Fourthly, Look upon your dying day as a reaping 2 Cor. 9. 2. Gal. 6. 7, 8, 9.
Isa. 38. 3. Mat. 25. 31, to 41.
that ever you have made, and of all the tears that ever you have shed, and of
all the sighs and groans that ever you have fetched, and of all the good words
that ever you have spoke, and of all the good works that ever you have done,
and of all the great things that ever you have suffered: When Mortality shall
put on Immortality, Eccles. 11. 1. 6.
you shall then reap a plentiful Crop, a glorious Crop (as the fruit) of that
good seed that for a time has seemed to be buried and lost. As Christ has a
tender heart, and a soft hand, so he has an Iron memory; he punctually Mat.
10. 24, 25.
remembers all the sorrows, and all the services, and all the sufferings of his
people, to reward them and crown them; Rev. 22. 12. But

Fifthly, Look upon your dying day as a gainful day, Phil 1. Eccles. 7. 1.
Phil. 1. 23.
21. For me to live is Christ, and to die is gain: A Christian gets more by
death, than he does by life; to be in Christ is very good, but to be with
Christ is best of all. 'Twas a mighty blessing for Christ to be with Paul on
earth, but 'twas the top of Blessings for Paul to be with Christ in heaven.
Seriously consider of a few things.

First, That by death you shall gain incomparable Rev. 2. 10. Jam. 1. 12. 2. A
Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. 3. An Incorruptible Crown, 1 Cor. 9. 24,
25. 4. A Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 5. 4. Now there are no Crowns to these Crowns,
as I have fully discovered in my discourse on The Divine Presence; to which I
refer you. But

Secondly, You shall gain a Glorious Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. It is your father's
pleasure to give you a Kingdom. But death is the young Prophet that anointeth
them to it, and gives them actual possession of it. They must put off their
rags of Mortality, that they may put on their robes of Glory. Israel must first
die in Egypt, before he can be carried into Canaan. There is no entering into
Paradise, but under the flaming sword of this Angel Death, that stands at the
Gate. Death is the dirty Lane through which the Saint passes to a Kingdom, to
a great Kingdom, to a glorious Kingdom, Heb. 12. 28. Dan. 2 44. cap. ^. 3. Rev.
19 7.
to a quiet Kingdom, to an unshaken Kingdom, to a durable Kingdom, to a lasting
Kingdom, yea, to an everlasting Kingdom. Death is a dark short way, through
which the Saints pass to the Marriage-supper of the Lamb. But

Thirdly, You shall gain a safe and honorable Convoy Luke 16. 22. Oh, in what
pomp and triumph did Lazarus ride to heaven on the wings of Angels! The Angels
conduct the Saints at death through the Air, the Devil's Region; every gracious
soul is carried into Christ's Presence by these heavenly Courtiers. Oh, what a
sudden change does death make! behold, he that even now was scorned by men, is
all on a sudden, carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom. But

Fourthly, You shall gain a glorious welcome, a joyful Rev. 4. 8, to 11. Luke
15. 7, 10. Heb. 12. 23.
welcome, a wonderful welcome into heaven. By general consent of all Antiquity,
the holy Angels and blessed Trinity rejoice at the sinner's Conversion; but oh,
what inexpressible, what transcendent joy is there, when a Saint is landed upon
the Shore of Eternity? God and Christ, Angels and Archangels, all stand ready
to welcome the Believer as soon as his feet are upon the threshold of Glory.
God the Father welcomes the Saints as his elect and chosen ones, Jesus Christ
welcomes them as his redeemed and purchased ones, and the Holy Spirit welcomes
them as his sanctified and renewed ones, and the Blessed Angels welcome them as
those they have Heb. 1. ult.
guarded and attended on. When the Saints enter upon the Suburbs of Glory, the
glorious Angels welcome them with harps in their hands, and ditties in their
mouths. But

Fifthly, You shall gain full freedom and liberty from viz. Sin, Satan Luke 1.
70, 71, 74, 75.
and the World. 1. Death will free you from the indwelling power of sin: In
heaven there is no complaints; Romans 7. 23.
as in hell there is nothing but wickedness, so in heaven there is nothing but
holiness. 2. Death will free Gal. 5. 17.
you from the power and prevalency of sin: Here sin plays the Tyrant, but in
heaven there is no Tyranny, but perfect felicity. 3. Death will free you from
all provocations, temptations and suggestions to sin. Now you shall be above
all Satan's batteries. Now God will make Romans 16. 20.
good the promise of treading Satan under your feet: Some say Serpents will not
live in Ireland. The old Serpent Rev. 12. 8, 9. cap. 21. ult.
is cast out, and shall be for ever kept out of the new Jerusalem above. 4.
Death will free you from all the effects and consequents of sin, viz. losses,
crosses, sicknesses, diseases, disgraces, sufferings, etc. when the cause is
taken away, the effect ceases; when the fountain of sin is dried up, the
streams of afflictions, of sufferings must be dried up; the fuel being taken
away, the fire will go out of it self. Sin and sorrow were born together, do
live together, and shall die together. To open this fourth Particular a little
more fully to you, consider these four things.

First, That death will free you from all reproach and Elijah is accounted the
1 King. 18. 17. N^hem. 6. 6. Psalm. 69. 12. Jer. 15. 10.
Troubler of Israel, Nehemiah a Rebel against his King, and David the song of
the Drunkards, and Jeremiah a man of contention, and Paul a pestilent fellow.
Heaven Act. 24. 10.
wipes away all blots, as well as all tears; as no sins, so no blots are to be
found in that upper world. The names of all the Saints in a state of Glory are
written (as I may say) in Characters of Gold. But

Secondly, Death will free you from all bodily infirmities Above all things let
us every day think (...) our last day, (...) (...)naus.
ways each several hour: As many senses, as many members, nay, as many pores as
there are in the body, so many windows there are for death to enter in at;
death needs not spend all its arrows upon us; a worm, a gnat, a fly, a hair,
the stone of a raisin, the kirnel of a grape, the fall of a horse, the
stumbling of a foot, the prick of a pin, the pairing of a nail, the cutting of
a corn; all these have been to others, and any one of them may be to us, the
means of our death, within the space of a few days, nay, of a few hours. Here
Job had his Botches, and Job 2. 6, 7. Is^ 37 21. (...) ^8. 5. (...) 20. Man. 9.
20.
Hezekiah had his Boil, and David his Wounds, and Lazarus his Sores, and the
poor Widow her Issue of Blood. Now the Fever burns up some, and the Dropsy
drowns others, and the Vapors stifle others; one dies of an Appoplexy in the
head, another of a Struma in the neck, a third of a Squinancy in the throat,
and a fourth of a Cough and Consumption of the lungs; others of Obstructions,
Inflammations, Plurisies, Gouts, etc. We are commonly full of complaints; one
complains of this distemper, and another of that; one of this disease, and
another of that; but death will cure us of* all diseases and distempers at
once. But

Thirdly, Death will free you from all your sorrows, Psalm. 38. 18. 2 Cor. 7.
11. Psalm. 119 136. Nehem. 1. 3, 4.
or the sins of others, whether for your own sufferings or the sufferings of
others. Now, it may be, one shall seldom find you, but with tears in your eyes,
or sorrow in your heart; O, but now death will be the funeral of all your
sorrows, death will wipe all tears from your eyes, and sorrow and mourning
shall flee away; Isa. 51. 11. But

Fourthly, Death will free you from all those troubles, Isa. 57 1. M^^h 7. 1 to
7.
a coming upon the earth, or upon this place or that. A year after Methuselah's
death, the Flood came, and carried away the old world: Augustine died a little
before the sacking of Hippo: Luther observes that all the Apostles died before
the destruction of Jerusalem: And Luther himself died a little before the Wars
brake forth in Germany. Dear Lady, death shall do that for you, which all your
Physicians could never do for you, which all your Relations could never do for
you, which all Ordinances could never do for you, nor which all your faithful
Ministers could never do for you; it shall both instantly and perfectly cure
you of all sorts of Maladies and weaknesses both inward and outward, or that
respects either your body or your soul, or both. Oh, my dear friend, is it not
better to die, and be rid of all sin; to die, and be rid of all temptations and
desertions; to die, and be rid of all sorts of miseries; than to live, and
still carry about with us our sins, our burdens, and such constant ailments, as
takes away all the pleasure and comfort of life? Here both our outward and
inward conditions are very various; sometimes heaven is open, and Lamen. 3 8,
44, 54 55, 56, 57. Psalm. 30. 7. 1 These 4 17, 18. Isa. 35. 10.
sometimes heaven is shut; sometimes we see the face of God, and rejoice, and
at other times he hides his face, and we are troubled: O, but now death will
bring us to an invariable Eternity. It is always day in heaven, and joy in
heaven.

Sixthly and lastly, You shall gain a clear, distinct and 1 Cor. 13. 10, 12.
of the Trinity, the Mystery of Christ's Incarnation, the Mystery of Man's
Redemption, the Mysteries of Providence, the Mysteries of Prophecies, and all
those Mysteries that relate to the Nature, Substances, Offices, Orders and
Excellencies of the Angels. If you please to consult my String of Pearls, or
the best thing reserved till last; with my Sermon on Eccles. 7. 1. Better is
the day of death than the day of ones birth; which is at the end of my Treatise
on Assurance; both which Treatises you have by you. There you will find many
more great and glorious things laid open that we gain by death: And to them I
refer you. But

Sixthly, Look upon death as a sleep; the Holy Ghost 1 Cor. 11. 30. cap. 15.
51. Joh. 11. ^^. Mark 5. 39. The Greeks call their Churchyards Dormitories,
sleeping places; and the Hebrews (...)-^^^^im, the house of the living.
show that this is the true, proper and genuine notion of death. When the
Saints die, they do but sleep; Mat. 9. 24. The maid is not dead but sleeps:
The same phrase he also used to his Disciples concerning Lazarus, our friend
Lazarus sleeps, Joh. 11. 11. The death of the Godly is as a sleep; Stephen
fell asleep, Act. 7. 60. And David fell asleep, Act. 13. 36. And Christ is the
first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15. 20. Them which sleep in Jesus, will
God bring with him, 1 These. 4. 14. The Saints of God do but sleep when they lay
down in the Grave; that which we call death (in such) is not death indeed, it
is but the image of death, the Shadow and Metaphor of death, death's younger
Brother, a mere sleep, and no more. I may not follow the Analogy that is
between death and sleep in the latitude of it, the Printer calling upon me to
conclude. Sleep is the Nurse of Nature, the sweet Parenthesis of all a man's
griefs and cares. But

Seventhly, Look upon death as a departure, 2 Timothy 4. For I am now ready to be
offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. He makes nothing of death: It
was Deuteronomy. 32. 49, 50.
no more betwixt God and Moses, but go up and die; and so betwixt Christ and
Paul, but launch out, and land immediately at the fair Haven of heaven; Phil.
1. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ, which is far better. Paul longed for that hour wherein he should
loose Anchor, (...), solv^r^ Anch ram: Or it may be rendered to return home, or
to change roo^s. ^t is a similitude taken from those that depart out of an I^n,
to take their journey toward their own Country.
and sail to Christ, as the Greek word (...), imports. It is a Metaphor from a
Ship at Anchor, importing a sailing from this present life to another Port.
Paul had a desire to loose from the shore of Life, and to launch out into the
Main of Immortality. The Apostle in this phrase (...), has a reference both to
his bonds and to his death; and his meaning is, I desire to be discharged and
released, as out of a common Goal, so also out of the prison of my body, that I
may presently be with Christ my Savior in heaven, in rest and bliss. After
Paul had been in the third heaven, his constant song was I desire to be with
Christ. Nature teaches that death is the end of misery; but grace will teach
us that death is the beginning of our felicity. But

Eighthly and lastly, Look upon death as a going to He shall enter into peace,
they shall rest in their beds, every one walking in their uprightness. Isa. 57.
2.
As the souls of the Saints pass to a place of rest and bliss, so their bodies
are laid down to* rest in the Grave, as in a Bed or Bedchamber; there to sleep
quietly, until the morning of the Resurrection. Death is nothing else, but a
Writ of ease to the weary Saints; it is a total cessation from all their labor
of nature, sin and affliction: Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, that
they may rest Rev. 14. 13.
from their labors, etc. Whilst the souls of the Saints do rest in Abraham's
bosom, their bodies do sweetly sleep in their beds of dust, as in a safe and
consecrated Dormitory. Every sincere Christian may, like the weary child, call
and cry to be laid to bed; knowing that death will send him to his everlasting
rest. Now you should always look upon death under Scripture Notions, and this
will take off the terror of death; yea, it will make the King of Terrors* to
be the King of desires; it will make you not only willing to die, but even long
to die, and to cry out, O that I had the wings of a dove, to fly away, and be
at rest. At death you shall have an eternal Jubilee, and be freed from all
encumbrances. Now sin shall be no more, nor trouble shall be no more, nor pain
nor ailments shall be no more. Now you shall have your Quietus est, now the
wicked shall cease from Job. 3. 17.
troubling, and now the weary shall be at rest, now all Rev. 7. 17.
tears shall be wiped from your eyes, now death shall be the way to bliss, the
Gate of Life, and the Portal to Paradise. It was well said of one, so far as we
tremble at death, so far we want love; it is sad when the contract is made
between Christ and a Christian, to see a Christian afraid of the making up the
Marriage. Lord (says Austin.
one, I will die that I may enjoy thee; I will not live, but I will die, I
desire to die, that I may see Christ; and refuse to live, that I may live with
Christ. The broken Rings, Contracts and Espousals, contents not the true Lover,
but he longs for the Marriage day. It is no credit to your Heavenly Father, for
you to be loath to go home. The Turks tell us that surely Christians do not
believe heaven to be such a glorious place as they talk of; for if they did,
they would not be so unwilling to go thither. The world may well think that the
Child has but cold welcome at his Father's house, that he lingers so much by
the way, and that he does not look and long to be at home: Such Children bring
an ill report upon their Father's House, upon the Holy Land; but I know you
have not so learned Christ, I know you long with Paul; to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ; and Phil. 1. 23.
with old Simeon, to cry out, Lord let thy servant depart Luke 2. 29.
in peace. That God whom you have long sought and served, will make your
passage into that other world safe, sweet and easy. Now, to the everlasting
arms of Divine Protection, and to the constant guidance and leadings of the
Spirit, and to the rich influences of Christ's Sovereign Grace, and to the
lively hopes of the Inheritance of the Saints in light, he commends you, who is

Dear Sister, yours in the strongest Bonds. Tho. Brooks.

Beloved in our Lord,
IN the first part of my golden Key, I have showed you seven several pleas,
that all sincere Christians may form up, as to those several Scriptures in the
Old and New Testament, that refer either to the great day of account, or to
their particular days of account. In this second part, I shall go on where I
left, and show you several other choice Pleas, that all believers may make in
the present case.

The eighth Plea that a believer may form up as to the E^cles. 11. 9. cap. 12.
14. Mat. 12. 14. cap. 18. 23. Luk 16 2. R^m. 14 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. H^b. 9 27.
cap. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 5.
ten Scriptures in the margent, that refer to the great day of account, or to a
man's particular account; may be drawn up from the consideration of the
covenant of grace, or the new covenant that all believers are under. It is of
high concernment to understand the tenure of the covenant of grace, or the new
Covenant, which is the Law you must judge of your estates by, for if you
mistake in that, you will err in the conclusion: That person is very unfit to
make a Judge, who is ignorant of the Law, by which himself and others must be
tried* For the clearing of my way, let me premise these six things;

First, premise this with me, that God has commonly dealt In the day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall die the Ge^. 2. 17. Genesis 9 11. 12, 13, 14, 15. ^en.
6. 18. C^r. 17. 1, 2.
death: and after this, he made a Covenant with the world, by Noah: and after
this, he made a Covenant with Abraham: and after this, he made a Covenant with
the Jews at Mount Exodus 19.
Sinai: Thus you see, that God has commonly dealth with man in the way of a
Covenant. But,

Secondly, premise this with me, All men are under Romans 6. 14. I am not of
Camero's mind, that there were three Covenants; but of the Apostles mind, who
expressly tells us, that there are two Testaments, and no more, in that Gal. 4.
24.
is under the Law, the other is under Grace. Now, he that is not under grace,
is under the Law. It is true, in the Scripture you do not read, in totidem
syllabis, of the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of grace: but that of the
Apostle, comes near it, Romans 3. 27. where is boasting then? it is excluded; by
what Law? of works? nay, but by the Law of faith: Here you have the Law of
works, opposed to the Law of faith; which holds out as much as the Covenant of
works, and the Covenant of grace. The Apostle sets forth this twofold
condition of men, by a very pertinent resemblance, namely, by that of marriage,
Romans 7. 1, 2, 3. All Adam's seed are married to one of these two husbands;
either to the Law, or to Christ. He that is not spiritually married to Christ,
and so brought under his Covenant, is still under the Law, as a Covenant of
works; even as a wife is under the Law of her husband, while he is yet alive.
Certainly, there were never any, but two Covenants made with man, the one
Legal, the other Evangelical; the one of works, the other of grace; the first
in innocence, the other after the fall: ponder upon Romans 4. 13. But,

Thirdly, Let me premise this, That the Covenant of of it, it is called a
Covenant of grace: But these were not two distinct Covenants, but one and the
same Covenant diversely dispensed. The Covenant of grace is the same for
substance now to us, since Christ was exhibited, as it was to the Jews, before
he was exhibited; but the manner of administration of it is different, because
it is: 1. Now clearer, things were declared then in types and shadows; Heaven
was then typed out by the Land of Canaan, but now we have things more plainly 2
Cor. 3. 12. Heb. 7. 12.
manifested. In this respect it is called a better Testament or Covenant; not
in substance, but in the manner of reveiling it; and the promises are said to
be better promises Heb. 8. 6. Act. 10. 35.
upon the same account. 2. The Covenant of grace, is now more largely extended;
then it extended only to the Jews, but now, to all that know the Lord, and that
Col^s. 3. 11. Ne^^m. 7. 2. J^b 1. 1, 8. Acts 13. 22. Romans 4 18, 19, 20.
choose him, fear him, love him, and serve him in all nations. 3. There is more
abundance of the spirit, of grace, of light, of knowledge, of holiness, poured
out generally The word Covenant, in our English tongue, signify, as we all
know, a mutual promise, bargain and obligation, between two persons; and so
likewise does the Hebrew Berith, and the Greek Diatheke. A Covenant is a solemn
compact or agreement, between two chosen parties, or more; whereby, with
mutual, free and full consent; they bind and oblige themselves, one to another.
A Covenant is Amicus status interf^derates: so Martin, a friendly state between
Allies.
times: Though then some few Saints, had much of the spirit, and much of grace
and holiness, both in their hearts and lives; but now the generality of the
Saints, have more of the spirit, and more grace and holiness, than the
generality of the Saints had in those times. But,

Fourthly, premise this with me, that a right notion of the Covenant, according
to the Originals of the Old and New Testament, will conduce much to a right
understanding of God's Covenant. The derivation of the Hebrew word, and of the
Greek, may give us great light and is of special use, to show the nature of the
Covenant which they principally signify, and what special things are therein
required: The Hebrew word, (...) Berith, a Covenant, is by learned men, derived
from several roots: First, some derive it from (...), Barar, to purify, make
clear, and to purge out dross, chaff, and all uncleanness; and to select, and
choose out, and separate the pure from the impure, the gold and silver from the
dross, and the pure wheat from the chaff. The reasons of this derivation are
these two: 1. Because, by Covenants open and clear amity is confirmed, and
faithfulness is plainly and clearly declared and ratified without deceit or
sophistication betwixt covenanters: And things are made plain and clear betwixt
them, in every point and article: 2. Because God, in the Covenant of works, did
choose out man especially, with whom he made the Covenant; and because, in the
Covenant of grace, he chooses out of the multitude his Elect, even his Church
and faithful people, whom he did separate by predestination and election from
all Eternity, to be an holy people to himself in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 4. 2. Some
derive it from (...), And verily, the Lord, when he makes a Covenant with any,
he does separate them from others, he looks on them, and takes them, and owns
them for his peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2. 9. for his peculiar treasure, Exodus 19.
5. and agrees with them, as the chosen and choicest of all others,: The first
staff in Zach. 11. 10. is called Beauty, and this was the Covenant; and
certainly it must be a high honor for a people to be in Covenant with God; for
by this means, God becomes ours, and we are made nigh unto him, Jer. 31. 38,
40, 41. He is ours, and we are his, in a very peculiar way of relation: and by
this means, God opens his love, and all his treasures of grace unto us: In his
Covenant he tells us of his special care, love, kindness, and great intentions
of good to us; and by this means his faithfulness comes to be obliged to make
good all his Covenant relations and engagements to us, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Now in all
this, God puts a great favor and honor upon his people. Hence, when the Lord
told Abraham, that he would make Genesis 1^. 2, 3.
a Covenant with him, Abraham fell upon his face, he was amazed at so great a
love and honor. Secondly, some derive the word from (...), Barah, comedit, to
eat, because usually they had a feast at the making of Covenants; in the
Eastern Countries they commonly established their Covenants, by cating and
dringing together. Herodotus tells us, that the Persians were wont to contract
Leagues and friendship, inter vinum and epulas, in a full feast, where whereat
their wives, children and friends were present. The like Tacitus reports of the
Germans amongst the Greeks and other nations, the Covenanters ate bread and
salt together. The Emperor of Russiah, at this day, when he would show
extraordinary grace and favor unto any, sends him bread and salt from his
table: And when he invited Baron Sigismond, the Emperor Ferdinand's
Ambassador, he did it in this form; Sigismunde, comedes sal and panem nostrum
nobiscum: Sigismond, you shall eat our bread and salt with us. Hence, that
Symbol of Pythagoras, (...), break no bread, is interpreted V^de ^urcium ^itum
^pu^ Busbeq^ium Epist. 1. 11
by Erasmus and others, to mean, break no friendship* Moreover the Egyptians,
Thracians and Libyans in special, are said to have used, to make leagues, and
contract friendship, by presenting a cup of wine one to another; which custom,
we find still in use amongst our western Nations. It has been the universal
custom of Mankind, and still remains in use, to contract Covenants, and make
Leagues and friendship by eating and drinking together. When Isaac made a
Covenant with Abimelech the King of Gerar, the Text says, He made him, and
Genesis 26. 30, 31.
those that were with him, a feast; and they did eat and drink and rose up
betimes in the morning, and swear one to another. When Jacob made a Covenant
with Laban, after they had sworn together, he made him a feast; and Genesis 31. 54.
called his brethren to eat bread, says the Text* When David made a League
with Abner, upon his promise of bringing all Israel unto him; David made Abner,
and the 2 ^am. 3 20.
men that were with him, a feast, says the Text. Hence, in the Hebrew tongue,
a Covenant is called (...), Berith, of (...)* Barah, To eat, as i^ they should
say, an eating; which derivation is so natural, that it deserves (say some) to
be preferred before that, from the other signification of the same verb, which
is to choose; of which before. Now they that derive Berith from Barah, which
signifies, to eat and refresh ones self with meat: They give this reason, for
that derivation, viz. Because the old Covenant of God, made with man in the
Creation, was a Covenant, wherein the condition or Law, was about eating: That
Genesis 2. 16, 17.
man should eat of all the trees and fruits, except of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil: And in the solemn making and sealing of the Covenant of grace,
in Christ, the blessed seed; the public Ceremony was slaying and sacrificing
of beasts; and eating some part of them, after the fat, and the choice parts
were offered up, and burned on the Altar: For God, by virtue of that Covenant,
gave man leave to eat the flesh of beasts, which he might not D^u^. 12. ^7.
Genesis 1 29. Genesis 31. 46.
do in the state of innocence; being limited to fruits of trees, and herbs
bearing seed, for his meat: so also in solemn Covenants between men, the
parties were wont to eat together. Thirdly, others derive the word Berith, from
(...), Bara, or (...), Barah, to smite, strike, cut, or divide (as both these
words signify) the word also signifies to elect or choose; and the reasons they
give for this derivation, are these two: First, because Covenants are not made,
but by choice persons, chosen out one by another, and about choice matters, and
upon choice conditions, chosen out, and agreed upon, by both parties: Secondly,
because, in making of Covenants, commonly sacrifices were stricken and slain,
for confirmation and solemnity: Of old, God sealed his Covenant by sacrifices
of beasts slain, divided and cut asunder, and the choice fat, and other parts,
offered upon the Altar. And in making of great and solemn Covenants, men in old
time, were wont to kill and cut asunder sacrificed beasts; and to pass ^e^. 15.
9 10, 17. Je^. 34. 18, 19, 20. Lev^. 26. 25. weigh well these two Scriptures;
(...) breakers may well look upon them, as flaming swords is terrible
thunderbolts.
between the parts divided, for a solemn testimony, or for the confirmation of
the Covenants that they had made. And as learned men have long since observed,
that the very Heathen, in their covenanting, used sacrifices, and divided them,
passing between the parts; and this they did, as some conjecture, in imitation
of God's people: This third is the common opinion, about the Original of this
name; and therefore, preferred before all other: So this word (...), Berith,
Covenant, seems to sound as much as (...), Kerith, a smiting or striking,
because of sacrifices slain in covenanting. Hence the word Covenant is often
joined witst (...), Karath, which signifies striking of Covenant. An example of
this beyond all exception And Riven in Genesis 31. Exerci^at 135.
(says my Author) is in that sacrifice, wherein God, by Moses, made a Covenant
with all the people of Israel, and bound them to obey his Law; the description
of it is in Exodus 24. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And Moses wrote all the wards of the Lord,
and rose up early in the morning, and builded an Altar under the hill, and
twelve pillars according to the twelve tribes of Israel. And he sent young men
of the children Anciently Co^enants were made with blood, to be taken con^^an y
in the covenant, even to the the^(...) of blood, and loss of life.
of Israel, which offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of
oxen unto the Lord. And Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basins; and
half of the blood he sprinkled on the Altar. And he took the book of the
Covenant and read in the audience of the people; and they said, all that the
Lord has said, will we do, and be obedient. And Moses took the blood, and
sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the Covenant, which
the Lord has made with you concerning all these words. I shall not Rup^rtus
Ambr^se Cajetan etc.
trouble my reader with that mystical and too curious a sense, that some of the
Ancients put upon these words: the historical sense is here more fit: For in
this Ceremony of dividing the blood in two parts, and so besprinkling the Altar
with the one half, which represented God; and the people with the other,
between whom the Covenant was confirmed; the old use in striking of Covenants,
is observed: For the ancient custom was, that they which made a League or
Covenant, divided some beast, and put the parts asunder, walking in the midst;
signifying, that as the beast was divided, so they should be, which brake the
Covenant: So when Saul went against the Ammonites, coming out of the field, he
hewed two Oxen, and sent them into all the coasts of Israel; expressing the 1 Samuel 11. 7.
like signification, that so should his Oxen be served, that came not forth
after Saul and Samuel: After the same manner, when God made a Covenant with
Abraham, and he had divided certain beasts, as God had commanded Genesis 15. 12.
to the 19.
him, and laid one part against another; a smoking ^ir^brand went between,
representing God, signifying, that so he should be divided, which violated the
Covenant* So in this place, not much unlike; the blood is parted in twain,
showing that so should his blood be shed, which kept not the Covenant.
Fourthly, some derive the word Berith, from (...), Bara, to create; and the
reason they give for this derivation is this, because the first state of
creation was confirmed by the Covenant which God made with man, and all
creatures were to be upheld by means of observing of the Law and condition of
the Covenant; and that Covenant being broken by man, the world, made subject to
ruin, is upheld; yea, and, as it were, created anew by the Covenant of grace
in Christ. Fifthly, some derive the word Berith, from (...), Berath, which
signifies firmness, sureness, because Covenants are firm and sure, and all
things agreed on are confirmed and made sure by them; God's Covenant is a sure
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. The Lord thy God, he is the faithful God (or the God
(...). 31. 31, 23, 35, ^6, 37. ^s^l. 19. 7. Rev. 3. 14. Isa. 54. 10.
of Amen) which keeps covenant with them that love him: Psalm. 89. 34. My
covenant will I not break (Hebrew, I will not profane) nor alter the thing that
is gone out of my lips. All God's precepts, all God's predictions, all God's
menaces, and all God's promises, are the issue of a most just, faithful and
righteous will. There are three things that God cannot do: 1. He cannot die: 2.
He cannot lie, Tiius 1. 2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie,
promised before the world began: 3. He cannot deny himself. Now the derivation
of Berith, from the several roots specified, and not from one only, does give
much light to the point under consideration; and does reconcile in one, all the
several opinions of the learned, and justifies their several derivations,
without rejecting or offering any wrong or disgrace to any.

Secondly, The Greek name, (...), Diatheke, A Covenant, or a Testament: By this
Greek word, the Septuagint, in their Greek Translation, do commonly express the
Hebrew word Berith; and it is observeable, that this is the only word, by
which, the Hebrew word Berith is rendered in the New Testament: This Greek word
Diatheke, is translated Covenant in the New Testament about Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9,
10 cap. 1. 4. Luke 1. 72. Romans 9. 4, etc. Mat. 26. 28. Luke 22. 20, etc.
twenty times; and the same word is translated Testament, in the New Testament
about twelve times: Wherever you find the word Covenant in the New Testament,
there you shall find Diatheke; and wherever you find the word Testament, in the
New Testament, there you shall find Diatheke: so that it is of importance for
us to understand this word aright. Now this Greek word, (...), Diatheke, is
derived from (...), Diatithemai, which has diverse of the significations of the
Hebrew words, of which Berith is derived; for it signifies to set things in
order and frame, to appoint orders, and make Laws, to pacify and make
satisfaction, and to dispose things by ones last Will and Testament. Now, to
compose and set things in order, is to uphold the Creation, to walk by orders
and Laws made and appointed, is to walk by rule, and to live, to deal plainly
and faithfully without deceit. To pacify and make satisfaction, includes
sacrifices and sin offerings: To dispose by will and Testament, implies choice
of persons and gifts; for men do commonly by will, give their best and most
choice things, to their most dear, and most choice friends. Thus the Greek
which the Apostles use in the New Testament, to signify a Covenant, to express
the Hebrew word Berith, which is used in the Law and the Prophets, does confirm
our derivation of it, from all the words beforenamed. And this Derivation of
the Hebrew and Greek names of a Covenant being thus laid down, and confirmed by
the reasons formerly cited, is of great use. The various acceptance and use of
these two names in the Old and New Testament, is very considerable for the
opening of the Covenant. First, to show unto us, the full signification of the
word Covenant, and what the nature of a Covenant is in general: 2. To justify
the diverse acceptations of the word, and to show the nature of every word in
particular; and so to make way for the knowledge of the agreement and difference
between the Old and New Covenant: here, as in a Crystal glass, you may see
that this word Berith, and this word Diatheke, signify all Covenants in
general, whether they are religious or civil; for there is nothing in any true
Covenant, which is not comprised in the signification of these words, being
expounded according to the former derivations. Here also, we may see what is
the nature of a Covenant in general, and what things are thereunto required: As
first, every true covenant presupposes a division or separation: Secondly, it
comprehends in it a mutual promising and binding between two distinct parties:
Thirdly, there must be faithful dealing, without fraud, or dissembling on both
sides: Fourthly, this must be between choice persons: Fifthly, it must be about
choice matters, and upon choice conditions, agreed upon by both: Sixthly and
lastly, it must tend to the well ordering and composing of things between them.
Now, all these are manifest by the several significations of the words, from
which Berith and Diatheke, are derived. And thus much for the word Covenant,
according to the Originals of the Old and New Testament.

Fifthly, premise this with me, That there was a Covenant of works, or
reciprocal Covenant, betwixt God and Adam, together with all his posterity:
Before Adam fell from his primitive holiness, beauty, glory and excellency; God
made a Covenant with Adam, as a public person, which represented all Mankind.
The Covenant of works was made with all men in Adam, who was made, and stood as
a public person, head and root, in a common and comprehensive capacity: I say,
it was made with him as such, and we all in him; he and all stood and fell
together: 1. Witness the imputation of Adam's sin to all mankind, Romans 5. 12.
In whom (or for as much as) all have sinned; they sinned nor all in themselves,
therefore in Adam, see verse. 14, In him all died. 2. Witness 1 Cor. 15. 47.
Deuteronomy. 29. 21. Romans 8. 20, ^1. Gal. 3. 10, 13.
the curse of the Covenant, that all mankind are directly under; consult the
Scriptures in the margent. Those, on whom the curse of the Covenant comes,
those are under the bond and precept of the Covenant; But all mankind are under
the curse of the Covenant; and therefore, all mankind are under the bond and
precept of the Covenant. Adam did understand the terms of the Covenant, and did
consent to the terms of the Covenant; for God dealt with him in a rational way,
and expected from him a reasonable service. The end of this Covenant, was the
upholding of the Creation, and of all the creatures, in their pure natural
estate, for the comfort of man continually, and for the special manifestation
of God's free grace: And that he might put the greater obligation upon Adam, to
obey his Creator, and to sweeten his authority to man; and that he might draw
out Adam to an exercise of his faith, love and hope in his Creator; and that he
might leave Adam the more inexcusable in case he should sin; and that so, a
clear way might be made for God's justification, and man's conviction: Upon
these grounds God dealt with Adam, not only in a way of sovereignty, but in a
way of Covenant.

But how may it be evidenced, that God entered into a Adam, before his fall,
there being no mention of such a Covenant in the Scripture, that we read of?

Though the name be not in the Scripture, yet the thing Socinians call for the
word satisfaction, others call for the word sacrament, others call for the word
Trinity, and others call for the word Sabbath, for Lords day, etc. and thence
conclude against Satisfaction, Sacraments, Trinity, Sabbath, for want of
express words* when the things themselves are plainly and li^ely set down in
other words, in the blessed Scriptures: so it is in this case of God's Covenant
with Adam. The vanity and folly of such ways of reasoning, is sufficiently
demonstrated by all writers upon those Subjects, that are ^ound in the faith,
etc.
Scripture with Scripture; though it be not positively and plainly said in the
blessed Scripture, that God made a Covenant of works with Adam, before his
fall: Yet, upon sundry Scripture grounds and considerations, it may be
sufficiently evinced, that God did make such a Covenant with Adam, before his
fall; and therefore, it is a nice cavil, and a foolish vanity, for any to make
such a noise about the word Covenant; and for want of the word Covenant, boldly
to conclude that there was no such Covenant made with Adam, when the thing is
lively set down in other words, though the word Covenant be not expressed; and
this I shall make evident by an induction of particulars, thus;

First, God, to declare his sovereignty and man's subjection, gave Adam, though
innocent, a Law. God's express prescription of a positive Law, unto Adam, in
his innocent state, is clearly and fully laid down, in that Genesis 2. 16, 17. And
the Lord God commanded the man, saying, of every tree of the garden thou may
freely eat: But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not
eat of it, for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die:
Hebrew, Dying, thou shall die. Mark how God bounds man's obedience with a
double fence: First, he fenced him with a free indulgence, to eat of every tree
in the Garden, but one; the less cause he had to be liquorish after forbidden
fruit; but, stolen waters are sweet. Secondly, by an exploratory prohibition
upon pain of death: by the first, the Lord wooes him by love; by the second, he
frights him by the terror of his justice; and bids him touch and taste, if he
durst. The Faederati were God and Adam; God the Creator, and man the creature,
made after Gods image and likeness; and so not contrary to God, nor at enmity
with him, but like unto God, though far different and inferior to God in
nature and substance. Here are also terms agreed on, and matters covenanted
reciprocally, by these parties: Adam, on his part, was to be obedient to God,
in forbearing to eat of the tree of knowledge only. God's charge to our first
parents was only negative, not to eat of the tree of knowledge; the other, to
eat of the trees, was left unto their choice. Eve confesses that God spoke
unto them both, and said, ye shall not eat of it: And God speaks unto both of
them Genesis 3. 2.
together in these words; Behold I have given unto you every Genesis 1. 19.
herb, and every tree, etc. At which time, also, it is very like, that he gave
them the other prohibition of not eating of that one tree; for if God had made
that exception before, he would not have given a general permission after; or
if this general grant had gone before, the exception coming, should seem to
abrogate the former grant. The Septuagint seem to be of this mind, that this
precept was given both to Adam and Eve, reading thus So does Gregory read as
the Septuagint does, Gr ^. l. b. 35. moral. ^. 10
in the plural number; In what day ye shall eat thereof, ye shall die. And
though, in the Original, the precept be given in the name of Adam only; that is
only, 1. Because Adam was the more principal, and he had the charge of the
woman: And 2. Because that the greatest danger was in his transgression, which
was the cause of the ruin of his posterity: 3. Because, as Mercerus well
observes, Adam was the common name, both of the man and woman; Genesis 5. 2. and
so is taken, verse, 15. And God, on his part, for the present, permits Adam to
eat of all other trees of the Garden. And for the future (in his explicit
threatening of death in case of disobedience) implicity promises life, in case
of obedience herein.

Secondly, the promises of this Covenant on God's part, Adam should have had
perfection without defect, beauty without deformity, labor without weariness.
Thirdly, as for spiritual life, Adam should never have known what it was to be
under (...). 18. 1. ^.
terrors and horrors of conscience, nor what a wounded spirit means, he
should never have found the arrows of (...) 6. 4.
the Almighty sticking fa^l in him, nor the poison thereof drinking up his
spirits, nor the terrors of God, to set themselves in array against him; nor
he should never have tasted of death: Death is a fall that came in by a fall;
had Adam never sinned, Adam had never died; had Adam stood fast in innocence,
he should have been translated to glory without dissolution. Death came in by
sin, and sin goes out by death: As the worm kills the worm that bred it, so
death (...) sin that bred it. Now, where there are parties covenanting,
promising, and agreeing upon terms, and terms mutually agreed upon by those
parties, as here. There Is the substance of an express Covenant, though it be
not formally, and in express words called a Covenant. This was the first
Covenant which God made with man, and this is called by the name Berith, Jer.
33. 20. where God says, If you can break my Covenant of the day and night, and
that there shall not be day and night in their season, verse. 21. Then may also
my Covenant with David, be broken. In these words he speaks plainly of the
promise in the Creation: That day and night should keep Genesis 1. 14, 15, 16.
their course, and the sun, moon, and stars, and all creatures, should serve
for man's use. Now, though man did break the Covenant on his part, yet God
being immutable, could not break Covenant on his part, neither did he suffer
his promise to fail; but by virtue of Christ promised to man in the new
Covenant, he will keep touch with man so long as mankind has a being on the
earth, In this first Covenant, God promised unto man life and happiness,
Lordship over all the creatures, liberty to use them, and all other blessings
which his heart could desire, to keep him in that happy estate, wherein he was
created. And man was bound to God, to walk in perfect righteousness, to observe
and keep God's Commandments, and to obey his will in all things, which were
within the reach of his nature, and so far as was reveiled to him: In the first
Covenant, God reveiled himself to man, as one God, Creator and Governor of all
things, infinite in power, wisdom, goodness, nature and substance. God was
man's good Lord, and man was God's good servant; God dearly loved man, and man
greatly loved God with all his heart; there was not the least shadow, or
occasion of hatred or enmity between them; there was nothing but mutual love,
mutual delight, mutual content, and mutual satisfaction, between God and man:
Man, in his primitive glory, needed no Mediator, to come between God and him;
man was perfect, pure, upright and good, created after God's own image; and the
nearer he came to God, the greater was his joy and comfort: God's presence now,
was man's great delight; and it was man's heaven on earth, to walk with God.
But,

Thirdly, Consider the intention and use of the two eminent viz. The tree of
life, and The tree of knowledge. The intended use of these two Trees in
Paradise, was Sacramental: Hence they are called Symbolical Trees, and
Sacramental Trees, by learned writers, both ancient and modern. By these the
Lord did signify and seal to our first parents, that they should always enjoy
that happy state of life, in which they were made, upon condition of obedience
to his Commandments, i. e. in The Tree of life was the (...) and ^eal which God
gave to man, for confirmation of this first Covenant; and it was to man, a
Sacrament and pledge of eternal life on earth, and of all blessings needful to
keep man in life.
eating of the tree of life, and not eating of the tree of knowledge. The Tree
of life is so called, not because of any native property, and peculiar virtue
it had in it self, to convey life; but symbolically, morally and sacramentally:
It was a sign and obsignation to them of life, natural and spiritual, to be
continued to them, as long as they continued in obedience to God. The seal of
the first Covenant was the Tree of life; which, if Adam had received, by taking
and eating of it, whilst he stood in the state of Innocence, before his fall,
he had certainly been established in that estate for ever; and the Covenant
being sealed and confirmed between God and him on both parts, he could not have
been seduced and supplanted by Satan, as some learned men do think, and as
God's own words seem to imply, Genesis 3. 22. And now, lest he put forth his hand,
and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever. The tree of
knowledge of good and evil, was spoken from the sad event and experience they
had of it, as Sampson had of God's departing from him, when he lost his
Nazaritish hair by Dalilah. The tree of life, was a Sacrament of life; The tree
of knowledge, a Sacrament of death: The tree of life, was for confirmation of
man's obedience; and The tree of knowledge, was for caution against
disobedience. Now if these two Trees were two Sacraments; the one assuring of
lite in case of obedience, the other assuring of death in case of disobedience;
then hence we may collect, That God not only entered into a Covenant of works
with the first Adam, but also gave him this Covenant under Sacramental signs
and scals. But,

Fourthly, Seriously consider that a Covenant of works Genesis 2. 16, 17. which
may thus be made evident; 1. Because that was the condition of man's standing
and life, as it was expressly declared: 2. Because, in the breach of that
Commandment given him, he lost all, and we in him. God made the Covenant of
works primarily with Adam, and with us in him, as our head, inclusively; so
that when he did fall, we did fall; when he lost all, we lost all. There are
five things we lost in our fall; 1. Our holy Image, and so became vile: 2. Our
sonship, and so became slaves: 3. Our friendship, and so became enemies: 4. Our
communion with God, and so became strangers: 5. Our glory, and so became
miserable. Sin and death came into the world by Adam's fall: In Adam's sinning,
we all sinned; 1 C^r. 15. 22. Romans 5. 12. to the end, etc.
and in Adam's dying, we all died; as you may see, by comparing the Scriptures
in the margent together. In Adam's first sin, we all became sinners by
imputation: Adam being an universal person, and all mankind one in him, by
God's Covenant of works with him: Omnes ille unus homo fuerunt, August. All
were that one man, viz. by federal consociation: God covenanted with Adam, and
in him with all his posterity; and therefore Adam's breach of Covenant, fell
not only upon him, but upon all his posterity. But,

Fifthly and lastly, we read of a Second Covenant, Heb. Romans 9. 4. Gal. 4. 24.
Ephesians. 2. 12. And we read of a New Covenant, Jer. 31. 31. Behold the days come,
says Heb. 8. 6, 7.
the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with
the house of Judah: So Heb. 8. 8. I will make a new covenant, etc. verse. 13. In
that he says a new covenant, he has made the first old, etc. Heb. 12. 24. And
to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, etc. Now if there be a Second
Covenant, then we may safely conclude there was a First; and if there be a New
Covenant, then we may boldly conclude that there was an Old Covenant: A
Covenant of Grace always supposes a Covenant of Works: I know there is a
repetition of the Covenant of Works with Adam, in the Law of Moses; as in that
of Heb. 8. 7, 8, 9.
the Apostle to the Galatians, The Law is not of faith, but the man that does
these things, shall live in them. The Law requires works, and promises no life
to those that will be justified by faith. In the first Covenant, three Gal. 3.
10, 11, 12.
things are observable; 1. The precept, That continues not in all things; the
precept requires perfect, personal and perpetual obedience: 2. The promise,
Live, the man that does them shall live; live happily, blessedly, cheerfully,
everlastingly: 3. The curse in case of transgression, Cursed is every one, that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the Law, to do
them: One sin, and that but in thought, broke the Angel's Covenant, Jude 6.
and has brought them into everlasting chains: So the same Apostle, to the
Romans, further tells us, that Moses describes the righteousness which is of
the law, that the man that does those things, shall live by them. Thus it was
Romans 10. 5.
with Adam, principally and properly, therefore he was under a Covenant of
works, when God gave him that command, Genesis 2. 16, 17. This first Covenant, is
called a Covenant of works, because this Covenant required working on our part,
as the condition of it, for justification and happiness, The man that does
these things, shall live. Under this Covenant, God left man to stand upon his
own bottom, and to live upon his own stock, and by his own industry; God made
him perfect and upright, and gave him power and ability to stand, and laid no
necessity at all upon him to fall. In this first Covenant of works, man had no
need of a Mediator, God did then stipulate with Adam immediately; for seeing he
had not made God his enemy by sin, he needed no days-man, to Job 9. 33.
Make friendly intercession for him.

Adam was invested and endowed with righteousness and holiness in his first
glorious estate; with righteousness, that he might carry it fairly, justly,
evenly and righteously toward man; and with holiness, that he Ephesians. 4. 22, 23,
24. In this Scripture, the Apostle speaks plainly of the Renovation of that
Knowledge, Holiness and Righteousness that Adam sometimes had, but lost it by
his fall.
might carry it wisely, lovingly, reverentially and holily toward God, and
that he might take up in God as his chiefest good, as in his great ALL. I shall
not now stand upon the discovery of Adam's Beauty, Authority, Dominion,
Dignity, Honor and Glory, with which he was adorned, invested and crowned in
innocence: Let this satisfy, that Adam's first estate, was a state of perfect
Psalm. 8. 4, 5, 6. Genesis 2. 20.
knowledge, wisdom and understanding; it was a perfect state of holiness,
righteousness and happiness; there was nothing within him, but what was
desirable and delectable; there was nothing without him, but what was amiable
and commendable; nor nothing about him, but what was serviceable and
comfortable. Adam, in his innocent estate, was the wonder of all understanding,
the mirror of wisdom and knowledge, the image of God, the delight of heaven,
the glory of the Creation, the world's great Lord, and the Lord's great
darling: Upon all these accounts, he had no need of a Mediator. And let thus
much suffice to have spoken concerning the first Covenant of works, that was
between God and Adam in innocence. But,

Sixthly, Premise this with me, viz. That there is a H^^ 8. 6 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13.
prove this, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. Know therefore, that the Lord thy God, he is God; the
faithful God, which keeps Covenant and mercy with them that love him, and
keep his commandments to a thousand generations: 2 Samuel 23. 5. Although See
this 2 S^m. 23. 5. opened in my box of precious Ointments. pa^. 369, 370 371
372, 373, 374.
my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me, an everlasting
covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and
all my desire; although he make it not to grow: Nehem. 1. 5. I beseech thee, O
Lord God of heaven, the great and ^errible God; that keeps covenant and mercy
for them that love him, and keep his commandments: Isa. 54. 10. For the
mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not
depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the
Lord, that has mercy on thee: Jer. 32. 40. And I will make an everlasting
covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me: Ezekiel. 20.
37. And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into D^ut.
4. 23. Is^. 55. 1, 2, 3. Jer. 24. 7. cap. 30. 22. cap. 31. 31, 33. cap. 32. 38.
Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10.
the bond of the Covenant: Deuteronomy. 29. 12. That thou should enter into
Covenant with the Lord thy God; and into his oath, which the Lord thy God
makes with thee to day: Consult the Scriptures in the margent also, for they
cannot be applied to Christ, but to us. But for the further evidencing of that
Covenant, that is between the Lord and his people. Now, that there is a
Covenant betwixt God and his people, may be further evinced by unanswerable
arguments, let me point at some among many.

First, Christ is said to be the mediator of this Covenant, Heb. 9. 15. And for
this cause, he is the mediator of the new testament, that by means of death for
the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first testament; they
which are called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance: Certainly,
that Covenant, of which Christ is the Testator, must needs be a Covenant made
with us: for else, if the Covenant were made only with Christ (as some would
have it) then it will roundly follow, that Jesus Christ is both Testator; and
the party, to whom the Testaments and Legacies are bequeathed: which sounds
harsh; yea, which, to assert, is very absurd: Since the creation of the world,
was it ever known, that ever any man did bequeath a Testament and Legacies to
himself? Surely no* Christ is the Testator of the New Covenant; and therefore,
we may safely conclude, that the New Covenant is made with us. The office of
Mediator (you know) is to stand betwixt two at variance: The two at variance,
were God and man: Man had offended and incensed God against him; God's wrath
was an insupportable burrhen, and a consuming fire; no creature was able to
stand under it, or before it: Therefore Christ, to rescue and redeem man,
becomes a Mediator; Christ* undertaking to be a Mediator, both procured a
Covenant to pass betwixt God and man, and also engaged himself for the
performance thereof on both parts; and to assure man of partaking of the
benefit of God's Covenant, Christ turns the Covenant into a Testament; that the
conditions of the Covenant, on God's part, might be as so many Legacies; which
being confirmed by the death of the Testator, none might disannul, Heb. 8. 6.
He is the mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better
promises. The promises of the new Covenant are said to be better in these six
respects, 1. All the promises of the Law, were conditional: Do this, and thou
shall live; the promises of the new Covenant are absolute of grace, as well as
to grace: 2. In this better Covenant, God promises higher things; here God
promises himself, his son, his spirit, a higher righteousness, and a higher
sonship: 3. Because of their stability, those of the old Covenant, were
swallowed up in the curse; Romans 4. 13, 16. Gal. 3. 16. 17. 2 Cor. 1. 20. Cant.
5 16. Col. 1. 19. cap. 2. 3. Isa. 44. 3. Jo^ 2. 28. Act. 2. 16, 17. Gal. 3. 2.
these are the sure mercies of David: 4. They are all bottomed upon faith, they
all depend upon faith: 5. They are all promised upon our interest in Christ;
this makes the promises sweet, because they lead us to Christ, the fountain of
them; whose mouth is most sweet, and in whose person, all the sweets of all
created beings do center: 6. Because God has promised to pour out a greater
measure of his spirit, under the New Covenant, than he did under the old
Covenant; Heb. 12. 24. And to Jesus, the mediator of the new covenant. Thus you
see that Christ is called, the mediator of the covenant, three several times:
Now, he could not be the Mediator of that Covenant that is betwixt God and
himself (of which more shortly) but of that Covenant, that is betwixt God and
his people. But

Secondly, The people of God have pleaded the Covenant, Remember thy Covenant:
Jer. 14. 21. Luke 1. 72. Psalm. 25. 6.
Now, how could they plead the Covenant betwixt God and them; if there were no
such Covenant; see the Scriptures in the margent. But,

Thirdly, God is often said to remember his Covenant, Ponde^ upon these
Scriptures, Psalm. 105. 8. Psalm. 106. 45. Psalm. 111. ^.
Genesis 9. 15. I Will remember my covenant, which is between you and me: Exodus 6. 5.
I have remembered my covenant: Lev. 26. 42. I remember my covenant with Jacob,
and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham, will I
remember: Ezekiel. 16. 60. I will remember my covenant with thee, and I will
establish unto thee an everlasting covenant. Now, how can God be said to
remember his Covenant with his people, if there were no Covenant betwixt God
and them? But,

Fourthly, the temporal and spiritual deliverances, that Genesis 9. 11. Isa. 54.
9. Psalm. 111. 9. Isa. 59. 21.
is a Covenant betwixt God and you, Zach. 9. 11. As for thee also, by the blood
of thy covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein there
was no water: These words include both temporal and spiritual deliverances: So
that now, if there be not a Covenant betwixt God and you, what deliverances can
you expect; seeing they all flow in upon the creature, by virtue of the
Covenant, and according to the Covenant? By the blood of the Covenant, Luk 16.
24, 25.
believers are delivered from the infernal pit; where there is not so much
water, as might cool Dives his tongue; and by the blood of the Covenant, they
are delivered from those deaths and dangers that do surround 2 Cor. 1. 8, 9, 10.
them: When sincere Christians fall into desperate distresses, and most deadly
dangers; yet they are prisoners of hope, and may look for deliverance by the
blood of the Covenant; this does sufficiently evince a Covenant betwixt God and
his people. But,

Fifthly, God has threatened, severely to avenge and Levit. 26. 25. And I Deuteronomy.
29. 20, 21, 24, 25. cap. 31. 20, 21. J^s^. 7. 11, 12, 15. cap. 23. 15, 16.
Ju^^. ^. 20. 2 King. 18 9, 10, 11, 12.
will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my covenant; or
which shall avenge the vengeance of the Covenant) etc. consult the Scriptures
in the m^^ge^t. Breach of Covenant betwixt God and man, breaks the peace, and
breeds a quarrel betwixt them; in which, he will take vengeance of man's
revolt, except there be repentance on man's side, and pardoning grace on his.
For breach of Covenant, Jerusalem is long since, laid waste, and the seven
golden candlesticks broken in pieces; and many others, this day, lie a bleeding
in the Nations, who have made no more of breaking Covenant with the great God,
than if therein they had to do with poor mortals, with dust and ashes like
themselves. Now, how can there be such a sin, as breach of Covenant; for which,
God will be avenged, if there were no Covenant betwixt God and his people. But,

Sixthly, The seals of the Covenant, are given to God's I^ reason, the Covenant
and the S^^ls must go together* Were it no^ a fond and foolish thing in any
man, to make a Covenant with ^^e, and to gi^e the seals to ano(...)? In Equity
and Justice, the Co^enant and Seals must go to the same persons.
are given, with them is the Covenant mad^, (for the seals of the Covenant, and
the Covenant go to the same persons) But the seals of the Covenant are given to
believers; Abraham receives the sign of circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of faith; Romans 4. 11. Ergo, the Covenant is made with believers:
Circumcision is a sign, in regard of the thing signified; and a seal, in regard
of the Covenant, made betwixt God and man: Seal is a borrowed word, taken from
Kings and Princes; who add their broad seal, or privy seal, to ratify and
confirm the Leagues, Edicts, Grants, Covenants, Charters, that are made with
their Subjects or Confederates. God had made a Covenant with Abraham; and by
circumcision, signs and seals up that Covenant. But,

Seventhly, The people of God are said, sometimes to Psalm. 25. 10. All the
paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep his covenant, and his
testimonies. Mercies flowing in upon us, through the Covenant, are of all
mercies, the most soul-satisfying, soul-refreshing, soul cheering mercies; yea,
they are the very cream of mercy: Oh, how well is it with that Saint, that can
look upon every mercy, as a present sent him from heaven, by virtue of the
Covenant! Oh, this sweetens every drop, and sip, and crust, and crum of mercy,
that a Christian enjoys, that all flows in upon him through the Covenant. The
promise last cited, is a very sweet, choice, precious promise, a promise more
worth, than all the riches of the Indies. Mark, All the paths of the Lord to
his people, they are not only mercy, but they are mercy and truth; that is,
they are sure mercies that stream in upon them, through the Covenant: Solomon's
dinner Prove. 15. 17. D^^. 1. 12. John 6. 9.
of green herbs, Daniel's pulse, Barley loaves and a sew fishes, swimming in
upon a Christian, through the New Covenant, are far better, greater and sweeter
mercies, than all those great things are, that flow in upon the great men of
the world, through that general providence, that feeds the birds of the air,
and the beasts of the field, Psalm. 44. 17. Yet have we not forgotten thee,
neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant; that is, We have kept Covenant
with thee, by endeavoring to the uttermost of our power, to keep off from the
breach of thy Covenant, and to live up to the duties of thy Covenant, suitable
to that of the Prophet Micah, We will walk in the name of the Lord our Mi^ha 4.
5.
God, for ever and ever. Persons in Covenant with God, will not only take a
turn or two in his ways (as Temporaries and Hypocrites do, who are hot at hand,
but soon tire, and give in) but they will hold on in a course of holiness, Rev
14. 4.
and not fail to follow the Lamb, withersoever he Cap. 17. 14.
goes, Psalm. 103. 17. The mercy of the Lord, is from everlasting, to
everlasting: verse. 18. To such as keep his Covenant, etc. All sincere
Christians, they keep Covenant with God: 1. In respect of their cordial
desires, to keep Covenant ^^em. 1. ult. (...). 119. 133. Psalm. 39. 1, 2.
with God: 2. In respect of their habitual purposes and resolutions, to keep
Covenant with God: 3. In respect of their habitual and constant endeavors to
keep Covenant with God: This is an Evangelical, and incomplete keeping Covenant
with God, which in Christ, God owns and accepts; and is as well pleased with
it, as he was with Adam's keeping of Covenant with him, before his fall. From
what has been said, we may thus argue* Those that keep Covenant with God, those
are in Covenant with God those have made a Covenant with God; But all sincer^
Christians, they do keep Covenant with God. Ergo: But,

Eighthly and lastly, The Lord has, by many choice, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
good that blessed Covenant that he has made with his people, yea, with his
choice and chosen ones: take a few instances, If ye hearken to these judgments
(says God to Deuteronomy. 7. 12.
Israel) and keep and do them: The Lord thy God shall keep unto thee, the
covenant and the mercy, which he swear unto Under the name Ju^gments, the
Commandments, and Statutes of God, are contained.
thy fathers. This blessed Covenant is grounded upon God's free grace; and
therefore, in recompencing their obedience, God has a respect to his own
mercy, and not to their merits: So Judge. 2. 1. I made you to go up out of
Egypt, and have brought you into the land which I swear unto your fathers; and
I said, I will never break my covenant with you. God is a God of mercy, and his
Covenant with his people, is a Covenant of mercy; and therefore he will be sure
to keep touch with them. So, Psalm. 89. 34. My covenant will I not break, nor
alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth: As if he should have said, Though
they break my Statutes, yet will I not break my Covenant; for this seems to
have reference to the 31: verse. If they break my statutes, etc. Though they had
profaned God's Statutes, yet God would not profane his Covenant, as the
Hebrew runs, My covenant will I not break; that is, I will stand steadfastly, to
the performance of it, and to every part and branch of it: I will never be
inconstant, I will never be off and on with my people, I will never change my
purpose, nor eat my words, nor unsay what I have said: So Jer. 33. 20. Thus
says the That is the order that I have set upon the courses and the
Revolutions of day and night.
Lord, if you can break my covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night,
and that there shall not be day and night in their season: verse. 21. Then may
also, my covenant be broken with my servant David, etc. It is impossible for
any created power, to break off the intercourse of night and day; so, it is
impossible for me, to break the Covenant that I have made with David my
servant; the day and night shall as soon fail, as my Covenant shall fail: So,
Isa. 54. 10. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee: Though great and huge
mountains should remove; yea, though heaven and earth Psalm. 46. 2.
should meet; yet the Covenant of God with his people, shall stand unmovable.
The Covenant of God, the mercy of God, and the loving kindness of God to his
people, shall last for ever, and remain constant and immutable, though all
things in the world, should be turned upside down. So, Psalm. 111. 4. The Lord
is gracious, and full of compassion: verse. 5. He will ever be mindful of his
covenant: God looks not at his peoples sins, but at his own promise; he will
pass by their infirmities, and supply all their necessities: God will never
break his Covenant, he will never alter his Covenant, he will still keep it, he
will for ever be mindful of it. The Covenant of God with his people, shall be
as inviolable, as the course and revolution of day and night; and more
immovable, than the very hills and mountains. From what has been said, we may
thus argue: If God has, by many choice, precious and pathetical promises,
engaged himself to make good that blessed Covenant that he has made with his
people; then certainly there is a Covenant between God and his people: But God
has, by many choice, precious and pathetical promises, engaged himself to make
good his Covenant to his people. Ergo.

I might have laid down several other unanswerable arguments to have evinced
this blessed truth, That there is a Covenant betwixt God and his people; but
let these eight suffice for the present.

Seventhly and lastly, premise this with me, viz. That 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4.
for all mortals, to have a clear and a right understanding of that Covenant,
under which they are: God deals with all men according to the Covenant, under
Psalm. 105. 8. ^sal. 111. 5. 1 ^^r. 11. 28. Gal. 4. 23, 24, 25.
which they stand: we shall never come to understand our spiritual estate and
condition, till we come to know under what Covenant we are. If we are under a
Covenant of works, our state is miserable; If we are under a Covenant of grace*
^ur state is happy; If we die under a Cov^nant of works, we shall be cert^inly
damned* If we die under ^ Covenant ^f grace, we shall be certainly sav^d. 'Till
we come to understand, under what Covenant we are, we shall never be able to
put a right construction, a right interpretation upon any of God's actions,
dealings or dispensations toward us: When we come to understand, that we are
under the Covenant of grace; then we shall be able to put a sweet, a loving and
a favorable Rev. 3. 19. J^b 1. 21. Jer. 24. 4, 5. Romans 8. 28. Heb. 12. 10, 11.
2 Cor. 4. 15, 16, 17, 18.
construction upon the most sharp, smart, severe and terrible dispensations of
God, knowing that all flows from love, and shall work for our external,
internal and eternal good, and for the advancement of God's honor and glory in
the world: When we come to understand, that we are under a Covenant of works,
then we shall know that there is wrath, and curses, and woes, wrapped up in the
most favorable dispensations; and in the greatest Prev. 1. 32. Mal. 2. 2.
Deuteronomy. 28. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Levit. 26. 14, to the 24. 2 Cor. 2. 14. Heb.
12. 1.
outward mercies and blessings that Christ confers upon us. If a man be under a
Covenant of grace, and does not know it; how can he rejoice in the Lord? how
can he sing out the high praises of God? how can he delight himself in the
Almighty? how can he triumph in Christ Jesus? how can he cheerfully run the
race that is before him? how can he bear up bravely and resolutely in his
sufferings for the cause of Christ? how can he besiege the throne of grace with
boldness? how can he be temptation proof? how can he be dead to this world; how
can he long to be with Christ, in that other world? And if a man be under a
Covenant of works, and does not know it, how can he lament and bewail his sad
condition? how can he be earnest with God, to bring him under the bond of the
New Covenant? how can he make out after Christ? how can he choose the things
that please God? how can he cease from doing evil, and learn to do well? how
can he lay hold on eternal life? how can he be saved from wrath to come? etc.
If we are under a Covenant of grace, and do not know it, how can we manage our
duties and services with that life, love, seriousness, holiness, spiritualness,
Psalm. 16. 4. Ames. 8. 5. Mal 1. 13. H^s. 6. 4. cap. 4. 10. Psalm. 36. 3.
and uprightness, as becomes us? etc. If we are under a Covenant of works, and
do not know it, how rare shall we be in religious duties? how weary shall we be
of religious duties? and how ready shall we be to cast off religious duties? By
these few things I have been hinting at, you may easily discern how greatly it
concerns all sorts of persons, to know what Covenant they are under; whether
they are under the first or second Covenant; whether they are under a Covenant
of works, or a Covenant of grace. Now, having premised these seven things, my
way is clear to that I would be at; which is this, viz.

That there are but two famous Covenants, that we must abide by; in one of
them, all men and women in the world, must of necessity be found; either in the
Covenant of grace, or in the Covenant of works: The Covenant of works is a
witness of God's holiness and perfection, the Covenant of grace is a witness of
God's goodness and commis^ration; the Covenant of works is a standing evidence
of man's guiltiness, the Covenant of grace is the standing evidence of God's
righteousness; the Covenant of works is the lasting monument of man's impotency
and changeableness, the Covenant of grace is the everlasting monument of God's
omnipotency and immutability: Now, no man can be under both these Covenants at
once; if he be under a Covenant of works, he is not under a Covenant of grace;
and if he be under a Covenant of grace, he cannot be under a Covenant of works:
Such as are under a Covenant of works, they have the breach of that Covenant to
count for, they being the S^rpentine brood of a transgressing stock; but such
as are under a Covenant of grace, shall never be tried by the Law of works,
because Christ their surety has fulfilled it for them; Acts 13. 38, 39. Romans
8. 2, 3, 4. Gal. 4. 4, 5, 6. But let me open my self more fully thus,

That all unbelievers, all Christless, graceless persons, are under a Covenant
of works, which they are never able, safely to live under; should they live and
die under a Covenant of works, they were surely lost and destroyed for ever;
for the Covenant of works condemns and curses the sinner, Cursed is every one
that continues not in all Gal. 3. 10.
things, which are written in the book of the law, to do them; neither has the
sinner any way to escape that curse of the Law, nor the wrath of God reveiled
against all unrighteousness and ungodlyness, but in the Covenant of grace; Romans
1. 18.
this Covenant of works the Apostle calls, The law of Romans 3. 27. Genesis 2. 16,
17.
works. This is the Covenant which God made with man, in the state of innocence
before the fall: In this Covenant God promised to Adam for himself and his
posterity, life and happiness, upon the condition of perfect, personal and
perpetual obedience; and it is summed up by the Apostle, Do this, and live. God
having created man upright, Gal. 3. 12. E^cl^^. 7. 29. Genesis 1. 26. 27.
after his own image; and so having furnished him with all abilities sufficient
for obedience; thereupon he made a Covenant with him for life, upon the
condition of obedience: I say, he made such a Covenant with Adam, as a public
person, as the head of the Covenant, and as he promised life to him and his
posterity, in case of obedience; so he threatened death and a curse unto him and
his posterity, in case of disobedience; In the day thou eatest Genesis 2. 1^. Gal.
3. 10. Not only the Covenant of Grace, but the Covenant of works also, is an
et(...) Co^^nant; and therefore, the curse of the Covenant remains upon me^
unto Eternity. There is an eternal obligation upon the creature he being bound
to God, by an eternal Law; and the transgression of that ^aw, carries with it
an eternal guilt; which eternal guilt, brings sinners under an eternal curse.
thereof, thou shall surely die; or dying, thou shall die. God, in this
Covenant of works, did deal with Adam and his posterity, in a way of supremacy
and righteousness; and therefore there is mention made only of the threatenings;
In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death: And it is further
observable, that in this Covenant that God made with Adam and his posterity, he
did promise unto them eternal life and happiness in heaven (and not eternal
life, in this world only, as some would have it) for Hell was threatened in
these words; In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death; and
therefore, heaven and happiness, salvation and glory, was promised on the
contrary; we must necessarily conclude, that the promise was as ample, large
and full, as the threatening was; yet this must be remembered, that when God did
at first enter into Covenant with us, and did promise us heaven and salvation;
it was upon condition of our personal, perfect and perpetual obedience, and
therefore called a Covenant of works. Do this, and live, was not only a
Command, but a Covenant, with a promise of eternal happiness, upon perfect and
perpetual obedience. All that are under a Covenant of works, are under the
curse of the Covevenant, and they are all bound over unto eternal wrath: But
the Lord Christ has put an end to this Covenant, and abolished it unto all that
are in him, being himself made under it; and satisfying the precept, and the
curse of it, and so he did cancel it; As a handwriting against us, nailing
Col. 2. 14.
it unto his cross: So that all they that are in Christ, are freed from the
Law, as a Covenant; but unto all other men, it remains a Covenant still, and
they remain under the curse of it for ever, and the wrath of God abides upon
John 3. 36.
them. Though the Covenant of works (as it is a Covenant for life) cease unto
believers, yet it stands in force against all unbelievers.

Now, oh, how sad is it for a man to be under a Covenant of works. For,

First, The Covenant of works, in the nature of it, requires As many as are of
the works of the Law, are under the Gal. 3. 10.
curse (presupposing man's fall, and consequently, his inablility to keep it)
For it is written, cursed is every one that Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
continues not in all things that are written in the book of the law, to do
them: The Covenant of works, therefore, affords no mercy to the transgressors
of it; but inflicts death and curse, for the least delinquency; For whosoever
James 2. 10.
shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all:
The whole Law is but one copulative; He that breaks one commandment,
habitually breaks all. A dispensatory conscience keeps not any commandment;
when the disposition of the heart is qualified to break every command, then a
man breaks every command in the account of* God; every one sin, contains
vertually, all sin in it: He that dares contemn the Lawgiver in any one
command, he dares contemn the Lawgiver in every command: He that allows
himself in any one known sin, in any course, way or trade of sin; he s^^s
himself under that curse, which is threatened against the transgressors of the
Law.

They that are under this Covenant of works, must of necessity perish. The case
stands thus, Adam did break this Covenant, and so brought the curse of it, both
upon himself, and all his seed, to the end of the world; in his sin, all men
sinned. Now, if we consider all men as Romans 5. 12.
involved in the first transgression of the Covenant, they must all needs
perish without a Savior, this is the miserable condition that all mortals are
in, that are under a Covenant of works. But,

Secondly, Such as are under a Covenant of works, their Cursed is he that
continues not in all Gal. 3. 10.
things that are written in the law of God, to do them. Hence it is, that the
best duties of all unregenerate persons, are loathed and abhorred by God; as
you may clearly see, by Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Jer. 6. 20. Isa. 66. 3.
Am^s 5. ^1. Mic. 6. 6. Mal. 1. 10.
comparing the Scriptures in the margent together; the most glorious duties,
and the most splendid performances of those that are under a Covenant of works,
are loathsome to God, for the least mistake that does accompany them. The
Covenant of works, deals with men according to the exactest terms of strict
justice, it does not make nor allow any favorable or gracious interpretation,
as the Covenant of grace does; the very least failour exposes the soul to
wrath, to great wrath, to everlasting wrath. This Covenant, is not a Covenant
of mercy, but of pure justice. But,

Thirdly, This Covenant admits of no Mediator: There Hence this Covenant is
called by some, Pa^tum ami^ (...), a Covenant of friendship
between them, neither was there any need of a Mediator; for God and man were
at no distance, at no variance; man was then righteous, perfectly righteous;
now, the proper work of a Mediator, is to make peace and reconciliation between
God and us: At the first, in the state of innocence, there was peace and
friendship between God and man, there was no enmity in God's heart toward man,
nor no enmity in man's heart toward God: But upon the fall, a breach and
separation was made between God and man; so that man flies from God, and hides
from Genesis 3. 8, 9, 10.
God, and trembles at the voice of God: Fallen man, is now turned Rebel, and is
become a desperate enemy to God; yea, his heart is full of enmity against God:
The Romans 8. 7.
wisdom of the flesh, is enmity against God; not an enemy, as the Vulgar Latin
reads it, but enmity in the abstract; The word signifies the act of a carnal
mind, comprehending thoughts, desire, discourse, etc. (...), on the words.
noting an excess of enmity: As, when we see a proud man, we say, there goes
pride; so here is enmity, nothing can be said more; for an enemy may be
reconciled, but enmity can never; a vicious man may become virtuous, but vice
cannot. There are natural Antipathies between some creatures; as between the
Lion and the Cock, the Elephant and the Boar, the Camel and the Horse, the
Eagle and the Dragon, etc. But what are all these Antipathies, to that
antipathy and enmity, that is in the hearts of all carnal men against God. Now,
whilst men stand under a Covenant of works, there is none to interpose by way
of mediation, but fallen man lies open to the wrath of God, and to all the
curses that are written in his book: When breaches are made between God and
man, under the Covenant of grace; there is a Mediator, to interpose and to make
up all such breaches; but under the Covenant of works, there is no Mediator, to
interpose between God and fallen man. These three things I have hinted a little
at, on purpose to work my reader, if under a Covenant of works, to be restless,
till he be got from under that Covenant, into the Covenant of grace; where
alone lies man's safety, felicity, happiness and comfort. Now, this
consideration leads me by the hand, to tell you,

Secondly, That there is a Covenant of grace, that all believers, all sincere
Christians, all real Saints, are under; for under these two Covenants, all
mankind fall. The Apostle calls this Covenant of grace, The law of faith. Romans
^. ^^.
Now, First, this Covenant of grace is sometimes styled an everlasting
Covenant, Isa. 55. 3. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even
the sure mercies of David: You need not question my security, in respect of the
great things, that I have propounded, and promised in my word, for the
encouragement of your faith and hope; for I will give you my bond for all I
have spoken, which 2 Samuel 23. 5.
shall be as surely made good to you, as the mercies that I have performed to
my servant David. The word everlasting, has two acceptations; it does denote,
1. Sometimes a long duration; in which respect, the old Covenant, clothed with
figures and ceremonies, is called everlasting, because it was to endure, and
did endure a Psalm. 105. 9, 10. Heb. 13. 2, etc.
long time: 2. Sometimes it denotes a perpetual duration; a duration, which
shall last for ever. In this respect, the Covenant of grace is everlasting; it
shall never cease, never be broken, nor never be altered. Now, the Covenant of
grace, is an everlasting Covenant, in a twofold respect.

First, ^x part faede^antis, in respect of God, who will ^it. 1. 2. Psalm. 90.
2.
and will be their God, for ever and ever; Psalm. 48. 14. For this God is our
God, for ever and ever; he will be our God, even unto death; I, and after death
too: for this is not to be taken exclusively; oh no! for he will never, never
Five times in scripture, i^ this pre^ious o^ (...) renewed, Joh. 1. 5. Deuteronomy.
31. 8. 1 King ^. 57. Genesis 28. 15. That we may be (...) a pre^^ing of it, ti^l
we have (...) all the (...) out of ^^. Isa. 66. 11.
leave them, nor forsake them; Heb. 13. 5. There are five Negatives in the
Greek, to assure God's people, that he will never forsake them: According to
the Greek, it may be rendered thus, I will not, not leave thee, neither will I
not, not forsake thee: Leave us! God may, to our thinking, leave us; but
forsake us, he will not. So, Psalm. 89. 34. My Covenant will I not break; Heb. I
will not profane my Covenant; nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
mouth, Heb. The issue of my lips I will not alter: Though God's people should
profane his Statutes, verse. 31. yet God will not profane his Covenant; though
his people often break with him, yet he will never break with them; though they
may be inconstant, yet God will be constant to his Covenant: Isa. 54. ^0. For
the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee; neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the
Lord that has mercy on thee: Though huge mountains should remove (which is not
probable) or though heaven and earth should meet (which is not likely) yet his
Covenant shall stand immovable; and his mercy and kindness to his people,
shall be immutable. This new Covenant of grace, is like the new heavens and new
earth, which will never wax old, or vanish away; Isa. 66. 22. But,

Secondly, The Covenant of grace is called an everlasting Covenant: ^x part
confaederatorum; in respect of the people of God, who are brought into
Covenant, and shall continue in Covenant for ever and ever: You have both these
expressed in that excellent Scripture; Jer. 32. 40. M^^. 3. 6. H^^ 2 19. Genesis
17. 7.
I will make an everlasting Covenant with them (Heb. I will cut out with them a
Covenant of perpetuity) that I will not turn away from them, to do them good;
but (Heb. and) I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart
from me: Seriously dwell upon the place; it shows that God will never ^^rcease
to pur(...) and follow his Vovenant People with (...) and blessings i^cess^ ^^.
the Covenant is everlasting on God's part, and also on our part: On God's
part, I will never turn away from them, to do them good; and on our part, They
shall never depart from me: How so? I will put my fear into their hearts, that
they shall not depart from me. That they may continue constant with me; and not
constrain me, by their Apostasy, to break again with them; I will so deeply
riv^t a reverend dread of my self in their souls, as shall cause them to cling,
and cleave, and keep close to me forever. In the Covenant of grace, God
undertakes for both parts: For his own, that he will be their God; i. e. that
all he is, and all he has, shall be employed for their external, internal and
eternal good: And for ours, that Jer. 32. 38.
we shall be his people; i. e. That we shall believe, love, E^^k. 36. 26, 27.
fear, repent, obey, serve him and walk with him, as he requires; and thus the
Covenant of grace* becomes an everlasting Covenant; yea, such a (...) as has
the sure, o^ (...) and (...). The Covenant of grace, (...) (...)meant, which God
has made with sinful man, out of his mere mercy and grace; wherein he
undertakes, both for himself, and for fallen man; and wherein he engages
himself to make fallen man everlastingly happy. In the Covenant of Grace, there
are two things considerable: First, the Covenant that God makes for himself, to
us; which consists mainly of these branches; 1. That he will be our ^ ult.
(...) 9. 1^, 17, 18.
God; that is, as if he said, you shall have as true an interest in all my
attributes, for your good, as they are mine for my own glory: My grace (says
God) shall be yours, to pardon you, and my power shall be yours, to protect
you, and my wisdom shall be yours, to direct you, and my goodness shall be
yours, to relieve you, and my mercy shall be yours, to supply you, and my glory
shall be yours, to crown you. This is a comprehensive promise, for God to be
our God* it includes all, Deus meus and omnia, said Luther. 2. That he will
give us his spirit; (...). 44. ^. (...). 31. 33. (...) 2. 28. (...) 14. 16, 20.
(...). ^. 23. (...) 2^. 4^. (...) 15. ^6. cap. 16. 7.
hence the spirit is called, the holy spirit of promise: The giving of the Holy
Ghost, is the great promise, which Christ, from the father, has made unto us:
It is the spirit that reveils the promises, that appli^s the promises, and that
helps the soul to live upon the promises, and to draw marrow and fatness out of
the promises. The great promise of the Old Testament, was the promise of
Christ; Genesis 3. 16. and the great promise of the New Testament, is the promise
of the spirit; as you may see by the Scriptures in the margent: That in this
last Age of the world, there may be a more clear and full discovery of Christ,
of the great things of the Gospel, of Antichrist, and of the glorious
conquests, that are in the last days, to be made upon him; the giving of the
spirit, is promised as the most excellent gift. 3. That he will take away the
heart (...). 36. 26. J^r. ^2. 40. (...). 36. 25. Jer. 33. 9, 10. Jer. 32. 41.
of stone, and give a heart of flesh; i. e. a soft and tender heart. 4. That he
will not ^u^n away his ^a^e from us, (...) doing of us good; and that he will
put his fear into our hearts. 5. That he will cle^^se us from all our
^ilthiness, and from all our Idols. 6. That he will r^j^yce over us, to do us
good. The second thing considerable in the Covenant of Grace, is the Covenant
which God does make for us, to himself; which consists mainly in these things:
1. That we shall Jer. 32. 38, 40. Ezekiel. 36. 27. Job 17. 9. Prove. 4. 18. Psalm.
1. 3. ^^^s^a 14. 5, 6, 7. Za^h. 12. 18. Mal. 4. ^. Jer. 24. 5. R^m. 8. 28. Luke
12. 3^. Rev. 2. 10. Psalm. 84. 11. John 10. 28. See the truth of this fully
evidenced in 12 particular^, in my box of precious ^vnt^n^nt. (...). 364, 365,
366, 367
be his people: 2. That we shall fear him for ever: 3. That we shall walk in
his Statutes, keep his Judgments, and do them: 4. That we shall never depart
from him: 5. That w^ shall persevere, and hold out to the end: 6. That we shall
grow, and ^lourish i^ gr^^e: 7. A true right to the creatures: 8. That all
providence, changes and conditions shall work for our good: 9. Union and
communion with Christ: 10. That ^^ s^all (...) Kingdom, a Crown, and glory at
last; and wh^ would w^ have more: By these short hints it is most evident, that
the Covenant of Grace, is an entire Covenant, an everlasting Covenant, made by
God, both for himself, and for us. Oh sirs! this is the glory (...) the
Covenant of Grace; That whatsoever God r^qui^^s of us, that he stands engaged
to give unto us; whatever in the Covenant of Grace, God requires on (...)'s
put, that he undertakes to perform for man. That this Covenant of Grace is an
everl^^ing Covenant, may be mad^ further clear from God's denomination, who
has (...) styled it an everlasting Covenant. In the Old Testament* he
frequently calls it, in Heb. (...), Berith ^^olam, A Covenant of ^ternity: In
the New Testament, he calls it in Greek, (...), Diatheke Aioni^s, The eternal
Covenant, or the everlasting Covenant. And those whom God has taken into
Covenant with himself, they have frequently acknowledged it to be an
everlasting Covenant, as is evident up and down the Scripture. The Covenant of
works was not everlasting, it was soon overthrown by Adam's sin; but the
Covenant of grace is Is^. ^5. 10. D^^. 9. 24.
everlasting: The joy that is wrapped up in the Covenant, is an everlasting
joy; and the righteousness that is wrapped up in the Covenant, is an
everlasting righteousness; and the life that is ^r^pped up in the Covenant, is
an everlasting cap. ^
life; John, 3. 16. and all the (...) glory, and salvation that is wrapped up
in the (...) ^verl^sting; the Covenant relation that is (...) God and his
people, is everlasting; and the (...) Covenant, is everlasting, viz. Jesus
Christ yesterday, and Heb. 13. 8.
to day, and the same for ever. Though the Covenant, in respect of our own
personal entering into it, is made with us now in time, and has a beginning;
yet, for continuance, it is everlasting, and without end; it shall remain for
ever and ever. But,

Secondly, This Covenant of Grace, under which the Mal. 2. 5. My Covenant was
with him, of life, and peace; life is restored, and life is promised, and life
is settled by the Covenant: There is no safe life, no comfortable life, no easy
Omnis vita ^st pr^p^^d ^e^ation^m Philosophers say that a fly is more excellent
than the hea^ens, because the fly has life, which the heavens have not.
life, no happy life, no honorable life, no glorious life, for any sinner,
that is not under the bond of this Covenant. All mankind had been eternally
lost, and God had lost all the glory of his mercy for ever, had he not, of his
own free grace and mercy, made a Covenant of life with poor sinners. A man, in
the Covenant of Grace, has three degrees of life: The first, in this life,
when Christ lives in him: The second, when his body returns to the earth, and
his soul to God that gave it: The third, at the end of the world, when body and
soul reunited, shall enjoy heaven.

Thirdly, This Covenant of Grace, under which, the a holy Covenant: Daniel,
describing the wickedness of Antiochus Epiphanes, says, His heart shall be
against the Da^. 11. 2^, 30.
holy Covenant; He shall have indignation against the holy Covenant* And have
intelligence with them that forsake the holy Covenant: So the Psalmist, For he
remembered his ^sal. ^^5. 42, 43. Heb. (...) of his ^^liness, that is, (...)
sacred and (...) Covenant, that ^e had ^ade with Abraham and ^is posterity.
holy promise, and Abraham his servant; Pro^ise her^ being put for Covenant, by
a Synechdoche, Luke 1. 72. To perf^rm the mercy promised to our fathers, and to
remember his holy covenant. The parties interested in this Covenant, are holy;
here you have a holy God, and a holy people, in Covenant together: Holiness is
one of the principal things that is promised in the Covenant; the Covenant
commands holiness, and encourages ^^ holiness, and works souls up to a higher
degree of holiness, and senses and arms gracious souls, against all external
and internal unholiness: See my Tre^tise of holiness. Psalm. ^0. 5. Heb. 3. 1. 1
These. 5. 27. 2 P^t. 1. 21. 1 Pet. 3. 5. 1 C^r. 3. 17. ^ Pet. 2. 9, etc.
The Author of this Covenant is holy, the Mediator of this Covenant, is holy;
the great blessings contained in this Covenant, are holy blessings; and the
people taken into this Covenant, are sometimes styled, holy brethren, holy men,
holy women; An holy Temple, an holy Priestood, an holy Nation, an holy People;
as you may see, by comparing the Scriptures in the margent together: When ever
God brings a poor soul under the bond of the Covenant, he makes him holy, and
he makes him love holiness, and prize holiness, and delight in holiness, and
J^b 8. Psalm. 20.
press and follow hard after holiness. A holy God will not take an unholy
person by the hand, as Joh speaks; neither will he allow of such, to take his
Covenant into their mouths, as the Psalmist speaks.

Fourthly, This Covenant of Grace, under which the Numb. 25. 12. Behold, I give
unto him, my covenant of peace: Peace is the comprehension of all blessings and
prosperity. Mat. 2. 5.
All sorts of peace, viz. peace with God, and peace with conscience, and peace
with the creatures flows from the Covenant of Grace. There is 1. An external
peace, and that is with men: 2. There is a supernatural peace, and that is with
God: 3. There is an internal peace, and that is with conscience: 4. There is an
eternal peace, and that is in heaven: Now, all these sorts of peace flow in
upon us, through the Covenant of Grace. The Hebrew word for peace, comes from a
root, which denotes perfection; the end of the upright man, is perfection of ^
happiness: Hence the Rabbis say, that the holy blessed God finds not any
vessel that will contain enough of blessin^^ f^^ Israel, but the vessel of
peace: Peace is a very comprehensive word; it carries in the womb of it, all
outward blessings; it was the common greeting of the Jews, (...) be unto you:
And thus David, by his proxy, salutes Nab^l* Peace be to thee* and thy house.
The Ancients were wo^^ to paint Peace in the form of a woman, with a ho^n of
plenty in her hand; The Covenant of Grace is that hand, by which God gives out
all sorts of peace unto us; Isa. 54. 10. Neither shall the Covenant of my peace
be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee: The Covenant is here called
the Covenant of peace, because the Lord therein offers us all those things,
that may make us completely happy; for under this word peace, the Hebrew
comprehend all happiness and felicity, Ezekiel. 34. 25. And I will make with them
a covenant of peace; the Hebrew is, I will cut with them a covenant of peace:
This expre^ion of cutting a Covenant, is taken from the custom of the Jews, in
their making of Covenants: The manner of this ceremony or solemnity, Jeremy
declares, saying, I will give Je^. 34. 18.
the men that have trans^ressed my Covenant, which have not performed the words
of the Covenant, which they had struck before me, when they cut the calf in
twain, and passed between the parts thereof: Their manner was to kill
Sacrifices, to cut This Ceremony, or Solemnity of co^enanting. The Romans, and
other Nations used, some Ju^ge: The Heat^^ns borrowed this custom (...) the
Jews. But of this before.
these Sacrifices in twain, to lay the two parts thus divided in the midst,
piece against piece, exactly one over against another, to answer each other:
Then the parties Covenanting, passed betwixt the parts of the Sacrifices so
slit in twain, and laid answerably to one another: The meaning of which
ceremonies and solemnities, is conceived to be this, viz. as part answered to
part, so there was an harmonious correspondency, and answerableness of their
minds and hearts, that struck Covenant: And as part was severed from part, so
the Covenanters employed (if not expressed) an imprecation or curse; wishing the
like dissection and destruction to the parties covenanting, as most deserved,
if they should break the Covenant, or deal falsely therein. To this custom God
alludes, when he says, I will cut with them a covenant of peace: And this he
did, by making Christ a sacrifice, by shedding his blood, and dividing his soul
and body; who is said to be given Is^. 42 6.
for a Covenant of the people; that is, to be the med^^tor of the Covenant
between God and his people. So Ezekiel. 37. 26. Moreover, I will make a Covenant
of peace with them, it shall be an everlasting Covenant with them, etc. The
word for peace, is Shalom; by which, the Heb^ (...)derstand not only outward
quietness, but all kind of outward happiness: Others, by the Covenant of peace
here, do understand the Gospel, wherein we see Christ, has pacified all
things, by the blood of his cross. And Lavater Col. 1. 20.
says, it is called a Covenant of peace; Quia Christi merito, pax inter Deum
and nos constituta est: Not only outward, but inward peace, between God and us,
is merited by our Lord Jesus Christ. But,

Fifthly, This Covenant of Grace, under which the Jer. Heb. 8. 8, 13. Heb. 9.
15.
31. 31. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant
with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: Heb. 12. 24. And to
Jesus, the Mediator of the new covenant, etc. Now the Covenant of grace is
styled a New Covenant, in several respects: First, in opposition to the former
Covenant, that was old, and being old, vanished away; Heb. 8. 13. It is called
a New Covenant, in opposition to the Covenant that was made with Adam, in the
state of innocence; and in opposition to the Covenant that was made with the
Jews, in the time of the Old Testament: 2. To show the excellency of the
Covenant of Grace, new things are rare and excellent ^
things; In the blessed Scriptures, excellent things are frequently called new:
As a New Testament, a New Jerusalem, New Heavens, and New Earth, A new name,
that is, an excellent name; A new Commandment, that is, an excellent
commandment; a new way, that is, an excellent way; a new heart, i^ an excellent
heart; a new spirit, is an excellent spirit; and a new s^ng, is an excellent
song. 3. In re^^rd of the succession of it, in ^he room of the former. 4. (...)
of the (...)ation and enlargement of it, i^ being in the days of old, confi^ed
to the Jewish Nation and S^^te* and some ^ew Pros^lytes that adjoined
themselves thereunto; whereas, now it i^ propounded and extended, without
respect of persons or places, unto all indifferently, of all people and nations
that shall embrace the says ^^ Christ. 5. Sometimes that is styled new, which
is (...) from what it was before; 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is
a new creature, A new creature has a new light, a new judgment, a new will, new
a(...)tions, new t(...)ght^, new (...)pany, new choice* new L^^d, ^ew law, new
way, new work, (...) A new creature is a cha^^ed (...) ^^t. 1 (...) 5. 23.
that is, he is not such a man, as he was before; a man must be either a new
man, or no man in Christ. The substance of the soul is not changed, but the
qualities and operations of it are altered; in regeneration, our natures are
changed, not destroyed: This word New, in Scripture, signifies as much as
another; not that it is essentially new, but new only in regard of qualities; a
new creature is a changed creature, 2 Cor. 3. 17. But we all with open face,
beh^lding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord; are changed into the some
image, from glory to glory (that is, from grace to grace.) In this respect
also, is the Covenant styled new, not only because it is diverse from the
Covenant of works, but also because it is diverse from it self, in respect of
the administration of it; after that Christ was manifested in the flesh, and
died, and rose again; from the different administration, it is called old and
new: This New Covenant has not those seals of Circumcision and the Passover;
nor those manifold sacrifices, ceremonies, types and shadows, etc. to the
observation whereof, the Jews were strictly obliged; but now, all these things
are taken away, upon the coming of Christ; and a service of God, much more
spiritual, substituted in the room of them: Upon which accounts, the Covenant
of Grace is called a New Covenant, 6. It is styled new, because it is ^
fresh, and green, and flourishing, it is like unto Aaron's Rod, which
continued new, fresh and flourishing: All the choice blessings, all the great
blessings, all the internal and all the eternal blessings of the New Covenant,
are as new, fresh and flourishing, as they were, when God brought your souls
first under the bond of the New Covenant. But Seventhly, Such things are
sometimes ^^iled new, which are strange, rare, wonderful, marvell^us, and
unusual, the like not heard of before: So Jer. 31. 22. The Lord has created a
new thing in the ^arth, a woman shall compass a man: As the not encloseth the
(...), not receiving ought from without, but conceiving and breeding of her
self, by the power of the Almighty, from within. That a virgin should conceive
and bring forth a manchild, this was indeed a new thing, a strange thing, a
wonderful thing, a thing that was never thought of, never heard of, never read
of, from the creation of the world, to that very day: So Isa. 43. 19. Behold, I
will do The word new, does intimate some more excellent mercies, than God had
formerly conferred upon his people.
a new thing, I will make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert.
This was a new work (that is) a wonderful and unusual work, for God to make a
plain or free way in the wilderness, where the ways are wont to be uneven, with
hills and dales, and obstructed with thickets, and overgrown with brambles and
briars, is a strange and marvelous work indeed: In this respect also, the
Covenant of grace is styled new (that is) it is a wonderful Covenant. O sirs!
what a wonder is this, that the great God, who was so transcendently
dishonored, despised, provoked, incensed and injured by poor base sinners,
should yet so freely, so readily, so graciously condescend to vile forlorn
sinners, as to treat with them, as to own them, as to love them, and as to
enter into a Covenant of grace and mercy with them! this may well be the wonder
of Angels, and the astonishment of men. Eighthly and lastly, it is called a New
Covenant, because it is never to be antiquated, as the Apostle explains
himself; Heb. 8. 13. But,

Sixthly, This Covenant of Grace, under which the Lev. Salt, they were bound
(as by a Covenant) to use in all sacrifices, or it means a sure and pure
Covenant. Some, by the salt of the Covenant, do mystically understand, the
Grace of the New Testament.
2. 13. Neither shall thou suffer the salt of the Covenant of thy God, to be
lacking from the meat offering, etc. The salt of the Covenant signifies, that
Covenant that God has made with us in Christ, who seasoneth us, and makes all
our services savoury. The meaning of the words, say some, is this, The Salt
shall put thee in mind of my Covenant, whereby thou stand engaged, to
endeavor always, for an untainted and uncorrupted life and conversation: By
this salting (say others) was signified the Covenant of grace in Christ, which
we, by faith, apprehend unto incorruption; wherefore, our unregenerate estate
is likened to a child new born, and not salted; Ezekiel* 16. 4. Others say, it
signifies the eternal and perpetual holiness of the Covenant, between God and
man: And some there be, that say, that this salt of the Covenant signifies the
grace of God, whereby they are guided and sanctified, that belong unto the
Covenant of grace. So Numb. 18. 19. It is a covenant of salt for ever, before
the Lord, unto thee, and to thy seed with thee: a Covenant of Salt is used for
an inviolable, incorruptible and perpetual Covenant. Of old, amity and
friendship was symbolized by salt, for its consolidating and conserving
property, says Pierias.
This Covenant which the Lord made with the Priests, is called a Covenant of
Salt; because, as Salt keeps from Corruption, so that Covenant was perpetual,
authentical and inviolable; as anciently the most solemn ceremony that was used
in Covenants, was to take and eat of the same salt; and it was esteemed more
sacred and firm, than to eat at the same table, and drink of the same cup. This
Covenant, in regard of its perpetuity, is here called a Covenant of Salt, that
is, a sure and stable, a firm and incorruptible Covenant: So 2 Chronicles. 13. 5.
Ought you not to know, that the Lord God of Israel, gave the kingdom over
Israel, to David for ever; even to him, Zanchy's Exposition of the place, is
strange, and far fetched.
and to his sons, by a covenant of salt; i. e. perpetual and inviolable, solemn
and sure; by this Metaphor of salt, a perpetuity is set forth, for salt makes
things last. The Covenant therefore, here intended, is by this Metaphor,
declared to be a perpetual Covenant, that was not to be abrogated or nulled: In
this respect, these two phrases, a Covenant of Salt, and for ever, are joined
together. Some take this Metaphor of Salt, to be used in relation to their
manner of making their Covenant, with a sacrifice; on Numb. 18. 19. but now
opened, Lev. 2. 13.
which Salt was always sprinkled; and thereby is employed, that it was a most
solemn Covenant, not to be violated. But,

Seventhly, The Covenant of Grace, under which the Shemurah, that is, kept,
observed, performed; the word imports care, diligence, and solicitude, lest any
thing be let go, let slip, etc. 2 Samuel 23. 5. Deuteronomy. 7. 9. 2 Chr^n. 6. 14. Psalm.
19. 7. Psalm. 89. 28. Titus 1. 2. Psalm. 13^. 11. Isa. 54. 10. See my Box of
precious Ointment, page 367, 368, 371 372, 373.
God is ever mindful of his Covenant, and will have that singular care, and
that constant and due regard to it, that not the least branch of it shall ever
fail, as you may clearly see, by consulting the special Scriptures in the
margin. Hence it is called the mercy and the truth; Mic. 7. 20. Thou will
perform the truth to Jacob (Heb. thou will give, for all is of free gift) and
the mercy to Abraham. The Covenant is called mercy, because mercy only drew
this Covenant; it was free mercy, it was mere mercy, it was only mercy, which
moved God to enter into Covenant with us. And it is called truth, because the
great God, who has made this Covenant, will assuredly make good all that mercy,
and all that grace, and all that favor, that is wrapped up in it: God having
made himself a voluntary debtor to his people, he will come off fairly with
them, and not be worse than his word. Hence Christ is said to Rev. 10. 1. Isa.
54. 9, 10. J^r. 33. 20, 25. The stability of God's Covenant is compared to the
unvariable course of the day and the night, and to the firmness and
unmoveableness, of the mighty mountains; Isa. 54 9, 10.
have a Rainbow upon his head, to show that he is faithful and constant in his
Covenant: God has hitherto kept promise with nights and days, that one shall
succeed the other; therefore, much more will he keep promise with his people.
Hence also, the Covenant is called the Oath, Luke 1. 73. The oath which he
swear unto our father Abraham: You never read of God's Oath, in a Covenant of
works: In that first Covenant, you read not of Mediator, nor of an Oath; but in
the Covenant of Grace, you read both of a Mediator, and of an Oath, the more
effectually to confirm us, as touching the immutability of his will and
purpose, for the accomplishment of all the good and the great things that are
mentioned in the Covenant of Grace. The Covenant of Grace is incomparably more
firm, sure, immutable and irrevocable, than all other Covenants in the world:
Therefore it is said, God willing Heb. 6. 17, 18. Who shall doubt when God does
swear? who cannot possibly deny himself, or forswear himself.
more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of his
counsel, confirmed it by an oath: That by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation: (...), that is, a
valiant, strong, prevailing consolation; such as swalloweth up all worldly
griefs, as Moses his serpent did the sorcerers serpents, or as the fire does
the fuel; God's word, his promise, his Covenant, is sufficient to assure us of
all the good that he has engaged to bestow upon us; yet God considering of our
infirmity, has bound his word with an oath. His word cannot be made more true,
but yet it may be made more credible: Now two things make a thing more
credible; 1. The quality of the person-speaking: 2. The manner of the speech;
If God does not simply speak, but solemnly swear, we have the highest cause
imaginable, to rest assured, and abundantly satisfied in the word and oath of
God: An oath amongst men, is the strongest, surest, most sacred and inviolable
bond; For men verily swear by the greater, Heb. 6. 16.
and an oath for confirmation, is to them an end of all strife: The end of an
Oath among men, is to help the truth in necessity, and to clear men's
innocence: O sirs, God does Exodus 22. 11.
not only make his Covenant, but swears his Covenant; My covenant (says the
Psalmist) will I not break, nor alter Psalm. 89. 34, 35.
the thing that is gone out of my lips; once have I sworn by my holiness, that
I will not lie unto David. This is as great and deep an Oath, as God could
take; for his holiness is himself, who is most holy and the foundation of all
holiness; See my Treatise of Holiness, page 585. to page 595.
God is essentially holy, unmixedly holy, universally holy, transcendently
holy, originally holy, independently holy, constantly holy, and exemplarily
holy: Now, for so holy a God, to swear once for all by his holiness, that he
will keep covenant, that he will keep touch with his people; how abundantly
should it settle and satisfy them! Ah my friends, has God said it, and will
he not do it? Yea, has he sworn it, and will he not bring it to pass? Dare we
trust an honest man, upon his bare word, much more upon his Oath; and shall we
not much more trust a holy, wise and faithful God, upon his word, upon his
Covenant, when confirmed by an oath. The Covenant of Grace is sure in it self,
it is a firm Covenant, an unalterable Covenant, an everlasting Covenant, a
ratified Covenant; so that heaven and earth may sooner pass away, than the
least branch or word of his Mat. 5. 18.
Covenant should pass away unfulfilled. Let us but cast our eyes upon the
several springs, from whence the Covenant of Grace flows; and then we cannot
but strongly conclude, that the Covenant of Grace is a sure Covenant. Now, if
you cast your eye aright, you shall see, that the Covenant of Grace flows from
these three springs.

First, From the free grace and favor of God: There whom he loves, he Jo^. 13.
3. Mal. 3. 6. James 1. 17.
loves to the end; whom God loves once, he loves for ever; he is not as man,
soon on and soon off again, soon in, and as soon out, as Joab's dagger was! Oh
no! his love is like himself, lasting, yea everlasting; I have loved thee with
an everlasting love* Jer. 31. 3. Though we 2 Timothy 2. 13.
break off with him, yet he abides faithful. Now, what can be more sure, than
that which springs from free love, Romans 4. 16.
from everlasting love? Hence the Covenant must be sure. The former Covenant
was not sure, because it was of Works; but this Covenant is sure, because it is
of Grace, and rests not on any sufficiency in us, but only on Grace.

Secondly, The Covenant of Grace springs from the Heb. 6. 17. God willing, more
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of his counsel
(confirmed it by an oath:) Times are mutable, and all sorts of men are mutable,
and the love and Isa. 40. 6. Psalm. 146. 3, 4. Jer. 33. 14.
favor of the creature is mutable; but the counsel of God, from which the
Covenant of Grace flows, is immutable, and therefore it must needs be sure. The
manifestation of the immutability of God's counsel, is here brought in, as one
end of God's Oath; God swears, that it might evidently appear, that what he had
purposed, counseled, determined and promised to Abraham and his seed, should
assuredly be accomplished, there should be, there could be no alteration
thereof: His counsel was more firm, than Dan. 6. 13.
the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which alters not; certainly God's
counsel is inviolable; My counsel shall stand, Isa. 46. 10. Psalm. 33. 11. The
counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all
generations; Prove. 19. 21. Nevertheless, the counsel of the Lord, that shall
stand. The immutability of God's counsel, springs from the unchangeableness of
his essence, the perfection of his wisdom, the infiniteness of his goodness,
the absoluteness of his sovereignty, the omnipotency of his power; God in his
essence, being unchangeable, his counsel also must needs be so; can darkness
flow out of light, or fullness out of emptiness, or heaven out of hell? No; no
more can changeable counsels flow from an immutable nature. Now, the Covenant
of Grace, flows from the immutable counsel of God, which is most firm and
inviolable, and therefore it must needs be a sure Covenant. But.

Thirdly, The Covenant of Grace springs from the Tim. 2. 19. The foundation of
God stands sure: Our graces are imperfect, our comforts ebb and flow; but
God's foundation stands sure.
That foundation of God, is his election, which is compared to a foundation;
because it is that, upon which, all our good and happiness is built, and
because, as a foundation, it abides firm and sure. The gracious purpose of God,
is the fountainhead of all our spiritual blessings: It is the impulsive cause
of our vocation, justification, glorification, it is the highest link in the
Golden chain of salvation; what is the reason that God has entered into a
Covenant with fallen man? it is from his eternal purpose: What is the reason,
that one man is brought under the bond of the Covenant, and not another? it is
from the E^ek. 20. 37.
eternal purpose of God. In all the great concerns of the Covenant of Grace,
the purpose of God gives the casting voice: The purpose of God, is the
sovereign cause of all that good that is in man, and of all that external,
internal and eternal good that comes to man: Not works past, for men are chosen
from everlasting; not works present, for Jacob was loved and chosen before he
was born; nor works fore seen, for men were all corrupt in Adam. All a
believer's present happiness, and all his future happiness springs from the
eternal purpose of God; as you may see, by comparing the Scriptures in the
margin together. This Romans 8. 28. cap. 9. 11. Ephesians. 1. 11. cap. 3. 11. 2 Timothy 1.
9.
purpose of God speaks our stability, and certainty of salvation by Christ;
God's eternal purpose never changes, never alters; Surely, as I have thought,
so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed (says God) so shall it stand:
God's purposes are immutable, so is his Covenant; God's purposes are sure, very
sure, so is his Covenant: The Covenant of Grace that flows from the eternal
purpose of God, is as sure as God is sure; for God can neither deceive, nor be
deceived. That Covenant that is built upon this rock of God's eternal purpose,
must needs be sure; and therefore, all that are in covenant with God, need
never fear falling away; there is no man, no power, no devil, no violent
temptation, that shall ever be able to overturn those that God has brought
under the bond of the Covenant; Joh. 10. 28, 29, 30, 31. 1 Pet. 1. 5. But,

Secondly, Consider that the Covenant of Grace, is Heb. 13. 20. Heb. 9. 16, 17.
The main point which the Apostle intended, by setting down the inviolableness
of men's last Wills, after their death, is to prove, that Christ's death was
very requisite for ratifying of the New Testament: consult these scriptures,
Mat. 16. 21. Luke 24. 26. Heb. 2. 10. cap. 2. 17.
which is called the blood of the everlasting Covenant; Christ, by his
irrevocable death, has made sure the Covenant to us. The Covenant of Grace, is
to be considered under the notion of a Testament; and Christ, as the Testator
of this will and testament. Now, look as a man's will and testament is
irrevocably confirmed by the Testator's death. For where a Testament is, there
must also, of necessity, be the death of the Testator; For a Testament is of
force, after men are dead; otherwise, it is of no strength at all, whilst the
Testator lives: These two verses are added as a proof of the necessity of
Christ's manner of confirming the new Testament, as he did, namely by his
death: The Argument is taken from the common use and equity of confirming
Testaments, which is by the death of the Testator. A Testament is only and
wholly at his pleasure that makes it, so that he may alter it, or disanul it
while he lives, as he sees good; but when he is dead, he not remaining to
alter it, none else can do it. In the seventeenth verse, the Apostle declares
the inviolableness of a man's last will, being ratified as before, by the
testator's death: This he shows two ways: 1. Affirmatively in these words; A
Testament is of force after men are dead: 2. Negatively, in these words,
otherwise it is of no strength. Now from the affirmative and the negative it
plainly appears, that a Testament is made inviolable by the Testator's death,
so Jesus Christ has unalterably confirmed this Will and Testament; viz. The
New Covenant, by his blood and Heb. 9. 15.
death; That by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions, that
were under the first testament; they which are called, might receive the
promise of eternal inheritance. Christ died, to purchase an eternal
inheritance; and on this ground, eternal life is called an eternal inheritance;
for we come to it as heirs, through the good will, grace and favor of the
purchaser thereof, manifested by the last Will and Testament: Hence you read,
This is my blood Man. 26. 28.
of the new testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins:
Again, This cup is the new testament in my ^uk. 22. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 25.
blood, which is shed for you. The Covenant is called both a Covenant and a
Testament, because his Covenant and Testament is founded, established,
ratified, and immutably sealed up, in and by his blood: Christ is the faithful
and true witness, yea, truth it self, his word shall not Rev. 3. 14. Joh. 14.
6. Mark 13. 31.
pass away. If the word of Christ be sure, if his promise be sure, if his
Covenant be sure, then surely his last Will and Testament, which is ratified
and confirmed by his death, must needs be very sure; Christ's blood is too
precious a thing to be spilt in vain; but in vain is it spilt, if his
Testament, his Covenant, ratified thereby, be altered. If the Covenant of Grace
be not a sure Covenant, then 1 Cor. 1^. 14.
Christ died in vain, and our preaching is in vain, and your hearing, and
receiving, and believing is all in vain: Christ's death is a declaration and
evidence of the eternal counsel of his father, which is most stable and
immutable in it self; but how much more is it so, when it is ratified by the
death of his dearest son, In whom all the promises are, yea, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
and Amen; that is, in Christ they are made, performed and ratified: By all
this, we may safely conclude, that the Covenant of Grace is a most sure
Covenant, there can be no addition to it, detraction from it, or alteration of
it; unless the death of Jesus Christ, whereby it is confirmed, be frustrated and
overthrown: Certainly, the Covenant is as sure as Christ's death is sure. The
sureness and certainty of the Covenant, is the ground and bottom of bottoms,
for our faith, hope, joy, patience, peace, etc. take this corner, this
foundation stone away, and all will tumble; were the Covenant uncertain, a
Christian could never have a good day all his days, his whole life would be
filled up with fears, doubts, disputes, distractions, etc. and he would be
still a crying out, Oh! I can never be sure that God will be mine, or that
Christ will be mine, or that mercy will be mine, or that pardon of sin will be
mine, or that heaven will be mine; Oh! I can never be sure that I shall escape
the great damnation, the worm 2 These. 1. 9.
that never dies, the fire that never goes out, or an eternal separation from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. The great glory of
the Covenant, is the certainty of the Covenant; and this is the top of God's
glory, and of a Christian's comfort, that all the mercies that are in the
Covenant of Grace are, the sure mercies of David; and that all the Grace that
is in the Covenant, is sure Grace; and that all the glory that is in the
Covenant, is sure glory; and that all the external, internal and eternal
blessings of the Covenant are sure blessings.

I might further argue the sureness of the Covenant of Grace, from all the
attributes of God, which are deeply engaged to make it good, as his wisdom,
love, power, justice, holiness, faithfulness, righteousness, etc. And I might
further argue the certainty of the Covenant of Grace, from the seals which God
has annexed to it: You know, what was sealed by the Kings Ring, could not be
altered; God has set his seals to this Covenant, his Est. 8. 8.
broad seal in the Sacraments, and his privy seal in the witness of his spirit;
and therefore the Covenant of Grace is sure* and can never be reversed: But
upon several accounts. I may not now insist on these things. And therefore.

Eighthly and lastly, the Covenant of Grace is styled a Sam. 23. 5. He has
made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: Oh, the
admirable counsel, wisdom, love, care and tenderness Romans 11. 33, 34, 35, 3^. 1
C^^. 2. 7. Ephesians. 1. 8. c^p. 3. 10. Psalm. 1 ^7. 5. Isa. 4^. 28. Rev. 7. 12.
of the blessed God, that sparkles and shines in the well ordering of the
Covenant of Grace! Oh, how comely and beautiful, with what symmetry and
proportion, are all things in this Covenant, ordered and prepared! Oh, what
head can conceive, or what tongue can express, that infinite understanding that
God has manifested, in ordering the Covenant of Grace so, as it may most and
best suit to all the wants, and straits, and necessities, and miseries* and
desires, and longings of poor sinner's souls: Here are ^it and full supplies
for all our spiritual wants; so excellently and orderly has God composed and
constituted the Covenant of Grace. In the Covenant of Grace, every poor sinner
may find a suitable help, a suitable remedy, a suitable succor, a suitable
support, a suitable supply. The Covenant of Grace is so well ordered by the
unsearchable wisdom of God, that you may find in it remedies, to cure all your
spiritual diseases; Jer. 33. 8. E^^^. 36. 25. ^sal. 94. 19.
and cordials, to comfort you under all your soulfaintings; and a spiritual
Armory, to arm you against all sorts of sins, and all sorts of snares, and all
sorts of temptations, and all sorts of oppositions, and all sorts of enemies,
Ephesians. 6. 10. to the 18.
whether inward or outward, open or secret, subtle or silly: Do thou, oh
distressed sinner, want a loving God, a compassionate God, a reconciled God, a
sin-par doning God, a tender hearted God; here thou may find Exodus 34. 5, 6,
7.
him in the Covenant of Grace. Do thou, oh sinner! want a Christ, to counsel
thee by his wisdom, and to Rev. 3. 17, 18.
cloth thee with his righteousness, and to enrich thee with his grace, and to
enlighten thee with his eye salve, and to justify thee from thy sins, and to
reconcile thee A^^. 13. 39. 1 These. 1. ult. John 10. 28, 29, 30, 31.
to God, and to secure thee from wrath to come; and after all, to bring thee to
heaven? here thou may find him in a Covenant of Grace: Do thou, oh sinner!
want the holy spirit, to awaken thee, and to convince thee of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment* or to enlighten thee, and teach thee, and lead
thee, and guide Ez^k. 36. 25, 26, 27. Luke 11. 13. Ephesians. 1. 13.
thee in the way everlasting; or to cleanse thee, or comfort thee, or to seal
thee up to the day of Redemption? here thou may find him in the Covenant of
Grace. Do thou, oh sinner! want grace, all grace, great grace, abundance of
grace, multiplied grace? here thou may find it in the Covenant of Grace: Do
thou, oh sinner! want peace, or ^ase, or rest, or quiet in thy Conscience? here
thou may find it in the Covenant of Grace. Do thou want, oh sinner! joy, or
comfort, or content, or satisfaction? here thou may have it in a Covenant of
Grace. Oh sinner, sinner! what ever thy bodily wants are, or whatever thy soul
wants are, they may all be supplied out of the Covenant of Grace: God, in his
infinite wisdom and love, has laid into the Covenant of Grace, as into a common
store, all those good things, and all those great things, and all those
suitable things, that either sinners or saints can either beg or need. Now, the
adequate suitableness of the Covenant of Grace, to all a sinners wants,
straits, necessities, miseries and desires, does sufficiently demonstrate the
Covenant of Grace to be a well ordered Covenant. Look, as that is a well
ordered Commonwealth, where there are no wholesome Laws wanting to govern a
^p^ople, and where there are no wholesome remedies wanting to relieve a people,
and where there are no defenses wanting to^ secure a people; so that must needs
be a well ordered Covenant, where there is nothing wanting to govern poor
souls, or to secure poor souls, or to save poor souls; and such a Covenant is
the Covenant of Grace. I might easily lay down other arguments, to evince the
Covenant of Grace to be a well ordered Covenant: As for the right placing of
all persons and things in the Covenant of Grace, and from the outward
dispensation of it: God reveiled it but gradually: First, he discovered it more
darkly, remotely and imperfectly, as we see things a great way off; but
afterward the Lord did more clearly, fully, immediately, frequently, and
completely discover it, as we discern things at hand: God did not, at once,
open all the riches and rarities of the Covenant to his people; but in the
opening of those treasures that were there laid up, God had a respect to the
nonage and full age of his people: And from God's dispensing and giving out
all the good and all the great things of the Covenant in their fittest time, in
a right and proper season, when his people most need them, and when they can
live no longer without them; but I must hasten to a closing up of this
particular. Thus you see in these Eight particulars, how gloriously the
Covenant of Grace, under which the saints stand, is set out in the blessed
Scriptures.

Concerning the Covenant of Grace, or the new Covenant, that all sincere
Christians are under; and by which, at last, they shall be judged: let me
further say, (besides what I have already said) All mankind had been eternally
lost, and God had lost all the glory of his mercy Asa. ^1. 1, 2. E^^. 1. 5, 6,
7. cap. 2. 5. 7. 8. 2 Samuel 7. 21. Romans 9. 18, 23. Jer. 3^, 38. 39, 40, 41.
Ez^k. 36. 25, 26, 27. Ezekiel. 16. 1. -- 10. Surely, if a woman commit Adultery,
it is a mere act of favor if her husband accept of her again; Jer. 3. 7. The
Application is easy.
for ever, had he not, of his own free grace and mercy, made a new Covenant
with sinful man. The fountain from whence this new Covenant flows, is the grace
of God, Genesis 17. 22. I will make (Hebrew, I will) my covenant: This Covenant is
called a Covenant of Grace, because it flows from the mere grace and mercy of
God: There was nothing out of God, nor nothing in God, but his mere mercy and
grace, that moved him to enter into Covenant with poor sinners, who were
miserable, who were loathsome, and polluted in their blood, and who had broken
the Covenant of their God, and were actually in arms against him: This must
needs be of mere favor and love for God to enter into Covenant with man, when
he lay wallowing in his blood, and no eye pitied him, no, not his own. As there
was nothing in fallen man, to draw God's favor or affection toward him, so
there was every thing in fallen man, that might justly provoke God's wrath and
indignation against him; and therefore it must be a very high act of favor and
grace, for the great, the glorious, the holy, the wise, and the all-sufficient
God, to enter into Covenant with such a forlorn creature as fallen man was:
Nothing but free Grace was the foundation of the Covenant of Grace with poor
sinners. Now, let us seriously mind how this Covenant of Grace, or this new
Covenant, runs both in the Old, and in the New Testament; Jer. 31. 31. Behold,
Though the Covenant of Redemption made to the fathers, and this which was given
after, seem diverse, yet they are all one, and grounded on Jesus Christ, save
that this is called new; because of the manifestations of Christ, and the
abundant graces of the Holy Ghost, given to his Church under the Gospel: 2 Cor.
3. 1, 2, 3.
the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house
of Israel, and with the house of Judah: verse. 32. Not according to the Covenant
that I made with their fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand, to
bring them out of the land of Egypt; (which, my covenant, they brake, although
I was an husband unto them, says the Lord. verse. 33. But this shall be the
Covenant, that I will make with the house of Israel; after those days, says
the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people: verse. 34. And they
shall teach no more, every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least of them, unto
the greatest of them, says the Lord: For I will forgive their iniquities, and
I will remember their sin no more. Now, let us see how Paul does exegetically
explain this New Covenant, in that, Heb. 8. 6. But now has he obtained a more
excellent Ministry; by how much also, he is the Mediator of a better Covenant,
which was established upon better promises: verse. 7. For if that first Covenant
had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the second; but
finding fault with them, he says, verse. 8. Behold, the days come (says the
Lord) when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and the house
of Judah* verse. 9. Not according to the Covenant that I made with their
fathers, in the day when I took them by the hand, to lead them out of the land
of Egypt, because they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded them not,
says the Lord. Verse. 10, But this is the Covenant that I will make with the
house of Israel; after those days, says the Lord, I will put my laws into
their mind, and write them in their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and
they shall be to me a people. verse. 11. And they shall not teach every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord; for all shall know
me, from the least to the greatest. verse. 12. For I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more.
verse. 13. In that he says a new covenant, he has made the first old: Now
Where then is the fire of purgatory, and that Popish distinction of the fault
and the punishment; as for the fiction of Purgatory, it deserves rather to be
hissed at, than by arguments refuted: And to punish sin in Purgatory, as Popish
Doctors teach; what is this, but to call sin tomind and memory, to view and
sight, to reckoning and account; which is contrary to the Doctrine of the New
Covenant.
that which decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away. This is the
substance of the New Covenant; and thus the Lord did fore-promise it by
Jeremiah, and afterward expounded it by Paul; some small difference there is
in their words, but the sense is one and the same. Now, this Covenant is styled
the New Covenant, because it is to continue new, and never to wax old, or wear
away, so long as this world shall continue: Neither does the holy Scriptures
any where reveal another Covenant, which shall succeed this Covenant. If any
Covenant should succeed this, it must be either a Covenant of works, or a
Covenant of Grace; not a Covenant of works, for that would bring us all under a
curse, and make our condition utterly desperate; not a Covenant of Grace,
because more grace cannot be shown in any other Covenant, than in this; here is
all grace, and all mercy, here is Jesus Christ, with all his righteousness,
mediatorship, merits, purchase: This Covenant is so full, so ample, so large,
so perfect, so complete, and is every way so accommodated to the condition of
lost sinners, that nothing can be altered, nor added, nor mended; and therefore
it must needs be the last Covenant, that ever God will make with man. So, Heb.
10. verse. 16. This is the Covenant that I will make with them, after those
days, says the Lord; I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds
will I write them: verse. 17. And their sins and iniquities will I remember no
more. Romans 11. 26. There shall come out of Zion the deliverer, and shall turn
away ungodliness from Jacob. The person delivering, is Christ, described here
by his office, and by his original; his office, The deliverer, the original
word, Ruomenos, which Paul uses, signifies delivering by a strong hand, to
rescue by force, as David delivered the Lamb out of the Lyon's paw, verse. 27.
For this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sin. This
Covenant concerning the pardon of believer's sins, and their deliverance by
Christ, God will certainly make good to his people.

Now, from the Covenant of Grace, or the new Covenant, Eccles. 11. 9. cap. 12.
14. Man. 12. 14. cap, 18. 23. Luke 16. 2. Romans 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb. 9.
27. cap. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 5.
that God has made with sincere Christians, a believer may form up this Eighth
Plea, to the Ten Scriptures cited in the margin, that refer to the great day of
account, or to a man's particular account; viz. Oh blessed God, thou have, in
the Covenant of Grace (by which I must be tried) freely and fully engaged thy
self; That thou will pardon mine iniquities, and remember my sins no more; so
runs the New Covenant: Jer. 31. 34. I will forgive their iniquity, and I will
remember their sin no more; So again, Heb. 8. 12. I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more:
So Heb 10. 17. Their sins and iniquities will I remember no more: Isa. 43. 25.
I even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake; and will
not remember thy sins: Ezekiel. 18. 22. All his transgressions that be has
committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: Jer. 50. 20. In th^se days,
says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be
none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found; for I will pardon
them The New Covenant can never be broken. 2 C^^^n. 13. 5. Psalm. 89. 34. Is 1.
50. 7. 2 Samuel 22. 5. Heb. 7. 25. 1 John 2. 1, 2. Isa. 54. 10.
whom I reserve. Now, Oh holy God, I cannot but observe that in the New
Covenant, thou have made such necessary, choice, absolute, and blessed
provision for thy poor people, that no sin can disanul the Covenant, or make a
final separation between thee and thy Vovenant People. Breaches made in the
first Covenant, were irreparable, but breaches made in the New Covenant are not
so, because this New Covenant is established in Christ; Christ lies at the
bottom of the Covenant, the New Covenant is an everlasting Covenant; and all
the breaches that we make upon that Covenant, are repaired and made up by the
blood and intercession of dear Jesus: Every jar does not break the marriage
Covenant between husband and wife, no more does every sin break the new
Covenant that is between God and our souls: Every breach of peace with God, is
not a breach of Covenant with God. That free, that rich, that infinite, that
sovereign, and that glorious grace of God, that shines in that Covenant of
Grace, tells us that our eternal estates shall never be judged by a Covenant of
works; and that the want of an absolute perfection, shall never damn a
believing soul; and that the obedience that God requires at our hands, is not a
legal, but an Evangelical obedience: So long as a Christian does not renounce
his Covenant with God, so long as he does not wilfully, wickedly and habitually
break the bond of the Covenant, the main, the substance of the Covenant is not
yet broken, though some articles of the Covenant may be violated: As among men,
there be some trespasses against some particular clauses in Covenants, which,
though they be violated, yet the whole Covenant is not forfeited; it is so here,
between God and his people.

And oh blessed God, I cannot but observe that in the Heb. 8. 12. Jer. 31. 34.
He is a forgiving. God: Nehem. 9. 31. None like him for that: Mic. 7. 18. He
forgives naturally, Ex^d. 2 2. abundantly, Isa 55. 7. 3. constantly, Psalm. 130.
4. Mal. 3. 6.
New Covenant, thou have engaged thy self to pardon all my sins; I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I
remember no more. Here are two things worthy of our notice; 1. The
reconciliation of God with his people, I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness; he will be merciful or propitious, appeased and pacified
toward them, which has respect to the ransom and satisfaction of Christ. 2.
That God will pardon the sins of his people fully, completely, perfectly; here
are three words, unrighteousness, sins and iniquities; to show that he will
forgive all sorts, kinds and degrees of sins. The three Original words here
expressed, are all in the plural number; 1. (...), unrighteousnesses: This word
is by some appropriated to the wrongs and injuries that are done against men:
2. (...), Sins; is a general word, and according to the notation of the
Greek, may imply a not following of that which is set before us; for he
sins, that follows not the rule that is set before him by God: The third
word, (...), Iniquities, according to the notation of the Greek, signifies in
general transgressions of the Law. This word is by some, appropriated to sins
against God: The Greek word (...), that is frequently translated iniquity, is a
general word which signifies a transgression of the Law, and so it is
translated, 1 John 3. 4. The word iniquity is of as large an extent, as the
word unrighteousness; and implies an unequal dealing, which is contrary to the
rule or law of God: And all this heap of words is to intimate to us, that it is
neither the several sorts of sins, nor degrees of sin, nor aggravations of sin,
nor yet the multitude of sins that shall ever prejudice those souls that are in
Covenant with God: God has mercy enough, and pardons enough for all his
Covenant-people's sins, whether original or actual, whether against the Law, or
against the Gospel, whether against the light of nature or the rule of grace,
whether against mercies or judgments; whether against great means of grace, or
small means of grace. The Covenant Remedy against all sorts and degrees of sin,
does infinitely transcend and surpass all our infirmities and enormities, our
weaknesses and wickednesses, our follies and unworthinesses, etc. What is our
unrighteousness to Christ's righteousness, our debts to Christ's pardons, our
unholiness to Christ's holiness, our ^ C^r. 1. 30. Phil. 1. 3, 9, 10. Mal. 4, 2.
emptiness to Christ's fullness, our weakness to Christ's strength, our poverty
to Christ's riches, our wounds to that healing, that is under the wings of the
Sun of Righteousness: Parallel to this, Heb. 8. 12. is that noble description
Exodus 34. 6, 7.
that Moses gives of God in that book of Ex^dus, The Lord, the Lord merciful
and gracious; forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin: Some, by these three
words, do understand such sins as are committed against our neighbor, against
God, or against our selves: A merciful God, a gracious God will pardon all
sorts of sinners, and all sorts and degrees of sin, by what names or titles
soever they be styled or distinguished: Some by iniquity, do understand sins of
infirmity; and by transgression, they understand sins of malice; and by sin
they understand sins of ignorance: God is said to keep mercy, and to forgive
all sorts of sins; as if his mercy were kept on purpose for pardoning all sorts
of sinners, and all sorts of sins! The Hebrew word (...), Gnavon, that is here
translated iniquity, signifies that which is unright, unequal, crooked or
perverse; it notes the vitiosity or crookedness of nature, it notes crooked
offenses, such as flow from malice, hatred and are committed on purpose.
Secondly, the Hebrew word (...), from (...), Pashang, that is here translated
transgression, signifies to deal unfaithfully, it notes such sins as are
treacherously committed against God, such sins as flow from pride and contempt
of God. Thirdly, the Hebrew word (...), Chataah, generally signifies sin, but
is more especially here taken for sins of ignorance and infirmity: Oh! what
singular mercy, what rich grace is here; that God will not only pardon our
light, our small offenses, but our great and mighty sins: etc.

And I cannot, oh dear father, but further observe, that in the New Covenant,
thou have frequently and deeply engaged thy self, that thou will remember the
sins of thy people no more: Oh my God, thou have told me six several times in
thy word, that thou will remember my sins no more: In the New Covenant thou
have engaged thy self, not only to forgive, but also to forget, and that thou will cross thy debt book, and never question or call me to an account for my
sins; that thou will pass an eternal act of oblivion upon them, and utterly
bury them in the grave of oblivion, as if they had never been. The sins that
are forgiven by God are forgotten by God, the sins that God remits he removes
from his remembrance: H^b. 10. 13, to 19. and cap. 10. 1, to 15.
Christ has so fully satisfied the justice of God for the sins of all his
seed, by the price of his own blood and death; that there needs no more
expiatory sacrifices, to be offered for their sins for ever; Christ has, by
the sacrifice of himself, blotted out the remembrance of his peoples sins with
God for ever. The New Covenant runs thus, And their sinful error, ((...), Lo
escar guhod) I will Jer. 31. 34.
not remember any more; but the Greek runs thus, And their sinful errors and
their unrighteousnesses, I will not remember Heb. 8. 12.
again, or any more; (...): Here are two negatives, which do more vehemently
deny according to the propriety of the Greek Language; that is, I will never
remember them again, I will in no case remember them any more, I will so
forgive as to forget: Not that in propriety of phrase, God either remembers or
forgets, for all things are present to him; he knows all things, he beholds, he
sees, he observes all things, by one eternal and simple act of his knowledge,
which is no way capable of change, as now knowing, and anon forgetting; but its
an allusion to the manner of men, who when they forgive injuries fully and
heartily, do also forget them, blot them out of mind, or rather (as some think)
its an allusion to the manner of the old Covenants administration in the
Sacrifices, where there was a remembrance again Heb. 10. 1, 2, 3, etc.
of sins every year, there was a fresh indictment and arraignment of the people
for sin continually: But under this New Covenant our Lord Jesus Christ has, by
one offering perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Christ See from verse.
5. to verse. 20.
has, for ever, taken away the sins of the Elect, there needs no more
expiatory sacrifice for them; they that are sprinkled with the blood of this
sacrifice shall never have their sins remembered any more against them: God's
not remembering or forgetting a thing, is not simply to be taken of his
essential knowledge; but respectively, of his judicial knowledge, to bring the
same into Judgment, not to remember a thing that was once known, and was in
mind and memory, is to forget it; but this properly, is not incident to God, it
is an infirmity: To him all things past and future, are as present; what he
once knows, he always knows; his memory is his very essence, neither can
any thing that has once been in it, slip out of it: For God to remit sin, is
not to remember it; and not to remember it, is to remit it: These are two
reciprocal propositions, therefore they are thus joined together; I will
forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no Jer. 31. 34. Isa. 43.
25.
more: I even I, am he, that blotteth out thy transgressions, for mine own
sake, and will not remember thy sins. To remember implies a fourfold act; 1.
To lay up in the mind, what is conceived thereby: 2. To hold it fast: 3. To
call it to mind again: 4. Often to think of it. Now in that God says, I will
remember their iniquities no more; he implies, that he will neither lay them
up in his mind, nor there hold them, nor call them again to mind, nor think on
them, but that they shall be to him, as if they had never been committed; God's
discharge of their sins, shall be a full discharge: such sinners shall never be
called to account for them; both the guilt and the punishment of them shall be
fully and everlastingly removed. Let the sins of a believer be what they will
for nature, Mat. 12. 31. ^sa. 55. 7. Jer. 31. 12. Ezk. 18. 22. ^sal. 32. 2.
Romans 4 8. Now, if God will not remember nor mention his peoples sins, then we
may safely and roundly infer, that either there is no Purgatory, or else that
God severely punishes those sins in Purgatory which he remembers not.
and never so many for number; they shall all be blotted out, they shall never
be mentioned more: 1. God will never remember, he will never mention their sins
so, as to impute them, or charge them upon his people: 2. God will never
remember, he will never mention their sins any more, so as to upbraid his
people with their follies or miscarriages: He will never hit them in the teeth
with their sins, he will never cast their weaknesses into their dish; when
persons are justified, their sins shall be as if they had not been, God will
bid them welcome into his presence, and embrace them in his arms, and will
never object to them their former unkindness, unfruitfulness, unthankfulness,
vileness, stubbornness, wickedness, as you may plainly see in the return of the
Prodigal, and his father's deportment toward him; Luke 15. 20, 21, 22, 23.
When he was a great way off: The Prodigal, was but conceiving a purpose to
return, and God met him. The very intention, and secret motions, and close
purposes of our hearts, are known to God: The old Father sees a great way off;
dim eyes can see a great way, when the Son is the object ( his father saw him,
and had compassion:) His bowels roll within him; the Father, not only sees, but
commiscrates and compassionates the returning Prodigal, as he did Ephraim of
old; My bowels Jer. 31. 20.
are troubled for him, I will, surely have mercy on him; or as the Hebrew runs,
I will, having mercy, have mercy, have mercy on him, or I will abundantly have
mercy on him. Look, says God, here is a poor prodigal returning to me, the
poor child is come back, he has smarted enough, he has suffered enough; I
will bid him welcome, I will forgive him all his high offenses, and will never
hit him in the teeth with his former vanities. ( And ran) The feet of mercy are
swift to meet a returning sinner: It had been sufficient for him to have stood,
being old, and a Father; but the Father runs to the Son: ( And fell on his
neck) He cannot stay and embrace him, or take him by the hand; but he falls
upon him, and incorporates himself into him. How open are the arms of mercy, to
embrace the returning sinner, and lie him in the bosom of love: ( and kissed
him) Free, rich and sovereign mercy has not only feet to meet us, and arms to
clasp us; but also lips to kiss us; one would have thought that he should
rather have kicked him or killed him, than have kissed him: But God is pater
miserationum, he is all bowels. All this while the father speaks not one word,
his joy was too great to be uttered; he ran, he fell on his neck, and kissed
him; and so sealed up to him mercy and peace, love and reconciliation with the
kisses of his lips. And the son said unto him; ( Father, I have sinned against
heaven; and in thy sight) Sincerely confess and the mends is made, acknowledge
but the debt, and he will cross the book: (And am no more worthy to be called
thy son;) Infernus sum domine, said that blessed Martyr, Lord, I am hell, but
Mr. (...) at ^^. death. (...) and Men. 1374.
thou art heaven; I am soil and a sink of sin, but thou art a gracious God,
etc. But the father said to his servants, bring forth the best robe, and put it
on him, and put a ring on his hands, and shoes on his feet: And bring hither
the Among the Romans, the ring was an ensign of virtue, honor and especially
nobility, whereby they were distinguished from the common people.
fatted calf, and kill it, and let us eat and be merry. Here you have, 1. The
best Robe: 2. The precious ring: 3. The comely shoes; and 4. The fatted calf.
The returning Prodigal has Garments, and Ornaments, and necessaries, and
comfortables; Some understand by the Robe the Royalty, which Adam lost; and by
the ring, they understand the seal of God's holy spirit; and by the shoes, the
preparation of the Gospel of peace; and by the fatted Calf, they understand
Christ, who was slain from the beginning; Christ is that fatted Calf (says Mr.
Tindal the Act. and Mon. Fol. 986.
Martyr) slain to make penitent sinners good cheer withal, and his
righteousness is the goodly raiment to cover the naked deformities of their
sins. The great things intended in this Parable, is to set forth the riches of
grace, and God's infinite goodness, and the returning sinner's happiness: When
once the sinner returns in good earnest to God; God will supply all his wants,
and bestow upon him more than ever he lost, and set him in a safer and happier
estate than that, from which he did fall in Adam; and will never hit him in the
teeth with his former enormities, nor never cast in his dish his old
wickednesses. You see plainly in this Parable, that the father of the Prodigal
does not so much as mention or object the former pleasures, lusts or vanities,
wherein his Prodigal son had formerly lived; all old scores are quit, and the
returning Prodigal embraced and welcomed, as if he had never offended. And now,
O Lord, I must humbly take lieve to tell thee further, that thou have confirmed
the New Covenant by thy word, and by thy oath, and by the seals that thou have
annexed to it, and by the death of thy Son; and therefore, thou can not but
make good every tittle, word, branch and article of it. Now this New Covenant
is my Plea, O holy God; and by this Plea I shall stand; hereupon God declares,
this Plea I accept, as holy, just and good; I have nothing to say against thee,
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

The Ninth Plea that a Believer may form up as to the Eccles. 11. 9. cap. 12.
14. Mat. 12. 14. cap, 18. 23. Luke 16. 2. Romans 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb. 9.
27. ^ap. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 5.
ten Scriptures that are in the margin, that refer to the great day of account,
or to a man's particular account; may be drawn up from the consideration of
that Evangelical obedience that God requires, and that the believer yields to
God. There is a legal, and there is an evangelical account; now the Saints, in
the great day, shall not be put to give up a legal account; the account they
shall be put to give up, is an Evangelical account. In the Covenant of works,
God required perfect obedience in our own persons; but in the Covenant of Grace
God will be content if there be but uprightness in us, if there be but sincere
desires to obey, if there be faithful endeavors to obey, if there be a hearty
willingness to obey; well, says God, though I stood upon perfect obedience in
the Covenant 2 Cor. 8. 12.
of works; yet now I will be satisfied with the will for the deed, if there be
but uprightness of heart (though that be attended with many weaknesses and
infirmities) yet I will be satisfied and contented with that* God, under the
Covenant of Grace, will for Christ's sake, accept of less than he requires in
the Covenant of works: He requires perfection of degrees, but he will accept of
perfection of parts; he requires us to live without sin, but he will accept of
our sincere endeavors to do it; though a believer, in his own person, cannot
perform all that God commands; yet Jesus Christ, as his surety, and in his
stead, has fulfilled the Law for him: So that Christ's perfect righteousness,
is a complete cover for a believer's imperfect righteousness. Hence the
believer flys from the Covenant of works, to the Covenant of Grace; from Luke
1. 5, 6. Man. 28. 20. Act. 24. ^6. 1 Pet. 1. 14. 15. Heb. 13. 18. Lex data est
ut gratia qu^reretur gratia data est ^t lex implere^ur. August.
his own unrighteousness, to the righteousness of Christ. If we consider the
Law in a high and rigid notion, so no believer can fulfill it; but if we
consider the Law in a soft and mild notion, so every believer does fulfill it,
Act. 13. 22. I have found David the son of Jesse, a man aften mine own heart,
which shall fulfill all my will; (...), All my wills, to note the universality
and sincerity of his obedience: David had many slips and falls, he often
transgressed the Royal Law; but being sincere in the main bent and frame of his
heart, and in the course of his life; God looked upon his sincere obedience, as
perfect obedience. A sincere Christian obedience is an entire obedience to all
the commands of God, though not in respect Psalm. 119. 6. Heb. When my eye is to
ill thy commandments.
of practice (which is impossible) but in disposition and affection. A sincere
obedience is an universal obedience: It is universal in respect of the subject,
the whole man; it is universal in respect of the object, the whole law; and it
is universal in respect of durance, the whole life; he who obeys sincerely,
obeys universally. There is no man that serves God truly, that does not
endeavor Numb. 14. 24.
to serve God fully: sincerity turns upon the hinges of universality; he who
obeys sincerely, endeavors to obey thoroughly. A sincere Christian does not
only love the Law, and like the law, and approve of the Law, and delight in the
Law, and consent to the Law, that it is holy, just and good; but he obeys it in
part; which, though Romans 7. 12, 16, 22.
it be but in part, yet he being sincere therein, pressing toward the mark,
and desiring and endeavoring to arrive Phil. 3. 13, 14.
at what is perfect; God accepts of such a soul, and is as well pleased with
such a soul, as if he had perfectly fulfilled the Law: Where the heart is
sincerely resolved to obey, there it does obey; an heart to obey, is our
obeying; a heart to do, is our doing; a heart to believe, is our believing; a
heart to repent, is our repenting; a heart to wait, is our waiting; a heart to
suffer, is our suffering; a heart to pray, is our praying; a heart to hear, is
our hearing; a heart to give, feed, cloth, visit, is our giving, feeding,
clothing, visiting; a heart to walk circumspectly, is our walking
circumspectly; a heart to work righteousness, is our working righteousness; a
heart to show mercy, is our showing mercy; a heart to sympathise with others,
is our sympathising with others: He that sincerely desire and resolves to keep
the commandments of God, he does keep the commandments of God; and he that
truly desires and resolves to walk in the statutes of God, he does walk in the
statutes of God. In God's account, and God's acceptance, every believer, every
sincere Christian is as wise, holy, humble, heavenly, spiritual, watchful,
faithful, fruitful, useful, thankful, joyful, etc. as he desires to be, as he
resolves to be, and as he endeavors to be; and this is the glory of the New
Covenant, and the happiness that we gain by dear Jesus. And, my friends, it is
remarkable, that our inchoate, partial and very imperfect obedience is
frequently set forth in the blessed Scriptures, by our fulfilling Luke 10. 25,
26, 27.
of the Law: Take a few places for a taste, Romans 2. 27. And shall not
uncircumcision, which is by nature, if it fulfill the Law, judge thee? etc. Romans
13. 8. He that loves another, has fulfilled the law: (Verse. 10.) Love is the
fulfilling of the Law. Not to love, is to do ill, and to break the Law, but
love is the fulfilling of it; Non potest peccari per illam, quae legis est
perfectio; we cannot do ill by that Am^. in (...).
which is the perfection and the fulfilling of the Law. Love is the sum of the
law, love is the perfection of the law; and were love perfect in us, it would
make us perfect keepers of the Law: Love works the Saints to keep the law in
desires and endeavors, with care and study to observe it in perfection of
parts, though not in perfection of degrees; Gal. 5. 14. All the law is
fulfilled in one word, even in this, thou shall love thy neighbors as thy
self: Gal. 6. 2. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.
Now in this sense that is under consideration, the Saints in themselves, even
in this life, do keep the Royal Law. Now, from what has been said, a believer
may form up this Plea.

Oh blessed God, in Christ my head, I have perfectly and completely kept thy
Royal Law; and in my own person, I have Evangelically kept thy Royal Law, in
respect of my sincere dosires, purposes, resolutions and endeavors to keep it:
And this Evangelical keeping, in Christ, and in the New Covenant, thou art
pleased to accept of, and art well satisfied with it. I know that breaches made
in the first Covenant, were irreparable, but breaches made in the Covenant of
Grace are not so; because this Covenant is established in Christ; who is still
a making up all breaches. Now, this is my Plea, O holy God, and by this Plea I
shall stand. Well, says God, I cannot in honor or justice, but accept of this
Plea, and therefore enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

The Tenth plea that a believer may form up, as to the Ten Scriptures that are
in the margin, that E^cle^. 11 9. cap. 12 14. Mat. 12. 14. cap, 18. 23. Luk 16.
2. (...) 14 1^. 2 Cor 5. 10. Heb. 9. 27. cap. 13. 17. 1 ^et. 4 5.
account, may be drawn up from the consideration of that compact, covenant and
agreement, that was solemnly made between God and Christ, touching the whole
business of man's salvation or redemption. We may present it to our
understanding in this form; God the Father says to Christ the Mediator, I
look upon Adam and his posterity, as a degenerate seed; a Generation of Vipers,
of Apostates, and Back-sliders, yea Traitors and Rebels, liable to all
temporal, spiritual and eternal judgments; yet I cannot find in my heart to
damn them all; Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together, I Hos. ^1. 9, 10.
will not execute the fierceness of mine anger; for I am God, and not man: And
therefore I have determined to show Rev. 7. 9, 10.
mercy upon many millions of them, and save them from wrath to come, and to
bring them to glory; but this I must do with a salvo to my Law, Justice and
Honor. If therefore, thou will undertake for them, and become a Gal 3. 10, 13.
Joh. 17. 2, 6, 11.
curse for their sakes, and so make satisfaction to my justice for their sins;
I will give them unto thee, to take care of them, and to bring them up to my
kingdom, for the manifestation of the glory of my Grace: Well, says Christ, I
am content, I will do all thou requirest with all my heart, and so the
agreement is made between thee and me; this may be gathered from the Scriptures
in the margin. Psalm. 2 7, 8. 9. ^sal. 40. 6, 7, 8.
Christ the son speaks in both places: In the first he publishes the decree or
ordinance of heaven, touching himself; and brings in the Father, enstalling
him into the Priesthood, or office of Mediator; for so the Apostle applies
that Text, Heb. 5. 5. Thou art my son, etc. and also avoucheth this Covenant
and agreement in the two main parts of it.

First, The condition which he will have performed on Consider Christ in the
capacity of a Mediator, for so only he covenanted with the father, for the
salvation of mankind.
Mediator, He must ask of God; that is, not only verbally, by prayers and
supplications, beg mercy, pardon, righteousness and salvation for poor lost
sinners; but also really by fulfilling the righteousness of the Law, both in
doing and suffering; and so by satisfaction and merit, purchasing acceptance
for them at his hands: The Father engaged so and so to Christ, and Christ
reciprocally engaged so and so to the Father; (a considerable part of the terms
and matter of which Covenant is set down, Isa. 53. 10. When thou shall make his
soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, etc.) The Father Covenants to
do thus and thus for fallen man; but first (in order thereunto) the Son must
covenant to take man's nature, therein to satisfy offended justice, to repair
and vindicate his father's honor, etc. Well, he submits, assents to these
demands, indents and covenants to make all good; and this was the substance of
the Covenant of Redemption. But,

Secondly, Let us consider the promise which the father engages to perform on
his part; the son must ask, and the father will give; He will give him the
heathen for his Psalm. 2. 8.
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession. (An
allusion to great Princes, when they would show great affection to their
Favorites, they bid them ask what they will, as Ahasuerus did, and as Herod
did) that Es^^ 5. 3. Man 6. 23. Isa. 49 6. M^t. 28. 18. ^al. 2. 10, 11. Psalm.
40. 6. 7, 8.
is, he shall both be the Lord's salvation to the ends of the earth, and have
all power given him in heaven and earth; so that all knees shall bow to him,
and every tongue shall confess him to be Lord. In the other Text before
mentioned, Psalm. 40. Christ declares his compliance to the agreement, and his
subscribing the Covenant on his part, when he came into the world; as the
Apostle explains it, Heb. 10. 5. etc. Mine ears (says he) have thou dug or
pierced: Lo, I come to do thy will; as if he had said, oh father, thou do
engage me to be thy servant in this great work of saving sinners: Lo, I come
to do the work, I here covenant and agree, to yield up my self to thy
disposing, and to serve thee for ever; it seems to be an allusion to the
master's boring through the servants ear. Exodus 21. 6. Among the Jews only one
ear was bored, but in this Psalm. 40. 6. Here are ears in the plural number, a
token of that perfect and desirable subjection, which Christ, as Mediator, was
in to his father. But for a more clear, distinct and full opening of the
Covenant of Redemption; or that blessed compact between God the father and
Jesus Christ, which is a matter of grand importance to all our souls; and
considering that it is a point that I have never yet treated of in pulpit or
press; I shall therefore, take the liberty at this time, to open my self, as
clearly and as fully as I can. And therefore thus,

If you ask me, what this Covenant of Redemption

I answer in the general, That a Covenant is a mutual

Secondly, and more particularly, I answer, The Covenant The Covenant of
Redemption defined.
stipulation that was betwixt God and Christ from everlasting, for the
accomplishment of the work of our Redemption, by the mediation of Jesus Christ,
to the eternal honor, and unspeakable praise of the glorious grace of God. Or
if you please, take it in another form of words, thus,

It is a compact, bargain and agreement between God the father, and God the
son, designed Mediator; concerning the conversion, sanctification and salvation
of the Elect, through the death, satisfaction and obedience of Jesus Christ;
which in due time, was to be given to the father. But for the making good the
definition I have laid down, I must take lieve to tell you, That there are many
choice Scriptures, which give clear intimation of such a federal transaction
between God the father and Jesus Christ, in order to the recovery, and
everlasting happiness and salvation of his Elect. I shall instance in the most
considerable of them.

The first is this, Genesis 3. 15. And I will put enmity between The first Proof.
thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy
head, and thou shall bruise its heel. Here begins the book of the Lord's Wars,
God's battles: The Scriptures are called the book of the Battles of the Lord.
Numb. 21. (...).
This is spoken of that holy enmity, that is between Christ and the Devil; and
of Christ's destroying the Kingdom and power of Satan: For as much then, as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise, took part
of the same; that through death, he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is, the devil. Heb. 2 14. God, by way of threatening, told Satan,
that the seed of the deceived woman, should overmatch him at last, and should
break in pieces his power and crafty plots; he gives Satan lieve to do his
worst, and proclaims an open and an utter enmity between Christ and him. From
this Scripture, some conclude that Christ covenanted from Eternity; to take
upon him the seed of the woman, and the sinless infirmities of our true humane
nature; and under those infirmities, to enter the lists with Satan, and to
continue obedient, through all his afflictions, temptations and trials to the
death, even to the death of the cross. And Phil. 2. 8, 9.
that God the father had covenanted with Christ, that in case Christ did
continue obedient through all his sufferings, temptations and trials, that then
his obedience to the death should be accounted as full satisfaction to divine
justice, for all those wrongs and injuries that were done to God, by the sins
of man; Christ must die, or else he could not have been the Mediator of the new
Covenant through death, Heb. 9. 15, 16. But

The Second Sripture is that, Isa: 42. 6. The Lord has The second Proo^
called thee in righteousness; and with hold thine hand, and will keep thee,
and give thee for a Covenant of the people, f^r a light of the gentiles. Thus
God speaks of Christ. In this Chapter, we have a glorious Prophecy of Christ
our Redeemer; here are four things proph^cied of him, 1. The Divine call,
whereby he was appointed to the work of our Redemption; verse. 1. Behold my
servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights; I have put my
spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the gentiles. Jesus Christ
would not, yea, he could not, he durst not thrust himself upon this great work,
or engage in this great work, 'till he had a clear call from heaven. 2. Here
you have the gracious carriage and deportment of Christ, in the work to which
he was called; this is fully set down, verse. 2, 3, 4. He shall not cry, nor
lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. He shall come clothed
with majesty and glory, and yet full of meekness: A bruised reed shall he not
break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench; he shall bring forth
judgment unto truth. In the words there is a Meiosis, he will not break, that
is, he will bind up the bruised reed, he will comfort the bruised reed, he will
strengthen the bruised reed: Christ will acknowledge and encourage the least
degrees of grace, he will turn a spark of grace into a flame, a drop into a
sea, etc. He shall not fail, nor be discouraged. These words show his Kingly
courage and magnanimity. Though he should meet with opposition from all hands,
yet nothing should daunt him, nothing should dismay him, no afflictions, no
temptations, no sufferings should in the least abate his courage and valor. 3.
The Divine Assistance, he should have from him that called him: This is set
down in two expressions, verse. 6. I will hold thy hand, I will keep thee.
Divine Assistance does usually concur with a divine call; when God sets his
servants on work, he uses to defend and uphold them in the work. 4. The work it
self, to which Christ was called: This is expressed under diverse phrases, verse.
6, 7. To be a light to the gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring out the
prisoners from the prison, and to be a covenant to the people. In these last
words, you have two things observ^able: The first is one special part of
Christ's office; He was given for a covenant. 2. The persons, in reference to
whom this office was designed: A Covenant of the people. One end, why God the
father gave Christ out of his bosom was, that he might be a Covenant to his
people: Christ is given for a Covenant, both to the believing Jews and
Gentiles. As he is the glory of the people of Israel, so he is a light to
lighten the Gentiles. In this Scripture last cited, you have the father's
designation and sealing of Christ, to the Mediatorial employment; promising him
much upon his undertaking it, and his acceptance of this office, and voluntary
Heb. 5. 4, 5. (...). 40. 7, 8. Joh. 10. 17, 18.
submission to the will of the father in it; Lo, I come to do thy will. And
these together amount to the making up of a Covenant between God the father,
and his son, for what more can be necessary to the making up of a Covenant,
than is here expressed* But, The Third proof. This Prophe^y is applied to
Christ, (...). 2. 2^. A^. 13. 47. Gal. 3. 16. Heb. 3 4 5. And many of the Jews
do conses^^ that this pla^^ i^ to be un^erstood of Christ only. (...). 1. ^1,
22. (...). 2. 10, 11. Heb. 1. ^.


The third Scripture is that, Isa. 49. 1. Listen, Oh Isles, unto me, and
hearken ye people from far; the Lord God has called me from the womb, from the
bowels of my mother has he made mention of my name. These words are spoken in
the person of Christ, he tells us how he is called by his father, to be a
Mediator and Savior of his people. Jesus Christ would not take one step in the
work of our Redemption, till he was called and commissionated by his father to
that work. God the father, who from Eternity, had fore-assigned Christ to this
office of a Mediator, a Redeemer; did both while he was in the womb, and as
soon as he was come out of it, manifest and make known this his purpose
concerning Christ, both to men and Angels. Christ did not thrust himself, he
did not intrude himself at random, into the office of a Redeemer. No man takes
Heb. 5. 4, 5.
this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. So Christ
took not upon himself the office of a Mediator, a Savior, but upon a call and
a commission from God: The sum is, that Christ took up the office of a
R^deemer^ by the ordinance of his father, that he might fulfill the work of our
Redemption, unto which he was destmated; verse. 2. And he made my mouth like a
sharp sword, in the shadow of his hand has he hid me; and made me a polished
shaft, in his quiver has he hid me. Christ having avouched his fathers calling
of him to the work of man's Redemption, he gives you a relation in this verse,
of God's fitting and furnishing of him with abilities sufficient for so
important a work; together with his sustaining and supporting of him, in the
performance of the same. Here are two similitudes or comparisons: 1. That of a
sharp sword: That of a bright and sharp arrow; to See Ephesians. 6. 17. Heb. 4. 12.
Rev. 1. 16. cap 6. 2.
show the efficacy of Christ's Doctrine. The word of Christ is a sword of great
power and efficacy, for the subduing of the souls of men to the obedience of
it, and for the cutting off of whomsoever, or whatsoever shall oppose or
withstand it: Christ was not sent of the father, to conquer by force of arms,
as earthly Princes do; but he conquers all sorts of sinners, even the proudest
and A^. 2. 37, 41. Act. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. Act, 16. 29, -- 35. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 6.
stoutest of them, by the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God; (as
you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the margin together,) Having spoken
of the efficacy of Christ's Doctrine, he tells us that he will take Joh. 7. 30,
44. Luke 22. 53. (...). 27. 62, to 6^. and cap. 27. 2, -- 6. A^t. 2 23, 24. or
as some render the words, thou art my servant to Israel, or for Israel; that
is, for Israel's good, for my peoples behoof. Few (says Sasb^nt) to this day
do consider Christ's labor in preaching, prayer fasting and suffering a cruel
death for us: for if they did, they would he more affected with love toward
him that loved them so dearly. Isa. 6. 13. cap. 8 18, etc.
care of the security of his person; In the shadow of his hand has he hid me,
and in his quiver has he hid me. God the father undertakes to protect the Lord
Jesus Christ, against all sorts of adversaries, that should band themselves
against him; and to maintain his doctrine against all enemies, that should
conspire to suppress it. God so protected his dear son, against all the might
and malice of his most capital enemies; that they neither could lay hold on
him, or do ought, before the time by God fore-designed, was come: Christ was
sheltered under the wing of God's protection, till that voluntarily he went to
his passion; neither could they keep him under, when that time was once over,
though they endeavored with all their might to do it. Now, in the the third
verse, God the father tells Jesus Christ, what a glorious reward he should have
for undertaking the great work of Redemption: And said unto me, thou art my
servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified, God having called Christ, set
him apart, sanctified him, and sent him into the world, for the execution of
the office of a Redeemer: He does, in this third verse, encourage him to set
upon it, and to go on cheerfully, resolutely and constantly in it, with
assurance of good and comfortable success; notwithstanding all the plots;
designs and oppositions, that Satan and his Imps might make against him; verse.
4. Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught,
and in vain; yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my works with my God.
In these words, Jesus Christ complains to his father of the incredulity,
wickedness and obstinate Rebellion of the greatest part of the Jews, against
that blessed word which he had clearly and faithfully made known to them: When
Christ looked upon the paucity and small number of those that his Ministry had
any saving and powerful work upon, he pours out his complaints before the
father; not that Christ's pains in his ministry among the Jews, were wholly in
vain, either in regard of God that sent him, or in regard of the persons, unto
whom he was sent; as if not any at all were converted: Oh no! for some were
called, converted and sanctified, as you may see by the Scriptures in the
margin: Or in regard of himself, as if any loss or prejudice should thereby
redound unto him: Oh no! but in regard of the small, the slender effect, that
his great labors had hitherto found; yet surely my judgment is with the Lord.
Christ, for the better support and re-encouraging of himself, to persist in his
employment, opposes unto the want of the chiefly desired success of his
labors with men, the gracious acceptance of them with God. It is as if Christ
had said, although my labor has not produced such fruits and effects as I
indeed desired, yet I do comfort and bear up my heart with this, that my
heavenly father knows, that in the office and place wherein he has set me, I
have faithfully done all that could be done for the salvation of poor sinners
souls, and for the securing of them from wrath to come: And my work (or reward)
with my God, that is, the reward of my work, or my wages for my work, which God
will render unto me, not according to the issue or success of my labors, but
according to my pains therein taken, and the faithful discharge of my office
and duty therein: What says Christ, though the Jews believe not, repent not,
return not to the most high, yet my labor is not lost; for my God will really,
he will signally reward me: Upon this, God the father comes off more freely and
roundly, and opens his heart more abundantly to Jesus Christ, and tells him in
the fifth and sixth verses following, that he will give him full, complete and
honorable satisfaction, for all his pains and labors in preaching, in doing,
in suffering, and dying, that he might bring many sons to glory, verse. 5. And
now, says the Lord, that formed me from the womb, to be his servant, to bring
Jacob again to him: though Israel is not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in
the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. In this verse, you have
a farther encouragement to our Lord Jesus Christ; God the father engaging
himself, not only to support him and protect him in the work of his Ministry,
but of making him glorious in it, and by it also; and that though his work
should not prove so successful among his own people as he desired, yet his
Ministry should become very glorious and efficacious upon the Gentiles far and
near, throughout the whole world. Jesus Christ is very confident of his being
high in the esteem of his father, for the faithful discharge of his duty: And
that, notwithstanding all the hard measure that he met with from the body of
the Jews, that yet his father would Joh. 5. 20, 23. cap. 10. 15, 17. Joh. 17.
1, 5. Thil. 2. 9.
crown him with honor and glory; and that he would enable him to go through
the work that is incumbent upon him, and that he would protect him and defend
him in his work, against all might and malice, all power and policy, that
should make head against him; verse. 6. And he said, it is a light thing, that
thou should be my servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore
the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee, for a light to the Gentiles,
that thou may be my salvation to the ends of the earth. Thus you see, that
God the father still goes on to show, that the labors of Christ should be very
glorious, not only in the eyes of God, but in the eyes of all the world: You
know, elsewhere Christ is called the way, Jo^. 14. 6.
the truth, and the life; and here he is called the light and salvation of the
Gentiles. God the father, speaking to Jesus Christ, tells him, that it was but
a small matter, a mean thing ( Heb. it is too light) for him to have such happy
and ample success, as to reduce and win the Jews in comparison of that further
work that he intended to effect by him, even the salvation of the Gentiles,
unto the ends of earth. God the father seems to say thus to Jesus Christ, the
dignity and worthiness of thy person, thou being the eternal, and only son of
God; as also the high office, whereunto I have called thee, requires more
excellent things, than that thou should only raise up and restore the people
of Israel to their right: I have also appointed and ordained thee for a Savior
to the Gentiles, even to the ends of the earth; therefore, though the greatest
part among the Jews will not receive thee, nor submit unto thee; yet the
Gentiles, they shall own thee and honor thee, they shall embrace thee, and
give themselves up unto thee. I shall be briefer in the remaining proofs: And
therefore,

The Fourth Scripture is that, Isa. 52. 13, 14. Behold, The fourth proof The
Chaldee Paraphrast, and some Jewish Doctors expound this place of the Messiah.
Isa. 42. 1. cap 53. 11, etc.
my servant shall deal prudently. he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very
high. The three last verses of this chapter, with the next chapter, do jointly
make up an entire Prophecy, concerning Christ, his person, parentage,
condition, manner of life, sufferings, humiliation, exaltation, etc. with the
noble benefits that redound to us, and the great honor that redounds to
himself. In these two verses you have, 1. The two parties contracting, viz.
God* the father, and Jesus Christ; Behold my servant, says God the father;
this title is several times given by the father, to Jesus Christ, because he
did the father great service in the work of man's Redemption, freeing fallen
man from the thraldom of sin and Satan. 2. Both parties are very sure and
confident of the event of the paction, and of the accomplishment of the whole
work of Redemption; Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be
exalted and extolled, and be very high. Here are diverse terms heaped up, to
express in part, the transcendent and unexpressible advancement of Jesus
Christ; when men are raised from a mean and low estate, to some honorable
condition; when men are furnished with such parts and endowments of prudence,
wisdom and understanding, as makes them admirable in the eyes of others; and
when they are enabled to do and suffer great things; whereby they become famous
and renowned far and near, then we say they are highly exalted: Now in all the
serespects, our Lord Jesus Christ was most eminently exalted above all
creatures in heaven and earth, as is most evident throughout the Scriptures.
Thirdly, He tells you of the price, which Jesus Christ should pay for the
Redemption of his people, agreed upon by paction, viz. the humbling of himself
to the death of the Cross, as you may see in verse. 14. As many were astonished at
thee, his visa^^ was so marred, more than any man's; and his form more than the
sons of men. This is the speech of the father, to Jesus Christ; his visage was
so marred, that the Jews were ashamed to own him for their King, and Messiah.
The astonishment here spoken of, is such an astonishment, as arises from the
contemplation of some strange, uncouth and ruful spectacle of desolation,
deformity and misery: And no wonder if many were astonished at the sight of our
Savior's condition, in regard of those base, disgraceful and despightful
usages, that were offered and done to him, in the time of his humiliation here
on earth; when his own followers were so amazed at the relation of them, Mar.
10. 32, 33, 34
when they were foretold of them. Oh sirs! the words last cited, are not so to
be understood, as if our blessed Savior had, in regard of his bodily person or
presence, been some strange, deformed or misshapen creature; but Isa. 51. 3.
in regard of his outward estate, coming of mean and obscure parents, living in
a low despicable condition, exposed to scorn and contempt, and to much
affliction, through the whole course of his life; and more especially yet, in
regard of what he was also in his personal appearance, through the base and
scornful usages, that he sustained at the hands of his malicious and
mischievous adversaries, when they had gotten him into their power; besides his
watchings, draggings to and fro, from place to place, buffettings, scourgings,
carrying his cross, and other base usages, could not, but much alter the state
of his body, and impair, yea deface all the sightliness of it: And yet all this
he suffered to make good the compact and agreement, that he had made with his
father, about the Redemption of his Elect. But,

The fifth Scripture is that 53. of Isaiah. This Scripture, The fifth proof.
among many others, gives us very clear intimations of a Federal transaction
between God the father, and Jesus Christ, in order to the recovery, and
everlasting happiness of poor sinners. The glorious Gospel seems to be
epitomized in this chapter; the subject matter of it, is the grievous
sufferings, and dolorous death of Christ, and the happy and glorious issue
thereof: Of all the Prophets, this Prophet Isaiah was the most Evangelical
Prophet, and Hierom calls him Isaiah the Evangelist.
of all the Prophecies of this Prophet, that which you have in this chapter, is
the most Evangelical Prophecy. In this chapter, you have a most plain, lively
and full description, In this chapter you have the compact and agreement
between God the father and Jesus Christ, plainly asserted and proved.
and representation of the humiliation, death and passion of Jesus Christ;
which indeed is so exact, and so consonant to what has fallen our since, that
Isaiah seems here, rather to pen an history than a Prophecy: The matter
contained in this chapter, is so convictive, from that clear light that goes
along with it ^ that several of the Jews, in reading of this chapter, have been
converted, as not being able to stand any longer out, against the shining light
and evidence of it: Out of this chapter, which is more worth, than all the Gold
of Ophir, yea, than ten thousand worlds, Observe with me these eight things.

First, Observe that God and Christ are sweetly agreed, verse. 10. He shall see
his seed, that is, he shall see them called, converted, changed and sanctified;
he shall see his seed, that is, an innumerable company shall be converted to
him by his word and spirit, in all countries Psalm. 110. 3. 1 Pet. 1. 23.
and nations, through the mighty workings of the spirit, and the incorruptible
seed of the word; infinite numbers of poor souls should be brought in to Jesus
Christ; which Rev. 7. 9. Heb. 2. 10, 13.
he should see to his full content and infinite satisfaction: He shall see his
seed, that is, he shall see them increase and multiply, he shall see believers
brought in to him, from all corners and quarters; and he shall see them greatly
increase and grow, by the preaching of the everlasting Gospel, especially after
his ascension into heaven, and a more glorious pouring forth of the Holy Ghost
upon his Apostles and others, Act. 2. 37, 41. Act. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. Act. 8. No
accountants on earth, can count or reckon up Christ's spiritual seed and issue.
But,

Secondly, observe with me, that in the persons redeemed Ex^k. 16. 1, -- 10.
worth, neither portion nor proportion, neither inward or outward excellencies
or beauties, for which the punishment due to them, should be transferred upon
dear Jesus; for if you look upon them in their sins, in their guilt, you shall
find them despisers and rejecters of Christ, v^rs. 4. Surely, he has born our
griefs, and carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of
God, and afflicted. Christ took upon him, not our nature alone, but the
infirmities also of it, and became liable to such sorrows, and afflictions, and
pains, and griefs, as man's sinful nature is exposed, and subject unto: They
R^m. 8. 3. Heb. 4. 15.
are called ours, because they were procured to him by our sins, and sustained
by him for the discharge of our sins; unto the guilt whereof, out of love to
us, undertaken by him, they were deservedly due. Christ, for our sakes, has
taken all our spiritual maladies (that is, all our sins) upon him, to make
satisfaction for them; and as our surety, to pay the debt that we had run into.
Christ, in the quality of a pledge for his Elect, has given full satisfaction
for all their sins; bearing all the punishments due for them, in torments and
extreme griefs, both of body and soul. The reason why they so much disesteemed
of Christ was, because they made no other account, but You know they traduced
hi^ as a notorious deceiver, a drunkard, a friend of publicans and sinners, and
one that wrought by the De^il.
that all those afflictions that befell him, were by God, inflicted upon him,
for his own evil deserts: They accounted him to be one out of grace and favor
with God, yea to be one pursued by him, with all those evils for his sins; when
the Jews saw what grievous things Christ suffered, they wickedly and impiously
judged, that he was thus handled by God, in way of vengeance for his sins: By
all which, you may see, that in the persons redeemed by Christ, there was
nothing of worth or honor to be found, for which the punishment due to them,
should be transferred upon our Lord Jesus Christ. But,

Thirdly, Observe with me, That no sin, nor meritorious verse. 5. 9. He was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: The
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. He
had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth. Sin had cast God
and us at infinite 1 Pet. 1 18, 19. Romans 3. 25. cap. 5. 1, 10. 2 Ce^. 5. 19,
21. Co(...). 1. 19, 22.
distance: Now Christ is punished, that our sins may be pardoned; he is
chastised, that God and we may be reconciled: Guilt stuck close upon us, but
Christ, by the price of his blood, has discharged that guilt, pacified divine
wrath, and made God and us friends. God the father laid upon dear Jesus, all
the punishments that were due to the Elect, for whom he was a pledge; and by
this means they come to be acquitted, and to obtain peace with God. Christ was
holy harmless and undefiled; no man Heb. 7. 26. J^^. 8. 46. cap. 14. 30. 1.
J^^. 3. 5.
could convince him of sin; yea, the Devil himself could find nothing amiss in
him, either as to word or deed: Christ was without original blemish, or actual
blot. All Christ's words and works were upright, just* and sincere; Christ's
innocence is sufficiently vindicated; verse. 9. It Is true, Christ suffered great
and grievous things, but not for his own sins; For he had done no violence,
neither was any deceit found in his mouth: But for ours, Christ had now put
himself in the sinner's stead, and was become his surety, and so obnoxious to
whatever the sinner had deserved in his own person; and upon this account, and
no other, was he wounded, bruised and chastised. The Lord. Jesus had no sin in
him by inhesion, but he had a great deal of sin upon him by imputation; He was
made 2 Cor. 5. 21.
sin, that knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.
It pleased our Lord Jesus Christ, to put himself under our guilt; and
therefore, it pleased the father to wound him, bruise him, and chastise him.
But,

Fourthly, Observe with me, That peace and reconciliation 1 Th^s. ^ (...). 1
^et. 1. 18, 19. R^m. 3. 25. cap. 5. 1, 16. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21.
and our deliverance from wrath to come, are all such noble favors, as are
purchased for us, by the blood of Christ; verse. 5. The chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed: Christ was chastised,
to procure our peace, by removal of our sins, that set God and us asunder; the
guilt thereof being discharged with the price of his blood, and we reconciled
to God by the same price; Christ was punished, that we, by him, might obtain
perfect peace with God, who was at enmity with us, by reason of our sins; by
Christ's stripes we are freed, both from sin and punishment. Now, because some
produce this Scripture, to justify that corrupt doctrine of universal
Redemption, give me leave to argue thus from it; That chastisement for sin,
that was laid upon the person of Jesus Christ, procured peace for them, for
whom he was so chastised; but there was no peace procured for the reprobates,
Isa 57. 21. Ephesians. 2. 14.
or those who should never believe, ergo. Further, by his stripes we are
healed: Whence I reason thus: the stripes inflicted upon Christ, are intended,
and do become healing medicines for them, for whom they are inflicted; but they
never become healing medicines for reprobates, or unbelievers; Nahum 3. 9.
There is no healing of their bruise; Ergo. But,

Fifthly, Observe with me, that the great and the grievous sufferings, that
were inflicted upon Jesus Christ, he did endure freely, willingly, meekly,
patiently, according to the Covenant and agreement that was made between the
father and himself; verse. 7. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he
opened not his mouth; he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter and as a sheep
before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. This is a very
pregnant place, to prove the satisfaction made by Christ's sufferings for our
sins. If we look upon the words, as they run in the original, for thus they
run; It was exacted, and he answered; that is, the penalty due to God's justice
for our sins, was exacted of Christ, and he sustained the same for us. The
Prophet does not speak of one and the same party, or parties, both sinning and
suffering, or sustaining penalties for their own defaults; but as one suffering
for the sins of another, and sustaining grievous penalties, for faults made,
and faults committed by other persons. The words rightly read and understood,
do sufficiently confirm the doctrine of satisfaction, made to God's justice, by
Christ's sufferings for our sins; the penalty due to us was, in rigor of
justice, exacted of him, and he became a sponsor or surety for us, by
undertaking in our behalf the discharge of it; Christ did voluntarily
undertake, and ^ngage himself unto God his father in our behalf, as a surety,
for the payment of all our debts; they were exacted of him, and he answered for
them all* that is, he not only undertook them, but he also discharged us of
them; so we use the word commonly in our English Tongue, to answer a debt, for
to discharge it: And this is most true of our dear Lord Jesus, for he answered
our debt, and caused our bond to be cancelled, Joh. 19 30. Romans 4. 25. C^l. ^.
2. 14.
that it might never come to be put in suit against us, either in this, or that
other world: Yet he opened not his mouth: this has respect to his patience; for
the oppressions and afflictions that he sustained for others, and that in
regard of those, by whom he suffered them unjustly, yet was he silent, he
neither murmured or repined at God's disposal of things in that manner, nor
used any railing or reviling speeches, against those that dealt so
despightfully with him, but carried himself calmly and quietly under them;
Christ having an eye to his voluntary obedience and submission Mat. 26. 39, 42.
Mark. 14. 36. Joh. 18. 23. 1 Pet. 2. 23.
to the will of his father, and agreement thereunto; he undertook willingly
what his father required of him; and as willingly, when the time came,
underwent it, neither hanging back, or opposing ought, in way of contradiction
thereunto; when it was by his father propounded to him at first, nor afterward
seeking to shift it off, when he was to perform what he had engaged himself
unto, by pleading ought for himself, and the releasment of him, from their most
unjust proceedings, in whose hands he then was: He opened not his mouth, to
confute the slanders, and false accusations of his enemies; neither did he
utter any thing to the prejudice of them that put him to death, but prayed for
them that crucified Luke 23. 34. Mat. 26. ^3. cap. 27. 12, 14.
him; He was led as a lamb to the slaughter (properly as an ewe-lamb, or she
lamb, the ewe is mentioned as the quieter of that kind, because the rams are
sometimes more unruly) and as a sheep that is dumb before the face of her
shearers. A lamb does not bite nor push him that is going about to kill it; but
goes as quietly to the shambles, or the slaughterhouse, as if it were going
to the fold, wherein it is usually lodged, or the field where it is wont to
feed. But,

Sixthly, Observe with me, That the original cause of verse. 10. It pleased the
Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief. God the father looks upon Jesus
Christ; as sustaining our person and cause; he looks upon all our sins, as laid
upon him, and to be punished in him: Sin could not be abolished, the justice of
God could not be satisfied, the wrath of God could not be appeased, the
terrible curse could not be removed, but by the death of Christ; and therefore
God the father took a pleasure to bruise him, and to put him to grief,
according to the agreement between him and his son. It must be readily granted,
that God did not incite or instigate the wicked Jews, to those vile and cruel
courses and carriages of their to Jesus Christ; but yet, that his sufferings
were by God predetermined for the salvation of mankind, is most evident by the
Scriptures in the margin; and accordingly, it pleased Act. 2. 23. cap. 4. 28.
the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief. The singular pleasure that
God the father takes in the work of our Redemption, is a wonderful
demonstration of his love and affection to us.

Seventhly, Observe with me, That it is agreed between vrrs. 11. He shall see
of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied, by his knowledge (or faith in
him) shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall hear their
iniquities. Or as some render it, He shall see the fruit of the travel of his
soul, and shall be satisfied; That is, Jesus Christ shall receive and enjoy
that, as the effect and issue of all the great pains that he has taken, and of
all the grievous things that he has suffered, as shall give him full content
and satisfaction; when Christ has accomplished the work of Redemption, he
shall receive a full reward for all his sufferings. Christ takes a singular
pleasure in the work of our Redemption, and does herein, as it were, refresh
himself, as with the fruits of his own labors. God the father engages to Jesus
Christ, that he should not travel in vain, but that he should survive to see
with great joy, a numerous issue of faithful souls begotten unto God; you know
when women, after sore, sharp, hard labor, are delivered, they are so greatly
refreshed, delighted, gladded and satisfied, that they forget their former
pains and sorrow, for joy that a manchild is born into the world. God the
father undertakes, Joh. 16. 21.
that Jesus Christ should have such a holy seed, such a blessed issue, as the
main fruit and effect of his passion, as should joy him, please him, and as he
should rest satisfied in: Certainly there could be no such joy and satisfaction
to Christ, as for him to see poor souls reconciled, justified and saved by his
sufferings and satisfaction; as it is the highest joy of a faithful minister, to
see souls 1 These. 2. 19, 20. Gal. 4. 19.
won over to Christ, and to see souls built up in Christ: Christ did bear the
guilt of his peoples sins, and thereby he made full satisfaction; and therefore
he is said here, to justify many; not all promiscuously, but those only, whose
sins he undertook to discharge, and for whom he laid down his life. Christ's
justifying of many, is his discharging of many from the guilt of sin, by making
satisfaction to God for the same. But,

Eighthly, Observe with me, That it is agreed between Besides the Ele^t, be
i^terceeds for none. Joh. 17. 9, 10.
Jesus Christ should lay down his life, he should stand intercessour for them
also; that so they may be brought to the possession of all those noble favors
and blessings that he has purchased with his dearest blood; verse. 12. He bare
the sins of many, and made intercession for the transgressors, saying, father,
forgive them, for they know not what they Luke 23. 24.
do: For those very transgressors, by whom he suffered, he does intercede; for
the article here is emphatical, and seems to point unto that special act, and
those particular persons: Not but that these words have relation also, to
Christ's intercession for all those sinners that belong to him, and that have
an interest in him; which intercession continues still, and shall do to the end
of the world; Heb. 7. 25. But,

The Sixth Scripture is that, Isa. 59. 20, 21. And the The Sixth Proof.
redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in
Jacob, says the Lord. As for me, this is my covenant with them, says the
Lord; my spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, no^ out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of
the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from hence forth, and for ever.
Out of this blessed Scripture you may observe these following things: First,
the parties covenanting and agreeing, and they are God the father and Jesus
Christ; God the father in those words, says the Lord; and Jesus Christ in
those words, The redeemer shall come to Zion. Secondly, You have God the
father, first covenanting with Jesus Christ, and then with his seed, as is
evident in the 21. verse. Thirdly, You have the persons described, that shall be
sharers in Redemption mercies, and they are the Sionites, the people of God,
the citizens of Zion; but lest any should think that all Zion should be saved,
it is added by way of explication, that only such of Zion (...)urn from
transgression in Jacob, shall have benefit by the Redeemer: The true Citizens
of Romans 11. 26.
Zion, the right Jacobs, the sincere Israelites, in whom there is no guile; are
they and only they that turn from their sins: None have interest in Christ,
none have redemption by Christ, but converts, but such as cast away their
transgressions, as Ephraim did his Idols, saying, Hos. 14. 8.
what have I any more to do with you. Fourthly, You have the way and manner of
the Elect's delivery, and that is, not only by paying down upon the nail, the
price agreed on, but also by a strong and powerful hand, as the original Romans
11. 26. Isa. 59. 20. Ru^mends. (...).
imports in the Scriptures cited in the margin. The Greek word that is used by
Paul, and the Hebrew word that is used by Isaiah, do both signify delivering
by strong hand, to rescue by force, as David delivered the Lamb out of the
Lyon's paw. Fifthly, you have the special blessings that are to be conferred
upon the Elect, viz. Redemption, conversion, says, repentance, reconciliation,
turning from their iniquity; all comprehended under that term, the Redeemed.
Sixthly, You have the Lord Jesus Christ considered as the head of the Church,
from whom all spiritual gifts, viz. sanctification, salvation and perseverance
do flow and run, as a precious balsom, upon the members of his body: My spirit
that is in me (says God the Father, to Christ the Redeemer) and my word which
I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth; nor out of the
mouth of thy seed, etc. In these words, God the father engages, that his spirit
and word should continue with his Church* to direct and instruct it, and the
children of it, in all necessaries, throughout all ages, successively, even
unto the world's end. But,

The Seventh Scripture is that, Zach. 6. 12, 13. And The 7. Proof.
speak unto him, saying, thus speaks the Lord of hosts, saying, behold the
man, whose name is the Branch, and he shall grow up out of his place, and he
shall build the temple of the Lord. Even he shall build the temple of the Lord,
and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he
shall be a priest upon his throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between
them bot(...) ^ow, that the business of man's Redemption was transacted betwixt
the father and the son, is very clear from this text. And the counsel of peace
shall be between them both, that is, the two persons spoken of, viz. the Lord
Jehovah, who speaks, and the man, whose name is the Branch, Jesus Christ: This
counsel was primarily about the reconcilation of the riches of God's grace, and
the glory of his justice; What ever Socinians say, it is most certain, that
Recon^iliation is not only on the sinner's part, but on God's also.
the design and counsel both of the father and the son, was our peace. The
counsel of reconciliation, how man that is now an enemy to God, may be
reconciled to God, and God to him; this counsel or consultation shall be
betwixt them b^th, that is. Jehovah and the Branch: There were blessed
transactions between the father and the son, in order to the making of peace
between an angry God, and sinful men; I know, several learned men interpret it
of Christ's offices, viz. of his Kingly and Priestly office; for both conspire
to make peace betwixt God and man. Now, if you will thus understand the text,
yet it will roundly follow, that there was a consultation at the counsel-board
in heaven, concerning the reconciliation of fallen man to God; which
reconciliation Christ, as King and Priest, was to bring about. Look, as there
was a counsel taken, touching the creation of mankind, between the persons in
the blessed Trinity, Let us make man after our Image; so there was a
consultation held, concerning Gal. 1. 26. Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24.
the restoration of mankind, out of their lapsed condition: The counsel of
peace shall be between them both: Certainly, there was a Covenant of Redemption
made with Christ; upon the terms whereof, he is constituted to be a Reconciler
and a Redeemer: To say to the prisoners, Go forth, to bring deliverance to the
captives, and to proclaim the year of release or Jubilee, the acceptable year of
the Lord, as it is, Isa. 61. 1, 2. But,

The Eighth Scripture is that, Psalm. 40. 6, 7, 8. Sacrifice The eighth proof
and offering thou did not desire, mine ears have thou opened, burnt offering
and sin offering have thou not required. Then said I, lo, I come, in the volume
of the book it is written of me: I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy
Law is within my heart; Heb. in the midst of my bowels; compared with that,
Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7. Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, sacrifice
and offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared for me: In burnt
offerings and sacrifices for sin, thou have had no pleasure: Then said I, lo, I
come, in the volume of the book, it is written of me, to do thy will, O God. In
these two Scriptures, two things are concluded. 1. The impotency of Legal
Sacrifices, verse. 5, 6. 2. The all sufficiency of Christ's sacrifice, verse. 7.
There is some difference in words and phrases, betwixt the Apostle and the
Prophet, but both agree in sense; as we shall endeavor to demonstrate. Pen men
of the New Testament, were not Translators of the Old, but only quoted them,
for proof of the point in hand; so as they were not tied to syllables and
letters, but to the sense. That which the Prophet speaks of himself, the
Apostle applies to Christ; say some, this may be readily granted: For David
being a special type of Christ, that may in history and type, be spoken of
David; which, in mystery and truth, is understood of Christ: But that which
David uttered in the aforesaid text, is questionless, uttered by the way of
Prophecy, concerning Christ, as is evident by these reasons.

First, In David's time, God required sacrifices and 1 Chronicles. 21. 26. 1 Samuel
26. 19.
David from heaven by fire, upon the Altar of burnt-offering; and David himself
advised Saul to offer a burnt offering, that God might accept of it.

Secondly, David was not able, so t^ do the will of God,

Thirdly, In the verse before (namely, Psalm. 40. 5.) That eye has not seen,
nor ear heard. neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God
has prepared for them that love him. 1 Cor. 2. 9.

Fourthly, These words used by the Apostle, when he comes into the world, he
says, are meant of Christ; which argue, that, that which follows, was an
express prophecy of Christ: These things being premised; out of the Texts last
cited, we may observe these following particulars, that make to our purpose.

First, That the holy spirit opens and expounds the blood; and that not the
blood of Bulls and Goats, but the blood of his son; which was the best, the
purest, and the H^b. 10. 4. cap. 9 22. J^h. 10. 11, 15, 17. 18. J^^. 1. 29. 1
Pet. 1. 18, 19.
noblest blood, that ever run in veins: Now Christ, to bring about the
redemption of fallen man, is willing to come up to the demands of his father,
and to lay down his blood: The Scripture calls the blood of Christ, (...),
precious blood; Oh! the virtue in it, the value of it; through this Red Sea, we
must pass to heaven; Sanguis Christi clavis coeli, Christ's blood is heaven's
key: Isal. 116. 15.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the blood of the Saints, and truly,
precious in the sight of the Saints, is the blood of Christ: Vna guttula plus
valet quam coelum and terra, Luther.
One little drop is more worth than heaven and earth. Christ's blood is
precious blood, in regard of the dignity of his person; it is the blood of God
himself; it is the blood Act. 20. 28.
of that person, who is very God as well as very man: Christ's blood was noble
blood, and therefore precious; he came of the race of Kings, as touching his
manhood; but being withal, the soh of God. This renders his nobility Isa. 19.
11.
matchless and peerless. It was Pharaoh's brag, that he was the son of ancient
Kings; who can lay claim to this, more than Christ? who can challenge this
honor, before him? he is the son of the ancientest King in the Dan. 7. 9, 13,
2^.
world, he was begot a King from all Eternity; and the blood of good Kings is
precious; Thou art worth ten thousand 2 Samuel 18. 3.
of us, said David's subjects to him; and therefore, they would not suffer him
to hazard himself in the batt^l: The nobleness of his person, did set a high
rate upon his blood: and whom does this argument more commend unto us, than
Christ. And the blood of Christ is precious blood, in regard of the virtues of
it; by this blood, God and man are reconciled, by this blood the chos^n of God
are redeemed. It was an excellent saying of Leo, The effusion of Christ's blood
is so rich and available, that Leo de p^s. s^rm. 12. c. 4.
if the whole multitude of captive sinners would believe in their Redeemer, not
one of them should be detained in the Tyrant's chains. This precious blood
justifi^s our Act. 13. 38, 39. R^m. 3. 24, 25. 1 J^h. 1. 7. 1 I^^s. 1. 10.
persons in the sight of God, it frees us from the guilt of sin, and it frees
us from the reign and dominion of sin, and it frees us from the punishments
that are due to sin, it saves us, (...), from that wrath that is to come. Now,
were not Christ's blood of infinite value and virtue, it could never have
produced such glorious effects; the blood of Christ is precious, beyond all
account; and yet, our Lord Jesus did not think it too dear a price to pay down
for his Saints: God the father would be satisfied with no other price; and
therefore, God the son comes up to his father's price, that our Redemption
might be sure. But,

Secondly, Observe that God rejects all ways of satisfaction 1 Cor. 13. 3.
weep as much blood, as there is water in the Ocean; and should they give all
their goods to the poor, and their bodies to be burnt, as some have done; yet,
all this would not satisfy for the least sin, not for an idle word, not for a
vain thought; Heb. 10. 5. Sacrifice and offering thou would not; that is,
thou will not accept of them, for an expiation and satisfaction for sin, as the
Jews imagined. The Apostle shows the impotency and insufficiency of legal
sacrifices, by God's rejecting of them; the things here set down, not to be
regarded by God (as sacrifices, offerings, burnt offerings, and sacrifices for
sin, together with other legal ordinances, comprised under them) do evidently
demonstrate, that God regards none of those things in a way of satisfaction,
they are no current price, they are no such pay that will be accepted of in the
Court of heaven. Remission of sin could never be obtained by sacrifices and
offerings, nor by prayers, tears, humblings, meltings, watchings, fastings,
penances, pilgrimages, etc. Remission of sins cost Christ dear, though it cost
us nothing: Remission of sins drops down from God to us, through Christ's
wounds, and swims to us in Christ's blood. It was well said by one of the
Ancients; I have not whence Ambros. de Jacob, (...). lib. 1. cap. 6. page 290,
291.
I may glory in my own works, I have not whence I may boast my self; and
therefore I will glory in Christ; I will not glory that I am righteous, but I
will glory that I am redeemed; I will glory, not because I am without sin, but
because my sins are forgiven; I will not glory because I have profited, or
because any has profited me, but because Christ is an Advocate with the father
for me, but because the blood of Christ is shed for me. Certainly, the Popish
Doctrine of man's own satisfaction, in part for his sins, is most derogatory,
to the blood, and to the plenary and complete satisfaction of Jesus Christ. But,

Thirdly, Observe, that nothing below the obedience and sufferings of Christ
our Mediator, could satisfy divine Justice, Heb. 10. 5. But a body have thou
prepared me; the Hebrew text, Psalm. 40. 7. says, Thou have boared through mine
ears; but the Apostle follows the Greek Translation, seeing the same sense is
contained in both. Christ having declared what his father delighted not in; he
further shows affirmatively what it was, wherein he rested well pleased; in
these words, but a body have thou prepared me. In this phrase, A body have thou
prepared me; Christ is brought in, speaking to his father. By body is meant the
humane nature of Christ: Body is Synecdochically put for the whole humane
nature, consisting of body and soul; the body was the visible part of Christ's
humane nature: A body is fit for a sacrifice, fit to be slain, fit to have
blood shed out of it, fit to be offered up, fit to be made a price, and a
ransom for our sins, and fit to answer the types under the Law: Pertinently
therefore, to this purpose, is it said of Christ, He himself bare our sins 1
P^t. 2. 24. H^b. 2. 9, 14, 17.
in his own body; and those infirmities, wherein he was made like unto us, were
most conspicuously evidenced in his body; and hereby Christ was manifested to
be a true man, he had a body like ours, a body subject to manifold infirmities,
yea to death it self. That body which Christ had, is said to be prepared by
God; the Greek word (...), which is translated prepared, is a Metaphor from
Mechanics, who do artificially fit one part of their work to another, and so
finish the whole. God fitted his son's body to be joined with the Deity, and to
be an expiatory sacrifice for sin. The word prepared implies, that God the
father ordained, formed and made fit and able, Christ's humane nature, to
undergo, suffer and fulfill that, for which he was sent into the world. God the
father is here said, to have prepared Christ a body; because Christ having
received of his father, the humane nature, out of the flesh and blood of the
Virgin Mary, by the power of the Mat. 1. 20. Luk, 1. 31. 35.
Holy Ghost; here gives up the same unto the service of his father, to do, to
suffer, to die, that he might be a sacrifice of expiation for our sins. As for
the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 40. 6. Mine ear have thou opened, Heb. dug
open. It is a proverbial manner of speech, whereby there is employed, the
qualifying or fitting a man unto obedience in service; the ear, or the opening
of the ear, Isa. 50 5. Job, 3. 16.
being an emblem, or symbol, or a Metaphorical sign of obedience. Now, St.
Paul, following the translation of the Septuagint, and being directed by the
spirit of God, expounds this, of God's sanctifying and fitting a body unto
Christ; wherein hs was obedient, even unto the shameful death of the Cross:
These words, thou have bored through mine ears, do import, that Christ, now
becoming man; gives up himself to be a willing servant of his father, to obey
him unto the death of the cross. And it is a similitude taken from the servants
of the Hebrews; who, after that they had served their masters six years, would
not depart out of their master's service the seventh year, but abide in it
continually until death; for a testimony whereof, their ear was bored through on
the posts of the door; as may be seen, Exodus 21. 6. It is therefore, as much as
if he should say, thou have given me a body that is willing and ready in thy
service, even unto death. But to conclude this head, the Apostle speaking of
disanulling the sacrifice of the Law, he uses this word body, to set out a
sacrifice, which should come in stead of the legal sacrifices, to effect that
which the legal sacrifices could not effect. But,

Fourthly, Observe that Christ our Mediator freely and Then said I, lo, I come,
to wit, as surety, to pay the ransom, and to do thy will, O God: Every word
carries a special emphasis; as, 1. The time, Then; even, so soon as he
perceived that his father had prepared his body for such an end; then without
delay, this speed implies forwardness and readiness, he would lose no
opportunity: 2. His profession in this word, said I; he did not closely,
secretly, timorously, as being ashamed thereof, but he makes profession
beforehand: 3. This note of observation, Lo; this is a kind of calling Angels
and men to witness, and a desire that all might know his inward intention, and
the disposition of his heart; wherein was as great a willingness, as any could
have to any thing: 4. An offering of himself, without any enforcement or
compulsion, this he manifests in this word, I come: 5. That very instant set
out in the present tense, I come; he puts it not off to a future and uncertain
time, but even in that moment, he says, I come: 6. The first person twice
expressed, thus, I said, I come; he sends not another person, nor
substituteth any in his room; but he, even he himself in his own person,
comes. All which do abundantly evidence Christ's singular readiness and
willingness, as our surety, to do his father's will, though it were by
suffering, and by being made a sacrifice for our sins. God's will was the rule
of Christ's active and passive obedience: Jesus Christ, our only Mediator and
surety, by free and ready obedience and death, did make a proper, real and full
satisfaction to God's justice, for the sins of all the Elect. Christ has, by
his death and blood, as an invaluable price of our redemption, made sure the
favor of God, the pardon of our sins, and the salvation of our souls: Christ
has freed his chosen from all temporal, spiritual, and eternal punishments,
properly so called; so that now, the mercy of God may embrace the sinner,
without the least of wrong to his truth or justice. But,

Fifthly, Observe that Jesus Christ our surety does not Heb. 10. 10. By the
which will (that is, by the execution of which will, by the obedience of Christ
to his heavenly father) we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ, once for all: Jesus Christ agrees with the father, that all those
shall be sanctified, for whom he has suffered and satisfied. The virtue,
efficacy and benefit of that which arises from the aforesaid will of the
father and of the son, is expressed under this word, sanctified: To pass by the
notation, and diverse acceptations of this word, sanctified, let it suffice to
tell you; It is not here to be taken, as distinguished from justification or
glorification, as it is else where taken; but 1 Cor. 1. 30. cap. 6. 11.
so as comprising under it, all the benefits of Christ's sacrifice, In this
general and large extent, it is sometimes Heb. 10. 14. cap. 2. 11. A^. 26. 18.
taken; only this word, sanctified, here gives us to understand, that
perfection consists especially in holiness; for he expresses the perfection
of Christ's sacrifice under the word, sanctified, which implies a making holy;
this Eccles. 7. 31.
was that special part of perfection, wherein man was made at first; and
whereunto the Apostle alludeth, where Ephesians. 4. 2^.
he exhorts, To put on that new man, which after God, is created in
righteousness and true holiness; for this end, Christ gave himself even unto
death, for his Church, that he might sanctify it. The principal thing under
this Ephesians. 5. 25.
word, sanctified, in this place is, that Christ's sacrifice makes perfect; in
this respect, Christ's sacrifice is here opposed to the legal sacrifices, which
could not make perfect: So that Christ's sacrifice was offered up, to do that
which they could not do; for this end, was Christ's sacrifice surrogated in the
room of the legal sacrifices; now this surrogation had been in vain, if
Christ's sacrifice had not made us perfect, if the dignity of his person that
was offered up, and his almighty power, and unsearchable wisdom, and other
divine excellencies of his be duly weighed, we cannot but acknowledge, that as
his sacrifice is perfect in it self, so it is sufficient to make us perfect
also. Christ's body was given up as a price and ransom, and offered up as a
sacrifice for our sins; and that we might be sanctified and made holy, Christ,
by the offering of his body once for all, has purchased of his father, grace
and holiness for all his redeemed ones: Christ agrees with his father, that he
will lay down an incomparable price for his chosen ones; and then he further
agrees with his father, that all those shall be sanctified, for whom he has
laid down an invaluable price. The will of God the father was, that Jesus
Christ should have a body, and that that body of his should be offered up, that
his Elect might be sanctified and saved: Now, to this Christ readily answers,
Lo, I come to do thy will. From what has been said from Psalm. 40. compared
with Heb. 10. we may very safely and roundly conclude, that it is most clear
and evident, that there was a Covenant, compact or agreement between God the
father and Jesus Christ, concerning the Redemption of fallen man. This I shall
more abundantly clear up, before I have said all I have to say about the
Covenant of Redemption, that is under our present consideration. But,

The Ninth Scripture is that, Psalm. 89. 28. My mercy The 9. Proof
will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him;
with whom? why with our dear Lord Jesus, of whom David was a singular type.
There are many passages in this Psalm, which do clearly evidence, that its to
be interpreted of Christ; yea, there are many things in this Psalm, that can
never be clearly, pertinently and appositely applied to any but Jesus Christ;
for a taste, see verse. 19. I have laid help upon one that is mighty, mighty to
pardon, to reconcile, to justify, to save, to bring to glory, suitable to that
of the Apostle, Heb. 7. 2* 5. He is able to save unto the uttermost, that is,
to all ends and purposes, perfectly, completely, fully, continually,
perpetually: Christ is a through Savior, a mighty Savior, Isa. 63. 1. Mighty
to save; there needs none to come after him, to finish the work which he has
begun, verse. 19. I have exalted one, chosen out of the people; which is the
very Ad plenum, E(...)mus, ad p^se ^um St^pulensis.
title given to our Lord Jesus, Isa. 42, 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold,
mine elect (or chosen one) in whom my soul delights: verse. 20. I have found
David my servant. Christ is very frequently called by that name, as being most
dearly beloved of God, and most highly esteemed and valued by God, and as being
typified by him both as King and Prophet of his Church, verse. 10. With my holy
Se^ Jer. 3^. 9. Hos. ^. 5. Ex^^. 34. 23.
oil have I anointed him; suitable to that of Christ, Luke 4. 18. The spirit of
the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the
poor; and therefore we need not doubt of the excellency, authority, certainty
and sufficiency of the Gospel, verse. 27. I will make him my first born, higher
than the kings of the earth; Christ is the first born of every creature, and in
all things has the pre-eminence: verse. 29. His seed also, will I make to
endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven; This is C^los. 1. 18. It
cannot be understood of David's seed, for Solomon's Throne was overthrown.
chiefly spoken of Christ and his Kingdom: The aspectible heaven is
corruptible, but the Kingdom of heaven is eternal; and such shall be Christ's
seed, throne and kingdom, verse. 36. his seed shall endure for ever, and his
throne as the sun before me: Christ shall see his seed, he shall prolong his
days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands. And his throne
as the sun before me; that is, Isa. 53. 10.
perpetual and glorious, (as the Chaldee explaineth it, shall shine as the
sun:) Other Kingdoms and Thrones have their times and their turns, their rise
and their ruins, but so has not the Kingdom and Throne of Jesus Christ;
Christ's dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall Dan. 7. 13, 14.
not pass away; and his Kingdom, that which shall not be destroyed. I might
give further instances out of this Psalm, but enough is as good as a feast.
Now, says God, I have made a Covenant with him; so then there is a Covenant
that God the Father has made with Christ the Mediator; which Covenant, the
father engages to the son, shall stand fast, there shall be no cancelling or
disanulling of it: God the father has not only made a Covenant of Grace with
the Saints in Christ (of which before,) but he has also made a Covenant of
Redemption (as we call it for distinction sake) with Jesus Christ himself, My
Covenant shall stand fast with him; that is, with Christ, as we have fully and
clearly demonstrated* But

The Tenth Scripture is that, Zach. 9. 11. As for thee, And thou also, died
with the blood of thy Covenant, when I ^ave sent out thy prisoners out of the
Cistern in which there are no waters. Trem.
also, by the blood of thy Covenant (or whose Covenant is by blood) I have sent
forth thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water. Here God the father
speaks to Christ, with relation to some Covenant between them both; and what
Covenant can that be, but the Covenant of Redemption. All the temporal,
spiritual and eternal deliverances which we enjoy, they swim to us through the
blood of that Covenant, that is passed between the father and the son: by
virtue of the same blood of the Covenant, wherewith we are reconciled,
justified and saved, were the Jews delivered from their Babilonish captivity:
The Babilonish Captivity, thraldom and dispersion, was that waterless pit, that
dirty dungeon, that uncomfortable and forlorn condition, out of which they were
delivered, by virtue of the blood of the Covenant, that is, by virtue of the
blood of Christ, figured by the blood Exodus 24. 8. ^sa^. 7^. 20. Heb. 13. 20.
that was sprinkled upon the people, and by virtue of the Covenant confirmed
thereby. Look, as all the choice mercies, the high favors, the noble blessings
that the Saints enjoy, are purchased by the blood of Christ; so they are made
sure to the Saints by the same blood; by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent
forth thy prisoners: Whatever desperate distresses, and deadly dangers, the
people of God may fall into, yet they are prisoners of hope, and may look for
deliverance by the blood of the Covenant.

By these ten Scriptures, it is most clear and evident, that there was a
Covenant, a compact and agreement between God the father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, concerning the work of our Redemption. Christ's being called the surety
of the better Covenant, shows that there was Heb. 7. 22.
a Covenant between God the father and him, as there is between a creditour and
a sutety; Christ gave bonds (as it were) to God the father, and paid down the
debt upon the nail, that breaches might be made up between God and us, and we
restored to divine favor for ever. But for the further clearing up of the
Covenant of Redemption, I shall, in the second place, lay down these
propositions: And

The first is this, That the Covenant of Redemption The First Proposition.
differs from the Covenant of Grace. It Is true, the Covenant of Redemption is a
Covenant of Grace, but it is not properly that Covenant of Grace, which the
Scripture holds out in opposition to the Covenant of works; which I shall thus
evidence: 1. The Covenant of Redemption differs from the Covenant of Grace, in
regard of the Federates; in the Covenant of Redemption, it is God the father and
Jesus Christ, that mutually covenant; but in the Covenant of Grace, the
confederates are God and believers. 2. In the Covenant of Redemption, God the
father requires of Jesus Christ, that he should suffer, sh^d his blood, die,
and make himself an offering for our sins: In the Covenant of Grace, God
requires of us, that we should believe and embrace the Lord Jesus. 3. In the
Covenant of Redemption, God the father has made many great, precious and
glorious promises to Jesus Christ As, sit on my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footstool: He^. 1. 13. Isa. 53. 10.
And he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hands: And Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance, Psalm. 2. 8.
and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession: Heb. 1. 5. Psalm. 84.
11. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.
And, I will be to him a father and he shall be to me a son: But in the
Covenant of Grace, God promises to us Grace and glory, holiness and happiness,
both the upper and the lower springs. 4. The Covenant of Redemption betwixt God
and Christ, secures the Covenant of Grace betwixt God and believers; for what
God promises to us, he did Tit. 1. 2.
before the foundation of the world, promise to Jesus Christ; and therefore, if
God the father should not make good his promises to his Saints, he would not
make good his promises to his dearest son, which for any to imagine, would be
high Blasphemy. God will be sure to keep touch with Jesus Christ; and
therefore, we may rest fully assured, that he will not fail to keep touch with
us. 5. The Covenant of Redemption is the very basis or bottom of the Covenant
of Grace: God made a Covenant with Christ the spiritual David, that he might
make a Covenant Psalm. 89. 3 4. R^^. 11. 26, 27.
with all his Elect in him; he made this agreement with Christ, as the head,
and on this is reared up the whole frame of precious promises, comprised in the
Covenant of Grace, as a goodly building upon a sure foundation. But,

The second Proposition is this, God the father, in order The Second
Proposition.
to man's Redemption and Salvation, stands stiffly and peremptorily upon
complete satisfaction; without full satisfaction, no remission, no salvation:
Satisfaction God will have to the utmost, though it cost Christ his life and
blood: Man is fallen from his primitive purity, glory Romans 8. 32.
and excellency, and by his fall, he has provoked divine justice, transgressed
God's righteous Law, and cast a deep dishonor upon his name; the case standing
thus, God is resolved to have ample satisfaction, in the reparation of this
honor, in the manifestation of his truth, and in the vindication of his
holiness and justice. All the attributes of God, are alike dear to him, and he
stands as much upon the advance of his justice, as he does upon the glory of
his Grace; and therefore he will not remit one sin, yea, not the least sin,
without entire satisfaction: In this God the father is fixed, that he will have
an offering for Isa. 53. 10. 1 ^^m. 2. 6.
sin, in an expiatory and propitiatory way; a price and a ransom he will have
paid down upon the nail, or else the captive sinner shall-never be released,
pardoned, saved: Now, lost man being wholly incapable of giving such a
satisfaction to Divine Justice, Christ must give it, or fallen man must perish
for ever. Sin and sorrow, iniquity and misery, always go hand in hand; The
wages of sin is Romans 6. 23. Romans 1. 32.
death; Every sinner is worthy of death; They which commit such things, are
worthy of death: If God be a just and righteous God, then sin cannot absolutely
escape unpunished; for it is but a just and righteous thing with God, to punish
the sinner, who is worthy of punishment: It is a righteous thing with God
(says the Apostle) to recompense 2 These. 1. 6.
tribulation to them that trouble you. And as God cannot but be just, so he
cannot but be true; and if he cannot but be true, then he cannot but make good
his threatenings against sin and sinners: The word is gone out of his mouth. In
the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely Genesis 2. 17.
die; And the soul which sins, shall die. Look, as there E^^k. 18. 4.
is not a promise of God, but shall take place in time, so there is not a
threatening of God, but shall take place in time: The faithfulness of God, and
the honor of God is as much concerned in making good of terrible threatenings,
2 Pet. 1. 4.
as they are concerned in making good of precious promises. God has given it
under his own hand, That he will by no means clear the guilty; And that the
soul that Exodus 34. 7. Ezekiel. 18. 20. Romans 2. 6.
sins, shall surely die; And that the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon
him; And that he will render to every man according to his deeds: And will God
abrogate his own laws, or will he dare men to sport and play with his
threatenings? Will not every wise and prudent Prince, look to the execution of
their own Laws; and shall not Isa. 40. 28. Isal. 147. 5.
that God who is wonderful in wisdom, and whose understanding is infinite, see
all his Laws put in execution against offenders? surely yes. Thus you see, that
God stands upon full satisfaction, and will admit of no treaty of peace with
fallen man without it: Now, sorry man is never able, either by doing or
suffering, to compensate, and make God amends for the wrong and injury, that he
has done to God by his sin; and therefore, one that is able, by doing and
suffering, to give complete satisfaction, must undertake it, or else we are
lost, cast and undone, in both worlds. Concerning that full and complete
satisfaction, that Jesus Christ has given to God's enraged Justice, I have in
part discovered already, and shall say more to it, before I close up the
Covenant of Redemption. But,

The third Proposition is this, The business transacted The Third Propo^tion.
between those two great and glorious persons, God the father, whose greatness
is unsearchable, and Jesus Christ, ^sal. 145. 3. Rev. 1. 5.
who is the prince of the kings of the earth; was the redemption and salvation
of the Elect; our everlasting blessedness was now fresh in their eyes, and warm
upon their Luke 15. 30.
hearts, how lost man might be found, and how fallen man might be restored, and
how miserable man might be made happy, how slaves might be made sons, and how
Ephesians. 2. 12. -- 17.
enemies might be made friends, and how those that were afar off, might be made
nigh, without the least prejudice to the honor, holiness, justice, wisdom and
truth of God; was the grand business, the thing of things, that lay before
them. Upon the account of the Covenant, compact and agreement, that was between
the father and the son, it is, that Christ is called the second Adam; for 1
Cor. 1^. ^5.
as with the first Adam, God plighted a Covenant concerning him and his
posterity, so also he did indent with Jesus Christ, concerning that eternal
Redemption, that he was Heb. 9. 12.
to obtain and secure for his seed. For the clearing of this, let us a little
consider of the excellent properties of that Redemption that we have by Jesus
Christ.

First, It Is a great Redemption, the work of Redemption mighty to save, was ^.
ever able to bring about the Redemption of man. Hence Christ is called the
deliverer, And their redeemer is mighty, Prove, 23. 11. Isa. 24. 6. And his
redeemer, the Lord of hosts: Isa. 47. 4. As for our redeemer, the Lord of hosts
is his name: Isa. 49. 26. And thy redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob: Jer. 50.
34. Their redeemer is strong, the Lord of hosts is his name. Again, the great
and invaluable price, that was paid down for our Redemption, speaks it out to
be a great Redemption; the price that we are bought with (...) 6. 19, 20. cap.
7. 23.
is a price beyond all compute; 2 Pet. 1. 18, 19. For as much as ye know, that
ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your
vain conversation; But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without
blemish, and without spot. Christ was a Lamb, 1. for harmlesness, 2. for
patience and silence in afflictions, 3. for meekness Isa. 32. 7. (...). 11. 19.
and humility, 4. for sacrifice; this Lamb was without blemish, that is, free
from actual sin; and without spot, (...).
that is, free from original sin: That the most absolute and perfect purity of
Christ, prefigured in the Lambs of the Old Testament, that were to be
sacrificed, might be better expressed; the Apostle calls him a lamb without
Ephesians. 5. 27. Neither God nor Christ could lay down a ^reat^^ price: All things
in heaven an^ earth, are (...) be compared 1 this blood, to this pri^e.
blemish, and without spot. The price that this Lamb without a spot has laid
down, is sufficient to pay all our debts; it is a price beyond all compute; All
the Silver, Gold, Pearl, Jewels in the world, are of no value, in respect of
this price; a price in it self infinite, and of infinite value. Among the
Romans, the goods and estates, which men had gotten in the Wars, with hazard of
their lives, were called ( peculium castrense) or a Field-purchase: O! how well
then may the Elect be called Christ's peculium castrense, his purchase, gotten
not only by the jeopardy of his life, but with the loss of his life and blood.
Again, J^^. 10, 11, 15. 17 18. (...). 20. 28.
if you compare the work of Redemption with other great works, you must
necessarily conclude, that the work of Redemption is a great work. The making
of the world Ge^. 1. 3 6, 9, 11, 14, 20, 24.
was a great work of God, but yet, that did but cost him a word of his mouth, a
let it be; he spoke the word, and it was done; he said, let there be light, and
there was light, etc. but the work of Redemption cost Christ's dearest blood.
Much matter of admiration does the work of Redemption afford us: The work of
Creation is many ways admirable, yet not to be compared with the work of
Redemption; wherein the power, wisdom, justice, mercy, and other divine
attributes of God, do much more shine forth; and wherein the redeemed reap much
more good, than Adam did by his creation; which will evidently appear, by
observing these particular differences.

First, In the Creation, God brought something out of nothig; but in the work
of Redemption, out of one contrary he brought another; out of death he brought
life: This was a work of far greater power* wisdom, mercy; death must first be
destroyed and then life brought forth.

Secondly, In Creation, there was but a word, and doing and dying: The work of
Redemption could be brought about by none but God; God must come down from
heaven, God must be made man, God must be made sin, God must be made a cu^se, 2
Cor. 5. 21. Gal. 3. 13.

Thirdly, In the Creation, God arrayed himself with Majesty, power, and other
like properties, fit for a great work; in the work of Redemption, he put on
weakness, he assumed a nature subject to infirmities, and the infirmities of
that nature; he did as David did when he fought against Goliath, he put off all
armor, and took his staff in his hand, and drew near to the Philistine: 1 Samuel
17. 39, 40.

Fourthly, In the work of Creation, there was nothing death and he that had the
power of death, was vanquished: Heb. 2, 14, 15. Colos. 2. 14. 15.

Fifthly, By Creation, man was made after God's image, Genesis 1. 26, 27. by
Redemption, man was made a member of the same mystical body, whereof Christ is
the head: Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.

Sixthly, By Creation, man received a natural being; spiritual.

Seventhly, By Creation, man received a possibility to certainty of standing,
and impossibility of falling: Joh. 10. 28, 29, 30, 31. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Jer. 33.
40, 41.

Eighthly, By Creation, man was placed in an earthly heavenly Paradise.

Thus you see how the work of Redemption transcends the work of Creation.
Again, the works of Providence are great, very great, in the eye of God, of
Angels, of men; but what are the work^ of Providence, to the works of
Redemption? for, in order to the accomplishment of that great work, Christ must
put off his Royal Rob^s, take a journey from heaven to earth, assume our
nature, do and die, etc. Again, the work of Redemption by Christ, will be sound
a great work, if you will but compare it with those Redemptions that were but
Types of this: Israel's Redemption from their Egyptian Bondage, and from their
Babilonish Bondage, were very great Redemptions, that were brought about by a
strong hand, a mighty hand, and an outstretched arm, as the Scripture speaks:
But alas, what were those Redemptions, to our being redeemed from the love of
sin, the guilt of sin, the dominion of sin, the damnatory power of sin; and to
our being redeemed from the power of Satan, the curse 1 T^^s. 1. (...).
of the Law, Hell and wrath to come. Lastly, the great things that are wrapped
up in the womb, in the belly of Redemption, speak out our Redemption by Christ,
to be a very great Redemption; in the womb of this Redemption, you shall find
reconciliation, justification, adoption. eternal salvation, etc. and are not
these great, very great things? surely yes. But,

A Second excellent Property of that Redemption that Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have
redemption through his bl^od, the forgiveness of sins, according (...), this
word properly signi^ies a deliverance, which is brought to pass by ^^^ing of a
ran^^^ and price (...) Mat. 20. 28. 1 ^^r 6. 20. 1 (...). 1. 18.
to the riches of his grace; that is, according to his exceeding great and
abundant grace, Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Christ Jesus; our Redemption is from the free love and favor of
God. It was free grace that put God the father upon finding out a way for the
redemption of lost sinners; It was free Grace that put God upon providing of
such a surety, as should undertake the work of Redemption, as should carry on
the work of Redemption, and as should accomplish and complete the work of
Redemption: And it was free grace that moved God the father to accept of what
Christ did and suffered, in order to the bringing about of our Redemption; and
it is free Grace, that moves God to make an application of this Redemption, to
the souls of his people. Ah poor souls, the Lord looks not neither Isa. 52. 3.
for money nor moneys worth from you, toward the purchase of your Redemption;
and therefore, always look upon your Redemption, as the mere fruit of rich
Grace. But,

The Third excellent Property of that Redemption, Psalm. 130. 7. Let Israel hope
in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous
redemption. Christ redeems us from all sin, and from all Tit. 2. 14. Hos. 13.
14.
the consequences of sin; he redeems from death, and from the power of the
grave; he redeems us from the Romans 7. 6. Gal. 4. 5. Gal. 3. 13.
Law, and from the malediction of the Law: Christ took that off, he was made a
curse for all that believe on him; he did not only stand in the room of eminent
believers, but he stood in the room of all believers, and endured the wrath of
God to the uttermost, for every one that believes on him: Every believer is
freed from a cursed estate, by the least faith; every degree of true faith
makes the condition to be a state of life, and passes us from death and
condemnation; There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: And
Christ redeems us from this present Romans 8. 1. Gal. 1. 4. Rev. 14. 3, 4. 1
These. 1. 10. Luke 1. 71, 74.
evil world, and from the earth, and from among men, and from wrath to come,
and from the hands of all our enemies. Jesus Christ has gone thorough-stitch
with the work of our Redemption; Christ does not his work by halves, all his
works are perfect, there is no defect or flaw in them at all: Christ does not
redeem us from some of our sins, and leave us to grapple with the rest; he does
not work out some part of our Redemption, and leave us to work out the rest; he
does not bear the heat and burden of divine wrath in part, and leave us to
wrestle with other parts of divine wrath: O! no, Christ makes most complete
work of it; he redeems us from all our iniquities, he delivers us out of the
hands of all our enemies; he pays Heb. 7. 25.
all debts, he cuts all scores, he delivers from all wrath, he takes off the
whole curse, he saves to the uttermost, and will settle us in a state of full
and perfect freedom, when grace shall be turned into glory; in heaven our
Redemption shall be entire and and perfect.

The Fourth excellent Property of that Redemption, Heb. 9. 12. Neither by the
blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the
holy place, having obtained e^ernal redemption for us. Redemption is in
general, Exodus 6. 6.
a freeing one out of thraldom: Now this is done three ways: 1. By interceding
and pacifying wrath, Thus the Prophet Oded procured Redemption for the Captives
2 Chronicles. 28. 9, etc.
of Judah, by his intercession. 2. By force and might: Thus Abraham redeemed
his brother Lot, and the people that Genesis 14. 16.
were captives with him, by overcoming their enemies. 3. By ransom, or paying a
price; Thus an Hebrew that Levit. 25. 48, 49.
was sold a slave to a stranger, might be redeemed by one of his brethren; the
last of these is most agreeable to the notation of the several words, which in
the three learned languages, do signify to redeem; though the last be
especially intended: In that, mention is made of a price, namely Christ's
blood; yet the other two are not altogether exempted, for Christ has all those
three ways redeemed his people: This will more clearly appear, if we duly weigh
the distinct kinds of bondage in which we Man. 6. 12. Ephesians. 2 3. Heb. 2. 143 5.
were, by reason of sin; 1. We were debtors to Divine Justice, 2. We were
children of wrath, 3. We were slaves to Satan: 1. As debtors, Christ has paid
a ransom for us: 2. As children of wrath, Christ makes intercession for us: 3.
But though Divine Justice be satisfied, and divine wrath pacified, yet the
Devil will not let his captives go, therefore Christ, by a strong hand, wrests
us out of Satan's power, and destroys him that had the power of death, Heb. 2.
24, 25.
that is, the devil. The Ransom which Christ paid, was the ground of man's full
and eternal Redemption; for by satisfaction of justice, way was made to pacify
wrath, both which being accomplished, the Devil lost his right and power over
such as he held in bondage. This Redemption is a full freedom from all misery,
and compriseth under it reconciliation, justification, sanctification and
salvation: By this Redemption, divine justice is satisfied, wrath pacified,
grace procured, and all spiritual enemies vanquished. The perfection of this
Redemption, is hinted (...).
in this word eternal; the eternity here meant, has a special respect to the
continual duration thereof, without end; yet also it respects the time past,
so as it looks backward and forward. It implies a virtue and efficacy, from
the beginning of the world, for Christ was a lamb slain from the foundation of
the world: Christ himself Rev. 13. 8. Rev. 1. 8.
is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, which is, and which was, and
which is to come. Now, that which is spoken of the person of Christ, may very
well be applied to our Redemption by Christ. This Epithete Eternal, is here
added to Redemption, in opposition to the legal purifications, which were
momentary and temporary: They had a day, and endured no longer than the time of
reformation. On this ground, by just and necessary consequence, it follows;
that the Redemption wrought by Christ, is absolutely perfect, and that there is
no need of any other. This being eternal, all that have been, all that shall be
redeemed, have been, and shall be redeemed by it; and they who are redeemed by
it, need no other means. The liberty whereinto Christ Jesus brings the Elect,
is permanent and lasting, it abides irremoveable and unchangeable to all
Eternity. The Jews which had sold themselves to be servants, were to be set
free at the Jubilee, yet the Jubilee lasted but for one year; Levit. 25.
therefore the same persons might afterward become bondmen again. But this
acceptable year of the Lord's Isa. 61. 2. cap. 63. 4.
redeemed, is an everlasting year, it shall never end; therefore they shall
never be subject to bondage any more. It is observable, that when the Lord
would comfort the Jews, with hopes of a return from Babylon, he usually annexed
Evangelical promises, respecting the deliverance of poor sinners from the
slavery of Satan, whereof that captivity was a Type; some of which promises do
plainly express the perpetuity of that spiritual freedom, which they shall
enjoy: Take a taste, Isa. 35. 10. And the ransomed of the Lord shall return,
and come to Zion, with songs See also, Jer. 32. 39. Ezekiel. 37. 25 26, 27, 28.
cap. 39. 29.
and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away: Isa. 51. 6. Lift up your eyes to the
heavens, and look upon the earth beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away
like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell
therein, shall die in like manner; but my salvation shall be for ever, and my
righteousness shall not be abolished: Isa. 60. 19, 20. The sun shall be no more
thy light by day, neither for brightness, shall the moon give light unto thee;
but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.
Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw it self; for the
Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be
ended: Jer. 31. 11, 12. For the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from
the hand of him that was stronger than he. Therefore they shall come and sing
in the height of Zion, and their soul shall be as a watered garden, and they
shall not sorrow any more at all. But,

The Fifth excellent Property of that Redemption that viz. It is an enriching
Redemption, it is a Redemption that makes men rich in spiritual blessings in
heavenly places: There are many choice Ephesians. 1. 3.
and rare spiritual benefits, that wait and attend on Redemption, that go hand
in hand with Redemption. As Romans 5. 1. cap. 3. 24, 25.
reconciliation, remission of our sins, justification of our persons, adoption,
sanctification, full glorification; we have some fore-tastes of it in this
life; here we have the first fruits of the spirit, but in the morning of the
Resurrection, Romans 8. 23, 30.
we shall reap the whole harvest of glory. It Is called, by way of eminency, the
salvation of our souls: 1 Pet. 1. 9.
Redemption and the noble benefits attending on it, are Salvation begun; but in
heaven, this shall be salvation consummate. Redemption is a rich Mine,
containing a Mass of Treasure, that cannot be valued; could we dig into it,
could we pry into it, we might find variety of the choicest Jewels and Pearls;
in comparison whereof, all the riches of the Indies, all the Gold of Ophir, and
all the precious Jewels, and most orient Pearls that are in the world, are no
better than dross. I have read of Tiberius the Emperor that passing by a place
where he saw a cross lying in the ground upon a Marble stone, and causing the
stone to be dug up, he found a great treasure under the Cross: But what was
this treasure, but a great nothing, to that treasure that is wrapped up in our
Redemption by Christ. What the Lord said once, to his anointed Cyrus, a
temporal deliverer of his people; the same he has spoken, and much more to his
Anointed Jesus, the greater Savior and Redeemer of his Church; I will give
thee, the treasures of darkness, the hidden riches of secret Isa. 43. 3. See my
Treatise called, The Unsearchable Ru^es of Christ.
places. There are unsearchable riches in Jesus Christ; in him are riches of
Grace, of all Grace; in him are riches of justification, and riches of
sanctification, and riches of consolation, and riches of glorification: Would
you share in the best of riches, would you share in the most durable riches,
would you share in soul riches, would you share in heavenly riches? O! then
secure your interest in the Redemption that is by Jesus Christ. But,

The sixth (and last) excellent Property of that Redemption, viz. It is a
Redemption, sweetning Redemption; it is such a Redemption, as sweetens all
other Redemptions; it is Redemption by Christ, that sweetens our Redemption out
of this trouble and that, out of this affliction and that, out of this danger
and that, out of this sickness and that, out of this bondage and that.
Redemption by Christ, is like that tree which Moses cast into the bitter Exed.
15. 25.
waters of Marah, that made them sweet: This water became sweet for the use and
service of the Israelites, for a time only, and remained not always sweet
after, as appears by Plinies Natural History; who makes mention Plin. Natural
History, ^^. 6. cap. 29
of those bitter waters, in his time: But the Redemption that we have by Jesus
Christ, does for ever sweeten all the bitter trials and afflictions that we
meet with in this world. The Jewish Doctors say, that this tree was bitter, and
they give us this note upon it; That it is the manner of the blessed God, to
sweeten that which is bitter, by that which is bitter. I shall not dispute
about the truth of their notion; but this I may safely say, that it is the
manner of the blessed God, to sweeten our greatest troubles, and our sharpest
trials, by that Redemption that we have by Jesus Christ. And thus you see the
excellent properties of that Redemption that Jesus Christ, by Covenant or
compact with his father, was engaged to work for us. But

The Fourth Proposition is this, viz. That the blessed holy Scriptures, do
clearly and strongly evidence, that there was a Covenant of Redemption passed
between God the father and Jesus Christ. He is called a Mediator of the
Covenant of reconciliation, interceding for, and procuring of it; and that not
by a simple entreaty, but by giving himself over to the father; (calling for
satisfaction to justice, that reconciliation might go on) for paying a
compensatory price, sufficient to satisfy divine justice for the Elect* There
is one God, and one Mediator between 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6.
God and man (to wit, God incarnate) the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a
ransom for all (to wit, his Elect children) to be testified in due time. Let me
glance a little upon the words, One Mediator between God and men; in the
Greek, it is one Mediator of God and men; which may refer, either to the two
parties betwixt which he deals, pleading for God to men, and for men to God, or
to the two natures, Mediator of God having the divine nature, and of men,
having the humane nature upon him; one Mediator, not of Redemption only (as
the Papists grant) but of intercession too: we need no other master of requests
in heaven, but the man Christ Jesus; who being so near us, in the matter of his
incarnation, will never be strange to us, in the business of intercession. A
ransom, the Greek (...), is a counter price, such as we could never have paid,
but must have remained, and even rotted in prison, but for our all-sufficient
surety and Savior: The ransom that Christ paid, was a real testimony of his
Mediatorship betwixt God and man, whereby he reconciled both. The man Christ
Jesus; Paul speaks not this to exclude his divinity, from this office of
Mediatorship, for he is God manifested in the flesh, and God has 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Act. 20 28.
purchased his Church by his own blood: But to show, that in his humane nature,
he paid the ransom for us, and that as man, he is like unto us; and therefore,
all sorts and Heb. 2. 10.
ranks of men have a free access by faith unto him, and to his sacrifice. He is
also called a Redeemer, I know that Job. 19. 25.
my redeemer lives. The word Redeemer in the Hebrew is very emphatical, Goel,
for it signifies a kinsman, near allied unto him; one that was bone of his
bone, and flesh Some read the words thus, I know, that my kinsman, or he that
is near to me lives. Ruth 3. 9, 12, 13. cap. 4. 4, 5.
of his flesh: Christ is of our kindred by incarnation, and redeems us by his
passion. The words are an allusion to the Ceremonial Law, where the nearest
kinsman was to take the wife, and buy the land; we were Satan's by nanature,
but Christ our brother, our kinsman, has redeemed Joh. 20. 17.
us by the price of his own blood, and will deliver us from hell, and bring us
to the inheritance of the saints 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. ^^los. 1. 12.
in light; and therefore deserves the name of a Redeemer. Jesus Christ is near,
very near, yea nearest of kin to us; Ephesians. 5. 30.
he is flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, and blood of our blood: For as
much as the children are partakers of Heb. 2. 14
flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the same. Now it is evident by
the old Law of Redemption, that the nearest kinsman was under a special
obligation to redeem; as you may see by comparing Ruth 3. 12, 13. with cap. 4.
4, 5. Boaz was a kinsman, and had right to redeem; yet, because there was a
nearer kinsman, he would not engage himself, but upon his refusal: If thou will
redeem it, redeem it; but if thou will not redeem it, then tell me, that I may
know; for there is none to redeem it besides thee, and I am after thee. Now
Jesus Christ is nearest of kin to us, and therefore, upon the strictest terms
and Laws of Redemption, he is ( Goel) our Redeemer. If we consider Jesus Christ
as a kinsman, a brother, we must say, that he had not only a right to redeem
us; but that he was also, under the highest obligation to redeem us. There is a
double way of redeeming persons: 1. By force and power, thus when Lot was taken
prisoner by those four Kings that Genesis 14. 14, 16.
came against Sodom; Abraham armed his servants, and by force and power
redeemed them ^^ we were all Satan's prisoners, Satan's captives, but Christ
our nearest kinsman, 2 Timothy 2. 25.
our brother, by spoiling principalities and powers, rescues us out of that
Tyrant's hand. 2. There is a Redemption Col^s. 2. 15
by price or ransom, to redeem is to buy again, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought
with a price, cap. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a price; the word price is added,
not by a Pleonasmus, but (...), to intimate the excellency and dignity of the
price wherewith they were bought, which was not silver or gold; but the
precious blood of Christ, as 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19
of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot: Ye are bought with a price, that
is, ye are dearly bought, by a price of inestimable value, but of this before.
Again, sometimes Christ is called the surety of a better covenant. By so much
Heb. 7. 22.
was Jesus made a surety of a better Testament, so called from the manner of
the confirmation of it, viz. by the death of Christ. Look, as Christ was our
surety to God, for the discharge of our debt (the surety and debtor, in law,
are reputed as one person) so he is God's surety to us, for the performance of
his promises: The office of a surety being applied to Christ shows, that he
has so far engaged himself for us, as that he neither can nor will start from
his engagement: You shall as soon remove the earth, stop the Sun in his course,
empty the Sea with a cockleshell, make a world, and unmake your selves, as any
power on earth, or in hell, shall ever be able to hinder Christ, from the
performance of the office of a surety. A perfect fulfilling of all
righteousness, according to the tenor of the Law, is required of man: Now
Christ our surety, by a voluntary subjection of himself to the Law, ^al. 4. 4.
Mat. 3. 15.
and by being made under the Law, he has fulfilled all righteousness; and that
he did this for us, is evident by that phrase of the Apostle, Romans 5. 19. By
the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous: The contents of the Law
must be accomplished by our surety, or else we can Gal. 3. 10. 13.
never escape the curse of the Law; there must be a translation of the Law from
us in our persons, unto the person of our surety, or we are undone, and that
for ever. Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, and has Romans 10. 4.
made us just by his obedience, we are made the righteousness 2 Cor. 5. 21.
of God in him: Our surety became subject to the Law, that he might redeem us
that were obnoxious to the Law. Again, full satisfaction for every
transgression is required of man: Now Christ our surety, has made satisfaction
for all our sins, He was made a curse for us; and by that Gal. 3. 13.
means he has redeemed us from the curse of the Law: To exact a debt which is
fully satisfied, is a point of injustice; now Christ our surety, having made
full satisfaction for all our sins, we need not fear to stand before the face
of God's justice. A debtor that has a surety that is able and willing to pay
his debt, yea, who has fully paid it, need fear no colors. This Title, a
surety of a better Covenant, does necessarily import a blessed Covenant between
Jesus Christ and his dear father, to whom he freely and readily becomes surety
for us; for what is suretiship, but a voluntary transferring of another's debt
upon the surety, he obliging to pay the debt for which he engages as surety.
Thus you see by the blessed and glorious Titles that are given to Jesus Christ
in the Scriptures, that there was a Covenant of Redemption past between God the
father and Jesus Christ. But,

The Fifth Proposition is this, That the work of our Rev. 13 8. God loved his
people, and provided for them, and contrived all their happiness before they
were, yea, before the world was.
Jesus is said, to be the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, because
that it was agreed and covenanted between God the father and Jesus Christ, that
he should, in the fullness of time, be made flesh, and die for sinners; and
therefore it was said to be done from the foundation of the world. Though
Christ was not actually slain, but when he suffered for us upon the Cross, yet
he was slain from the beginning; in God's purpose, in God's decrees, in God's
promises, in the sacrifices, in the faith of the elect, and in the martyrs; for
Abel, the first that ever died, died a Martyr, he died for Religion. This
compact betwixt the father and the son, bears date from Eternity; this the
Apostle asserts, 2 Timothy 1. 9. who has saved us and called The Grace here
spoken of, cannot be understood of in(...) Grace, unless we will say, that it
could be inf(...) into us be^^re, either the world was, or we were in it.
us with an holy calling; not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began.
Here is grace given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began: But what grace
was that which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began? doubtless
it was the Grace of Redemption, which God in his purpose and decree, had given
us in Christ Jesus, before the world began. The Scripture last cited does
clearly show, that God the father and Jesus Christ dealt together about the
Redemption of souls, before the world began; and that all our everlasting
concernments were agreed on, and made sure between them; so that Titus 1. 2.
gives the same sound, In hope of eternal life; which God that cannot lie,
promised before the world began. How was this life promised before the world
began, but in this Covenant of Redemption, wherein God The whole business of
our salvation was first transacted between the father and Christ, before it was
reveiled to us; Joh. 6. 27. The Apostle Peter, speaking of our Redemption by
the precious blood of Christ, says, That Christ was foreordained (thereunto)
before the foundation of the world. 1 Pet. 1. 20.
the father promised and engaged to Jesus Christ, that he would give eternal
life to all his seed? So the Apostle tells us, He has chosen us in him (that
is, in Christ) before the foundation of the world. There was an eternal
contrivance, compact, covenant or agreement between God the father and Jesus
Christ, concerning the sanctification, holiness and salvation of the Elect. God
agrees with Christ, about the everlasting happiness of his chosen, before the
world began. So Joh. 10. 16. And other sheep I have, which are not of this
fold; them also, I must bring. Why must he bring them home? how was he bound,
how was he engaged to bring home his other sheep, that he puts a must upon it?
them also I must bring: Doubtless, it was from this Covenant and agreement
which he had made with God the father, wherein he had engaged himself, to bring
home all his Elect. Christ takes a great deal of pains to bring home his sheep;
being bound in the Covenant of Redemption, to present all that are given him by
charter, blameless before the father; therefore, says Colos. 1. 22.
he, I bring them, and I must bring them; the matter not being lest arbitrary,
even in respect of his obligation to Psalm. 2. 7. Act. 15. 18. Act. 2. 23. Ephesians.
1. 9. Prove. 8. 22, -- 32.
God the father. Certainly the Decree, Covenant and agreement between God the
father and Jesus Christ, about the whole way of Redemption, about all things
belonging to the salvation of the Elect, to be brought about in due time; was
fixed and settled before the world began. Ponder seriously on this, it may well
be a lodestone to draw out your hearts more than ever, to love the father and
the son, and to delight in the father and the son, and to act faith upon the
father and the son, and to long to be with the father and the son, and all your
days to admire at the love of the father and the son; who have from eternity,
by compact and agreement, secured your souls and your everlasting concernments.
But,

The Sixth Proposition is this, That God the father had Heb. 2. 10.
he and his son had agreed to bring many sons to glory: Weak Christians many
times have their thoughts and apprehensions more busied and taken up with the
love of the son, than with the love of the father; but they must remember, that
in the great and glorious work of Redemption, God the father had a great hand,
an eminent hand, yea, the first and chief hand: God the father first laid the
foundation stone of all our happiness and blessedness; his head and heart was
first taken up about that heaven-born project, the salvation of sinners, Isa.
28. 16. Therefore, thus says the Lord God, behold, I lay in Zion for a
foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation;
(Heb. I am he that foundeth a stone in Zion.) It is God the father that has
long since, laid Christ as a sure foundation, for all his people to build their
hopes of happiness upon; it is he that first laid Christ the true cornerstone,
Romans 9. 33. 1 Pet. 2. 6. Isa. 53. 10.
whereby Zion is for ever secured against death, hell and wrath: Hence it is
said, the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand; that is, God's
Eternal Decree about the work of our Redemption and salvation, shall be
powerfully, faithfully and completely executed by Jesus Christ; who, by his
word and spirit, shall communicate unto all his Elect, the fruit of his death,
to life and salvation. Jeb 23. 24. This is a full place against all Socini^ans,
who boldly allert that God removes the curse of the Law, by a free and absolute
pardon, without satisfaction. Grotius's Exposition on the place, is but flat
and dull. When God says, I have (...) a ransom, we are to understand it of a
real Ransom, of full pay or satisfaction, and not of a Ransom by favor and
acceptance.
Again, Deliver me from going down into the pit for I have found a ransom: The
Hebrew word signifies a price paid to redeem a man's life or liberty, I have
found a ransom, or an atonement, a cover for man's sin: Angels and men could
never have found a ransom, but by my deep, infinite and unsearchable wisdom,
says God the father, I have found a Ransom, I have found out a way, a means
for the redeeming of mankind, from going down to the infernal pit, viz. the
death and passion of my dearest son: But where, O blessed God, did thou find
a Ransom? not in Angels, not in men, not in Legal Sacrifices, not in Gold or
Silver, not in tears, humblings and meltings of my people; but in my own bosom:
That Jesus, that son of my love, who has layen in my bosom from all Eternity,
Joh. 1. 18. he is that Ransom, that by my own matchless wisdom, and singular
goodness, I have found. I have not called a Council, to enquire where to find a
Ransom, that fallen man might be preserved from falling into the fatal pit of
destruction; but I have found a ransom in my own heart, my own breasts, my own
bosom, without advising or consulting with others, I have found out a way how
to save sinners with a salvo to my honor, justice, holiness and truth. Had all
the Angels in heaven, from the first day of their creation, to this very day,
sat in serious Council, to invent, contrive or find out a way, a means, whereby
lost man might be secured against the curse of the Law, hell, condemnation and
wrath to come, and whereby he might have been made happy, and blessed for ever;
and all this without the least wrong or prejudice to the justice and
righteousness of God; they could never have found out any way or means to have
effected those great things. Our Redemption by a Ransom, is God's own
invention, and God's only invention. The blessed Ransom which the Lord has
found out for poor sinners, is the blood of his own dearest son (a ransom which
never entered into the thoughts or hearts of Angels and men, till God had
reveiled it) which is called the blood of the Covenant, because thereby the
Covenant is confirmed, and all Covenant-mercies assured to us, Joh. 3. 16.
Again, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son: Here is a
sic, without a sicut; that sic so, signifies the firstness of the father's
love, and the freeness of the father's love, 1 John 3. 19. Hos. 14. 4.
and the vehemence of the father's love, and the admirableness of the father's
love, and the matchlesness of the father's love. O! what manner of love is
this, for God to give his son, not his servant; his begotten son, not his
adopted son; his only son, and not one son of many; his only son by eternal
generation, and communication of the same Essence; to be a Ransom and Mediator
for sinners! God the father loving lost man, sent his son to suffer, and to do
the office of a Mediator; that through his mediation, he might communicate the
effects of his love, in a way agreeable to his justice; for God loved the
world, and that antecedently, to his giving Christ, and as a cause of it. The
design, the project of saving sinners, was first contrived and laid by God the
father; therefore Christ says, The son can do nothing of himself, but what he
sees the father do: God the father sent his son, and God the father sealed his
son a commission, to give life to lost sinners, Him has God the father sealed;
that is, made his Commission authentical, as men do their Deeds by their seals.
It is a Metaphor taken from them who ratify their authority; whom they send,
that is, approve of them, as it were, by setting to their seal. Christ is to be
acknowledged to be he, whom the father has authorized and furnished, to be the
Savior and Redeemer of lost sinners; and the storehouse, from whence they are
to expect all spiritual supplies. Look, as Kings give sealed Warrants and
Commissions to their ministers of State, who are sent 1 King. 21 8. Est^. 3.
12. cap. 8. 8.
out, or employed in great affairs: So Christ is the father's great
Ambassador, authorized and sent out by him; to bring about the Redemption and
Salvation of lost man. And look, as a seal represents in wax, that which is
engraven on it; so the father has communicated to him, his divine essence and
properties, and stamped upon him all divine perfection, for carrying on the
work of Redemption: And look, as a seal annexed to a Commission, is a public
evidence of the person's authority; so Christ's endowments are visible marks,
whereby to know him, and clear evidences, that he was the true Messiah; and of
the father's installing him into that office of a Redeemer: So Joh. 6. 38. I
came down from heaven, not to do mine See Joh. 10. 17. c^p. 16. 27.
own will, but the will of him that sent me: In this verse, Christ declares in
the general; that his errand into the world, is to do his father's will who
sent him, and not his own; which is not to be understood that, as God, he has
a different and contrary will to the fathers (though, as man, he has a
distinct and subordinate will to his) but the meaning is, he came not to do his
own will only (as the Jews alleged against him) but the father's also; and
that in this work, he was the father's Commissioner, sent to do what he had
entrusted him with; and not as the Jews gave out, that he was one, who did that
for which he had no warrant. Christ, in entertaining them that come to him (as
in verse. 37.) is not only led thereunto by his own mercy, and bounty, and love
toward them, as the reward of all his sufferings; but does also stand obliged
thereunto, by virtue of a Commission and trust laid upon him by the father, and
accepted and undertaken by him; therefore he does mention the will of him that
sent him, as a reason of his fidelity in this matter. By what has been said, it
is most evident that God the father had the first and chief hand in the great
work of our Redemption. It is good to look upon God the father, as the first
projector of our happiness and blessedness, that we may honor the father as we
honor the son, and love the father as we love the son, and value the father as
we value the son, and admire the father as we admire the son, and exalt the
father as we exalt the son, and cleave to the father as we cleave to the son,
etc. I have a little the longer insisted on this propositon, because, commonly
we are more apprehensive of the love of the son, than we are of the love of the
father; and that I may the more heighten your apprehensions of the father's
love, in the great work of Redemption. Ah! what amazing love is this, that the
thoughts of the father, that the eye of the father, that the heart of the
father should be first fixed upon us, that he should begin the treaty with his
son, that he should make the first motion of love, that he should first propose
the Covenant of Redemption; and thereby lay such a sure foundation for man's
recovery out of his slavery and misery. To speak after the manner of men, the
business from Eternity lay thus, here is man (says God the father to his son)
fallen from his primitive purity, glory and excellency, into a most woeful gulf
of sin and misery; he that was once a son, is now become a slave; he that was
once a friend, is E^h. 2. 12, 13.
now become an enemy; he that was once near us, is now afar off; he that was
once in favor, is now cast off, he Genesis 1. 26, 27.
that was once made in our image, has now the image of Satan stamped upon him;
he who had once sweet communion with us, has now fellowship with the Devil and
his Angels: Now, out of this forlorn estate, he can never deliver himself,
neither can all the Angels in heaven deliver him; now this being his present
case and state, I make this offer to thee, O my son: If, in the fullness of
Phil. 2. 7, 8. Isa. 63. 3. Gal. 3. 13.
time, thou will assume the nature of man, tread the winepress of my wrath
alone, bear the curse, shed thy blood, die, suffer, satisfy my justice, fulfill
my Royal Law; then I can, upon the most honorable terms imaginable, save
fallen man; and put him into a safer and happier condition, than ever that was
from whence Adam fell; and give thee a noble reward for all thy sufferings:
Upon this Jesus Christ replies, O my father, I am very ready* and willing to
do, to suffer, to die, to satisfy thy justice, to comply with thee in all thy
noble motions, and in all thy gracious and favorable inclinations; that poor
sinners may be sanctified and saved, made gracious and glorious, 1 These. 1.
ult. Heb. 10. 10. 14. Psalm. 40. 6, 7.
holy and happy; that poor sinners may never perish, that poor sinners may be
secured from wrath to come, and be brought into a state of light, life and
love; I am willing to make my self an offering, and Lo, I am come to do thy
will, O God. Thus you see how firstly, and greatly, and graciously, the
thoughts of God have been set at work, that poor sinners may be for ever
secured and saved. But,

The Seventh Proposition is this, It was agreed between Genesis 3. 15. 1 John 3.
8. A^t. 2. 30. cap. 3. 22. Isa. 7. 14. cap. 9. 6. D^ut. 18. 15, 18. Gal. 4. 4.
^em. 8. 3.
the father. and the son, that Jesus Christ should be incarnate, that he should
take on him the nature of those whom he was to save, and for whom he was to
satisfy, and to bring to glory; Christ's incarnation was very necessary in
respect of that work of Redemption, that he, by agreement with the father, had
undertaken; he had engaged himself to his father, that the would redeem lost
sinners, and as their surety, make full satisfaction. By the fall of Adam, God
and man was fallen out, they were at variance, at enmity, at open R^m. 8. 7.
hostility; so that by this means, all intercourse between heaven and earth was
stopped, and all trading between God and us ceased. Now, to redress all this,
and to make an atonement, a Mediator was necessary; now, this office belonged
unto Jesus Christ, both by his father's Heb. 10 5, 6, 7.
ordination, and his own voluntary susception; and for discharge of it, a
humane nature was very requisite; there was an absolute necessity that Christ
should suffer, partly because he was pleased to substitute himself in the
sinner's stead, and partly because his sufferings only could be satisfactory:
But now, unless Christ be incarnate, how can he suffer? the whole lies thus;
without satisfaction no Redemption, without suffering no satisfaction, without
flesh no suffering; Ergo, Christ must be incarnate. The Joh. 1. 14.
word must be made flesh: And so Heb. 2. 14, 16. For as much then, as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise, took part
of the same; that through death, he might destroy him that had the power of
death; that is, the devil: For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels,
but he took on him the seed of Abraham: 1 Timothy 3. 16. Without controversy,
great is the mystery of godliness; God was manifested in the flesh, justified
in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, received up into glory. This is only applicable to the person of Christ:
He that by his office, is to be Emmanuel, God with us; he must, in regard of
his person, be Emanuel also, that is, God-man in one person: He that by office,
is to make peace between God and man, he must be God-man; he that by office, is
to stand and minister between God and men, he must be God and Heb. 2. 17, 18.
cap. 4. 15* 16.
man; that so he might not be only zealously faithful toward God's justice,
but also tenderly merciful toward men's errors. Look, as he must be more than
man, that he may be able so to suffer, that his sufferings may be meritorious,
that he may go through-stitch with the work of Redemption, and triumph over
death, Devils, difficulties, discouragements, curse, hell, wrath, etc. (All
which, Christ could never have done, had he been but a mere man) So it was
requisite that he should be man, that he might be in a capacity to suffer, die
and obey, for these are not works for one who is only God: A God only cannot
suffer, a man only cannot merit; God cannot obey, man is bound to obey;
wherefore Christ, that he might obey and suffer, he was man; and that he might
merit by his obedience and suffering, he was God-man; now such a person, and
only such a person, did the work of Redemption call for. That is a mighty
Scripture, Phil. 2. 6, 7. Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery
to be equal with God (here is Christ's pre-existing in the nature of the
Godhead, and then after comes his manhood) But made himself of no reputation;
(Greek, he emptied Isa. 53. 6. 9.
himself, as it were, of his divine dignity and majesty; he did disrobe himself
of his glory, and became a sinner, both by imputation and reputation, for our
sakes, for our salvation) and took upon him the form* of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men. All this Christ did upon his father's
prescription, and in pursuit of the great work of Redemption. The blessed
spirit fitted the man Christ Jesus, to be a meet Mediator and Redeemer for
poor sinners. The spirit formed the nature of man* Luke 1. 35. Gal. 4. 4.
of the substance of the Virgin, after an extraordinary manner, for the service
of the Lord Christ; he sanctined the humane nature which Christ assumed, after
such a perfect manner, that it was free from all sin; in the very Luke 1. 35.
moment of conception, he united this pure humane nature with the divine in the
same person, the person of the Heb. 10. 5.
son of God, that he might be a fit head, Mediator and Redeemer for us. But,

The Eighth Proposition is this, viz. That there were commandments from the
father to the son, which he must obey and submit to. God the father did put
forth his paternal authority, and lay his commands upon his son, to engage in
this great work of redeeming and saving poor sinners souls, he had a command
from the father what to teach his people, as the Prophet of the Church: For I
have not spoken of my self (says Christ) but the father which sent me, he gave
me a commandment, what I should say, and Joh. 12. 49.
what I should speak. Christ declares, that he had received a Commission from
the father, who sent him, concerning his Doctrine, and what to say and speak;
and that he was persuaded that this Doctrine delivered to him by the father,
points out the true way to eternal life; and that he had exactly followed this
Commission in preaching, both for matter and manor. The two words of saying
Between saying and speaking, there is this difference (says a Lapide) that to
say, is to teach and publish a thing gravely; to speak, is familiararly to
utter a thing.
and speaking, may be taken comprehensively, pointing out all the ways of
delivering his commission, by set and solemn preaching, or occasional
conferences, and the whole subject matter of his preaching, in precepts,
promises and threatenings, and so it will (...)port that his commission from the
father was full, both for matter and manner, and his discharge thereof
answerable: Christ is a true Prophet, who speaks neither more or less in the
Doctrine of the Gospel, than what was the father's will, should be delivered to
us; For whatsoever I speak, even as the father said unto me, so I speak: Christ
keeps close to his Commission, without adding or diminishing; and herein
Christ's practice should be every faithful minister's pattern^* Again, Christ
had a command to lay down his life for those that were giu(...); No man takes
it from Jo^. 1^. 18.
me, but I lay it down of my self* I have power to lay it down, and I have
power to take it again; this commundment have I received of my father: The
father is so well pleased with the reconciliation of lost sinners, that he
loves Christ for the undertaking thereof, and is fully satisfied with his
suffering for attaining that end; in both these respects it holds good,
Therefore does my father love me, because I lay down my life; verse. 17. The
father is pleased with him, that he undertook this service, and is content with
his death, as a sufficient ransom: Christ having laid down his life for the
Redemption of lost man, did take it again, as a testimony that the father was
satisfied with his sufferings. Now, the way of the accomplishment of our
Redemption was agreed on betwixt the father and the son, before the
accomplishment thereof: Therefore, says he, this commandment have I received
of my father; which Psalm. 40. 6, 7. with Heb. 10. 6, 7, 8.
makes it clear that he came into the world fully instructed about carrying on
the work of Redemption: It pleased Christ to suffer death, not only
voluntarily, but in a way of subjection to his father's command, that so the
merit thereof might every way be full and acceptable to the father; for this
commandment have I received: he was content to be a servant by paction, that so
his sufferings might be accepted for his people, And so when Christ was going
to die, he says, That the world may know that I love the Joh. 14. 31.
father; and as the father gave me commandment, even so I do: arise, let us go
hence. As if he had said, power is permitted to Satan and his accomplices, to
persecute me to death; that dying for man's Redemption, the world may see the
obedience and love I bear to the father, who has thus determined. All that
Christ suffered for the Redemption of sinners, was by the order, and at the
command of the father, who did covenant with him, concerning this work: For, as
the father gave me a commandment, even so do I: In this Scripture, as in a
crystal-glass, you may see that Christ did enter the lists in his sufferings,
with much willingness and alacrity, with much courage and resolution; that so
he might commend his love to us, and encourage us to do the like through him.
Therefore, says he, arise, and let us go hence: I am very free and ready, by
my death and sufferings, to complete the work of man's Redemption, according to
the Covenant and agreement, that long since was made between the father and my
self. If Christ should fail in complying with his father's commands about
suffering and dying for us, then, not only the breach of Articles, but high
disobedience too, might be justly charged upon him; but from all such charges,
Christ has bravely quitted himself: There was a special Law laid upon Christ,
as he was our Mediator; which Law, he was willing and ready to obey, in order
to our Redemption. That Christ should die, was no part of the moral Law, but it
was a positive special Law laid upon Christ; well* this Law he obeys, he
complies with, I lay down my life for my sheep; this commandment J^^. 10, 11,
15, 17, 18.
have I received of my father: Christ, as Mediator, had a command from his
father to die, and he observes it; hence God calls him his servant, Behold my
servant whom Is^. 42. 1.
I uphold: And in pursuance of God's Royal Law, will and pleasure, he takes
upon him the form of a servant; and frequently* proclaims before all the world,
that he came to do the will of him that sent him. Again, God the father Phil.
2. 6, 7.
lays a special command upon Jesus Christ, to preserve and bring to glory all
those that come unto him: Jesus Christ has not only leave to save the Elect,
but a charge to save the Elect; All that the father gives me, shall come Joh.
6. 37, 38, 39, 40. Here you have Christ's Commission to save the Elect, etc.
to me; and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out (where the
doubled negatives, in the Original, serve to make the assertion strong, and to
carry their faith over all their doubts and fears) For I came down from heaven,
not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And this is the
fathers will which has sent me; that of all which he has give^ me, I should
lose nothing,* but should raise it up again at the last day. And this is the
will of him that sent me; that every one which sees the son, and believes on
him, may have everla^ing life; and I will raise him up at the last day. Christ
is to be answerable for all those that are given to him, at the last day* and
therefore we need no^ doubt, but that he will certainly employ all the power of
his Godhead, to secure and save all those that he must be accountable for. In
this blessed Scripture, there are several special things that we may take
notice of, that are pat to our present purpose. As first, that it is the great
dignity and happiness of the Elect^, that they are, from Eternity, given to
Christ in the Covenant of Redemption, as the reward of his sufferings, to come
to him in due time; and that they are given to him in trust, and that he must
be accountable for them, as being given by the father to him. Isal. 24. 1.
They were the father's first, not only by the right of Creation, but by
particular Election also; and being thus the father's, they are given to
Christ, from eternity to be redeemed by him, and as the reward of his
sufferings. Again, such as are elected and given to Christ, will certainly, in
due time, come to him: Their being given from eternity, produces their being
given, and coming in time; for God is faithful, who will not frustrate Christ
of what he has purchased, and the power that draws them is invincible and
irresistible; therefore, says he, All that the father gives me, shall come to
me. Again, Christ, in entertaining them that come to him, is not only led
thereunto by his own mercy, and bounty, and love toward them, as the reward of
his sufferings, but does also stand obliged thereunto, by virtue of a
commission and trust laid upon him by the father, and accepted and undertaken
by him; therefore does he mention the will of him that sent me, as a reason of
his fidelity in this matter. Further, from verse. 39. We may observe, that the
Gospel contains an extract of the de^p counsels of God, and of the eternal
transactions betwixt the father and the son, concerning lost man, so far as is
for our good; for he brings out, and reads in the Gospel his very Commission,
and some Articles of the Covenant, past betwixt the father and him. Again, the
first fountain and rise of the salvation of any of lost mankind, is in the
absolute and sovereign will and pleasure of God; for here he mentions the will
of him that sent him, as the first original of all; from whence their giving to
Christ, their coming and safety do flow. Again, these whose salvation the
father wills, are given over to Christ, in his eternal purpose, to be brought
to him in due time; for so it is here held out. Again, such as are given to
Christ by the father, and do in time come to him, are put in his keeping, and
he has a care of them, not to lose the least of them; For this is the will of
him that sent me, that of Joh. 10. 28, 29.
all he has given me, I should lose nothing; wherein the father does so commit
the trust to him, as that he still keeps them in his own hand also. Again,
Christ's charge and care of these that are given to him, extends even to the
very day of their Resurrection, that there he may make a good account of them,
when all perils and hazards are now over, and that he may not so much as lose
their dust, but gather it together again, and raise it up in glory, to be a
proof of his fidelity; for, says he, I should lose nothing, but raise it up
again at the last day; and so death and dissolution proves no loss. Again, from
verse. 40. we may observe, That such as are given to Christ, to be under his
charge, and to participate of his benefits, are drawn to believe on him: And it
is the father's will, and a part of the transaction betwixt him and his son,
that faith be the way to partake of these benefits, and not the fulfilling of
the impossible condition of the works of the Law; for they who are given to
Christ, are expounded to be they who believe on him; and it is the father's
will, that such partake of these benefits here mentioned, as of the rest of his
purchase. Albeit mortification, holiness, etc. do prepare for the possession of
these benefits, and do evidence a right thereunto, and the begun possession
thereof; yet it is only faith in Christ, that gives the right Ephesians. 2. 6, 7, 8.
and title, that so it may be of Grace. Again, it is covenanted betwixt the
father and the son, that believers shall be made partakers of everlasting life;
for it is explained, that not to lose them, verse. 39. is that they may have
everlasting life, for the further assurance of believers, of their eternal
happiness; it is also covenanted, that they shall have this life in present
possession, in the earnest, and first fruits thereof; for they have everlasting
life even here, and before their raising up: They have everlasting life; 1. in
pr^misso, 2. in pretio, 3. in primltiis; he stands already on the battlements
of heaven, he has one foot in the porch of Paradise. Again, Christ having
given an earnest-penny of salvation, will not suffer it to be lost, by any
difficulty or impediment in the way, but will carry believers through all
difficulties, till he destroy death and the grave, and raise up their very
dust, that in body and soul, they may partake of that bliss; and that he may
make it manifest, that death and rotting in the grave does not make void his
interest, nor cause his affection to cease. Therefore it is added, And I will
raise him up at the last day. Thus you see, that God the father did lay his
commands upon his son, to engage in this great work of redeeming and saving
poor sinners souls, etc.

In the third place I shall show you, that the manner or Isa. 42. 6. God the
father engages himself to direct and assist Christ, and to keep him from
miscarrying; and that he will give him all necessary strength and ability, for
the execution of his mediatory office, and work wonders by him and with him,
according to that word, My father hitherto works, and I work: and the son
engages Joh. 5. 17.
himself, that he will obey the fathers call, and not be rebellious, Isa. 50.
5. I was not rebellious, neither turned away Exodus 3. 11, 13. cap. 4. 1, 10, 13.
back; that is, I did not hang back, as Moses once and again did; nor refuse to
go when God sent me, as once Jon. 1. 3.
Jon. ^s did, but I offered my self freely and readily to my father's call;
there was no affliction, no opposition, no persecution, no evil usage that I
met with in carrying on the work of Redemption, that did ever startle me, or
discourage me, or make me flinch or shrink back from that great and blessed
work that I had undertaken: I was dutiful and obedient to the calls and
commands of my father, in all things that he required of me, or set me about.
Now the father and the son being thus mutually engaged by promise one to
another in honor and faithfulness, it highly concerned them to keep one
another close to the terms of the Covenant that was made between them, and
accordingly they did; for God the father peremptorily stands upon that complete
and full satisfaction, that Christ had promised to give to his justice; and
therefore, when the day of payment came, he would not abate Jesus Christ one
penny, one farthing of the many ten thousand Talents, that he Mat. 18. 24.
was to pay down upon the nail for us; Romans 8. 32. God spared not his own son;
that is, he abated nothing of that full price that, by agreement with his
father, he was to lay down for us; other fathers give their all, to spare and
redeem their children; but the heart of God the father is so fully and strongly
set upon satisfaction, that he will not spare his son, his own son, his only
son, but give him up to death, yea, to an accursed death, that we might be
Mauritius, who died most miserably.
spared and saved for ever. I have read of a Roman Emperor, who chose rather
to spare his money, than to redeem his soldiers, being taken prisoners: But to
redeem us God would not spare, no not his own son; because no money nor
treasure would serve the turn, but only the blood, yea, the heart-blood of his
dear son; 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.

And as God the father keeps Christ close to the terms of the Covenant, so
Jesus Christ keeps his father close to the terms of the Covenant also, Joh. 17.
4, 5. I have glorified thee on the earth (says Christ to his father;) I have
finished the work which thou gave me to do. And now, O father, glorify thou
me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world
was: O my father, I have finished the work of Redemption; but where is the
wages, where is the glory, where is the reward that thou have promised me. There
was nothing committed to Christ by the father, to be done on earth for the
purchasing of our Redemption, but he did finish it; so that the debt is paid,
justice satisfied, and sin, Satan and death spoiled; so that nothing remains,
but that Christ be glorified according to the promise of the father to him. The
sum of Christ's petition is this, that since he had finished the work of
Redemption, that therefore the father, according to his engagement, would
advance him to the possession of that glory that he enjoyed from all eternity.
Now, for the clearing of this, we must consider, that as Christ was from
Eternity the glorious God, so we are not to conceive of any real change in this
glory of his Godhead; as if, by his estate of humiliation, he had suffered any
diminution; or by his state of exaltation, any real accession were made to his
glory, as God: But the true meaning is this, That Christ having (according to
the paction past betwixt the father and him) obscured the glory of his Godhead
for a time, under the veil of the Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8.
form of a servant, and our sinless infirmities, does now expect (according to
the tenor of the same paction) after he had done his work, to be exalted and
glorified, and openly declared to be the son of God; the veil of his estate
Romans 1. 4.
of humiliation, though not of our nature, being taken away. It is further to
be considered, that however this eternal glory be proper to him as God, yet he
prays to be glorified in his whole person, Glorify me; because, not only his
humane nature was to be exalted to what glory finite nature was capable of, but
the glory of his Godhead was to shine in the person of Christ, God-man, and in
the man Christ, though without confusion of his natures and properties. Christ
did so faithfully discharge his trust, and perfect the work of Redemption, as
that the father was engaged by paction to glorify him; and accordingly Christ,
God incarnate, is exalted* with the father in glory and majesty; so that
believers may be as sure that all things necessary for their Redemption are
done* as it is sure that Christ is glorified. But,

In the fourth place let us seriously consider of the Articles, agreed on
between the father and the son; let us weigh well the promises that God the
father makes to Jesus Christ, and the promises that Jesus Christ makes to the
father, for the bringing about our reconciliation and Redemption, that so we
may the more clearly see, how greatly both the heart of the father, and the
heart of the son is engaged in the salvation of poor sinners souls. Now there
are Seven things, which God the father promises to do for Jesus Christ, upon
his undertaking the work of our Redemption.

First, That he will give him the spirit in an abundant The spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him, the spirit sa. 11. 12.
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of the Lord: God the father fits Jesus Christ for the
work of Redemption, by a large effusion of the Graces and gifts of the spirit
upon him: The spirit of the Lord shall not only come upon Christ, but rest and
abide with him; the holy spirit shall take up in a more special, yea, singular
manner, its perpetual, and never interrupted or eclipsed residence with him,
and in him. God the father promises, that Christ shall, in his humane nature,
be filled with all the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost, that he may be as an
everlasting treasure, and as an overflowing fountain to all his people. So,
Isa. 42. 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, m^^^^ elect in whom my soul
delights: I have put my spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the
Gentiles: So Isa. 61. 1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me: So Joh. 3. 34. God
gives not the spirit by measure unto him. Christ, as Mediator, is endued with
the spirit, for the discharge of that office; and though Christ as man, has
not an infinite measure of the spirit (though indeed in that person, the
fullness of the Godhead dwells, as being God also) for that were to be no more
man, but God: Yet the gifts and graces of the spirit, are poured out upon the
man Christ, in a measure far above all creatures; for though Celos. 2. 10.
every believer be complete in him, yet, for what is inherent ^ Cer. 12. 4.
Ephesians. 4. 7.
in him, they have but some gifts of the spirit; but Jesus Christ had all sorts
of gifts: They had gifts for some particular uses, but he had gifts for all
uses; they have a measure of gifts which are capable of increase, he above
measure, so much as the humane nature is capable of; which, though it be finite
in it self, yet it cannot be measured nor comprehended by us: So much is
imported in that, God gives not the spirit by measure to him, being understood
of his manhood. Though (as we said) if we Celes. 1. 19. cap. 2. 3, 9.
speak of his person, he has the spirit infinitely, and without measure. This
fullness became Christ as man, that he might be a fit temple for the Godhead;
and as a Mediator, that he might be the universal head of his Church, and
storehouse of his people; that from him, as from a common person, spiritual
root or principle, the Holy Ghost, with his gifts and graces, might be
communicated Psalm. 68. 18.
to us: He received gifts for men, yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord
God might dwell among them; of his fullness Joh. 1. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 45.
we receive grace for grace. The first Adam was a living soul, but the second
Adam is a quickening spirit. In the man Christ Jesus there is a Treasury, and
fullness of grace and glory for us; he is the Lord Keeper of all our lives, of
all our souls, of all our comforts, and of all 2 Timothy 1. 12.
our graces; and he is the Lord-Treasurer of all our spiritual, durable and
eternal riches; we lost our first stock Prove. 8. 18.
by the fall of Adam; God put a stock into our own hands, and we soon proved
Bankrupts, and run out of stock and block: Now, since that fatal fall, God will
trust us no more; but he has, out of his great love, and noble bounty, put a
new stock of grace and glory for us, into the Isa. 9. 6. Heb. 7. 25. Colos. 2.
3.
hands of Jesus Christ, who is mighty, who is able to save to the uttermost,
and in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Christ was more
capable by infinite degrees, of the fullness of the holy Ghost, than mere men
were or could be; and his employment being, also, infinitely beyond the
employment of men; the measure of the Holy Ghost's fullness in him must needs
be, accordingly, beyond all measure. Hence, by way of Emphasis, Joh. 1^. 15.
Luke 32, 33. Act. 3. 22, 23.
Christ is called the anointed one of God: The Kings, Priests and Prophets
among the Jews (who were anointed) were in their unction, but types of Christ,
who is the great King, Priest and Prophet of his Church; and anointed above
them all; yea, and above all the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
Teachers and Believers, under the New Testament ministration. In Christ there
is all kind of grace, and it is in him in the highest and utmost degree, that
he might be able to manage all his offices, and finish that work which God gave
him to do; and Joh. 17. 4.
God has filled him with his spirit, that he might succesfully bring about the
Redemption and salvation of sinners. But,

Secondly, God the father promises to invest Jesus Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. cap. 33.
22.
furnish him with what ever was requisite for the discharge of those three
offices, viz. his prophetical, priestly and kingly offices; Christ never forced
himself into any of these offices, he never intruded himself into any one
office, he never run before he was sent, he never assumed any office, till his
father had signed and sealed his Commission: J^h. 6. 27.
Whatever Jesus Christ had acted, without a Commission under his father's hand,
had been invalid and lost, and God would, one day, have said to him, who has
required this at thy hand. In order to our spiritual sa. 1. 12. A (...) was a
King (...) a ^ (...) a Prie^t a ^ was 2 King (...) but never ^et all ti^^ in
any but in Christ alone.
and eternal recovery out of sin and misery, it was absolutely necessary, that
whatever Christ did act as a Priest, Prophet or King, he should act by the
authority of his father, by a Commission under the Broad Seal of heaven; Heb.
5. 5. so also, Christ glorified not himself, to be made an high priest, but he
that said unto him, thou art my son. These two conjunctions ((...)) so also,
being joined together, are notes of a reddition, or later part of a comparison,
which is the application thereof; this application may have reference, either
to the general proposition, thus, As no man takes this honor unto himself; so
also, nor Christ: Or to the particular instance of Aaron, thus, As Aaron took
not to himself that honor; so, nor Christ; both tend to the same end: The High
Priesthood was an honor; for Christ to have taken that to himself, without a
Commission from his father, had been to glorify himself, by conferring glory
and honor upon himself. This negative, that Christ glorified not himself, is a
clear evidence, that Christ arrogated no honor to himself; Christ would not
arrogate honor to himself, but rather wait upon his father, that he might
confer upon him what honor he saw meet: Christ glorified not himself to be
made an High Priest; but his father glorified him, in ordaining or
commissionating him to be the High Priest: In short, to be made an High Priest,
is to be deputed or appointed, and set a part to that function: And thus was
our Lord Jesus Christ made an High Priest; he had never undertaken that office,
had he not been ordained to it by his father. But that you may see Christ's
threefold commission, to his threefold office; Consider,

First, That God the father promises to Jesus Christ, 1. Heb. 2. 17, 18. Psalm.
110. 4.
an excellent, royal and eternal Priesthood; Heb. 7. 21. For those priests were
made without an oath, but this with an oath, by him that said unto him, the
Lord swear and will not repent, thou art a priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedek. Among the Jews, in the times of the Old Testament, they had an
High Priest, that was in all things, to stand between God and them; and in case
any sinned, to make an atonement for them: Now, look as the Jews had their High
Priest, so the Lord Jesus Christ, he was to be, and he is, the Apostle, and the
High Priest of our Christian profession, as Aaron was of the Jews profession.
The Priestly office of Jesus Christ is erected and set up, on Heb. 3. 1. By
the^ way you may take notice that the whole body of Anti-christianism, is but
an invasion upon the Priestly office of Christ: What is the Popish Mass, (that
unbloody sacrifice) but a derogation from the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, once
upon the Cross; and so a derogation from his Priestly Office? What are all
those Popish Penances and satisfactions enjoined, but a derogation unto the
satisfaction of Christ; and so unto the Priestly office of Christ? What is all
their praying to Saints and Angels, but a derogation unto the intercession of
Christ; and so unto the Priestly office. God deputes Christ to his Priestly
office, as God and man; yet Papists say, that Christ is a Priest only in his
humane nature. God says to his son, Thou art a priest; yet they make many
Priests: God makes his Son a Priest for ever, yet they substitute others in his
room: God gave Christ to offer up but one sacrifice, and that but once; but
they, every day, offer up many sacrifices in the Mass: God gave Christ to offer
up himself; but they offer up bread and wine, upon pretense that its the body
and blood of Christ: Christ's sacrifico was a bloody sacrifice; but they style
theirs an unbloody sacrifice.
purpose for the relief of poor distressed sinners. The work of the High
Priest, is to make reconciliation for the sins of the people: In the times of
the Old Testament, the High Priest made an atonement for the people; in case
any man had sinned, he brought a sacrifice, and his sins were laid upon the
head of the sacrifice: Once every year, the High Priest did enter into the holy
of holies; and with the blood of the sacrifice, did sprinkle the Mercy-Seat,
and laid the sins of the people upon the head of the Scapegoat, and so made an
Atonement for the people; as is clear in that, Levit. 16. 14. He shall take of
the blood of the Bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger, upon the Mercy-seat
eastward, and before the Mercy-seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with his
finger, seven times: And at verse. 21. Aaron shall lie both his hands upon the
head of the live Goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children
of Israel, and all their transgressions, and all their sins, putting them upon
the head of the Goat; and shall send him away, by the hand of a fit man, into
the wilderness; and so he shall make an Atonement. This was the work of the
High Priest, in case any had sinned, to make an Atonement and satisfaction (by
the way of Type) for the sins of the people. The main scope of the Apostle in
that, Heb. 7. is to advance Christ his Priesthood above the Levitical
Priesthood; in order to which, he premiseth this, That those priests were made
without an oath; verse. 20: The Apostle's third Argument to prove the excellency
of Christ's Priestood above the Levitical, is taken from the different manner
of instituting the one and the other: Christ's institution was more solemn than
the Levites; their institution was without an oath, Christ's institution was
with an oath: The Argument may be thus framed, That Priesthood which is
established by an oath, is more excellent than that which is without an oath;
but Christ's Priesthood is with an oath, and theirs without; Ergo, It is here
taken for granted, that Christ was most solemnly instituted a Priest, even by
an oath; yea, by the oath of God himself; which is the greatest, and most
solemn manner of institution that can be. God's oath imports two things; 1. An
infallible certainty of that which he swears: 2. A solemn authority and
dignity conferred upon that which he instituted by oath. Great and weighty
matters of much concernment, use to be established by oath; hereby it
appears, that Christ's Priesthood is a matter of great moment, and of much
concernment: This will appear the more evident, if we consider the person who
was made Priest, viz. our Lord Jesus Christ, who was the greatest person that
could be; Heb. 7. 28. therefore he is fitly called a great high priest, Heb. 4.
14. Or if we consider the ends of Christ's Priesthood, which were very weighty,
and that in reference both to God and man: To God, for the manifestation of his
perfect justice, infinite mercy, almighty power, unsearchable wisdom, and other
divine attributes, which never were, nor ever can be so manifested, as in and
by Christ's Priesthood: To man, that God's wrath might be averted, his favor
procured, man's sin purged, and he freed from all evil, and brought to eternal
happiness. Or if we consider the benefits of Christ's Priesthood, which are
answerable to the foresaid ends. Jesus Christ was appointed and made by the
father, The Apostle and High Priest of the Churches profession: Heb. 3. 1, 2.
Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling; consider the
Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus; who was faithful to
him that appointed him. Christ had a divine call to the execution of all those
offices, which he sustained as our Mediator; he did not run before he was sent,
he did not act without a Commission and Warrant, he was lawfully constituted by
him who had power, to undertake that great charge he has over the Church; this
we shall find asserted of all his three offices. As for his Priestly office, he
was made a Priest by an immediate call and ordination from God: Heb. 5. 4, 5,
6. The scope of the Apostle, is to set out the excellency of Christ's
Priesthood, by comparing it with the Levitical; His Priesthood had a
concurrence of all things necessary to the Levitical; and it had many
excellencies above that. Now, among other things required in the Priesthood of
Aaron, this was one, there must be a divine regular call; this was in the
Priesthood of Christ; He was called of God, an high priest, after the order
Psalm. 110. 4. The Hebrew is, Thou a Priest, etc. i. e. Thou shall be a priest
for ever; it being the manner of the Hebrew Tongue, sometimes for brevity sake,
to leave out a word, which is to be understood and supplied.
of Melchisedek: that Psalm. 110. 4. is God's sure and irrevocable promise to
Christ, touching that excellent and eternal Priesthood, whereby the recovery of
his seed, was to be meritoriously obtained. This Priestly office of Christ is
sure, because it is confirmed by God's oath (of which before) as well as his
promise. The promise makes it sure, the oath doubly sure, irrevocable: And
certainly, the Lord neither can nor will ever repent himself of this promise
and oath. The Priesthood of Christ is the most noble part of all his mediation;
in the Priesthood of Christ, and in that especially, lies the latitude and
longitude, the profundity and sublimity of God's love toward us; and in
respect of this especially, is the whole mystery of our Redemption by Christ
called, (...), the magnificent works of God. Christ as man, and as Mediator
between God and man, was, by his father, deputed unto his Priestly office:
Concerning the dignity and excellency of Christ's Priestly office, above the
Levitical Priesthood, I have spoke elsewhere. But,

Secondly, God the father promises to Jesus Christ, to Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Vide Act.
3. 22. and ^^p. 7. 37. Deuteronomy. 18. 15. Isa. 61. 1.
I will raise them a prophet, from among their brethren, like unto thee; and
will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall
command them. Christ does not raise himself up to the Prophetical office, but
God the father raises him up to this great office: He was anointed of God to
preach glad tidings; weigh that, Isa. 42. 6, I will give thee for a light to
the gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from their
prison, and them that sit in darkness, out of the prisonhouse. The spirit of
the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed Luke 4. 21.
me, to preach good tidings unto the meek; he has sent me to bind up the
broken hearted, etc. Thus you see, that this Prophetical dignity of Christ,
that he is the grand Doctor of the Church, is built upon the Authority of his
^ather, who has authorized and commissionated him to Christ displaces all
Rabbis, by assuming this title to himself, one is your Doctor and Master, even
Christ, Mat. 23.
that great office, Isa. 50. 4. The Lord has given me the tong^e of the
learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary:
He wakeneth morning by morning, ^^ wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned.
Thus you see th^^ God the father promises to invest Christ with a
Prop(...)tick office; for the opening the eyes of the blind, etc. This great
Prophet is richly furnished with all kind of knowledge; In him are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge; they are hid in him as gold and silver are in
suo loco, as the Philosopher speaks, hid in the veins of the earth: Treasures
of knowledge, that is, precious knowledge, saving knowledge; Treasures of
knowledge, that is, plentiful knowledge, abundance of knowledge; Treasures, that
is, hidden and stored knowledge, was laid up in him. All the Angels in heaven,
and all the men on earth, do not know all that is in the heart of God; but now
Jesus Christ, who lies in the bosom of the father; he knows Joh. 1. 1^.
all that is in his father's heart; all those secret mysteries, that were laid
up in the bosom of eternity, are fully known to this great Prophet of the
Church; Joh. 5. 20. The father loves the son, and shows him all things that
himself does, by a divine and unspeakable communication. God the father shows
to Jesus Christ all things that he does; God's love is communicative, and will
manifest it self in effects, according to the capacity of the party beloved; so
much appears in that unspeakable love of the father to the son; The father
loves the son, and shows him all things, etc. Or communicates his nature,
wisdom and power, for operation with him; which is expressed in terms taken
from among men, because of our weakness; and ought to be spiritually, and not
carnally conceived of. And therefore these terms of the father's showing, and
the son's seeing, are made use of to prevent all carnal and gross conceptions
of this inexpressible communication from the Father, and participation by the
Son. In the blessed Scripture, Jesus Christ is sometimes called (the) Prophet,
and (that) Prophet; because he is one that came from the bosom of the father,
and lives and lies i^ the bosom of the father, and understands the whole mi^d,
will, heart, counsels, designs, ways and workings of the father. Jesus Christ
is anointed by God the father, ^o be the great Prophet and teacher of his
Elect; and ac^^rdingly Jesus Christ has taken that office upon himself (...)
the father has laid a charge upon Jesus Christ, to tea^h and instruct all those
that he has given him, in his whole mind and will, so far as is necessary to
their salvation, edification, consolation, etc. Moses was faithful as a
servant, but Heb. 3. 2, 5, 6.
Christ as a son. Christ cannot be unfaithful in his Prophetical office; those
that God the father has charged him to teach and instruct, he will teach and
instruct, in the great things of their peace; and no wonder, for the knowledge
that is communicated to Jesus Christ, the great Prophet of his Church, is not
by Dreams, or Visions, or Revelations of Angels (as to the Prophets of old) but
by a clear, full, intimate view, and beholding of the Godhead, the fountain of
all sacred knowledge; Rev. 5. 6. And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the
throne, and of the The Lamb stands because, 1. Prepared to perfect the work of
Redemption: 2. To help: 3. To judge: 4. To intercede.
four beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stood a lamb as it had been
slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God,
sent forth into all the earth: The Lamb slain opens the Prophecies, and
foretells what shall befall the Church, to the end of the world, The discovery
of the secrets of God in his word, are the fruit of Christ slain, ascended and
anointed, as the great Prophet of the Church. The Lamb wanted neither power nor
wisdom to open the seven seals, and therefore he is said to have seven horns
and seven eyes: Seven is a number Dan. 7. 24. Isa. 35. 5. Mat. 28. 18. Colos.
2. 3, 9.
of perfection. Horns signify power, eyes signify knowledge or wisdom; both
joined together, argue a fullness and perfection of power and wisdom in Christ;
so that we have here a lively representation of the three fold office of
Christ: His Sacerdotal or Priestly office in the Lamb as slain, his Royal or
Princely office in the horns, and his Prophetical office in the eyes. But,

Thirdly, God the father promises to make him a King, higher than the Kings of
the earth; he is the Psalm. 89. 27. Rev. 1. 5. Rev. 17. 14.
prince of the kings of the earth; he is Lord of Lords, and ki^^ of kings. I
remember Theodotius the Emperor, and an^^^er Emperor did use to call
themselves the vassals of of Christ; and it is most certain that all the
Emperors, Kings and Princes of the world, are but the vassals of ^is great
King. Christ is not only King of Saints, but Rev. 15. 3, 4. Rev. 12. 5. Dan. 7.
17.
he is also King of Nations: There was given him dominion, and glory, and a
kingdom; that all people, nations and languages should serve him: God, by
promise, has given Psalm. 2. 8.
him the heathen for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for his
possession. The Monarchs of the world have stretched their Empires far;
Nebuchadnezzar's kingdom in Strabo, reached as far as Spain; The Persians
reached farther, Alexander farther than they, and the Romans farther than them
all; but none of all these has subdued Romans 10. 18. Rev. 11. 15. Mat. 28. 18.
Joh. 3. 35. 1 Cor. 15. 27.
the whole habitable world, as Christ has and will: All power is given unto
him, both in heaven and in earth: The father loves the son, and has given all
things into his hand; and the father, also, has put all things under his feet.
The Government of all the world is given to Jesus Christ as God-man. All the
Nations of the earth are under the Government of Christ; he is to govern them,
and rule them, and judge them, and make what use he pleases of them, as may make
most for his own glory, and the good of his chosen. Now God the father
promises to invest My King, in a peculiar way, Decre^um, Scri^^um, Promulgatum.
Jesus Christ with this Kingly office; Psalm. 2. 6. Yet have I set my king upon
my holy hill of Zion. These words are spoken by God the father, of his son
Jesus Christ: In a promissory way, God the father anoints Jesus Christ, as
Zion's King; and therefore it cannot but be the highest madness, folly and
vanity, for any sort or number of men under heaven, to seek or attempt to pull
that King of Saints down, whom God the father has set up: Christ rules for his
father, and from his father, and will so rule in despite of all the rage and
wrath malice and madness of men and devils; yet have I set my king, Heb. I have
anointed. Where the sign of Christ's inauguration, or entrance into his
Kingdom, is put for the possession and enjoying thereof: Christ was anointed
and appointed by his father, to the office and work of a Mediator, and is
therefore here called his King. There is an Emphasis in the word ( I) Yet have
I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion: Isa. 40. 15, 17.
I, before whom all the nations of the earth are b^^ as ^ drop of a bucket, and
as the small d^st of the (...) I, before whom all nations are as nothing. yea,
less than nothing; I, by whom Princes rule, and Nobles, even Pr^v. 8. 16.
all the Judges of the earth; I that rule the Kingdoms of men, and give them to
whomsoever I will, and Dan. 4. 17.
who set over them the basest of men; I that change times and seasons, and that
remove Kings, and set Dan. 2. 21.
up Kings; I, that can kill and make alive, save and dan^^, D^ut. 32. 39.
bring to heaven and throw down to hell; I am he that has set up Christ as
King, and therefore let me see the Nation, the Council, the Princes, the
Nobles, the Judges, the Family, the person, that dare oppose or run
countercross to what I have done. Again, the Lord, in a promissory way,
approves and establishes this King by a firm decree; Psalm. 2. 7. I will
declare the decree; not the secret decree, but the decree manifested in the
word. I, the son of God, will, by my everlasting Gospel, proclaim my father's
counsel, concerning the establishment of my Kingdom; I will declare that
irrevocable decree of the father, for the setting up of his son's Scepter,
contra gentes, point blank, opposite to that decree of theirs, verse. 3. The
Decree of God, concerning the Kingly office and authority of Christ, is
immutable, and in effect, as irrevocable (so much may be collected out of the
propriety of the word (...)) as those things are, that are most irrevocable in
the course of nature. Again, the Lord, in a promissory way, extends the
dominion of Christ to the Gentiles, and to the uttermost parts of the earth;
verse. 8. So far should the enemies of Christ be from ruining his Kingdom, that
God the father promises that all the inhabitants of the earth should be his,
and brought into subjection to him: not only the Jews, but all the inhabitants
of the earth shall be subjected to Christ's Kingdom (the elect he shall save,
and the refractory he shall destroy.) He shall have dominion from sea to sea,
and from the river, even to ^he ends of the earth. Again, the Lord, in a
promissory way, declares the power, prevalency and victory of Christ over all
his enemies: verse. 9. Thou shall break them with ar^d of iron, thou shall dash
them in pieces like a potters vessel: This signifies their ^tter de^^ruction,
so that there is no hope of recovery; a Potter^s vessel, when it is once
broken, cannot be made up again. This Proverb* also, signifies facility in
destroying them. As for such that plot, bandy and combine together against the
Lord Jesus Christ; he shall as easily, and as irrecoverably, by his almighty,
(...) and unresistible power, dash them in pieces, as a Potter br^^ks his
vessels in pieces: Jer. 19. 11. I will break this people and this city, as one
breaks a potter's vessel, that cannot be made whole again: So Isa. 30. 14.
And be shall break it as the breaking ^f the p^tter's vessel* that is broken in
pieces, he shall not ^^are* so that there shall not be found in the ^^^tings ^f
it* ^ ^herd to take ^re from the hearth, or to ^ake water withal out of the
^it. The Jews, you know, were Christ's obstinate (...) and he has so da^^^d
them in pieces that they (...) scattered abroad all the world over. The (...)
has ^^de another promise, that Christ (...) King it; Psalm. ^10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6. And no wonder, when we (...) that God the father has called Christ to the
Kingly (...) the Scepter is given into his (...) Cr^wn is put upon his head,
and the Key of Gove(...) ^^ laid upon his shoulder by God himself; Isa. 22. 22.
it is written thus of Eliakim, The key of the house of David, will I lay upon
his shoulder; So he shall open and none shall shut^ and he shall shut and none
shall open. Now, herein was this Rev. 3 7.
precious soul a lively figure and type of Christ: The words of the Prophecy
are applied to Christ, in his advertisement to Philadelphia; and the sense is
this, that look as Eliakim was made Steward or Treasurer under Hezekiah, that
is, the next under the King in Government all over the Land, to command, to
forbid, to permit, to reward, to punish, to do justice, and to repress all
disorder; of which Authority, the bearing of a key on the shoulder, was a
badge: So Christ, as Mediator, under his father, has Regal power and authority
over his Church, where he commands in chief, as I may say, and no man may lift
up his hand or foot without him; he has the key of the house of David upon his
shoulder, to prescribe, to inhibit, to call, to harden, to save, and to destroy
at his pleasure; such a Monarch and King is Christ, neither has any such Rule
and Sovereignty beside him. And if you look into Dan. 7. 13, 14. you may
observe, that after the abolishing of the four Monarchies, Christ's Monarchy is
established by the Ancient of days, giving to Jesus Christ dominion, and glory,
and a kingdom, that all people, nations and languages should serve him; and his
dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom
that which shall not be destroyed: Christ did not thrust himself into the
Throne, as some have done; neither did he swim to his Crown through a Sea of
blood, as others have done; nor yet swam he through a Sea of sorrow to this
Crown, as Queen Elizabeth is said to do; no, he stayed till authority was given
him by his father. But,

Thirdly, God the father has promised, that he will etc. that he should meet
with in the accomplishing our Redemption; upon which accounts, Jesus Christ
undertakes to go through a Sea of trouble, a sea of sorrow, a sea of blood, and
a sea of wrath; Isa. 42. 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine Christ is
(...) Lord, but in the work of Redemption, ^e was the father's ser^ant.
elect in whom my soul delights: Verse. 4. He shall not fail nor be
discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth; and the Isles shall wait
for his law. Verse. 6. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will
hold thine hand, and will keep thee: What Is that? why, I will support,
strengthen and preserve thee with my glorious power; I will so hold thy hand,
that thou shall not be discouraged, but finish that great work of Redemption,
which, by agreement with m^, thou have undertaken. God the father agreed with
Jesus Christ, about the power, strength, success and assistance that he should
have, to carry on the work of Redemption; all which God the father made good to
him, till he had sent forth judgment unto victory: As Christ himself
acknowledges, Isa. 49. 1, 2, 3.
saying, Listen, O Isles, unto me, and hearken ye people from far; the Lord
has called me from the w^mb, from the bowels of my mother has he made mention
of my name: And he has made my mouth like a sharp sword, in the shadow of his
hand has he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver has he hid
me: And said unto me, thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be
glorified. The work of Redemption was so high, so hard, so great, so difficult
a work, that it would have broken the hearts, backs and necks of all the
glorious Angels in heaven, and mighty men on earth, had they engaged in it; and
therefore J^^. 17. 2.
God the father engages himself to stand close to Jesus Christ, and mightily to
assist him, and to be singularly present with him, and wonderfully to
strengthen him in all his Mediatory Administrations; upon which accounts M^. ^.
11. Luke 22. 43. Celes. 2. 15.
Jesus Christ despises his enemies, bears up bravely under all his sore
temptations and trials, and triumphs over principalities and powers. And
certainly, if Christ had not had singular support, and an Almighty strength
from the Godhead, he could never have been able to have bore up under that
mighty wrath, and to have drunk of that bloody cup that he did drink off. Now,
upon the account of God the father's engaging himself, to own Christ, and stand
by him in the great work of our Redemption: Jesus Christ acts faith against all
his deepest discouragements, w(...) he should meet with in the discharge of his
Mediatory office, as the Prophet tells us; The Lord God will help me, therefore
shall I not be confounded; therefore Is^. 50. 7, 8, 9.
have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. He is
near that justifies me, who will contend with me: From the consideration of
God's help, Jesus Christ strengthens and encourages himself in the execution of
his office, against all oppositions: God's presence and assistance, made Jesus
Christ victorious over all wrongs and injuries: Jesus Christ knew that God the
father would clear up his innocence and integrity, and this made him patient
and constant to the last, But,

Fourthly, God the father promises to Jesus Christ, (...), ^^ 1. 53. 10.
(...). 49. 6, 7, ^, 9, 10, 11, 12. (...). 4. 3.
to the son, you have in that, Isa. 55. 5. Nations that know thee not, shall
run unto thee: The Gentiles that never heard of Christ, nor ever were
acquainted with Christ, nor ever had any notice of Christ; when Christ calls,
they shall readily and speedily repair unto him, and submit unto him: Christ
shall one day see and reap the sweet and happy fruit of his blood, sufferings
and undertakings; the pleasure of the Lord shall, certainly, prosper in his
hand. Christ's sufferings were as a woman's travail, sharp though short: Now,
though a woman suffers many grievous pains and pangs; yet, when she sees a man
child brought into the world, she joys and is satisfied: So when nations shall
run to Christ, he shall see his seed, and be satisfied. God the father
promises that Jesus Christ shall have a numerous spiritual post^rity,
begetting and bringing many thousands to the obedience of his father; Nations
shall run unto thee: And this shall fill the heart of Jesus Christ with
abundance of joy and comfort, contentment and satisfaction; when he shall see
the fruit of his bitter sufferings, when he shall see abundance of poor filthy,
guilty, condemned sinners pardoned, justified and accepted with his Psalm. 63. 5.
father; His soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness. The numerous
body of believers past, present and to come, that God the father had promised
to Jesus Christ was the life of his life. That Is a sweet promise, Psalm. 110. 2.
Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies; they that will not bend, must break;
those that will not stoop to his government, shall feel his power: Thy people
(the people Joh. 17. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Luke 1. 57. 1 Cor. 3. ult.
of God are Christ's five ways; 1. By donation: 2. By purchase: 3. By conquest:
4. By covenant: 5. By communication) shall be willing in the day of thy power,
(Heb. willingnesses in the abstract and in the plural number, as if the Holy
Ghost could not sufficiently set forth their exceeding great willingness to
submit to all the Royal commands of the Lord.) All Christ's Subjects are
Volunteers, free hearted, like those Isles that wait for God's Law; Isa. 42. 4.
cap. 56. 6.
Zach. 8. 21. And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, let
us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts: I will
go also. From the womb of the morning, thou have the dew of thy youth. Here Is
the success of Christ's office promised, both in the victorious subduing of his
enemies, and in the cheerful willingness of his subjects, and in the wonderful
numerousness of his people brought over to him, even like the innumerable drops
of the morning dew. Another promise of that great and complete success, that
God the father has made for Jesus Christ, in his Mediatory office, you have in
that, Isa. 49. from the 6. verse to the 14. verse: Christ shall have a people
gathered to him, and a seed to serve him, Because he has made his soul an
offering for their sins: The multitude of sinners brought over to Jesus Christ,
is the product of the satisfaction which he has made for them, and the
trophies of the victory that he has got, by dying the death of the Cross. Thus
you see that God the father has not only engaged himself by compact, to
preserve Jesus Christ in his work, but he has also made to him several
precious promises of preservation, protection and success, so that the work of
Redemption shall be sure to prosper in his hand: And to make these glorious
promises the more valid and binding, God confirms them solemnly by an oath;
Heb. 7. 21. This Priest (Christ) was made with an oath by him that said unto
him, The Lord swear and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever. God the
father foresaw from everlasting, that Jesus Christ would so infinitely satisfy
him, and please him, by his incarnation, obedience and death, that thereupon he
swears. But,

Fifthly, God the father promises to Jesus Christ, Rule Psalm. 2. 8, 9.
is promised to Jesus Christ, in Isa. 40. 10. His arm shall rule for him, He
shall sit in judgment in the earth, and the Isles shall wait for his law: Isa.
42. 4. not the Jews only, but the Gentiles also, the people of diverse countries
and nations shall willingly and readily receive and embrace his doctrine, and
submit to his Laws, and give up themselves to his rule; Mic. 4. 3. He shall
judge among many nations, that is, rule, order, command and direct, as a Judge
and and Ruler among many nations. The Conquests that Christ shall gain over the
Nations, shall not be by swords and arms; but he shall bring them to a
voluntary obedience, and spiritual subjection, by his Spirit and Gospel; Joh.
3. 35. The father loves the son, and has given all things into his hand; that
is, God the father has given the rule and power over all things in heaven and
earth, to Jesus Christ. In carrying on the Redemption of sinners, as the matter
is accorded betwixt the father and the son, so the redeemed are not left to
themselves, but are put under Christ's charge and custody; who has purchased
them with his blood; God the father having given him dominion over all that may
contribute to help, or hinder his peoples happiness, that he may order them so
as may be for their good. And this power he has, as God, with the father; and
as man and Mediator, by donation Mat. ^8. 18. c^p. 2. 3.
and gift from the father; and thus every believer's happiness is most firm and
sure, all things being wisely and faithfully transacted between the father and
the son, Col^s. 1. 19. cap. 2. 1.
As long as Jesus Christ has all power to defend his people, and all wisdom and
knowledge to guide and govern his people, and all dominion to curb the enemies
of his people, and a commission and charge to be answerable for them; we may
roundly conclude of their eternal safety, security and felicity. But,

Sixthly, God the father promises to accept of Jesus Isa. 49. 5.
Christ, in his Mediatory office, according to that of Isaiah, Though Israel be
not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord; that is as if he
had said, notwithstanding the infidelity, obstinacy and impenitency of the
greatest part of the Jews; yet my faithful labor and diligence in the
execution of my Mediatory office, is, and shall be, greatly accepted, and
highly esteemed of by my heavenly father. Artaxerxes the King of Persia
lovingly accepted of the poor man's Present of water, because his good will was
in it; and put it into a golden vessel, and gave him the vessel of Gold;
accounting it the part of a truly noble and generous spirit, to take in good
part small presents offered with an hearty affection: Oh, how much more will
God the father kindly accept of Jesus Christ, in Jer^m says, that the Jews
cursed Christ in their Synagogues three times a d^y; they so greatly abhorred
the name Jesus, that they would not pronounce it; but if they did unawars
happen* to pronounce it, then they would punish themselve with a blow on their
faces, etc.
his Mediatory office; verse. 7. Thus says the Lord the Redeemer of Israel, and
his holy One, to him whom man despises, to him whom the nation abhors, to a
servant of rulers; Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship,
because of the Lord that is faithful, and the holy one of Israel, and he shall
choose thee. God the father comforting of Christ, tells him, that though he were
contemptible to to many, yea, to the Nation of the Jews, and used basely like a
servant by their Princes, Herod, Annas, Caiphas, and Pontius Pilat; yet other
Kings and Princes should see his dignity and glory, and submit to him, and
honor him, as the Savior and Redeemer of the world. God the father chose
Jesus Christ to his servant, and to be a Mediator for his Elect; he designed
him to that office of being a Savior, both to the Jew and Gentile, and
accordingly he accepted of him; Thus says the Lord, In an acceptable time have
I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve
thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to
cause to inherit the desolate heritage: Here you see that God the father still
goes on to speak more and more comfortably and encouragingly to Jesus Christ;
for he tells him, that he will be at hand to hear, and help, and assist him;
and he tells him, that he will preserve him both in his This Jerome applies to
the time of Christ's hanging on the Cross, he cried out, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me; for God made it appear that he heard him, and forsook
him not, in that he raised him from the dead, etc. See Heb. 5. 7.
person, and in the execution of his office; and he tells him, that he will
accept of his person, and of his services, and of his suits, and intercession,
for himself and his people. So Mat. 3. 17. And lo, a voice from heaven, saying,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: The voice from heaven was
doubtless the voice of his father, in that he says, This is my beloved Son, my
natural son, by eternal and incomprehensible generation; and therefore dearest
to me and most acceptable with me; my judgment is satisfied in him, my love is
settled upon him, and I have an inestimable value for him; and therefore I
cannot but declare my approbation and acceptance, both of him and his work; I
am well pleased in him, I am infinitely pleased in him, I am only pleased in
him, I am at all times pleased in him, I am for ever pleased in him; I am so
well pleased in him, that, for his sake, I am fully appeased with all them whom
I have given him, and who come unto him: Joh. 6. 37, 38, 39, 40. But,

Seventhly, God the father promises, highly to exalt And nations that knew not
thee, shall run Isa. 49. 4, 5, 6. Isa. 40. 10.
unto thee, because of the Lord thy God, and for the holy One of Israel; for he
has glorified thee: These are the words of God the father to his son,
promising of him to set such a Crown of glory upon his head, as should make the
nations of the world run unto him. God the father made Christ glorious in his
birth, by the Angel's Doxology, Glory be to God on high; in his baptism by his
speaking Luke 2. 1^, 14. Mat. 3. ult. cap. 17. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. R^m. 1. 4. Act. 1
9, 10, 11.
of him from heaven, as his beloved son; in his transfiguration on the mount,
in his resurrection, and in his ascension into heaven: So Isa 53. 12. Therefore
will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with
the strong, because he has poured out his soul unto death; and he was numbered
with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for
the transgressors. The meaning is this, I will impart, says God the father,
to my son, such honor, glory, renown and riches after his sufferings, as
Conquerours use to have; and he shall have them as a glorious reward of all his
conflicts with my wrath, with temptations, with persecutions, with reproach,
with contempt, with death, yea, and with hell it self. The words are a plain
allusion to Conquerours in War, who are commonly exalted and greatly rewarded
by their Princes, for venturing of their lives, and obtaining of Conquests, as
all Histories will tell you: And indeed, should not God the father reward Jesus
Christ for all his hard services, and his matchless sufferings, he would
express less kindness to him, than he has done to heathen Princes; for he gave
Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar as his hire, for his service at Tire; and to Cyrus,
Ezekiel. 29. 18, 19. Isa. 45. 1, 2, 3.
he gave hidden Treasure: But alas, what were their services to Christ's
services, or their sufferings to Christ's sufferings? I have read of Cyrus, how
that in a great expedition against his enemies, the better to encourage his
soldiers to fight; in an Oration that he made at the head of his Army, he
promised upon the victory, to make every foot-souldier an horseman, and every
horseman a Commander; and that no officer that did valiantly, Col^s. 2. 14, 15.
should be unrewarded: And will God the father let the son of his dearest love,
who has fought against all infernal powers, and conquered them, go without his
reward? surely no. So in Psalm. 2. 7. I will declare the decree, the Lord has
said unto me, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee: David was God's
son by Adoption and acceptance, Psalm. ^9. 26* 27. Prove. 8. Heb. 1. 5.
but Christ was his son; 1. By eternal Generation* 2. By hypostatical union;
and so God had one only son, as Abraham had one only Isaac, though otherwise he
was the father of many nations; some by this day do understand the day of
Eternity, where there is no time past nor to come, no beginning nor ending, but
always one present day: Others by this day, do understand it of the day of
Christ's incarnation, and coming into the world; some again, do understand it
of the whole time of his manifestation in the world, when he was sent forth as
a Prophet to teach them, and was declared evidently to be the son of God, both
by his miracles and ministry, Jo^. 1. 14.
and by that voice that was heard from heaven; This is my beloved son, in whom
I am well pleased: Others do understand it of the day of Christ's Resurrection
(and with them I close) for this seems to be chiefly intended; partly because
it seems to be spoken of some solemn time of Christ's manifestation to be the
son of God, and he was declared to be the son of God with power, according to
the Romans 1. 4.
spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead; that is, by the power
and force of the Deity, sanctifying and quickening the flesh, he was raised
from the dead, and so declared mightily to be the son of God; but mainly
because the Apostle does clearly affirm, that this was in Christ's
Resurrection: He has raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the
second Psalm; Thou art my son, this Act. 13. 32, 33.
day have I begotten thee. In the day of Christ's Resurrection, he seems to
tell all the world, that though, from the beginning, he had been hid in the
bosom of his father, J^h. 1. 18.
and that though in the Law he had been but darkly shadowed out; yet in the day
of his Resurrection, they might plainly see that he had fully satisfied Divine
Justice, finished his s^fferings, and completed the Redemption of his Elect;
and that accordingly, his father had arrayed him with that glory that was
suitable to him. Before the Resurrection, the Godhead was veiled under the
infirmity of the flesh; but in the Resurrection, and after the Resurrection,
the Godhead did sparkle and shine forth 2 Cor. 13. 4.
very gloriously and wonderfully; least the humane nature of Christ, upon its
assumption, should shrink at the approach of sufferings, God the father engages
himself to give Jesus Christ a full and ample reward, And to exalt him far
above all principality and power, and to put all things Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. ^ ^il.
2. 9. Name is put for person, and bowing of the knee, a bodily ceremony, to
express inward subjection. Estius, (...).
under his feet, and to make him head over all things to the Church: And to
give him a name above every name; that at the name of Jesus, every knee should
bow; and all because (to give satisfaction to his father) he made himself of no
reputation, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross; that
is, to his dying day: He went thorough many a little death, all his life long,
and at length underwent that cursed and painful death of the Cross; upon which
account, the father rewards him highly, by exalting him to singular glory, and
transcendent honor. Look that as the assumption of the humane nature is the
highest instance of free mercy, so is the rewarding thereof in its state of
exaltation, the highest instance of remunerative justice. Oh, how highly is the
humane nature of Christ honored, by being exalted to a personal union with the
Godhead; though vain men may dishonor Christ, yet the father has conferred
honor upon him as Mediator, that it may be a Testimony to us, that he is
infinitely pleased with the Redemption of lost man. Although Christ be in
himself, God all-sufficient, God blessed for ever, and so is not capable of any
access of glory; yet it pleased him to condescend so far, as to obscure his own
glory under the veil of his flesh, and state of humiliation, till he had
perfected the work of Redemption; and to account of his office of Mediator, and
the dignity accompanying it, as great honor conferred upon him by the father:
J^l. 8. 54.
And it is observable that Christ, having finished our Redemption on earth, he
petitions his father to advance him to the possession of that glory that he
enjoyed from all eternity; And now, O father, glorify thou me, Joh. 17. ^.
with thine own self; with the glory which I had with thee, before the world
was. Now, for the clearing up of this Text, we are to consider, that as Christ
was from all Eternity, the glorious God, the God of glory; so we are not to
conceive of any real change, in this glory of his Jesus Christ is true God, and
was infinitely glorious from all eternity, for he had glory with his father,
before the world was; and therefore he was no upstart God, and of a later
standing* as the Arians and Maho^etans make of him.
Godhead; as if, by his estate of humiliation, he had suffered any diminution,
or by his state of exaltation any real accession were made to his glory as God.
But the meaning is this, That Christ having (according to the paction past
betwixt the father and him) obscured the glory of his Godhead for a time, under
the veil of the form of a servant, and our sinless infirmities, does now expect
(according to the tenor of the same paction) that after he has done his work
as Mediator, he be highly exalted and glorified in his whole person, that his
humane nature be exalted to what glory finite nature is capable of; and that
the glory of his Godhead might shine in the person of Christ, God-man, and in
the man Christ Jesus. Thus you see the promises, the encouragements and
rewards, that God the father sets before Jesus Christ. And let thus much
suffice, concerning the Articles of the Covenant on God's part.

In the last place, let us seriously consider of the Articles of the Covenant
on Christ's part; and let us weigh well the promises that Jesus Christ has made
to the father, for the bringing about the great work of our Redemption; that so
we may see what infinite cause we have to love the son as we love the father,
and to honor the son as we honor the father, and to trust in the son as we
trust in the father, and to glorify the son as we glorify the father, etc.
Now, there are six observable things on Christ's part, on Christ's side, that
we are to take special notice of, etc.

First, Christ having consented and agreed with the father Heb. 2. 14. For as
much then, as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part of the same: He who was equal with God, did so far abase
himself, as to take on him the nature of man, and subjected himself to all
manner* of humane frailties (so far as they are freed from sin) even such as
accompany flesh and blood; and this is one of the wonders of mercy and love,
that Christ our head should stoop so low (who was himself full of glory) as to
take part of flesh and blood, that he might suffer for flesh and blood; verse.
16. For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the
seed of Abraham: Christ assumed the common nature of man, and not of any
particular person. The Apostle does here purposely use this word seed, to show
that Christ came out of the Genesis 46. 26. Exodus 1. 5. Heb. 7. 5. 1 King. 8. 19.
loins of man, as Jacob's children and their children are said to come out of
his loins, and as all the Jews are said to come out of the loins of Abraham,
and as Solomon is said to come out of the loins of David; in a man's loins his
seed is, and it is a part of his substance: Thus it shows that Christ's
humane nature was of the very substance of man, and that Christ was the very
same that was promised to be the Redeemer of man; for of old he was foretold
under this word seed, as The seed of the woman, Genesis 3. 15. Genesis 12. 18. Romans
9. 7. Heb. 11. 18. 2 Ram. 7. 12. Joh. 8. 58.
the seed of Abraham, the seed of Isaac, the seed of David; This word, he took
on him, as it sets out the humane nature of Christ, so it gives us a hint of
his Divine Nature; for it presupposes that Christ was before he took on him
the seed of Abraham. He that takes any thing on him, must needs be before he
do so; is it possible for him that is not, to take any thing on him? Now
Christ, in regard of his humane nature, was not before he assumed that nature;
therefore that former being must needs be in regard of his divine nature, in
that respect he ever was, even the eternal God; being God, he took on him an
humane nature. Christ's Eternal Deity shines in this 16. verse, and so does his
true humanity; in that he took upon him the seed of man, it is most evident
that he was a true man; Seed is the matter of man's nature, and the very
substance thereof. The seed of man is the root, out Isa. 11. 1. Luke 1. 35.
of which Christ assumed his humane nature: The humane nature was not created
of nothing, nor was it brought from heaven, but assumed out of the seed of man.
The humane nature of Christ never had a subsistence in it self. At or in the
very first framing or making it, it was united to the Divine nature; and at or
in the first uniting it, it Crean^^^ fundi^ur, and in^und^ndo creatu^.
was framed or made. Philosophers say of the uniting of the soul to the body,
in creating it it is infused, and in infusing it it is created. Much more is
this true, concerning the Humane nature of Christ, united to his Divine. Fitly
therefore is it here said, that he took on him the seed of Abraham. So Joh. 1.
14. The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us: The Evangelist having proved
the Divinity of Jesus Christ, comes now to speak of his humanity, incarnation
and manifestation in the flesh, whereby he became God and Man in one person.
Flesh here signifies the whole man in Scripture; ye all know that man
consists of two parts, which are sometimes called flesh and spirit, and
sometimes called soul and body; Now by a Synecdoche, either of these p^rts may
b^ put for the whole: And so sometimes the soul is put for the whole man, and
sometimes the body is put for the whole man; as you may see, by comparing the
Scriptures in the Margin A^l. 27. 37. Genesis ^6. 27. R^m. 12. 1. cap. 3. 20.
Christ put himself into a low si^ leprous suit of ours, to expiate our pride
and robbery in reaching after the D^ity, and to heal ^^ of our spiritual
Leprosy; for if ^^ had not assumed our flesh, he had not saved us. N^zianz.
together. Christ did assume the whole man, he did assume the soul as well as
the body, and both under the term Flesh. And indeed, unless he had assumed the
whole man, the whole man could not have been saved; if Christ had not taken the
whole man, he could not have saved the whole man: Christ took the nature of
man, that he might be a fit Mediator; if he had not been man, he could not have
died; and if he had not been God, he could not have satisfied. So great was the
difficulty of restoring the Image of God in lost man, and of restoring him to
God's favor, and the dignity of sonship, that no less could do it, than the
natural son of God, his becomeing the son of man, to suffer in our nature; and
so great was the Father's love and the Son's love to fallen man, as to lay a
foundation of reconciliation betwixt God and man, in the personal union of the
Divine and Humane nature of Christ; so much is imported in those words, the
word was made flesh. The person of the Godhead that was incarnate, was neither
the Father nor the Holy Ghost, but the Son, the second Person, for the Word was
made Flesh. There being a real distinction of the Persons, that one of them is
is not another; and each of them having their proper manner of subsistence, the
one of them might be incarnate, and not the other; and it is the Godhead, not
simply considered, but the Person of the Son, subsisting in that Godhead, that
was incarnate. And it was very convenient, that the second or middle Person (in
order of subsistence) of the blessed Trinity, should be the Reconciler of God
and man; and that he by whom all things Celes. 1. 16, 17. Heb. 1. 2, 3.
were made, should be the Restorer and Maker of the new World; and that he who
was the express Image of his Father, should be the Repairer of the Image of God
in us. Oh the admirable love and wisdom of God that shines in this, that the
second Person in the Trinity is set on work to procure our Redemption! Though
reason could never have found out such a way, yet when God has revealed it,
reason, though but shallow, can see a fitness in it; because there being a
necessity that the Savior of man should be man, and an impossibility that any
but God should save him; and one Person in the Trinity being to be incarnate,
it agrees to reason, that the first Person in the Trinity should not be the
Mediator; for who should send him? he is of none, and therefore could not be
sent: There must be one sent to reconcile the enmity, and another to give gifts
to friends; two proceeding Persons, the Son from the Father, and the Holy Ghost
from the Father and the Son: Accordingly the second Person, which is the Son,
he is sent upon the first errand, to reconcile man to God; and the third
person, the Holy Ghost, he is sent to give gifts to men so reconciled; so as to
reason, it is suitable, and a very great congruity; that God, having made all
things by his Son, should now repair all things by his Son; that he that was
the middle Person in the Trinity, should become the Mediator between God* and
man; that he that was the express Image of the Father's Person, should restore
the Image of God, defaced in man by his sins. Ah Christians, how well does it
become you to lose your selves in the admiration of the wisdom of God, in the
contrivance of the work of our Redemption! For the Son of God to take on him
the nature of man, with all the essential properties thereof, and all the
sinless infirmities and frailties thereof, is a wonder that may well take up
our thoughts to all Eternity. And Christ took the infirmities of our nature, as
well as the nature it self: To show the truth of his Humanity; he had a nature
that could hunger and thirst even as ours do, and to sanctify them to us; and
that so he might sympathize with us, as a merciful and faithful High Priest;
and that we might Heb. 2. 16, 17, 18. cap. 4. 15, 16.
confide the more in him, and have acce^s to him with boldness. By reason of
the personal union of the two natures in Christ, he is a fit Mediator betwixt
God and man, Act. 20. 28.
his sufferings are of infinite value, being the sufferings of one who is God,
and who is mighty to carry on the work Isa. 63 1. He^. 7. 25.
of Redemption, and to apply his own purchase, and repair all our losses. Oh,
what an honor has Jesus Christ put upon fallen man, by taking the nature of
man on him! What is so near and dear to us as our own nature? and lo, our
nature is highly preferred by Jesus Christ, to a Union in the Godhead; Christ
now sits in heaven with Act. 1. 9, 10, 11.
our nature, and the same flesh that we have upon us, only glorified. It is
that which all the world cannot give a sufficient reason, why the same word in
the Hebrew, Bashar, should signify both Flesh, and Good Tidings; Divinity will
give you a reason, though Grammar cannot; Christ's taking of flesh upon him,
was good tidings to all the whole world, therefore no wonder if one word
signify both. Abundance of comfort may be taken from hence to poor souls, when
they think God has forgotten them, to consider, is it likely that Christ who
is Man, should forget man, now he is at the right hand of the Father, clothed
in that nature that we have; when we are troubled to think it is impossible God
and man should ever be reconciled, let us consider that God and man did meet in
Christ, therefore it is possible we may meet, what has been may be again; the
two natures met in Christ, therefore God may be reconciled to man; yea, they
therefore met, that God might be reconciled to man; he was made Immanuel, God
with us, that he might bring God and us together; when a man is troubled to
think of the corruptious of his nature, that is so full of ^efilements, that it
cannot be sanctified perfectly, let him withal think, that his nature is
capable of Sanctification to the full. Christ received Humane nature which was
not polluted, his nature is the same, therefore that nature is capable of
sanctification to the uttermost. Oh sirs! if Christ, the second Person in the
Trinity, did put on man, how careful should men be to put on Christ! Put you on
the Lord Jesus, says Re^ 13. 14.
the Apostle. If Christ assumed our Humane nature, how should we wrestle with
God, to be made partakers of the Divine Nature; 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given
unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these we may be made
partakers of the Divine Nature. If Christ became thus one flesh with us, how
zealous should we be to become one spirit with Christ; 1 Cor. 6. 17. Even as
man and wife is one flesh, so he that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit: Was
the word made flesh? did Christ take our nature? yea, did he take our nature at
the worst, after the fall? what high cause have we to bless his name for ever,
for this condescension of his! Should all the Princes of the world have come
from their Thrones, and have gone a begging from door to door, it would not
amount to so much as for Christ to become Man for our sakes: christ took our
nature, not in the the integrity of it, as in Adam before his fall; but in the
infirmities of it, which came to it by the fall: What a mazing love was this!
For Christ to have taken our nature as it was in Adam, while he stood clothed
in his integrity, and stood right in the sight of God, had not been so much as
when Adam was fallen, and proclaimed Traitor: As Bernard says, Quo pro me
vilior, eo mihi charior, Domine: Lord, thou shall be so much the more dear to
me, by how much the more thou have been vile for me. Here is condescension
indeed, that Christ should stoop so low to take Flesh, and Flesh with
Infirmities. But

Secondly, Jesus Christ promises to God the Father, Compare Psalm. 40. 6. to
the 11. with Heb. 10. 5. to the 11. and Isa. ^1. 1, 2, 3. Lu^* 4. 18, 19. 20.
A^^. 13. 23. cap. 7. 22. Heb. 10. 1^, 14.
in the Margin, they having been formerly opened; and in them you will find,
that Christ did not take the office of Mediatorship upon himself; but first the
Father calls him to it, and then the Son accepts it: Christ glorified not
himself, to be made an High Priest; but he that said unto him, thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee: He called him, and then the Son answered him,
Lo, I come. God the Father promises, that upon the payment of such a price by
his Son, such and such souls should be ransomed and set free from the curse,
from wrath, from hell, etc. Jesus Christ readily consents to the price, and
pays it down upon the nail at once, and so makes good his Mediatory office. It
pleased the glorious Son of God, in obedience to the Father, to humble himself,
and obscure the glory of his Godhead, that he might be like his brethren, and a
fit Mediator for sympathy and suffering, and that he might engage his life and
glory for the redeeming of the Elect, and lay by his Robes of Majesty, and not
be reassumed till he gave a good account of that work, till he was able to
say, I have finished the work that thou gave me to do. Christ very freely and
cheerfully undertakes to do and suffer whatever was the will of his Father,
that he should do or suffer for the bringing about the Redemption of Mankind.
Christ willingly undertakes to be his Father's Servant in this great work, and
accordingly he looks upon his Father as his Lord, Thou art my Lord; that Isa.
50. 5, 6, 7. Psalm. 16. 2.
is, thou art he, to whom I have engaged my self, that I will satisfy all thy
demands, I will fulfill thy Royal Law, I will bear the Curse, I will satisfy
thy Justice, I will humble my self to the death of the Cross, I will tread the
Psalm. ^. 8. Isa. 6^. ^.
Wine* press of my Father's Wrath, I will fully discharge all the Bonds, Bills
and Obligations, that lie in open Court, against any of those whom, by compact,
thou have given Colos. 2. 13, 14, 15
me; let their debts be never so many, or never so great, or of never so long
continuance, I will pay them all* there is no work so high, nor no work so
hard, nor no work so hot, nor no work so bloody, nor no work so low, in which I
am not ready to engage, upon the account of my chosen: Lo, I come, I delight
to do thy will; yea, thy law is in my heart^: Christ freely submits, not only
to the duty of the Law, but also to the penalty of the Law; not only to do what
the Law enjoins, but also to suffer what the Law threatens; the former he Gal.
4. 4. 5.
makes good by his active obedience, and the l^ter by his passive obedience.
This was the way wherein the Father, by an eternal agreement with his Son,
would (...) 1. 2.
have the salvation of lost sinners brought about; and accordingly Jesus Christ
very readily complies with his Father's will and way. Christ, as Mediator, had
a command Joh. 10. 18.
from his Father to die, which Command* ^he readily closes with; Joh. 10. 11. I
am the good shepherd, the good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep:
verse. 15. I lay down my life for the sheep: verse. 17. I lay down my life, that
I might take it again: verse. 18. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of
my self; this commandment have I received of my father. Christ was content to
be a servant by paction, that so his sufferings might be accepted for his
people; and certainly, whatever God the ^^ther put Jesus Christ upon in his
whole Mediatory work, that Jesus Christ did freely, fully and heartily comply
with. Lo, I come, And I have finished the work that thou gave J^^. 17. 4.
me to do: And had not Christ been free and voluntary in his active and passive
obedience, his active and passive obedience would never have been acceptable,
satisfactory or meritorious. To go further to prove it, would be to light a
candle to see the sun at noon. But,

Thirdly, Jesus Christ promises and engages himself, and Devils; Heb. 2. 13.
And again, I will put my trust in him: Christ's confidence in his Father, was
one great encouragement to him, to hold out in the execution of his office; and
his confidence in God speaks him out to be a true man, in that, as other men,
he stood in need of God's aid and assistance; and thereupon, as others of the
sons men (his brethren) he puts his trust in God. The Greek Phrase used by the
Apostle, carries Emphasis; it implies (...). Psalm. 18. 2. Isa. 8. 18.
trust on a good persuasion, that he shall not be disappointed; it is
translated Confidence, Phil. 1. 6. word for word it may here be thus
translated, I will be confident in him: The Relative Him has apparent
reference to God, so as Christ himself, being man, rested on God to be
supported in his works, and to to be carried thorough all his undertakings,
till the Top-stone was laid, and the work of Redemption accomplished. Christ
had many great and potent enemies, and was brought to very great straits, Psalm.
18. 3, 4, 5. Isa 8. 18. Mat. 27. 43.
yea, he and his were for s^gns and wonders in Israel; yet he fainted not, but
put his trust in the Lord; yea, his greatest enemies gave him this Testimony,
that he trusted in God; and though they spoke it in scorn and derision, yet it
was a real truth. Christ's confidence in his Father was further manifested by
the many Prayers, which Heb. 5. 7.
time after time, he made to his Father. Another proof of Christ's confidence
in God's assistance, even in his greatest plunges, and his sharpest sufferings,
the Prophet Isaiah will furnish us with, The Lord God has opened mine Isa. 5^.
5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
ear (says the Prophet) and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back. I
gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I
hid not my face from shame and spitting. For the Lord God will help me,
therefore shall I not he confounded, therefore have I set my face like a flint,
and I know that I shall not be ashamed. He is near that justifies me, who will
contend with me? let us stand together: Who is mine adversary? let him come
near to me. Behold, the Lord God will help me, who is he that shall condemn me?
lo, they all shall wax old as a garment: The moth shall eat them up. Christ as
Mediator, trusted God the Father, to carry him through all difficulties and
oppositions, till he had completed the great work of his Mediation: Christ
strengthens and encourages himself in the execution of his Office, against all
hardships and oppositions, from his confidence and assurance of God's aid and
assistance; and by the same eye of Faith, he looks upon all his opposites, as
worn out and weathered by him. Christ's Faith, Patience and Constancy gave him
victory over all wrongs and injuries. So Isa. 49. 5. My God shall be my
strength: Christ is very confident of his Father's assistance, to carry him
thorough that work that he had assigned him to: Christ, in the want of comfort,
never wanted faith to hang upon God, and to call him his God; My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27. 46. As man he ^r^e^ out, My God, my God,
etc. when a^ God, he promises Paradise to the penitent thief Hilary.
Christ was never forsaken, in regard of the Hypostatical Union; the Union was
not dissolved, but the Beams, the Influence was restrained: Nor in regard of
his Faith; for though now he was sweltering under the wrath of God, as our
Surety, and left in the hands of his enemies, and deserted by his Disciples and
dearest friends, and under the loss of the comforting and solacing presence of
his Father; yet, in the midst of all, such was the strength and power of his
faith, that he could say, My God, my God. Christ, before the world began,
having promised and engaged to the Tit. 1. 2. Gal. 4. 4. Isa. 63. 3. Gal. 3.
13. Romans 8. 3, 4.
Father; that in the fullness of time he would come into the world, assume our
nature, be made under the Law, tread the Wine Press of the Father's wrath, bear
the Curse, and give satisfaction to his Justice. Now upon the credit of this
promise, upon this undertaking of Christ, God the Father takes up the
Patriarchs, and all the Old Testament-believers to Glory. God the Father
resting upon the promise and engagement of his Son, admits many thousands into
those (...)ons above, before Joh. 14. 2, 3.
Christ took Flesh upon him. Now as t^^ Father, of old, has rested and relied
on the promise and engagement of Christ; so Jesus Christ does, to this very
day, ^^st and stay himself upon the promise of his Father, that he shall, in
Isa. ^3. 10.
due time, see all his seed, and reap the full benefit of that full Ransom that
he has paid down upon the nail, for all that have believed on him, that do
believe on him, and that shall believe on him. Christ knew God's infinite Love,
his tender Compassions, and his matchless Bowels to all those for whom he died:
And he knew very well the Covenant, the Compact, the Agreement, that past
between the Father and himself; and so trusted the Father fully, in the great
business of their everlasting happiness and blessedness, relying upon the love
and faithfulness of God, his love to the Elect, and his faithfulness to keep
Covenant with him. As the Elect are committed to Christ's charge, to give an
account of them; so also is the Father engaged for their conversion, and for
their preservation being converted: As being not only his own, Joh. 6. 37. Isa.
53. 11.
given to Christ out of his love to them; but as being engaged to Christ, that
he shall not be frustrate of the reward of his Sufferings, but have a Seed to
glorify him for ever. Therefore does Christ, not only constantly preserve them
by his Spirit, but does leave, also, that burden on the Father; Father, keep
those whom thou have given me: Joh. 17. 11. But

Fourthly, Jesus Christ promises and engages himself to Isa. 5^. 5, 6. Joh. 10.
17. 18. cap. 15. 10. Luke 24. 46. Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 10. I have opened these
Scriptures already.
Margin together. The work of Redemption could never have been effected by
silver or gold, or by prayers or tears, or by the blood of Bulls or Goats; but
by the second Adam's obedience, even to the death of the Cross. Remission of
sin, the favor of God, the heavenly Inheritance could never have been
obtained, but by the procious blood of the Son of God. The innocent Lamb of God
was slain, in typical prefigurations, from the beginning of the world; and
slain in real performance, in the fullness of time, or else fallen man had layen
under guilt and wrath for ever: The heart of Jesus Christ was strongly set upon
all those that his Father had given him, and he was fully resolved to secure
them from Hell and the Curse, whatever it cost him; and seeing no price would
satisfy his Father's Justice below his Blood, he lays down his life at his
Father's feet, according to the Covenant and Agreement of old, that had past
between his Father and himself. But

Fifthly, The Lord Jesus Christ was very free, ready, Joh. 12. 49, 50. cap. 17.
6.
on for the Redemption and Salvation of the Elect: Joh. 17. 4. I have finished
the work that thou gave me to do. There was nothing committed to Christ by
the Father, to be done on earth, for the purchasing of our Redemption, but he
did finish it; so that the Debt is paid, Colos. 2. 14, 15. Heb. 2. 14.
Justice satisfied, and sin, Satan and death spoiled of all their hurting and
destroying power. By the Covenant of Redemption, Christ was under an obligation
to die, to Dan. 9. 24.
satisfy to Divine Justice, to pay our debts, to bring in an everlasting
Righteousness, to purchase our Pardon, and Heb. 9. 12.
to obtain eternal Redemption for us; all which, he completed and finished,
before he ascended up to glory: And Act. 1. 9, 10, 11.
without a peradventure, had not Jesus Christ kept touch with his Father, had
not he made good the Covenant, the Compact, the Agreement on his part, his
Father would never have given him such a welcome to heaven as he did, nor he
would never have admitted him to have sat down Heb. 1. 3. Romans 8 34. Col^s. ^.
1. H^b. 8. 1. cap. 10. 12. 1 ^et. 3. 22.
on the right hand of the Majesty on high, as he did. The right hand is a place
of the greatest honor, dignity and safety, that any can be advanced to: But
had not Jesus Christ first purged away our sins, he had never sat down on the
right hand of his Father. Christ's advancement is properly Mat. 26. 64. Act. 7.
56.
of his Humane Nature; That Nature, wherein Christ was crucified, was exalted;
for God being the Most High, needs not be exalted; yet the Humane Nature, in
this exaltation, is not singly and simply considered in it self, but as united
to the Deity; so that it is the Person consisting of two Natures, even God-man,
which is thus dignified: For as the Humane Nature of Christ is inferior to
God, and is capable of advancement; so also is the person consisting of a
Divine and Humane Nature. Christ, as the Son of God, the second Person of the
sacred Trinity, is, in regard of his Deity, no whit inferior to his Father,
but every way equal; yet he assumed our nature, and became a Mediator betwixt
God and man; he humbled himself, and made himself inferior to his Father; his
Father therefore has highly exalted him, Phil. 2. 8, 9.
and set him down on his right hand. If Christ had not Ephesians. 1. 20.
expiated our sins, and completed the work of our Redemption, he could never
have sat down on the right hand of God; Heb. 10. 12. But this man, after he had
offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God.
This verse is added in opposition to the former, as is evident by the first
Particle ((...)) But in the former verse it was proved, that the Sacrifices
which were offered under the Law, could not take away sins: This verse proves,
that there is a Sacrifice, which has done that that they could not do. The
Argument is taken from that Priest's ceasing to offer any more Sacrifices,
after he had offered one; whereby is employed, that there needed no other,
because that one had done it to the full; sin was taken away by Christ's
Sacrifice, for thereby a Ransom was paid, and satisfaction made to the Justice
of God for man's sin, and thereupon sin taken aaway: Now, sin being taken away,
Christ sits down on the right hand of his Father. Look, as the humiliation of
Christ was manifested in offering a Sacrifice, so his exaltation, in sitting at
God's right hand, was manifested, after that he had offered that sacrifice.
This phrase, Set down, is a note of dignity and authority; and this dignity and
Authority is amplified by the place where he is said to sit down, viz. on the
right hand of God; and this honor and dignity is much illustrated by the
continuance thereof, which is without date; For ever sat down on the right hand
of God. It is an Eclipse of the luster of any glory, to have a date and a
period: The very thought that such a glory shall one day cease, will cast a
damp upon the Spirit of him that enjoys that Glory: Christ's constant sitting
at the right hand of his Father, is a clear evidence, that he has finished and
completed the work of our Redemption. Christ could never have gone to his
Father, nor never have set down at the right hand of his Father, if he had not
first fulfilled all Righteousness, and fully acquitted us of all our
iniquities; Joh. 16. 10. Of righteousness, because I go to my Father. The
strength of the Argument lies in this, Christ took upon him to be our Surety,
and he must acquit us of all our sins, and satisfy his Father's Justice,
before he can go to his Father, and be accepted of his Father, and sit down on
the right hand of his Father: If God had not been fully satisfied, or if any
part of Righteousness had been to be fulfilled, Christ should have been still
in the grave, and not gone to heaven; his very going to his Father, argues all
is done, all is finished and completed. But

Sixthly, Christ having performed all the conditions of Father, Joh. 17. 4, 5.
says he, I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with
the glory which I had with thee, before the world was: There was a most This
transaction between the father and the son, is worthy of our most d^ep, serious
and frequent meditation.
blessed transaction between God the Father and God the Son, before the world
began, for the everlasting good of the Elect; and upon that Transaction depends
all the good, and all the happiness, and all the salvation of God's chosen; and
upon this ground, pleads with his Father, that all his members may behold his
glory; Joh. 17. 24. Father, I will that they also which thou have given me, be
with me where I am, that they may behold my glory: Father, I will; not only I
pray, I beseech, but I will; I ask this as my right, by virtue of the Covenant
betwixt us; I have done thus and thus, and I have suffered thus and thus, and
therefore I cannot but peremptorily insist upon it; that those that I have
undertaken for, be where I am, that they may behold my glory: (For though Glory
be a gift to us, yet it is a debt that is due to Christ.) It is a part of
Christ's joy, that we should be where he is; Christ will not be happy alone, as
a tender father, he can enjoy nothing, if his children may not have part with
him. The greatest part of our happiness that we shall have in heaven, lies in
this, that then we shall be with Christ, and have immediate communion with him.
Oh sirs! the great end of our being in heaven, is to behold and enjoy the glory
of Christ: Christ is very desirous, and much taken up with his peoples
fellowship and company; so that before he removes his bodily presence from
them, his heart is upon meeting and fellowship again, as here we see in his
prayer before his departure; and this he makes evident from day to day, in
that, until that time of meeting come, two or three are not gathered in his
name, but he is in the midst of them; to eye their behavior, to Mat. 18. 20.
hear their suits, to guide their way, to to protect their persons, to cheer
their spirits, and to delight in their presence: He delights to walk in the
midst of the seven golden Rev. 2. 1. Mat. 5. 14, 16. Psalm. 68, 16.
candlesticks; the Golden Candlesticks are the Churches, which are the light of
the world; and excel all other societies, as much as Gold does other Metals:
And he desires to dwell in the low and little hill of Zion; Zion is his resting
place, his chosen place, his dwelling place; Psalm. 132. 13. For the Lord has
chosen Zion, he has desired it for his habitation: Verse. 14. This is my rest
for ever: Here will I dwell, for I have desired it: Christ chose Zion for his
love, and loves it for his choice; and accordingly, he he delights to dwell
there. The Lamb stands on Mount Rev. 14. 1.
Zion: Christ is ready pressed for action; and in the midst of all Antichrist's
Persecutions, he has always a watchful eye over Mount Zion, and will be a sure
lifeguard to Mount Isa. 4. 5, 6.
Zion; he stands readily prepared to assist Mount Zion, to fight for Mount
Zion, to communicate to Mount Zion, Isa. 8. 18.
and to be a refuge to Mount Zion; and no wonder, for he dwells in mount Zion.
Now, if Christ take so much delight to have spiritual communion with his people
in this 2 Cor. 6. 16. I will dwell in them. The words are very significant ^n
the Original, (...), In ill in-dwell in them; so the words are; there are two
ins in the Original, as if God could never have enoughe* ^^munion with them. 2
Tr^^, 1. 10.
world, no wonder that he can never rest satisfied, till their gracious
communion with him here, issue in their perfect and glorious communion with him
in heaven: And certainly the glory and happiness of heaven to the Elect, will
consist much in being in Christ's company, in whom they delight so much on
earth; to follow the Lamb whither soever he goes, to enjoy him fully, and to be
always in his presence, is the heaven of heaven, the glory of glory; it is the
sparkling Diamond in the Ring of Glory. The day is coming, wherein Believers
shall be completely happy, in a sight of Christ's glory, when he shall be
conspicuously glorified and admired in all his Saints, and glorified by them;
and when, all veils being laid aside, and they fitted for a more full fruition,
shall visibly and immediately behold and enjoy him; therefore is their
condition in heaven described, as consisting in this, that they may behold my
glory which thou have given me. ^hus I have glanced at Christ's solemn demand
on earth, for the full accomplishment of that blessed Compact, Covenant,
Agreement and Promises that were made to him, when he undertook the office of a
Mediator; and now is in heaven, he appears in the presence of God for us, as a
(...). 9. ^4.
Lawyer appears in open Court for his Client; opens the case, pleads the cause,
and carries the day. The Verb, (...), translated to appear, signifies
conspicuously to manifest: It is sometimes taken in a good sense, viz. to
appear for one as a Favorite before a Prince, or as an Advocate or an
Attorney before a Judge, or as the High Priests appeared once a year in the
Holy of Holiest, to Exodus 30. 10.
make atonement for the people: Christ is the great Favorite in the Court of
glory, and is always at God's Romans 8. 34.
right hand, ready on all occasions, to present our petitions to his Father, to
pacify his anger, and to obtain all 1 Jo^. 2. 1.
noble and needful favors for us: And Christ is our great Advocate, to plead
our cause effectually for us. Look, as in Humane Courts, there is the Guilty,
the Accuser, the Court, the Judge, and the Advocate, so it is here; Heaven is
the Court, Man is the guilty Person, Satan is the Accuser, God is the Judge,
and Christ is the Advovocate: Now, look as the Advocate appears in the Court
before the Judge, to plead for the guilty, against the accuser; so does Christ
appear before God in heaven, to answer* all Satan's objections and accusations,
that he may make in the Court of heaven against us; He ever lives to make
intercession for us: Heb. 7. 25. The verb (...), translated intercession, is a
compound, and signi^ies to call upon one; it is a judicial word, and imports
a calling upon a Judge, to be heard in this or that, against A^^. 25. ^^. R^m.
11. 2. c^p. 8. 34.
another or for another; so here Christ makes intercession for them. The
Metaphor is taken from Attorneys or Advocates, who appear for men in Courts of
Justice; from Counselors, who plead their Clients cause, answer the Adversary,
supplicate the Judge, and procure sentence to pass on their Clients side. This
Act of making Intercession, may also be taken from Kings Favorites, who are
much in the King's presence, and ever ready to make request for their friends:
But remember, though this be thus attributed to Christ, yet we may not think,
that in heaven Christ prostrateth himself before him, or makes actual prayers;
that was a part of his humiliation, which he did in the days of his flesh; but
it implies ^eb. 5 7.
a presenting of himself a Sacrifice, a Surety, and one that has made
satisfaction for all our sins, together with manifesting of his will and
desires, that such and such should partake of the virtue and benefit of his
Sacrifice; so as Christ's intercession consists rather in the perpetual
vigor of his Sacrifice, and continual application thereof, than in any actual
supplication. The intendment of this Phrase applied to Christ, to make
intercession, is to show, that Christ being God's Favorite, and our Advocate,
continually appears before God, to make application of that Sacrifice, which
once he offered up for our sins. Christ appears in the presence of God for us;
1. To present unto his Father himself, who is the price of our Redemption: 2*
To make application of his Sacrifice to his Church time after time, according
to the need of the several members thereof: 3. To make our persons, prayers,
services and all good things acceptable to God. But

Seventhly and lastly, The whole Compact and Agreement viz. the Holy Ghost; who
being a third Person of the glorious Trinity of the same Divine Essence, and of
equal power and glory makes up a third Legal Witness with the Father and the
Son. They being (after the manner of Kings) their own Witnesses So the King
written, (...) me^^^. This 1 John 5. 7. is a very clea^ Proof and Testimony of
the Trinity of Persons, in the Unity of the Divine ^ssence, they are ^ll one in
^ssence and Will. As if three lamps were lighted in o^^ chamber, albeit the
lamps be di^ers, yet the lights cannot be s^ (...)* so in the (...) there is a
destruction of Persons (...) ^ (...)phei^y of nature.
also, 1 John 5. 7. For there be three that ^ear record in heaven, the Father,
the Word and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one: Three, 1. In the true and
real distinction of their Persons; 2. In their inward Properties, as to beget,
to be begotten, and to proceed; 3. In their several offices one to another, as
to send and to be sent: And these three are one, one in Nature and Essence, one
in Power and Will, one in the act of producing all such actions as, without
themselves, any of them is said to act; and one in their Testimony, concerning
the Covenant of Redemption, that was agreed on between the Father and the Son.
Consent of all parties, the Allowance of the Judge, and public Record, is as
much as can be desi^ed to make all public Contracts authentic in Courts of
Justice; and what can we desire more, to settle, satisfy and assure our own
souls, that all the Article, of the Covenant of Redemption shall, on all hands,
be (...)inly made good, than this, that these three heave^ly Witnesse^, God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy G^^st, do all agree to the Articles of
the Covenant, and (...) Witnesses to the same Covenant? Thus you see* that
there was a Covenant of Redemption made with Christ* upon the terms whereof he
is constituted to be a (...); to say to the prisoners, go forth, to bring
delivera^^e to the captives, and to proclaim the year of release (or Jubilee)
the acceptable year of the Lord; as it is, Isa. 61. 1, 2. I have been the
longer in opening the ^ovenant of Redemption, partly because of its grand
importance to all our souls, and partly because others have spoken so little to
it, to the best of my observation* and partly because I have never before
handled this Subject, either in the Pulpit, or the Press, etc.

Now, from the serious consideration of this Compact, Covenant and Agreement,
that was solemnly made between God and Christ, touching the whole business of
man's Salvation or Redemption, I may form up this tenth Plea, as to the ten
Scriptures that are in the Margin, that Eccles. 11. 9. cap. 12. 14. Mat. 12.
14. cap. 18. 23. Luke 16. 2. Romans ^4. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Heb. 9. 27. cap. 13.
17. 1 Pet. 4. 5. Isa. 53. 6. R^m. 5. 6* 8. Gal. 2. 20.
refer to the great day of account, or to a man's particular day of account. Oh
blessed God! I have read over the Articles of the Covenant of Redemption, that
were agreed on between thy self and thy dearest Son; and I find by those
Articles, that dear Jesus has died, and satisfied thy Justice, and pacified thy
Wrath, and bore the Curse, and purchased my pardon, and procured thy
everlasting favor: And I find by the same Articles, that whatever Jesus Christ
acted or suffered, he did act or suffer as my Surety, and in my stead and room.
Oh Lord! when I look upon my manifold weaknesses and imperfections, though
under a Covenant of Grace, yet I am many times, not only grieved, but also
stumbled and staggered; but when I look up to the Covenant of Redemption, I am
cheared, raised and quieted; for I am abundantly satisfied, that both thy self
and thy dear Son, are infinitely ready, able, willing and faithful to perform
whatever in that Covenant is comprised; by these things men live, Isa. 38. 16,
17.
and in these is the life of my spirit: men may fail, and Friends may fail, and
Relations may fail, and Trade may fail, and natural strength may fail, and my
heart may fail, but the Covenant of Redemption can never fail, nor the Psalm.
73. 24, 25.
Federates, who are mutually engaged in that Covenant, can never fail, and
therefore I am safe and happy for ever; what though my sins have been great and
h^ynous, yet they are not greater than Christ's satisfaction, he did bear the
Curse for great sins as well as small, for sins against the Gospel as well as
for sins against the Law, for omissions as well as for commissions; assuredly,
the Covenant of Redemption is a mighty thing, and there are no mighty sins that
can stand before that Covenant: If we look upon Manasseh, in those black and
ugly colors that the 1 King. 21. 1, to 16
Holy Ghost paints him out in, we must needs conclude that he was a mighty
sinner, a monstrous sinner; and yet his mighty sins, his monstrous sins could
not stand before the Covenant of Redemption; the greatest sins are finite, but
the merit of Christ's Redemption is infinite: All the Egyptians were drowned in
the Red Sea, there remained not so much as one of them, there was not one of
them Exodus 14. 28. Psalm. 106. 11.
left alive to carry the news; the high and the low, the great and the small,
the rich and the poor, the honorable and the base, were all drowned: The Red
Sea of Christ's blood drowns all our sins, whether they are great or small,
high or low, etc. though my sins be as scarlet, Isa. 1. 18.
my Redeemer will make them as white as snow; though they be as read as
crimson, they shall be as wool: There is not one of my sins, for which Jesus
Christ has not suffered Ephesians. 1. 7. Colos. 1. 14.
and satisfied; nor there is not one of my sins, for which Jesus Christ has
not purchased a pardon, and for which he has not made my peace; though my sins
are innumerable, though they are more than the hairs of my head, Psalm. 4^. 12.
or the sands on the seashore, yet they are not to be named in the day wherein
the merits of Christ, the satisfaction of Christ, and the Covenant of
Redemption is mentioned and pleaded: Be my sins never so many; yea, though they
might fill a Roll that might reach from East to West, from North to South, from
earth ^^ heaven, yet they could but bring me under the Curse, now Christ my
Surety, that he might redeem me from the Curse, has Gal. 3. 13.
taken upon him the whole Curse: I know there is no summing up of my debts, but
Christ has paid them all; woe had been to me for ever* ^ad Christ left but on^
^^nny upon the score, for me to pay. As I have multiplied my sins, so he has
multiplied his pardons; Christ has cancelled Isa. 55. 7.
all bonds, and therefore it is but justice in God, to Col^s. 2. 13, 14, 15,
Jo^. 3^. 24.
give me a full Acquittance, and to throw down all bonds as cancelled, saying,
Deliver him, I have found a ransom. Oh God, though my sins are very many, and
very great, yet if thou do not pardon them, the innocent blood of thy dearest
Son will lie upon thee, and cry out against thee; for he therefore died, that
my sins might be pardoned, so that now, in honor and justice, thou art obliged
to pardon all my transgressions, and remember mine iniquities no Isa. 43. 25
Dan. 9. 24.
more. Now this is my Plea, Oh holy God, which I make to all those Scriptures
that respect my last account, and by this Plea I shall stand, well, says God
the Father, I accept of this Plea, I am pleased with this Plea, thy E^^k. 18.
22.
sins shall not be mentioned, Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

I* shall now make a little improvement of what has been said as to the
Covenant of Redemption, and so draw to a conclusion.

First, This Covenant of Redemption, as we have opened Mat. 24. 16. Luk 12. 32.
Romans 9. 11, 12. cap ^^. 5. 6. 7, ^. Romans 8. 39, 40.
man in the world, but only to those that are given by God the Father to Jesus
Christ. 2. It looks sadly and sowrly upon those that make so great a noise
about Gods choosing or electing of men, upon the account of God's foreseeing
their faith, good works, obedience, holiness when our election is merely of
grace and savor, and flows only D^^. 7. 6, 7. 8. ^ap* 33. 1^. Romans 9 11. (...)
1. 9. Ephesians. 1. 4. Romans 8. 29 30. ^ (...) ^. 1^. 1 P^^. 1. 2.
from the good will of h^^ that dwelt in the bush, and faith, good works,
holiness, sanctification, are the fruits and effects of Election, as the
Scripture every where tells us; and as has been made evident in my opening the
gracious terms of the Covenant of Redemption, but because I have, in another
place, treated of th^se things more largely, a touch here may suffice. But

Secondly. How should this Covenant of Redemption to do any thing for Christ,
to suffer any thing for Christ, to venture any thing for Christ, to part with
any thing Mark. 8. 34. 35, 38 Heb. 10. 34. cap. 11.
for Christ, to give up any thing to Christ, who, according to the Covenant of
Redemption, has done and sufferred such great and grievous things, that he
might bring us to glory, that are above all apprehensions, and beyond Heb. 2.
1^, 1^.
all expressions, who can tell me what is fully wrapped up in that one
expression, viz. That he poured out his soul unto death: Let us not shrink, nor
saint, nor grow weary under our greatest sufferings for Christ, when sufferings
multiply, when they are sharp, when they are more bitter than Gall or Wormwood,
yea, more bitter than death it self, then Remember the Covenant of Redemption,
and how punctually Christ made good all the Articles of it on his side, and
then saint and give out if you can: Well may I be afraid, but I do not
therefore despair, for I think Austin.
upon, and remember the wounds of the Lord, says one: Nolo vivere sine
vulnere, cum te video vulneratum; Ob my ^
God, as long as I see thy wounds, I will never live without wound, says
another: Crux Christi clavis Paradisi; The Damas^^n.
Cross of Christ is the Golden Key that opens Paradise to us, says one: I had
rather, with the Martyrs and Consessors, ^
have my Savior's Cross, than, with their Persecutors, the worlds Crown; the
harder we are put to it, the greater shall be our reward in heaven, says
another: Gardius the Martyr hit the nail, when he said, it is to my loss if you
Chrysost^m.
ab^^e me any thing in my sufferings: If you suffer not for Religion, you will
suffer for a worse thing, says one: V^n^^mi^s.
Never did any man serve me better than you serve me, said another to his
Persecutors: Adversus gentes, gratias agimus quod a molestis dominis liberemur,
We thank you for delivering us from hard Taskmasters, that we may enjoy more
sweetly the bosom of our Lord Jesus, said the Martyrs: 'Twas a notable saying
of ^^^her, Ecclesia totum mundum convertit sanguine and oratione; the Church
converteth the whole world by blood and prayers: They may kill me, said
Socrates of his enemies, but they cannot hurt me; so may the redeemed of the
Lord say; they may take away my head, but they cannot take away my Crown of
life, of righteousness, of glory, of immortality. The Lacedaemonians Rev. 2. 10.
2 lim. 4. 8. 1 Pe^. 5. 4. 5.
were wont to say, it is a shame for any man to fly in time of danger; but for
a Lacedemonian, it is a shame for him to deliberate: Oh, what a shame is it for
Christians, when they look upon the Covenant of Redemption, so much as to
deliberate whether they were best suffer for Christ or no. Petrus Blesensis has
long since observed, that the Courtiers of his time suffered as great trouble,
and as many vexations, for vanity, as good Christians did for the truth; the
Courtiers suffered weariness and painfulness, hunger and thirst, with all the
Catalogue of Paul's afflictions; and what can the best Saints suffer more? Now,
shall men that are strangers to the Covenant of Redemption, suffer such hard
and great things for their lusts, for very vanity? and will not you, who are
acquainted with the Covenant of Redemption, and who are interested in the
Covenant of Redemption, be ready and willing to suffer any thing for that
Jesus, who, according to the Covenant of Redemption, has suffered such dreadful
things for you, and merited such glorious things for you? But

Thirdly, From this Covenant of Redemption, as we have opened it, you may see
what infinite cause we have God so loved his Son, that he gave him all the
world for his possession, Psalm. 2. 8. But he so loved the world, that he gave
Son and all for its Redemption. Bernard
and happiness, from his freedom and liberty, into a most woeful gulf of sin and
misery; when Angels and men were all at a loss, and knew no way or means,
whereby fallen man might be raised, restored and saved; that then God should
firstly and freely propose this Covenant, and enter into this Covenant, that
miserable man might be saved from wrath to come; and raised and settled in a
more safe, high and happy estate than that was, from which he was fallen in
Adam: Oh, what wonderful, what amazing love is this! Abraham manifested a great
deal of love to God, in offering up of his only Isaac; but God Genesis 22. 12.
has showed far greater love to poor sinners, in making his only Son an
offering for their sins; for 1. God loved Christ with a more transcendent love,
than Abraham could Joh. 10. 18. Heb. 10. 10, 12.
love Isaac: 2. God was not bound by the commandment of a superior to do it,
as Abraham was: 3. God freely and voluntarily did it, which Abraham would never
have done without a commandment: 4. Isaac was to be offered after the manner of
holy Sacrifices, but Christ suffered an ignominious death, after the manner of
Thieves: 5. Isaac was all along in the hands of a tender Father, but Christ was
all along in the hands of barbarous enemies: 6. Isaac was offered but in show,
but Christ was offered indeed and in very good earnest: Is not this an excess,
yea, a miracle of love? It Is good to be always a musing upon this love, and
delighting our selves in this love. But

Fourthly, From this Covenant of Redemption, as we He was made a curse Gal. 3
13.
for us, whereby he has redeemed us from the curse of the Law: All his
sufferings were for us. All that can be desired of God by man, is mercy and
truth; mercy in regard of our misery, truth in reference to God's promises:
That which moved Christ to engage himself as a Surety for us, was his respect
to God and man: To God, for the honor of his Name; neither the mercy, nor the
truth, nor the justice of God had been so conspicuously manifested, if Jesus
Christ had not been our Surety: To man, and that to help us in our succourless
and desperate estate. No creature either would or could discharge that debt,
wherein man stood obliged to the justice of God. This is a mighty evidence of
the endless love of Christ, this is an evidence of the endless and matchless
love of Christ: We count it a great evidence of love, for a friend to be surety
for us, when we intend no damage to him thereupon; but if a man be surety for
that, which he knows the principal debtor is not able to pay, and thereupon
purposes to pay it himself; this we look upon as an extraordinary evidence of
love: But what amazing love, what matchless love is this, for a man to engage
his person and life for his friend, when as skin for skin, and all that a man
has, will he give for his life; and yet, according to the Covenant of
Redemption, Jesus Christ has done all this and much more for us, as is evident,
if you will but cast your eye back upon the Articles of the Covenant, or
consult the Scriptures in the Margin. If a friend, to free a J^^. 2. 4. Jo^.
1^. 11, 15* 17 18, 28* R^m. 5. 6, (...) Ephesians. 1. 5, 6, 7, (...) 2. 13, 14, 15
Heb. 2. 13, 1^, 15.
captive, or one condemned to death, should put himself into the state and
condition of him whom he freeth; that would be an evidence of love beyond all
comparison. But now, if the dignity of Christ's person and our unworthiness, if
the greatness of the debt and kind of payment, and if the benefit which we reap
thereby be duly weighed, we shall find these evidences of love to come as much
behind the love of Christ, as the light of a candle comes short of the light
of the Sun. Christ's Suretiship, according to the Covenant of Redemption is and
ought to be a prop of props to our faith: It is as sure a ground of confidence
that all is well, and shall be for ever well between God and us, as any the
Scriptures does afford; by virtue hereof, we have a right to appeal to God's
Justice, for this Surety has made full satisfaction; and to exact a debt which
is fully satisfied, is a point of injustice. Christ knew very well what the
Redemption of fallen man would cost him, he knew that his life and blood must
go for it, he knew that he must lay by his Robes of Majesty, and be clothed
with flesh, he knew that he must encounter S^lus Amo^ nes^it difficultates.
men and Devils, he knew that he must tread the Winepress of his Father's
wrath, bear the Curse, and make himself an offering for our sins, for our
sakes, for our salvation; yet, for all this, he is very ready and willing to
bind himself by Covenant, that he will redeem us, whatever it cost him. Oh,
what tongue can express, what heart Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. Look where thou will, thou
art surrounded with flames of his love; and it were strange if thou should
not be set on fire, if not, sure thou must needs be a Diabolical Salamander,
say^ Cu^anus.
can conceive, what soul can comprehend, the heights, depths, bredths and
lengths of this love! Oh blessed Jesus, what manner of love is this! that thou
should wash away my scarlet sins, in thine own blood! that thou should
die, that I may live! that thou should be cursed, that I might be blessed!
that thou should undergo the pains of hell, that I might enjoy the joys of
heaven! that the face of God should be clouded from thee, that his everlasting
favor might rest upon me! that thou should be an everlasting Skreen,
betwixt the wrath of God and my immortal soul! that thou should do for me
beyond all expression, and suffer for me beyond all conception, and gloriously
provide for me beyond all expectation! and all this according to the Covenant
of Redemption! what shall I say? what can I say to all this? but fall down
before thy grace, and spend my days in wondering at that matchless, bottomless
love that can never be fathomed by Angels or men. Oh Lord Jesus (says one)
plusquam B^rnard.
mea, plusquam meas, plusquam me; I love thee more than all my goods, and I
love thee more than all my friends, yea, I love thee more than my very self:
It Is good to write after this copy. But

The Eleventh and last Plea that a Believer may form Eccles. 11. 9. cap. 12.
14. ^^at. 12. 14. cap. 18. 23. Luke 16. 2. Romans 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. H^b. 9.
27. cap. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 5.
refer to the great day of account, or to a man's particular account, may be
drawn up from the consideration of the Book of Life; out of which all the
Saints shall be judged in the great day of our Lord; Rev. 20. 11. And I saw a
great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the
heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them. Verse. 12. And I saw
the dead small and great, stand before God: And the books were opened: and
another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged
out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works.
Verse. 13. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it: And death and hell
delivered up the dead which were in them: And they were judged every man
according to their works. Verse. 14. And death and hell were cast into the lake
of fire: this is the second death. And whosoever was not found written in the
book of life, was cast into the lake of fire. In the 11. verse, John describes
the Judge with his preparation, in the 12. verse, he describes the persons that
should be judged, and then he describes the process and sentence, and lastly he
describes the execution of the sentence; viz. the casting of the reprobates
into the Lake of fire, and the placing and fixing of the Elect in the heavenly
Jerusalem; verse. 13, 14, 15.

In the five last verses cited, you have a clear and full description of the
last General Judgment, as is evident by the native Context and Series of this
Chapter: For having Rev. 2^. 1, 2, 3. Jude verse. 6.
spoken of the Devil's last Judgment, which by Jude is called The judgment of
the great day: It is consentaneous therefore, to understand this of such a
Judgment, whereby he is judged. And indeed, the expressions are so full, and
the matter and circumstances so satisfying and convincing, that they leave no
place for fears, doubts or disputes. This Scripture that is under our present
consideration, runs parallel with that, Dan. 12. 1, 2, 3. and several other
places of Scripture, where the day of Judgment is spoken of; and let him that
can, show me at what other Judgment, all the dead are raised and judged; and
all Reprobates sent to hell, and all the Elect brought to heaven, and death and
hell cast into the Lake; all which are plainly expressed here: He shall be an
Apollo to me, that can make these things that are hero spoken of, to agree with
any other Judgment than the last Judgment. Let me give a little light into this
Scripture, before I improve it, to that purpose for which I have cited it.

And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it. a lively description
of the last Judgment, A Great Throne: Great, because it is set up for the
General Judgment of all, for the universal judgment of the whole world: Before
this Throne all the Great ones of the world must stand, Popes, Emperors,
Kings, Princes, Nobles, Judges, Prelates, without their Mitres, Crowns,
Sceptres, Royal Robes, Gold chains, etc. And before this Throne, all other
sorts and ranks of men must stand. And he that sits upon this Throne, is a
great King, and a great Rev. 1. 5. cap. 17. 14. Rev. 19. 16. All the thrones of
the Kings of the earth, with Solomon's Golden Throne, are but petty Thrones to
this Throne; yea, they are but footstools to this Throne; and therefore upon
this single ground it may well be called a great Throne.
God above all Gods; he is Prince of the Kings of the earth, who is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords. Upon all which accounts, this Throne may well be
called a great Throne. And it is called A White Throne, because of its Celestial
Splendour and Majesty, and to show the uprightness and Glory of the Judge: The
white color in Scripture, is used to represent purity and glory; here it
signifies, that Christ the Judge shall give most just and righteous Judgment,
free from all spot of partiality.

From whose Face the heaven and the earth fled away. The Splendour and Majesty
of the Judge is such, as neither heaven or earth is able to behold or abide the
same; how then shall the wicked be able to stand before him? Augustine
understands it, for the future renovation of heaven and earth; and here he
acknowledges an (...), for the heaven and the earth fled not before, but after
the Judgment; to wit, says he, The Judgment being finished then shall this
heaven and earth cease to be, when the Hysterosis is, when a thing is before
put down, which should come after; or contrariwise. Aug. lib. 20. de. C. D. c.
14. 1 ^^t. 3. 12.
new heaven and earth shall begin; for this world shall pass away by a change
of things, not by an utter destruction: The heaven and the earth shall flee
away; that is, this shape of heaven and earth shall pass away; because they
shall be changed from vanity, through fire, that so they may be transformed
into a much better and more beautiful estate; according to that which the
Apostle Peter writes, The heaven shall pass away with a great noise, and the
elements melt with heat; but we expect new heavens and a new earth, wherein
dwells righteousness. How this passing away, ^r perishing of heaven and
earth, shall come to pass, there are diverse opinions of learned men: Some
think, that the substance or essence it self of the world, shall wholly perish
and be annihilated: Others are of opinion, that only the corruptible* qualities
thereof shall perish and be changed, and the substance or essence remain: There
shall be a renovation of all things, say most, and that only the fashion of the
world, that is, the outward form and corruptible qualities shall be destroyed;
and so the earth shall be found no more as it was, but shall be made most
beautiful and glorious, being to be delivered into the glorious liberty (as far
as it is capable) of the sons Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22.
of God; being to be freed from corruption and bondage: (And with these I
close.) The sum of the 21. verse is, That the Creature shall not be always
subject to vanity, but shall have a manumission from bondage; of the which
deliverance, three things are declared; First, who, the Creature, that is, The
World: Secondly, From what, from Corruption, which is a bondage: Thirdly, Into
what estate, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. Some here note, the
time of the deliverance of the Creature, namely, when the children of God shall
be wholly set free; for though they have here a freedom unto righteousneess,
from the bondage of sin, yet they have not a freedom of glory, which is from
the bondage of misery: But others take it for the state it self which shall be
glorious, not the same with the children of God, but proportioned according to
its kind with them; for it is most suitable to the liberty of the faithful,
that as they are renewed, so also should their habitation, And as, when a Noble
man mourns, his servants are all clad in black; so it is for the greater
glory of man, that the Creatures, his servants, should in their kind, partake
of his glory. And whereas some say, that it is deliverance enough for the
creature, if it cease to serve man, and have an end of vanity, by annihilation:
I affirm, it is not enough, because this 21. verse notes, not only such
deliverance, but also a further estate which it shall have after such
deliverance; namely, to communicate in some degree, with the children of God in
glory. Certainly, the Creatures in their kind and manner, shall be made
partakers of a far better estate, than they had while the world endured;
because that God shall fully and wholly restore the world, being fallen into
corruption through the transgression and sin of Mankind. And this does more
plainly appear by the Apostle's opposing subsequent liberty against former
bondage; which, that he might more enlarge, he calls it not simply, freedom
or liberty, but liberty of (...). If any shall enquire, what shall be the
particular properties, works and uses of all and every creature, after the last
Judgment. I answer, 1. That as to these things, the word is silent, and it is
not safe to be wise, above what is written: 2. Here is place for that which
Tertu^ian calls, a learned Ignorance.
Glory, as it is in the Greek Text; meaning thereby, according to the phrase
and propriety of the Hebrew tongue, glorious liberty, or liberty that brings
glory with it; under which term of glory, he compriseth the excellent estate
that they shall be in after their delivery from their former baseness and
servitude. As for those words of the sons of God, to which we must refer the
glorious liberty before mentioned; they must be understood by a certain
proportion or similitude, thus; that as in that great day, and not before,
God's children shall be graciously freed from all dangers and distresses of
this life whatsoever either in body or soul; and on the other side, made
perfect partakers of Eternal Blessedness; so the Creatures then, and not
before, shall be delivered from the vanity of man, and their own corruption,
and restored to a far better estate, than at present they enjoy: which also,
may further appear by the words the Apostle uses, setting glorious liberty,
deliverance and freedom, against servile bondage and slavery. Chrysostom
reads (...), for the glorious liberty of the sons of God; as if the end or
final cause of their deliverance were pointed at, namely, that as God made the
world for man, and for man's sin subdued it to vanity: So he would deliver it
and restore* it for men, even to illustrate and enlarge the glory of God's
children. I could, by variety of Arguments, prove, that this deliverance of the
Creature, that our Apostle speaks of; shall not be by a reduction into nothing,
but by an alteration into a better estate: But I must hasten to a close.

Verse. 12. And I saw the dead small and great, stand before God. The Judge,
before whom all do appear, is our dear Lord Jesus, who has the keys of hell
and death in Rev. 1. 18. Act. 17. 30, 31.
his hands; and who is designed and appointed by God the Father, to be the
Judge of quick and dead; he has Authority, and a Commission under his Father's
hand, to sit and act as Judge. Here you see, that John calls the Judge
absolutely God, but Christ is the Judge; therefore Christ is God absolutely;
and he will appear to be God in our nature, in that great day.

The Parties judged who stand before the Throne, are 1. Generally, the dead,
all who had died from Adam, to the last day; he calls them the dead after the
common Law of Nature (but then raised from death to life by the Ephesians 2. 5.
Colos. 2. 13.
power of God) he speaks not of men dead in sins and trespasses, but of such as
died corporally, and now were raised up to judgment. But shall not the living,
then, be judged? Oh, yes! For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat 2
Cor. 5. 10. Romans 149, 10.
of Christ: That he may be Judge of the quick and the dead; and be Lord, both
of the dead and the living: Under this phrase, the dead, are comprehended all
those that then shall be found alive: By the dead, we are to understand the
living also, by an Argument from the lesser. If the dead shall appear before
the Judgment Seat, how much more the living? But the dead alone are named,
either because the number of the dead, from Adam to the last day, shall be far
greater than those that shall be found alive on earth in that day; or because
those that remain alive, shall be accounted as dead; because they shall be 1
Cor. 15. 52.
changed in the twinkling of an eye. Secondly, he describes them from their age
and condition, for the words may be understood of both, Great and small; which
takes in all sorts of men, Tyrants, Emperors, Kings, Princes, Dukes, Lords,
etc. as well as Subjects, Vassals; Slaves, Beggars; rich and poor, strong and
weak, bond and free, old and young, all and every one, without exception, are
to be judged; for the Judgment shall be universal, no man shall be so great, as
to escape the same; nor none so small, as to be excluded; but every one shall
have justice done him, without respect of persons; as that great Apostle Paul
tells us, We must all appear before the Judgment Seat 2 Cor. 5. 10.
of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according
to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. I am no admirer of the
School-men's notion, who suppose that all shall be raised about the age of Lum.
lib did. 44
33. which was Christ's Age; but do judge that that perfection, which
consists in the conforming them to Christ's glorious body, is of another
kind, than to respect either age, stature, or the like.

Stand before God; that is, brought to Judgment; the Joh. 3. 18.
guilty standing ready to be condemned, and the Saints standing ready, in
Christ's presence, to be absolved and pronounced blessed.

And the books were opened. Christ the Judge being set on his Throne, and
having all the world before him, the books are opened: 1. In the general, the
books are said to be open: 2. Here is a special book for the Elect, The book of
life was opened: 3. Here you have sentence passed and pronounced, according to
what was written in these books, and according to their works: And the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to
their works. Here the Judicial Process is noted by imitation of Humane Courts,
in which the whole Process is wont to be drawn up, and laid before the Judge;
from whence the Judge determines for or against the person, according to the
Acts and Proofs that lie open before him. The Equity, Justice and Righteousness
of Christ the Judge, that sits on his white Throne, is set forth by a Metaphor
taken from Humane Courts; where the Judge pronounces sentence according to the
written Law, and the Acts and Proofs agreeing thereunto: All things are Heb. 4.
13. Rev. 1. 14.
naked and bare before him, whose eyes are as a flame of fire. But to show that
the Judgment shall be as accurate and particular in the trial, and just and
righteous in the close; as if all were registered and put on Record, nothing
shall escape or be mistaken in its circumstances, but all things shall be so
cleared and issued beyond all doubts and disputes, as if an exact Registre of
them had been kept and published; in all which, there is a plain allusion unto
the words of Daniel, speaking thus of this Judgment, The Dan. 7. 10.
Judgment was set, and the books were opened: We find six several books
mentioned in the Scripture.

First, The Book of Nature, that is mentioned by David* Psalm. 139. 16.
Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect, and in thy book all my
members were written; which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there
was none of them. It Is a Metaphor from curious work men, that do all by the The
world says Clemens Alexandrious is De^ Scriptura, the first Bible that God
made for the instruction of Man.
Book, or by a Model set before them, that nothing may be deficient, or done
amiss. Had God left out an eye in his common place Book (says one) thou had
wanted it: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handy work: The Psalmist looks upon that great Volume of heaven and earth, and
there reads in Capital letters, the Prints and Characters of God's glory. This
Book (says one) was imprinted at the New Jerusalem, by the finger of Jehovah;
and is not to be sold, but to be seen, at the sign of Glory, of every one that
lifts up his eyes to heaven. In this Book of nature which is made up of three
great leaves, Heaven, Earth and Sea, God has made himself visible, yea,
legible; even his eternal power and Godhead: So that all men are left without
Romans 1. 20.
excuse. Out of this Book, the poor blind Gentiles might have learned many
choice lessons; as, First, that they had a maker: Secondly, That this Maker
being before the things made, is eternal, without beginning or ending. Thirdly,
That he must needs be Almighty, which made all things out of nothing; and
sustained such a Mass of creatures: Fourthly, The order, variety and
distinction of creatures, declare his mavelous Wisdom: Fifthly, In this Book
they might run and read the great goodness, and the admirable kindness of God,
to the sons of men; in making all the creatures for their good, for their
service and benefit: Sixthly and lastly, In this Book they might run and read,
what a most excellent, what a most admirable, what a most transcendent workman
God was: What are the Heavens, the Earth, the Sea, but a sheet of Royal Paper,
written all over with the Wisdom and Power of God? Now, in the great day of
account, this Book shall be produced to witness against the Heathen World,
because they did not live up to the light that was held forth to them in this
Book; but crucified that light and knowledge, by false ways of worship, and by
their wicked manners; whereof the Apostle gives you a Bead-roll or Catalogue,
from verse. 21. to the end of that 1. of the Romans. But

Secondly, there is the Book of Providence, wherein ^.
all particulars are registered, even such as Atheists may count trivial and
inconsiderable; Mat. 10. 30. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered:
And where is their number summed up? even in the Book of Providence. The three
Worthies were taken out of the fiery furnace, Dan. 3. 27
with their hairs in full number, not one of them singed: Paul encouraging the
Passengers to eat, who were in fear and danger of death; tells them, that there
should not an Act. 27. 34.
hair fall from the head of any of them: And when Saul 1 Samuel 14. 45.
would have put Jonathan to death, the people told him, That there should not a
hair of his head fall to the ground. Christ does not say, that the hairs of
your eye lids are numbered, but the hairs of your head, where there is the
greatest plenty, and the least use. Though hair is but an excrement, and the
most contemptible part of man; yet every hair of an Elect person, is observed,
and registered down in God's Books, and not one of them shall be lost. Nor the
Holy Ghost does not say, the hairs of your heads shall be numbered, but the
hairs of your head are all numbered, God has already booked them all down; and
all to show us that special, that singular care that God takes of the smallest
and least concernments of his chosen ones. This Book of Providence God will
produce in the great day, to confute and condemn the Atheists of the World; who
have denied a Divine Providence, and whose hearts have swelled against his
Government of the world, according to the counsels of his own heart. But

Thirdly, There is the Book of men's afflictions, this some account an entire
Book of it self; Psalm. 56. 8. Thou tellest my wanderings; put thou my tears into
thy bottle, are The Septuagint, for my wanderings or flit^ings, have (...), my
L^fe; to teach us, says one, that our life is but a flitting.
they not in thy book? God told all those weary steps that David took, in
passing over those two great Forests, when he fled from Saul; or thou
cypherest up my flittings, as the words may be read; whilst David was hunted up
and down like a Partridge, and hushed out of every bush, and had no certain
dwelling place; but driven from post to pillar, from one Country to another:
God was all this while a noting down, and a numbering of his flittings, and a
bottleing up his tears, and a booking down his sighs; Put thou my tears into
thy bottle, Heb. my tear; that is every tear of mine; let not one of them be
lost, but kept safe with thee, as so much sweet water. God is said in
Scripture, to have a Bag and a Bottle, a Bag for our sins, and a Bottle for our
tears; and Oh, that we would all labor to fill his bottle with our tears, as
we have filled his bag with our sins; and certainly, if the white tears of his
servants be bottled up, the red tears of their blood shall not be cast away; if
God keep the tears of the Saints in store, much more will he remember their
blood to avenge it; and though Tyrants burn the bones of the Saints, yet they
cannot blot out their tears and blood out of God's Register; Are they not in
thy book? are they not in thy Register, or Book of Accounts (where they cannot
be blotted out by any time or Tyrants?) i. e. yes, certainly they are; thou
do assuredly book them down, and wilt never forget one of them, according to
the usual Interrogatory, that was used among the Hebrews, when they affirmed a
thing past all doubt. Let the great Nimrods and oppressors of the Saints look
to themselves, for God books down all the afflictions, sufferings and
persecutions of his servants; and in the great day, he will bring in this Book,
this Register, to witness against them. Ah sinners, sinners, look to your
selves; in the great day of account, the Lord will reckon with you, for every
rod that he has spent upon you; he will reckon with you, not only for all your
mercies, but also for all your crosses; not only for all your sweets, but also
for all your bitters; not only for all your cordials, but also for all your
corrasives: In this Book of Afflictions, there is not only Item for this mercy
and that, but Item, also, for this affliction and that, this sickness and that,
this cross and that, this loss and that: And will not the opening of this Book
of the Saints afflictions and sufferings, and of sinners afflictions and
sufferings, be as the handwriting upon Dan. 5. 5, 6.
the wall, to all the wicked of the earth, in the great day of account? surely,
yes; for as they cannot answer for one mercy of ten thousand that they have
enjoyed, so they cannot answer for one affliction of ten thousand, that they
have been exercised with. But

Fourthly, There is the Book of Conscience. Conscience, Philo, is the little
Consistory of the soul: Conscience R^m. 2. 14, 15.
is Mill Testes, A thousand Witnesses, for or against a man: Conscience is
God's Preacher, in the bosom: Conscience has a good memory. (says one.) The
chief Genesis 41. 9.
Butler forgot the promise that he had made to Joseph, but Conscience told him
of it. Fama propter homines, conscientia propter Deum, says Augustine; A good
name will carry it amongst men; but it is a good conscience only, that can
acquit us before God. In this great day, the Book of every man's Conscience
shall be opened for their conviction, The Conscience is a Domestic and true
Tribunal, says Nazianzen^^.
wherein they shall read their guilt in legible Characters; for that is a Book
of Record, wherein men's actions are entered: and although now it be shut up
close, and sinners will, by no means, be brought to look into it; ^and though
many things that are written in this Book, seem to be so greatly obliterated
and blotted, that they can hardly be read: Yet, in that great day of Accounts,
God will refresh and recover the luster of those Ancient Writings; and sinners,
in that day, shall find, that Conscience ^
has an Iron Memory. In the last day, God will bring the Book of Conscience
out of the Rubbish, as they did the Book of the Law, in Josiah's time; and the
very laying open of this Book before sinners, will even put them besides their
w^ts, and fill them with unspeakable horror and terror; and be a hell on this
side hell unto them: In this Book they shall find an exact account of every
vain thought they have had, and of every idle word they have spoke, and of
every evil action they have done; and Oh, what amazement and astonishment will
this fill them with! By the Books, in this, Rev. 20. 12. Origin does Comm. ad.
Romans 14.
understand the Books of Conscience, which now are hid, not from God, but from
most men; for the hidden things of the heart are not now known; but then they
shall be opened, and manifested to the Consciences of every sinner, so as there
shall be no place, no room left for any Ambr. in Psalm. 1.
excuse or Plea. Ambrose says, that the Books that are here said to be opened,
are the Books of men's Consciences, and God's Omniscience. Oh, what dreadful
challenges and accusations will every sinner be forced to read out of this Book
of Conscience, in the great day: Oh, how, in that great day, will all wicked
men wish, that they had followed the counsel of the Heathen Orator, when he
said, A recta conscientia ne latum quidem unguem discedendum: Ci^. ^^ Ossic.
A man may not depart an hairs breadth, all his life long, from the dictates of
a good Conscience. The Book of God's Omniscience takes in all things past,
present and to come, as if he had kept a Diary of every man's thoughts, words
and actions. But

Fifthly, There is the Book of Scripture; and of all Jam. 2. 12. So speak ye;
and so do, as they that shall be judged Jam. 23, 25.
by the law of liberty; i. e. by the Gospel of Jesus Christ, by the whole Word
of God, registered in the blessed Scriptures. Now, the whole Word of God is
called the Law of Liberty; because thereby we are born again, to a new
spiritual life, and so freed from the Bondage and Slavery of sin and Satan. Our
Lord Jesus Christ, in his proceedings Let the Word be President in all
Assemblies and Judgments, says Beza. In the Nicene Council Censt^n^^e caused
the Bible to be set upon a Desk* a^ Judge of all controversies: the Word shall
be the Judge of all men's Estates at last* every man shall stand or fall
according as he holds weight in the Balance of the Sanctuary.
in the great day of Account, will judge us by the Scriptures, and pass
everlasting sentence upon us, according to the tenor of the Scriptures. At the
great and general Assizes, Christ will try all causes by the Word of God, and
pass Judgment upon all sorts of persons according to the Word; Joh. 12. 48. He
that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him; the
word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. The persons
that are to be judged in the great day, are not believers in Christ, they are
not receivers of Christ; but such as reject his person, and receive not his
Doctrine. He that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that
judges him; etc. However the rejecters of Christ may escape Judgment for a
time; yet, they shall never be able to escape the Judgment of the last day;
they shall assuredly, they shall unavoidably be judged in the last day: Though
the rejecters of Christ had none to witness against them, yet the Word of the
Lord shall be more than a thousand witnesses against them in the great day: The
word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. The Word of
the Lord is so sure and infallible a word, that Christ's Sentence in the great
day (when heaven 2 Pet. 3. 7, 10, 11, 12.
and earth shall pass away) shall proceed according to the Verdict and
Testimony thereof; For the word that I have spoken, shall judge him in the last
day: Christ will pronounce then, according to what it says now; and that as
well in favor of Believers, as against unbelievers. Ad. 17. 31.
Look, as Christ himself is ordained to be the Judge of quick and dead; so the
Word, the Doctrines which he has delivered, will be the rule of all his
Judicial proceedings, both in acquitting the righteous, and condemning the
wicked. By the Books in this, Rev. 20. 12. Augustine Lib. 20. De C. Dei c. 14.
and Beda says the same with Austin.
understands the Books of the Old and New Testament, which shall then be
opened; because, according to them the Judge will pronounce sentence; Romans 2.
16. When God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my
Gospel, which promises heaven and happiness to all believers. The Sentence of
the last day shall be but a more manifest declaration of that Judgment, that
the Lord, in this life, most an end, has passed upon men. Heathens shall be
judged by the Law of Nature, profligate Professors by the written Law, and the
Word Mar. 16. 16.
preached: Believers by the Gospel, which says, He that believes, shall be
saved; He that believes, shall not Joh. 3. 15, 16. 36. cap. 5. 24. Pa^eus. 2
Cor. 8. 12.
perish, but have eternal, life; He that believes on the Son, has everlasting
life; He that believes, shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
death to life. Christ shall, in the great day, give Sentence according to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, which says, If there be first a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.
The Jesuits report of a Student at Paris, who coming to Confession, and not
being able, for tears and sobbings, to speak, was willed by his Confessor, to
write down his sins, which he did; and when the Confessor received it, the
writing vanished, and there remained nothing but the white and clean paper;
this say they, was by a miracle, because of his great contrition. Let the
credit of this story, be upon the reporter; but upon the credit of the Word of
God, if we believe: really, savingly, and repent unfeignedly, all our sins
shall be blotted out; and a Book of God neither needs nor uses Books to
judge by, but this is spoken after the manner of men. Mordecai's name was
Registered in the Chronicles of Persia, Ejih. 6. 1, 2 3. And Iamerlane had
always, by him a Catalogue of his best Servants, and their good deserts, which
he daily perused.
Judge. But

Sixthly, and lastly, There is a Book of Life, Rev. 20. 12. And another book
was opened, which is the book of life: the Book of Life, is the Book of all
those that were elected and redeemed to life, through Christ Jesus. This Book
of Life contains a Register of such particular persons, in whose Salvation,
God from all Eternity, determined to have his mercy glorified; and for whom
Christ merited Faith; Repentance, and perseverance, that they should repent,
believe, and be finally saved. The book of life shall be opened; that is to
say, the Decrees of God will be then published and made known, which now are
sealed up in his breast, and locked up in his Archives. Then it will be seen
who are appointed to life, for the glorifying of God's free, rich and Sovereign
Grace; and whom he purposed to leave in their sins, and to perish for ever, for
the exaltation of his Justice. It Is called A Book of Life; not that God has
need of a Book, but to note the certainty of Predestination; viz. that God
knows all and every of the Elect, even as men know a thing which, for memory's
sake, they set down in writing. This Book of Life shall be opened in the great
day, because then it shall appear, who were Elect, who Reprobates; who truly
believed in Christ, who not; who worshipped God in spirit and in truth, and who
not; who walked with God as Noah, and who not, who set up God as the object of
their fear; who not; who followed the Lamb whither ever he went, and who not;
who were sincere, and who not; who preferred Christ above ten thousand worlds,
and who preferred Barrabas before Jesus; and their Farms, and their Oxen, and
their Mat. 25. 32.
Swine, yea, their very Lusts, before a Savior, a Redeemer; Ezekiel. 9. 4, 6.
who are Sheep, and who are Goats; who are Sons, and who are Slaves; who have
mourned for their own sins and the sins of the time, and who they are that have
made a sport of sin, etc. Of this Book of Life, you read often in Scripture;
Phil. 4. 3. And I entreat thee also, true yoke fellow, help those women which
labored with me in the Gospel, with Clement also, and with other my
fellow laborers, whose names are in the book of life. Vorstius thinks it a
speech taken from the custom of soldiers or Cities, in which the chosen
Soldiers or Citizens, are by name written in a certain Book or Roll. This Book
or Roll is called here The Book of Life, because therein are written all the
Elect, who are ordained to Eternal Life, Rev. 3. 5. He that overcomes, the
same shall be clothed in white raiment, and I will not blot out his name out
of the book of life: In this Book of Life, all the just that live by faith, are
written. The Elect are certain of Joh. 10. 28, 29, 30 31.
eternal life, they shall never perish, nor none can ever pluck them out of the
Father's hand, nor out of Christ's hand. God is said to have Books
Metaphorically, The Holy God, by an Ambr^pepatheria speaks to our capacity,
for he does all things without the help of Books.
he needs no Books to help his Memory, he does all things by his infinite
Wisdom, Eternal Foreknowledge, Counsel, Government and Judgment; but thus men
cannot do; for whatsoever is done in their Councils, Cities, Families,
Contracts, etc. for memory's sake, is set down in writing; that so, as there is
occasion, they may look it over, and call to mind such things as they desire:
Mark, not to have our names blotted out of the Book of Life, is to have them
always remain therein; that is, to enjoy Eternal Glory; and what can the soul
desire more? The names of the Elect are written in the Book of Life; they do
not obtain Salvation by chance, but were elected of God to life and happiness,
before the Foundation of the World. Now, their names being once written in the
Book of Life, they shall never, never be blotted out of that Book. In the Book
of Predestination, there is not one blot to be found; the Salvation of the
Elect, is most sure and certain; Rev. 13. 8. And all that dwell on the earth
shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life, of the Lamb
slain from the foundation of the world. The names of the Elect are said to be
written in the Book of Life, by an usual Metaphor, for we commonly write down
the names of such as are dear unto us, that we may continually remember them:
So God having, in his Eternal Council, elected some to Salvation, has written
their names in the Book of Life; as our Savior tells us, Rejoice, because your
Luke 10. 20.
names are written in heaven. Some understand the Metaphor of the Sonship of
the Elect; so that to be written in the Book of Life, shows that they are heirs
of Glory; for we know that such are to inherit, whose names are written in the
last Will and Testament of men. Of this Book of Life, you may further read,
Rev. 17. 8. Rev. 20. 15. Rev. 21. 27. Rev. 22. 19.

Now, from this Book of Life, that shall be opened, in the great day, when the
other Books shall be opened (as has been showed) every sincere Christian may
form up this Eleventh Plea, as to the Ten Scriptures that are in the Margin,
that refer to the great Eccles. 9. 11. cap. 12. 14. Mat. 12. 14. cap. 18 23.
Luke 16. 2. Romans 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. H^b. 9. 27. cap. 13. 17. 1 Pet. ^. 5.
Dan. 9. 24. Coals. 2. 14.
day of account, or t(...) man's particular account. Most Holy and Blessed
Lord! cast thine eye upon the Book of Election, and there thou will find my
name written: Now, my name being written in that Book, I am exempt from all
condemnation, and interested in the great Salvation; my name being written in
the Book of Life, I am secured from coming into the Judgment of Reprobation or
Condemnation; Joh. 5. 14. Revel. 21. 27. Jesus Christ, who has written my name
in the Book of Life, has made up my acounts for me; he has satisfied thy
Justice, and pacified thy Wrath, and born the Curse, and purchased my Pardon,
and put upon me an everlasting Righteousness, and given me my Quietus est; he
has crossed out the black lines of my sins, with the red lines of his blood; he
has cancelled all the Bonds, wherein I stood obliged to Divine Justice. I
further plead, O Blessed Lord! That there is an immutable Connection betwixt
being written in this Book of Life, and the obtaining of Eternal Life; and if
the Connection betwixt being written in this Book of Life, and the obtaining of
Eternal Life were not peremptory, what reason could there be of opening this
Book, in the day of Judgment. The Book of Life is a Book of Sovereign Grace,
upon which lies the weight of my Salvation, my happiness, my all; and
therefore, by that Book I desire to stand or fall. Well, says the Lord, I
cannot but accept of this Plea, as holy, honorable, just and righteous; and
therefore, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for thee: Mat. 25. 21, 34. Thus, by Divine Aslistance, and by a special, and a
gracious hand of Providence upon me, I have finished those select and important
Cases of Conscience, which I designed to speak to.

Soli Deo Gloria in Aeternum.

