THE READING Of that famous Lawyer Sr. Robert Brook Knight. Upon the Statute of
LIMITATIONS, 32. H. 8. Cap. 2.

London, Printed for Hen. Twyford, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Vine-Court, in the Middle Temple. 1647.

THE WORDS OF THE STATUTE OF 32. Hen. 8. Cap. 2. of Limitations.
NO person shall sue, have, Droitures auncestres* 60. years.
or maintain any writ of right, or make any prescription, title or claim to,
or for any Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Commons, Pensions,
Portions, Corodies, or other Hereditaments of the possession of his or their
Ancestors or predecessors; and declare and allege any further seisin or
possession of his or their ancestor or predecessor, but only of the seisin or
possession of his Ancestor or predecessor which has been, or now is, or shall
be seized of the said Manors, Lands, etc. or other Hereditaments within
sixty years next before the test of the same writ, or next before the said
prescription title or claim so sued, commenced, brought, made or had.

Droiturel possory 50. years.
No person or persons shall sue, have or maintain any Assesse of Morduncestor,
Cosinage, Ayel, writ of entry upon dissease done to any of his Ancestors or
predecessors, or any other action possessory upon the possession of any of his
Ancestors or predecessors, for any Manors, Lands, Tenements or other
Hereditaments of any further seisin or possession of his or their Ancestor or
predecessor, but only of the seisin or possession of his or their Ancestor or
predecessor, which was or hereafter shall be seized of the same Manors, Lands,
Tenements or other Hereditaments within 50. years next before the test of the
original of the same writ to be brought.

Actions possessory, 30. years.
or other Hereditaments of or upon his or their own seisin above 30. years
next before the test of the original of the same writ to be brought, etc.

Avowries, 50. years.
and allege any seisin of any suite or service in the same avowry or
cognizance in the possession of his or their Ancestors or predecessor or
predecessors or in his own possession, or in the possession of any other whose
estate he shall pretend or claim to have above fifty years next before the
making of the said Avowry or cognizance.

formedous in reverter, formedous in remainder and Scire facias, upon fines of
any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments, shall be sued and taken
within fifty years next after the title and cause of action fallend. and at
no time after the said fifty years passed.

his, or their Ancestors or predecessors were in actual possession or seisin
of, or in the same Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and at any time
within the years before limited in this act and in manner and form aforesaid;
if the same be traversed or denied by the party, person, or defendant, then
after such trial therein had, all and every such person and persons and their
heirs shall from thenceforth be utterly barred for ever of all and every the
said writs, actions, avowries, cognizance, prescription, title and claim
hereafter to be sued, had, or made of, and for the same Manors, Lands, etc. or
other the premises, or any part of the same.

Provided always that every Scire facias, Com. cognizance, title, claim or
prescription depending; or that shall hereafter bring any of the said actions,
or make any of the said avowries, prescription, title, etc. at any time before
the Feast of the Ascension of our Lord, 1546. shall allege the seisin of his
or their ancestors or predecessors, and his own possession and seisin, and
have also all other like advantage to all intents and purposes in the same
writs, actions, avowries, cognisances and prescriptions, titles, and claim as
he or they might have had at any time before the making of this Statute.

prescriptions, titles or claymes, that such person or persons may sue,
commence, or bring any of the said writs or actions, or make any of the said
avowries cognisances, prescriptions, titles or claim at any time within six
years next after such person, nor being within age shall accomplish the age of
21. years, or within six years next after such person now being in prison
shall be enlarged, or never being out of the Realm come into the Realm. And
that every such person in their said actions, writs, avowries, cognisances,
prescriptions, title or claim to be made, etc. within the said six years,
shall allege within the said six years, the seisin of his or their Ancestors
or predecessors, or of his own possession, or of the possession of those whose
estate he shall then claim. And also within the same six years shall have
all and every such advantages in the same as he or they might have had before
the making of this act.

such manner as the same infant after his full age, or the said woman covert
after, etc. should or might have had within six years then next ensuing by
virtue of the provision last before rehearsed.

make their said titles within the said one year, as the demandant demandants
in such writ, etc. should or might have had or enjoyed in the said former
action or suite.

Provided furthermore, that if any false Verdict happen hereafter to be given
or made in any of the said actions, suites, avowries, prescriptions, titles or
claymes; that then the party grieved by reason of the same shall and may have
his Attaint upon every such Verdict so given or made, and the plaintiff in the
Attaint upon judgment for him given, shall have his recovery, execution, and
other advantage in like manner as heretofore has been used, any thing in this
Statute contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

OBSERVATIONS MADE BY THE READER, By way of Introduction for the better
understanding of the true meaning of this Statute.
How the Common Law was before the making of this Statute.

IT to be observed that by the Statute of Westminster the first, Writ of right.
Cap. 38. the limitation in a Writ of Right is from the time of Richard the
first, which is 340. years past.

And in a Writ of Assise of Novill dissesin, Assesse Nuper obiit.
and in a Nuper obiit by the same Statute of Westminster the first, post primam
tranfretationem domini Hen. filii regis Johannis in vasconiam, which is 300.
years past.

Mardancester, cosinage nativo habendo, writ of Entry. Avowries.
And in a Writ of Mordancestor, Ayle, Cosinage, and Nativo habendo, and in a
Writ of Entry, Post Coronationem domini Henrici filii Regis Johannis, which is
325 years past.

And the said Statute of Westminster the second, gives the like limitation in
Avowries, as in an Assise of Novel disseisin, that is to say, Post primam
transfretationem domini Henrici filii Regis Johannis in vasconiam, which is
300. years past.

Assise.
But now the Writ of Assise which was wont to be Quod disscisivit eum post
primam transfretationem domini Henrici filii Regis Johannis in vasconiam, shall
be Quod disseisivit eum infra 30. annis jam ult. elapsos.

Writ of Entrey.
And whereas the Writ of Entry was wont to be Quod disseisivit eum post primam
transfretationem domini Henrici filii Regis Johannis in vasconiam, It shall be
now Quod disseisivit eum infra 50. annis jam ult. elapsos.

Mardancester.
Also the Writs of Mordancestor, which were Si obiit post Coronationem domini
Henrici filii Regis Johannis, shall now (...) Si obiit infra 50. annis iam ult.
elapsos.

Also the Writ of Nativo habendo, Nativo habendo.
which was Quod fugiit de terra sua post Coronationem domini Henrici filii
Regis Johannis, shall be recovered, if it be brought of the seisin of his
Ancestor, Quod fugiit infra 50. annis iam ult. elapsos, And if it be of his own
seisin, then Si fugiit infra 30. annos iam ult. elapsos.

And note that in all Writs of Right, The form of writs and declaration since
this Statute
Ayle, Cosinage, Nuper obiit, and in all Writs of Possession, and in all other
Writs, in which men shall allege explees, or make mention of any seisin, that
they shall be of the same form as they were before the making of this Statute,
but when they declare, then they shall make a special allegation of the
explees within such a time, within the limitation of this Statute, that is to
say, Tempore Regis nunc, and the like, etc. But if he allege the seisin
within the time of such a King, of which part may be within the limitation, and
part without, there he shall allege the year certain, that is to say,
Capiendo inde exples. etc. an. 12. Reg. H. 7. or the like, for that the Statute
is, that he shall allege seisin within the time, and not beyond, and
therefore he may not allege generally in the time of such a King, where part
is within, and part without, for the doubt, etc. But where he alleges
seisin An. octavo of such a King, and in truth the seisin was An. 9. or in the
tenth year, this is not traversable, but where the seisin was before, which is
out of the limitation, that is material and issuable.

And note, that if the seisin may be proved within the years before the
limitation, that suffices, because the statute says, that if the seisin shall
be traversed, and the demandant cannot prove the seisin within the years
before limited, that he upon such trial shall be barred and his heirs, etc.

Devisio 1ma.
In what actions these limitations shall hold place, and in what Courts, and in
what not: And where a man may make title beyond threescore years, and what
shall be good titles upon this Statute.

AN heir brought an Admeasurement of dower against the wife tenant in dower of
this indowment being within age, which indowment was two and thirty years
past, the action is not good.

Because this is to recover land and of his own possession, and lies well at
full age.

A man brought a writ of Contra formam feoffamenti upon a deed bearing date in
the time of Edward the third, the account well lies,

Because it is to discharge himself, and to recover nothing.

A man brings a writ of contribution upon a cause of action, happening
threescore and one years past before the Writ purchased, the Action lies well,

Because he goes to have damages of the charge only of the suite, for part.

A Cessavit was brought of a Cessor 63. years past before the writ purchased,
the action lies well,

Because it is not of the seisin of him nor of his ancesters in this land.

A man brought a writ of error upon an erroneous judgment given against his
father 62. years before the writ purchased, the action well lies,

Because nothing is prohibited but a writ of right, and an action possessory of
the seisin of him or his precessors or ancestors, and this is not of his own
seisin, and is only to reverse the first judgment.

The Lord brought a writ de consuetudinibus, and servitiis, of a deforcement
61. years past, the account does not lie, because he is to recover a seigniory.

A Writ of false judgment was brought of a judgment given 61. years past,
the account lies well,

Because it is not properly a Writ of Right, nor an action of possession; and
if it be neither, nor of his own seisin, then he is not prohibited, because
that is properly of no seisin.

A man brings a Writ of Escheat of an Action accrued 62. years before this
Writ purchased, the Action lies well,

Because it is not of the seisin of himself, nor of his ancesters in this
land, but ratione dominii.

A Monstraverunt brought by tenants in ancient demesne; and declares that the
Lord demanded more services in the time of Ed. 4.61. years past, then were
demanded in the time of the Kings Progenitors, yet the action well lies,

Because it is not to recover any thing, but to discharge themselves of the
services.

A writ of Nativo habendo was brought, and declared of a seisin 61. years past,
the action does not lie,

Because he is to recover the villein, (and a termor shall not have his action
by Fitzherb. quaere inde) but is a writ of Right in its nature, or an action
possessorie at the least.

A writ of Ne injuste vexes brought against the Lord to avoid an incroachment
gained 61. years past, the action lies,

Because it is only to discharge the land, and to recover nothing; and yet it
is a writ of right.

A man brought a writ of Mesne upon a deed of acquitall, made 61. years past,
the action lies,

Because it is only in discharge, and is to recover nothing; and is not
properly a writ of right, because battle nor grand assise does not lie in it,
and he shall recover nothing but his acquitall, and he is supposed in possession
of his acquitall, and it is not of the possession of the plaintiff, because it
may be that neither he nor his ancesters were never acquitted, and that the Lord
Paramount never demanded the services until now, and therefore the action is
not restrained.

One brought a Quare Impedit, and declared of the seisin of his ancestour 61.
years past by presentation, and that afterward the Church became void, and the
Bishop presented by lapse, and now his Clarke is dead, etc. the action well
lies,

Because the avoidance which is the title, is within the time of limitation,
because the lapse did not set him out of possession, and he shall recover the
presentation.

A man brought a Quo jure, and declared of a time 61. years past, the action
lies,

Because though it be a writ of Right, yet it is only in discharge, and to
recover nothing.

A Warrantia Chartae is brought by one, Quia timet implacitari: and declares
upon a warrantie made 61. years past, the action well lies,

Because he shall recover nothing but his warrantie, and if he lose
afterward, then he shall have in value by a Scire facias, which is another
action; and also he must vouche afterward, etc. and if he be impleaded in an
Assise, he shall give notice, etc. so that there shall be other circumstances
before that he shall recover.

A man brought an Assise of Nuisance, and declared of a Nuisance levied by the
defendant 32. years past, the action well lies,

Because he shall recover nothing, but remove the Nuisance.

A man brings a Quid juris clamat, or a Per quae servitia against the tenant
upon a fine levied of a reversion or services 62. years past, the action lies,

Because the reversion and services are in him, and he demands nothing but
attornement.

A Formedon in the Discender is brought, (of cause of action accrued 62. years
past) and within 60. years the action does not lie,

Because that is an action possessorie, and not a writ of right, ut videtur,
Vide Dyer 278. and 291. that a Formedon in Reverter and Remainder is not within
the statute, because the gift is the title.

A writ of Waste is brought of waste made 60. years past, the action lies,

Because no land is expressly demanded, and he declares of no seisin.

A man brought a plaint in a base Court of customarie land, and made
protestation in the nature of a writ of Right at the Common Law, and declares
of a seisin 61. years past, the action does not lie,

Because this is ruled by the equity of this Statute, and so it was by the
ancient limitation: and also the declaration is in the nature of such a writ at
the Common Law, and every writ at the Common Law is ordered by this Statute.
Yet quaere whether this Statute extend to Copieholders as to the avowrie for
services, for it seems that it does not but only to freeholders, because
they shall not allege seisin in his or their auncesters, according to the
words of the Statute, but only in the Lord.

A man brings a plaint in a privileged Court, or in Wales, or in the
Cinqueports, where they have authority to hold pleas per querelam, and declares
upon the ancient limitation, it lies well,

Because the Statute speaks of the test of the Writ, so that it must be by
Writ, which this is not.

A man brought a writ of right close in ancient demean, he cannot declare of
the ancient limitation,

Because the Statute speaks from the test of the Writ.

In a writ of right of Ward, the plaintiff declared of seisin of service and
seigniory, etc. 61. years past, and that his tenant died, his heir within
age, and that the defendant deforced him, this is a good declaration,
notwithstanding the Statute,

Because he was possessed of his seigniory until the deforcement, which is
within 61. years, and he shall recover but a chattell only.

A man recovers certain land by a Praecipe quod reddat, or by another action,
the tenant dies, his heir enters, the 61. years pass, the demandant or his
heir may have a Scire facias to execute the judgment,

Because this is not an action possessorie, nor in the droit, but a writ of
execution, and therefore out of the Statute.

A woman brought a writ of right of dower of the seisin of her husband, 61.
years past, the action lies,

Because that is not of her own seisin, nor of none of her ancestors nor
predecessors, neither is it an action possessorie, and it is not prohibited by
the statute.

A writ of Right of Disclaimer is brought, and declares of a Disclaimer 61.
years past, this is a good declaration,

Because it is not of the seisin of his Ancestour, nor predecessor, but
ratione dominii, because this seisin shall be referred to the land, and not to
the seigniory, as appears by express words of the Statute in the end of the
third Article, because the Statute speaks where he or his ancesters or
predecessors were seized of the same land or tenements, or hereditaments,
within 60. years. And also the Writ does not demand land, and yet it may
recover land.

Tenant by the courtesy of England of a Manor with estovers appendant, is
disturbed, and after is outlawed of felony, the King enters by office, the
tenant by courtesy dies 61. years after the utlawry, the heir shall not have
a Quod permittat,

Because it is a writ of right, and to recover the common of estovers, and the
time is past, and in this action he shall allege seisin.

A man seized of an advowson presents, and his Clarke is instituted and
inducted, and dies 61. years after this statute, the patron presents and is
disturbed, and he brings a writ of right of advowson, he may declare of a
seisin 61. years past notwithstanding this statute,

Because he shall recover possession of the advowson, and the possession of the
presentation afterward is a seisin for the patron in the patronage, and also
in this case he was seized within 60. years, because he was seized until the
usurper disturbed him, and that was within 60. years.

A Formedon of ten acres of land which passed against the tenant, and judgment
given thirty two years past, the Tenant shall have an attaint,

Because that albeit it shall be of his own seisin, and to recover land, and
the 11. article of the Statute cannot be so taken to set the lands at liberty,
etc. yet that is not properly of the seisin of himself nor of his ancestors,
because that is taken, where it is taken upon the seisin, as in an assise and
other actions, where they shall allege seisin and explees, as appears by the
first branch of the statute, which has these words, viz. [And allege and
declare any farther seisin, etc.] because the action is brought upon the false
verdict, and not upon the seisin, etc.

An Assise of Fresh force is brought in a City by Bill without writ of a
disseisin made to the plaintiff himself twenty two years past, the action
does not lie, notwithstanding that it be within the limitation of an Assise,

Because that fresh force ought to be brought and recovered within 40. days
after disseisin, etc. and therefore notwithstanding that it be not by Writ, yet
that will not serve by the Common Law.

In an annuity the plaintiff declared of a grant made to him and his heirs,
by the defendant for him and his heirs, 61. years past, the action lies,

Because no tenant is charged, and he does not declare of any seisin, but only
upon the grant.

In an Assise the tenant makes a bar at large, the plaintiff said that I.H.
was seized in fee, and holds of him, and dies seized without heir 34. years
past, by which he enters presently by Eschete, and was seized, and disseised by
the defendant 28. years past, etc. this is a good title, besides this
limitation, notwithstanding this statute,

Because it is not brought of the seisin of his ancestour or predecessor in
this land, and his own seisin was within 30. years, and therefore when that
seisin serves to bring an action upon his own possession, he may make title
before the limitation, if it be not made of the seisin of his ancester or
predecessor.

Assise the tenant made a bar at large, the plaintiff said that his villein
purchased the land of I. S. by which the plaintiff entered 35. years past, and
was seized and disseised by the plaintiff 20. years past, etc. this is a good
title, ratione qua supra.

In a writ of entry, in nature of an Assise, the tenant made a bar by the
feoffment of I. H. and gives a color, the plaintiff said that his father was
seized, and died seized 12. years past, and he entered as heir, and was seized
and disseised 11. years past, etc. this is no good title upon this statute,

Because in this action he shall not make title at large as in an Assise. Note
the difference.

In a writ of Right of Advowson the plaintiff made title that he himself 20.
years past recovered the Advowson in a writ of Right of Advowson against I. N.
the Church full, and now the Incumbent dead, and the plaintiff presented, and
the def. disturbed him, this is no good title upon this stat.

Because in this action he shall allege seisin as in grossis decimis, small
tithes, etc. which he cannot do, without alleging seisin; so that a recovery
only without seisin in him or his ancesters is not good.

An Assise the tenant pleads a recovery against the father of the plaintiff,
whose heir he is, etc. by which he enters, the plaintiff says, that after
seisin the father of the plaintiff enters, and dies seized 12. years past,
and he enters as heir, and was seized and disseised, etc. this is a good
title, notwithstanding the recovery,

Because that notwithstanding the recovery binds the blood, yet the seisin and
disseisin is a new title.

In an Assise the tenant makes a bar at large, the plaintiff said that the
tenant himself 62 years past was seized in fee, and infeoffed a stranger,
upon condition that he shall enfeoffe such a person as he shall name before
Easter, and first he names an estranger before Easter, and afterward and
before Easter he names the plaintiff, and thereupon the feoffee enfeoffs the
plaintiff who was seized and disseised fourteen years past, this is a good
title, notwithstanding that it be without the limitation,

Because by 14 Ed. 4. the feoffee may enfeoffe either the one or the other, and
it is not of the seisin of his ancestour nor predecessor.

An Assise the tenant makes a bar by a bargain and sale of I. S. by
Indenture enrolled within the 6. months, and the plaintiff made title by
another bargain and sale from the same I. S. by Indenture enrolled within,
etc. made unto him after the first deed indented, because that I. S. at the
time of the first bargain and inrolment was an infant, and entered at one and
twenty years, and sold by the last deed enrolled to the plaintiff, by which he
was seized and disseised, etc. this is no good title, etc.

Because an infant shall not avoid a deed enrolled by nonage, nor he which
claims by him.

In an Assise the tenant made a bar by a lease made by I.S. to W.N. for term
of life, the lessee grants the reversion to the defendant, and W.H. the tenant
attorns, and after aliens to the plaintiff, by which he enters; the plaintiff
says that the said I.S. the lessor leased to the said W.H. for term of life,
upon condition that if he grant the reversion to any during the life of the
said W.N. that then W.N. shall have fee, and said that the lessor granted the
said reversion 61. years past by that deed to the tenant, and after he attorned
as aforesaid, and after W. N. enfeoffed the plaintiff, and was seized and
disseised 12. years past, etc. this is a good title,

Because it is not of the seisin of his ancestors nor predecessors, but of
his own seisin, and the grant of the reversion in see was in the lessee,
because there was the same instrument, the grant and attornement: and therefore
the attornment void, contrary if the grant had been by fine, as in a Quid juris
clamat, 6 R. 2. that then the condition would come too late.

In an Assise the tenant was barred by a feoffment of the plaintiff himself
with warrantie 61. years past, and relyes upon the warrantie; the plaintiff
shows that the same feoffment was by deed indented, and that upon a condition
that if the defendant do not pay 100. pound within one year to the plaintiff,
that he shall reenter, the defendant does not pay, by which he entered, and was
seized, and disseised 12. years past, etc. this is a good title,
notwithstanding this stat.

Because where a man binds the defendant, he may make title of his own
possession, as recovery of a villein, and the like; and it is no part of the
seisin of his ancestour nor predecessor, and therefore out of the case of the
statute, as to the 61. years past.

Assise the tenant makes a bar at large, the plaintiff makes title, for that
the same defendant in the life of his father sold the land, etc. to the
plaintiff by Indenture, and delivers to him the Deed, and afterward the father
dies within the 6. months, and the defendant enrols the Deed within the 6.
months, by which the plaintiff enters, and was seized and disseised, etc. this
is no good title upon this statute,

Because a man may confess and avoid a Deed enrolled, as to say that he had
nothing at that time, etc. but not by Infancy, Ideocie, Non sanae memoriae or
the like; and the Deed takes its perfection by the livery, and not by the
inrolment; for if one make a grant when he has nothing, and the land, and he
has before attornement, this does not make the grant good, and the Indenture
is not an estoppell, because where a man releaseth to I. N. being in full
seisin, yet he may say that he had nothing at the time of the grant, etc. And
the same law is it of a lease by Indenture in the time of his father, and by 12
H. 4. f. 12. a man may confess and avoid a deed enrolled.

In an Assise the tenant makes a bar at large, the plaintiff makes title
because that I.N. was seized in fee, and leaseth to W. X. and T.S. for term of
life, and after grants his reversion which he had depending upon the estate of
T. S. to the plaintiff, the tenants attorne and dye, and the plaintiff enters,
and was seized and disseised, and all is within 20 years, this is not a good
title upon this statute,

Because the Grantor shall not have such a reversion.

Mayor and Comminalty by their name of Corporation, and not by their proper
name, may make title after this Statute by 80. years past,

Because that is of their own possession, and not of the seisin of their
ancestour nor predecessor: And the same law of Deane and Chapter, but contrary
of Bishop and Parson upon a seisin of his Predecessor, because that is
expressly within the words of the Statute. Nota.

DIVISIO 2da. OR, The second days Reading, or Lecture.
Where a man shall prescribe according to the ancient form, and where not; and
what prescriptions sha^ be good upon this limitation, an^ what not.

A Man may prescribe th^^ he and his ancestors (...) predecessors, or tho^^
whose estate, etc. were seized from the time th^^ contrary whereof, etc. as
before th^^ Statute: yet he shall not allege or declare in the record of a
seisin within 6^ years before the confession of the prescription, yet it
seems that he shall take advantage in evidence of the prescription of an
ancient seisin before 60. years, with a seisin alleged within 60. years,
without elder commencement: And therefore the prescription as it seems ought
to be elder, but he cannot allege nor declare in the record but within 60.
years, but may enforce it in evidence at large, quod nota. And by the general
ancient form of prescription, it shall be intended and meant as a
prescription, of which part of the seisin is within 60. years, according to
this Statute.

In a Quod permittat the plaintiff prescribes in him, and those whose estate he
has in the Manor of D. for common appointment from the time of King Rich. the
first, he may do it well, notwithstanding this statute,

Because the Statute does not extend to a prescription by whose estate, etc.
but to a prescription in him, his ancestors and predecessors.

A Quo Warranto the plaintiff prescribes in him and his ancestors for toll
traverse from the time, etc. to have a penny for every load of stuff carried
over my land to his Manor, etc. this is a good prescription,

Because this is to go overthwart my land, but through toll is to go over the
way through my land, and therefore contrary there: and the prescription shall
serve as a new title, by the usage afterward.

Assise of common the plaintiff made title to common appendant in the Manor
of the defendant, the defendant prescribes that he, etc. and all his ancestors
whose heir he is, etc. have used from the time of Rich. the first to put forth
of their Commons such cattle which were not levant and couchant upon the same
lands to which, etc. and for that that those cattle were not levant, etc. he
put them forth, etc. this is a good prescription,

Because it is not to recover any thing, but to discharge only.

In a Quo Warranto, etc. the plaintiff prescribes in him and his ancestors
Lords of the Manor of D. from the time, etc. to take a penny for every load of
through toll of those which carry through his Manor, this is a good
prescription,

For the reasons before alleged, and because it is contrary to common right.

In a Quo warranto the party prescribed in him and his ancestors Lords of the
Manor of D. to have cognizance of pleas, and to hold plea in the Court of the
Manor aforesaid, from the time of, etc. this is a good prescription,

Because he cannot prescribe in the grant of pleas.

Assise of land, the def. disclaimes in the survey, and prescribes that he and
his ancestors seized of the Manor of D. have used from the time of R. 1. etc.
that when such a gutter which conduces water to such a house was ruinous, to
enter into this land, and to repair it, and that he therefore entered to
repair, this is a good prescription, notwithstanding this Statute,

Because he is not to recover anything, but to have easement, because the
Statute does not speak but only of prescription to lands, tenements, commons,
rents, portions, pensions, and hereditaments.

A quod permittat of common the plantife made title by prescription, from the
time of R. 1. etc. the defendant said that he, etc. have been within age
successively de tempore, etc, judgment, etc. this shall not avoid the
prescription,

Because this is a Law, as a condition or recovery.

A man has had a Fair, and one Market by prescription, from the time of R. 1.
etc. which is seized into the Kings hands 60. years past by non-claime in a
Quo Warranto before this Statute, etc. he shall never have the liberties again
by prescription nor otherwise,

Because he might replevie them within 50. years.

A man which had a Leet, and Warren, and Wreck by the Kings grant, made no
claim to the same before the Justices in Air 62. years past, by which his
liberties are seized into the Kings hands, and yet he and his heirs
continually used the same afterward, and in a Quo Warranto his heir made
title to that by prescription; according to this limitation, he shall not have
his liberties by this prescription.

A man has had catalla felonum and fugitivorum from the time of R. 1. etc. and
has had allowance in Air, and afterward makes his claim in Air by
prescription, etc. he shall not have those liberties, etc.

Because a man cannot prescribe in those things which touch the Crown.

A man has had a Fair and Market by prescription certain days, and
afterward the King grants the same liberty to him by his Letters Patents 40.
years, before the Ascension, 1546. and in a Quo Warranto a month after the
Ascension, etc. he makes his claim to that by prescription, by an usage
before, etc. this is not a good prescription upon the matter,

Because the grant determines the prescription, as an obligation determines a
grant or contract.

A man prescribes that he, etc. ancient tenants of D. and all lands of D. from
the time of R. 1. etc. have been quit of toll, this is a good prescription
notwithstanding this statute,

Because that it goes in discharge, and to recover nothing.

In a Serta molendini the plaintiff after Ascension, etc. made his declaration,
that he and all those whose estate he has in the Manor of D. have had suit
of their tenants to their Mill within his Manor, from the time of R. 1. this
is a good prescription,

Because he prescribes ( per que estate) which is not restrained by the Statute.

Assise of Common the plaintiff prescribes that he has been seized of Common
for all cattle in the place where, etc. by all the time of this limitation,
this is not a good prescription,

Because the Statute says that he shall not make prescription but of the seisin
of his ancestors or predecessors within 60. years before the making, etc. and
his ancestour was not seized within the 60. years, but himself, etc. such a
prescription is not warrantable either by this Statute or by the Common Law.

In a Replevin the defendant prescribes in him and his auncesters to have
amerciaments of all his tenants of D. from the time, etc. in quibuscunque
curiis, and may distrain and make avowry for them, this is a good prescription
upon this Statute, notwithstanding that it be of an amerciament in Curia Regis.

In a Quo Warranto the plaintiff makes his title by prescription in him and his
ancestors, that they have used to have waifes from the time of, etc. and to
retain them, notwithstanding fresh suit from the time, etc. this is no good
prescription,

Because it is contrary to common right, and cannot have any lawful beginning.

A man makes a prescription in trespass, etc. that he and his auncesters from
the time, etc. to have the escapes of cattle in another man's land, in driving
to such a Park without amends made from the time of Rich. 1. this is a good
prescription, notwithstanding this Statute,

Because it is not to recover any inheritance, but only by way of discharge.

An Assise of Nuisance for stopping of water, by reason whereof 20. acres of
land are surrounded, the defendant prescribes that he and his Auncesters Lords
of the Mill of Dale, have used from the time of R. 1. etc. to stop, during the
reedifying and repair of their Mill; this is a good prescription,

Because it goes by way of easement, and to recover nothing.

A man prescribed that he, etc. Lords of the Manor of D. have had ^ way over
the land of another party from the time of R. 1. etc. to the Church of D. this
is a good prescription,

Because it is neither tenement nor he reditament, but easement, because an
Assise does not lie of a way; nor if a man give omnia tenement^ and
hereditamenta sua, the way does not pass.

In an Assise a man prescribes in common, etc. in him and his ancestors de
tempore, etc. upon which they are at issue, and it is found that he and his
ancestors have been seized by 10. years, and have been disturbed by another
10. years alternis vicibus de tempore, etc. he shall not recover upon this
verdict and prescription,

Because the interruption is equal with the seisin.

In an Assise the tenant prescribed in him and his ancestors tenants of such
land in D. to enter into the land of the plaintiff and to abate the Nuisance as
often as the plaintiff or his ancestors estop such a river de tempore, etc.
this is not a good prescription,

Because where the Common Law will serve him, he shall not prescribe. 9 Ed. 4.

Quo Warranto the Bailiffes and Comminalty of S. claim to make Fraternities of
themselves by Master and Brethren by usage de tempore, etc. and the same being
so made shall so implead and be impleaded, etc. this is no good prescription
upon this Statute, 9 E. 4.3.

An Assise by Master and Confreres of D. the defendant said that there were no
Master and Confreres there, and the plaintiff said that he and his
predecessors have been Masters and Confreres there, and capable by that name,
and have used to implead and be impleaded by that name, from the time of R. 1.
and continually afterward, this is a good prescription after this Statute, etc.

Because he cannot prescribe in a Corporation; and this prescription is to
enable him, and is not made to the land, and therefore out of the case of the
Statute.

Lord of a Manor and tenant by homage, fealty, and 10. shill. rent, the Lord
releases the services of the tenant, saving the rents, and afterward is seized
of the rent, and disseised, and brings an Assise, and makes title that he and
his auncesters, etc. de tempore, etc. have been seized of the rent, this is a
good prescription upon the Statute 31 E. 3. p. 33.

Because in a rent service a man shall not prescribe, because he may make
another title by the Common Law, contrary for a rent seck.

In a Replevin the defendant avowed because that it had been used by him and
his ancestors whose heir, etc. Lord of the Manor of D. for to distreine for
Heriot custom upon the death of every tenant of the Manor de tempore, etc.
and for Heriot custom after the death of I.W. etc. he avoweth etc. this is not
a good prescription upon this Statute,

Because for Heriot custom the property is in him, and he may seize it, and
may have an action, and a man may not prescribe in his own goods.

Dower by a woman, the defendant said that the husband was attainted of felony,
etc. the plaintiff said that it had been used in this Manor from the time of
R. 1. that the wives of a man attainted shall have dower, this is a good
prescription upon this Statute 8 H. 3. the like in Gavelkind, of which the
heir shall inherit. And this prescription is not made of the seisin of him nor
of his ancestors, and therefore out of the case of the Statute.

A replevin for an amerciament, in a leete for not coming to be sworn to the
King, the defendant prescribes that the usage is there to be sworn before the
Constable and Portreeve, and not in the Leet, this is no good prescription by
the opinion of the Court, 2 H. 4.

Abbe and his predecessors have been seized of a rent by prescription out of
the mannonr of D. de tempore, etc. the Abbey is changed into a Deane and
Chapter, where they shall not prescribe in them and their predecessors de
tempore, etc. upon this Statute,

Because they ought to prescribe part in the Abbe, and his predecessors, and
then show the alteration, and prescribe by the name of Dean and Chapter, etc. 7
Ed. 4.

Replevin the def. prescribes to have 10. pound for every daughter of every
villain which is married in his manor of D. de tempore, etc. and for to
distraine the goods of the father for the same, etc. and for marriage of such a
daughter of I.N. his villein, he avoweth this is no good prescription upon this
Statute,

Because he may take all their goods at the Common Law.

In an Assise the tenant said that he leased to W.H. for life who aliened to
the plantife in fee for which he entered, the plantife said that it had been
used de tempore, etc. which in the Village of Dale ubi, etc. that whatsoever
estate a man made, that nothing should pass but only his own estate, and the
rest to be void, this is a good prescription upon this Statute,

Because a thing which may be intended to have a lawful beginning, as by grant
or reasonable usage it is good; as to have for every poll 4. pence of the
cattle distrained, or to kill the distress which he takes damage fesant, or
to have of every one which breaks his pound, this is no good prescription
against a stranger, but against his own tenants it is, because it may begin by
assent.

In a replevin the defendant said that the tenant held 4. acres of him by
fealty, and two shillings rent, for which rent, etc. his ancestors have used
de tempore, etc. to distraine, this is no good prescription upon this Statute,

Because where the Common Law will serve, he shall not prescribe.

A man prescribes in an Avowry that he, etc. have been seized of Common without
number in the place, etc. by 40. years before the making of the prescription,
this is no good prescription,

Because the Statute does not warrant it, albeit it speak of seisin within 60.
years.

The third DIVISION, or LECTURE.
Where he that has cause of action, entry, title, or right, and suffers this
limitation to pass, may have remedy afterward, and what remedy, and where
not; As also where the laches of one shall prejudice another, and where not;
and where a may may make a claim after 60. years, and where not.

A Man sels his land by Indenture after the Statute, and before the inrolment
the vendor is atainted of felony committed after the bargain and before the
inrolment, and after the deed is enrolled, within six months the Lord enters
for Escheate, the vendee does Ouster him, and declares of a seisin by 60.
years, the Lord may re-enter, and retain, notwithstanding the Statute,

Because that the Land is not vested in the Vendee, until enrollment, and a
matter of Record shall not have relation beyond the rest, and measne acts
vested shall not be divested: And it seems that this Statute of Limitations
does not take away the right nor entry of none of his own proper seisin, but
only his action, prescription, title, and claim of the seisin of his
ancestors and predecessors; and if the vendor die before inrollment, the Lord
shall have the Ward.

A man seized of a Manor, and villain regardant in the right of his wife, the
villain purchases Lands, the husband enters, and dies, his heir enters, the
wife may enter 61. years afterward, and retain notwithstanding the Statute,

Because the husband shall not have the Land purchased in right of the wife,
and the wife was seized with him, contrary, of a termor, or tenant for life,
which are seized, jure proprio.

A man made a feoffement upon condition, on the part of the feoffee, the
condition is broken, the feoffee dies seized, his heir enters, the 60. years
pass, the feoffor may enter and retain, notwithstanding this Statute,

Because the Land is bound with a condition, and if it be by deed, it may be
pleaded by Littleton, tamen cave, that he bring no action after his entry,
because it seems that if he be driven to make title, that then he is gone:
And the like seems, if he be driven to plead that by way of bar, but upon a
general issue he may give it in evidence.

A feme disseiseres takes a husband, the disseisee releaseth to the husband
and his heirs all his right, the husband dies, the heir of the husband
enters the 60. years pass, the wife may enter, and retain,

Because this release shall enure to the wife, for albeit that the wife was it
by wrong, the husband was in by title, and therefore that enures according to
the estate, and perfects the estate of the wife; as a release to three feoffees
of a disseisor, where there are four feoffees, that enures to the rest, but
contrary, of a rel. to one of the disseisors.

An infant seized of land, takes a wife which has issue, a son, the husband
being then of the age of 8. years, and after had another son, the husband
being of the age of 18. years, the husband dies, the youngest son enters, and
the eldest son enters upon him, and continues possession by 60. years, yet
the youngest may enter and retain,

Because the eldest is bastard, by reason of the age of the father, 29. E.
3.54. and 38, and that such bastardy shall be tried by Assise by special
pleading.

A man seized of Lands, has 2. daughters and dies, I. S. abateth, and the
eldest son makes claim a furlong disjunct from the land, because he dares not
enter, and after dies without issue 60. years after, there the other sister
may enter and retain,

Because the claim of one, is an entry for the other, and one assise shall
serve for the entrer, 38. E. 3.23. but such claim shall be within the view of
the Land, for otherwise it shall not stand for an entry upon trial, etc.
because the issue was taken, 4. H. 4. And the Stat, says, that a man shall not
declare nor allege any farther seisin of his Ancestor or Predecessor then
within 60. years, etc.

A man makes a feoffement in fee to I. N. upon condition that he shall deliver
xx. yards, or etc. of Wool at Roan in France, the feoffee does not deliver it,
the feoffee enters and declares by 60. years, the feoffee may claim, or
enter, and retain,

Cont. Cok. li. 6, fo. 47. etc. in Dowdals Case with a difference.
Because the condition is void to be performed beyond Sea, which cannot be
tried here, 10. H. 6. and therefore the entry of the feoffor was a disseisin,
vide 7. H. 6.14.

A feme disseiseres takes a husband, the husband makes a lease for life, and
the disseisee releases all his right to the tenant for life, the tenant for
life dies, the husband dies having issue, etc. the heir enters, the wife
enters upon him, and continues possession by 60. years, the heir of the
husband may claim the Land, or enter and retain,

Because by the discontinuance the reversion was to the husband alone, and
therefore the release to tenant for life, enureth to the estate of the Land,
and of him in the reversion, Tit. Release, Litt. 119.

A man has issue bastard reign, and mulier puisne, and dies, the bastard
enters, and indoweth the wife of the father and dies, and the tenant in dowre
dies, the issue of the bastard enters, and continues possession by 60.
years, the mulier cannot claim, nor enter, nor retain,

Because that although the bastard does not die seized, as of a reversion, yet
the mulier cannot enter as heir of his auncestor after 60. years, because that
is a claim in Law.

A man seized has issue, two daughters, the one a bastard reign, and the
other a mulier puisne, and dies, the daughters enter, and are impleaded, and
vouch an estranger, who enters into the warranty, and leeseth, the demandant
recovers, and they over in value, the mulier ousts the bastard, and continues
possession 60. years, the bastard may enter, and retain,

Because the Vouchee is a conclusion.

A villain takes a wife, and purchases Land to him and his wife in see, the
Lord enters, the bastard dies, the Lord continues seisin, 60. years pass
after the death of the husband, the wife may enter, and retain the Land,

Because there are no moities between husband and wife, of a purchase, during
covertures.

id. Coke li. 4. l. 71.
A feme seized in fee, sels the Land after the Statute, by Deed indented, and
after is ravished, and consents to the ravishor, his son enters, and after the
Deed is enrolled within six months, the vendee enters and is seized by 60.
years, the son may make claim, or enter, or retain,

Because it was perfectly vested, as where a daughter takes a perquisite, or
remainder, and after a son is borne.

A man marries with his Neife, and Land is given them in fee, the husband
dies without issue, the heir enters, the wife ousts him by a continuant by
60. years, the heir may enter and retain,

Because the marriage is not an enfranchisement, and then by the death of the
husband this is a purchase by the villain, because by Natura Brevium she
shall not have Dowre.

A man seized in right of his wife, aliens in see upon a condition, the husband
dies, the condition is broken, the heir of the husband enters, and continues
60. years, the wife may enter, and retain,

Because the entry of the heir purges the discontinuance, 4. H. 6.

A man has issue, two daughters, the one a bastard, and the other a mulier,
and holds of the King, and dies seized, the daughters enter, and sue livery,
and after the mulier ousts the bastard, and continues by 60. years, the
bastard may enter, and retain the avowry, and if she be ousted, she may have a
Writ of Right,

Because the Livery is an Estoppell, and a descent between privities shall not
take away an entry, and the bastard is privy by Estoppell.

A man is disseised of a message, and dies, the heir suffers 60. years to
pass, and after comes to the door to set his foot to enter, the disseisor
stands in the door with a Sword, by which the other dares not enter, and
afterward in the same manner the disseisor dies seized, and his heir enters,
this claim shall not serve the heir of the disseisee,

A feme covert is disseised, the disseisor dies seized, his heir enters, the
husband and wife dies, the 60. years pass, the heir of the wife cannot
enter, nor retain,

Because this is a claim upon the seisin of the auncestor.

A man sels his Land by Indenture, and after disclaimes in an avowry, by which
the Lord recovers by a Writ of Right, sur disclaimer, and enters, and
afterward the vendor inrolls the Deed within the 6. months, the vendee
enters, the six months pass, the Lord may enter, and retain, and if he be
ousted, he may have a Writ of Right, and in all these Cases they claim of
their proper seisin, and not of the seisin of their auncestor, or predecessor.

Two parceners bring a sur cui in vita, the one is nonsuited, summoned, and
severed, the other recovers the moity, and both enter, and afterward he which
recovered, ousteth the other, and continues by 60. years, yet the other may
enter with her sister, and retain, and if she be ousted, she may have a Writ
of Right, 19. H. 6. f. 4.

A feme grants a reversion by deed in fee, and takes the grantee to husband,
and after the tenant Attornes, the husband dies, his heir enters, the wife
ousteth him, and continues seisin by 60. years, the heir of the husband may
enter, and retain, and if he be ousted, he may have a Writ of Right,

Because the Attornment is good, contrary if the grant were to have been
persons, because then that will not pass by the Attornment for to prejudice
the husband.

A feme sole makes a feoffement upon a condition that the feoffee shall re-en
feoffe him when he shall be required by him, and takes a husband, and makes
request, the feoffee refuses by commandment of the husband, the husband dies,
and after the feoffee dies seized, and his heir enters, and continues
possession by 60. years, the wife may enter, and retain, and if she be
ousted, she may have a Writ of Right,

Because her entry was changeable by the refusal, by reason of the first
condition, notwithstanding the descent, where it is upon condition, 35. E.
3.11. and the request is good.

Tenant in tail discontinueth, and has issue, a daughter, and dies, the 60.
years pass, etc. the daughter takes a husband, the feoffee makes an estate to
the husband and wife, for the life of I. N. the husband dies, I. N. dies, the
discontinued enters upon the wife, she may enter and retain,

Because she is remitted, quaere, because she cannot have an action, by reason
of the time past, and then out of the case of remitter, yet it seems that the
issue in tail which is outlawed, and has a release, may be remitted.

A man is disseised, and releaseth all his right to the disseisor, upon
condition that the disseisor shall enfeoffe him of other Land within a month,
the time expires, no feoffement made, the 60. years pass, the disseisee may
re-enter and retain, and if he be ousted, he may have a Writ of Right by reason
of the condition.

Tenant in tail discontinueth, the 60. years pass, the issue in tail
disse^seth the discontinued, and the discontinued has issue within age, and
dies, the heir in tail dies seized, his heir enters during the infancy of
the heir of the discontinued, the heir of the discontinued cannot enter, nor
retain, by reason of the remitter.

A man is disseised and dies, his heir within age, the disseisor dies
seized, his heir enters during the nonage of the heir, and continues seisin
by.60. years, the heir of the disseisee cannot enter, nor claim, nor have
action,

Because he claimed upon a seisin of his auncestor, which is defended by the
Statute.

A man is defaced of certain Lands, and recovers the Land in a praecipe quod
reddat, the tenant dies seized, his heir enters, the 60. years pass, yet the
defaced may enter, and retain, and if he be ousted, he may have a Writ of
Right.

Note that Deane and Chapter, and the like, by the name of their corporation
may make a claim by an 100. years past,

For the reasons rendered in the first Lecture.

A man seized in the right of his wife, is disseised, or makes a discontin, and
lives 61 years, he and his wife die, the heir of the wife shall not have
action, claim, nor enter,

Because none is aided but those which were covert at the time of the Statute,
etc. and the heir does not claim upon the seisin of his auncestor beyond 60.
years, and an entry is a claim.

If tenant for life, or an Idiot, or a man imprisoned, or beyond Sea, are
disseised and suffer the 60. years to pass, and dies, their heir, nor those
in the reversion shall not make claim, nor enter, nor have action,

Because if their entries are taken away they shall be barred in perpetuum, for
the reason aforesaid.

If an Infant be seized at 14. years, and has issue, and dies before 21.
years, and every issue one after the other, until 60. years are past, their
heir shall never have action, nor claim,

By reason of this Statute, because an Infant or the like, are not excepted,
but only those which were Infants tempore Statuti.

An Infant sells his Land by deed indented, and inrolls the deed within six
months, he being within age, the vendee enters, the Infant ousts him, and
continues by 60. years, the vendee may re-enter, and retraverse, and if he
be ousted, may have a Writ of Right,

Because the Infant is estopped by the inrollment, to say that he was within
age, tempore, etc,

A man has issue, two sons, and dies seized, the first enters, and dies
seized, the 60. years pass, the eldest cannot make his claim, nor enter, nor
retain, because that notwithstanding there be a privity in blood, etc. yet he
must claim of the seisin of his auncestor, and an entry is a claim in Law,
which is ousted by the Statute.

A man seized in fee has issue, a son, and a daughter, by one Venture, and a
son by another Venture, and gives his Land to his eldest son in tail, and
dies, and after the eldest son dies without issue, the daughter of the entire
blood shall enter, the youngest ousteth him, and continues seisin by 61.
years, the daughter cannot make claim, nor enter, and retain, because the fee
does not vest in the eldest son by descent, by reason of the entayle, and
therefore it was in abeyance, and yet it is in him for to give and forfeit as a
reversion, etc.

The fourth Lecture. Of Avowries.
Where a man shall make an Avowry of a longer time then is limited by this
Statute, and where not, and what shall be good Avowries upon this limitation,
and what not.

A Man holds by grand Serjeanty of the King, distraines, and alleges seisin
within 50. years, and avowes for aid to marry his daughter, the Avowry is not
good, 10. H. 6. by all the Justices,

Because none shall pay such aid, but tenants in Soccage, or Chivalrie, and
not tenant by grand Serjeanty, nec alii.

Replevin against two, of a horse taken, who come, and one of them avoweth for
a rent charge, and the other for a rent service out of the same Land, and both
allege seisin within 50. years, this is a good avowry upon this limitation,
31. E. 3. in Fitz. 241.

Because it is not like to coparceners, betwixt whom is privity.

A man avowes the taking of two Clothes for toll due, 52. years past, by
custom to destraine the goods of the buyer within the village for toll, etc.
this is a good avowry, notwithstanding this Statute,

Because it is not for rent, suit, nor service, 20. E. 3.

Avowry, because the custom of his Manor is, that if any one break the
pound, that he and his ancestors de tempore, etc. have used to distraine for x.
s. this is good, notwithstanding this Statute,

Because the prescription is good betwixt Tenants of the Manor, and it is not
for rent, suit, nor service.

Lords measne, and Tenant, the measne is in arrerages to the Lord, the Lord
distraines the Tenant, the Tenant forejudges the measne, the Lord accepts the
rent, and services by the hands of the Tenant, and after avowes upon the Land
for the arrerages of the measne, and alleges seisin within 50. years, this
is no good avowry for the arrerages,

Because this is the act of the Tenant, and cannot do otherwise but take him
for his Tenant, 7. E. 3.

Avowry for xx s. for bloodshed presented upon the plaintiff in his Leet, 51.
years past, according to the custom, etc. this is a good avowry
notwithstanding this Statute, which speaks of 50. years,

Because it is not for rent, suit, nor service, and the custom is good.

Grandfather, Father, and Son, the Grandfather holds of the Lord by Harriot,
Relief, and xii.d. rent, the Grandfather dies, the Father enters, and enfeoffs
the Son, and dies, the Lord accepts the rent of the Son, and within 50, years
distraines and avowes upon the son for the Harriot and relief of his
Grandfather, due within the 50. years, and alleages seisin within 50. years,
this avowry will not serve upon this limitation,

Because by the acceptance of the rent and service of the son he has lost the
Harriot and relief, and all the arrerages, 4. E. 3.

A man seized of a Manor in right of his wife, leaseth the Manor for xx.
years, rendering x.li. by the year at Michaelmas, the wife dies without issue
before Michaelmas, after Michaelmas past, the lessor may distraine and make an
avowry by this Statute,

Because that until the wise enters, the tenant shall render the rent to the
husband.

Avowry because the custom of the Manor is to have x.li. for a fine of every
villain there which marries his daughter without license, and that such a
villain married there within 50. years without lilence, etc. and therefore
avoweth, this is not good,

Because he may take the goods of his villain by the common Law.

A man distraines his Tenant for homage due 50. years past, the Tenant dies,
his Executor sueth a Replevin after 50. years, the defendant justifies for
homage, which was due 50. years past, and that the tenant is dead, this is a
good justification, notwithstanding the Statute,

Because the Statute speaks only of an avowry, and cognizance, and not of
justification.

A man is the Kings Baily, makes cognizance for xx. s. rent, against the
plaintiff, and declares of seisin in the King, by the hands of the plaintiff
60. years past, this is a good cognizance,

Because the King is not bound by the Statute,

Avowry for x. s. Amerciaments in a Leet for breaking of the assise of bread
and bear 50. years past, this is good,

Because it is not for rent, custom, nor service.

A man graunts a rent charge of x.li. payable yearly at Michaelmas, and if it
be behind fourteen days, then to distraine as well for the Rent, as for xx. s.
nomine penae, in this case, if it be behind by 14. days, 50. years past, the
grantee may distrein and avow for the penalty, but not for the rent,

Because out of the case of the Statute,

In a Replevin the Defendant said that W. leased the Manor of D. to I. N. for
term of life, and he as baily to the said I. N. distreines for rent due 51.
years past, and this day the said I. S. dyed, and the Tenant that now is, had
sued a Replevin, this is a good justification after this limitation,
notwithstanding this Statute,

Because this is a justification, etc. and the Statute 32. is, that the
Executor may make an avowry, or have debt, but the avowry of the party is
determined by his death.

Tenant in tail aliens in fee, an ancestor collateral of the donor releaseth
with warranty, and dies without issue, the donor distraines and avowes for the
rent upon issue in tail, and not upon the feoffee for the arrerages due within
50. years, and after the feoffement this avowry is not good upon this
limitation,

Because that notwithstanding that he shall not be driven to avow upon the
feoffee, and the feoffee connot plead the matter, and the warranty does not
extend to service, yet the service is incident to the reversion, which is
determined by the collateral warranty descended, and by the grant or release
of the reversion, the rent passes, and it appears 31. ass. tit. Reservation
11. that the services cannot be taken from the reversion by grant, because they
are incident, and the rent passes not, but as a rent seck, of which no avowry
lies, and therefore a determination of the reversion, is a determination of
the rent.

Lord and Tenant by Harriot, the lessor distraines, and avowes upon the heir
for Harriot of the Grand father, and for Harriot of the Father of the plaintiff
upon a seisin 50. years, this is a good avowry upon this Statute,

Because all is upon one survey.

Lords measne, and tenant, and every one holds of the other in chivalry, the
tenant goes with the King into Scotland by the common summons of the King, and
the measne does not go, the Lord distraines and avowes upon the measne for
escuage by a seisin within 50. years, etc. this is not a good avowry upon this
Statute, notwithstanding it be within 50. years,

Because the avowry of the tenant shall serve the measne, because that if the
tenant do the service, that suffices.

Lord and Tenant, the Tenant disclaimes in avowry, the Lord dies, the son
distraines, and alleges seisin in the Father within 50. years, and avowes
for rent due to him within 50. years, this is a good avowry upon this
limitation,

Because the son cannot have a Writ of Right upon disclaimer, upon a disclaimer
made in the life of the father.

An avowry, for that I. S. holds three acres of him by fealty, and a Hawke,
which was arer. by x. years, and that afterward he enfeoffed the plaintiff of
one acre, which was in arer. by two years, and he comes and distraines the
Cattle for all the arrerages for x. years, and avowes for two Hawks for two
years due, that is to say, x. cattle for one rent, and two for another, and
alleges seisin within 50. years, etc. this is a good avowry upon this
limitation, 22. E. 4.

Because that every acre is charged with the entire arrerages which was due
before this feoffement, and every one shall hold by one Hawke after the
feoffement, and so now he shall have two Hawks, and he may charge the feoffee
with the arrerages of all.

Avowry for aid to make the son a Knight, the Land is of the value of x. li.
by the year, which is holden in Soccage, and the son of 15. years of age,
etc. and alleges seisin within 50. years, the plaintiff pleads a release
made by the Lord to him by 9. years past, of all suits, services, and demands,
besides fealty, and x. s. rent, this is no good avowry, notwithstanding this
matter,

Because that that which is incident cannot be released by general words, 40.
E. 3.14.

A man distraines for aid to marry his daughter 51. years past, the Tenant
cannot sue a replevin until after the one and fifty years, the Lord upon the
matter makes an avowry for aid due 51. years past, which is out of this
limitation, yet this is a good avowry, notwithstanding this Statute,

Because the aid is incident to the tenure, and is not rent, suit, nor service,

A village is assessed to x.li. for the fees of the Knights from the beginning
of the Parliament, 51. years past, and cannot agree of his tax betwixt them,
by which the Sheriff distraines the village, and makes an avowry for this
sum due, 51. years past, this is good,

Because it is not rent, suit, nor service, Fitz. Avowry, 13. E. 4.

The Guardian endowes the feme the time of the second husband, reserving 3. s.
rent by the year for equality, and makes an avowry for the rent against the
feme after the death of the second husband, and alleges seisin within 50.
years, the avowry is not good upon this limitation, 17. E. 3.

Because the woman was covert, tempore, etc. and it is not like a rent reserved
upon partition, etc.

Replevin, the defendant avowes for that that he leased his Land after this
Statute, to the plaintiff at, in, etc. for the yearly rent of xx. s. per
annum, at, to, and in, and for the rent due at, in, etc. and within 50. years
after he distraines, and avowes, this avowry is not good by this Statute, etc.

Because when the term is ended, he cannot distraine.

I. N. holds of W. S. two acres of Land by 2. shillings, and 3. other acres by
3. shillings, the Lord distraines two Cattle in one Land, and two in another,
and avows for 5. shillings by seisin within 50. years, this is not good,

Because he shall make two avowries.

Lord and Tenant of three acres of Land holden by 3.d* rent, the Tenant leaseth
one acre to the Lord for 12. years, the Lord distraines in the other two
acres, and makes an avowry for two pence upon this limitation, this avowry is
not good,

Because a suspension for part is a suspension for all, but by the
extinguishment of part, the rest shall be apportioned. Nota differentiam.

Lord and two joyntenants by fealty 2. s. and suit of Court, the Lord brings a
Cessavit against both, and has execution, and distraines in the other moity,
and makes an avowry for suit upon a seisin within 50. years according to this
Statute, this avowry is not good,

Because by this recovery and execution the entire suit is gone, because he
cannot be contributory to himself, contrary of a rent, because that shall be
apportioned, note the difference.

Lord and Tenant by fealty and four shillings rent, the Lord releases the rent
to the tenant, and to the heirs of his body, the tenant dies without issue,
the Lord distraines his next heir, and makes an avowry upon this limitation,
for rent due after the death of the Tenant, the avowry well lies,

Because a release for one hour to tenant in fee-simple, as to the title of
the Land is good for ever, and yet contrary of a rent Fitz Voucher 120.13. E.
3.92. because that was his estate in the rent, and so is it there adjudged.

Lords measne and tenant, every one holds of each other by iiii.d. the Lord
releaseth to the Tenant all his right in the Land, and after the measne
distraines and avowes for iiii.d. upon the tenant, upon this limitation the
avowry does not lie,

Because by the release the moity is extinct.

Lord and Tenant by fealty, and iiii.d. rent, the rent is behind, the Lord
disseiseth the Tenant of the same Land, and continues possession by a year,
and after the tenant recovers by an Assise, the Lord distraines and makes an
avowry for arrerages due before the disseisin upon this limitation, this is a
good avowry, 8. E. 3.37.

Because all is received by the recovery, and nothing shall be recompted, but
that which is before the unity.

A man has issue, a son, and a daughter, by one Venture, and a son by another,
and is seized of two acres of Land, and grants x. s. rent charge in fee out of
one to the son, the son dies without issue, and after the father dies, the
daughters enter, and make partition, and the acre charged is allotted to the
youngest, the eldest daughter distraines his sister, and makes an avowry upon
this limitation for 5. s. this is goods,

Because nothing is extinct but the moity of the rent, for nothing is descended
of the Land to the eldest daughter but the moity of the land, but the entire
rent is descended to him, 34. E. 3. Quintons Case.

A man makes one Steward of his Manor, and gives x.li. fee to him with
distress, and officio suo exequendo, with manger and boyer for term of life,
and the Steward leaseth the fee, and the manger and boyer to the Lord of the
Manor for four years, rendering to him 12.li. per annum, with clause of
distress in the Manor by deed indented, the Steward does not keep the Courts,
and afterward distraines for the 12.li. and makes an avowry upon this
limitation, the avowry does not lie,

Because it is extinct by the nonfeasance of the services, etc. 20. E. 4.12.
because when the Rent comes by reason of the Land, there a lease to the Lord is
a suspension, but contrary, where it comes ratione personae per Curiam.

Tenant in tail aliens in fee with warranty, and leaves assets and dies, the
issue is barred in a formedon, the donor destraines and avowes upon the heir
in tail of the seisin within 50. years, the avowry is good upon the Statute,

Because this is nothing to the doner.

The fifth Lecture. Of Formedons.
Whereas the Statute is, that Formedons in reversion shall be brought within
50. years after title, and cause of action accrued. It is to be seen to whom
action shall be said sufficiently accrued to take advantage of the Statute, and
from what time the 50. years shall be accounted, and e contra.

A Man lets Land to one for life, the remainder to his own wife in tail and
dies, the Tenant for life dies, and I. N. enters, Action is not accrued to the
wife to have a formedon in remainder within the 50. years,

Because a gift immediate to his own wife is not good, but contrary, of a
feoffement to an use, or a demise, but if he in the remainder be not capable at
the time of the livery, he shall never be as in the case of Rikhill.

A man lets for life the remainder of I. N. in fee, I. N. enters in religion,
the lessee for life dies, the brother of I.N. enters, and commits felony, and
is attainted, the Lord enters for an Escheate, I.N. is deraigned before 30. H.
8. no action of formedon in the remainder is accrued to him,

Because it was executed before in his heir, and the forfeiture for felony is
executed also, and religious persons shall not be capable by the Statute of 31.
H. 8.

A man leaseth for life the remainder to Deane and Chapter, and to the heirs
of the Deane, the Tenant for life dies, I. N. enters, the Deane and Chapter
which then were, die, and others are chosen, action is accrued to the heir of
the Deane by a formedon in the remainder, but not of all,

Because he had but a moity only.

A man leaseth for life the remainder in tail, the tenant for life alieneth in
fee, no formedon in remainder is accrued to him in the remainder,

Because tenant for life is yet living, and during his life a formedon lies
not.

Lord measne and tenant, the measne graunts his menasltie for term of life,
the remainder over in tail, the remainder over in fee, the tenant attornes,
the terr tenant brings a Writ of measne against the measne for term of life,
and forejudges him, the measne for life dies, a formedon is not accrued to him
in the remainder,

Because the tenant of the Lord paramount, by the forejudger, and all the
remainders is but the same seigniory, because that albeit forejudger does not
lie against tenant for term of life, nor against tenant in tail, nor a feme
covert, yet the judgment is not void, but error, and the action does not lie
until judgment reversed, and in remainder by equity of the Statute, which
speaks of reversions, 9. R. 2. cap. 3.

A man gives Land for term of life, the remainder in fee, the tenant for life
is disseised, the Lord brings a Writ of Right, the Lord disclaimes against the
disseisor, and recovers upon the disclaimer, the tenant for term of life
dies, the Lord enters, action is accrued to him in the remainder, by a
formedon in remainder,

Because that he in the remainder is not bound.

A man gives in tail to I. N. who leaseth for life, and enters, and dies
without issue, 60. years before Ascension, 1546. the tenant for life dies 26.
years after, he in the reversion may have a formed on in reverter post. I. N.
habit. religionis assumpsit,

Because the Register warrants, or formedon in discender and reverter; but
quaere of a remainder, and the action does not fall until after the death of
tenant for life, and the Stat. of 31. does not make them capable which are
expelled out of a house dissolved.

A woman sells her land to two by Indenture, to have to one for term of life,
and to another in tail, the remainder in fee, and delivers the deed, and after
takes a husband, and after he and the wife within the 6. months cause that to
be enrolled, and acknowledge it to be the deed of the wife, the tenant for
life dies, the husband holds possession, a formedon in remainder is not accrued
to him in the remainder,

By reason of the husbands interest.

A man seized of a rent, grants that to another, to him and his heirs, or to
the heirs of his body, the remainder in fee, provided, that if the grantee
die, his heirs females within age, that the rent shall cease during their
nonage, the grauntee has issue, two daughters, one within age, and the other
of full age, and dies without issue male, I. N. haps the rent, action is
accrued by a formedon in remainder, to him in the reversion in fee,

Because one is of full age, and therefore the rent shall not cease.

A man disseised of two Acres by the Bishop of L. and after releases to the
Bishop and his successors, the Bishop gives in tail, and dies, the tenant in
tail dies without issue, a formedon in reverter accrues to the successor of
the Bishop, and not to his heir,

Because where he was a disseisor of the fee at the first to him and his
heirs, the release enures to an entry and feoffement.

Land in Gavelkinde is given to one in tail, who takea a wife and dies without
issue, the wife holds all in dowre by custom, and dies xx. years after the
death of the husband, I. N. enters, he in the reversion brings a formedon in
reverter 60. years after the death of the husband, and after this Statute, the
action is well brought by this branch of the Statute,

Because the action is not accrued until after the death of the wife, and so
is it taken within 40. years after her death.

A man of non sane memory made a feoffement in fee, and after is made Bishop of
R. the feoffe^ enfeoffes the Bishop to him and his successors which gives in
tail, the tenant in tail dies without issue, the Bishop dies, a formedon in
reverter is accrued to the heir of the Bishop, and not to his successor,

Because by the refeoffement the Bishop was remitted, for his entry was
congeable.

A man gives in tail, the remainder in fee, the Lord brings a restraint
against the tenant in tail, and he appears, and leaseth, and dies without
issue, a formedon in remainder shall not accrue to him in the remainder within
the 50. years,

Because the Land is lost by judgment, by Statute Law of W. 2.21.

A man leaseth for life the remainder in tail, to another the remainder in
fee, to the first Tenant by a Fine, the Tenant for life dies, and he in the
remainder in tail dies without issue, I. N enters, action is accrued by Scire
facias within the 50. years to the heir of the tenant for life,
notwithstanding the seisin of his Father,

Because the fee was not executed, 38. E. 3.21.

A man leaseth for life upon condition, that if the leasee has issue in his
life, that the Land shall remain over to W. N. it fee, the leasor recovers
against their leasee, by a Writ of Waste, and has execution, the leasee has
issue and dies no action of formedon is accrued to W. N.

Because the fee remains in the leasor until the tenant has issue, and then
the recovery defeates the first Livery.

A man gives to husband and wife in special tail by Fine, the wife dies
without issue, the husband leaseth his estate to him in the reversion, upon a
condition, and for the condition broken he reenters and dies, a stranger
enters, action is accrued to him in the reversion within the 50. years by
Scire facias,

Because the execution of the estate is defeated by the entry, by the
condition, and he in the reversion may well have an action, 38. E. 3.19.

A man leaseth for life the remainder in tail to I. N. the tenant for life is
disseised, an ancestor collateral of the Tenant in tail releaseth with
warranty, and dies without issue, the tenant for life reenters upon the
disseisor and dies, the disseisor reenters, a formedon in the remainder is
not accrued to him in the remainder,

Because the entry of tenant for life shall not remain, the remainder which
was bound by the descent of the collateral warranty before the entry, etc. 44.
E. 3.

Lord and Tenant, the Tenant dies without heir, I. N. enters and leaseth to
the Lord for term of another man's life, the reversion over in tail, cesty que
vy dies, a formedon in remainder is accrued to him in the remainder,

Because the Lord cannot be remitted, because he had no right of entry, but a
title, and he had disclosed his intent to the contrary.

A man levyeth a Fine of a Manor for term of life, the remainder over in fee,
and after a tenant of the Manor dies without heir, the conusor enters in the
Land, and has the Manor, the tenant for life dies, he in the remainder shall
have a Scire facias of the Manor within the 50. years, and recover the Land
escheated against him which enters, etc.

And here it shall be by the name of a Manor, because now this is parcel of
the Manor, because it is come instead of the services, yet if he enter in this
parcel only, it seems that a Scire facias will not lie of that.

A man demiseth Land to I. N. for life upon condition to be Chaplain, and to
pray for the soul of the demisor, the remainder to another in tail, the
demisor dies, I. N. takes the profits by 6. years, and is no priest, the
heir of the devisor enters, I. N. dies, a formedon in reversion is accrued to
him in the remainder within the 50. years,

Because the entry by the condition, which depends only upon one estate, does
not defeat the remainder, which was not tied to the condition, but contrary
where there was no remainder; Note the diversity.

A man leaseth to I. N. and E. his wife for life, the remainder over in fee, I.
N. dies, and it is enacted by Parliament, that all estates made to the said I.
N. shall be void, and the wife 12. years after Act of Parliament dies, he in
the remainder 60. years after the Act, may have a formedon in remainder by
this branch of the Statute,

Because the estate of the wife, nor the remainder are not void by the limit.
action, not accruing until after the death of the wife, and it is brought
within 48. years, etc. 5. H. 7.30.

A man leaseth for life the remainder over in fee, the tenant for life leeseth
by erroneous judgment, and dies, and he in the reversion twelve years after
the death of tenant for life, brings a Writ of error, and reverseth the
judgment, and an estranger enters, and he in the remainder brings a formedon
60. years after the death of tenant for life, the action well lies by the
branch of this Statute, which speaks of 50. years,

Because the action is not accrued until after the reversall, and a Writ of
error is not an action, nor a release of actions is not a plea in this, and he
in the remainder shall have error by equity of the Statute, by him in the
reversion.

A man grants a seigniory in gross to one in tail, the remainder over in fee
by Fine, the Tenant attornes, and after aliens in Mortmaine, the Tenant in
tail enters, and makes a feoffement of the Land, and dies without issue, no
Scire facias is accrued to him in the remainder of the Land, nor of the Rent,

Because the Land was not given, and the seisin was determined by the entry of
the Tenant in tail, and the Statute of Mortmaine says, that Capitalis Dominus
intrabit, and retinebit in feodo, and therefore is a perquisite to him, and the
Book of 44. E. 3. is no rule that a Scire facias shall lie of the tenancy, in
lieu of the services.

A man leaseth for life, the remainder over in tail, the Tenant for life
leaseth to Tenant in tail for the life of Tenant in tail, who dies without
issue, the Tenant for life enters, a sormedon in remainder is not accrued to
him in the reversion,

Because the lease of the Manor is not a surrender, nor forfeiture, tit. dowre
Fitz. and Park. fo. 20.7. H. 6.4.

A man leaseth for life the remainder in tail, the remainder in fee, the
Tenant for life grants his estate to him in the remainder in tail, and to I.
N. he in the remainder in tail dies without issue, action of formedon is not
accrued to him in the remainder in fee,

Because the tenant for life, and I. N. are living, and it is no surrender for
the advantage of the survivor I. N. Gascoignes case, 7. H. 6.

The sixth Lecture. Seisins and Trials.
What proofs upon such issues limited by the Statute shall be sufficient, and
contrariwise, and what trials upon that shall be good, and e contra, and who
shall be bound by them, and who shall take advantage, and where the party may
refuse the trial, and e contra: And what ma^ters shall lie in trial,
notwithstandstanding this Statute, as before this Statute, and e contra.

DOwre, they are at issue that the husband was never seized of such an estate
of which she was dowable, etc. the wife proves seisin 61. years before the
test of the Writ, this a good proof of the seisin to recover, notwithstanding
this Statute,

Because that this is of the seisin of the husband, and not of the party, her
ancestors, or predecessors.

In an assise of Common they are at issue, ne unque seize so that he might be
disseised, the plaintiff said that I. N. was seized, and grants to him in fee,
and because he had not Cattle of his own, he puts in Cattle of others, with
the assent of the grantor, this is a good proof of the seisin to have an
Assise, 22. E. 3. p. 84.

Dowre of rent they are at issue ne unque seize, the plaintiff prooves that the
rent was granted by the husband in fee, upon a proviso, that if he die his
heir within age, that the rent shall cease during the nonage; the father dies
the son within age, and takes the demandant to wife, and dies before 21. years
of age, this is no good proof of feisin,

Because the rent had not essens during this time, and it is not like the case
of 24. E. 3. where she was endowed with a cesset executio, because there the
husband was seized indeed, and it is not like a Dowry of a seigniory in
suspense, as where the Lord marryeth his Tenant, which is a woman, he dies, she
shall be endowed of the seigniory, but here the rent cease by matter in fayt,
and not by matter in Law.

Dowre, The parties are at issue upon ne unque seize, etc. the demaundant
proves a lease for life made by an estr, the remainder to her husband in tail,
the tenant for life leaseth to the husband for life of the husband, the husband
dies, the tenant for life enters, and she brought dowre, this is no proof of
the seisin,

Because it is no surrender nor forfeiture, and the tenant for life which
leaseth, shall have the reversion in this case.

In dowre they are at issue upon the seisin, the tenant shows that the husband
was his villeine, and purchased, wherefore he entered upon the husband, the
Plaintiff says that this purchase and entry was during coverture, and the
husband dyed, etc. this is a good proof of seisin to have dowre,

Because the title of the Lord is not until his entry, and therefore the wife
had the elder title.

A woman has issue, a son, and consents to the ravishor, the mother leaseth to
the son for term of life by deed poll, the son has issue and dies, the mother
enters, the issue brings a Mortdan. and they are at issue upon the seisin, the
issue gives all the matter in evidence for seisin in fee upon the lawful entry
of his father, this is no good proof of seisin,

Because that he which has but a title of entry, and not a right of entry,
cannot be remitted.

In an Assise they are at issue upon Ne unque seize, etc. the Pl'. gives in
evidence that I.N. holds the Land of him, and was attainted of felony, and that
the King should have annum diem and vast. and grants it over, the defendant
enters upon the grauntee within the year, and the Pl'. brings an Assise within
the year, this is a good proof of the seisin,

Because he can have no other seisin during that year.

Assise, they are at issue upon Ne unque seize, the plaintiff gives in evidence
that the Land is demisable, etc. and that I. N. his testator was seized, and
demised to him, being his executor to sell, etc. and dies, the plaintiff
enters, and the defendant ousts him, and he brings an Assise, this is a good
proof of seisin, per judicium,

Because he had the fruit against an estranger, until the heir may espy a
forfeiture, and makes actual entry.

Tenant by the courtesy of a rent charge granted to his wife in fee, to be
paid at Michaelmas, his wife dies before the feast, he makes an Avowry, the
Tenant traverseth the seisin which is found for him, the Tenant by the
courtesy dies, the heir of him and his wife distrain and makes an Avowry
upon the same grant, he shall not be bound by the same trial,

Because the judgment is only to recover damages, and he claims as heir of
his mother, and not as heir to the father, and avoweth by the grant, for the
seisin is not material; And because that he in the reversion may fanxesie the
recovery in another point which was not tried, as to say that another had title
to the seigniory, and not the avowant, and so the seisin void.

In a Mortdauncestor the Tenant traverseth the seisin, the Jury find that the
grandfather dyed seized, and that afterward the father of the demandant dies
before that any stranger enters, and after dies, and the Tenant abates, this is
good proof of seisin, but yet it shall not serve, but this trial shall bind
the demandant, etc.

Because the Stat. speaks of an actual seisin, and this is a seisin in Law.

Lord measne and tenant, the Tenant traverseth the seisin in an avowry against
the measne which is tried for him, and afterward forejudgeth the measne, there
the Lord may distraine and make avowry, and shall not be bound by the said
trial,

Because he avoweth for his seigniory, and he is not heir to the measne.

A woman seignioresse, measne and tenant, the measne is bound to acquittall,
she takes a husband, the tenant releaseth to the woman, and his heirs acquit,
the husband and wife have issue, the wife dies, the tenant brings a Writ of
measne against the husband, contrary to his acquittall by prescript. in the
wife and her ancestors, the husband traverseth the seisin which is found
against him, and he dies, the heir shall not be bound by this trial in
another Writ of measne,

Because he has a release to plead, and has the menalty, as heir to his
mother, and not as heir of his father, and may falsify, ut supra: And this
action is not to recover Land, Tenements, nor Hereditaments, but goes by way
of discharge.

Tenant for life, the reversion to another in fee is impleaded by a praecipe,
etc. and traverseth the seisin which is found against him upon a faint title by
covin, and the demaundant recovers, the Tenant for life surrenders, he in the
reversion shall be bound by this trial, viz. during the life of the Tenant
which surrenders, and not afterward, notwithstanding the Statute of 32. of
Recoveries by covin, as where Tenant for life grants a rent, and surrenders,
etc. And Nota that he in the reversion may falsify in a title in another
point, which was not tried, but he which may have an attaint, cannot falsify
in the same point, which was tried, and he in the reversion may have an attaint
and error by the Statute of R. 2. and this recovery is as a purchase.

A Segniory is given to two, and to the Aires of one, he which has the fee
dies, he which survives distraines, and makes an avowry, the tenant traverseth
the seisin which is found for him, the Defendant dies, and the heir of the
other distraines and makes an avowry upon the same seisin, he shall not be
bound by the first trial,

Because the first judgment is not to be barred of the seigniory, but only to
recover damages, and also he is not heir to him which was party to the
trial, but to another which had the fee, yet he had a reversion at the time,
etc. And he in the reversion, and those which may have error or attaint are
bound by the common Law, and shall not falsify the point which was tried by
verdict, contrary in other points, and contrary of them which cannot have error
nor attaint; note the difference by many books, and by the Statute of 9. R. 2.
c. 3.

A feme Covert brought a Writ of Aile after Ascens. etc. the tenant traverseth
the seisin which is found for him, and after the husband and wife die, and the
heir brings a Writ of cosenage, he shall be bound by this trial,

Because albeit the bar be at liberty, yet it is contrary of the wife.

An Infant brings a precipe by Attourny, as a man of full age, the tenant said
that he is an infant, judgment if he shall be by Attorney, and yet the Court
admits him by Attorney, the tenant traverseth the seisin which is found for
him, the demandant and his heirs shall be bound by this trial for ever,

Because this is not error, and an infant is not excepted in the Statute.

Lord and tenant, the tenant is disseised, the Lord brings a Writ of Customs
and services against the desseisor, who traverseth the seisin, which is found
against the Lord, the desseisee reenters, the Lord distraines him and makes an
avowry upon the first seisin, the disseise shall have advantage to bar him by
the first trial,

Because he made plede, per que estate, and bind the Lord, because the
judgment was given against the Lord, and so he barred.

A man seized in right of his wife, make a feoffment in fee, the husband dies,
the feoffee is impleaded and traverseth the seisin which is found for him, the
wife brings a cui in vita, and recovers, the demandant in the first precipe,
brings another precipe against the woman, she shall have advantage of the first
trial,

Because the demaundant was once barred, and so his right extinguished.

A man makes a feoffment in fee upon condition the feoffee is impleaded after
Ascension, etc. and traverseth the seisin which is found for him, the feoffor
enters after the condition broken, the demaundant brings a new Writ against
him, the feoffor shall have advantage of the first trial, for the reason
aforesaid.

Avowry by the Lord upon the tenant for x. s. rent, and alleges seisin within
50. years, the plantife alleges a confirmation by the deed of the father of
the Lord 60. years past, tenend. by iiii.d. for all rents, and services,
besides fealty, this is a good bar notwitstanding this Statute.

Because the Statute says only, that a man shall not have a writ, nor make a
prescription, title, nor claim beyond that limitation, but it does not speak
of bars in defense of possession, and therefore it seems that the eldest bar
shall be tried by the intention of that Statute, because the words of the
preamble are, that the eldest seisin shall not be disturbed.

Avowry for Rent upon this limitation, the Plaintiff pleads a Release of all
actions made 51. years past by the Avowant to the Plaintiff, this is a good
Plea, and shall be tried notwithstanding this Statute, Tit. bar. in Fitz. 8. H.
6.10. and 27

E. 3. ibid. that it is a good bar.

Lord and tenant of 3. Acres of Land by fealty, and two shillings, the Lord
distraines in the Acre, and avoweth for xii.d. the Plaintiff says that 60.
years past he leased the other Acre to the Lord for 60. years, which are yet
enduring, judgment, if he shall avow for any thing in the other Acre during
the term; this is a good Plea, and shall be tried, notwithstanding that it be
out of the limitation,

Because a suspention of part, is a suspention of all, contrary, of an
extinguishment of part, because there may be an apportionment in that case.

A Mortdancester of a seisin within 50. years, the tenant said that the
demaundant himself leased for term of life to him 52. years past by his deed,
etc. judgment, etc. and this is a good bar, and shall be tried notwithstanding
the Statute, etc. and this notwithstanding that it was in the life of the
auncester, and without answering to the dying seized.

Because the Writ and Declaration is but a supposall, and the bar is matter
in fait.

A fine is levied of land, which is ancient demean, and after I. H. brings a
Writ of right close in the Court of ancient demeasne, and recovers the land
upon issue, upon the seisin against the tenant in tail, which dies, his issue
shall be bound by this trial,

Because it is not void but voidable, because it is impleadable there by a part
right patent, and it is but one writ brought for another.

An Assise, the tenant says, that the great Grandfather of this plaintiff,
infeoffed W.N. who infeoffed the tenant 32. years past judgment, etc. this
bar shall be tried, notwithstanding this Statute, and notwithstanding that
the Plaintiff had dyed.

Because that this matter in fayt, and the writ and plaint is but a supposall.

Cessavit supposing the tenure by fealty, and two shillings rent, the tenant
said that J.M. whose estate the demaundant had in the signiory after the
ancient limitation, and before the Stat, of Westminster. 2. enfeoffed the prior of D.
to hold in frankaliens, to hold by all services by the deed, which he showed,
etc. whose estate he had in the land to hold quite for all services, judgment,
etc. this is a good bar, notwithstanding the seisin afterward, and shall be
tried, notwithstanding the Statute 31. E. 3. Fitz, Cessavit. 22.

Avowry for suit of Court to every two Courts, and at the third to go free,
and alleged seisin, the Plaintiff said that he and two others held jointly 3.
acres of land of the defendant, by suit of Court, Vnde, etc. and 60. years past
the defendant brought a Cessavit against them, and he, and another after, and
the third made a default, after default, wherefore the defendant reiceived a
third part, and had execution in severalty, judgment, etc. this is a good ba^,
and it shall be tried, notwithstanding, that this is out of the limitation,

Because the Lord cannot take the suit, and be contrary to the suit.

Assise of lands in D. they are at issue upon the seisin, the assisse find for
the Plaintiff, and thereby he recovereth, the tenant dies, and his heir
brings a precipe against the Plaintiff in the assise of land in D. the
Plaintiff in the assise pleades the first recovery of the same lands in D. and
averreth that all is one and the same land, the demaundant shall not be bound
by the first trial. 14. E. 3. p. 9.

A man recovers in a precipe in the Common pleas land in the Cinque Ports upon
issue upon the seisin, the tenant dies, his heir brings an action in the
Cinque Ports of the same land, he shall be bound by the first trial, 9. H.
7.12. In the County Palatine a Commission in Air issued, and after another
Commission in Air issued, who repealed the first, and I.N. recovered land upon
issue, upon the seisin before the first Commissioners, the tenant dies, his
heir shall be bound by this seisin in an action brought before the last
Commissioners,

Because the first Commission is not determined before Proclamation or notice
given to the first Commissioners, 34. E. 3. p. 1.

A man recovers in banco, land which is in Lancaster upon issue upon the
seisin, the tenant which lost, brought another action against the demandant at
Lancaster, he shall not be bound by the first trial. 9. H. 7.12.

Because it was coram non judice, and breve Rs. non currit.

A man leaseth for life, a man brings a precipe quod red. of Rent against the
tenant for life by covin, and recovers upon issue upon the seisin, the tenant
for life dies, he in the reversion shall not be bound by this trial,

Because a feint recovery shall be avoided by the Statute of 32. H. 8. and by
this Statute the party and his heirs shall be bound, and he it the reversion
is not heir.

A Cessavit by tenant in tail, they are at issue upon trial of the seisin,
which is found for the tenant, who has judgment, the demandant dies, his
issue shall not be barred by this trial to make an avowry, or to have another
Cessavit afterward,

Because this is none of the actions which is spoken of in the Statute, and
also the judgment is, that he shall be barred of the land, and not of the
seigniory, and upon a new Cessavit the heir may aver a Cesser, and the issue
was upon a Cesser in the seignory, and the Statute speaks of a seisin of the
thing demanded, which is the land, and not the seigniory.

Dowre, they are at issue that the husband was never seized, which is found
against the demandant, by which she is barred, her son and heir of her and
her husband brings a Mortdancester against the same tenant, he shall not be
barred by the first trial,

Because the first judgment was only of Dowre, and not of title, and the
heir claims as heir, and not as heir to the mother.

Lord mesne and tenant, the tenant holds by fealty and sixpence, and the mesne
by homage, fealty, escuage, and twelve pence, the measne makes an avowry upon
the tenant for fealty and sixpence, and alleges seisin of the fealty and rent
in his father, which is found and tried against him, and judgment given by
this trial, the Lord may distraine the tenant, and make avowry for homage,
fealty, and 12 d.

Because the Statute says, that by the trial, the measne and his heirs shall
be barred of all avowries and claims, therefore the menalty is gone, and the
tenant shall hold of the Lord, which is his own act, as a Release, Foreiudger,
and the like, and claim extends to all interrests; tamen quere, because it
seems that he shall not be barred, but only in the action in which the
trial is.

Lord and tenant, the Lord avoweth, the Plaintiff traverseth the seisin which
is found for him, and he has judgment, and recovers damages, the Lord cannot
bring a precipe quod reddat of the same rent against the Plaintiff,

Because the Statute says, that that shall be a bar of all avowries and
claims after, yet it seems that the the law is contrary, and that he shall
be barred only in his action.

Juris utrum passes against the person upon the trial of a seisin, his
successor shall be barred by this trial,

Because within the equity of the Statute.

The seventh Lecture.
What Infants, Feme Coverts, and the like, shall have actions, and shall be
aided by this Statute, etc.

TWo joyntenants have cause of a Writ of entry upon the ancient limitation,
tempore statuti, whereas one was imprisoned tempore statuti, and after he which
was imprisoned dies, the other shall not have an action within six months
upon the ancient limitation, notwithstanding this Statute,

Because the ancient limitation was expired at Ascension 1546. and he which
survived was not imprisoned, and he is not heir to the other, and so not aided.

Two parceners, of which one was a seem Covert before the Statute, had cause of
action of two acres of land upon the ancient limitation tempore statuti, he
which was not covert dies without issue, the other shall not have an action
upon the ancient limitation within the six years to recover the two acres,

Because she was to have but a moity, and the other moity was bound in her
sister by her larches, because she and her heirs were bound, by reason that she
was not covert.

A man which had cause of action upon the ancient limitation, had issue, two
sons, and dies before the statute, the eldest is professed in France at the
time of the statute, and the youngest is within age at the time of the Statute,
and after the eldest is deraigned and comes back out of France, there the
youngest which comes at full age, nor the eldest shall not have an action with
the six years upon the ancient limitation,

Because the Statute does not provide for those which were beyond sea, unless
they had cause of action at the time of the Statute, and a man in Religion had
not cause of action at the time of the Statute, and the youngest cannot have
it, because yet he is not heir.

A feme covert had cause of action upon the ancient limitation at the time of
the Statute, and after is divorced, after Ascension, 1546. and does not
commence action within the six years, but the husband brings an Appeal within
the six years, which depends 18. years, and afterward the divorce is
Repealed, the husband dies, the wife shall have an action upon the ancient
limitation within other six years,

Because while the Appeal is depending, the Espousals shall not be determined.

A man imprisoned at the time of the Statute, had cause of action upon the
ancient limitation, and after Ascension, 1546. he goes at large, and going to
West* for to purchase his Writ, is freshly arrested, and imprisoned by 7.
years, and afterward is enlarged, he shall not have an action upon the
ancient limitat. within the 6. years after his enlargement,

Because the 6. years shall be accounted from his first enlargement.

A feme covert at the time of the Statute had cause of action upon the ancient
limitation, and after Ascension 1546. after her a divorce is had, and the
husband brings an Appeal, which continued 8. years, and is nonsuted in his
Appeal, the wife shall have an action upon the ancient limitation within the
six years after the nonsute,

Because that depending, the Appeal it is taken in the spiritual Law, that
the Espousals are not discharged,

A Daughter within age, at the time of the Statute had cause of action,
Auncestral to 4. Acres of Land upon the ancient limitation, and within one
month after the Parliament another Daughter is borne, they shall not recover
the four Acres by an action after taken within the six years upon the ancient
limitation, notwithstanding this proviso of the Stat.

A man of non sane memory at the time of the Statute, or an Idiot, had cause of
action, Tempore Statuti, and dies after Ascension 1546. his heir shall never
have an action,

Because he is not aided by the Statute, and the ancient limitation is expired.

A man which had cause of action upon the ancient limitation at the time of the
Statute is excommunicated, and brought his action before Ascension 1546. and is
disabled by the excomunication, and after Ascension 1546. is absolved, he shall
well have his action upon the ancient limitation,

Because the ancient Writ shall serve him, because that shall not abate, but
shall delay the plea, and shall be revived by Resummons, and it was taken
before Ascension, etc. and therefore well.

A man which was an infant at the time of the Statute, and then having cause of
action upon the ancient limitation, brought his action upon the ancient
limitation, after Ascension 1546. and within the six years and is nonsuited,
or his Writ abateth by the plea of the tenant, and he brings another action
within the six years, he may declare upon the ancient limitation,

Because the Statute warrants all that which is within the six years.

A feme Covert at the time of the Statute, had cause of action Auncestrall,
upon the ancient limitation, and after Ascension 1546. she and her husband
brought an action upon the ancient limitation within a year then following,
etc. they shall not have an action, notwithstanding this proviso of the Statute,

Because the wife is aided within the six years, after discontinuance, but
not the husband and wife, after Ascension 1546. the coverture containing,
because the ancient limitation is expired.

A daughter within age at the time of the Statute, had cause of a Writ of Ayle,
and after a son is borne, and enters, and dies without issue, the first Abator
continues his seisin, the daughter shall not have an action against the Abator
upon the Ancient limitation within the six years, etc.

Because by the entry of the son, the ancient action is determined, and she may
have an action upon the new limitation as heir to the son.

A man which had cause of action upon the ancient limitation at the time of the
Statute, dies within two days after the Statute, his heir within age, who
comes to full age after Ascension, 1546* he shall not have an action upon the
ancient limitation within the 6. years,

Because his father was not an Infant, nor imprisoned, nor beyond sea at the
time of the Statute, and so he is not aided.

A man which was beyond sea at the time of the making of the Statute, had cause
of action upon the ancient limitation, and makes an Atturnie after Ascension,
1546. who brought an action in the name of his Master upon the ancient
limitation in absence of his Master, the action does not lie upon the ancient
limitation,

Because it is not given but within six years after his return, and not after
Ascension, etc. and in his absence, and now the ancient limitation is expired.

A man which had cause of action upon the ancient limitation at the time to the
Statute, dies the next day after the Statute, his daughter and heir being
feme covert, the husband dies after Ascension, 1546. she shall not have an
action within the 6. years upon the ancient limitation,

Because she had not cause of action at the time of the Statute, and her father
was neither an infant, imprisoned, nor beyond the sea at the time of the
Statute, and so he is not aided.

A man which had cause of action upon the ancient limitation at the time of the
Statute, dies one day after the Statute, his son beyond sea, who returns
after Ascension, 1546. the said son shall not have an action within the six
years, upon the ancient limitation,

Because he had not cause of action at the time of the Statute, and his father
was not privileged as an infant, and the like, at the time, etc.

Deane and Chapter have cause of action upon the ancient limitation at the time
of the Statute, the Deane within age at the time, etc. The Deane and Chapter
after Ascension, 1546. shall not have an action within the six years upon the
ancient limitation,

Because Infancy shall not serve in his capacity.

An Infant which had cause of action upon the Ancient limitation, takes a
lease for three years, which continues tempore statuti, he within age, and
after Ascension 1546. he comes to full age, the term expires, he shall not
have an action upont he Ancient limitation, within the six years,

Because he had not cause of action at the time of the statute, for it was not
suspended.

A woman is disseised of a Rent charge 40. years before the Statute, by the
Tenant of the land, the tenant makes a lease of the land to the woman for
years, she takes a husband, the Statute is made, and after the term expires,
and the husband dies after Ascension 1546. she shall not have an action upon
the Ancient limitation within the six years,

Because it was suspended at the time of the Statute, and therefore no cause of
action at the time, etc.

Baron and feme have cause of action to xx. acres of land in the wives right
upon the Ancient limitation, the husband is imprisoned at the time of the
Statute, the husband and wife shall not have an action within the six years
upon the ancient limitation,

Because the wife by whom the action accrueth was not imprisoned at the time,
and she by the coverture is not aided by the Statute during the life of her
husband. For the Statute speaks of six years after discoverture, and the
husband and wife are not one person, as to this purpose, because she shall not
join in an action for the imprisonment of her husband.

Lord and Tenant by homage, fealty, and Rent, the Tenant leaseth the land to
one for term of life, the remainder to I. N. in fee, the Lord is desseised of
the Rent by Tenant for life 31. years before the Statute, he in the remainder
dies without heir, eand the Lord is beyond seas at the time of the Statute, he
shall not have an action of the Rent after Ascension 1546. within the six
years upon the Ancient limitation,

Because the seigniory was extinct by the excheat of the remainder, tempore
statuti, and the seigniorie was in him, for a disseisin of the Rent is not a
disseisin of the service, and so no cause of action tempore statuti.

Lord and Tenant, the tenant defeceth the Lord of his rents and services, 32.
years before the Statute, and after enfeoffeth the Lord, and I.N. of the Land,
and makes livery to I.N. and the Lord is imprisoned, tempore statuti, who
comes at large after Ascension, 1546. he shall have an action upon the
ancient limitation within the fix years,

Because the Livery was not made to the Lord, and the user of the action is a
disclaimer.

Two parceners which are within age at the time of the Statute, have cause of
action auncestral upon the ancient limitation, one comes at full age within a
month after Ascension, 1546. and the other comes at full age 8. years after,
etc. they may bring their action upon the ancient limitation within 6. years
after the full age of the youngest, notwithstanding that it be x. years after
the full age of the eldest.

Because that they are but one heir, and the age of the one shall stay the
parcel for the other.

A daughter within age at the time of the Statute, had cause of an Aff. of
Mortdancester upon the ancient limitation, as heir of her father, and after
Ascension, 1546. a son is born, and after he dies without issue, the daughter
shall not have in action upon the ancient limitation within the 6. years,

Because her action was once extinguished by the birth of the son.

A Parson of a Church had cause of an Assise tempore statuti of a disseisin,
32. years before, etc. and is imprisoned at the time of the Statute, and is
deposed, and another put in, and afterward the new Parson is deposed, and the
first is inducted Parson again, he shall not have an Assise upon the ancient
limitation within the six years,

Because that albeit that an Assise may revive, as in case where a descent is
had, and after the Land discends to the disseisor, etc. and outlawry, and the
like, etc. yet that is upon the ancient title which remains in the plaintiff,
but in this case the title was gone by the deprivation, and he is now Parson by
the new presentation, and so a new title, and his first charge, lease and
grant are determined.

Alienee purchases land, and is disseised 33. years before the Statute, and
is beyond the sea at the time of the Statute, and after the King makes him
denizen, and he comes back, he shall not have an Assise upon the ancient
limitation within the six years, by this proviso of the Statute,

Because he had not cause of an Assise at the time, etc. for that he was an
Alien, and an Alien borne is not to enjoy an action as a subject.

A man takes his Neife to wife, I. N. enfeoffeth the husband and wife in fee,
the husband dies, the wife enters and is ousted by the heir of her husband
who is desseised by I.S. 3. years before the Statute, and the woman and the
heir of the husband are beyond sea at the time of the Statute, the heir shall
have an action upon the ancient limitation, within the six years, and not the
wife,

Because it is no enfranchisement by Not. brev. for the wife shall not have
dowre in that case, and therefore the heir may enter in the land purchased by
his villain, and so the action to him.

The eighth Lecture.
What causes are sufficient causes of action vested in in such persons at the
time of the Statute to have an action upon the Ancient limitation within the
six years, and to take advantage of the six years, and which not.

IF the King gives land of the suppression of 27. H. 8. to I. S. in fee, which
was holden by the Abbey of D. of I. S. by fealty and xx.s. Rent, I. N.
distraines for the Rent, I.S. makes a rescous, 32. years pass the Statute
comes, I.N. beyond Sea, he had cause of action for the Rent by this branch of
the Statute, to have advantage of the six years.

Because the act reserves Rents and services to strangers, but otherwise it is
where the King is entitled by double matter of record, as for forfeits for
treason, and office found, or by office found for not doing of their duty, for
in those cases, if the act of Parliament give that to the King, saving titles
of estrangers, as if no such act had been made, that would not serve, because
if no such act had been, the seisin of the King, by matter of Record,
extinguisheth all seigniories, but the words of the act of the 1. suppression
are [saving to all estrangers, their titles, as if the Abbe had been living,
not a diver si tat.

A man is attainted of Treason by Act of Parliament, and after the heir is
restored in as high a manner, as if no such attainder had been, the Lord
distraines for his Rent, and rescous is made 32. years past, the statute
comes, the Lord is imprisoned, he had good cause of action for the Rent to have
advantage of the 6. years.

Because all is revived, as in the case of a condition, etc.

A man holds of his son by 3. s. and dies, the son enters, by which the
seigniory is extinct, and endoweth his mother of the third part of the land,
the Statute comes, the son beyond Sea, he has cause of action of the third
part of the Rent, within the 6. years upon the ancient limitation, if he be
debtor.

34. E. 3.15. that the wife is in by the husband, and the seigniory was
determined by the act of the Law, and not by the act of the Lord as a purchase,
and therefore she shall be attendant for the third part of the Rent.

What causes of action shall serve those which were infants and covert, The
eight Article of the Statute.
and the like, tempore statuti, and what not?

A man gives land in tail, reserving Rent, and dies, his wife is endowed of
the Rent, the tenant in tail dies without issue, the heir of the dower
enters, and defeceth the wife of the Rent, 52. years before the Statute, and
she is beyond sea at the time of the Statute, she has not cause of action upon
the ancient limitation, to use it within the six years, etc. 10. E. 3.

A woman seized of certain land, takes a husband, and after the husband, enters
in religion, the wife aliens in fee, and after the husband is dereigned before
the stat. of desolutions, and enters, and is ousted by the alience 52. years
before this Statute of limitations, and is imprisoned at the time of the
Statute, he had good cause of action to use within six years upon the
Ancient limitation, 33. E. 3. Tit. enter.

A man seized in fee, takes a wife, the Lord of the land grants the seigniory
to the wife and her husband in fee, and the husband dies, she accepts homage of
the Tenant 52. years before the Statute, and is beyond Sea at the time of the
Statute, she had not cause to have a writ of dowre upon the Land within the
six years upon the Anncient limitation,

Because she had accepted the seigniory, and she shall not have both, 11. E. 3.

Land is given by Fine to one for life, the remainder to one which was baptized
by the name of John in fee, and after he in the remainder is confirmed by the
name of William, the Tenant for life dies, an estranger enters 52. years
before the Statute, he in the remainder is imprisoned at the time of the
statute, this is not sufficient cause of action to have a Scire facias within
the six years upon the ancient limitation,

12. R. 2. contrary upon a purchase executed.

A mardeaseth for life, and Tenant for life leaseth for another life, upon
condition, and enters for the condition broken, he in the reversion enters 32.
years before this statute, the Tenant for life imprisoned, tempore statuti, he
had not cause of action to enjoy the ancient limitation within the six years,

Because a forfeiture shall not revive.

A man who was beyond Sea at the time of the statute, and had cause of action,
etc. comes to dowre, and incontinent, the King sends him back to war in
France, who continues there seven years in a fortress, and comes back, he
shall not have his action within the six years, nor otherwise.

A man seized in right of his wife, aliens Mortmaine, the Lord enters, the
husband dies 52. years before this statute, the wife is beyond sea, tempore
statuti, etc. the wife had good cause of action to recover the Land within the
six years of his return, upon the ancient limitation.

The Lord disseiseth his Tenant, and makes a feoffment in fee upon condition,
and reenters for the condition broken, the Tenant enters upon him, and
rescousseth a distress 30. years before this Statute, the Lord is imprisoned
at the time of the Statute, he had not cause of action, nor to avow for the
Rent, nor seigniory upon the ancient limitation within the six years of his
enlargement,

Because the Rent and seigniory were extinct before and cannot be revived by
the condition.

An Alience has issue a son, and is made denizen, and purchazeth Land, and
has issue another son, and dies, the youngest son enters, the eldest
does oust him 32. years before this Statute, the youngest is imprisoned at the
time of the Statute, he has good cause of action to use it within six years
upon the ancient limitation,

Because he was not inheritable before his father was Denizen, as the son of a
villain borne after the enfranchisment is free, but contrary, of him which was
borne before, etc.

Grandfather and son, the Grandfather dies seized, I. H. abates, the son
disseiseth him, the father dies 33. years before this Statute, I. H. has not
cause of action to use it within 6. years upon the ancient limitation,

Because the descent of the right of the Father to the son does remit him.

A man leaseth land for life, the tenant for life is disseised, an ancester
collateral of the tenant for life releaseth with warrantty, and dies without
issue 32. years past, the Statute is made, the tenant for life beyond the sea,
he had not cause of action to enjoy the six years by this branch of the
Statute, 15. H. 7.

Tenant in tail discontinueth, and retaketh in fee, and grants a Rent charge,
and makes a feoffment upon condition, the grantee is defeced of the Rent, the
tenant in tail had issue, and dies, the heir enters for the condition
broken, the grantee is imprisoned, etc. he had good cause of action for the
Rent by this branch, etc.

Because the heir is not remitted for that that he entered at full age,
contrary of such an entry for a condition within age, 8. H. 7.

Grandfather, Father, and Son, the grandfather is seized of certain land with
common appurtenance, and is disseised of the Common, and brings an asseise, and
is nonsuited, and enfeoffeth the father of the land with the appurt. and dies,
the father dies 52. years before this statute, the son within age at the
time of the Statute, no cause of action is to the son to have an action
within the six years, 4. E. 3.

A man made a feoffment in fee to a woman, upon condition, that if he marry
her, that it shall be lawful to him to enter, and he marries him, and aliens,
and dies 52. years before the statute, the wife is beyond sea at the time of
the Statute, she had cause of action, by a Cui in vita, to use it within the
six years, 5. E. 2.

Because he was seized in right of his wife before, and he could not enter upon
himself.

The nineth Lecture.
Because the Statute in the ninth Article is, That if those which were Infants
Fem. Coverts and the like, die within age Covert, etc. no judgment or
Determination had of such Titles, Actions or Rights, that their next heir or
heirs shall have like liberty and advantage within the six years next after
the death of the Auncester, as the Auncester might have had within the six
years, etc.

It is therefore at this time to be seen, what judgments shall make a
Determination of the Action in such Cases, and e contra; and what Persons shall
be aided by this branch, and what not.

A Man brought a Writ of Mortdauncestor, after Ascension, 1546. upon the
Ancient Limitation, and within the six years, etc. because that he was an
Infant, tempore statuti: the Tenant pleads darrain scisin in the Demaundant
judgment, etc. the Demaundant pleads an Estoppel, which is adjudged against
him in another Term, by which judgment is given, etc. the Demaundant dies,
this judgment is a good determination of this action against the Heir, to
have such action within another six years.

Because albeit he be not party to the Writ, and to all actions, yet he is
barred as to this action, because the Heir may have a writ of coufinage or
besaile, and not a writ of Aile, because he is not within the degree, etc. and
the writ shall say, de quo, I. H. proavus suus fuit seisitus die quo obiit, etc.

He which was an infant, tempore statuti, brought a Formedon after Ascension,
etc. and within the 6. years, etc. upon the ancient limitation, and is
nonsuited, and judgment is given upon that, and he dies, his issue shall have
another formedon within another 6. years upon the the ancient limitation,
notwithstanding this Statute.

Because this is no determination of the action, nor bail, but the heir shall
have another Formedon, and so is the intent of the Statute, ut patet, by
another clause of the Statute.

A man which was imprisoned, tempore statuti, brings a writ of Right upon a
disclaymer against his Tenant, which had disclaimed, the Tenant pleads Faux
latin to the writ, by which the writ abates by judgment; the demandant dies
within the 6. years, his heir shall not have another 6. years to bring his
action in upon the ancient limitation.

Because the heir shall not have droyt sur disclaymer, by the disclaymer to his
father. 22. p. 6.

He who was beyond sea at the time of the Statute, brings a writ of entry in
the per, upon the ancient limitation after ascension, etc. the writ abates by
judgment by the death of the Tenant, his heir entered, and the demandant dies
within the 6. years, this judgment is a good determination of this action
against the heir, so that he shall not have such another action within another
6. years.

Because he shall have that in the Per and cui, and not in the per.

A precipe upon the ancient limitation after Ascension, by a Fem. which was
covert at the time of the Stat. and within 6. years the tenant pleads
excommunication in the Demandant, which is adjudged for a good plea, the
demandant dies within the 6. years, his heir shall have an action upon the
ancient limitation within another 6. years, notwithstanding this Judgment.

Because it is but a demurrer of the parol, which is not peremptory.

A woman which was covert, tempore statuti, brings a Formedon in remainder upon
the ancient limitation after Ascension, etc. within the six years, the tenant
demands oyer of the deed of remainder, and demurreth for the not showing of it,
which demurrer is adjudged against the demandant, and he dies within the 6.
years, the Heir shall not have another Formedon within another 6. years.

Because this judgment is a bar at the time of the monstration. Fitz. 19. 2,
3.172 and 7 H. 6.19. and the judgment is, that the demandant shall take
nothing by this writ.

A writ of Entry in the quibus is brought by the heir against a termor, which
does nothing, and against another, which pleads non disscisivit, the termor is
acquitted, and the other is found guilty, the Plaintiff recovers, this is a
good determination against the Termor, so that he nor his Executors shall not
have an action, nor remedy, notwithstanding that he had a good Title to the
term, and the Plaintiff no title to the land.

A man which was imprisoned at the time of the Statute, brings an Assise after
Ascension, etc. and within the 6. years, upon the ancient limitation, the
Tenant voucheth another Record of Assise, brought by the Plaintiff against him,
in which he was barred, the Plaintiff pleads null. tiel Record, and a Record is
certified, brought against the Demandant, and his wife, by which Judgment is
given against the Plaintiff, who dies within the 6. years, this Judgment is a
good determination, so that the heir shall not have an action within other 6.
years.

Because it is a good bar, and no fayler of Record.

Heir in Tail, which was within age at the time of the Statute, brought a writ
of Right after Ascension, etc. upon the ancient limitation, and within the 6.
years. and he and the tenant ioynes the mise upon the mere droyt, and after the
Demandant made default, by which judgment final is given, and he dies within
the 6. years, there the heir shall have an Action within other 6. years,
notwithstanding this judgment.

For he shall have a formedon, because the default was the act of the father,
which shall not prejudice the Issue in tail by the Statute of Westminster. 2.

A man which was beyond sea at the time of the Statute, brings a writ of right
after Ascension, upon the ancient limitation, and within the 6. years the
Tenant tenders the half-mark for to enquire of the seisin, which is found for
him, and judgment final is given, the Demandant dies within 6. years; this is
not a good judgment to oust the heir, to have an action within another 6.
years.

Because he may reverse that by error, 34. E. 3. tit. Judgment. Fitz. 2 E. 6.
and the enquiry of the seisin was no Issue, and therefore is clear by the
Statute of Ieofayles.

Tenant in tail, which was imprisoned tempore statuti, brings a writ of Nativo
habendo, of a villain regardant after Ascension, etc. and within the 6. years
upon the ancient limitation, the Defendant pleads Frank etc. and gives an
enfranchisement by the Plaintiff by deed in evidence, the Jury possesses for
him, the Plaintiff is barred by judgment, and dies within the 6. years; this
is no determination against the heir, to have another Action within another
six years.

Because the issue was true, but now the issue in tail may confess and avoid
this judgment. 12. E. 4.

He which was imprisoned at the time of the Statute, had cause of Attaint upon
the ancient limitation, and brings that within the 6. years, and after is
nonsuited at the first day, and dies; this is no determination against the
heir, but that he may have an attaint within another 6. years.

Because the nonsuit is not peremptory, but where it is taken after 32. E. 3.

A Quere in P. the Plaintiff declares, the defendant makes his bar, the
Plaintiff is nonsuit, this is a good determination against the Plaintiff, so
that he shall not have another Quere in P.

Because the nonsuit after appearance is peremptory. 19. E. 4.

A man that was beyond sea at the time of the Statute, brings a writ of right
close after Ascension, etc. and within the six years, upon the ancient
limitation, in Ancient Demean, where the Lord had confirmed the state of the
tenant before by Deed indented, to hold by lesser services, the tenant pleads a
plea which is found for him, the demandant is barred by judgment, and dies
within the six years, this is a good determination of the Action for ever, so
that the heir shall not have an Action within other six years.

Because a Confirmation does not make a Frank Fee, because no alteration of
possession, contrary of a Fine or feoffment.

Two Parteners, one releaseth to the other, One brought a Precipe against both,
he who released made default, the other appears, and prays the view, and will
not take the entire tenancy, the Demandant records the moietie of him which did
not appear by default, and after is nonsuit, and had execution of the moiety,
he which lost is imprisoned at the time of the Statute, and brings an Assise
after Ascension, etc. and within the 6. years, against him which recorded upon
the ancient limitation, and dies within the six years; this judgment
aforesaid is not a determination against the heir, to bring a writ of Entry in
the quibus, or another Action within other 6. years. 22. E. 6.

Because a Recovery against him who had nothing, is of no validity, etc. nor
shall not bind him.

A man which was an infant at the time of the Statute, makes a plaint of
Mordauncestor without an original before the Justices of Assise, upon the
ancient limitation after Ascension, etc. and within the 6. years, the tenant
pleads in bar, which is found for him, and had judgment against the Plaintiff,
the Plaintiff dies within the 6. years, this judgment is no determination
against the heir, to oust him of an Action within 6. other years.

For it is void, and coram non judice, otherwise if the trial had been in
banco.

A man which was imprisoned at the time of the Statute, brings a Cui in vita in
banco, upon the ancient limitation after Ascension, etc. and within the 6.
years, the tenant appears and pleads, and bars the Demandant by demurre, by
which judgment is given, this judgment shall be a determination against the
heir, to bring another action.

Because it is not void but error, because this court had authority; contrary
of Justices of Assise, without a writ and patent of Assise; for the others have
a general commission.

A man which was beyond sea at the time of the Statute, brings an Ass. after
Ascension, 1546. upon the ancient limitation, and within the 6. years which
remained, etc. one of the Justices dies, and the Plaintiff is associated to
the other Justice, and judgment is given against the Plaintiff at the next
Sessions upon issue tried, and he dies within the 6. years, this is a
determination against the heir for ever, so that he shall never have action
within the 6. years, nor otherwise.

Because now it is not error by reason of the Statute of Ieofayles, and it may
be that there were two persons notwithstanding the wards of the Record.

He which was an Infant tempore statuti, brings a formedon after Ascension, and
within the 6. years after, upon the ancient limitation against tenant for
life, who disclaimeth, the demandant has judgment, and enters, and the tenant
for life dies, he in the reversion enters upon the demandant, and the
demandant dies within the 6. years, this Iudgem. and execution thereupon, is
not a determination against the heir in tail, but that he may have another
action against him in the reversion, within the other six years.

Because upon the disclaymer the judgment is no other but that the writ shall
aba^e, and the demandant to enter in at his peril, which does not bind him in
the reversion; contrary of a Recovery against tenant for life, note the
difference, 36. H. 6. f. 30.

A man leaseth land for another man's life, and grants the reversion over the
tenant Aff. and aliens in fee, he in the reversion is beyond sea, tempore
statuti, etc. and there dies, his heir shall not have a writ of Entry, ad
terminum qui preteriit, within the 6. years.

Because it does not lie, but for the first lessor, and his heirs.

A Parson of a parish was imprisoned tempore statuti, and brings a Imcis utrum
after Ascension, etc. upon the ancient limitation within the 6. years, which
was adjudged against him upon a demurrer upon a plea pleaded to the writ, and
he dies within the 6. years, this is no determination against the successor,
but that he may have another action within the 6. years, notwithstanding that
the statute speaks of heirs only.

Because he is within the equity of the Statute.

A Commission of Air issues in the County of D. one which was an infant
tempore statuti, brings an Assise before them after Ascension, etc. upon the
ancient limitation within the 6. years, and depending that the Court of Kings
bench comes into the same County, and proclaims the peace, and after the
Tenant bars the Plaintiff by demur upon the title, the Plaintiff dies within
the 6. years, this is no good judgment against the heir, to bring an Action
within another 6. years.

Because the judgment is void by the coming of the Kings Bench, and making
of Proclamation, or error at the least.

A Stativo habendo brought by a man which was beyond sea at the time of the
Statute, and after Ascension, etc. and upon the ancient limitation, within the
six years, the Plaintiff declares, and is nonsuited, and judgment is given
upon that, and the Plaintiff dies within the six years; this is a
determination against the heir, so that he shall have no other action within
other six years.

Because the nonsuit is peremptory in favorem libertatis.

He which was an infant tempore statuti, brought a Cessavit upon the ancient
limitation after Ascension, etc. and within the six years, the Tenant pleads
false Latin to the writ, by which the writ abates by judgment upon demurrer,
the demandant dies within 6. years, this is a good determination, so that the
heir shall have an Action of that within other 6 years.

Because he shall not have a Cessavit of a Cesser in his fathers time.

A Woman which was covert at the time of the Statute, brings a Precipe in
banco, upon the ancient limitation, after Ascension, etc. and within six
years, of land in the County Palatine of Durham, the tenant pleads a bar, the
demandant demurres, and is barred by judgment, and dies within the 6. years;
this is no determination to oust the heir of an action within other 6. years.

Because this is a void judgment, and coram non iudice: contrary in the Cinque
Ports, and ancient them.

The husband discontinueth the right of his wife, and dies, the Feoffee
cease, the lord records by a Cessav, the wife beyond sea at the time of the
Statute, the wife dies within the 6. years; this judgment is no determination
against the heir, but that he may have another action within another 6. years.

Because his title is before the Cesser, for albeit the Recovery in the
Cessavit against the husband and wife, shall bind, yet otherwise it is, when
the wife is not party.

A Precipe by a man which was beyond sea at the time of the Statute, brought
within the 6. years, the Bailiffes of D. demand conusance and ousted of it by
reason of failee of right, and they demand cognizance again, and traverse the
failer of right, and the Demandant also, and the Tenant joyneth in issue to the
Bailifes, and the issue is found against the Bailiffes, by which judgment is
given, the demand, dies, this judgment is a determination to the heir, so
that he need not have another action within other 6. years.

Because the tenant had lost the land, and the heir may enter if he will.

The tenth Lecture. Of Determinations in fait.
What matters, and what things shall be said good Determinations of Titles and
Rights of Infants, Fem. Coverts and the like, at the time of the statute, so
that if they die within the 6. years, their heirs shall not have advantage of
another six years.

I N. had cause of Action upon the ancient limitation against a villain, and is
beyond sea, tempore statuti, and returns, An auncester collateral of I. N.
releaseth to the villain, with warranty, the Lord of the villain enters, the
auncester collateral dies without issue, J. N. dies within the 6. years,
this is no Determination to hinder the heir, I. N. to have an action within
another 6. years.

Because the warranty is not descended upon the possession of him to whom it
was made, 22. Ass.

He which was an Infant tempore statuti, and had cause of action to a
Rentcharge upon the ancient limitation, out of Ten acres of land, enters into
one acre at full age, and enfeoffeth an estrainger, and dies within the 6.
years, the Tenant reenters, the interest of the heir is gone to have an action
within the other 6. years.

Because a discharge of one acre by a tertious entry, is a discharge of all,
as by a purchase of one acre, because there cannot be an apportionment, and
notwithstanding, that he would enter as heir, yet if the disseisee would would
not re-enter upon him, the rent shall not revive.

A man which was an infant tempore statuti, had cause of action upon the
ancient limitation for common, out of twenty acres of land, the tenant of the
soil enfeoffeth the infant of the land unde, etc* upon condition, the infant
enfeoffeth a stranger, and dies within the 6. years, the feoffer enters for
the condition broken, the title of the heir is not determined.

Because of the infancy at the time of the feoffment, and the regresse of the
feoffer revives all.

He which was an Infant at the time of the Statute, had cause of action upon
the ancient limitation to a Rent charge, the tenant of the soil devises the
land to the infant for to sell, according to the custom, etc. the infant comes
of full age, and sells, and dies within the 6. years, the title of the Rent
is not determined, but that his heir shall have remedy within another 6. years.

Because the land, out of which the Rent was issuing, passed by the will of the
devisor, and not by the infant which sold.

Lord and tenant of 4. acres by four pence Rent, the Lord is disseised of the
Rent by the tenant 33. years before the Statute, he being imprisoned at the
time of the Statute, and afterward releaseth to the tenant all his right in
one of the acres, and had issue, and dies within 6. years, the interest of
the heir in the rent is not determined to have an action within the other 6.
years.

Because it is but for part, as a purchase of one acre, etc.

Lord and tenant, the tenant is disseised 60. years past, and is beyond sea at
the time of the Statute, and returns, and is utlawed of felony by erroneous
process, and dies within the 6. years, the Lord enters, the heir reverseth
the utlary by error, this action, nor title to the land is not determined to
have remedy within 6. other years.

Because the reversing of the utlary ab initio, reverseth the title of the land.

A man which was imprisoned at the the of the Statute, had cause of a formedon
upon the ancient limitation, upon an alienation with warranty, and dies within
the 6. years, and had assetts descended, which assetts was impaired by
drowning in the time of the ancestor, the title of the heir is not determined
to have an action within the other 6. years.

Because it is not asserts the day of the writ purchased. 4 E. 3. contr. by
Thiop.

A man which had title of action upon the ancient limitation, has issue two
sons and dies, the eldest in religion before the Statute of 31. H. 8. the
youngest brings an action for the land, and leeseth by false verdict, the
eldest is derained, and he and the youngest are imprisoned at the time of the
Statute, and the youngest dies within the 6. years, the title of the eldest
is determined to have an action or an entry within other 6. years.

Because the youngest was barred as heir, and none may have an attaint but the
heir of the youngest, and the verdict binds the title.

A man makes a feoffment in fee, upon condition the feoffee is disseised, and
imprisoned tempore statuti, the feoffer had issue a daughter, and dies, his
wife privement enseint, the daughter enters for the condition broken, the
feoffee dies within the 6. years, and a son is borne of the wife of the
feoffer, the heir of the feoffee, nor the son shall not have remedy within the
other 6. years.

Because this is as a purchase to the daughter, tempore statuti.

A man seized of two acres of land in two villages in one County, is disseised
by another, that is to say, of one acre at one time, and of another acre at
another time, the disseisor of non sane memory, makes a feoffment of one acre,
and is imprisoned tempore statuti, and dies within the six years, the
disseisee enters into the other acre, of which no feoffment was made in the
name of both, the title of the heir of the disseisor is determined for both
acres, to have remedy within six other years.

Because the entry into one acre in the name of two, is good against the same
person, contrary against two several disseisors.

A man seized of two acres enfeoffeth one of 1. acre upon condition, and
enfeoffeth another of another acre upon another condition, the first feoffee
within age, enfeoffeth a stranger in that acre, and is within age at the time
of the Statute, and dies within the six years, the conditions are broken, the
first feoffer enters in the other acre, in the hands of him which did not make
the feoffment in name of both acres, the title of the heir of the infant is not
determined by this entry.

Because the entry upon the feoffee in name of both shall not serve against the
feoffee, and therefore remedy for one acre.

A disseisor makes a gift in tail, the reversion in fee, the tenant in tail
had issue and dies, the issue enters and dies without issue, he in the
remainder enters, the disseisee is imprisoned at the time of the Statute,
within the 6. years, the title of entry of his heir is not determined to enter
within six other years.

Because by the death of tenant in tail without issue the descent is gone, and
so the title of entry for the heir is revived.

A Parson makes a Lease for life, and dies, his successor is beyond sea at the
time of the Statute, and after dies, his successor takes fealty of the
Lessor, his title is determined to take benefit within the other six years.

Because this acceptance is a receipt of Rent.

A man which was imprisoned at the time of the Statute, and had cause of
action, ut supra, etc. is enlarged after ascension, etc. and delivers a
Release, as an Escrow to I. N. upon certain conditions to be performed, to
deliver it to the terr tenant, as his Deed, and before the day, he is of non
sane memory, and after the conditions are performed, and I. N. delivers the
Deed and the Feoffor dies within the six years, this is a good Determination
of the right, so that the heir shall not have an action within other six years.

Because that had relation to the commandment, etc.

A man enfeoffed I. N. upon condition that he should enfeoffe a woman, and he
enfeoffed the woman and her husband to them and the heirs of the wife, and
after the husband discontinueth, the Statute comes, the husband dies, the
wife dies within the six years, the first feoffor enters, the title of the
heir of the wife is determined to have remedy within the other 6. years.

Because by the misexecuting of the state to the husband and wife, which should
have been only to the wife, the condition is broken.

The eleventh Lecture.
For that the Statute says, That if any person takes any of the said Actions,
Auditories, Scire facias, Prescriptions, Titles or claims, before Ascension,
1546. which abateth by the death of any party, no Judgment or Determination
being had, that the party which lives, or his heir shall have a new action,
etc. within a year after such writ or suit abated, and shall have such
advantages within that year, as at the common Law, and the Eighth Article
within 6. years likewise.

It is to be see^, where such persons may declare upon the Ancient Limitation,
and e contra, and what advantages they shall have, and e contra.

TWo Parcenors, Heirs in tail, bring a Formedon upon the ancient limitation,
before Ascensi. 1546. one dies without Issue, after Ascension, etc. the other
prays leave to have another writ, and brings that freshly against the first
Tenant within the year, who pleads non tenure, the Demandant avers him Tenant
the day of the first Writ, and shall have advantage to have this amercement for
the land first in demand.

Because she claims as heir of her father, and not as heir of the sister.

Two parcenors are disseised 32. years before the statute, and brings a writ of
Enter in the nature of an Assise before Ascension, 1546. and one dies without
issue, after Ascension, the other prays leave to have another writ, and
brought that freshly against the same tenant within a year, etc. for the same
land, who pleads non tenure, the Demandant avers him Tenant, the day of their
first writ, she shall not have advantage to have this averment.

Because it cannot be by another, but by the same title of the same action,
and here she claims a moiety by her sister.

Two Infants are desseised 33. years before the statute, and brought a writ of
entry, in the nature of an Assise before Ascension, 1546. and one dies after
ascension, etc. and the tenant also, and his heir is in by descent, the other
brings a writ of entry in the per, within the year, and the heir of the Tenant
is essoined, and after had the view by Attorney, and after his Attour. is
essoined upon the view there at the day, the Demandant cannot declare upon the
ancient Limitation, notwithstanding this Statute.

Because the year is past, and therefore this article is little worth.

A man brings a Precipe upon the ancient Limitation, before ascension, 1546.
the tenant tenders his law of non summons, and performs that after ascension,
etc. by which the Writ abates, and he brings a new within the year, by
journeys, accounts, etc. he shall not have advantage to declare upon the
ancient limitation.

Because that is expired, and the Statute does not warrant no abatement but by
death.

A man brought a Precipe upon the ancient limitation before ascension, the writ
is abated by false Latin after ascension, etc. the Demandant prays to have
another writ, and takes it freshly by journeys, accounts within the year, etc.
the tenant pleads non-tenure, the demandant shall not have advantage to aver
him tenant the day of the first writ by journeys, accounts, etc.

Because the first writ did not abate by death, and the averment proves, that
he took the writ upon the ancient title, where the ancient limitation is
determined, and therefore without the case of the statute.

A man brought a Precipe before Ascension, etc. upon the ancient limitation,
the writ is abated by Jointenancy after ascension, etc. the Demandant takes a
new writ by journeys, accounts, etc. within the year against both, the tenant
pleads Non tenure, the Demandant avers them tenants die primi brevis, he shall
not have advantage of this averment.

Because the writ does not abate by death, and a writ by journeys, accounts,
does not lie against him which was not party to the first writ, nor by
construction against his companion which was party.

Two infants bring an Assise upon the ancient limitation before Ascension, etc.
and after Ascension, the Assise abateth by death of one of the Plaintifes, the
other may have another Assise within the year freshly, and shall have advantage
to recover the entire costs of the first suit.

Because it is by journeys, accounts, etc.

He which was imprisoned at the time of the statute, having cause of action,
etc. and brings an action within the year, within the end of the six years,
according to the statute, the tenant is essoined, and after had the view, and
his attorney is essoined upon the view, there the Demandant cannot declare upon
the ancient limitation, notwithstanding the eighth and nineth article of the
statute.

Because the six years are past.

A Precipe, quod reddat, brought by one against two before ascension, etc. upon
the ancient limitation, one of the tenants dies after ascension, etc. sc.
termino Trin. and judgment is given, that the writ shall abate in the term of
Saint Mich. next following, etc. and the demandant brings another writ, which
bears test a year and two months after the death of the tenant, and within
the year of the judgment, he shall not have advantage to declare upon the
ancient limitation, 21 E. 3.

Because the statute is (within the year after the writ abates) and it is in
truth abated by the death, and the judgment shall have relation to the death,
contrariwise upon another abatement; note the diversity.

A man recovers his warranty, pro loco and tempore, in a warantia charte before
ascension, etc. quia timet implacitari, and after leeseth in a Precipe or
assise, and after ascension brings a Scire facias, within the year, to have in
value, he shall not have advantage to have in value, upon the first indictment.

Because he ought to have vouched, or to have given notice in the first suit.

A man brought a Precipe before ascension, etc. upon the ancient limitation,
which abates after ascension, etc. by death of the tenant, and the Demandant
brought another Precipe half a year within the year, the tenant casts a
protection, which is allowed, and after the year, the demandant brings a
Resummons, he shall not have advantage to declare upon the ancient limitation.

Because the year is past by the protection pending.

A man brings a Precipe upon a false limitation before ascension, etc. which
abates after ascension, etc. by death of the tenant, And the demandant brings
another Precipe, half a year within the year, the tenant is essoyned de
servitio Rs. which is admitted, and after the expiration of that, the Demandant
comes to declare, he shall not have advantage to declare the ancient limitation.

Because the year is expired.

Two Parceners brought a writ of Aile before ascension, etc. upon the ancient
limitation, and one had issue, and dies after ascension, etc. and the other,
and the issue brings a writ of Ayle within the year, etc. they shall not have
advantage for to declare upon the ancient limitation.

Because the ancester was grandfather to one, and great grandfather to to
other, and therefore could not join, and they shall not be aided by the
equality of the statute, as in Mordauncestor.

A man brings a Precipe upon the ancient limitation, before ascension, etc.
which abates by the death of the tenant after ascension, and the Demandant
brings another writ within the year, and the tenant voucheth an infant within
age of 19. years, by which the plea demurs, and at full age the Demandant
brought a Resummons against the Vouch, the demandant shall not have advantage
to declare against him, upon the ancient limitation.

Because the year is expired.

A man brought a Precipe upon the ancient limitation, before ascension, etc.
against two tenants for life, which abated after the ascension, etc. by the
death of one of the Tenants, the Demandant brings another writ within the year,
the tenant is essoined, and after had the view, and after the Demand, declares,
the Ten. prays in aid of him in the reversion, and had the aid, by reason
whereof summons ad auxiliand. issues, and the Pry is essoined, so that the
year is now past, and now the Pry joyneth, now the demandant shall have
advantage to make his Declaration upon the ancient limitation.

Because this is a new Declaration, as against vouch and tenant by receipt, but
the Pry shall have oyer of the ancient declaration: nota differentiam.

A Precipe by him which was beyond sea, tempore statuti, etc. upon the ancient
limitation, brought within the six years, the tenant voucheth an infant of the
age of 15. years, by which the Parol demurres until his age, and after the
vouchee upon a Resummons enters into the warranty, the demandant shall not have
advantage to declare upon the ancient limitation.

Because the 6. years are past.

A Precipe brought by one within years, tempore statuti, upon the ancient
limitation, and they are at issue, and at the habeas corpora, or distringas
juratores, the Demandant is essoined within the year, the Demandant shall have
advantage to have the essoyne. Fitz. tit. essoin. 20. E. 3.

Because none can restrain him to delay himself: A man brought a precipe
against two Joynt-tenants upon the ancient limitation before Ascension, etc.
which have the view; and after Ascension the Writ is abated by the death of one
of them; the Demandant brings another Precipe against the other within the
year, and he demands the view again, the Demandant shall have advantage, to
oust him of the view, but contrary is it where the Demandant is nonsuited, or
discontinueth, and brings another Writ. 12. E. 3.

A Precipe quod reddat upon the ancient limitation against J. N. and W.S.
before Ascension, etc. and the Writ abates after Ascension, by the death of W.
S. the Demandant brings another Precipe within the year, etc. against J. N. who
said, that the land was given to his father, and to him, and to the said W. S.
which is dead, and to the Heirs of his Father who died; J. N. his Heir within
age, and prays his age; the Demandant demurrs upon this matter, he shall have
advantage to oust the Tenant of his age.

Because the possession is by purchase notwithstanding that the Fee be
descended, 30. E. 3.

A Precipe brought within the year upon this branch of the Statute, the Tenant
voucheth within the year, the Demandant says that the Tenant is outlawed, he
shall have advantage by this matter to oust him of the voucher, 25. E. 3. and
the same Law is it, that the vouchee is dead.

Because that voucher is in lieu of an action, and a man outlawed shall not
have an action.

A Precipe brought by one upon this Article of the Statute against Tenant for
life within a year, which made default after default, and he in the reversion,
prays to be received: the Demandant says that he entered upon the land pending
the writ, the demandant shall not have advantage to oust him of the resceit 13.
R. 2. And the same Law by Thorpe if the Tenant surrender, pending the Writ.

A Precipe by one within years upon this branch of the Statute, the Tenant
vouches Process continues until the sequat. etc. The Demandant recovers
against the tenant, and after brings a new Precipe against the same Tenant;
within the year, the Tenant vouches the same Vouchee again; the Demandant, nor
the Vouchee shall not have advantage to oust him of the Voucher 10. E. 3.

For the 1. seisin continues, because he took not execution, and therefore the
first warranty remains until execution.

A Precipe by one upon this Article of the Statute within a year, etc. against
two, one makes default after default, the other takes the entire tenancy, and
prays the view, the Demandant demurs, he shall have advantage to oust him of
the view.

Because by the taking of the tenancy he had taken notice, etc. And the Statute
is, where a writ abates by non-tenure, misnaming of the village, etc. Quod in
modo brevi non erit visus concedendus: Et quod concedatur visus, ubi visus est
necessarius, etc.

A Precipe by him which was imprisoned tempore Statuti, within six years, etc.
Upon the ancient limitation, the Tenant vouches half a year before the end of
the six years; the Vouchee casts a protection, and after the year of that the
Demandant sues a Resummons, the Vouchee comes and enters, the Demandant shall
not have advantage to declare upon the ancient limitation.

Because the six years are past by the depending of the protection.

The twelfth Lecture.
Upon what Verdicts given upon actions upon this limitation; Attaint shall lie,
and e contra: and who shall have that, and upon what cause, and e contra.

A Man recovers by Assise upon this limitation, and after is ousted by the
defendant, and brings a Redisseisin: and the Jury finds for the defendant by
false verdict, the plaintiff shall not have an Attaint.

Because it is in a manner but an Enquest of Office.

A man leaseth for 23. years after Ascension, etc. and after ousts the termor,
and enfeoffeth I. N. who continues seized until the feoffor ousted him; the
feoffee brings an Assise upon this limitation against the feoffor and the term
or, and both plead Null tort: and the Jury finds that the feoffor disseised the
plaintiff, and acquits the termor: the plaintiff recovers, the termor shall
lose his term, and shall not have an Attaint.

Because the pleading is a conclusion against him, to have the term, and the
Jury found nothing against him.

A man enfeoffed another upon condition without deed, and after enters for the
condition broken after Ascension, etc. the feoffee brought an Assise, which is
taken upon the point of the Asseise, the Jury found the seisin and disseisin,
by which the feoffee recovers, the feoffor shall not have an Attaint.

Because they were not bound to find the condition where it was not pleaded.

A man brought an Assise against two 32 years before Ascension, etc. One pleads
Null tort, which is found against him to the damage of 10. li. which is
excessive; and the other pleads a foreign Release, he shall have an Attaint of
the first verdict, to which he was not party.

Because he is privy to the original, and charged with the damages 39 H. 6.1.
for the first Jury shall tax damages.

A Mordauncester upon this limitation, the Jury finds for the demandant 20 d.
damages, where the damages are 20 li. the demandant shall not have an
Attaint. And if in trespass they find damages 10 li. which is not but 10. d.
the deft. shall have an Attaint; but if they find 10. s^ damages, where the
damage is 10. li. the plaintiff shall not have an Attaint; quod nota
differentiam, between the Plaintiff and Defendant.

Because that he which shall render the damages, if they are excessive, shall
have an Attaint; but contrary of him which restrains the damages, and they
are too little. And nota that the statute Articulo. II. says, that a man shall
have an Attaint, and shall have Judgment and Execution as heretofore, etc.
which copulative refers, that he shall have it after the 30 years, or after 40
years. And by the words Ascension, etc. nothing to the contrary, etc. because
nothing is spoken to the contrary, but only the limitation of time, etc.

A man recovers in an Asseise upon the ancient limitation, and had damages 10.
li. which are excessive; the plaintiff releases his damages, and has
judgment, and recovers, the defendant shall not have an Attaint of the
damages.

Because he is not grieved 12. E. 4.5.

A Manor with a villain regardant is given to two, and to the heir of one,
and the villain is found frank against them by an action tried falsely; he which
had the fee dies, and after the other dies, the heir of him which had the fee
shall not have an Attaint.

Because it was once survived to the other joint tenant which cannot descend to
the heir of the other after, 13 E. 4.2. because an estranger in blood.

An Asseise upon the new limitation; the defendant joint tenant by deed with a
stranger which comes and joyneth, and maintains the joynt-tenancy which is
found against them by false verdict the defendant dies; the other which joined
and which was party to the issue shall not have an Attaint;

Because he is a stranger to the original, but he may have an Assise.

A Writ of Entry in the nature of an Assise upon the new limitation, against
two which plead the general issue; the Jury find that one made the disseisin
ad damnum 20 li. and acquit the other; whereas in verity none of them made any
disseisin he which is found disseisor dies, the other shall not have an
Attaint, and yet the verdict is false.

Because he is acquitted, and so not grieved, tit. brief Fitz. 287.

A man had issue a son, and his wife dies, he takes another wife, and land is
given to him, and to the heirs of his body upon his second wife engendered by
whom he had issue another son, and leeseth by false verdict after Ascent, etc.
and dies, the heir to the Entayl, shall not have an attaint.

Because that discends to the eldest son, and no mischief, because the
youngest son may falsify, the recovery 21 H. 6.31.

In a precipe the tenant voucheth; the vouchee enters and voucheth over one
which enters and leeseth by false verdict; the demandant had judgment and
enters; no execution in value is made over against the vouchee, and after the
vouchee brings an Attaint forty years after, it lies well.

Because forasmuch as judgment and execution is had against the tenant, he may
have in value at his pleasure, and yet if no execution had been against the
tenant, no Attaint shall lie. And yet it seems that by the judgment without
the execution in an action personal, Attaint lies contrary; in an action
real Fitz. tit. Attaint 41 N. 77.

In a Cessavit upon this new limitation brought by the Bishop of L. the tenant
pleads overt to his distress, the Jury is charged therewith, and with the
collusion, and the overture found against the tenant which is true, and as to
the collusions that he had ceased by collusion, which is false: the demandant
had judgment and enters, the Lord Parramont enters upon him for the Mortmayn;
the demandant shall not have an Attaint of the collusion.

Because that the enquiry of the collusion was but of office, and also it
seems that the judgment is erroneous by reason of the collusion, etc. and
therefore may have error, tamen videtur that notwithstanding, that the
judgment be erroneous; yet if the verdict be false attaint lies, because the
other cannot compel the party to bring a Writ of error 18. E. 4.9. but it
seems otherwise if the Court be deceived in judgment.

A Mordancester upon the new limitation, the tenant said, that he himself is
Heir to the Ancestor, and not the Demandant, and so at issue. And upon that the
Tenant gives in evidence to the Jury, that he was Heir by the second wife of
the same Ancestor, because that the first wife by which the demandant is Heir,
was divorced, the Jury found the demandant, heir notwithstanding the divorce,
the Tenant shall not have an Attaint.

Because they are not bound to find the divorce, for it is a spiritual Record.

Certain Observations out of Law Books in Print upon this Statute.
THE first four branches of the Statute use the word (seisin) indefinitely,
Cook l. 4. Bevils case f. 8. etc.
and therefore if the Statute had not gone farther, the word (seisin) should
have been construed, Secundum subjectam materiam: viz. sometimes for actual
seisin, and sometimes for seisin in Law.

And therefore as to a writ of right mordancestor Ayle, Assise, etc. it shall
be intended of an actual seisin, and not of a seisin in Law, so that the three
first branches are to be intended of an actual seisin.

And the fourth branch concerning Avowries extends to seisins in law as well as
to seisins in fayt or actual seisins.

But the words upon which farther doubt may arise are contained in the 6.
branch of the said Statute in these words, viz. If any person or persons do at
any time sue any of the said actions, etc. or make any avowry, etc. and cannot
prove that some of his ancestors or predecessors were in actual possession or
seison of the said lands, tenements, etc. within the time limited, etc. if that
be traversed or denied by the plantiffe demandant, etc. that after such trial,
the party and his heirs shall be barred to all such Writs, actions, etc.

Upon which said words it was objected; Object.
that whereas at the Common Law before this Statute, a seisin in Law was
sufficient for avowries, yet now by the express words there must be an actual
seisin, for that the words (actual possession or seisin) excludes a seisin in
law; and the rather for that an actual seisin is the sure badge of right.

But it was resolved that a seisin in law was sufficient for an avowry within
the intention of this Act: For the intention of the Act was only to limit a
time within which, seisin ought to be had, and not to exclude any seisin which
was a good seisin at the Common Law, as appears by the preamble of the
Statute: neither did the former Statutes of limitations of Westminster 1. cap.
38. or of W. 2. cap. 2 and 46. exclude a seisin in Law, or any seisin which was
a sufficient seisin at the common Law. Also whereas the three first branches
extend to actual seisin only; and the 4. branch extends as well to a seisin
law as to an actual seisin: And the sixth Article speaks by words dis-junctive
of actual possession or seisin) makes a distinction betwixt actual
possession, which referres to the three first branches, and seisin which
refers to the fourth branch, for that the words subsequent are (in manner,
and form aforesaid.

It was also resolved that this Statute does not extend to such rent or service
which by common possibility cannot happen or become due within 60 years.

As a signiory consisting upon homage and fealty only; for that the tenant may
live above 60 years after that they were made: and so of casual services, as
to go to war with the Lord, and the like of a Formedon in discender, for that
the tenant in tail may live 60 years after discontinuance, and albeit that the
tenant in tail do dye, so that the issue may bring his Formedon within the
time etc. yet that altreth not the case, but that the issue may bring his
Formedon in discender at any time, as it was adjudged in Fitz Williams case,
Die. 278, and the same law is of homage and fealty and all other accidental
services; or where there was an impossibility to have seisin within the
limitation. And in this case of Bevill it was agreed f. 11. a. that a Writ
Esolvert, Cessavit or Rescous are not within this statute, for that in those
Writs the seisin as not traversable but the tenure; and by those Writs the
land is demanded, and the demandant cannot allege any seisin etc. for he
comes to them in the post. And the statute extends only to such writs where
a seisin may be alleged, and 21 H. 6.22. that seisin shall not be alleged
in those writs; for that the land is demanded by reason of the signiory, and
not by reason of seisin of the land: and accordingly it is resolved, Die. 11.
Eliz. 278.

If a man had been out of possession of land by 60 years, Sol. 3.
yet if his entry be not taken away, he may enter and bring any action of his
own possession, because the first clause does not bar any right; but prohibits
that no person shall sue or maintain any writ of right or make any prescription
etc, of the possession of his ancestor or predecessor, but only of the seisin
of some of his ancestors within 60 years, which does not inhibit, but that if
his entry be lawful, and he does enter, he may have an action of his own
possession.

And note that the 1. and 2. clauses of the statute extend only to seisin,
Ancestrall, and not to a writ of right of his own seisin. And the third branch
extends only to actions of his own possession, and not to entries. The fourth
to Avowries, etc.

And forasmuch as the services of homage and fealty are not within this
statute, and that the seisin of rent, or other annual service is a seisin of
homage, and that likewise a seisin of homage or fealty is a seisin of all
services annual, or not annual: that therefoee when the tenant has done
homage or fealty that shall be a seisin of all other services: as to Avowrie
which of right ought to be made, notwithstanding that the Lord or any by whom
he claims have had seisin within 60 years. Co. l. 4 Bevils case.

Nota by the opinion of the Court, that in a writ of Formedon in the reverter
or remainder or a scire facias upon a fine of the like nature, the demandant
need not allege in his writ, or declaration, any limitation by this statute,
till within 50 years after title: because that before this statute no
limitation was mentioned in such writs, nor in a Formedon in the disce^der, but
that is to come on the part of the tenant by traverse as in an avowry not
seized of the services within the limitation Die. f. 215.

In a replevin the defendant avowed for a rent charge reserved by deed upon a
feoffment, viz. for the arrerages for 20 years; the defendant pleaded in bar,
that neque the plaintiff nor his ancestors, nec aliqui alii quorum statum, the
plaintiff, habuit in redditu predicto, were seized of the said Rent within 40.
years past: ante predictum tempus quo etc. upon which the avowant demurred. And
it was resolved that the said statute of 32. H. 8. of limitations, extends
only to such cases where a seisin ought to have been alleged before the
statute, and that was where seisin was so material that it should not be
avoided: albeit the seisin were gained by inchroachment, as of a rent betwixt
Lord and tenant. And not in case of a Rent by reservation or grant, for there
the deed is the title, and no incroachment will hurt in that case and herewith
accords Plo. f. 94. in Woodlands case. And the avowant in his avowryneed not
allege seisin within 40 years, but that shall come on the other part, Cook l*
8. f. 64. Sir William Fosters case.

The said statute of 32 does not extend to copyholders as to avowry or
demanding of services, because the stat. is to be intended of free-holds only
betwixt very Lord and very tenant.

It was resolved in the Lord Comptons case 10 and 11 Eliz. Rot. 583. that a
Formedon in discender was out of the statute.

It seems that the said statute of limitations is not only for to limit the
time of writs, but to cut off and extinguish the right, for that Stamf. prerog.
Reg. 42. cites Bracton and Britton, which say that if the King had right to
any lands, and had surceased his time so long that it exceeded the time of
limitation, in a writ of right his highness had thereby lost his right for ever.

The prescription which a copyholder is not in himself, or of the seisin of
his ancestors but in the Lord and so out of the words of the statute; and the
like law is of a prescription by the inhabitants of a town.

The lord does neither seize nor claim his villain, nor his issues within 100
years; so that a nativo habendo does not lie against the issue of the villain,
because of the said Stat. of 32 of limitations: whether may the lord seize or
not? And it seems that he cannot, because it is in favorem libertatis.

The seisin of the donee was never traversable, nor intended to be within the
ancient statutes of limitations: for the Formedon was given after the making of
the statute of Westminster the first 10 years, but Welsh doubted hereof, Die. f.
278. S. 2.3.

Cook in his Comment upon Littleton f. 114. b. says that limitation as it is
taken in law, is a certain time prescribed by statute; within the which the
demandant in the action must prove himself or some of his ancestors seized. And
that in ancient time, the limitation in a writ of right was from the time of H.
1. and was therefore alleged to be tempore H. senioris. Afterward by the
Statute of Merton, the limitation was from the time of Henry the second, and by
the statute of Westminster 1. the limitation was from the time of R. 1. which
is the limitation that Littleton speaks of in his Book of Tenures. And from
the statute of 32. H. 8. aforesaid, does not extend to a Formedon in discender,
nor to the services of Escuage, Homage, and Fealty, nor to any other service,
which by common possibility may not be due within 60 years, as to cover the
Lords Hall; nor where the seisin is not traversable or issuable; nor any rent
created by deed, or reserved upon a particular Estate; nor to any writ of
right, of advowson, quare imp. or Assise of darrain presentment; or any writ of
right, of ward, or ravishment of ward, etc. but they are left as they were
before the said stat. of 32.

FINIS.

