The CROWN and GLORY OF CHRISTIANITY: OR HOLINESS, The only way to HAPPINESS.

Discovered in LVIII. Sermons, from Heb. 12.14. Where you have the Necessity,
Excellency, Rarity, Beauty and Glory of Holiness set forth; with the resolution
of many weighty Questions and Cases. Also Motives and Means to perfect
Holiness: With many other things of very high and great importance to all the
Sons and Daughters of men, that had rather be blessed then cursed, saved then
damned.

By THOMAS BROOKS, late Preacher of the Gospel at Margarets New Fish-street,
and still Preacher of the Word in London, and Pastor of a Congregation there.

To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of
God, Psalm 50. ult.

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Matthew. 5.8.

God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of
the Spirit, and belief of the truth, 2 These. 2.13.

LONDON, Printed for H. Crips, J^ Sims, and H. Mortlock, and are to be sold at
their shops, at the entrance into Pope's Head Alley out of Lumbard street, and
at the sign of the Cross-keyes, and at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard,
near the little North door, 1662.

To all the Lords, Knights, Ladies, Gentry, Ministers and Commons of England,
(and the Dominions thereunto belonging) that have but the least desire, the
least mind, or the least will to escape hell, and to go to heaven, or to be
happy in both worlds, etc.
My Lords, Ladies, and Gentlemen, etc.
THe Philosophers speaking of happiness, were divided into two hundred eighty
eight opinions, every one intending something, yet resolving upon nothing; and
therefore the man in Plutarch hearing them wrangle about (summum bonum) the
chiefest good, one placing of it in this, and another in that, went to the
Market and bought up all that was good, hoping that among all he should not
miss of happiness, and yet he mist it; true happiness being too great and too
glorious a thing to be found in any thing below real holiness.

All men in the general desire to be happy, but all men do not desire in this
or that particular, or in this or that way to be happy; here there is an
infinite difference, quot homines tot sententiae, so many men so many minds.

A desire of happiness is planted in all men by the constitution of nature;
this is so intrinsecal, and so innate in nature, it is so engraven in it, that
even the fall of Adam, as great as it was, has not blotted it out.

This desire of happiness is left in man for a stock to graft holiness on: God
grafts the plant of Grace upon the stock of nature. Genesis 29.20. to the 27.
Indeed Happiness, like Rachel, is so fair and so beautiful a thing, that every
one is apt to fall in love with it, and earnestly to desire it; yea many there
be, that would serve twice seven years to enjoy it; but by the standing Law of
that heavenly Country above, the younger sister must never be bestowed before
the elder; you can never enjoy fair Rachel, Heaven and Happiness, except you
are first married to tender-eyed Leah, real holiness; he that will have heaven,
must have union and communion with Christ: and he that will have union and
communion with Christ, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
must be holy. For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and
what communion has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with
Belial? Of all the many thousands that have traveled to happiness, there is
not one to be found but has traveled thither in a way of holiness. Now the
drift, the scope of this following Treatise, is to make men holy, that they may
be happy: it is to make men gracious on earth, that they may be glorious in
heaven. Now to prevent all mistakes, rash censures and misconstructions, I
judge it very convenient and necessary before I go any further, to acquaint the
Reader plainly and honestly with those Arguments that have prevailed with me to
Dedicate this Book to all sorts, ranks and degrees of persons, rather then to
any single person, or to any one sort or rank of men whatsoever: And they are
these six,

First, Because all sorts and ranks of men are fallen Psalm 14.3. Romans 3.12. Qui
te non habet Domine Deus, totum perdidit. Bernard.
There are five things that we have all lost by our fall in Adam. First, we
have all lost that holy image that God had stamped upon us, and so we are become
vile. Secondly, we have all lost our Sonship, and so we are become slaves.
Thirdly, we have all lost our friendship with God, and so we are become
enemies. Fourthly, we have all lost our communion with God, and so we are
become strangers. And fifthly, we have all lost our glory, and so we are become
miserable. Some say that the naked body of man was so glorious in his estate of
Innocence, that all the beasts of the field admired it, and thereupon did
homage to him. O how glorious was his soul then! Certainly if the Cabinet was
so glorious, the Jewel within it was much more glorious; But how glorious
soever man was in his primitive estate, it is most certain that he is now so
sadly fallen from the highest pinnacle of glory, to so low a step of misery, that
God sometimes s^^ds him to the Pismire to learn instruction; Prove. 6.6, 7.
and sometimes he sends him to the Stork and the Swallow to make a right
improvement of precious time; Jer. 8.7.
and sometimes he sends him to the Ox and to the Ass to learn knowledge; Isa.
1.3.
and sometimes he sends him to the Fowls of the air to learn confidence; yea
and sometimes he sends him to the very Lillies and Grass of the field, Matthew.
6.25, ult.
to learn how to live without carking and distracting cares. It is true, man's
first estate was a state of perfect holiness, Genesis 1.27.
he being made in the image of God, and after the likeness of God. It was an
estate of perfect light, Genesis 2.20.
knowledge, prudence, wisdom and understanding; It was an estate of very great
honor and dignity, and therefore the Psalmist (speaking of man in this estate)
brings him in with a Crown of glory and honor upon his head. Psalm 8.5.
Thou have crowned him with glory and honor. Man's first estate was so stately
an estate, that he was not so much below the glorious Angels, as he was above
all other creatures. God made him the Sovereign Lord of the whole Creation,
Genesis 1.26. Psalm 8.6, 7, 8.
God gave him an absolute Dominion and Authority both of Sea and Land, and all
creatures in both were subjected to him. Such was the exquisite beauty and
perfection of his body, that from the crown of his head to the soles of his
feet, there was not the least blain or blemish; his outward man was clothed
with all such requisite beauties and abilities that might render him lovely and
comely to every eye. In a word, man's first estate was a state of perfect
happiness, all within him, and all without him, and all about him, spoke him
out to be completely blessed; there was nothing within him, but what was very
sweet and desirable; there was nothing without him, but what was very
delightful and amiable; neither was there any thing about him, but what was
serviceable and comfortable. Lam. 5.16.
O but now by his fall, his crown is fallen from his head, and from the heads of
all his posterity; for Adam was a public person, he was the Prince of all
mankind; and though all mankind was not actually in his loins when he fell, yet
they were all potentially in his loins when he fell. If two Kings make a
league, and the one break it, he makes not only himself but all his Subjects
liable and obnoxious to all the calamities and miseries that shall follow
thereupon. Adam was our common Father, and we are all his Sons and Daughters:
Now we know by the Law of inheritance, that if the Father forfeit his Lease, he
dis-inherits his posterity. Now Adam forfeited his Lease (as I may say) and
divine Justice took the advantage of the forfeiture, and so has turned all his
posterity out of doors. So that there is now no way under heaven to be happy,
but by being holy; all sorts and ranks of men are fallen in Adam, and there is no
way to rise but by Christ and holiness, etc.

A second Reason why I dedicate this Treatise to all

A third reason why I dedicate this Treatise to all 1 Cor. 1.26.
though not many mighty, yet some mighty; though not many noble, yet some
noble, shall be called, sanctified and saved. Look as the Sun in the Firmament
does cast his light and warmth upon all sorts, ranks and degrees of men: Matthew.
5.45.
So does the Sun of righteousness shine upon the understandings and consciences
of all sorts, ranks and degrees of men, and by his secret and spiritual
influences, he warms and cheers the hearts of high and low, rich and poor,
noble and ignoble. Abraham was very great and very gracious: Joseph was very
high, and very holy: Job was very rich, and very righteous. It is a strange
s^ying in L^psius, The names of all good Princes (says he) may easily be
engraven or written in a small Ring. Lips. de co^stantia, lib. 2. cap. 25.
Though most of those Kings and Princes that we read of in Scripture were bad,
very bad, yet some of them were good, yea very good. Some of them were as
famous for grace, righteousness, and holiness, witness David, Asa, Josiah,
Hezekiah, Jehosaphat, etc. as Saul, Jehoram, Jehu, Ahab, and others of them
were infamous for all unrighteousness and wickedness. God for the glory of his
own grace, and the honor of his Sons blood, will have some of all sorts, ranks
and degrees sanctified and saved: and upon this very ground he engages his
servants to pray for all sorts, ranks and degrees of men, in 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3,
4. Now where God is resolved to save, there he is resolved to sanctify: where
he is resolved to make happy, there he is resolved to make holy. And therefore
I look upon my self as many ways obliged to have so large a heart for God, as
to do all I can to help on the salvation of all sorts, ranks, and degrees of
men in the world. My hearts desire and prayer for England is, Romans 10.1. Paul's
Copy is not to be despised, but imitated.
that her Princes and Nobles may be sanctified and saved, and that her Gentry
may be sanctified and saved, and that all the people of the Nation may be
sanctified and saved. I look upon my self as engaged to do all I can by my pen
and prayers to help make England holy, that so England may be truly happy: For
of this I am most certain, that if God will but make England a holy Nation, it
is not all the powers on earth, nor all the powers of hell, that shall ever
make England a miserable Nation.

and degrees; and I have been encouraged, whetted and stirred up by some on all
hands, once more to cast in my Net, and now I have done it; O that it may issue
in the drawing of many souls to Christ, and in the making of the graceless
gracious, the profane holy, and in the making of those that are holy, to be
yet more holy, etc.

A fifth Reason why I thus Dedicate this Treatise as Reader if thou art one
that stand upon thy birth, nobility and greatness, do thy self that favor,
and thy soul that right, as to read from page 343. to page 447. before thou
go any further.
God has laid upon them greater obligations and Ties to holiness, then he
has upon any other men under heaven; and this you may see so clearly and so
fully proved in this Book, (from page 433. to page 447.) that neither the world
nor the Devil, as cunning and as learned a Devil as he is, will ever be able to
disprove. This reason alone is sufficient to justify my present practice.

My sixth and last Reason why I thus Dedicate this Treatise as you see, is,
that it may be a blessed Testimony and a standing Witness for Christ (in this
day of blasphemy, Isa. 43.10, 12. chap. 44.8.
and wickedness) against all sorts, and ranks of persons into whose hands it
may fall, who notwithstanding all that is here said, shall continue obstinate
and impenitent in their ungodly courses and practices, as men resolved rather
to go to hell then to heaven, and to be for ever unhappy, rather then they will
be holy. Woe, woe to them for ever, that had rather be Satan's bondslaves then
Christ's freemen, that had rather be vessels of wrath then vessels of honor,
and that had rather be firebrarnds of hell then glorious Saints in heaven.
Ephesians. 2.12. Romans 9.22.
And so I have done with those reason^ that may satisfy the Reader concerning
my Dedication of this Treatise to all sorts, ranks and degrees of persons.

Having premised these things in the general, give me leave to say, That if
this Treatise should fall into the hands of any of the Learned Judges of this
Land, or into the hands of any of the Justices of this Nation, I would then
take the humble boldness to offer this to their most serious consideration,
viz. That if they would discharge the duties of their places, so as to give up
their accounts at last with joy and cheerfulness to the King of Kings and Lord
of Lords, it highly concerns them to study this doctrine of holiness, yea to
fall in love with holiness, and highly to prize it, and earnestly to press
after it, and to be restless in their own spirits, till they have experienced
the powerful operations of holiness in their own souls; for till then, they
will never be able so to administer Justice and Judgment as becomes those that
have the name of God, and the name of profession upon them, and that judge
themselves to be in a higher Form then those Heathens were, who were famous for
justice and righteousness, Cato, Fabricius, Scipio, Cambyses, etc.
(and yet never heard of a Christ nor salvation by him) and as becomes those
that would not stand trembling and quaking in the great and terrible day, when
Christ the Lord-chief-Iustice of heaven and earth shall pass a righteous and
impartial judgment upon all the Judges and Justices that ever were on earth.
Joel 2.11, 31. Acts 17.31. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.


Where justice is, God is, and where God is, there is no want of men or
fortitude, said Herod at the head of his Army, the better to encourage his
soldiers.
My Lords and Gentlemen, you know that the wisest Prince that ever set upon a
Throne, has told us that Righteousness exalts a Nation, Prove. 14.34. It is
not valor in war, but righteousness; it is not policy in Government, but
righteousness; it is not wittiness of invention, but righteousness; it is
not civility in behavior, but righteousness; it is not antiquity of forms,
but righteousness; it is not largeness of dominion, but righteousness; nor
it is not greatness of command, Justice is conservatrix Humanae conjunctionis,
quae ad beatitudinem via est, etc. Amos 5.24. The Hebrew word Veiiggalchat is
here rendered run down, is from (...) Galal, that signifies to roll down f eely,
plentifully, plainly, vigorously, constantly: Where justice thus rouls down,
all the world shall never make that Nation miserable.
but righteousness that is the honor and the safety, that is the renown and
the security of a Nation: That Nation that exalts righteousness, that Nation
shall be certainly exalted by righteousness. It is not Achitophels policy, it
is not Jeroboams calves in Dan and Bethel, it is not Jehues pompous zeal, it is
not Goliahs sword, it is not rich Mines of Gold and Silver, nor Magazines, nor
Armies, nor Counsels, nor Fleets, nor Forts, but Justice and Righteousness
that exalts a Nation, and that will make a mean people to become a great, a
glorious, and a famous people in the world. The world is a Ring, and
Righteousness is the Diamond in that Ring: The world is a body, and
Righteousness and Justice is the soul of that body. Ah England, England, so
long as judgment runs down as waters in the midst of thee, and righteousness
as a mighty stream, thou shall not die but live and bear up bravely against all
gainsayers and opposers; but if injustice shall grow rampant, and thou shall
brandish the sword of Justice in the behalf of the friends of Baal, Balaam, and
Bacchus, and turn the wheel upon the righteous; if the sword of justice shall
be a sword of protection to the desperate swearer, and to the cruel oppressor,
and to the roaring drunkard, and to the cursing monster, and to the Gospel
despiser, and to the Christ contemner, etc. and shall be a devouring sword to
the upright and peaceable in the Land, Divine vengeance will dig thy grave, and
divine Justice will tumble thee into it, though all the Nations of the earth
should labor to prevent it. It is a base and ignoble spirit, to pity Cataline
more then to pity Rome; to pity any particular sort of men, more then to pity
the whole: It is cruelty to the good, to justify the bad: It is wrong to the
sheep, to animate the Wolves: It is danger (if not death) to the Lambs, not to
restrain or chain up the Lions; but from all these vanities the Lord deliver
all your souls. And O that you would for ever remember this, that as the
constitution of a man's body is best known by his pulse; if it stir not at all,
then we know he is dead: if it stir violently, then we know him to be in a
Fever: if it keep an equal stroke, then we know he is sound, well, and whole;
so the estate and constitution of a Kingdom or Commonweal, is best known by
the manner of executing justice therein: for justice is the pulse of a Kingdom;
if justice be violent, then the Kingdom is in a Fever, in a very bad estate; if
it stir not at all, then the Kingdom is dead; but if it have an equal stroke,
if it be justly and duly administered, then the Kingdom is in a good, a safe,
and sound condition. When Vespasian asked Apollonus, What was the cause of Nero
's ruin? he answered, That Nero could tune the Harps well, but in Government
he did always wind up the strings too high, or let them down too low; The
Application is easy.

Now having premised thus much in the general, give me leave to tell you, that
there are eight special Rules that you are carefully and faithfully to observe
in the administration of Justice and Righteousnsse. And how you will be able to
act suitable to those Rules without a Spirit of holiness, without principles of
holiness, and without an experience of the powerful influences and operations
of holiness in your own souls, I cannot for the present understand.

Psalm 82.1, 6. Luke 20.21. Mat. 22.16.
is this, You must do Justice impartially: you are called Gods, and in this you
must be like to God, who is no acceptor of persons: Audi alteram partem, said
Lotharius the second Duke of Saxony.
he accepts not the rich man because of his Robes, neither does he reject the
poor man because of his Rags. Deuteronomy. 1.17. Ye shall not respect persons in
judgment, but you shall hear the small as well as the great; you shall not be
afraid of the face of man, Bona est misericordia, sed non quum est contra
judicium, Aug. Mercy is good, but not when it is contrary to judgment.
for the judgment is Gods: and the cause that is too hard for you, bring it
unto me, and I will hear it. And so in Levit. 19.15. Ye shall do no
unrighteousness in judgment; thou shall not respect the person of the poor,
nor honor the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shall thou judge thy
neighbor. The great man is not to be spared for his might, nor the poor man
for his misery: It is neither the great man's power, nor the poor man's meanness,
The Judges in Egypt were pourtraied without hands and without eyes, to
signify that they were not to take bribes, nor to accept men's persons.
that a Judge is to mind in judgment. A Judge, a Justice, must never out of
carnal pity cry out, Oh he is a poor man; nor yet out of base fear cry out, Oh
he is a great man. Their eyes are to be always upon causes, and not upon
persons. The statues of the Theban Judges were made without hands and without
eyes, to intimate to us, that as Judges and Justices should have no hands to
receive Bribes, so they should have no eyes to see a friend from a foe, a
brother from a stranger. And it was the O^^ ^f the Heathen Judges, as the
Orator relates, Audiam accusatorem and reum sinc affectibus and personarum
respectione. I will hear the Plantiff and Defendant, with an equal mind,
without affection and respect of persons. In the twelfth Novel of Justinian,
you may read of an Oath imposed upon Judges and Justices, against inclining or
addicting themselves to either party: yea they put themselves under a deep and
bitter execration and curse in case of partiality, imploring God in such
language as this, Let me have my part with Judas, and let the leprosy of
Gehezi cleave to me, and the trembling of Cain come upon me, and whatsoever
else may astonish and dismay a man, if I am partial in the administration of
Justice. That was a famous act of justice that was performed by Canutus King of
Denmark, who when one of the twelve Thieves that he had condemned, pleaded that
he was of the Royal blood, says the King, It is reason some favor should be
showed to this person; whereupon he commanded that he should be hanged on the
highest Gibbet, which was done accordingly. It was Cato's complaint of old,
Cato, ap. Gell. l. 11. c. 18. The Roman Orator observed, that the force of
justice is such, and so great, that even Thieves and Robbers, both by Sea and
Land, who live upon injustice and rapine, yet cannot live upon their trade
without some practice of it among themselves.
that those that robbed private men, were clapped up and laid by the heels in
cold irons: but, says he, public thieves that wrong and rob the
Commonwealth, they sit in scarlet, with gold chains about their necks. And the
Scythian Philosopher has long since complained, that Laws were like Spiders
webs, that would take flies, but not Wasps or Hornets; his meaning was, that if
poor mean men offended, they should be sure to be punished; but great men that
were the makers of Laws, they might be breakers of the Laws, and yet never
smart for it. In all ages some or others have poured out sad complaints against
partial justice. Pilate that unjustly condemned Christ, was afterward kicked
off the Bench by Caius the Emperor for partial justice, and for grief and
shame he became h^s own executioner. O Sirs, God will one day kick such Judges
and Justices, Psalm. 9.17. and Psalm 11.5.
not only off the Bench, but into hell who make a Trade of partial justice,
except there be sound repentance on their sides, and pardoning grace on his. O
that all the Judges and Justices of the Land would for ever remember, what the
wisest Prince that ever swayed a Scepter says, in Prove. 18.5. It is not good
to accept the person of the wicked, to overthrow the righteous in judgment. It
is not good, that is, it is bad, By the figure Liptote, much is to be
understood, when there is but little said.
it is very bad, yea it is so exceeding bad, as that it can hardly be expressed
or uttered: it is so great a wickedness, it is so horrid and so hideous a
wickedness, yea it is so hell sh a wickedness^, as can hardly be imagined, as
can rarely be declared. The Poet in the (Greek) Epigram taught the silver Ax of
justice that was carried before the Roman Magistrate to proclaim, If thou be an
offender, let not the silver flatter thee: if an innocent, let not the Ax
affright thee. The Athenian Judges judged in the night, when the faces of men
could not be seen, that so they might be impartial in judgment. I have read of
Zaleucus, that impartial Lawgiver and Judge among the Locrians, how that he
made a very severe Law against Adulterers: viz. That whosoever should be found
guilty thereof, should have both their eyes put out; Now it so fell out, that
his Son proved the first offender: forthwith sentence was pronounced, and
execution ready to be done, whereupon the people earnestly entreated the Judge
his father that he would pardon the fact, who upon serious deliberation, put
out one of his own eyes, and one of his sons, and so showed himself to be both
a tender Father, and an upright and impartial Judge at once. O Sirs, it is your
wisdom and work, yea it is as much your glory as it is your duty, to be
impartial in all your administrations of Justice, and not to favor friends or
relations, nor to fear the frowns of enemies, but to proceed impartially
according to the merits of the Cause that is before you. But,

Secondly, As you must do justice impartially, so you must Jer. 28.12. O house
of David, thus says the Lord, execute judgment in the morning, and deliver
him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go out like
fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.
Ezra 7.16.
After examination, execution is to be done with expedition: When men cry out
for justice, justice, you must not cry out Cras, Cras, to morrow, to morrrw;
you must do justice in the morning; Noon justice and evening justice is not so
acceptable to God, nor so honorable to your selves, nor so advantageous to
others, as morning justice is. You are called Gods: and as in other things,
Joel 3.4. Genesis 19. Number. 16. Psalm 101.8. The Persian King had one about him,
whose office it was to mind him every morning of his cha ge, saying, Arise O
King, and have an eye to those affairs for which the great God has made you
King, and dispatch them.
so in this, you should be like to God, who is speedy and swift in the exercise
of Justice, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the margin together.
To delay justice, is worse sometimes then to deny justice; it is an evil thing
and a dangerous thing, when Magistrates, Judges and Justices, are as long a
bringing forth their Verdicts, as the Elephant her young. Delays of justice
makes many more irreconcilable: It makes the Clyent often go with an heavy
heart, an empty purse, and a thredbare coat: It fetches heavy sighs and groans
from the hearts, and a Sea of tears from the eyes of the delayed and oppressed.
Magistrates, Judges, and Justices, should be always ready to do justice: they
should be always at leisure to do justice. I have read of one of the Kings of
Persia, how that he would many times alight off from his horse to do justice
only to a poor body. It were well if all Judges and Justices would write after
this Copy, to be ready to do justice and judgment at all times, and upon all
occasions. O Sirs, you may have time to live, even when you have outlived your
seasons and opportunities of doing justice and judgment; and what a hell will
then your lives be to you? To prevent this hell, it is good to do justice in
the morning. I have read of a very poor woman, who was very earnest with King
Philip of Macedon to do her Justice, but he deferred her, Plutarch. Apothegm.
in vita Dometrii.
and told her that he had no leisure to hear her: she replied then, Why have
you leisure to be King? The poor woman thought that they were very unmeet to be
Kings and Judges, who could not be at leisure to do justice, when the
necessities and miseries of poor creatures cried aloud for Justice, Justice. I
have read of a famouus passage of Theodorick King of the Romans, who when a
widow came to him with a sad complaint, The Poets feign Justice to be the
daughter of Jupiter, whom he has set over the world to revenge those injuries
that one man does to another, etc.
that she had a suit depending in the Court three years, which might have been
ended in a few days: the King demands of her the Judges names; she tells him;
he sends a special command to them to give all the speedy dispatch that was
possible to the widows cause, which they did, and in two days determined it to
the widows liking: this being done, the King calls for the Judges, and they
supposing that they should have both applause and reward for their expedition,
hastened to him full of joy: but after the King had propounded several things
to them about their former delays, he commanded both their heads to be struck
off, because they had spun out that Cause to a three years length, which two
days would have ended. Here was Royal Justice indeed. O that all the
Magistrates, Judges, and Justices of the Nation, would every morning lay Prove.
13.12. warm upon their hearts. Hope deferred makes the heart sick: but when
the desire comes, it is a tree of life. The Hebrew word Memushshacah, that is
here rendered deferred, is from Mashach, that signifies to draw out at length:
men are short-breathed, and short-spirited, and hopes hours are full of
eternity: and when their hopes are drawn out at length, this makes their hearts
sick; and ah what a world of such sick souls lies languishing at Hopes Hospital
all the Nation over, yea all the world over. Hope in this Text is put for the
good things men hope for; now when the good things men hope for (be it justice
or a quick dispatch, etc.) are deferred and delayed, this makes the poor Client
sick at heart. A lingering hope always breeds in the heart a lingering
consumption. The harder travel hope has, and the more strongly it labors to
bring forth, and yet is deferred and delayed, the more deadly sick the Client
grows. But when the desire comes, that is, when the thing desired, wished and
looked for, be it justice, be it righteousness, be it success, etc. is
gained, it is a Tree of life; or rather as the Hebrew has it, is a Tree
(Chajim) of lives. All sorts of lives, and all the comforts and contents of
life, are wrapped up in the enjoyment of the thing desired. He that has these
things granted to him, that are earnestly desired by him, is once more put into
a Paradise. Wilful delays in justice, makes the Judge unrighteous, Luke 18.6.
But,

Isa. 61.8.
you must do justice out of love to justice. When the golden Angels appear to
draw you to perver^ justice, Acts 8.20.
you must say as Peter did to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee. Deuteronomy.
16.20. That which is altogether just shall thou follow, that thou may live,
and inherit the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Or rather as the
Hebrew has it, (...) Tsedek, Tsedek; Justice, Justice shall thou follow, that
is, pure Justice shall thou follow. The streams of justice should be always
pure and clear. Justice, Justice shall thou follow; that is, all manner of
Justice shall thou follow, and nothing but Justice shall thou follow; and thou
shall follow Justice sincerely, exactly, carefully, and constantly: thou shall
be not seemingly just, but really just; not hypocritically just, but entirely
just; not partially just, but universally just; not just to some, but just to
all; not transiently just, but perpetually just; not sometimes just, but
always just; and so much the Geminating of the word Justice, Justice, imports.
Prove. 21.15. It is joy to the just to do judgment. This argues much sincerity
and integrity in a man's spirit, when he does not only do judgment, but joys to
do judgment; it is a vanity to do justice slightly, lightly, wantonly; but it
is an honor to do justice from a principle of divine joy; he that joys to do
judgment, he will do justice sincerly, he will do justice out of love to
justice; and indeed there are no Judges, there are no Justices to those that do
justice out of love to justice. Mazarinus complains of Foreign Judges, that
they too much resembled the boodstone, which has a special property to
stanch blood, but as Jewellers observe, it puts not forth this virtue, unless
it be let in or covered over with silver, and so applied to the vein: but
certainly these men were far from doing justice sincerely, from doing justice
out of love to justice. Some Judges and Justices there have been, who for the
cleanliness of the conveyance, would like Mendicant Friars, touch no money
themselves, but have a boy or a Clerk with a bag to receive it for them:
Certainly these were as far from doing justice out of love to justice, as
heaven is from hell, or as the Pope, the Turk and the Devil, are from being
real Saints. Doubtless many Magistrates, Judges, and Justices have found that
a gift blinds the wise, Exodus 23.8.
and perverteth the words of the righteous. Golden dust has put out more eyes
then it has done good to hearts. O this golden-wedge, this silver squinsie
has made many men silent and speechless in good causes. Titus Vespasian was
so delighted in doing of justice, that if a day had past over his head wherein
he had done no (...) of justice, he would cry out, Amici, diem perdidi: O my
friends, I have lost a day. And so Epaminondas a Heathen, though he was very
poor, and often tempted with great bribes and presents to be unjust, yet he
refused and scorned all, and would commonly say, that if the cause were good,
he would do it without a bribe, because it was good; but if the cause was bad,
he would not meddle with it for a world. These Heathens will one day rise in
judgment against all such corrupt Judges and Justices, that will not do
justice without a bribe. If this Treatise should fall into the hands of any
such, I would then let them know, that God will one day make good that dreadful
word against them, that you have in Job 15.34. For the Congregation of
hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall consume the Tabernacles of
bribery; Or as the Septuagint reads it, of men that take gifts fire shall
consume: or rather as the Hebrew has it, Fire shall eat the Tabernacles, it
shall feed on their Tabernacles as greedily as a hungry man does feed on his
meat. O, the sumptuous buildings and brave structures that have been built by
the hands of bribery, shall be set on fire by a hand of justice. Prove. 10.2, 3.
and chap. 3.33.
If bribery brings in a thousand one year, Divine justice will cast away two
for it the next year. God will one day burn up on both hands, all the comforts,
and all the contentments, and all the enjoyments of corrupt Magistrates,
Judges, and Justices. I have read of a Polonian Judge, that stood up very
stoutly and resolutely a long time for a poor Plaintiff against a rich
Defendant: but at last he received from the Defendant a great sum of money,
stamped with the usual stamp of that Country, which is a man in complete
armor; and at the next Session in open Court, he adjudged the Cause in the
favor of the Defendant: and being sharply blamed by his friends for it, he
showed them his large bribe, and demanded of them Who could stand out against
so many men in complete armor? Ah England, England, it would be better with
thee, if this spirit did not still survive; but alas, what good will all these
men's men in armor do them in the great day of our Lord, when the thoughts of
all such corrupt Magistrates, Judges, and Justices, shall be exceedingly
troubled, their countenances changed, their hearts terrified, their consciences
awakened, their souls amazed, and their knees dashed one against another! O
that all Judges and Justices would for ever make Isa. 5.23. their daily
companion, Woe to them which justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him. I have read of Sysamnes a covetous
tenacious Judge, who for filthy lucre pronounced a false sentence; whereupon
Cambyses King of Persia commanded him to be killed and flead, and his skin to
be nailed over the Tribunal: and then he commanded his son to sit as Judge
there, that so this sight might arm him against all injustice, and be a terror
to all that succeeded him. If Princes did but exercise such Royal justice upon
all corrupt covetous Judges and Justices, justice would be had at a cheaper
rate, and poor men would not be so often put to pawn their Coats, nor rich men
would not so often empty their Purses, nor mortgage their inheritances. But,

Fourthly, As you must do justice sincerly, so you must Deuteronomy 17.4.
or else you will tell the world at once, that you are both weak and wicked.
Deuteronomy. 19.17, 18, 19. vide. It argues much weakness and emptiness of spirit, to
judge a matter before all is heard that can be said. Job 29.16.
Jobs piety and prudence shined forth eminently in this, that the Cause that he
knew not, he searched it out. Before God would pronounce judgment upon Adam,
Genesis 3.
he first examins him, and propounds several interrogatories to him: And in
those two great and famous acts of justice, when God confounded Babels
builders, Genesis 1. and chap. 18.
and rained hell out of heaven upon Sodom and Gomorah, he tells you that he
will go down and see. You are called gods; in this it is as much your glory as
it is your duty, to imitate the great God. Though Solomon was in all his glory,
yet he had patience to hear both what the mother and the harlot had to say. The
Holy Ghost puts the fool upon him that answers a matter before he hears it,
Prove. 18.13. It was the usual custom of Philip King of Macedon, to step one of
his ears whilst the accuser was speaking, that so he might reserve it for the
defendant. I have read of some who have deeply suffered both in their civil
liberties, and in their consciences, for their rash and hasty passing of
judgment upon others. Why has God given the Judges of the earth two ears, and
but one tongue, (...) that they should be swift to hear, and slow to speak? I
have read of Lewis King of France, that when he had through inadvertency
granted an unjust suit, as soon as ever he had read those words of the
Psalmist, Blessed is he that does righteousness at all times, Psalm 106.3.
he presently recollected himself, and upon better thoughts gave his judgem^nt
quite contrary. Certainly all acts of justice ought to flow from mature
deliberation: All Magistrates, Judges, and Justices, in their administrations
of justice and judgment, should wisely observe by what principles they act,
and by what Rules they act, and by what Authority they act, and in what manner
they act, and to what ends they act: and how all these important things can be
done without serious deliberation, I cannot for the present understand. Justice
in the Emblem is represented with a Balance in the one hand, and a Sword in
the other, to note that matters must be first delib^rately weighed in the
Balance, before Judgment can be passed. He that only uses the Sword and not
the Balance, may smite an innocent Naboth, and acquit a guilty Ah^b. The Civil
Law concludes it very unreasonable for any man to give Advice or Judgment
before he has considered and weighed the whole Cause. Civil dig. 4. de legis
senatusque consul.
And therefore by your own Laws you are bound to deliberate before you give
Judgment: Unless you will tell the world, that you, even you, are
unreasonable men, who above all others should be the Masters of the greatest
reason as well as men of the greatest measures of grace and holiness. But,

Fifthly, As you must do Justice deliberately, so you Joshua came into the
office of Magistracy, God charges him no less then three times (in a breath as
it were) to be very courageous, in Joshua 1.6, 7, 9. A Judge that is timorous,
will quickly be treacherous: A Judge that is fearful, can never be faithful.
Solomon's Throne was supported with Lions, to show that Magistrates should be
men of courage and metal. The Athenian Judges sat in Mars street, Acts 17.22.
Job 31, 31, 34.
to show that they had Martial hearts, and that they were men of courage and
metal. Job was a Judge of rare courage and magnanimity; nothing could fear
him, nothing could daunt him, nothing could terrify him, nothing could
discourage him from doing Justice and Judgment. The Graecians placed Justice
betwixt Leo and Libra to signify that as there must be indifferency in
determining, so there ought to be courage in executing. Where there is courage
without knowledge, there the eye of Justice is blind; and where there is
knowledge without courage, there the sword of Justice is blunt. Judges and
Justices should be men of courage for God and godliness: Why should not the
standard be of steel, and the chief posts in the house be heart of Oak? I have
read of Agesilaus how that he was by all concluded fit to be made their King,
but that he halted. Men of the best and choicest accomplishments, if they are
not courageous and magnanimous, but lame and halting, they are no ways fit for
Magistrates. Judges and Justices should have Martial Spirits, high Spirits for
Justice and Righteousness. Every Judge, every Justice should have a Lions
heart, an Eagles eye, and a Giants arm. Such men whose hearts are faint, whose
heads are dull, whose ears are heavy, whose eyes are dim, whose hands are weak,
and whose feet are lame, are more fit to sit in a Chimney corner, then to sit
Judges and Justices upon the Bench. It has been long since said of Cato,
Fabritius, and Aristides, that it was as easy to remove the Sun out of the
Firmament, as to remove them from Justice and Equity, they were men of such
courageous and magnanimous Spirits for Justice and Righteousness, No scarlet
Robe does so well become a Judge, as holy courage and stoutnesse does. I have
read of Lewis the eleventh King of France, who going about to establish some
unjust Edicts, which when some of his chief Courtiers perceived, they went
altogether to him in Red-Gowns: the King asked them what they would have: the
President La Vacqueri answered, We are come with a full purpose to lose our
lives every one of us, rather then by our connivency any unjust Ordinance
should take place: The King being amazed at this Answer, and at the courage,
constancy and resolution of those Peers, gave them gracious entertainment, and
commanded, that all the former Edicts should be forthwith cancelled in his
presence. Courage and resolution may prevent many a Public mischief and
misery. But,

Sixthly, As you are to do Justice resolutely, courageously, Exodus 23.6, 7.13.
The Egyptians had a notable practice, when their Judges were set, they caused
the Image of a divine Numen by them called truth, to be hung about his neck,
who sat next unto the Judges, to make them the more exact and heedfull in
Judgment.
2 Chro. 19.5, 6, 7. And he set Judges in the Land, throughout all the fenced
Cities of Judah, City by City. And said to the Judges, Take heed what you do,
for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment.
Wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon you; Take heed and do it, for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of person, nor taking
of gifts. God is exact in all his ways, and he is exact in all his works: he
is exact in all his promises, and he is exact in all his threatenings: he is
exact in all his Rewards, and he is exact in all his punishments; he is exact
in the exercise of his mercy, and he is exact in the exercise of his Justice:
And therefore you that are called Gods, should in this be like God. O Sirs,
some by force, others by flattery; some by large presents to your relations,
and others by promising great rewards to your selves may endeavor to corrupt
you, and blind you, and induce you to judge rashly, inconsiderately,
irregularly, etc. And therefore you have the more cause to be exact in
transacting all your judicial affairs. O remember, that the most sharp and
piercing eye of God is still upon you! O remember, that the severe eye of Jesus
Christ, who is the Judge of Judges, is never off of you; And the Angels those
Princes of glory, are very strict Observers of you. When the Ethiopian Judges
were set in their seats of Judicature, certain empty chairs were placed about
them, into which they conjectured the holy Angels came and were spectators of
all their transactions; and this they thought would work such an awe, such a
dread, such a care, such a fear, and such a resolution in them that they could
not but manage all their Judicial proceedings with much exactness and
heedfulnesse. And as the Angels have their eyes upon you, so Satan has always
his eyes upon you, Cave, spectat Cato, was a watchword among the Romans. O how
much more should Cave, spectat Dominus, be a watchword amongst you!
he has always a watchful eye, an envious eye, a malicious eye, a crafty
eye, and a revengfull eye upon you; witness his dissuading you sometimes from
your duty, and witness his distracting and disturbing of you whilst you are
in your duty; and witness his accusing of you for the neglect of your duty;
and witness his endeavors to pride you, and puff you up upon the discharge
of your duty. And as the eye of Satan is upon you, so the eyes of good men are
upon you, and the eyes of bad men are upon you: And if all this does not
bespeak you to be very exact and accurate in all your Judicial transactions, I
know nothing. My Lords and Gentlemen, if all this will not do, then remember
that the lives, liberties, consciences, rights, privileges, estates and
interests of persons (next to God, and Christ, and Grace) are the most choice
and precious, the most desirable and delectable Jewels that men have in all
the world, and therefore you had need be very exact and accurate in all your
Judicial transactions. Yea once more, remember that God will one day bring you
to an exact account concerning all your Judicial proceedings: That same mouth
that tells you that you are Gods, Psalm 82.6. Heb. 9.27.
tells you also, that you must die like men: And after death comes Judgment.
You that now call others to Judgment, shall shortly be called to Judgment
your selves: Acts 17.32.
you that now sit in Judgment upon others, shall ere long be Judged by him
that will Judge the world in righttousness. My Lords and Gentlemen, give me
leave to tell you, Tennes the son of Cyrnus, (who was worshipped as a god) was
so strict and exact in Judgment, that he caused an Ax to be held over the
witnesses heads, to execute them out of hand, if they were taken with falsehood;
and from thence was the Proverb, Tenedia bipennis.
that that Judge to whom you must be responsible, is no ignorant Judge, nor no
covetous Judge, nor no partial Judge, nor no fearful Judge, nor no doting
Judge, nor no trifling Judge, though such there may be in the world; but he is
an omniscient Judge, an omnipotent Judge, an impartial Judge, a holy Judge, a
courageous Judge, a serious Judge, a severe Judge, an unbiassed Judge, a
righteous Judge, and a resolute Judge. Alas Sirs, it is not your scarlet Gowns,
nor your Titles of honor, nor your great estates, nor your interest in
Princes, nor your noble relations, nor your applause among men, that will stand
you in stead when you shall stand before that Judge that is a consuming fire,
Heb. 12. ult. Well Gentlemen, remember this, there is never a professing Judge
nor Iust^ce in the world, that will be able at last to give up their accounts
with joy, and to stand in judgment when the Lamb shall sit upon his Throne,
but such as have made it their great business to take the spirit of the Lord
for their guide, and to set up the glory of the Lord as their great end, and to
make the Word of the Lord their principal Rule, and to eye the example of the
Lord as their choicest and chiefest pattern; and therefore it is much to be
feared, that the numher of such Judges and Justices, that will be able to stand
before the Judge of all the world, will be but few. But,

Seventhly, As you must do justice and judgment exactly; them. Mat. 7.12.
Severus the Emperor had this Scripture often in his mouth; and whenever he
punished any of his soldiers for offering of injuries to others, he still
commanded this Scripture to be proclaimed by the Crier.
Whatever by the light of nature, or by the light of conscience, or by the
light of Scripture, a Judge, a Justice, would have another do to him, the same
must he do to another. In all just things (for so this Law of Christ is only to
be understood) we must do to others, as we would have others do to us; as we
would have others carry it equally, justly and righteously toward us, so we
must carry it equally, justly, and righteously toward others: and as we would
not have others to wrong us in our names, estates, rights, liberties, lives, so
we must not wrong others in their names, estates, rights, liberties, lives,
etc. This Law of Christ is the sum of all righteousness; it is the
foundation of all Justice and Equity. Self-love does so commonly blind the sons
of men, that to judge righteously, they must change the person, they must put
themselves in others room. All Princes, Judges, Justices, Parents, Masters,
Subjects, Servants and Children should so act in their relations, as they would
have others act in the correlation. All injustice will be repaid one time or
another; and therefore men had need be just, and do to others as they would
have others do to them. I have read of a Citizen of Comun in the Dukedom of
Farrara, who being cast into prison upon suspit^on of murder, his wife could
get no promise of his deliverance, unl^sse she would give the Captain, whose
prisoner he was, two hundred Ducats, and yield her body to his pleasure; which,
with the consent of her husband, she did; but after the Captain had his desire,
he notwithstanding put him to death. The Duke Gonzala hearing of it, commanded
the Captain to restore the two hundred Ducats to the widow, with an addition of
seven hundred Crowns; then he enjoined him to marry her presently, and lastly,
before he could enjoy his new wife, the Duke caused him to be hanged for his
treachery and injustice. Sometimes in this life, injustice is repaid upon the
heads of unjust Judges. My Lords and Gentlemen, before I close up this head,
give me leave heartily to recommend to your Justice, those wrongs and injuries
which more immed^ately strike at the honor and glory of the great God. God
has put his name upon you, Psalm 82.6. I said that ye are gods: yet it must be
granted that you are gods in a smaller letter, mortal gods, gods that must die
like m^n; all the sons of Ish, are sons of Adam. And as God has put his name
upon you so he has made you his Vice-Royes. 2 Chronicles. 19 6. Ye judge not for
your selves, but for the Lord. Romans 13.2. Exodus 16.7, 8. 1 Samuel 8.7.
And therefore God takes all affronts that are done to you, as done to himself,
as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the margin together. And God has
provided for your honor among men. Exodus 20.28. Thou shall not revile the
gods, Romans 13.7. Josh. 4.14.
( i. e. the Magistrates) nor curse the Ruler of thy people. I have read of
Fabius Maximus, who highly reverenced and honored his own son, being Consul:
this Heathen will one day rise up in judgment against all such that scorn to
give to Magistrates that honor that by the fifth Commandment is due unto them.
2 Pet. 2.9, 10. 1 Samuel 10.2. Jude 8.2. 1 Samuel 8.7.
And God is very severe in revenging the wrongs that are done to you: He
interprets all the injuries that are done to you, as done to himself. And why
then will you not revenge the wrongs and injuries that are done to the great
God? Give me leave, Gentlemen, in the behalf of the great God, a little to
expostulate with you. Shall the least dishonorable word that is spoken against
an earthly Prince be severely punished? and shall all those horrid and hellish
blasphemies by which the Prince of the Kings of the earth is dishonored and
reproached all the Nation over, pass unobserved? Rev. 1.5.
Shall all affronts that are offered to Ambassadors, be deeply resented and
justly censured, as high indignities done to the Prince that employed them? And
shall the Ambassadors of the great God (I mean such as are called,
commissionated, spirited, gifted and graced for that high office by God
himself) be scorned, defamed, injured, reviled, and on all hands evilly
entreated? and yet no man say, Why do you thus wickedly, 2 Chronicles. 36.15. ult.
to provoke the great God to your own destruction? Shall it be looked upon as
noble and necessary justice, that all insurrections in the State be punished as
Rebellion? and shall those who are daily up in open arms against the great God,
and that daily bid defiance to him, to his Son, to his Ordinances, to his
people, to his word, and to his ways, escape without the least lash, the least
censure? Shall those that rob their neigbours (though it be but to the value of
five shillings, yea less) be indicted, examined, condemned and executed? and
shall others that rob God of his glory, of his Sabboths, and of his service,
etc. escape without the least shaking of the rod, or without the least danger
of the whip? Shall all prophan^sse, loosnesse and wickedness be winked at, yea
countenanced and encouraged, notwithstanding his Majesty's most Zealous, pious
and renowned Declaration against it? and shall real holiness and the power of
godliness, be on all hands scorned, discountenanced, opposed and reviled, and
yet no man say, What means these things? Well, my Lords and Gentlemen, for ever
remember this, All those sins that are in this Land committed, which by your
just power and gracious examples might have been prevented, all those sins in
the great day shall be charged upon your accounts; and therefore it highly
concerns you with all your might to brow-beat wickedness, to discountenance
ungodliness, and to improve your power to the uttermost for the suppressing of
all profaneness, and for the countenancing, encouraging, and promoting of real
holiness, that so you may give up your accounts at last with joy. I have read
of King Ethelbert, how that by his godly example, and by his countenancing and
encouraging such as were godly, and by his discountenancing of profaneness and
wickedness, he drew this whole Kingdom once to look after godliness. Oh my
Lords and Gentlemen, if you would be but shining examples and patterns of
holiness to the Nation; if you would but in good earnest put forth your utmost
power for the encouraging of godliness, and for the suppressing of
profaneness: O what a holy Nation, yea what a happy Nation should we have! King
Cyrus commanded the chief officers of his Army to keep a strict hand upon
themselves; for says he, that is the best way in the world to keep the whole
Army in good order: the application is easy. But,

Eighthly, In the exercise of justice, you must look that Prove. 20.28. Prove.
29.14. Psalm 101.1.
Mercy and truth preserve the King: and his Throne is upholden by mercy: Some
read the words thus, It is usual in Scripture, by Truth, to understand Justice.
Mercy and justice preserve the King, and his Throne is upholden by mercy. All
justice will not preserve the King, nor all mercy will not preserve the King;
there must be a mixture both of justice and mercy to preserve the King, and to
uphold his Throne; and to show that mercy is more requisite then justice, the
word Mercy is doubled in the Text. Justice without Mercy turns into rigor, and
so becomes hateful; Mercy without Justice turns into fond pity, and so becomes
contemptible. Look as the rod of Aaron and the pot of Manna were by Gods
command laid up in the same Ark, so must mercy and justice be preserved entire
in the bosom of the same Magistrate, King John thought to strengthen himself by
gathering a great deal of money together, but neglecting the exercise of mercy,
clemency and lenity, he lost his peoples affections, and so after many endless
turmoyles, he came to an unhappy end.
Judge, and Justice. Mercy and justice, mildness and righteousness, lenity
and fidelity, are a safer and a stronger guard to Princes and People, then rich
Mines, munitions of Rocks, mighty Armies, powerful Navies, or any warlike
preparations. It is very observable that Christ is called but once the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah, in the book of the Revelation, and that is in chap. 5.5.
but he is called a Lamb no less then nine and twenty times in that book: and
what is this, but to show the transcendent mercy, clemency, lenity, mildness
and sweetness that is in Jesus Christ, and to show that he is infinitely more
inclined to the exercise of mercy, then he is to the exercise of justice. It is
true, Magistrates, Judges and Justices, should be Lions in the execution of
justice; and it is as true, that they should be Lambs in the exercise of mercy
and clemency, mildn^sse and sweetness: And the more ready and inclinable they
are to the exercise of mercy, where mercy is to be showed, the more like to the
Lamb they are. Seneca has long since observed, that the custom of anointing
Kings, was to show that Kings should be above all other men of the greatest
sweetness and mildness; their anointing being a sign of that Kingly
sweetness and mildness that should be in them. Nero's speech has great
praise, who when he was to subscribe to the death of any condemned man, would
say, Utinam nescirem literas, I wish I did not know how to write. But,

as any man is punished beyond the demerit of his offense; I have read of the
River Nilus, that if it either exceed or be defective in its due overflowings
of the land of Egypt, it causes famine: the application is easy. Cleobulus,
one of the seven Sages, was wont to say, that Mediocrity was without compare.
and to punish less then the Fact deserves, may be of dangerous consequence to
the public. The Roman Fasces were a bundle of rods with an Ax in the midst, to
signify the equity of Magistrates in punishing some only with reds, and others
with the Ax; the Romans had their rods for lesser faults, and their Ax for
capital crimes. Justice is then remiss, when it spares where it ought to
punish; and Justice is then too s^vere, when it punishes where it ought to
spare. Extreme right often proves extreme wrong: he that will always go to the
utmost of what the Law allows, will too too often do more then the Law
requires; it is rare, very rare, to see a man dance upon the brink of the pit,
and not to tumble in: A rigid-severity often mars all; equity is still to be
preferred before extremity. To inflict great penalties and heavy censures for
light offenses, this is to kill a Fly upon a man's forehead with a Beetle. In
the French History, there is mention made of an old Courtier that would needs
depart the Court, and retire himself to a private life; the King desired him
before he went, to leave his advice in some general Rules, what was best to be
done in the Government of the Kingdom. Upon which motion, he took a fair paper,
and wrote upon the top of the leaf, Moderation; and in the middle of the leaf,
Moderation; and at the bottom of the leaf, Moderation; signifying thereby thus
much to the King, that the best way in the world to have his Crown set fast,
and to keep his Kingdom safe, was to manage throughout all his affairs with
moderation. And there is nothing more evident in Scripture and History then
this, that many by scruing the pegs of Government too high, have broke all in
pieces about their ears.

Now my Lords and Gentlemen, there are five things or Rules that will be of
singular use to help you in this case, to steer such a course as may be safe
and honorable to you; and as may render you a mercy and a blessing to the
Nation.

Israel is. Indeed the Papists, that are will-worshippers, and commonly highly
conceited of their own wisdom and worth, they frequently transgress this Rule
with their Touch not, Col. 2.21, 23.
taste not, handle not; which things have indeed a show of wisdom in
will worship, etc. but why should you? why should you? who have a higher
profession upon you, and a more clear Gospel Light shining every day more
strongly upon you. But,

Isa. 33.22. Jam. 4.12.
Such things that do neither fall under a general nor a particular command of
God, may not be imposed upon the consciences of men as absolute and necessary
duties to be performed by them; a faithful observing of these two Rules, would
prevent a multitude of sins, a sea of sorrows, and a world of troubles. But,



nor that are not pleadable before the Court of heaven, when you shall stand
before Christ's Judgement-feat. But,

Fifthly and lastly, In all your administrations of justice not able to see; If
you please to read from page 433. to page 447. you will find many more weighty
arguments to move you to labor after holiness.
and therefore how much it stands you upon that want that holiness, that this
Treatise holds forth, to study holiness, to love holiness, to prize
holiness, to countenance holiness, to encourage holiness, to promote
holiness, and to be restless till you have experienced the power, and life,
and sweet of holiness in your own hearts and lives, I must leave you to Judge.
And O that after all this pains that I have taken upon the account of your
immortal souls, I may not have cause to complain, as once Marcus Antonius did,
Alas (says he) those Graces which the Deity sent down as so many pillars to
stay up humane Societies, viz. Faith and Modesty, Justice and Verity, they
found such cold entertainment in the world, that they are fled back to heaven.
I shall follow these weak endeavors with my best prayers, that you may all put
on holiness as a Royal Robe, and that all your Judicial administrations may
savor of a spirit of holiness, and of the power and prevalency of holiness,
that so you may be as high in happiness above others, as you are now in power
and place exalted above others.

If this Treatise should fall into any of their hands who call and account
themselves the only Ministers of Jesus Christ; I mean such, who preach rather
to please then to profit; to tickle the ear, then to awaken the conscience;
that are better at fleecing of their Flocks, then they are at feeding of their
Flocks; Ezekiel. 13. read it throughout. Mat. 23.23. Mat. 15.1, 10.
that seek more men's goods, then their good; that set up men's Traditions above
Gods own institutions; that prefer humane commands, before divine commands;
that are very zealous and warm for Mint, Anise, and Cummin, but are very cold,
careless and negligent in the great and weighty matters of the Law, viz.
Judgment, Mercy and Faith. That can bless God in the Church, and blaspheme
him in the Tavern: That prefer music in the Church, Gentlemen, if you please
to turn to page 296, 297, 298, 299. of this book, you will find more matter
that concerns you.
before singing of Hallelujahs in heaven: That prefer a fat Benefice before an
interest in an heavenly inheritance: That can kneel devoutly behind a pillar,
and in their drunken fits rail as stoutly against a post: That pretend a great
deal of reverence to the name of Jesus, and yet in their lives do daily
crucify the Lord Jesus: That with Judas, can kiss Christ, and betray Christ
in a breath: That pretend much kindness to the head, and yet show nothing but
unkindnesse to the body: That preach as if they had no mind to go to heaven,
and live as if they were resolved to go to hell: That feast their own bodies,
but starve their peoples souls: That are very devout upon a Saints day, but
very loose and profane upon the Lords day: That think it a greater sin to eat
flesh in Lent, then it is to lie with their neighbors wife: That speak ten
words for themselves, and hardly two for Christ; and that instead of preaching
up holiness, and promoting of holiness, and countenancing and encouraging of
holiness, do all they can to discountenance holiness, to brow-beat holiness,
to keep down holiness, to bespatter holiness, to work men out of love with
holiness, and to hinder the growth and increase of holiness; O that these men
would seriously consider, how unlike to the Ministers of Jesus Christ they are:
Do but look into a Scripture glass, and you may easily see that Hell is not
more unlike to Heaven, nor sin more unlike to grace, nor Satan more unlike to
God, then you are unlike to the holy, conscientious, painful, etc. Ministers of
Jesus Christ. Several Authors in Print have proved this to my hand at large,
and therefore I shall not enlarge upon it; only give me leave to say, that Gods
holy things ought to be handled with fear and reverence, rather then with wit
and dalliance: Spiritual niceness is the next degree to unfaithfulnsse. See my
Precious R^medies against Satan's Devices, from page 349. to page 357. And see
my Unsearchable Riches of Christ, from page 291. to page 314.
Ministers must not be like the drug that the Physicians say is hot in the
mouth, and cold in the operation: hot in the Pulpit, but cold, carnal, and
careless in their conversations. Those that stand before Princes, must be
exact in their carriages. God appointed both the weights and measures of the
sanctuary to be twice as large as those of the Commonwealth; to show that he
expects much more of those that serve him there, then he does of others. The
souls of Priests, (I may say of Ministers) must be purer then the Sunbeams,
says goldenmouth'd Chrysostom. Gay things in a Sermon are only for men to gaze
upon and admire: What are high strains and flashes of wit, new minted words and
phrases, but like gay weeds and blew-bottles to the good corn? Doctrine is but
the drawing of the bow, application is the hitting of the mark: How many are
wise in generals, but vain (en dia-l^gism is) in their practical inferences! A
general Doctrine not applied, is as a sword without an edge, not in it self,
but to others; or as a whole loaf set before children, that will do them no
good. A garment fitted for all bodies, is fit for no body: and so that which is
spoken to all, is taken as spoken to none. Aarons bells were golden bells
(Dulce sonantes) sounding pleasantly, and not as sounding brass or tinkling
Cymbals, as many of the carnal Clergy of this Nation are this day. Many there
be that account themselves the only Ministers of Jesus Christ, that are but
like empty Orators, that have a flood of words, and but a drop of matter; of
whom we may truly say, Multa loquuntur and nihil dicunt; they speak much, and
yet say nothing, because they say nothing to the purpose. When the Lacedemonian
in Plutarch heard how sweetly the Nightingale sang: O, said he, that I had this
Bird, surely it is a rare dish; but when he had taken it, and eat it, and found
nothing but a little picking meat, he concluded with that proverbial saying,
Voxes and praeterea nihil: Now I see that thou art a mere voice and nothing
else. How applicable this is to many Preachers in these days, who have good
lungs, but bad brains, and worse hearts and lives, the prudent Reader may
easily see. John the Baptist was a burning and a shining light, as well as a
voice: His Sermons were stuffed with divine and weighty matter, etc. and not
filled up with big words, or strains of wit. Many there be that have John's
voice in the Ministry, that have not that heat and life that John had in his
Ministry. That great Orator (Demosthenes) himself could say, that the riches of
Greece did not consist in words. The Oracle would have King Philip of Macedon
to use silver lances in winning an impregnable fort, etc. But it is not for
Ministers to use golden sentences, strong lines, frothy wit, in winning of
souls to Christ; for it is iron and not gold that kills in the encounter: it
is the steel sword, and not the golden sword that wins the field. Job 38.2.
We to such Preachers that darken counsel by words without knowledge, that
affect sublime notions, obscure expressions, uncouth phrases, making plain
truths difficult, and easy truths hard: that seek abstrusities, and love to
soar aloft in dark expressions, and take pleasure to shoot their arrows over
their hearers heads. The heathenish Priests had their Mythologies and strange
canting expressions of their imaginary unaccessible Deities, to amaze and amuse
their blind superstitious followers, and thereby to hold up their Popish and
Apish Idolatries in greater veneration. And is not this spirit now revived
among many? Certainly men of abstracted conceits and sublime speculations, are
but wise fools, and commonly they are as erroneous as they are curious: Such as
mind more the humoring of their hearers fancies, then the saving of their
souls, do little consider that of Seneca, Aeger non quaerit medicum eloquen^em
sed sanantem: Sick men are not bettered by Physicians sugared words, but by
their skilful hands. The sword of the spirit never wounds deep, till it be
plucked out of the gaudy scabards of humane eloquence. Mr. Greenham speaking of
non-Residents, wishes that this Motto might be written on their study doors
without, and walls within, on all their books they look on, on all the beds
they lie on, and on all the tables they sit at, etc. The price of blood, the
price of blood, the price of blood. A Preachers life should be a Commentary
upon his doctrine; his practice should be the counterpane of his Sermons:
heavenly doctrines should always be adorned with a heavenly life.

Preachers are the Glass, the School, the Book,
Where peoples eyes do learn, do read, do look.
Gentlemen, by these short hints you may see, as in a glass, if you will not
put a cheat upon your own souls, how unlike to the true, holy, and faithful
Ministers of Jesus Christ you are. O Sirs, do not you know that the holy
Scriptures (that never spoke Treason nor Sedition) do clearly evidence, that an
ignorant, profane, scandalous, superstitious, insufficient, and
soul-flattering Clergy, are the greatest Pest, Plague, Affliction, Judgment,
etc. that can befall a people, as you may easily see by comparing these
Scriptures together, Mich. 2.11. Isa. 30.10, 11. Jer. 5. ult. Lam. 2.14. Isa.
9.16. Ezekiel. 3.18. Jer. 23.9, 18. Ezekiel. 13.22. Jer. 6.14. and chap. 27.14, 16. 1
These. 5.3. Jer. 14.13, 14, 15, 16. Isa. 28.7, 8. Ezekiel. 34. throughout. Romans
2.21, 22, 23, 24. Other judgments, as sword, famine, pestilence, burning
fevers, agues, etc. cannot separate between God and men's souls; for men may
have very sweet and high communion with God under the sorest of those
judgments. Other afflictions and judgments may spring from the fatherly love
of God, and from a gracious design of good to his people. Rev. 3.19. Prove.
3.11. Heb. 12.5.6, 7, 8. Psalm 89.30, 35. Job 7.17, 18. but this is a sad fruit
of Gods judicial Anger and severe Indignation against a people. Other
judgments often issue in men's seeking of the Lord, and in men's returning to
the Lord. Isa. 26.16, 17. Hosea 5.14, 15. compared with chap 6.1, 2, 3. and
chap. 2.6, 7. but this judgment frequently issues in men's forsaking of the
Lord, and in their running from God, and in their walking contrary to God, and
in the hardening of them against God, and in an everlasting shutting of them
out from the presence of the Lord: as you may see by comparing of these
Scriptures together. Matthew. 15.14. Luke 6.39. 1 These. 5.3. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9,
10. Matthew. 23.13. Do not you know that where there is no vision, the people
perish? Prove. 29.18. Jipparang, that is here rendered perish, is from Parange,
that signifies to be made naked, to be made bare and uncovered. They are made
naked as soldiers are among the shot and weapons of their enemies, when their
armor is not on their backs; or they are naked as people that are stripped of
their garments, and exposed to perish by cold in the Winter, or to be scorched
or roasted by heat in the Summer; or they are naked, i. e. they are made the
objects of shame and contempt to all that look upon them: or they are made
naked, that is, of the grace, Exodus 32.25.
blessing, and protection of God: or they are naked, that is, say others, they
are forsaken and cast off; for every one forsakes and casts off naked persons,
they will have nothing to do with them: Others render the words thus, The
people will keep holy day, they will have nothing to do but to weep and wail,
or, they will do nothing that is good; Others thus, The people shall be
stripped naked, they shall be left as a City without walls, exposed to the fury
of the enemy, as a body without clothes, open to wind and weather. Others carry
it thus, The people shall be discovered; it will then appear what is within,
whether grace or sin; it will then be discovered, what pantings, breathings,
hungerings, and longings there be in souls after God, and Christ, and
holiness, and Ordinances, etc. Pagnin thus, The people will grow barbarous,
rebellious, etc. as experience in all ages has fully demonstrated. Others
thus, The people shall be of no esteem, of no repute, no body will prize them,
no body will value them, no body will regard them; men set no price, no value
upon naked persons. Others thus, The people shall be dispersed, scattered,
shivered and shattered; and this in all Ages has been too apparent. Others
thus, They shall be drawn away with errors: they shall either be starved, or
else poisoned with God-dishonouring, Christ-denying, Scripture-debasing,
Conscience-wasting, life-polluting, and soul-damning opinions; it is concluded
on all hands, that it shall go ill, very ill, with that people that want
vision, that want serious, sincere, faithful and powerful preaching; for where
there is no vision, no serious, sincere, faithful and powerful preaching, there
the people perish certainly, undoubtedly, there they go tumbling to hell thick
and threefold; and this is evident in the Text, where there is no vision, the
people perish; he does not say they may perish, but they do perish: or they are
in danger of perishing, but they do certainly perish. Where there is no
serious, conscientious, faithful, powerful preaching, there the people grow
abominably wicked; as woeful experience tells us: And what the issue of that
will be, you may see in Psalm 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, See
Psalm 11.6.
and all the Nations that forget God: or as the Hebrew has it, the wicked
shall be turned into, into hell, that is, they shall certainly be turned into
hell; yea, they shall be turned into the nethermost hell, into the lowest
dungeon in hell.

Where vision fails, there men perish temporally; when vision, when preaching
ceased among the Jews, O the dreadful calamities and miseries that came upon
that people! how soon did God burn up all their outward comforts, contentments
and enjoyments on every hand, 2 Chronicles. 15.3, 5, 6. compared with Chapter 13.9, 10,
11. and Chap. 36.15. -- ult. Mat. 23.37, 38. They shut their eyes against all
that light that Christ and his Apostles brought amongst them: and what was the
Issue of this? why about 40 years after Christ's Ascension the Romans came and
took away their City, and sold thirty of them a penny, as Josephus writes, etc.
and ever since that time, (which is above sixteen hundred years ago) they have
been scattered as Dung over the face of the whole earth.

Where vision fails, there men perish totally: Romans 6.16.17, 19.
both the bodies and the souls of men perish, where serious, conscientious
preaching fails, Hos. 4.6. My people are destroyed for want of knowledge: The
Chaldee rendereth it, they are besotted and so fitted for destruction. The
Papist say, that ignorance is the Mother of devotion: but this Text tells us
that it is the Mother of destruction. The Heathens were wont to say, that if
their God Jupiter would destroy one, he would first besot him: So these people
were first besotted, and then destroyed.

Where vision fails, there the people perish insensibly and unexpectedly: they
flatter themselves that God is made up all of mercy, and will not believe but
they shall go to heaven, till they awake with everlasting flames about their
ears, as you may see in Sodom and Gomorrah.

Where vision fails, there men perish suddenly: In a moment they go down to
hell, Job 21.13, 14, 15. As the travail of a woman comes suddenly upon her when
she least expects it, Prove. 24.22. Deuteronomy. 7.4.
so everlasting pains and torments come suddenly upon poor sinners when they
least expect them. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. As God rained hell out of heaven upon Sodom
and Gomorrah on a sudden: Genesis 18. Matthew. 24.37, 38, 39. 1 Samuel 15.32.
and as he swept away the Old world on a sudden: and as Samuel cut off Agag on
a sudden, when he concluded that the bitterness of death was past: so God casts
sinners to hell on a sudden, he sweeps them away on a sudden, he cuts them off
on a sudden; and when they say Surely the bitterness of death is past, and
everlasting wrath is past, and hell is past, and eternal ruin is past, then on
a sudden God cuts them off, and gives them their portion with Devils and damned
Spirits, etc.

Where vision fails, there men perish inevitably, irrecoverably, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
And they shall not escape, Prove. 6.15. Therefore shall his calamity come
suddenly, suddenly shall he be broken without remedy. Here is their dismial
doom, they shall not be only bruised, but broken, yea, they shall be suddenly
broken when they least look for it, when they do not at all dream of it, or
dread it; and this without remedy, they shall be so broken, as that there shall
not be so much as a pessibility of making them up again; if a man lose his
estate, his friend, his child, this l^sse may be made up again; but if a man
once lose his soul, there is no repairing nor making up of that less.

Where there is no vision, there men perish everlastingly, there they perish
eternally, 2 Thessal. 1.7, 8, 9. Jude 7.

Do not you know that God will require the blood of all their souls at your
hands, that perish either by your insufficiency, or neglect, or bad examples!
Ezekiel. 3.18, 19, 20. Thou shall surely die; Moth Tamuth, in dying thou shall
die; that is, thou shall certainly die, thou shall eternally die, The Ancients
commonly interpret it of the death of the soul.

Do not you know that a man were better have the blood of all the men in the
world upon him, then the blood of one soul upon him? For there is no blood that
cries so loud, that will lie so heavy, and that will sink a man so deep in
hell, as the blood of souls. I say as the blood of souls.

Do not you know that there are no men upon the face of the earth, that are by
office so strictly, so strongly, so universally, so indispensably, and so
signally engaged to prize ho^inesse, to countenance holiness, to encourage
holiness, to promote holiness, and to practice holiness, as the Ministers of
Jesus Christ are? Do not you know that Ministers are called Angels in respect
of their offices? Rev. 2. Psalm 104.9.
now Angels are spiritual creatures, their communion is spiritual, their food
is spiritual, their delights are spiritual, their minds are spiritual, their
affections are spiritual, and their exercises are spiritual; and in all these
respects Ministers should be like to the Angels; but are not many of them
spiritual mad men in these days? being nothing l^sse then what they profess
to be; spiritual men in a mockery; Hosea 9.7.
such as many light slight souls call a Spiritual Pig, that is the poorest, the
leanest, and the worst of all the ten, such a one as has no substance in it.
So these have no substantial goodness, no substantial holiness at all in
them; whereas in holiness they should as far exceed all other men, as the
Angels in holiness do exceed them.

Do not you know, that there is no rank nor order of men on earth that have so
enriched hell, that have been such benefactors to hell, as the ignorant,
insufficient, profane, scandalous and superstitious, Clergy? In times of
Popery letters were framed and published as sent from hell, wherein the Devil
gave the carnal, ignorant, insufficient, scandalous and superstitious Clergy of
those times no small thanks for so many millions of souls as by their means
were daily sent to hell.

Do not you know, that all the true faithful Prophets, Apostles and Ministers
of Jesus Christ, that are mentioned in the Old and New Testament, 2 Chronicles.
36.15. Jer. 7.25. chap. 25.4. and 35.15. chap. 11.7, etc. 2 Corin. 11. etc.
were men of the greatest holiness; and men that made it their greatest
business and work in this world, to keep down a spirit of profaneness and
wickedness, and to countenance, encourage and promote holiness! O how
diligent, O how frequent, O how abundant, O how constant were they in the work
of the Lord, that profane persons might be made holy, and that those that were
holy might be made more and more holy! yea that they might perfect holiness in
the fear of the Lord, In a Sermon before King Edward the sixth.
etc. Bishop Latimer speaking of the Clergy of his time, tells us, that many
can away with praesunt, but not with been; if that been were out of the Text
all were well; if a man might eat the sweet and never sweat, it were an easy
matter to be a Preacher; if there were not opus but bonum, all were well too.
But every Clergy man is or ought to be (...), that is, says Augustine, Nomen
operis, to be a Steward and Over-seer in Gods house; and that is an office of
great labor, trust and employment. Stewards and Overseers commonly eat their
bread in the sweat of their brows, and after much beating of their brains; but
how unlike to such Stewards and Overseers the Clergy are that I am now
expostulating with, I must leave the Christian Reader to judge. Ernestus Duke
of Lunebury, caused a burning Lamp to be stamped on his coin, with these four
letters, A. S. M. C. by which was meant, Aliis serviens meipsum contero: By
giving light to others, I consume my self. And such were the Lords faithful
Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers of old: and such are all his faithful,
laborious, and conscientious Ministers now: But how unlike to the one or the
other they are, that now I am reasoning with, you may easily perceive, by
comparing them together. I have read of the Nobles of Polonia, that when the
Gospel is read, they clap their hands upon their swords, and begin to draw them
out, intimating by that Ceremony, their resolution to defend the Faith, and
their willingness to hazard their lives for the Gospels safety. The faithful
Prophets, Apostles and Ministers of old, were willing to sacrifice themselves
for the Gospels sake: but how many are there in these days, that are more
ready and willing to make a sacrifice of the Gospel for profit sake, and
preferment sake, and honor sake, and lusts sake, etc. then they are to make
themselves a sacrifice for the Gospel sake! and how unlike these are to the
faithful, conscientious Ministers of Jesus Christ that have been in all Ages, I
must leave you to judge.

Do not you know that Pharaoh had that tender regard of his cattle, as that he
thought none fit to be their Ruler, their Over-seer, but such as were known men
of activity? Genesis 47.6, 7.
Pharaoh would have none to be his Cowherds, but men of activity, men of skill,
men that were prudent and diligent, ingenuous and industrious. Shall Pharaoh be
so careful for his Cows, and shall not others be as careful for souls? What man
is there under heaven that has the use of his reason, his wits, etc. that when
he is to travel, would take a fool, an Ignoramus for his guide: and that when
he is sick, would send for a Mountebank to be his Physician: or that when he is
to ride a dangerous way, would make choice of a Coward to defend him: or that
when he has a Lawsuit, would make use of a Dunce to plead it: or that when he
has a suit of clothes to make, would send for a bungling Tailor to make it?
surely none. And why then should not men be as wise for their souls?

Do not you know that that sort of persons that now I am a speaking of, have
been the greatest instruments of bringing the greatest calamities and miseries,
and the sorest desolations and destructions that ever have been brought upon
Cities, Nations, Kingdoms and Countries! Compare the Scriptures in the margin
together, Jer. 26.8, 9, 11, 14, 15. Lam. 4.11, 12, 13. Amos 7.10, 11. 1 Kings
22. 2 Chronicles. 18.
and then let conscience speak. And who is so ignorant as not to know that it
was the Highpriests, Scribes and Pharisees that brought the innocent blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ upon that once great and glorious Nation of the Jews, to
their utter destruction and desolation, about forty years after Christ's
Ascension, when the Romans came and took their City, and practiced the greatest
severity and cruelty imaginable upon them, as Josephus and other Historians
show? In the Marian days, and in the Massacre of the Protestants in France,
how great a hand this sort of men had that I am now a reasoning with, all the
world knows. And so the Pagan Priests stirred up the Pagan Emperors to be
desperate Persecutors of the people of God that were within their Empires;
which occasioned. Tertullian to give that good counsel to Scapula a Pagan
persecutor; God (says he) will surely make inquisition for our blood, and
therefore if thou will not spare us, yet spare thy self: if not thy self, yet
spare thy Country, which must be responsible when God comes to visit for blood.

Do not you know that his Majesty has very Christianly, Zealously,
argumentatively, and smartly declared against drunkenness, lewdness,
prophansse, etc. and that he has declared that his resolution is and shall be
to promote the power of godliness, to encourage the Exercises of Religion,
both public and private, to take care that the Lords day be applied to holy
Exercises, without unnecessary divertisements; and that insufficient, negligent
and scandalous Ministers be not permitted in the Church?

Do not you know that when the great Shepherd our Lord Jesus Christ shall
appear, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4: Ezekiel. 3.17, 18, 19.
that he will call you to a particular and exact account for every soul that
has miscarried under your charge, either by reason of your ignorance,
insufficiency, profaneness, loosnesse, or superstition, etc. and how will you
then be able to stand in that day? etc.

Gentlemen, if you say you know not these things, and that they are Riddles and
Mysteries to you, how dare you say that you are the Ministers of Jesus Christ?
But if you shall say that you know very well that these things are certainly
true, yea that they are such clear and undeniable truths, that no Devil can
deny, and yet shall continue in your ignorance, insufficiency, profaneness,
loosnesse, superstition, etc. what man on earth is there that has but read the
Scriptures, and that can but write his own name, and that would not be begged
for a fool in folio, will believe you to be the true faithful Ministers of
Jesus Christ?

Well Gentlemen, I have read of Alexander the great, how that he had a soldier
of his name that was a Coward, which when he understood, he commanded him
either to fight like Alexander, or else to lay down the name of Alexander: So
say I to you, Gentlemen, either preach as the Ministers of Jesus Christ ought
to preach, viz. plainly, spiritually powerfully, f^elingly, fervently,
frequently, etc. and live as the Ministers of Jesus Christ ought to live, viz.
heavenly, graciously, holly, humbly, righteously, harmlesly, and exemplarily,
etc. Or else lay down your very names of being the Ministers of Jesus Christ,
and put no longer a cheat upon your selves, nor upon the people, by making them
believe that you are the only Ministers of Jesus Christ, when you have nothing
of the Spirit of Christ, nor of the Anointings of Christ, nor of the Grace of
Christ, nor of the life of Christ in you. Gentlemen, if this counsel be
seriously minded and faithfully followed, it will turn more to your accounts in
the great day of our Lord Jesus, and do you more good then, then all the
profits, preferments, and honors of this world can do you good now: But if you
shall slight and despise this counsel now, I shall be found a true Prophet to
your woe and misery in that great day, etc.

If this Treatise should fall in the hands of any Ladies and Gentlewomen (as I
suppose it may) that have not yet experienced the sweet and powerful operations
of holiness in their own souls, I would then say,

Ladies and Gentlewomen, your souls are as precious, and as immortal, and as
capable of union and communion with Christ here, and of an eternal fruition of
Christ hereafter, as the souls of any men in the world are. I have read a sad
story of one Bochna, a woman which had but two sons in all the world; and
whilst she was walking with the one toward the River, she heard the other
crying out, and hastening back, she found a knife sticking in his side, which
killed him immediately: then she made haste to the other child, but he in her
absence was fain into the River and drowned, and so she lost both her sons at
once. Now Ladies, this is your very case; every one of you have two children
(as I may say) a soul and a body, a life eternal, and a life temporal; and O
what a dreadful and unspeakable loss would it be to lose both these at once?
and yet as certain as there is a God in Heaven, you will lose them both without
Holiness.

All know, that know any thing of Scripture or History, that there have been
many great Ladies and Gentlewomen, that have been great lovers of holiness,
and great delighters in holiness, and great prizers of holiness, and great
admirers of holiness, and great countenancers of holiness, and great
encouragers of holiness, and great promoters of holiness, and great followers
after holiness, and great experiencers of the sweet and powerful operations of
holiness in their own souls. And O that this might be all your honor and
happiness, to be in all respects as famous for holiness, as any of your sex
has been before you.

Christ has prayed as much for your souls, as he has for the souls of others;
and he has paid as much for your souls, as he has for the souls of others;
and he has sweat, and wept, and bled as much for your souls, as he has for
the souls of others; and he has suffered, and satisfied as much for your
souls, as he has for the souls of others; and he has purchased and prepared
as great and as glorious things for your souls, as he has for the souls of
others, if you will be but a holy people to him; and what does all this speak
out, but an unspeakable readiness and willingness in Jesus Christ to
sanctify you, and save you, as well as others?

A man might write volumes on this subject; there is so much said in Scripture
and History upon this account; but in an Epistle a touch must suffice, etc.
All knowing men can tell you, that many Ladies and Gentlewomen in all Ages,
have been very famous for all Natural, Moral, Spiritual and Acquired
excellencies; yea more famous then many men that yet have done worthily in
their Generation; and by their seize you may easily see what is possible
for you to attain unto, both in respect of gifts and grace. Of all things,
gracious examples are most awakening, convincing and encouraging; for in them
you may see that both the attainment of holiness, and the exercise of
holiness, is possible, though difficult; in eying of examples, it is always
best to eye the highest, the holiest and the worthiest examples; for as he that
shoots at the Sun, though he falls short of his mark, yet will shoot higher
then he that aims only at a shrub; so those that set up the highest examples
of holiness for their mark, for their imitation, will certainly attain to
greater degrees of holiness, then those that propose to themselves the meanest
and the lowest examples of holiness for their pattern and imitation.

Well, Ladies and Gentlewomen, do you think that it is good going to hell, Isa.
33.14. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9, 10.
that it is good dwelling with the devouring fire, that it is good dwelling
with everlasting burnings, that it is good for ever to be separated from the
presence of God, Christ, Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect? that
it is good for ever to lie a sweltering under the wrath of an infinite just
God, and to abide for ever and ever under those pains and torments that are
endless, easelesse, hopeless and remediless? and that it is good to be
associated, and fettered with Devils and damned spirits to all eternity? O no,
this cannot be good; for the very serious thoughts of these things are enough
even to raise a hell a this side hell in our hearts. O then, Ladies and
Gentlewomen, pray that you may be holy; hear that you may be holy; read that
you may be holy; and with all your might press after holiness, and pursue
hard after holiness, as after the one thing necessary; for without holiness
you will as certainly go to hell, as holy persons shall certainly go to heaven;
and this you will find as clearly and fully proved in this following Treatise,
as heart can wish.

O that you would for ever remember this, that without all peradventure you
shall never be saved, unless you are sanctified; you shall never be truly
happy, unless you are really holy: except God should do five things that are
not possible for him to do: viz. 1. Change his purpose. 2. Make null and void
his decree. 3. Make a new Gospel. 4. Find out a new way to heaven. And 5. ungod
himself. God must undo himself and ungod himself, if ever he make you happy
before he has made you holy: and therefore O what infinite cause have you to
read this following Treatise, and to study this Treatise, and to meditate on
this Treatise, and to pray over this Treatise, and to look up to heaven for
counsel and strength to make such an improvement of the means, helps, and
directions that are here prescribed for the attaining of holiness, as that you
may be made really holy, that so you may be everlastingly happy! And to quicken
and encourage your hearts in this work, I could heartily wish, that as soon as
you have read over the Epistle, you would read from page 433. to page 447. for
there you will find many Arguments that are of a particular concernment to
your selves, and that ought to be no small obligations upon you to work you to
pursue after holiness with all your might, etc.

If this Treatise should fall into the hands of any faithful, serious,
gracious, conscientious, laboririous Ministers hands, (as I suppose it may) I
would then say, Reverend Sirs, let my weak endeavors be a spur, a provocation
to you to lay out your choicest and your chiefest gifts, parts, strength, time
and opportunities to promote holiness of life, and holiness in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and in all your sacred Communions. Certainly, had we all
eyed holiness more, and preached holiness more, and practiced holiness more,
and cried up holiness more, and encouraged holiness more, and countenanced
holiness more, the countenance both of God and man might have been set more
pleasingly toward us, then they are this day. When once maintenance comes to
be more in Ministers eyes then holiness; and when their studies and endeavors
are more to make men Proselytes to this or that way, this or that form, this or
that party, then to make men holy, it is no wonder if God writes out bitter
things against them. I doubt not but providential dispensations have bad such a
teaching virtue in them, as to lead you to lay your fingers upon several such
like sores, and to mourn over them, and to justify the holy One of Israel who
is holy in all his ways, and righteous in all his works.

Truly Brethren, I have always looked upon the great work of the Ministry to
lie in two things; First in making unholy men holy: and secondly in making them
that are already holy, to be more and more holy. First to beget holiness, and
then to nurse up holiness; first to bring souls to Christ, and then to build
up souls in Christ, is without all peradventure the work of works that should
be most in every Ministers eye, and that should always lie nearest and warmest
upon every Ministers heart, etc. And through grace I have read this my grand
design in the course of my Ministry, and throughout all my writings; and now it
yields me that joy, that comfort, that content, and that satisfaction, that I
would not be without for all the world. Besides, I know it will turn most to my
account at the great day. O that all of you that yet have any opportunities and
advantages in your hands to preach the everlasting Gospel, would make this your
great business to promote holiness, and to exalt and lift up holiness in the
world: For as this great principle of holiness shall gain ground upon the
hearts, consciences and lives of men; so all the things of Antichrist, and all
the Trade of Antichrist, and all those grand mischiefs and miseries that
threaten the sons of men, will fall before it, as Dagon fell before the Ark.

If this Treatise should fall into the hands of any of Gods sanctified ones, of
what degree or rank soever they are of, as I suppose it may fall into the hands
of many such, I would then say, Dear friends, In this Treatise you will find
many strong Motives to provoke you to perfect holiness in the fear of the
Lord, and many special Means to enable you to perfect holiness in the fear of
the Lord, and many evidences whereby you may certainly and infallibly know
whether you have attained to any considerable highth of holiness, or no; and
in the opening of these things, you will find that great Doctrine about degrees
of Glory in Heaven to be Asserted and Proved, and the Objections against it to
be fairly dismissed, etc.

Reader, If thou art one that to this very day art in an unsanctified estate,
and an enemy to holiness, or a scoffer at holiness, or a a secret despiser of
holiness, or a desperate opposer of holiness, or a bitter persecutor of
holiness, then I would commend this following Treatise (before any I know
extant in the world) to the service of thy soul, for I know none that is so
calculated and fitted up for that purpose as this is. Read and judge. This I
will assure thee, O thou unsanctified soul, that the grand design of this book
is thy salvation; it is to make thee really holy, that thou may be eternally
happy; and of this thou may be confident, viz. that I shall follow these
poor labors with my earnest prayers that they may be blessed to the internal
and eternal welfare of thy soul, and that they may issue in the conviction,
conversion, and salvation of thy soul. I shall send this Treatise forth into
the world with Jacobs blessing and prayer for his sons, Genesis 43.14.
God Almighty send thee mercy in the sight of the man, etc. in the sight of the
proud man that he may be humbled, and in the sight of the hardened man that he
may be softened, and in the sight of the carnal man that he may be
spiritualized, and in the sight of the polluted man that he may be washed, and
in the sight of the unsanctified man that he may be sanctified, and in the
sight of the ignorant man that he may be enlightened, and in the sight of the
stubborn man that he may be bowed, and in the sight of the unconverted man that
he may be changed, and in the sight of the lost man that he may be saved.

Christian Reader, I suppose by this time that I have almost tired thee in
reading, as I have my self in writing, and therefore I shall presently draw to
a close; only before I take my leave of thee, give me leave to say, that I am
much of Carthagena's his mind, who to those three things which the Ancients
held impossible, says, that to find a Book Printed without Errata's, should
undoubtedly have been added as a fourth impossible, if the Art of Printing had
been then invented, though the Author had Briareus his hands, and the Printer
Argus his eyes. Notwithstanding all the care that has been taken, thou will
find figures misplaced, and some mispointings, with some other mistakes of the
Printer: I hope the ingenuous Reader will cast a mantle of love over the
mistakes of the press, and do me that right and himself that courtesy as to
correct such errors of the Press that the second Impression may prevent.
Seneca I remember is railed upon by slanderous tongues for the faults of Nero
his Scholar. And the scapes of Quintilians Scholars, are imputed to
Quintilian himself; but I know the Christian Reader that is daily sensible of
the Errata's of his life, has not so learned Christ.

Reader, I do not offer thee that which cost me nothing: This Treatise that now
I put into thy hand, is the fruit of much prayer and serious study: If thou
find any profit and benefit by it, give Christ all the glory; the crown of
praise becomes no head but his; only when thou art in the Mount, let me lie
near thy heart: O pray earnestly, pray fervently, pray frequently, and pray
unweariedly, that I may have much of the fresh annointings of the holy Spirit,
that my communion with a holy God may every day rise higher and higher, and
that all my transactions both before God and man may savor of some highths of
holiness: So thou will the more strongly oblige me to be

Thy souls Servant in all Gospel-Engagements, Tho. Brooks.

The Necessity, Excellency, Rarity, and Beauty of HOLINESS.
HEBREWS 12.14. Follow Peace with all men, and Holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord.


I Remember a saying of golden mouthed Chrysostom, The preamble to the Text.
If I were (said he) the fittest man in the world to preach a Sermon to the
whole world, gathered together in one Congregation, and had some high mountain
for my Pulpit, from whence I might have a prospect of all the world in my view,
and were furnished with a voice of Brass, a voice as loud as the trumpet of the
Archangel, that all the world might hear me, I would choose to preach on no
other text then that in Psalm 4.2. O mortal men, how long will ye love vanity,
and follow after leasing? So I say, had I Chrysostomes tongue, head and heart,
and were I every way advantaged to preach a Sermon to the whole world, I would
choose to preach on this Text, before any other in the Bible, Follow peace with
all men, and Holiness without which no man shall see the Lord.

Beloved, the salvation of souls is that which should be first, and most in a
Ministers eye, and that which should always lie closest and warmest upon a
Ministers heart. Isa. 63.3. John 17.22. Luke 4 4. 1 Cor. 6.20. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19,
20. Heb. 9.12, 13, 14, 15.
O Sirs, our dear Lord Jesus was infinitely tender of the souls of men; he left
his Fathers bosom for souls, he trod the Wine Press of his Fathers wrath for
souls; he prayed for souls; he paid for souls; he sweated for souls; he bled
out his heart blood for souls; and he made himself an offering for souls: and O
what an encouragement should this be to all his faithful Messengers to woe for
souls, to mourn for souls, to pray for souls, to study for souls, and in
preaching to spend, and to be spent for the salvation of souls! Ah friends,
there is no work, nor wisdom on earth to that of winning souls, Prove. 11.30.
and He that wins souls is wise. There is no Art, no industry to that of
winning souls, of taking souls as Fowlers take Birds, as the Hebrew word
((...)) imports. Now though there is a great deal of Art required to take
Birds; yet there is ten thousand times more Art required to take souls: In a
word, to convert a soul is a greater work, then to sway a Scepter, Chrysostom.
or then it is to pour out ten thousand Talents into the Baskets of the poor.
My design in choosing this Text, is the winning of souls, it is the salvation of
souls: it is the bringing in, and building up of souls. I have read of Lewis
the ninth King of France, that he was found instructing his poor kitching-boy
in the way to heaven, and being asked the reason of it: he answered, The
meanest has a soul as precious as my own, and bought by the same blood of
Christ: he who only went to the price of souls, Matthew. 16.26.
has long since told us, 2 Cor. 12.16.
that a soul is more worth then a world. That I may catch some poor soul or
other by a holy craft, and establish, and strengthen others in the love and
liking of holiness, and in the power and practice of holiness, I have cast my
thoughts upon this Scripture.

But to draw nearer to my Text.

As no means has more enriched hell then beautiful faces: so no means has
more enriched heaven then the beauty of holiness. Now that I may discover the
Necessity, Beauty, Rarity, and Excellency of Holiness, I have chosen this Text,
Follow peace with all men, and Holiness without which no man shall see the
Lord. I shall give a little light into the words, and then come to that main
point I intend to stand upon.

Follow peace with all men: the Greek word (...) translated follow, signifies
to pursue and press after peace: As the persecutor pursues and presses after
him he persecutes; it notes an earnest, an eager, an affectionate, and an
incessant pressing, and following after peace with all men, Psalm 34.14. Seek
peace, and pursue it: Here the Hebrew word (Bakkish) translated seek, signifies
to seek earnestly, Dulce nomen pacis. The ve y name of peace is sweet.
vehemently, studiously, industirously: Thus peace with God, and peace with
conscience, and peace with men must be sought. Seek peace and pursue it: the
word translated pursue (Veradhphehu from Radaph) signifies an earnest pursuit:
it is a Metaphor taken from the earnestness of wild Beasts, or ravenous Foul
which will run or fly fast and far, eagerly and unweariedly, rather then be
disappointed of their prey: though Christians meet with many rubs and remoraes,
yet peace must be resolutely pursued. Gal. 5.22. 2 Cor. 13.11. Isa. 9.6, 7.
Heb. 1.2.
The spirit of God is a spirit of peace: and God delights to be styled Deus
pacis, the God of peace, and Christ affects to be Princeps pacis, the Prince of
peace: and King of Salem, i. e. King of peace. Vbi pax, ibi Christus, quia
Christus pax: Where peace is, there is Christ, because Christ is peace:
Therefore let all that are interested in Christ, pursue after peace. But this
is not the point that I have in my eye at this time. I shall hasten to it; With
all men, that is, with all Orders, Ranks, and sorts of men.

And Holiness, etc. We must so pursue after peace, A man may be miserable under
peace, but never under holiness.
as that we do not neglect holiness for peace sake. Better is holiness without
peace, then peace without holiness. Holiness differs nothing from happiness but
in name; holiness is happiness in the Bud, and happiness is holiness at the
full. Happiness is nothing but the Quintessence of holiness. A man were better
be holy in hell, then unholy in heaven: holiness would make hell to be no hell,
as the fire was no fire to those holy Worthies, Dan. 3.27. Look as unholiness
would make heaven to be no heaven, yea, turn a heaven into a very hell. So
holiness would turn a hell into a very heaven: What holiness this is in the
text, I shall discover to you in the opening of that point I intend to stand
upon.

Without which no man; This expression is Exclusive, no man, be he rich or
poor, high or low, honorable or base, young or old, Jew or Gentile, bond or
free, under one form or another, etc.

Shall see the Lord. To see in the Hebrew phrase, is ordinarily used to enjoy,
Psalm. 4.6. Who will show us any good? The word in the Hebrew is from (...) to
see, Who will make us to see any good! that is, to enjoy any good. Without
holiness no man shall see the Lord: that is, without holiness no man shall ever
come to a blessed, to a glorious fruition and enjoyment of the Lord. Chrysostom.
There was once a holy man who professed that the want of the enjoyment of God
would be a far greater hell to him, then the feeling of any punishment: and yet
this great hell, every one shall be sure to feel that lives and dies without
holiness. The Jews say of holy Moses, Psalm 37.37.
that he died ad osculum or is Dei, at the kisses of Gods mouth, and in divine
embraces. When a man of holiness dies, he shall be sure to die in divine
embraces, and live for ever in divine embraces. When Socrates was to die, he
comforted himself with this, that he should go to a place where he should enjoy
Homer and Musaeus, and other Worthies who lived before him. But ah, what an
unspeakable comfort is this to a holy man when he comes to die, to consider
that he is going to a place where he shall see the Lord, not as now through a
glass darkly, 1 Cor. 13.12.
but in all his heavenly bravery, and in all his divine Embroidery, and
bespangled Glory! And let this suffice for the opening of the words.

In my Text you have two things, First, An Exhortation to follow peace and
holiness. Secondly, The Reason or Argument to enforce the duty pressed, viz.
Without which no man shall see the Lord. The words will afford us many weighty
Observations; I shall only name one, which I intend to insist upon, and that is
this: viz.

DOCTRINE.
That real holiness is the only way to happiness: All men must be holy on
earth, or they shall never see the beatifical vision, they shall never reach to
a glorious fruition of God in Heaven.

For the clearing up, and making good of this great and glorious truth, I shall
endeavor these three things.

First, to show you what this holiness is, without which no

Secondly, I shall by an induction of particulars make good

Thirdly, give you the Reasons of the point.

First, What is this holiness without which no man shall see the Lord? I answer
there is a sixfold holiness.

First, There is a Legal holiness: Now a Legal holiness consists Adam had in
his innocence: and this holiness was immediately derived from God, and was
perfect. Adam knew the will of God perfectly (so far as it was revealed to him)
and had a divine principle in him of perfect conformity to that blessed will.
Adams holiness was as co-natural to him, as unholiness is now to us: and had he
stood fast in that glorious condition, we had all been as naturally holy from
the womb, as now we are sinful. Psalm 51.5.
Adams holiness was as natural, and as pleasing, and as delightful to him, as
any way of unholiness can be natural, pleasing and delightful unto us. But
this holiness which was Adams choicest sparkling gemm of beauty, and his
weightiest crown of glory, is by Satan's policy long since fallen off from Adams
head; now if this Legal holiness were the holiness meant in the text, then woe
to man that ever he was born; for then no man should ever see the Lord. Rom ^
For by Adams fall all men are gone out of the way, and there is none legally
righteous, no not one. Now if we look upon man as fallen from that holiness
which was his greatest honor, dignity and excellency, Greg Nazianz. Pindarus.
Aeschylus. Marcus Imperat.
he is become a pile of dust, a puff of wind, says one, a dream of a shadow
says another, a shadow of smoke, says a third: a poor silly flea, a worm, a
little foul, a curious nothing; yea, man fallen from his primitive glory is
become a very vanity, says the Prophet, Psalm 39.5. Verily, Every man at his
best state is altogether vanity. Verily, this asseveration is only used in
matters of greatest weight and moment: and notes the reality and certainty of
the things delivered. Every man (chol Adam all Adam) Or every Son of Adam, not
some man, but every man at his best state ( Nitsab from Jatsab) that is, in his
most settled and composed condition, when he is best constituted and underlaid,
when he stands a tiptoe, and is in the height and perfection of all creature
comforts and contentments, is altogether, not in some measure, but altogether
vanity, (chol Hebel) all vanity. Since the fall of Adam every natural man in
his best estate is vanity: nay, every man is every vanity: Imagine what vanity
you will, fallen man is that, he is a comprehensive vanity: be is an Epitome of
all vanity. Man in honor before his fall, was the best of creatures, but since
his fall he is become the worst of creatures; by his fall he is fallen below
the very beasts that perish, Isaiah 1.3, 4. Prove. 6.6. Jer. 8.7. Matthew. 6. He
that was once the Image of God, the glory of Paradise, the worlds Lord, and the
Lords darling, is now become a burden to heaven, a burden to himself, and a
slave to others, etc. which made One cry out, Oh what is man?
Quarles.
A scu^tlefull of dust, a measured span,
Man's breath a bubble, and his days a span;
It Is glorious misery to be born a man.
By all which, you may easily perceive how far we are off from that legal
holiness that Adam had in innocence. R. Solom. Deuteronomy. cap. 3.
Rabbi Solomon makes Adam so high, that he touched heaven with his head. I
shall not dispute the certainty of that: but certainly, the higher he was in
holiness, the greater was his fall, and ours in him. This Legal holiness was so
lost in Adam, that no son of Adam could ever find it since Adam fell: and if
this were the holiness without which no man should ever see the Lord, then
farewell for ever to the sons of Adam. But this legal holiness is not the
holiness in the Text.

Secondly, There is an Imaginary holiness, a Conceited There is a generation
that are pure in their own eyes, Coelum gratis non acciqiam. I will not have
heaven, but at a rate: said a proud impure person.
and yet is not washed from their filthiness: they were very bad, and yet they
had a great opinion of their own goodness; they were very filthy, and yet they
stood very much upon their own purity; their hands were black, their hearts
were black, their works were black, and their ways were as black as hell and
yet they durst say that none could say black was their eye: they were filthy
within, and filthy without, filthy in body, and filthy in soul, and filthy in
spirit; filthiness had quite overspred them, and yet they thought to cover
their filthiness with a vizzard of holiness (the worst men are commonly best
conceited of themselves.) Ah friends, there has been no generation wherein
there has not been such a generation of men who have wallowed in sin like
Swine in the mire, and yet have kept up in themselves a strong opinion of their
own goodness and holiness: this generation had neither their souls nor
consciences washed in the blood of Christ, nor sanctified by the spirit of
Christ, and yet they gloried in their conceited purity and holiness, as if they
had been purified by Christ. There are many that are shining Christians, that
are pure golden Christians in their own eyes, that are viler then dross, yea,
Regis animum quisque intra se habet. Every man has in him the mind of a King:
is Calvin's Note on that 1 Pet. 5.5.
then smoke in Gods eyes, Isa. 65.5. Stand by thy self, come not near to me;
for I am holier then thou: these are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burns
all the day: they were very licentious, very ungracious, very rebellious, very
Superstitious, very Idolatrous, ver. 2, 3, 4. and yet counted themselves very
religious: they were worse then others, and yet thought themselves better then
others; they were very bad, and yet judged themselves very good: they were more
impure, more profane, and more polluted then others, and yet they reckon
themselves more pure and holier then others: they stand upon their comparative
goodnesses, and yet at the the same time are charged by God of the greatest
wickedness. And thus their kinsmen the Pharisees stand upon their images,
forgeries, and outward dresses of holiness, when at the same time they
practiced the worst of wickedness, Mat. 23.5. Luke 30. and 18.11, 12. So those
in Hos. 12.8. And Ephraim said, yet I am become rich, I have found me out
substance: in all my labors they shall find no iniquity in me, that were sin;
or is sin. Ephraims iniquities were grown ever his head (as may be seen
throughout this whole Prophecy) and yet Ephraim cannot bear the being charged
with iniquity: it was little less then sin to charge Ephraim with sin, though
he was notoriously guilty of the highest crimes: yet he would have you to know
that he was as shie of sin, and as clear of sin, as he that was shiest and
clearest. Ephraim could give good words when his works were abominable; he
could pretend much to innocence, when he was guilty of the greatest impiety:
but though Ephraim had his cloak at hand, yet it was too short to cover his
sin; for God saw it, and condemned him for it. Chrysostom does elegantly set
forth the blindness and brutishness of such persons. When they lie in the mire
(says he) they think they are besmeared with some sweet ointments: when they
are full of Vermin, There is a truth in that old saying, Avaro deest tam quod
habet, quam quod non habet: A covetous man wants as well that which he has,
as that which he has not.
they vaunt themselves, as if they were adorned with precious stones. And so
the Laodiceans were of the same temper of spirit, Rev. 3.17. Because thou
say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: and
know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked. They had a great opinion of their own goodness, worth, and excellent
state, having need of nothing, when they they had nothing of a Christian in
them. Thou say thou art rich, I but thou do but say so; thou boastest and
braggest of thy riches: as many proud Beggars do of that wealth they have not;
for all thou deemest thy self rich, thou art but poor and beggarly. It is man's
sin, and judgment, that ever since he ceased to be what he should be, he
striveth to seem to be what he is not: Thou say thou art increased with
goods, and need nothing; I, but thou do but say so, thou do but dream it
is so: for thou art ignorant of thine own wretched and lamentable estate; Thou
say thou art rich, but I know thou art poor and beggarly: if a dram of grace
would save thy life, thy soul, thy family, nay, the whole world, thou have it
not: Thou say, thou see: but thou art blind, thou art destitute of
spiritual eyesight; thou see not thine own wants, nor Christ's worth: thine
own emptiness, nor Christ's fullness: thine own sinfulness, nor Christ's holiness:
thine own poverty, nor Christ's (riches and) plenty; thine own misery, nor
Christ's mercy: thine own insufficiency, nor Christ's alsufficiency: thine own
vanity, nor Christ's glory, etc. Multi multa sciunt, se autem nemo: Many know
much, but few know themselves, or their own danger, infelicity, or misery: and
indeed no misery to this. The Chinese use to say of themselves, that all other
Nations of the world did see but with one eye, they only with two; and of this
spirit and temper were those blind Laodiceans: they thought they knew all
things, when they knew nothing that they should, nor as they should. By all
which you may see, that there is an imaginary holiness, a conceited holiness,
where there is no real holiness; but an imaginary holiness will bring a man but
to an imaginary blessedness; a conceited holiness will bring a man but to a
conceited happiness; he that does but dream that he is holy, he does but dream
that he shall be happy.

Bastards of old were not to inherit, Genesis 21.10.
but to be thrust out from among the true heirs, Judges 11.1, 2. Now Jepthah
the Gileadite was a mighty man of valor, and he was the son of a harlot: and
Gilead begat Jephthah: And Gileads wife bare him sons, and his wives sons grew
up, and they thrust out Jephthah, and said unto him, Thou shall not inherit in
our Fathers house, for thou art the son of a strange woman. Ah Sirs, you that
are but bastard Christians, bastard Professors, bastard Believers, bastard
Saints, you shall never inherit among the heirs of glory, 2 These. 1.8, 9.
Matthew. 8.12. Chapter 22.13.
but shall be thrust out for ever from the presence of the Lord, and the glory
of his power, and thrust into utter darkness, because you have pleased your
selves, and satisfied your spirits, and blessed your souls in a bastard holiness,
in a conceited holiness, Deuteronomy. 23.2. A bastard shall not inherit in the
Congregation of the Lord: he shall have no fellowship, nor communion with the
people of God: the door of Admission shall be shut upon him: Mat. 25.10, 11,
12. Chapter 7.21, 22, 23.
The foolish Virgins had but a Bastard holiness, a conceited holiness, an
outward dress of holiness: and therefore the door of life, the door of hope,
the door of help, the door of grace, the door of mercy, the door of glory was
shut upon them. William the Conqueror was much slighted and scorned because he
was a Bastard: God and his people will slight such, and scorn such, and turn
their backs at last upon such that have no more then a bastardly holiness: and
therefore this cannot be the holiness here meant: But,

Luke 1.5, 6. (...), they were both, says the Vulgar, Sine querela, without
complaint; their conversation was such as none could justly complain of it. It
was irreprehensible, it could not be reprehended.
Now in this sense Zacharias and Elizabeth were both holy persons: for they
walked in all the commandments and ordinances of God blameless. And so the
Apostles, 1 Thessalonians. 2.10. For ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily, and
justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves among you that believe:
Answerable to this, is that of the Apostle in 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is
this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
Not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had our conversation
in the world, and more abundantly to you-wards. These precious souls behaved
themselves holily toward God, justly toward the world, and unblameably
toward believers; they were holy in Religious work, they were just in their
Civil affairs and Commerce, and unblameable in their private carriage and
behavior amongst their familiar and most bosom friends. And this is that the
Apostle presses upon Christians in Phil. 2.15. That ye may be blameless and
harmeless, the sons of God, without rebuke, (or unblemished) in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye shine (or shine ye) as lights in the
world. Christians must be the spotless sons of God: Deuteronomy. 32.5.
they must have no spots upon them that are inconsistent with Sonship, or
Saintship. Now it is certain: without this outward visible holiness there is no
happiness, there is no fruition of God in everlasting blessedness: They that
pretend their hearts are as good as the best, when their lives are as bad as
the worst, shall experience this truth at last to their shame and cost, that
without visible holiness here, there can be no fruition of God hereafter.

Yet this must be granted, 2 Timothy 3.5. They say of Halifax Nuts, that they are
all shells, no kirnels. There are many that make a glorious show before men,
that are abominable in the sight of God, Luke 16.15. that are Aurum hominibus,
lutum Deo: Gold in man's eyes, dirt in Gods sight. Gregor. Mor. c. 34. l. 13.
that a man may be visibly holy, that is not inwardly holy: A man may be
outwardly holy, that is not throughout holy: a man may have an outward dress of
holiness upon him, that has not the spirit and vitals of holiness in him: As
Judas had, and Simon Magus had, and Demas had, and the Scribes and Pharisees
had, Matthew. 23.25, 27, 28. We unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for
ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are
full of extortion and excess. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites;
for ye are like unto whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward,
but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye also
outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and
iniquity. They were outwardly religious, but inwardly vicious; they had the
semblance of sanctity but (inwardly) very full of impurity: They were fair
Professors, but foul Sinners; they were gracious without, but impious within.
Look as they are the worst of vices that are covered over with the show of
virtue: so they are the worst of sinners that cover over their inward
filthiness under the vizards of outward holiness. The Egyptian Temples were
fair without, but foul and filthy within; such were the Scribes and Pharisees
in Christ's days, and such are many professors in our days. It is said of
Dionysius the Tyrant, that though he loved not the Philophers, yet he would
wrap himself up in their cloaks, that men might have the better opinion of him:
So there be many that put on an outward dress of holiness, that wrap themselves
up in the cloak of holiness, that so others may take them for holy persons, and
yet they love not holiness, they have nothing of real honliess in them; but as
he is not a Jew which is one outwardly, Romans 2.28, 29. Cha. 4.12.
but not inwardly: so he is not a holy person who is only so outwardly, but not
inwardly; that has the name of holiness upon him, but has no principles of
holiness in him: though without outward visible holiness no man shall see the
Lord; yet a man may have an outward visible holiness, that shall never see the
Lord in happiness. I hate him even to hell (says the Heathen in Homer) that
says one thing with his mouth, and thinks another thing in his heart. So God
will at last hate that man to hell, Mat 23.14. 2 Timothy 3.5. 1 Cor. 7.19. Philip.
3.3. Gal. 5.6. Chap. 6.15.
yea, cast him into the hottest place in hell, that has a form of godliness
upon him, but nothing of the reality and power of holiness in him. Outward
holiness is good, but it must be throughout-holiness that will do a man good to
all eternity. It is not the shows but the substance of holiness that will bring
a man to everlasting happiness: Mere outward holiness will certainly leave a
man short of heaven and happiness: but throughout-holiness will certainly lodge
the soul in the bosom of God for ever. It is true, all men reach not to an
outward holiness; which made Athanasius wish, Vtinam omnes essent Hypocritae,
Would to God that all were hypocrites: Without all peradventure, it is a very
desirable thing that all were outwardly holy: yet all that reach to this, must
go farther, or else they will sit down on this side happiness, Mat. 5.20. For I
say unto you, that except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of
heaven: Now they were much in works of Piety, in works of Charity, in works of
Equity, and in works of Courtesy, by which means they gained so much upon the
hearts of the people, that it was commonly conceited and voted among them, that
if there were but two of all the world that should go to heaven, the one should
be a Scribe, and the other a Pharisee. Yet your righteousness must exceed
theirs, or the gates of glory will be shut upon you. Their righteousness and
holiness was only external, not internal; it was partial, not universal; it was
rather circumstantial then substantial: and therefore Heavens doors were
double-bolted against them. Heaven is for that man, and that man is for heaven,
that is not only outwardly holy, but throughout holy.

Fourthly, There is a Relative holiness; now Relative holiness

First, A separation of persons or things from common use: Deuteronomy. 19.2. 1 Kings
8.35. Ezra. 8.28. Chap. 10, 11. Isa. 63.18.
those things were called holy which were separated from common use, and set
apart for the Worship and Service of God: As the Oil, Shewbread, First Fruits,
Incense, Altars, Vestments; and in this sense the Priests and Levites were
called holy, because they were separated from others to serve in the
Tabernacle. And in this sense the people of Israel are frequently called a
sanctified people, a holy people, etc. The Greek word (...) answers to the
Hebrew word (...) which commonly signifies that which is appropriated to a holy
use: and this is the proper notion of holiness in the Old and New Testament, as
I might show you out of some hundred places of Scripture. Now certainly without
this holiness of special separation from the common conversation of the world,
there is no seeing of God, nor no fruition of God hereafter, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto
you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. God will
have no communion with any in this world that are not separated from the
sinful practices of the world. God will look upon none, he will own none, he
will delight in none, he will acknowledge none, he will receive none for his
sons and daughters, but such as are separated from all evil vices, and unholy
courses. Suitable to this, is Isa. 52.11. Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from
thence, touch no unclean things, go ye out of the midst of her; Be ye clean
that bear the vessels of the Lord. Estrange your selves from them that are
estranged from God; Cicero (though Heathen) had rather to have no companion
then a bad one.
have nothing to do with them that have nothing to do with God; separate your
selves from them who have separated themselves from God; have no delightful
converse with them who have no delightful converse with God; have no bosom
communion with them that have no bosom communion with God. Oh Sirs, you are to
keep your selves as pure and clean from others defilements, as you would keep
your selves free from others punishments: He that will imitate others in their
sins, shall certainly participate with others in their sorrows. It is true we
may live with wicked men in their Cities: but it is as true, we must not lie
with wicked men in their enormities. There are many professors that are like
the Planet Mercury, good in conjunction with those that are good, and bad with
those that are bad; but these wound many at once: God, Christ, the Gospel, and
their own credits and consciences: These do virtutis stragulam pudefacere, put
virtue to an open shame: And these are deservedly to be shamed by your
separating from them, and by your renouncing all intimate communion or
fellowship with them. But,

Secondly, As Relative holiness takes in a separation of persons or things from
common use, 2. So Christ is said to sanctify himself, when he dedicated
himself to be a sacrifice for the sins of his people, etc.
so it takes in a dedication and devoting of them to a holy use. And thus the
Nazarites, Temple, Mount Zion, the Sabbath day, and other Festival days are
said to be holy under the Law. In short, the whole Jewish Religion did lie in
holy times, holy places, holy persons, and holy things; and certainly without
this holiness, without this dedicating of our selves to God, we shall never
come to a glorious fruition of God; he that does not dedicate himself really to
God, wholly to God, only to God, and always to God on earth, shall never come
to a sight and vision of God in heaven: if we do not give up our selves to God,
God will never give up himself to us, Hos. 3.3. And I said unto her, Thou shall
abide for me many days: thou shall not play the harlot, and thou shall not be
for another man: so will I also be for thee. God will be only theirs that are
really his: and he will be altogether theirs that are wholly his; he will only
be a husband to them that dedicate themselves to him, as a wife does to her
husband: he will devote himself theirs, who devote themselves his: he will
avouch himself to be theirs who avouch themselves to be his, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18,
19. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his
ways, and to keep his Statutes, and his Commandments, and his Judgments, and
to hearken unto his voice. And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his
peculiar people, as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all his
commandments: And to make thee high above all Nations which he has made in
praise, and in name, and in honor, and that thou may be a holy people unto
the Lord thy God, as he has spoken. That is an apt saying of Tertullian,
Negotiatio est aliquid amittere ut majora lucreris: That is right merchandise
when something is parted with to gain more.
God will resign himself up to them who resign themselves up to him; he will
give up himself to them that have given up their names and their hearts to him:
He will bestow himself as the greatest pearl of price upon them that shall
make a surrender of themselves to him. There is no way to be higher then
others, happier then others, more noble and honorable then others, then by
making a dedi-gift of our selves to God. He that dedicates himself to God,
dedicates all; he that does not dedicate himself, dedicates nothing at all.
What Eschines once said to Socrates, Others, said he, give thee Gold, Silver,
Jewels, but I give thee my self: That must a Christian say to his God, Ah Lord,
there are some that give thee their lips, but I give thee my heart; others give
thee good words, good expressions, but I give thee the best of my affections:
others give thee a few cold prayers, but I give thee my whole soul: and had I
as many hearts in my body as I have hairs on my head, I would give them all to
thee: for thou art worthy, thou only art worthy. What the King of Israel once
said to the King of Syria, 1 Kings 20.4.
I am thine, and all that I have, that must a Christian say to his Christ, I am
thine O Lord, and all that I have. A Christian must cry out with him who cried,
Lord, I have two mites, a soul and a body, and I give them both to thee.
Bernard.
And this was the honor and commendations of the Macedonians, that they gave
up themselves to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5. Having no better present at hand, they
present themselves to God; and certainly there is no present more honorable,
Romans 12.1.
dilectable, and acceptable to God then this, of giving up our selves to God.
Well, remember this: That man was never really holy, that is not relatively
holy; nor that man will never be really happy, that is not relatively holy:
without Relative holiness there will be no vision of God in everlasting
happiness: We must be separated from the corruptions and pollutions of the
world, and we must dedicate our selves to God, or we shall never come to a
future fruition of God. But,

Consult these Scriptures, Luke 1.35. Mark 1.24. Heb. 7.26. Romans 5.19. Col.
1.22. Romans 2.3, 4. 2 Cor. 5.21, 22. Galat. 3.13. Jerem. 23.6.
first, there is his essential and personal holiness as he is God: Now this
essential holiness of Christ cannot be imparted nor imputed to any mortal man;
it is essential to him. But Secondly, there is his mediatory holiness, or that
holiness which he wrought for us as Mediator. Now the holiness of Christ as
Mediator did consist both in the habitual holiness of his person, in the
absence of all sin, and in the rich and plentiful presence of all holy and
supernatural qualities, as also in the actual holiness of his life and death:
by his active obedience, by his subjecting of his heart and life to divine
precepts, he perfectly fulfilled the commands of the Law: and by his passive
obedience, his voluntary sufferings, he fully satisfied the comminations,
penalties, and curses of the Law. Now this mediatory holiness of Christ's is
ours by imputation, and by virtue of which we stand recti in curia, justified
in the sight of God, 1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God
is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption:
This Mediatory holiness of Christ reckoned unto a believing sinner, is that
whereby he is constituted holy in foro Dei; and upon this account they are said
to be all fair, Cant. 4.7. Nemo-bonus, qui non ex malo bonus. Aug.
to be without spot or wrinckle, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. to be complete in him,
Col. 2.10. and to be without fault before the throne of God, Rev. 14.4, 5. And
certainly, without this mediatory holiness of Christ there is no appearing
before God, there is no glorious vision nor fruition of God. Hab. 1.13.
God is a God of that infinite purity and holiness, that no holiness below the
imputative holiness of Christ can make a man stand before him, or bring a man
to the fruition of him. It was a very sweet and excellent saying of Bernard,
when in his own opinion he was at the point of death: I confess (said he) I am
not worthy, Guliel. Abbas in. vita Bern. lib. 1. cap. 12.
I have no merits of mine own to obtain heaven by: but my Lord had a double
right thereunto; An hereditary right, as a Son, and a Meritorious right as a
Sacrifice: He was contented with the one right himself; the other right he has
given unto me; by the virtue of which gift, I do rightly lay claim unto it, and
am not confounded. Though we cannot lay claim to heaven, nor to a blessed
fruition of God by any inherent holiness in us, it being weak and imperfect;
yet we may lay claim to both by the mediatory holiness of Christ imputed to us.
As Christ's Essential holiness gives him an hereditary right to everlasting
happiness; So his Mediatory holiness gives us a right to everlasting
blessedness. The costly cloak (of Alcisthenes) which Dionysius sold to the
Carthaginians for an hundred Talents, was but a mean and beggarly ragg to that
embroidered royal Robe of Christ's mediatory holiness, that is imputed or
reckoned to us. And therefore as ever you would come to a vision of God in
happiness, you must labor to be interested by faith in Christ's mediatory
holiness. But,

Sixthly and Lastly, there is an inherent, internal qualitative Holiness is not
any single grace alone, but a conjunction, a constellation of all graces
together.
Now this inherent holiness lies in two things. First, in the infusing of holy
principles, divine qualities, or supernatural graces into the soul; such as the
Apostle mentions in Gal. 5.22, 23. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance;
against such there is no Law. These habits of grace which are severally
distinguished by the names of faith, love, hope, meekness, etc. are nothing
else but the new nature, or new-man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. These seeds of holiness, these
habits of grace are those sweet ointments with which all must be anointed, 1
John 3.9. 2 Cor. 1.21. 1 John 2.27.
that shall ever come to a blessed sight or vision of God. You may know much of
God, you may hear much of God, you may talk much of God, and you may boast much
of your hopes and interest in God, and yet without these habits of holiness,
you shall never, come to a blessed fruition of God in happiness; without these
feeds of holiness, you shall never reap a crop of blessedness. But,

Acts 10.35. 1 John 1.3.7. Tit. 2.12. Luke 1.73. 2 Pet. 1.8. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.
Isa. 35.8.
all holy habits must be brought forth into holy acts; gracious habits must be
attended with gracious motions; gracious operations, and a gracious
conversation: outward works must be suitable to inward habits; it is with
spiritual habits as it is with natural habits; the more they are acted and
exercised, the more they are increased and strengthened: holy habits are golden
Talents that must be employed and improved. Gracious habits are the candles of
the Lord set up in us: and God has set up those candles of heaven not to idle
by, not to sleep by, but to work by, and to walk by. Where there is holiness of
disposition, there must be, nay, there will be holiness of conversation; a holy
heart is always attended with a holy life: Where there are the seeds of
holiness, there will be the flowers of holiness.
you may separate a man from his friend, but you can never separate (though you
may distinguish) acts of holiness from the habits of holiness: now it is
certain without this holiness, you shall never come to a sight or fruition of
God in happiness. And thus I have showed you what that holiness is, without
which there is no hope, no possibility of ever seeing the Lord.

I come now to the second thing, and that is, to prove the truth of the
Proposition, viz. That without men are holy, they can never be happy; without
holiness on earth, none of the sons of men shall ever come to a blessed vision
and fruition of God in heaven. Now this great and weighty truth, I shall make
good by an induction of particulars thus.

See also Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. Chapter 25.10, 11, 12.
Witness 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God? be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. Heaven is an undefiled inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4.
and none that are defiled can enter into the possession of it. When the Angels
fell from their righteousness, heaven rejected them; it would no longer hold
them: and will it now accept of the unrighteous? will it now entertain and
welcome them? surely no. Such sinners make the very earth to mourn and groan
now, and shall they make heaven to mourn and groan hereafter? Surely no. What
though the Serpent did wind himself into an earthy Paradise, yet none of the
seed of the Serpent (so remaining) shall ever be able to wind themselves into a
heavenly Paradise, witness Gal. 19.20, 21. Now the works of the flesh are
manifest, which are these, Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions,
heresies, envying, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the
which I tell you before, as I also have told you in time past, that they which
do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Before they go to hell he
tells them again and again, that they shall not inherit the kingdom of God. By
the Kingdom of God, we are to to understand the kingdom of Heaven, the kingdom
of glory: now the kingdom of heaven, of glory, is called the kingdom of God; 1.
Because he has prepared it. 2. Mat. 20.23. Luke 12 32.
Because it is a royal gift that he confers and bestows upon his little, little
flock. Augustus in his Solemn Feasts gave trifles to some, and Gold to others:
Rev. 4.10, 11. Chap. 20.6. Dan. 4.16, 17.
The trifles of this world God often gives to the worst and basest of men; but
the kingdom of heaven he only gives to his bosom friends. 3. Because that of,
and under him, the Saints hold it and possess it. 4. Because with him they
shall for ever reign in the fruition of it. And so that in John 3.3. Jesus
answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be
born again, be cannot see the kingdom of God. To give a little light into the
words.

(...), Truth, truth, or truly, truly.
Verily, verily; the Greek is Amen, amen: The word Amen is Hebrew, and in the
Old Testament is most commonly used by way of wishing, or imprecation; but
here, and in other places of the New Testament, the sense of it is altered from
precatory to assertory, or from the way of wishing, to the way of affirming.
This phrase, Amen, amen, or Verily, verily, imports,

Amen does properly signify truth.



Verily, verily, is a vehement confirmation of what Christ speaks.



Ver. 2.
I say unto thee; I, that thou have confessed to be a Teacher sent from God; I,
that lie in the bosom of the Father; I, John 1.18. Rev. 3.14.
that am of the Cabinet Counsel of heaven; I, that know his heart, and all his
secrets; I, that am the faithful and true witness and cannot lie; I, that am
called the Amen, the truth it self; Rev. 1.18.
I, that have the keys of heaven and hell at my own Girdle; I, that open and
no man shuts, and I that shut and no man opens; I that shall be your Judge in
the great day, I say unto thee, etc.

Romans 2.28, 29.
Except a man be born again; A man, be he old or young, learned or unlearned,
high or low, rich or poor, knowing or ignorant, circumcised or uncircumcised,
under this form or that, a member of this Church or that, let his disposition
be nev^r so ingenuous, and his parts never so high, and his conversation (as to
men) never so blameless and harmless; yet except this man be born again, he
cannot see the kingdom of God.

2 Cor. 5.17.
Be born again: Except a man be first unmade, and newmade up again; except he
be of an old creature made a new creature, yea, a new creation of God, there is
no seeing of the kingdom of God; the whole frame of the old man must be
dissolved, and a new frame erected; else there is no heaven to be enjoyed. The
kingdom of God is a divine kingdom, and there is no possession of it without a
divine nature; a new head without a new heart; 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 Cor. 7.19. Gal.
5.6. Luke 17.21. Romans 14.17.
a new lip without a new life, will never bring a man to this kingdom of light.
That man is for the kingdom of God, and the kingdom of God is for that man,
that has got the kingdom of God within him; if the kingdom of grace do not
enter into thee here, thou shall never enter into the kingdom of glory
hereafter. A new heart is for a new heaven, and a new heaven is for a new
heart. Except a man be born again, except a man be born from above, and so
Cyrill interprets that word (...). Generation in some sense is from below, but
regeneration is only from above, and without this there is no fruition of God
above.

He cannot see the kingdom of God. The Scripture speaks of several Cannots.

First, There is a natural Cannot: now every son and Adam is by nature born
under a Cannot; they are all born under a cannot believe, a cannot repent, a
cannot love God, a cannot walk with God, a cannot see God, a cannot enjoy God,
1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. A blind man cannot see colors, nor a natural man cannot
discern spiritual things: they are too high, they are too sublime for him, they
are mysteries that he cannot understand, that he cannot unriddle. The natural
man can ascend no higher then nature, as the water can rise no higher then the
spring from whence it comes. Quantum descendit, tantum ascendit.
The Scripture sets such sad souls below the Ox, and the Ass, Isa. 1.3. Take
nature civilized, and moralized, refined and raised, sublimated, strengthened,
and improved to the utmost, and it cannot enable a man to do a supernatural
action; nature cannot act ultra sphaeram, above it self. But,

Secondly, there is a contracted and an habituated Cannot: To whom shall I
speak, and give warning, that they may hear? behold their ear is uncircumcised,
and they cannot hearken: behold, the word of the Lord is unto them a reproach:
they have no delight in it: They had by their carnality, impiety, sensuality,
security and obstinacy, contracted upon their poor souls such deafness,
wretchedness, unteachableness, and untractableness, that they could neither
love the word, nor like it: they could neither take pleasure nor delight in it;
nay, they could neither hear it, nor bear it, though it never so nearly
concerned the internal and eternal welfare of their souls. (...) properly,
distinctly signifies an adulteteress: and this phrase of having eyes full of
the adulteress, answers to that of the Rhetorician who describing an unchaste,
lascivious person, rhetorically said of him, that he had Whores in his eyes.
And of this Cannot the Apostle speaks in 2 Pet. 2.14. Having eyes full of
adultery, and that cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls: an heart
they have exercised with covetous practices: cursed children. By their riot and
excess, by their lasciviousness and wantonness, by their looseness and
uncleanness which they had habituated and accustomed themselves unto, they
brought upon themselves a cursed necessity of sinning, so that they could not
cease from sin: They mourn over sin, and yet they cannot cease from sin: they
resolve against sin, yet they cannot cease to sins they pray against sin, yet
they cannot cease to sin: they make many promises, vows, and Covenants against
sin, yet they cannot cease from sin, their souls being habituated and
accustomated thereunto, Jer. 2.20. For of old time I have broken thy yoke, and
burst thy bands; and thou said I will not transgress: (I will never play the
harlot more: but were they as good as their word? no,) for upon every high
hill, and under every green tree, they wandered playing the harlot. I have read
of a man who in the time of his sickness, was so terrified in his conscience
for his sins, that he made the very bed to shake upon which he lay: and cried
out all night long, I am damned, I am damned, and made many great promises and
protestations of amendment of life, if God would be pleased to recover him; In
a little while he did recover: and being recovered, he was as base and vile, as
wretched and wicked as ever he was before. Custom in sin takes away all
conscience of sin, Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
Leopard his spots? then may he also do good that is accustomed to do evil. The
Ethiopian cannot make his black skin white: he cannot change the hew or the
color of it by washing; to attempt this is but labor in vain. Nor the Leopard
cannot change his spots: no more can a poor sinner that has habituated and
accustomed himself to sin, that is desperately enthralled to sin, turn from his
sin: The spots of the Leopard are not in him by accident but by nature: and
they are such which no Art can cure, nor water wash off, because they are not
only in the skin, but in the flesh and bones, in the sinews and most inward
parts. By custom sin has bespotted not only the skin, the life, the outside of
a poor sinner, but also the very heart and soul of a poor sinner, so as that he
is never able to wash off these spots. Ambrose reports of one Theotimus, that
having a disease upon his body, his Physician told him, that except he did
abstain from intemperance, drunkenness, uncleaness, etc. he was like to lose
his eyes; his heart being habituated to sin, and set upon wickedness, he
answered, Vale lumen amicum, farewell sweet light then. But,

Thirdly, as there is a contracted Cannot, an habituated etc. and this Cannot
the Lord in wrath has brought upon them, Isa. 6.9, 10. And he said, Go and
tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not: and see ye indeed, but
perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and
shut their eyes; (or anoint, besmeer, lime their eyes) lest they see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, Many men, says Bernard do seek for
straws to put out their own eyes.
and understand with their heart, and convert and be healed. They would not
see, they shall not see; they would not hear, they shall not hear; they would
not understand, they shall not understand: they would not convert, they shall
not convert: they would not be healed, they shall not be healed. When men are
stiffly and desperately resolved upon their sinful courses, when men grow
stubborn, rebellious, licentious, and will wilfully wink and shut their eyes
against the light, and stop their ears against the truth, God in his just
judgment gives them up to dullness, stupidness, blindness, darkness, Isa.
44.18. They have not known nor understood, for he has shut their eyes that
they cannot see; (...) dawbed, or plaistered.
(or he has dawbed up their eyes from seeing) and their hearts, that they
cannot understand. God in his righteous judgment casts a judicial Cannot upon
them, he has dawbed up their eyes that they cannot see, and he has shut up
their hearts that they cannot understand the great concernments of their souls.
Now whilst men lie under these sad Cannots, they can never see the kingdom of
God. These three Cannots like a threefold cord, bind poor sinners, so as that
they can never come to a sight or fruition of God in grace or glory till they
are delivered from these Cannots, by a new birth, by being born again.

See the kingdom of God: that is, they cannot enter into it, they cannot enjoy
it, they can have no child's part or portion in it, except they are new born,
except they pass the pangs of the second birth. Let their education be never so
sweet, their illumination never so great, their profession never so amiable,
and their conversation never so unblameable; yet except they are new born, it
had been good for them that they had never been born. And thus you see by plain
Scriptures, that the Lord has bolted the gates of glory against all unholy
persons.

etc. is this; Without holiness men are strangers to God, and therefore without
holiness they cannot be admitted to a co-habitation with God. God loves not to
dwell with strangers, nor to associate himself with strangers; now such are all
unholy persons, Ephesians. 2.12. That at time ye were without Christ, being aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel, (or being far removed from the Citizenship of
Israel) and strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no hope, and
without God in the world. Here are five withouts in the words, 1. They were
without God the Author of hope. 2. They were without Christ the foundation of
hope. 3. They were without the Church (which was contained in the Commonwealth
of Israel) the place of hope. 4. They were without the Covenants of promise.
(That is, they were without the precious promises which God in his Covenant had
made, and oftentimes renewed with the Israelites, and therefore called
Covenants in the plural number) the ground and reason of hope. And Lastly, they
were without the grace of hope: they had no hope of communion with Christ, no
hope of fellowship with the Saints; no hope of any interest in the promise; no
hope of reconciliation to God here, nor no hope of a fruition of God hereafter.
And thus you see what strangers they were to the Lord, and to the great
concernments of their own souls. God of old would not have strangers come into
his Sanctuary: And do you think then that he will ever admit such into heaven?
Surely no. Ezekiel. 44.6.7, 9. And thou shall say to the rebellious, even to the
house of Israel, Thus says the Lord God, O ye house of Israel, Heaven would be
no heaven, were there any strangers there. See my String of Pearls.
let it suffice you of all your abominations, In that ye have brought into my
Sanctuary strangers uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be
in my Sanctuary to pollute it, even my house; when ye offer my bread, the fat
and the blood, and they have broken my Covenant, because of all your
abominations. Thus says the Lord God, No stranger uncircumcised in heart, nor
uncircumcised in flesh shall enter into my Sanctuary, Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. Chapter
25, 11, 12. Chapter 22.11, 12, 13.
of any stranger that is among the children of Israel. Such as had no holiness
within, nor no holiness without: such as had no holiness in their hearts, nor
no holiness in their lives, God would not have them to enter into his
Sanctuary; and therefore certainly such he will never suffer to enter into
heaven. If God shuts the doors of an earthly Tabernacle against such as were
strangers to him, to his Covenant, to his Church, and to themselves, will he
not much more shut the door of his heavenly Tabernacle against such that are
strangers to him, and to his Christ, and to his word, yea, that are strangers
to their own souls, and to all the concernments of another world? and such are
all those that are uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh. Princes
Palaces are not for strangers, but for sons, friends, familiars, favorites;
no more is the Palace of heaven: we will not admit strangers to cohabit with
us: and will ^od admit such to cohabit with him, that never had any
acquaintance or familiarity with him? Surely no. In history we read of such
Towns and Cities as would not admit strangers to inhabit among them: and such a
City is that above. Exodus 33.12, 17.
It has been long since concluded, that (In coelo nullus erit alienus) in
heaven there shall be no strangers: none shall be admitted into that state, but
such as God knows by name. Charon (in Lucian) requesting Mercurius to show him
Jupiters Palace above; how says Mercurius, that such a caitiff as thou whose
conversation has been altogether with black shades, and impure ghosts,
should set thy foot in that pure place of light! what a dishonor and
derogation were that to the place! The Application is easy.

2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16.
As righteousness can have no fellowship with unrighteousness, nor light with
darkness, nor Christ with Belial, nor heaven with hell, no more can a holy God
have any communion or fellowship with unholy souls: for they are Satan's house,
Luke 11.21. he keeps possession of them as a man does of his house, Rev. 18.2.
and has familiarity with them as a man has with those of his house: he is
their Father, and they are his children, John 8.44. and look what familiarity a
Father has with his children, that has an unholy devil with unholy souls. A
workman cannot be more familiar with his tools, then Satan is with unholy
souls, and therefore he is said to work in the children of disobedience; as a
Smith works in his forge, or as an Artificer works in his shop, Ehpes. 2.2.
Unholy persons have bosom fellowship with Satan, 1 John 5.19. And we know that
we are of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness: or in that wicked one
the Devil, as the Greek will bear; they lie as it were in the bosom of Satan,
as the child lies in the bosom of the Mother, or as the Wife lies in the bosom
of the Husband, or as a friend lies in the bosom of his friend: Unholy persons
partake with him at his Table, they eat with him, and drink with him, and
converse with him, 1 Cor. 10.21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the
cup of Devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the Table of
Devils. If Judas was at the Sacrament, the greater was his woe.
Ambrose brings in the Devil boasting against Christ, and challenging Judas as
his own thus, He is not thine Lord Jesus, he is mine; his thoughts beat for me;
He eats with thee, but is fed by me; he takes bread from thee, but money from
me: he drinks with thee, and sells thy blood to me. By all which you may see
what fellowship and familiarity there is between Satan and a sinner. Now what
is this less then blasphemy to assert, that a holy God will have fellowship
with them that have fellowship with the Devil? God has not cast Satan out of
heaven, that he may make room for his familiars in heaven: if heaven was too
holy to hold unholy devils, it will be found at last to be too holy to hold
unholy souls; certainly they shall not lie in the bosom of God, who have the
Devil for their bedfellow.

Fourthly, Unholy persons are full of contrariety to God; Lev. 26.21, 22, 23,
24, 27, 28, 40, 41. Isa. 58.4, 5, 6. Jerem. 44.16, 17, 18. Chapter 2.25. and Ch
18.11, 12
are contrary to God, his name, nature, being, truth and glory; you may as soon
bring East and West, North and South, light and darkness, heaven and hell
together, as you shall bring a holy God and unholy souls together. Antipathies
will never incorporate; as soon may midnight be married to the noonday, as a
holy God embrace an unholy sinner. That unholy persons are made up of
contrarieties to God, is most evident, as you may see in Isa. 22.12, 13. And in
that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to
baldnest, and to girding with sackcloth: And behold, joy, and gladness,
slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine; let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall die. These sad souls practice quite contrary
to what the Lord calls for at their hands: Rom 8.7. James 4 4. Pope Julius the
third would have his Pork (though it was forbidden him by h^s Physicians) in
despite of God himse^f.
he calls them to weeping, and mourning; and behold joy and gladness: he calls
them to fasting, and behold here is nothing but feasting, carousing, and making
merry, and jovial, and that in contempt of God and his dreadful judgments.
Unholy persons are like the Rainbow; now the Rainbow is never on that side of
the world that the Sun is on; but whenever it appears, it is still in
opposition against the Sun if the Sun be in the East, the Rainbow is in the
West, etc. So unholy souls in all t^eir actings and walkings will still be
opposite to God; they will still be cross and contrary to him, John 8.38. I
speak that which I have seen with my Father: and ye do that which ye have seen
with your Father. Unholy hearts are full of the highest strains of contrariety
and opposition against the Lord. I have read of a King (that Reigned in no very
remote part of the world) who having received a blow from the hand of God, took
a solemn Oath to be revenged on him; and ordained that for ten years space no
man should pray to him, speak of him, nor so long as he was in Authority, to
believe in him. O the vanity, the contrariety and blasphemy of this Prince! Now
we will not admit such to be about us who are made up of contrarieties to us:
and will God, will God? heaven and earth, fire and water, the Woolf and the
Lamb, the Winds and the Sea will sooner accord then a holy God, and an unholy
heart. There can be no amity where there is a spiritual Antipathy.

reading and meditation without holiness, Deuteronomy. 23.14. For the Lord thy God
walks in the midst of thy Camp to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies
before thee; therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in
thee, and turn away from thee. Keep up holiness among you, and you shall keep
me among you, says God; but if you turn away from holiness, I will undoubtedly
turn away from you: a holy God will keep company with none but those that are
holy. Holiness is the bond that ties God and souls together: God will cleave
close to them who in holiness cleave fast to him: but if he see uncleanness and
wickedness among you, he will certainly turn away from you. The holy spirit
gives the lie to those that say they have fellowship with God, and yet maintain
familiarity and fellowship with sin, 1 John 1.6. If we say we have fellowship
with him, and walk in darkness, we lie. The Apostle dares give the lie to any
man (without fearing the stab) who pretends to communion with God, and yet
walks in darkness. Men may be much in Ordinances, and yet for want of holiness
may have no communion at all with God in Ordinances. Isaiah 1.11. -- 18. and
though communion with God in Ordinances is the very life and soul of
Ordinances; yet multitudes who enjoy Ordinances can content and satisfy
themselves without that which is the very life, soul and quintessense of
Ordinances. There are many that cry out, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, who have no communion with the Lord of the
Temple at all, Jer. 7.4. -- 12. Though unholy persons may trade much in
Ordinances, Isa. 29.13. Ezekiel. 24.21, 22. Chapter 33, 30, 31, 32.
yet they will never make any earnings, any advantage by all their trading and
stir, because they cannot reach to communion with God in them, which is the
only means of being enriched by them. As many men rise early and go to bed
late, and make a great deal of stir and do to be rich in the world, and yet for
want of a stock nothing comes on it; they are poor still, and beggarly still,
and low and mean in the world still. So many rise early, and go late to
Ordinances, they exercise themselves much in religious duties, and yet nothing
comes on it; their souls are poor, and beggarly, and thredbare still: And no
wonder; for they want a stock of holiness to trade with. Remigius a Judge of
Lorraign, says that the Devil in those parts did use to give money to Witches
which at first did appear to be good and current coin, but after a while it
turned to dry leaves. Ah Sirs, all duties and Ordinances to a man that wants
holiness, will be sound at last to be but as dry leaves, to be sapless and
liveless, and heartless, and comfortless to him. Now if without holiness no man
can have any spiritual communion or fellowship with God here, then certainly
without holiness no man can have a glorious communion with God hereafter: if
without holiness God will not take us into his arms on earth, then undoubtedly
without holiness God will never put us into his bosom in heaven. But to proceed.

(Synonomaes) words signifying the same thing in Scripture, Deu. 36.6.21. Psalm
94.8.
Psalm 14.1. The fool (i. e. the wicked, the unholy person) has said in his
heart, there is no God: they are corrupt, they have done abominable works,
there is none that does good, Jer. 4.22. For my people are foolish, they have
not known me, they are sottish children, and they have no understanding: they
are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge, Prove. 1.7. Fools
despise wisdom, and instruction, that is, wicked and ungodly men despise wisdom
and instruction: and to show that the world is full of such fools, he uses the
word in the plural no less then sixteen times in this book of the Proverbs. I
shall open this truth a little more to you, by proving that they have all the
characteristical notes and properties of fools: So that one face is not more
like another, then a fool is like a wicked man, or then a wicked man is like a
fool: For,

First, A fool prefers toys and trifles before things of greatest Prove. 1.29.
an Apple that pleases the eye, before a pearl of greatest price; so wicked
and ungodly men, they prefer their lusts before the Lord, Isa. 65.12. Therefore
will I number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter:
because when I called, ye did not answer; when I spoke, ye did not hear, but
did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not. Such a
one was Cardinal Borbonius who professed he would not leave his part in Paris for
a portion in Paradise.
Upon choice they preferred the honors, the riches, the bravery and glory of
the world, above their own souls, and the great concernments of another world.
Such fools were Laban, and Nabal, in the Old Testament; (whose names by
inversion of letters are the same; and the latter signifies a fool) and such
were the two rich fools in the New Testament, Luke 12.16. -- 22. and Chap.
16.19. -- ult. I have read of the foolish people of the East Indi^s in the Isle
Zeylon, who preferred a consecrated Apes tooth above an incredible mass of
treasure. Such fools are all unholy persons, who prefer the toys, the trifles
of this world before the pleasures and treasures that be at Gods right hand.
The world is full of such fools. Psalm 16.11. Mat. 6.19, 10.
(Si admores hominum respicias, mundum universum stultorum domum judicabis)
says One, if thou beholdest the manners of men, thou will judge the whole
world to be a house of fools. Ah friends! What folly to that of men's spending
their time, their strength, their lives, their souls in getting the great
things of this world, and neglecting that one thing necessary, the salvation of
their souls! Matthew. 16.26. O! What vanity is it to prefer a smoke of honor, a
blast of fame, a dream of pleasure, a wedge of gold, a Babylonish garment, and
such like transitory trifles and trash before a blessed eternity!

Secondly, Fools make no improvement of advantages and Wherefore is there a
price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, Like Gra^hoppers they sing and sport
away their precious time and opportunities of mercy, etc.
seeing he has no heart to it. It is to no purpose to put a price into the
hand, if folly be bound up in the heart: if a man had as much wealth as would
buy all the grace, all the peace, all the comforts, and all the wisdom in the
world; yet if he has neither wit nor will to make an improvement of his
wealth, what good would his wealth do him? To what purpose is the Market open,
and good penny worths put into the buyers hands, if the buyer has neither
wisdom nor heart to buy! Unholy persons are such spiritual fools; though they
have a price, an opportunity put into their hands, which if improved might make
them for ever: yet they have no heart to make an improvement of the means and
advantages that might do them good to all eternity. Prove 1.20. ult. Isa. 53.1.
Chapter 55.1, 2. Mat. 25.3.6.10. Ch 23.37. Luke 19.41, 42. etc. That great
Conqueror vainly feared, that his Father Philips Victories would deprive the
Son of an opportunity to improve his Magnanimity.
Ah what opportunities have unsanctified persons to get changed hearts, renewed
natures, purged consciences, reformed lives, to get an interest in Christ, to
obtain the favor of God, to procure pardon of sin, to make provision for their
immortal souls! But they have no hearts to improve these opportunities, and so
by neglecting of them they cut the throat of their own souls: And this will be
the worm that will he gnawing of them to all eternity, that they have let slip
the opportunities of grace, that they have trifled away the seasons of mercy.
Ah Sirs, there is no fool to that fool that has an opportunity put into his
hand to make himself for ever, and yet has no heart to improve it: The hottest
place in hell will be the portion of such fools, Mat. 11.21, 22. The little Be
so soon as flowers appear, goes abroad, views the gay Diapery and the diversity
of the flowery fields, sucks the sweetest of them, fraights her thighs, makes a
curious comb, and so betimes hoards up honey in Summer against Winter. And so
the little busy Ant in Summer provides food for Winter, Prove. 6.6.7, 8. The
Stork, the Crane and the Swallow know their seasons and opportunities, Jer.
8.7. All these poor little creatures are not so much below man in nature, as
they are above sinful man in worth, wisdom and work: These improve their
Summer seasons, their harvest hours; and yet such spiritual fools are wicked
man, that they let slip such seasons of grace and mercy, that cannot be
redeemed with ten thousand worlds. Ah how is man fallen from his primitive
nobility and glory, that these little busy creatures are propounded as a
pattern of diligence and wisdom unto him! The Ancients painted Opportunity with
a hairy forehead, but bald behind, to signify that while a man has it before
him, he may lay hold on it, but if he lets it slip away, he cannot pull it back
again. There is a great truth in what the Rabbi has long since said, Nemo est
cui non sit hora sua; Every man has his hour: and he who overslips his season,
may never meet with the like again; There are many thousand spiritual fools in
hell: that find this true by experience, and therefore now they bewail their
folly, but all too late, all too late.

Thirdly, Natural fools are very inconstant, they are never long in one mind:
now they are for this, Ecclesiasticus 22.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
and anon Hosanna, Hosanna in the highest, Mat. 21.9, 15. but did they hold in
this mind long? no their mind is presently changed, and they cry out crucify
him, crucify him, Luke 23.21. Now they are for the Saints, and anon they are
against them: they cry up the Gospel, and presently they make opposition
against the Gospel; like the kingdom of Congo who at first kindly embraced the
Gospel, but as soon as they found it restrain their lusts and carnal liberties,
they made fierce opposition against the Gospel: this week they are for
Ordinances, and the next they are against Ordinances: this hour they will
forsake their sins, and the next hour they are return to their sins as the dog
to his vomit, and as the Sow to her wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
Now they are for this way, and anon for that; now they are for this opinion,
and anon for that: now they are for this Religion, Beza.
and to morrow they are for another Religion, 2 Kings 17.33. like Baldwin a
French Lawyer of whom it is said that he had Religionem Ephemeram, every day a
new Religion, but constant to none: This moment you shall hear them bless, and
the next moment you shall hear them curse, James 3.9, 10. Out of the same mouth
proceeds blessing and cursing. Lewis the second would swear, and then kiss his
Crucifix, and then swear again more confidently, and kiss his Crucifix again
more devoutly. Now because this Age is full of such swearing fools, and happily
this Treatise may fall into some of their hands, give me leave to say, that it
is observable that the word in the Hebrew which the Scripture uses for
swearing, is always used in the passive voice (...) Nashabange to note (say
some) that a man should not swear but when an oath is laid upon him, and he
driven to it. The word also has a signification of seven (...) as having
reference (say some) to the seven spirits of God before the throne, before whom
we swear, and therefore should never swear but in truth, righteousness and
Judgment, Jer. 4.2. Rev. 1.4. Chapter 5, 6. one day you shall have these spiritual
fools these profane fools crying out, O! heaven, heaven, heaven: O! That we
may go to heaven; and the next day you shall see them live as if there were
neither heaven nor hell: one day with Balaam you shall have them wish, Oh that
we might die the death of the righteous! and the next day with Saul you shall
have them a persecuting of the righteous to death: one day you shall have them
cry out What shall we do to be saved! and the next day you shall see them live
as if they were resolved to be damned. Thus these spititual fools like natural
fools are always

Mischief is the fools babble, the fools fiddle. Fools can rejoice in other men's
harms, and laugh to see others lament.
Fourthly, Fools delight to sport and play with such things as are most
hurtful, pernicious and dangerous to them, as you all know that have observed
any thing of natural fools, Prove. 10.23. It is a sport to a fool to do
mischief. Fools take as great delight and pleasure in doing mischief, as wise
men do in their lawful sports or pastimes: Wisdom is not more a joy and
delight to a man of understanding, then mischief and wickedness is a sport or
recreation to a fool: It is a great contentment and merriment to a fool to do
wickedly, Prove. 14.9. Fools make a mock of sin; they make a jear of that which
they should fear more then hell it self; they make that matter of sport which
may prove matter of damnation to them: they make a May Game, a pastime of that
which may make them miserable to all eternity; they make a mock and flout of
that on earth for which the devil will mock and flout them for ever in hell.
Justice will at last turn over such fools to Satan who will be sure to return
mock for mock, jear for jear, and flout for flout: they that love such kind of
pastime, shall have enough of it in hell. Now all unholy persons are such
spiritual fools, as that they delight, Prove. 1.22.
and take pleasure in sin which is the most pernicious and dangerous thing in
the world, Psalm. 62.4. They delight in lies. Though every lie deserves a stab
from God, yet spiritual fools make but a sport of them. Such a one was Thespis
(the Poet) who being reproved by Solon for lying: answered him That it was not
material, Plutarch in the life of Solon.
seeing it was but in sport: upon which Solon beating the ground with his
staff, replied, If we commend lying in sport, we shall find it afterward in
good earnest in all our bargains and dealings. It is said of Ep^minondas a
heathen, that he abhorred mendacium jocosum, a jesting lie; this Heathen in the
great day will put such liars to the blush who delight in lies, Isa, 66.3.
There was no flesh so sweet as that which the Eagle robbed the Altar of.
There soul delights in their abomination, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. they take pleasure
in unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.13. They count it pleasure to riot in the day
time, sporting themselves with their own deceivings. Not that there is any real
delight in intemperance, for if there were then Heliogabalus an exceeding
intemperate person should have been more happy then Adam in Paradise. He writ a
Book to provoke the Appetite.
Apicius was the greatest Glutton that ever was; at length he hanged himself:
such shall hang in hell at last, who delight to abuse many at once; the
creatures, their Creator, and their own souls and bodies. Well Sirs, Sin is the
poison of the soul, the nakedness of the soul, the disease of the soul, the
burden of the soul, and if mercy do not prevent, will prove the bane of the
soul. O then how great is their folly that delight in it, and that make a sport
of it!

Fifthly, Natural fools are taken more with the outward and precious stones,
then they are with the worth and value of them. So unholy hearts are taken more
with the form of godliness then they are with the power, 2 Timothy 2.5. they are
taken more with a name to live, with a name of being holy, then they are taken
with holiness it self. Rev. 3.1, 2. Augustine.
Multi Christianum nomen ad judicium habent, non ad remedium: Many have the
name of Christians to their condemnation, Isa. 58.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Mat. 1.9. Za.
7.4, 5, 6, 7. Matthew. 23.
not to their salvation: They are taken more with the outward shine and pomp of
duties then they are taken with the spiritualness and holiness of duties; they
are taken more with what of man is in duty, then they are taken with that of
God which is in a duty; they are taken more with raised notions, then they are
taken with raised affections; they are taken more with some witty, rhetorical
expressions in duty, then they are taken with the holy movings and breathings
of the spirit in duty, Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32. All which speaks them out to be
spiritual fools; and indeed no fools to those who are taken more with the
shadow of Religion, then they are with the substance of Religion; who are taken
more with the outside of godliness then they are with the infide of godliness:
for what is this but to be taken more with the outside of the Cabinet then with
the treasure that is within; or to be taken more with the purse that holds the
gold, then with the gold that is in the purse; and with Democritus the
Philosopher to esteem a Room covered

They cry as the Epicure cried, Vtere temporibus, praesentibus utere rebus.
Sixthly, Natural fools are all for the present; they cry out Spend and God will
send; they only mind and care for the things of this life; As what they shall
eat, and what they shall drink, and what they shall put on; they are all for
their bodies, their bellies, their backs: they take no care, they make no
provision for their immortal souls. A spruce Roman riding on a lean Jade, was
asked by the Censor his reason: he answered, I look to my self, but my man to
my horse. So fools look only to their bodies, let who list look to their souls.
Such fools are all unsanctified persons: they look only after their bodies, and
their outward concerments: they look not at the necessities, miseries and wants
of their souls; such were those in John 6.26, 27. who crossed the Seas and
followed after Christ for loaves, but never looked after the meat which endures
to everlasting life. And such fools were those in Hos. 7.14. who howled upon
their beds for corn and wine: let them have but provender, provant for their
bodies, and they care not what becomes of their souls; and such were they in
Phil. 3.19. whose God was their gut. And such were the Laodiceans in Rev. 3.14.
-- 19. who had well fed bodies, but starved souls: whose houses were full of
goods, but their hearts empty and void of Christ and grace: who had threadbare
souls under all their purple Robes; who were rich in temporals, but very poor
and beggarly in spirituals. And such a one was that rich fool in Luke 12. who
only laid up for his body, for this life, but never took care for another life,
for a better life; he makes many years provision for his body, and not a days
provision for his soul; he talks of living many years when he had not a day,
nor a night to live in this world: And being thus foolish in his reckoning,
Christ brands him for a fool to all generations, Ver. 20, 21. Thou fool, this
night shall thy soul be required of thee: then whose shall these things be
which thou have provided! So is he that heapeth up treasure for himself, and is
not rich toward God. Every man in the world is a fool, that heaps up treasure
to himself, that adds land to land, and house to house, and heap to heap, and
baggs to baggs, and hundreds to hundreds, Plato seeing one over indulgent to
his body, asked him what he meant to make his prison so strong.
and thousands to thousands, and is not rich toward God. This age is full of
such golden fools, who pamper their bodies, but starve their souls: who trick
and trim up their bodies with Gold, Silver and Silks, whilst their souls are
naked, and ragged, and destitute of all grace and goodness. The Jews have a
story of a foolish woman that took two children to nurse, the one very mean,
deformed, crooked, blind, and not likely to live long: the other a goodly,
lively, lovely, beautiful child, and likely to live long: now this foolish
woman spent all her pains, care, diligence and attendance upon the worst child,
never so much as minding or regarding the best child: this age is full of such
foolish men and women who having two to nurse, their bodies and their souls,
spend their time, their care, labor and pains in making provision for the
flesh, in laying up for their bodies, and in the mean while never regard their
souls, never look after their souls, though they have the beauty of a Deity
upon them, and though they are immortal, and capable of union and communion
with God in grace, and of a blessed fruition of God in glory. Surely no fools
to these fools.

etc. A fool will not leave his folly: nay you shall sooner beat a fool to
death then you shall beat him off from his folly, Prove. 27.22. Solomon in this
place alludeth to one kind of grinding which in old time the people were
accustomed to, which was to put their parched corn into a mortar, and to beat
it unto powder.
Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a pestell, yet
will not his foolishness depart from him: The husk does not stick so close to
the grain of corn, as folly does to the heart of a fool: there is a possibility
of severing the husk from the flower by beating; but there is no possibility of
severing a fool from his folly. You see it in Pharaoh, who though he was often
in Gods mortar, yet he could not be severed from his folly; nay, he did choose
rather to be beaten to death; and to see his friends relations, favorites,
followers, subjects, and soldiers, with their first born, beaten to death
before his eyes, rather the he would leave his folly. And such a fool was King
Ahaz, who when God had him in the mortar, and threatened to beat him and his
people to death, yet then in his distress he sinned more against the Lord; 2 Chronicles. 28.22. and therefore for his obstinacy, obdurateness and
irreclaimableness, he is branded and marked with a black coal by the Lord to
all posterity, They were like those Bears in Pliny, that could not be stirred
with the sharpest prickles.
This is that King Ahaz. And such spiritual fools are all ungodly persons; let
God frown, chide, strike, reprove, correct, yet they will not turn from the
evil of their doings: they will rather be consumed and destroyed, then they
will be amended or reformed. Jer. 5.3. O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the
truth? thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou have consumed
them, but they have refused to receive correction: See Ez. 22.18. Jer. 2.30,
31. Chapter 19. ult. Amos 4.4.13. Isa. 26.10, 11. 2 Pet. 2.22.
they have made their faces harder then a rock; they have refused to return. no
smart nor grief, no calamities nor miseries can turn obstinate fools from their
impieties, Jer. 6.29. The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed of the fire;
the Founder melts in vain; (or in vain melting melts he, trying tries he)
for the wicked are not plucked away. All the cost and charge that God has been
at, all the pains and labor that he has taken to sever these wicked ones from
their wickedness was lost; they would not be refined nor reformed. After Gods
greatest severity, a spiritual fool will return to his iniquity, Prove. 26.11.
As a dog returns to his vomit, so a fool returns to his folly, or iterateth
his folly. It is true, the comparison is homely, but good enough for those
fools to whom it is applied. Spiritual fools sometimes vomit up their sins when
they are under terrors of conscience, or under the afflicting hand of God, or
upon a dying bed: but still retain a disposition and purpose to return to them
again. As some say, the Serpent vomits up his poison when he goes to drink, and
then takes it in again. Foolish souls say to their lusts, as Abraham to his
servants, Genesis 22.5. Abide you here, and I will go yonder and come again to
you. Whatever becomes of their souls, they are resolved to keep close to their
sins, Isa. 1.5. And as Aesops foolish fishes leaped out of the warm water into
the burning fire for ease: So these poor fools will rather adventure a burning
in hell: then they will attempt a turning from their folly.

Eighthly, Natural fools make the simplest and unhappiest The foolish Indians
prefer every toy and trifle above their mines of Gold.
things of greatest worth and value for a feather, a ribbon, a toy, a trifle; a
house to live in, for a house of clay, or a house of Cards: and like Glaucus a
foolish Captain who changed with Diomedes his Armor of Gold for Dioemedes his
armor of brass. All unholy persons are spiritual fools; they will exchange
spirituals for carnals, and eternals for temporals; they will exchange God,
Christ, the Gospel, heaven and their souls for a lust, for the world, nay, for
a little of the worlds smiles, pleasures, or profits, Mat. 16.26. and well may
he lay claim to a Boat-swains place in Barkleys ship of fools, that will
exchange his soul, and his soul concernments for the toys and trifles of this
world.

Now do you think, that God who has within himself all the wisdom of Angels,
of men, and universal nature, that he who has all glory, all dignity, all
riches, all treasures, all pleasures, all comforts, all delights, all joys,
all beatitudes in himself; That that God who is a super-substantial substance,
and understanding not to be understood, a word never to be spoken, Dionys.
Areop. de divin. nom. cap. 1.
that he will have everlasting fellowship and communion with fools! that a God
whose wisdom is infinite and unsearchable, will ever debase himself so as to
have his royal Palace filled with fools, as to make those his companions in
heaven, that he can take no pleasure in on earth! Eccles. 5.4. he has no
pleasure in fools. The wise God would not have his children keep company with
fools, Prove. 14.7. Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest
not in him the lips of knowledge: and will he keep company with them himself?
Surely no. God has given it under his own hand, that such shall not tarry in
his sight, Psalm. 5.5. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight (or as the
Hebrew has it, before thine eyes) thou hate all workers of iniquity. God
will never admit fools to be his favorites: he will at last shut the door of
glory against them, Mat. 25.4. -- 13.

take these for a taste, Lev. 10.10. Lev. 13.46. Numb. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Exodus
12.48. Lev. 22.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. As often, said One, as I have been among wicked
men, I return home less a man then I was before. The Docrenean well will quench
a burning torch; so will bad company the most burning and most shining
Christians, as you see in Joseph and Peter. Psalm. 106.35. when they were
mingled among the Heathen, they quickly learn, their works. Psa. 119.115.
And that ye may put difference between holy and unholy, and between unclean
and clean, Ezekiel. 44.23. And they shall teach my people the difference between
the holy and profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the
clean. And because the Priests did not improve their power and interest to
preserve the things of God from profaning and polluting, the Lord was very
much offended and provoked. Ezekiel. 22.26. Her Priests have violated my Law, and
have profaned mine holy things; they have put no difference between the holy
and profane, neither have they showed difference between the unclean and the
clean, and have hid their eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.
And in Chap. 44.7, 8. God sadly complains that they brought into his Sanctuary
strangers uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh: and prohibits such
from entering into his Sanctuary, ver. 9. Thus says the Lord God, No stranger
uncircumcised in heart nor uncircumcised in flesh shall enter into my
Sanctuary, of any stranger that is among the children of Israel. God expects
that faithful teachers should put a difference between person and person,
between the holy and profane, between the clean and the unclean in all holy
administrations. Jerem. 15.19. Therefore thus says the Lord, If thou take
forth the precious from the vile, then thou shall be as my mouth; let them
return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. Now certainly if under the
Ceremonial Law natural uncleanness did exclude and shut out the Israelites from
a participation in holy things, then certainly moral uncleanness may justly
exclude and shut out Christians from a participation in holy things under the
Gospel, Mat. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again
and rent you. Holy things are too precious to be spent and spilt upon swinish
sinners. Gospel administrations are precious pearls that must not be given to
swine, 2 Cor. 6.17. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate,
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you.
Profane, scandalous, blind and ignorant persons are very unclean things, and
from them we must come out; as we would be in with God, we must be out with
them: we must reject them as we would have God to receive us, 2 Timothy 3.5.
Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn away.
Our Savior Christ hied him to the wilderness amongst the beasts, and carried
his Disciples with him, holding their fellowship to be less hurtful and
dangerous: It is better to live among beasts, then to live among men of beastly
principles and beastly practices. Now there are ten sorts of persons that
Christians must turn from, that they must have no intimate, no special
communion with in this world:

Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. We should not close with them that have not closed with
Christ; nor give our selves up to them who have not given up themselves to
Christ. Every unbeliever is a condemned person: the Law has cast him, John
3.18.
the Gospel has cast him, and his own conscience has cast him; and what
sacred communion, what delightful fellowship can believers have with condemned
persons! Ver. 36.
Every Unbeliever is under the wrath of the great God; he is under that wrath
that he can neither avoid nor abide; and what communion can such have who are
under love, with those that are under wrath. Every unbeliever makes God a Liar.
1 John 5.10.
And what children will have communion with such who every day give their
Father the Lie to his very face! Every unbeliever does practically say, Tush
there is no such loveliness, or comeliness, there is no such beauty or glory,
there is no such fullness or sweetness, there is no such goodness or
graciousness in Jesus as men would make us believe: and what is this but to
give God the Lie? Tus^ there is no such favor, there is no such peace, there
is no such pardon, there is no such Righteousness, there is no such Grace,
there is no such glory to be reaped by Christ as God and men would persuade us;
and what is this, but to tell God he lies to his very teeth? And what ingenuous
child can take pleasure in such who are still a spitting in his Fathers face!
Every unbeliever is a disobedient person, Numb. 14.11. Heb. 11.31. (...). 1 Timothy 5.8. 2 Cor 6.14, 15. 1 Cor. 14.23. ult. 2 Timothy 3.1.6.
and therefore unbelievers and disobedient are in the Greek expressed by one
word; and what communion can obedient children have with those that are
disobedient and rebellious! Every unbeliever is a Pagan, a Heathen in the
Scripture dialect; and what communion can those who are of the household of
faith have with Pagans and Heathens! Every unbeliever is a Traitor, he commits
Treason daily against the Crown and dignity of heaven; and what Loyal Subjects
will hold communion with Traitors! Unbelievers are the greatest Robbers, they
rob God of his declarative glory (though they cannot rob him of his Essential
glory) they rob h m of the glory of his truth and faithfulness; as if he would
falsify the word that is gone out of his mouth: as if he were yea and nay; and
as if his credit was so low and contemptibe, that he must needs run a hazard
that shall trust to him, or roll himself upon him. They rob him of the glory of
his goodness and mercy, as if there were any sins too great for him to pardon;
or any mercy too great for him to give, or any wrath too great for him to
divert, or any debt too great for him to satisfy. They rob him of the glory of
his omnipotency and alsufficiency, as if there were something too hard for a
God; now what communion can the people of God have with Robbers? with the
greatest Robbers, with the worst of Robbers; and yet such are all unbelievers.
And therefore let no unbelievers mutter or murmur when the door

Secondly, Such as have a form, a picture, a mask, Solon made a Law, that the
Son should not be bound to relieve his Father when he was old, unless he had
set him in his youth to some calling. Plutarch in the life of ^olon.
a Tim. 3.5.

Thirdly, Such as walk disorderly, that live either without a calling, or idly
and negligently in their calling: these make Religion odious, by making
Religion a mask for their idleness and laziness, 2 These. 3.6. Now we command
you, Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your
selves from every Brother that walks disorderly Now who they are that walk
dissorderly, you may see in verse 11. For we hear that there are some which
walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but are busy bodies. Such
vagrant Professors that live idely, that will have an ore in every man's boat, a
sickle in every man's harvest, a curious eye upon every man's way and work, are
to be shut out of the communion of Christians, and to be shunned as a man would
shun a Serpent, an ill Air, a contagious disease, or as the Seaman shuns rocks
and sands and shelfs. It was a great vanity in Dionysius that would needs be
the best Poet; and in Caligula that would needs be the best Orator; and in Nero
that would needs be the best Fiddler; and so became the three worst Princes,
minding more other men's business then their own callings; so it is a very great
vanity in many professors to mind more other men's business then their own; from
the society of such, Saints must withdraw. No man is too Noble to have a
calling; if Iron had reason, it would choose rather to be used in Labor then to
grow rusty in a corner. By Mahomets Law the Grand Turk himself was to be of
some Trade. The hour of Idleness is the hour of temptation; an Idle person is
the Devils Tennis-ball tossed by him at his pleasure. God ordained the neck of
the consecrated Ass should be broken ( Exodus 13.13.) instead of sacrificing
him; peradventure because that creature has ever been the Heroglyphick of
sloth and laziness. Among the Egyptians Idleness was a capital crime. Says
Diphilus.
Among the Lucans he that lent money to an Idle person, was to lose it. Among
the Corinthians Idle persons were delivered to the Carnifex. By Solons Law Idle
persons were to suffer death. The Ancients call Idleness the burial of a living
man. And Seneca had rather be sick, then idle. Now shall Nature do more then
Grace? Shall poor blind Heathens be so severe against Idle persons; and shall
Christians embrace them? Shall they not rather turn their backs upon them, and
have no communion with them, who think themselves too great, or too good to
hold the Plough!

A man that is an heretic, after the first and second Admonition reject. A
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump: and what leaven is more infections then
that of heresy and error! 2 John 9, 10. Whosoever transgresses and abides
not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God: he that abides in the doctrine of
Christ (...) has both the Father and the Son. If there come any (...) you, and
bring not this doctrine, receive him (...) in^^ your house, neither bid him God
speed. You must have nothing to do with them, who have nothing to do with God;
1 John 2.22, 23, 24, 25. Col. 2.18, 19. Euse. l. 3. c. 25. Lev. 13.44.
your house must be too hot to hold him who holds not fast to foundation
truths, who holds not close to Christ the head. Eusebius reports of John the
Evangelist, that he would not suffer Corinthus the Heretic in the same Bath
with him, lest some Judgment should abide them both; He that had the Leprosy
in his head, was to be pronounced utterly unclean: the breath of the erroneous
is more dangerous and infectious then the breath of Lepers: for one infects but
the body, but the other infects the soul, and therefore ought more carefully to
be avoided. An erroneous mind is as odious to God as a vicious life; and why
should it not be so to us also? Certainly we should shun the society of
erroneous persons as we should shun a Serpent in the way, or poison in our
meat, 1 Timothy 6.5. Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of
the truth, supposing that gain is godliness: from such withraw thy self: Or as
the Greek word (...) signifies, stand off, keep at a distance, as you would
from one that has an infectious disease; or as Seamen stand off from rocks,
or from a Lee-shore. It is recorded by Theodoret, that when Lucius an Arrian
Bishop came and preached amongst the Antiochians his erroneous doctrines, the
people went out of the Congregation, Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 20.
and would not so much as lend an ear to him. In these days there are many old
errors new vampt, and old Jezebels (old harlots) new painted. The best way is
not to lend an ear to them, 2 Kings 8.30.36.
but to serve them as they served Jezebel: they gave her no quarter, but cast
her down, and trod her under foot. Errors about the foundation are like the
Jerusalem Artichoaks which overrun all the ground where they are planted, and
choke the very heart of it. And therefore to be abhorred, avoided, and shunned
as a man would shun hell it self. Who but a fool or mad man would exchange one
old piece of gold for a hundred n^w counters? and what then shall we think of
those who willingly and readily exchange old tried truths for new (...)! The
society of such must be shunned.

Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avod them. Mark them, the
Greek word (...) signifies such a marking as a watchman uses that stands on a
Watch-Towre to descry an approaching enemy. The Turks pray daily that the
divisions among Christians may be hightned, that so they may be the sooner
^^ined and undone.
Ah, with what a wary, with what a watchful, with what a curious, with what a
jealous, with what a serious, with what a diligent eye does the watchman watch
all the motions, turnings and windings of the approachiny enemy! with such an
eye we should mark them that cause divisions. And avoid them, the Greek word
(...) signifies a studious careful declining of them: A man must decline and
shun them, as he would decline and shun such persons or things that are most
pernicious, dangerous or infectious to him. Divisions are a dishonor to
Christ, a reproach to Christians, a blot upon profession, a block in the way of
the weak, and a sword in the hand of the wicked; they are Satan's Engines and an
inlet to all destruction and confusion. And therefore the Authors of them are
to be shunned and avoided.

But now I have written unto you, (...), not to be joined, mixed, or mingled
with them, etc. Prove. 9.6. Psalm. 15.4. Ephesians. 5.7. Psalm. 119.115. Prove. 4.14,
15.
not to keep company; if any man that is called Brother, be a fornicator, or
covetous, or an Idolater, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with
such a one no not to eat: with such a Brother who belies his profession, with
such a Brother whose course and conversation contradicts his profession, we
must not hold Christian communion. Certainly I may not have fellowship with him
at the Lords Table, whom I may not have fellowship with at my own Table, Ephesians.
5.11. Have no fellowship with unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove
them, Acts 2.40. Save your selves from this untoward generation: Wicked company
is very dangerous and infectious, 1 Cor. 15.33. Evil communication corrupts
good manners. As he that walks in the Sun will be tanned, and he that
touches pitch will be defiled; so he that associateth himself with the wicked
will be tainted and polluted; Guilt or grief is all you shall gain by bad
company, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. witness Lot, David, Joseph, Psalm. 120.7, 8. Genesis 42.15,
16. Ma^k 14.66. ult. 1 Kings 22.8. 2 Chronicles. 24.17, 18.
and Pe^er. By bad company Christians come to lose much of the sweetness,
seriousness, goodness and graciousness of their spirits. Gold though the
noblest metal, loses of its luster by being continually worn in the same
purse with Silver. Familiarity with vain persons has much worn off the
spiritual luster, beauty and glory that has been upon many Christians. Bad
company will prove a very great hinderance to you in your Christian course,
Psalm 119.115. Away from me ye wicked, for I will keep the commandments of my
God. I cannot keep my Gods commands whilst I keep your company; I shall never
do my duty till I abandon your Society. Divine commands will never lie close
and warm upon my heart, so long as I give you my hand. How hard is it to keep
the commandment of labor among the slothful, or the commandment of diligence
among the negligent, or that of liberality among the covetous, or that of
humility among the Ambitious, or that of love among the malicious, or that of
union among the contentious, or that of chastity among the lascivious, or that
of righteousness among the unrighteous, or that of faithfulness among the
unfaithful, or that of fruitfulness amongst the unfruitful, or that of
thankfulness among the unthankful, or that of faith among the doubtful? etc.
But,

Seventhly, Matthew. 16.6.11, 12. Gal. 1.8. Mat. 7 15.13. De. 13.1, 2, 3. Titus
10.11.
A seventh sort of persons that Christians must have no intimate, no special
communion with, is false Prophets, false Teachers. They are not to give such
any house room, 2 John 10.11. nor heart room, Mat. 24, 23, 24.26 They are to
shun them and avoid them, Romans 16.17. It is not safe for a Christian to hear
them or to have any communion or fellowship with them. Aristotle writes of a
certain Bird called (Capri-mulgus) a Goat-Sucker, Lib. de Animal.
which uses to come flying on the Goats, and suck them, and upon that their
milk dries up, and they grow blind. Ah how many a seeing man has been made
blind, and how many hopeful thriving Christians have had all their springs of
love, of life, of sweetness and goodness dried up in them by the slights,
deceits, and insinuations of false Teachers! False Prophets have their
pithanology, their good words and fair speeches, and subtle devices whereby
they blind many souls, and dry up all the spiritual milk and moisture that is
in them and therefore they are to be shunned and avoided. But,

The Greek word (...) is very significant, for it denotes such a perturbation
of the mind, that he who is affected therewith, seeks up and down where he may
hide himself for shame.
2 These. 3.14. And if any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man,
and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed, or that he may turn into
himself, as it is in the Orignal. Such as are refractory, must be noted with a
brand of infamy; such must be infamous in your eye who look with an eye of
contumacy upon any command, or institution of Christ. The Greek word
(Semeiousthai,) signifies to note him so as to make a sign (as it were) of him;
or to mark him so as to put him to the blush, to put him to shame. The
obstinate, the refractory person should be a marked person, you must set a
cross upon him, that all may know him, and shun him; the Assemblies of the
Saints are honorable, and refractory Christians are to be shut out of them;
Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. Moreover, if thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go
and t^ll him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou
have gained thy Brother. But if he will not hear thee, (if he be refractory)
then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word may be established; And if he shall neglect to hear them,
tell it unto the Church: but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto
thee as an heathen man, and a Publican. He that shall be refractory under
private and public admonition, is to be shut out from Church Communion: He
that to small faults shall add contumacy, is to be cut off from the Saints
Society. We must turn our backs upon him that turns his back upon the Church.
As we would keep our selves untainted, as we would preserve the Church from
being infected, as we would not have the name of God blasphemed, and as we
would have the refractory Christian ashamed and humbled, we must neither have
Sacred nor Civil Society with him.

A ninth sort of persons that Christians must have no intimate, Forsake the
foolish, and live; and go in the way of understanding. Chap. 14.7. Go from the
presence of a foolish man, Who would hang a Jewel in a Swines ear, or sow
precious seed among craggy Rocks, or put sweet liquor into a musty vessel? etc.
when thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge. Chap. 23.9. Speak not
in the ears of a fool: for he will despise the wisdom of thy words. There is no
profit, no pleasure, no delight to be had in the society of fools. Fools are
neither capable of doing good, nor of receiving good: and therefore what should
good souls do among such! A fool has neither an ear to hear, nor an eye to
see, nor a heart to understand, nor a memory to retain, nor a will to choose,
nor affections to embrace any thing that is good. And therefore their company
is to be shunned and avoided. The society of fools is as dangerous as it is
vexations. Proverbs 13.20. He that walks with wise men shall be wise: but a
companion of fools shall be destroyed. The Hebrew word (Jeroange) that is here
used, signifies to be broken: yea, to be broken as sometimes an Army is broken
by some fierce and sudden surprizal; a companion of fools shall be broken in
his credit, in his estate, in his name, in his reputation; yea, in his very
wits, for nothing contributes so much to make a man a fool as the company of
fools.

The tenth and last sort of persons that Christians must as scorn the Saints,
Quintinus the Libertine was a great scoffer and scorner of the Saints; he
called the Apostle Paul a broken vessel; John a foolish youth, Peter a denyer
of God; and Matthew an usurer, etc. Calvin.
and scorn Religion, and scorn Profession; such who scorn every way of Christ,
and every institution of Christ, Prove. 9.8. Reprove not a scorner lest he hate
thee: Wise and gracious reproofs are pearls that are not to be cast before
scorners. Now certainly, if I may not reprove scorners, then I may not keep
company with scorners, Prove. 22.10. Cast out the scorner, and contention shall
go out, yea strife and reproach shall cease. The scorner must be cast out of
your family, and out of your company. Strife and contention, shame and reproach
are the scorners attendants, and therefore he that would be rid of them, must
cast out him. The Hebrew word (Geresh) here translated cast out, signifies not
simply to eject or cast out: but to cast out or drive out, as God did drive
Adam out of Paradise, Genesis 3.24. for the word is the same; and this God did as
the Rabbis observe, with violence and displeasure. So must the scorner be cast
out, or drove out. Look as God did drive out the Amorite and the Cananite, and
the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite before his
people, Exodus 34.11. So must the scorner be driven out of the society of the
Saints; for the Hebrew word is the same in both places. Look as Sarah would
have Abraham to cast out the bondwoman and her Son, Genesis 21.10. so must the
scorner be cast out of the company of the Saints; the word is still the same.
Look as the Sea casts up mire and dirt, Isa. 57.10. so should Christians cast
out scorners from among them, the word being still the same. The scorner
construes every thing to the worst; he envies those that excel him; he
disdains those that are below him; he is never contented, never satisfied, he
is still a quarrelling, still a fretting, and still a perplexing of himself and
others; and therefore you must cast him out with scoffing Ismael, or the house
will be too hot to hold you. Cast out the firebrand, and the fire goes out;
cast out Jonah, and the storm shall cease; cast out the bondwoman, and her
scornful son, and all will be quiet: David's blessed man is desribed by this,
Psalm 1.1.
that he fits not in the seat of the scornful. Scorners are no companions for
blessed men; Of all men the blessed man will never choose the scorner for his
Pue-fellow. God himself scorns the scorner, Prove. 3.34. Surely he scorneth the
scorner, etc. of all men in the world God casts the greatest contempt and scorn
upon scorners, and therefore why should we make such our bosom Associates? And
thus you see the several sorts of persons that God has shut out from the
communion of his people: Well Christians, remember this, dead stones must not
be laid in a living Temple: No stones but hewn stones were to be brought and
laid in the building of Solomon's Temple, 1 Kings 5.15, 16, 17, 18. 2 Chronicles. 2.
Chap. 2.18. 1 Pet. 2 5. 2 Chronicles. 35.
which was a Type of the Church of Christ in Gospel days: Certainly such
stones, such souls as are not hewn by the word and spirit, are not fit to be
laid in Christ's building. In Josiahs days when the Passover was kept, there
were Porters at every gate of Jerusalem, that no unclean or uncircumcised ones
might enter. And the English Annotations on Rev. 21.27. do say, that in the
last Church on earth, discipline in likelihood shall be so strictly executed,
that no profane person shall be found there, only elect persons so far as men
can Judge. That vain persons are to be shut out from sacred communion with the
people of God, is further evident by the Judgment of many approved Authors. As,

Chrysostom Chrysostom.
says, that the Table of the Lord is that whereon the carcass is laid, and
that we must not suffer chattering Jayes to come thereunto; for only
high-flying Eagles are to feed thereupon. Thereupon the same Author protested,
that he had rather give his life to a murderer then Christ's body to an unworthy
receiver, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 6. Chrysostom in Mat. Hom. 83.
and rather suffer his own blood to be poured out like water, then to tender
Christ's blessed blood to a base liver. And again, Church Officers (says he)
are to keep the Sacrament pure, as a man would keep a pleasant spring clean
whereat he uses to drink, not letting the feet of filthy beasts and Swine to
puddle it. The same Author further says, Chrysostom in Epist. ad Heb. Hom. 17.
that in the Primitive times when ever tht Sacrament was Administered; a Deacon
stood up, and cried in the open Assembly, Holy things to holy men, holy things
to holy men, thereby debarring all others that were unholy, and raising the
hearts of the holy.

Justin Martyr Justin Martyr.
who was about the year after Christ 150. he lived not above thirty years after
St. John, he in his Apology (to Antoninus the Emperor) for Christians, writes
thus, In our Assemblies we admit none to the Lords Supper, but such as being
baptized continue in professing the true faith, and in leading such lives as
Christ has taught. There were three things, says this Author, that were
required of them that were to be received to the Sacrament, A New Birth; 2.
Soundness in Faith; 3. A promise to live well.

Austin Austin.
well observes, That as many think the eating of an Apple was but a small sin;
So many think that the eating of the Sacrament is but a small sin: But as many
horrid sins were wrapped up in that, so are there many wrapped up in this: 1. Here
is pride; else no man in his wickedness would presume to come to the Lords
Table 2. Here is Rebellion and Treason against the Crown and dignity of Christ,
Romans 2.22.
their hands and lips adore him (as Judas his did) but their hearts and lives
abhor him. 3. Here is Theft, and Sacrilege; now if to take away the Communion
cup be such a high offense, 1 Cor. 11.27.29.
such horrid sacrilege; what is it then to take the Bread and Wine set apart
and sanctified for a holy use by the Lord himself? 4. Here is Murder, the worst
murder, the greatest murder, the cruelest murder; thou killest thy self, thy
soul, and as much as in thee lies, Gods dearest Son. Now certainly, in some
respects this sin is a greater sin then Adams was: For 1. Adams Eating was
against a Creator, but thine is against a Redeemer: now it is more to redeem a
soul, then to create a world. 2. His was against the word of the Lord, thine
against the blood of the Lord. 3. His struck at the Covenant of Works, thine at
the Covenant of Grace. 4. He eat but once, but thou eatest often.

Yea, Aquinas Aquinas.
says, the Majesty of Church Discipline should never suffer this, to let open
and known offenders presume to come to the Table of the Lord.

It was a worthy saying of Bilson an approved Author, Suppose any man (says
he) be he a Prince, Bilsons Christian Subject. par. 3. page 63. 64, 74, etc. 52.
if he will not submit himself to the precepts of Christ, but wilfully maintain
either heresy or open impurity, the Ministers are to admonish him what danger
from God is at the door; and if he impenitently persist, they must not suffer
him to communicate either in divine prayer, or any holy mysteries among the
people of God; but wholly to be excluded the Congregation. Again, not only the
lack of the word and Sacraments (says the same Author) but the abuse of either
greatly hazards the weal of the whole Church: yea, casting holy things to
dogs, etc. procures a dreadful doom as well to consenters as presumers, it
being the way to turn the house of God into a den of Theives, if profane ones
be allowed to defile the mysteries and Assemblies of the faithful.

I, said Calvin, Calvin.
will sooner die then this hand of mine shall give the things of God to the
contemners of God.

Mr. Rutherford Rutherford.
(that champion for Presbytery) in his divine right of Church Government, page
520, says that they are copartners with the wicked who dispense the bread to
them who are knowingly dead in sins. I might multiply many others: but let
these suffice: for a close, let me only say, How the Father can be guiltless of
the death of his child, that gives him poison, to drink, with this Caution,
that he tells him it is poison I cannot see. Josephus reports of some that
profanely searched the sepulchers of the Saints, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 12, 13.
and l. 16. cap. 11.
supposing to find some treasures there, but God made fire to rise out of the
earth that devoured them on a sudden. Now if Gods wrath like fire breaks forth
to consume such as wrong but the sepulchers of his Saints, etc. Oh then with
what flames of fury will God burn up such as abuse not only the Sacrament of
his Son, but his Son himself? It was a very great wickededness in Julian to
throw his blood in the face of Christ; but for a wicked Communicant to take
Christ's own blood as it were running from his heart, and to throw it into he
face of Christ, is most abominable and damnable. By all that has been spoken,
you clearly see, that unholy persons are to b^ shut out of the special
communion of Saints here on earth: and therefore certainly the Lord will never
suffer such to have communion with him in heaven; it will not stand with the
holiness and purity of God to have fellowship with such in the kingdom of
glory, whom he would not have his people have fellowship with in the kingdom of
grace.

Unholy persons are throughout the Scriptures branded to their everlasting
contempt) with the worst Appellations.
that without holiness on earth, no man shall ever come to a bl^ssed vision or
fruition of God in heaven, is this, The Scripture that speaks no Treason,
styles unholy persons beasts, yea, the worst of beasts: and what should such do
in heaven. Unholy persons are the most dangerous, and the most unruly pieces in
the world, and therefore are emblemized by Lions, Psalm 22.21. and they are
cruel: by Bears, and they are savage, Isa. 11.7. by Dragons, and they are
hideous, Ezekiel. 29.3. by Wolves, and they are ravenous, Ezekiel. 22.27. by dogs,
and they are snarling, Rev. 22.15. by Vipers and Scorpions, and they are
stinging, Mat. 12.34. Ezekiel. 2.6. by Spiders and Cockatrices, and they are
poisoning, Isa. 59.5. by swine, and they are still gruntling, Mat. 7.6. No man
in this world is more like another, It was wont to be a trial whither land
belonged to England or Ireland, by putting in Toads or Snakes, etc. into it; if
they lived there, it was concluded that the land belonged to England; if they
died, to Ireland.
then the Epicure is like a Swine; the fraudulent person a Fox; the lustful
person a Goat; the back-biter a barking Curr; the slanderer an Asp; the
oppressor a Wolf; the Persecutor a Tiger; the Seducer a Serpent. Certainly the
Irish Air will sooner brook Toads and Snakes and Serpents to live therein, then
heaven will brook such beasts as unholy souls are to live there. Surely, God
and Christ, and the Spirit, and Angels, and the Spirits of just men made
perfect are not so in love with Dogs and Swine, etc. as to put them into their
bosoms, or make them their companions. Heaven is a place of too great state to
admit such vermin to inhabit there. When Cyneas the Ambassador of Pyrrhus
after his return from Rome, was asked by his Master what he thought of the City
and State; he answered and said, that it seemed to him to be Respublica Regum,
a State of none but great Statesmen, and a Commonwealth of Kings. Such is
heaven, it is no other State then a Parliament of Emperors, a Commonwealth of
Kings. There is not a soul in heaven under the degree of a King, Rev 6.1. and
every King there has a Robe of honor upon his back, a golden Scepter in his
hand, and a glorious Crown upon his head: And do you think that it will stand
with the State of heaven, or with the State of this Commonwealth of Kings to
admit such vermin as as unholy persons are, to be of that noble society,
surely no? God has long since resolved upon it, that no unclean beasts shall
enter into heaven, that no dirty dogs shall ever trample upon that golden
pavement: All in heaven are holy, the Angels holy, the Saints holy, the
Patriarchs holy, the Prophets holy, the Apostles holy, the Martyrs holy, but
the Lord himself above all is most glorious in holiness, and therefore all
those holy ones do as it were in a divine Anthem sing and say, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God Almighty, Rev. 21. ult. There are no Owls in Creet, nor no wild
beasts in Lebanon.
heaven and earth are full of the Majesty of thy glory. Now certainly, it would
be a hell to these holy ones to have unholy wretches to be their companions.
When the holy Angels fell from their holiness, heaven was so holy that it
spewed them out, Isaiah 6.3.
as once Canaan did its (unholy) inhabitants; and therefore certainly there
will be no room in heaven for such filthy beasts as unholy persons are. Well,
remember this, that all those stinging Expressions and Appellations which
disgrace and vilify unholy persons, they were inspired by a holy spirit, and
penned by holy Secretaries and enrolled in his holy word, and published by his
holy messengers, and all by his holy appointment, who as he is greater then the
greatest, and wiser then the wisest, and better then the best: Lev. 18.28.
So he is too pure and too holy to eat the words that are gone out of his
mouth, or to deny or unsay what he has spoken, or not to maintain the truth
thereof against all gainsayers. It is prophesied that when the Church shall be
restored to her purity and glory, such beasts shall not be there, Isa. 35.9.
Ezekiel. 28.24. The Majesty of Church Discipline shall be such as shall keep out
all such beasts. Jerusalem above is too glorious a habitation for beasts, or
for men of beastly spirits, or beastly principles, or beastly practices. The
City of the great God was never built for beasts. A wilderness and not a
Paradise is fittest for beasts.

Exodus 23.32. Chap. 34.12. If you would see the greatness and dangerousness of
this sin, then read Ezra 10. and 1 Kings 11. with Exo. 34.14, 15, 16. Judge.
3.6, 7, 8. When Dionysius the elder Tyrant of Syracusa asked Aristides a
Locrian his good will to marry his daughter; I had rather see my daughter dead
(said he) then married unto a Tyrant. Plutarch in the life of Timoleon. The
Application is easy.
is this God; would not have his holy ones in this world to be yoked in
marriage with unholy ones, and therefore certainly he will never suffer such to
be yoked to himself to all eternity. That God would not have his righteous
people to be yoked in marriage with the unrighteous, is most evident by these
Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 7.3.6. Neither shall thou make marriages with them: thy
daughter thou shall not give to his son, nor his daughter shall thou take unto
thy Son: For thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God: the Lord thy God
has chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people that are
upon the face of the earth. Ezra 9.12. Now therefore give not your daughters
unto their sons, neither take their daughters unto your sons. But did they keep
this commandment of the Lord? No, as you may see in the second verse of that
chapter: For they have taken of their daughters for themselves, and for their
sons: so that the holy seed have mingled themselves with the people of those
lands; yea, the hand of the Princes and Rulers have been chief in this
trespass. But how did this operate upon good Ezra! that you may see in the
third verse, And when I heard this thing, I rent my garment and my mantle, and
plucked off the hair of my head, and of my beard, and sat down astonished. Oh the
sorrow, the grief, the perplexity, the holy passion, the indignation, the
amazement, the astonishment that this abomination begot in the heart of good
Ezra! The like effect this sin had upon the heart of good Nehemiah, as you may
see in that remarkable text, Neh. 13.23, 24, 25. compared with Chapter 10.29, 30.
So in 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for
what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion
has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? or what
part has he that believes with an infidel? It is an evil thing, a dangerous
thing to be yoked to any who have neither skill nor will to bear the yoke of
Christ. Under the Law an Ox and an Ass might not be yoked or coupled together,
Deuteronomy. 22.10. (and to this the Apostle alludes as some judge) God would not have
righteous souls to be yoked in marriage with those that are unrighteous: a
gracious soul were better be married to a quartern ague then to an ungracious
wife. Proverbs 12.4.
A virtuous wife is a crown to her husband: she is the life of life: if thou
art a man of holiness, thou must look more for a portion of grace in a wife, 1
Cor 7.39.
then for a portion of gold with a wife: thou must look more after
righteousness then riches: more after piety then money: more after what
inheritance she has in heaven, then what possessions she has on earth: more
at what interest she has in Christ, then at what interest she has in
creatures; more at her being new born, then at her being high born; more at her
being good, then at all her worldly goods. If money makes the match, and she be
good enough, that has but goods enough, thou shall be sure to have hell enough
with such a wife. In thy choice to err but once is to be undone for ever, at
least as to the comforts and contentments of thy life: once blessed or cursed must
be for ever so: Men have not leave to choose or change often. By what has been
said, it is most evident that God would not have the holy seed to mingle or
marry with the unholy. And do you think that a holy God will mingle and marry
with such in heaven, that he would not have his people to mingle or marry with
on earth? surely no. Or do you think that that God that would not in the Law
have an Ox and an Ass plough together that he will be yoked to such wretches
(may I say to such Asses) whose ungodliness has debased them below the very Ox
and Ass! Isa. 1.3. Surely no.

The tenth and last Argument to prove that without real etc. is this. Unholy
persons are adjudged, doomed and sentenced to another place, viz. to hell,
Matthew 11.23. Chapter 23.15.33. The Hebrew word Sh^ol has several significations;
Sometimes it signifies the grave, sometimes it signifies extraordinary great
anguishes and distresses; and sometimes it signifies hell or the place of the
damned, as here, and as in Job 11.8. and Prove. 15.1^.
Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the Nations that
forget God. In the Hebrew there are two into's: into, into Hell, that is, the
wicked shall be turned into the nether most hell, into the lowest and darkest
dungeon of Hell: They shall be turned into hell, that is, they shall be
certainly turned into hell; they shall be vehemently, forcibly turned into
hell: God will as it were with both hands thrust them into hell. The wicked
shall from hell to judgment, and from judgment they shall be turned with a
witness into hell. The Photinians hold that there is no hell, and many now
adays say there is no hell but what a man finds in his own conscience: and
multitudes with Caesar do think that all that is spoken of hell, is false and
fabulous: They will not believe that there is a hell, till they come to feel
themselves in hell, till they find everlasting flames about their ears. They
are sentenced to the fire, to everlasting fire, they are doomed to fire and
brimstone, Mat. 25.41. Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, Depart
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. This terrible sentence breaths out nothing but fire and brimstone,
terror and horror, dread and woe. The last words that ever Christ will speak in
this world, will be the most tormenting, and amazing, the most killing and
damning, the most stinging and wounding. Depart from me, there is rejection:
Pack, be gone, get you out of my fight, let me never see your faces more. It was
a heavy doom that was past upon Nebuchadnezzar, that he should be driven from
the society of men, Daniel 4.25.
and in an extremity of a sottish melancholy spend his time amongst the beasts
of the field: but that was nothing to this soul-killing word Depart from me; it
was nothing to men's being cast out of the presence of Christ for ever; The
remembranre of which made one to pray thus, Bernard in Psalm 91.
O Lord, deliver me at the great day from that soul killing word Depart. And
what says another, Sphinx.
This word Depart, the Goats with horror hears.
But this word Come, the Sheep to joy appears.


Ye cursed: there is malediction. But Lord, if we must depart, Oh let us depart
blessed; no, depart ye cursed: You have cursed others, Cursings now are their
hymns, but in hell they shall be their woes, Rev. 16.9.11.21.
and now you shall be cursed your selves; you have delighted your selves in
cursing, and now you shall be cursed for ever. You shall be cursed in your
bodies, and cursed in your souls; you shall be cursed of God, and cursed of
Angels, and cursed of Saints, and cursed of Devils, and cursed of your companions,
yea, you shall curse your very selves, your very souls. You loved not blessing,
and therefore you shall have cursing enough: Depart from me ye cursed: all your
curses, all your malidictions shall at last recoyl upon your own souls. Now
thou cursest every man and thing that stands in the way of thy lusts, and that
crosses thy designs: but at last all the curses of heaven and hell shall meet
in their full power and force upon thee.

But Lord, if we must depart, and depart cursed; Oh let us go into some good
place: no, depart ye into everlasting fire; Therefore they do but dream, who
think and say, that the devil and damned shall be delivered at last. Psalm
11.6. Alsted.
there is the vengeance and continuance of it. You shall go into fire, into
everlasting fire, that will neither consume it self, nor consume you. Eternity
of extremity is the hell of hell. The fire in hell is like that stone in
Arcadia, which being one kindled could never be quenched. If all the fires that
over were in the world were contracted into one fire, how terrible would it be!
yet such a fire would be but as a painted fire upon the wall, to the fire of
hell. The greatest and the hottest fires that ever were on earth are but Ice in
comparison of the fire of hell. If it be so sad a spectacle to behold a
malefactors flesh consumed by peice-meals in a lingering fire: Ah how sad, how
dreadful would it be to experience what it is to lie in unquenchable fire, not
for a day, a month, or a year, or a hundred, or a thousand years, but for ever
and ever! If it were says one, but for a thousand years, I could bear, it but
seeing is for eternity, this amazeth and affrighteth me. I am afraid of hell
says another, because the worm there never dies, Cyril.
and the fire never goes out: It is called unquenchable fire, Mat. 18.8. and
eternal fire in the Epistle of Jude, ver. 7. The torments of the damned are
very grievous for the bitterness of them, but more grievous for the diversity
of them, but most of all grievous for the eternity of them. To lie in
everlasting torments, Dionys. in A ocaleps. 18. fol. 301.
Matthew. 25. ult. goes beyond all the bounds of desperation: To roar for ever
for disquietnesse of heart, to rage for ever for madness of soul, to weep, and
grieve, and gnash the teeth for ever for vexation of spirit, is a misery beyond
all expression. Suetonius reports of Tiberius Caesar, that being petitioned by
a certain offender to hasten his punishment, and to grant him a speedy
dispatch, L^b. 3 cap. 6.
he made him this Answer, Nondum tecum in gratiam redii: Stay Sir, you and I
are not friends yet. So if after a damned soul has been in hell a thousand
years, he should petition the Lord for a speedy death, the Lord would answer
after the same manner, Stay soul, you and I are not yet friends: if after
thousands and millions of thousands of years, the request should be renewed,
the Answer would still be the same. Stay you and I are not yet friends. Wronged
Justice can never be satisfied, and therefore the sinner must be for ever
tormented: the sinner in hell will sin for ever, and therefore he must be
punished for ever. It will not stand with the unspotted Justice and
righteousness of God to cease punishing where the sinner ceases not sinning.
One tells us of some Devout personages, Jo. Pet. Camois. B. of Betty in France
in his draught of eternity, Dan. 3. etc.
who caused those words of the Prophet, Isa. 33.14. Who among us shall dwell
with the devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? to
be written in letters of gold upon their chimney pieces. The fear of
Nebuchadnezzars fiery furnace made men do any thing to avoid it: and shall not
the fear of eternal flames, of everlasting burnings, work men to bewail their
sins, to hate all their bitter sweets, and to lay hold on everlasting strength,
that it may go well with them for ever! I have read of a chaste Virgin, who
being strongly tempted and soliticed by a lewd Russian to uncleanness, after
some disscourse, she called for a pan of burning coals, requesting him for her
sake to hold his finger in them but one hour; he answered, it is an unkind and
unreasonable request: it is truth says she, it is so; but you ask me a more
unkind and unreasonable request, viz. to satisfy you in a thing for which I
shall not only burn an hour, but burn both body and soul in hell fire for ever
and ever. And so overcame the temptation.

But Lord, if I must go into fire, into everlasting fire: Oh let me have some
good company in my misery. No, the Devil and his Angels shall be your
companions. Ah who can conceive or express the misery of cohabitation with
Devils and damned Spirits. Many unholy souls would not live in a house haunted
with evil spirits one night for all the world, and yet they live as if it were
nothing to be billetted with hellish Fiends and furies for ever. If the sight
of a seeming ghost for a moment be such a terror and torment to thee: what will
the horrible sight of devils, and the ghastly sight of the damned be? Job 30.29.
If it was so great an affliction to Job to be a companion to Owls, what will
it be to thee to be a companion to devils? Psalm 120.5.
If it was so great a grief and woe to David to sojourn in Mesech, and to dwell
in the tents of Kedar for a time; what a woe will it be to unholy souls to dwell
with Devils and reprobates for ever? Ah, how will Satan's deformity, antipathy
and cruelty amaze thee, and torment thee! How will the damneds wringing of
hands and gnashing of teeth abash thee and confound thee! How will thine old
companions cursing of thee, the sight of thy near relations in misery with
thee, and devils scornfully insulting over thee, and the never dying worm
feeding perpetually upon thee, be many hells of horror to thee? Had an unholy
soul as many worlds in his hand to give as there be stars in heaven, he would
give them all for a license always to sleep under those pains and torments
that will admit of no intermission or mitigation. In Rev. 21.8. As the Ancients
fain of Endymion, that he got leave of Jupiter always to sleep.
you have a catalogue of that damned crew, of that rout of Reprobates which
shall be your companions for ever: But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the
abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and
all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone: which is the second death. These companions are the devils
lime-twigs; they are his scorpions with which he will torment and whip poor
souls for ever: Such companions will make many hells to meet in one; they will
be the top of the souls torments. Thus I have done with those arguments that
prove the point; Viz. That without holiness there is no happiness, etc.

I come now to the Reasons of the Point, Why is it that Without holiness there
is no happiness; that without holiness on earth, no man shall ever come to a
blessed vision or fruition of God in heaven. Among other Reasons that might be
rendered, you may please to take these.

Isaiah 46.11. Chap. 48.15. Jerem. 32.24. Isaiah 55.11. Zech. 1.6. Dan. 9.12.
Psalm. 119.138.
God is not a man that he should lie, Numb. 23, 19. Also the strength of Israel
will not lie, 1 Samuel 15.29. God will make good every word that is gone out of
his mouth: Men sometimes eat their words as soon as they have spoken them; they
often say and unsay, but so will not the holy One of Israel; that first and
supreme being, that gives being to all others, will certainly give being to all
his promises and threatenings. God himself shall sooner cease to be, then the
word that is gone out of his mouth shall be frustrated. He that is the faithful
witness has said it, that without holiness no man shall see the Lord. And
verily, heaven and earth shall pass away before one jot or one tittle (that is,
before the least letter or particle of a letter) of Gods blessed word shall
pass unfulfilled. Matthew. 5.18.
Gods faithfulness is great. Lam. 3.23. It reaches unto the clouds, Psalm
36.5. He will not suffer his faithfulness to fail, Psalm 89.33. His
faithfulness endures through all Generations, Psalm 119.90. God will never
suffer his faithfulness to be stained or blotted, and therefore he will
undoubtedly make good the word that is gone out of his mouth. I had rather said
Plutarch, that men should say there was never any such person in the world as
Plutarch, then that they should say Plutarch is unfaithful. A man were better
say there is no God, then say that God is unfaithful; a noble spirit can better
bear any charge, then that of being unfaithful; and so can a faithful God.

Secondly, Because real holiness is that great principle The glory of glory
consists in seeing of God. 1 Cor. 13:12. 1 John 3.2. as the hell of hell lies
in the souls everlasting separation from God.
and for a blessed sight and fruition of God, Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall see God. Without a principle of purity, of sanctity,
there is no vision of God in glory: If a man be never so poor, yet if his heart
be pure, God will make a house of his heart, wherein his honor will delight to
dwell; let a man's outside be never so homely, yet if his inside be but cleanly,
God will make it his own habitation. God is for that man, and that man is for
God, that carries about with him a pure heart. Heart-purity makes a man a
darling of heaven. Many affect pure language, pure houses, pure habits, pure
hands, pure air, pure meat, pure drink, pure gestures, etc. who yet for want of
heart-purity shall never see the face of God in glory. Heart-purity speaks a
man eternally happy. Holiness is that noble principle that fits a man for the
happiest sight of God: it makes a man a meet companion for God both here and
herafter; without this principle no man can have communion with God in this
world, much less can he have communion with God in heaven, if this precious
principle of holiness be not seated in his heart; it will not stand with the
holiness of God, to have any thing to do with those that have no principles of
holiness in them: It is a principle of holiness that fits a man for the
service of God, that fits a man for fellowship with God, that fits a man for
walking with God, that fits a man for correspondency with God, and that fits a
man for the delight of God, and that fits a man for an everlasting fruition of
God. And therefore certainly without holiness there is no happiness; without
a principle of purity there can be no seeing of the face of God in glory.

Without real holiness there is no happiness, etc. is this, because heaven is
a holy place, and therefore no unholy souls can enter there: it is called the
high and holy place, Isa. 57.15. the inheritance of the Saints in heaven is an
inheritance that is incorruptible and undefiled. 1 Pet. 1.4. Holiness dwells
in heaven, 2 Pet. 3.13. as a man dwells in his house. Heaven is the house of
Gods holiness, and therefore certainly without holiness there is no entering
into that house, Exodus 26.34. Psalm 78.69. Hebrews 9.8. Chap. 12.24.
Rev. 21.27. The Holy of Holies in the Temple was a Type of heaven. And as none
might enter into the Holy of holies that were unholy; so none can enter into
heaven, which is the true Holy of holies, but those that are holy. Heaven was
so holy, that it cast out the Angels when they fell from their holiness:
Paradise was a Type of heaven, and no sooner did Adam lose his holiness, but
he was shut out of Paradise. Heaven is a City of holiness, and none can enter
into that City but such as are holy, Rev. 22.14. Heaven is so holy that it
would groan to bare one unholy soul. Well, heaven is a holy place, and the
inhabitants are all holy, and the work of heaven is holy, and what then should
unholy souls do there?

Without real holiness there is no happiness, Coelum est altera gehenna
damnatorum. Heaven is another hell to the damned, said One. Isa. 66.3, 4.
etc. is this, Because unholy persons have no hearts to go to heaven: though
now and then they may talk of heaven, and now and then lift up their eyes and
hands to heaven, and now and then express a few cold wishes, and lazy desires
after heaven; it is no difficult thing to demonstrate that in good earnest they
have no heart to go to heaven! For First, How often has God set life and
death, heaven and hell before them, and they have chosen death rather then
life, and hell rather then heaven. 2. Do you ^hink that that man has any heart
to heaven, that will not so much as part with a lust for heaven? Luke 13.33, 34.
3. Will you say that that man has a heart to go to heaven, that has not so
much as a hand to lay hold on the opportunities of grace that might bring him
to heaven! 4. Will you say that that man has a heart to go to heaven, that
daily hardens his heart against him who is the way to heaven. 5. John 14.6. Isa
63.10.
Will you say that that man has a heart to go to heaven, who is still a
grieving, vexing, and quenching that spirit of holiness that can only fit,
frame and form him for heaven! 6. Will you say that that man has a heart to go
to heaven, that rarely spends a serious thought of heaven, and that lives in
this world as if there were no heaven! 7. Will you say that that man has a
heart to go to heaven whose sinful courses speak him out to be one of those
who have made a covenant with death, Isa. 18.15, 18.
and an agreement with hell! 8. Do you think that that man has a heart to go
to heaven, Romans 3.8. 1 Cor. 4.9, 10.
that detests those most that are the best woers for heaven! 9. Do you think
that that man has any heart to go to heaven, who can take no pleasure nor
delight in those that are travailing toward heaven! 10. Will you say that that
man has a heart to go to heaven, that will do nothing affectionately for
heaven; that will not hear for heaven, nor pray for heaven, nor trade for
heaven, nor look for heaven, nor long for heaven, nor strive for heaven, No man
ever went to heaven sleeping.
nor wait for heaven! The heart commands all, it carries all; if the heart were
bent for heaven, the head would contrive for heaven, the eye would look out for
heaven, and the ear would hear for heaven, and the tongue would speak for
heaven, and the foot would walk toward heaven, and the hand would do for
heaven. By all which it is most evident that unholy persons are not cordially
willing to go to heaven: it is most certain, that unholy persons have no such
great mind to go to heaven; as some imagine when Dives was in hell, his desire
was not to be with Abraham in heaven, Luke 16.24, 27, 28, 29.
but that Lazarus might come and give him a little ease in hell: he preferred a
little ease in hell before his being with Abraham in heaven. Neither did he
desire, that his five brethren might go to heaven, but that they might be kept
out of hell; and that not out of love to them, but out of love to himself, he
knowing that their company would be no small increase of his own torments.
Heaven would be a very hell to an unholy heart. If now the presence of God in
his servants, and the presence of God in his Ordinances be such a hell to
unholy souls: Ah what a hell would the presence of God in heaven be to unholy
hearts! It is true, an unholy heart may desire heaven as it is a place of
freedom from troubles, afflictions, oppressions, vexations, etc. and as it is a
place of peace, rest, ease, safety, etc. but this is the least and lowest part
of heaven; but to desire it as it is a place of purity, of grace, of holiness,
of enjoying of God, etc. is above the reach of an unholy heart. The company of
heaven are all holy, the employments of heaven are all holy, and the enjoyments
of heaven are all holy, and therefore heaven cannot but be an undesireable
thing to unholy hearts. An unholy heart is no ways desirous nor ambitious of
such a heaven as will rid him of his darling sins, as will make him conformable
to a holy God, as will everlastingly divorce him from his old companions, and
link him for ever to those gracious souls that he has scorned, despised and
persecuted in this world. Ergo, etc.

etc. Men void of holiness are in the Scripture resembled to chaff, Psalm 1.4.
Isa. 41.2. Zeph. 1.17. Ezekiel 2.6. Isa. 9.18. Chapter 10.6.17. Chap. 57.27.
to dust, to dirt, to briars and thorns, which are things that are good for
nothing, that are fit for nothing. And what should such men do in heaven, who
are good for nothing on earth! The Horse is good to carry, the Ox is good to
draw, the Sheep is good for cloth, the Cow is good to give milk, the Ass is
good to bear, and the Dog is good to keep the house; but what is a man void of
holiness good for? An unholy person is good for nothing but to be destroyed,
and to make some room for a better person to stand up in that place which he
takes up in the world: As the Hogg in the Arabic fable tells us that a Butcher
carrying three creatures upon his Horse, A Sheep, a Goat and a Hog, the two
former lay very quiet and still, but the Hog kicked and cried and would never
be quiet: thereupon the Butcher said, Why are thou so impatient when the other
two are so quiet? the Hog answered, Every one knows himself; the Sheep knows
that he is brought into the City for his wool sake, and the Goat knows that he
is brought into the City for his milk sake, and so they need not fear nor care;
but alas I know very well, that I have neither wool nor milk, but that as soon
as I am come into the City I must be killed, for that is all I am good for.
Matthew. 7.6.
An unholy soul is like a Hog, good for nothing but to be killed. Certainly,
heaven-happinesse is too great and too glorious a thing to be possessed by them
that are good for nothing. We look upon such as are fit for nothing, to be
worthy of banishment from the society of men: But oh how much more worthy are
they to be banished from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power,
2 Thessalonians. 1.8 9. Heb. 12.22, 23. Romans 2.5.
and to be shut out for ever from the society of Angels, and the spirits of
just men made perfect, who are fit for nothing but to dishonor the Lord, undo
their own souls, and to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath! And thus I
have given you an account of the Reasons of the Point.

Use.
WE shall now come to make some improvement of this great truth to our own
souls. Is it so, That real holiness is the only way to happiness, and that
without holiness here, no man shall ever come to a blessed vision or fruition
of God hereafter? Then the first Use shall be a Use of Conviction. This then
may serve to convince the world of several things: As

First, That the number of those that shall be eternally happy, the number of
those that shall attain to a blessed Rev. 3.4. Thou have a few names, A few
names, that is, a few persons, ^cts 1.15. who are all known to Christ by name;
as he said to Moses, I know thee by name, Ex. 33 12, 17. by these Scriptures it
is evident that few shall be saved, Jer. 5.1. Ezekiel. 22.30. Chapter 9.4, 6, 7. Mich.
1.13. Luke 23. Romans 9.21. Matthew. 22.14. 1 Cor. 1.20.
even in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk
with me in white: for they are worthy. Among the many in Sardis there were but
a few that had holy insides and pure outsides: Among the multitude that made a
holy profession, there were but few that walked answerable to their holy
calling: and therefore but a few that should walk with Christ in white. White
in ancient times was the Habit of Nobles: to walk with Christ in white, is to
partake with Christ in his glory, they and only they at last shall be clothed
nobly, royally, gloriously, who maintain inward and outward purity. The holy
seed is a little little flock, Luke 12.32. here are two Diminitives in the
Greek (...) little little flock; to show the exceeding littleness of it. They
were little in their own eyes, and little in their enemies eyes, and little in
regard of that world of Wolves among whom they were preserved as a spark of
fire in the midst of the wide Ocean. When the Syrians came up against Israel in
the time of Ahab, it is said that the children of Israel pitched before them
like two little flocks of Kids, but the Syrians filled the country, 1 Kings
20.27. holy souls are but like two little flocks of kids; but the unholy fill
the world: Gracious souls are like the three hundred men of Gideon: but
graceless souls are as the Midianites that were like Grasshoppers for multitude,
Judges 7.7.12. Straight is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto
life, and few there be that find it, Matthew. 7.14. The way of holiness that
leads to happiness, is a narrow way; there is but just room enough for a holy
God and a holy soul to walk together. And few there be that find it; And no
wonder: for there are but few that minds it, that loves it, that likes it, or
that enquires after it. The whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. and
will die in their wickedness, Amongst the millions in Rome, there are but a few
Senators, and they too none of the best.
John 8.21. Geographers say, that if all the known parts of the world were
divided into one and thirty parts, there will be found but five parts that do
so much as profess the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; For at this day
nineteen parts of the world are possessed by unholy Turks and Jews, which do not,
nor will not so much as acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the King and Head of his
Church. And seven parts of the world is possessed this day merely by Heathens who
worship stocks and stones. And of those five parts that are possessed by
Christians, how many are Papists, Atheists, Hypocrites, Drunkards, Swearers,
Liars, Adulterers, Idolaters, Oppressors? How many are proud, covetous, carnal,
formal, lukewarm, indifferent, etc! Now should all these sorts of sinners be
separated (as they shall in the great day) from those that are gracious and
holy, would it not quickly appear, that the flock of Christ is a little little
flock! Ah how few among the great ones are found to be gracious! How few among
the rich are found to be rich in Christ, rich in grace, rich in good works! 1
Cor. 1.16. 1 Timothy 6.16, 17. Flavus Vopiscus. Lips. de Constantia, lib. 2. cap.
25.
how few among those that are high born, can you find that are new born? It was
the saying of One, that all the names of good Emperors might be engraven in a
little Ring. And so says Lipsius, that the names of all good Princes may
easily be written in a small Ring. I have read of godly Mr. Buchanan that was
King James his Tutor, who lying upon his dying bed, desired a Noble man then
with him to tell the King, that his old Master Buchanan was going to a place
where few Kings come. (Kings are as rare meat in heaven, as venison is in poor
men's kitchins, says the Dutch Proverb.) And how few among the wise can you
find that are wise for heaven, that are wise for their souls, that are wise for
eternity. And how few among the learned, can you find that have learned Christ,
and learned their own hearts, and learned to deny themselves, and learned to
save their own souls and others! By all which it is most evident that few are
holy, and that few shall be happy. But,

Secondly, and more particularly, Is it so that real holiness

Job 21.14. 2 Pet. 2.20. ult. Isa. 66.3. Ephesians. 4.19. Isaiah 5.19. Ierem. 9.5.
who wallow in all ungodliness, and delight themselves in all manner of
filthiness, who commit wickedness with greediness; who draw iniquity with cords
of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart-rope; who weary themselves to commit
iniquity; who are so desperately set upon wickedness, that neither the rod of
God, the lashes and checks of their own consciences, nor the flashes of hell
upon their souls can reduce them, who are resolved that they will gratify
their lusts, though they damn their souls; and who will live wickedly, though
they perish eternally: Who by custom in sin, have destroyed all conscience of
sin, and contracted such desperate hardness upon their own hearts, as neither
smiles nor frowns, promises, nor threatenings, life nor death, heaven nor hell,
ministry nor misery, miracle nor mercy can possibly mollify them; these are
grown from naught, to be very naught; from very naught, to be stark naught;
these souls are sadly left of God, and woefully blinded by Satan, and fully
ripened for ruin. Now if without holiness no man shall see the Lord, what will
become of all profane wretches, who are so far from being holy, that they fall
short of common honesty? Certainly God will shut the gates of glory upon such
workers of iniquity. Such profane Esaus shall never be blessed with a sight of
God in glory. Matthew. 7.22.
A wicked man is a sin lover; he is a sin maker, he lives in sin upon choice;
Psalm 11.5. 1 John 3.8.
the Hebrew word that is commonly used for a wicked man (...) properly
signifies a laborious sinner, a practitioner in sin; now such as these are, God
will have nothing to do with, Job 8.20. Behold God will not cast away a perfect
man, neither will he help the evil doers, or rather as the Hebrew carries it,
he will not take the ungodly by the hand: that is, he will not have any
fellowship, any society, any familiarity with the ungodly: the holy God will
not so much as take an ununholy soul by the hand; he will not in the least
countenance him nor respect him; he will not welcome him nor entertain him, nor
show the least favor to him. Now certainly if God will not take the wicked by
the hand, he will never take them into heaven, he will never take them into his
bosom. God will have no commerce nor communion with those to whom he will not
so much as lend a hand. God will wash his hands of them for ever, to whom he
will not give a hand. Which made Austin say, that he would not be a wicked man
one half hour for all the world, because he might die in that half hour. God
will wash his hands of every man that lives and dies a wicked man, Mat
25.11.12. The hearts and ways of wicked menare full of hells: and therefore to
fill heaven with such, would be to fill heaven with hells.

Secondly, This truth may serve to convince those that 2 Pet. 3.3. Jude 18.
that men should rather honor it, then deride it; reverence it, then reproach
it: they should rather set a crown of glory, then a crown of thorns upon the
head of it. Holiness is the glorious Image of God fairly stamped upon the foul;
and to deride holiness, is to deride God himself: God takes all the affronts
that are done to his Image: as done to himself: and this scoffers shall know at
last to their eternal woe. As Suetonius reports it was.
If it was such a heinous crime in Tiberius his days to carry the Image of
Augustus upon a Ring or Coin into any sordid place; Ah how heinous a crime is
it then to cast dirt and filth, scorn and reproach upun holiness, which is the
Image of the invisible God! The despite and contempt that is done to the Image
or coin of a Prince is done to the Prince himself; and accordingly he will
revenge it. In old Rome there were near as many Statues as there were living
people; and some were made of Gold, some of Silver, some of Brass, some of
Ivory, and some of polished Marble: And there was an Earl appointed whose
office it was continually to walk up and down in the night attended with many
soldiers to see that none did wrong the Statues of those that were set up in
the City, Lipsius de Mag. Romans Imperii.
and if any such were found that had done wrong to any of the Statues, they
were put to death. Holiness is the Statue of God, and such as shall dare to
deface it and wrong it, God will destroy: Genesis 9 22.25. Ch 21.9.15. The Apostle
interprets Ismaels mocking to be persecution. Gal. 4, 27. 2 Kings 2.23, 24. 2
Chr. 30.10. Chapter 36.15.21. 2 Kings 19.20. ult.
The old world scofft and scornd at righteousness, and God sweeps them away
with a flood. Cham mocked and scoff't at Righteous Noah; and what did he get by
it, but a curse? Ismael scoff't at holy Isaac; and what did he get by his
scoffing and mocking but ejection out of Abraham's family? And what became of
those two and forty young scoffers that scoffed and mocked at holy Elisha? were
they not cursed in the name of the Lord, and torn in pieces by two She bears,
which were more fierce and cruel then others? The Jews were much given up to
scoffing and mocking of the messengers of the Lord, till there was no remedy:
till old and young were destroyed by the sword of the Caldees: till their
Temple and City were fired and sacked, and thirty of them sold for a penny:
etc. and those that escaped the sword, were captivated and enslaved. Senacherib
scoffed and mocked at the Virgin d^ughter of Sion, but his scoffs issued in the
destruction of his Army by the hand of an Angel; and in his own, by the hands
of his two Sons. Julian the Emperor was a great mocker and scoffer at the
Christians, but God struck him with an Arrow from heaven, which made him cry
out Vicisti Galilee, thou Galilean (meaning our Lord Jesus) have overcome me.
Felix for one malicious scoff did nothing day and night but vomit blood till
his unhappy soul was separated from his wretched body. Lucian for barking
against religion as a dog, was by the just judgments of God devoured of dogs.
History tells us of some scoffers that God has stricken with madness: Others
with blindness: others with loathsome diseases: and some God has stricken
dead: and others he has left to be their own Executioners. Scoffing at
holiness is a Metropolitan sin; and therefore no wonder if God executes upon
scoffers Metropolitan judgments. Mockers and scoffers are the worst of
sinners. Among the three sorts of sinners that David mentions, Scorners have
the chair. The chair of Pestilence, as the Septuagint translateth it. Scorners
are the pests of mankind. Psalm 1.1. In Cathedra pest lentiae.
The eye of the Scorner is blinded; the heart of the scorner is hardened; the
judgment of the scorner is perverted: the will of the scorner is enthralled:
and the conscience of the scorner is seared, and this makes the scorner fall
mad upon scoffing at holy men and holy things. Look as they are the worst of
servants that will scoff and mock a child in the family, because he is his
Fathers picture (though they take wages of his Father, and live by his Father)
so they are the worst of sinners who scoff at holiness which is the very
picture of God, though they live by him, and cannot live without him: Yet this
world is full of such monsters who count it a grace to disgrace holiness, and
to lade holy ones with all the names of scorn and contempt that they can
invent, or that Satan can help them to: These are your holy brethren, these are
Phanaticks, these are your holy Sect, these are your pure souls, these are your
strict Precifians, these are the Saints forsooth, these are the brotherhood!
Erasmus says, that that Proverb, A young Saint, and an old devil, was devised
by the Devil himself to scoff and mock men out of their holiness. It has been
the common portion of men most eminent in grace and holiness, to be most scofft
and scorned in all Ages: Job 17.2. Nehem. 4.1. Isaiah 28.22. Luke 18.32.
witness Noah, Isaac and Elisha but now cited: and witness Job, Chap. 21.3.
Suffer me that I may speak, and after that I have spoken mock on. Chap. 12.4. I
am as one mocked of his neighbor, who calls upon God, and he answers him:
the just upright man is laughed to scorn. So David, Psalm 35.16. With
hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their teeth, Psalm
44.14. Thou make us a byword among the Heathen. Psalm 79.4. We are become a
reproach, and derision to them who are round about us. Psalm 109.25. I am
become a reproach to them; when they looked upon me, they shaked their heads.
So Isa. 8.18. Behold I and the children that the Lord has given me, are for
signs, and for wonders in Israel. So Jeremiah, Chap. 20.7. I am in derision
daily, every one mocketh me. So Paul, Acts 17.18. What will this babbler say? So
the Apostles, Acts 2.13. Others mocking, said, These men are full of new wine.
So those Worthies of whom this world was not worthy, Heb. 11.36. Mat. 26.68.
Chapter 27 29, 31. Luke 22 63. Chap. 23.11. Mark 15 31. Yea, the Philosophers
called Christ a Magician, and affirmed that he did all by Necromancy. Calv.
Jnst. Advers. Libert. c. 9.
Others had trial of cruel mockings. But above all, how sadly, how frequently,
yea, how fearfully was our Lord Jesus Christ scoffed and scorned by Herod and
Pilate, and flouted by the rascally soldiers? but the vengeance of his Father
overtook them all. And in the Primitive times as Tertullian observes, the
Saints were called, herds of Asses, vile fellows, the Disciples of a man
crucified: Galileans, Nazarites; Eaters of men's flesh, and drinkers of men's
blood. The Heathens (as the same Author observes) painted the God of the
Christians with an Asses head, and a book in his hand; to signify that though
the Christians pretended to knowledge, yet they were a company of silly
ignorant Asses. The Libertines of old have cast much scorn and contempt upon
all the Apostles: they call Matthew an Usurer, Lam 3.45. 1 Cor. 4 45. Lam 2.15,
16. Chapter 4 2. vide.
Peter an Apostate, Luke a pelting Physician, Paul a broken vessel, and John a
foolish young man, etc. by way of scorn and contempt: Athanasius was called
Sathanasius, and Cyprian was called Coprian, one that gathers up dung: and so
Luther, Calvin, and almost every one that has attained to any eminency in
holiness, they have been commonly accounted as the offscouring and refuse
among the people. Now certainly, if holiness be the only way to happiness, etc.
then such as are scorners and scoffers at holiness; are out of the very way to
happiness: and how such are like to come to heaven, that scorn the very path
that leads to heaven, I shall leave you to judge. If the Ravens of the valley
shall pick out his eyes that mocketh his Father, and the young Eagles eat out
his eyes that despises the instruction of his Mother, Prove. 30.17. The first
thing that Eagles do when they have found a carcass, is to pick out its eyes.
(as Solomon speaks) then of how much sorer punishment are they guilty off, who
mock and scoff at holiness which is the very Image, picture and glory of God
himself! holiness is so near akin to God, that no man can deride holiness, but
he derides God himself. As he that mocks the poor, derides him that made him,
Prove. 17.5. so he that mocks holy ones, derides that God that made them holy.
And will God take this at the scorners hands? no, he will retaliate: he loves
to retaliate scorn upon the scorner, Proverbs 3.34. Surely he scorneth the
scorners: God will pay home scorners in their own coin, scorners shall be sure
to have scorning enough. Prove. 1.24. ult. Psalm 2.4. Isa. 37.36.
God so scorns the persons and prayers of scorners, that he will have nothing
to do with them. The Angels so scorn scorners, that instead of being a
lifeguard to them; they stand ready pressed to execute the vengeance of heaven
upon them. And Saints are so far to scorn them (by a divine precept) as not to
reprove them, Prove. 9.8. Reprove not a scorner lest he hate thee. Yea, God in
his just judgments will make scorners to be an abomination to all sorts of
men, Prove. 24.9. The scorner is an abomination to men; that is, to all sorts of
men: the scorner is an abomination not only to holy men, but also to all
ingenious men, and to all civil and moral honest men. As the scorners tongue
and hand is against every man, so every man's tongue and hand shall be against
him. Now if the scorners of men be abominable to men, then much more are the
scorners of holiness abominable to God: and therefore certainly, such shall be
shut out from a glorious fruition of God.

Thirdly, If real holiness be the only way to happiness, Isa. 58.1.2, 3. Zach.
7.4.5, 6.
Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn
away. They have ((...)) a face, a vizard, a mask, a show of godliness, but they
have nothing of the pith, sap, life, or marrow of godliness: their devotion,
their godliness lies in good words, and in fair shows, and in religious
gestures; if you hearken to their voice, if you look upon their eyes, if you
observe the motion of their hands, and the bowing of their knees, and the
shaking of their heads, etc. you would think that they were men of much
religion, of much godliness. But if you look into their hearts and lives, you
will find them to be the greatest renouncers and denyers of Religion and
godliliness in the world. They have the semblance of goliness, but not the
substance; they have the lineaments of godliness, but not the life: they have
the face of godliness, but not the heart: they have the form, the shadow of
godliness, but not the power. They are like a well drawn picture which has all
the lineaments of a man, but wants life, wants a principle of motion and
operation. Mark 1. A form of godliness is Englands Epidemical disease.
The form of godliness is common, but the power of godliness is rare. 2. The
form of godliness is cheap, but the power of godliness is dear. 3. The form of
godliness is easy, but the power of godliness is difficult. 4. The form of
godliness is a credit, but the power of godliness is a reproach. 5. The form of
godliness is pleasurable and delightful, but the power of godliness is
displeasing and undelightful (to the ignoble part of a Christian.) 6. The form
of godliness will stand with secret and with open wickedness (as you see in
Saul, 1 Peter 1.17. Jer. 44.17.
Jehu, Judas, Simon Magus, Demas, and the Scribes and Pharisees) but the power
of godliness will not; the power of godliness lays the Ax to the very root of
all sin, both secret and open. Rachel was very fair and beautiful to the eye,
but she was barren, and that marred all. So the Formalist, he is a very fair
and beautiful Christian to the eye, but he is barren God-wards, and
Christ-wards, and Heaven-wards: he is fruitless, sapless, and lifeless, and
that marrs all. The Formalist takes up a form of godliness, 1. To quiet his
conscience: 2. To get himself a name. 3. To cloak over his sins. 4. To advance
his worldly interest: and 5. To avoid opposition and persecution from the
world, the flesh, and the Devil. 6. And to conform to old customs. And what
should such Formalists do in heaven? A formal Christian is but a figure, a
flaunt, a flourish, a flash; and all he does, is but the shadow of what he
should do. A formalist is more light then life, more notion then motion, more
head then heart, more outside then inside, more leaves then fruit, more shadow
then substance. A formalist is a blazing Comet, a painted Tomb, a Stage Player,
a white devil, or a devil in an Angels habit, and what should such devils do in
heaven? Certainly, if without real holiness no man shall see the Lord; then the
formalist (that has only the shape, the show, the form of godliness, but
nothing of the reality and power of it) shall never be blessed with such a sight:
A formalist is neither hot nor cold; of all sorts of sinners he is the worst,
and God so loathes him, that he is resolved he will rid his stomach of him, Rev.
3.16. I will spue thee out of my mouth: and certainly, heaven is too holy a
place to lick up that gorge God has cast up. Lukewarm water cannot be so
loathsome to our stomachs, as a formalist is to Gods. God is never at such
ease, as when he has cast up, and cast out the formal Christian. Magdenburge
Cent. 5.
I have read of Anastasius the Emperor, how God shot him to death with a
thunderbolt because of his lukewarmness and formality. God has a
thunder-boult for every formalist, by which he will at last certainly strike
them down to the lowest hell: A formalist is too loathsome a thing, too heavy a
burden for heaven to bear.

Fourthly, If real holiness be the only way to happiness: Luke 18.10, 11, 12,
13, 14. Mat. 5.21. Chap. 19.20, 21, 22.
nor extortioners, nor adulterers, etc. they pay every man his own, they are
just and righteous in their dealings; no man can say black is their eye; their
carriage is civil, comely, harmless and blameless. They make a fair show in
the flesh, Gal. 6.12. or as the Greek has it, they set a good face on it. But
as good a face as they do set on it, I must crave leave to tell them that
civility is not sanctity; civility rested in, is but a beautiful abomination,
a smooth way to hell and destruction. I may truly say of all civil men (who are
disstitute of that real holiness that leads to happiness) what Erasmus said of
Seneca, If you look upon him as a heathen, then he seems to write as if he
were a Christian; but if you look upon him as a Christian, then he seems to
write as a heathen. So if you look upon many civil moral men's lives, you will
find them so full of ingenuity, equity, righteousness, sweetness and justice,
that you will be ready to say, Sure these are holy men. But then do but observe
how unacquainted they are with God, with Christ, with the Scripture, with the
way and working of the spirit, with the filthiness of sin, with the depths and
devices of Satan, with their own hearts, with the newbirth, and with the great
concernments of eternity, and you will judge them to be mere heathens, to be
men void of all principles of grace and holiness; and to be mere strangers to
union and communion with Christ, and to the more secret and inward operations
and workings of the spirit of Christ, and to the most spiritual duties and
services that are commanded by Christ. Civility is very often the nurse of
impiety, Mat. 5.19, 20, Acts 7.54. Chap. 13.50. Chapter 17.17, 18. Romans 8.7.
the mother of flattery, and an enemy to real sanctity: a high conceit of
civility keeps many a man from looking after inward and outward purity: moral
honesty proves to many men a bond of iniquity. There are those who are so
blinded with the fair shows of civility, that they can neither see the
necessity, nor beauty of sanctity: there are those that now bless themselves in
their common honesty, whom at last God will scorn and cast off for want of real
holiness and purity. Matthew. 25.3.11, 12. As Aristides, so Socrates, Plato,
Titus Vespatian, Tully, with multitudes of others amongst the Lacedaemonians,
Grecians, Romans, etc.
Many of the Heathens were so famous for justice and righteousness, for equity,
fidelity and sobriety, for civility and moral honesty, that it would put many
professors to the blush to read what is written of them: and yet there was such
a tincture of popular applause, of pride and vain glory, of hypocrisy and
self-flattery, upon their civility and moral honesty, that for any thing we can
find in Scripture to the contrary, there is cause to fear that they shall be
miserable to all eternity: for all their civility and moral honesty, they were
left in a damnable, I will not say in a damned condition: he that rises to no
higher pitch then civility and moral honesty, shall never have communion with
God in glory. Naaman was a great man but a Leper, 2 Kings 5.1:
Naaman was an honorable man, but a Leper; Naaman was a mighty man, but a
Leper; Naaman was a victorious man but a Leper; Naaman was in high favor and
esteem with his Prince, but a Leper. This but he was a Leper, stained all his
honor, and was a blot upon all his greatness and glory, both at Court, and in
the field; both in the City, and in the Country. So it is a stain, a blot upon
the most moral honest man in the world to say, he is a very civil honest man,
but Christless: he is a very just man, but graceless; he is a man of much moral
righteousness, but he has not a dram of real holiness, etc. This but is a fly
in the box of ointment that spoils all. Well Sirs, remember this, though the
moral honest man be good for many things, yet he is not good enough to go to
heaven, he is not good enough to be made glorious, Mat. 5.20. Certainly, there
is nothing in all the world below real sanctity, that will ever bring a man to
the possession of glory. And though it may grieve us (to speak after the manner
of men) to see sweet natures, to see many moral honest men take many a weary
step toward heaven, and to come near to heaven, and to bid fair for heaven,
and yet after all to fall short of heaven: yet it will be no way grievous to a
holy God to turn such sweet natures into hell, Psalm. 9.17. moral honesty is not
sufficient to keep a man out of eternal misery; all it can do is to help a man
to one of the best rooms and easiest beds that hell affords. For look as the
moral man's sins are not so great as others, so his punishments shall not be so
great as others. This is all the comfort that can be afforded to a moral man,
that he shall have a cooler hell then others have: but this is but cold
comfort. Moral honesty without piety is as a body without a soul, and will ever
God accept of such a stinking sacrifice. Surely no.

Fifthly, If real holiness be the only way to happiness; if Matthew 6.29.
who halt between God and Baal, 1 Kings 18.21. Zeph. 1.5. 2 Kings 17.32, 33.
Chap. 18.11. James 1.8. A double-soul'd man. Matthew. 19.16.26.
who divide their souls between heaven and earth, between Religion and their
lusts. Like the Samaritans, who both worshipped the Lord, and the Assyrians
Idols too. A Neuter is a monster; he has two tongues, two minds, and two
souls: he has a tongue for God, and a tongue for the world too; he looks up to
God and says Certainly thou art mine; he looks down upon the world, and says
Surely I am thine; He has a mind to be religious, and a mind to save his own
stake in the world too. He has a soul reaching after the happiness of another
world, Numb. 23.10.
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his, says
Balaam: and he has a soul strongly reaching after this evil world too, 1 Pet.
2.15. Jude 11. Callenuceus tells us of a Noble man of Naples, that was wont
profanely to say that he had two souls in his body, one for God, and another
for whosoever would buy it.
as if heaven and happiness were wrapped up in it. As you may see in the same
person, he loved the wages of unrighteousness: he loved it as his portion, he
loved it as his life, he loved it as his happiness, he loved it as his all; he
loved it as his soul, yea, he loved it above his own soul, for he damned his
soul to gain it. It is true, when he was under a divine restraint, he professed
that he would not curse the people of God for a house full of Gold; but when he
was from under that restraint, his heart was so set upon the unrighteous
reward, that he would have cursed them for a handful of gold. The Neuter (as
the Romans paint Erasmus) hangs between heaven and earth; He is neither fit to
go to heaven, nor yet worthy to live on earth. If Meroz was to be certainly
cursed, to be bitterly cursed, to be universally cursed (as the Hebrew phrase,
cursing curse ye Meroz imports, in Judges 5.23.) for standing Neuter, when they
should have come forth to the help of the Lord: Do you think that Neuters in
religion shall be blessed? Do you think that ever such shall go to heaven, who
are indifferent whether they go to heaven, or no? or that ever such shall be
happy, who are indifferent whether they be holy or no? or that ever such shall
see the face of Christ with joy, who are indifferent whether they have an
interest in Christ or no? or that ever such shall be admitted into the kingdom
of glory, who are indifferent where ever they have any entrance into the
kingdom of grace or no. Certainly heaven is too holy to hold any such
indifferent, irresolute Neutral souls. In the University not long since there
were three Doctors heads of houses; one of them was accounted an Innovator; the
second a Puritan; the third a Neuter. A witty Scholar presented them thus to
the world; the first in a Coach driving to Rome: the second driving to Genev^h:
the third running on foot, begging sometimes the one, sometimes the other to
receive him, but both refused him. Neuters shall be refused on all hands at
last. Newters are Traitors; they betray Christ for the worlds sake, and the
world for Christ's sake; and themselves for sin and Satan's sake; And who will
not refuse and scorn traitors?
God will refuse them because he loathes halting: Angels will refuse them
because they loath halving: Good men will refuse them, because they loath
lukewarmness; and bad men will refuse them because they pretend to goodness,
though they live in wickedness. Ambo-dexters in Religion are ignominious
disgracers both of the name and profession of Christians, they are prodigious
traitors to the crown of heaven: they are the greatest enemies to the power of
godliness, they are the very offspring of Judas, and in the day of account it
will be found that it had been good for them that they had never been born.
Neutrality is the spiritual adultery of the heart: Aut totum mecum tene, aut
totum omit. Greg. Nazien.
Neuters are spiritual Harlots, they have their hearts divided between God and
Mammon, betwixt Christ and other Lovers. Now Harlots in Ancient time were to be
burnt, Genesis 38.24. Certainly hell is for the Neuter, and the neuter for hell:
God will be as severe, yea, more severe in punishing spiritual whoredom, then
ever men have been in punishing corporal whoredom. God looks upon every neuter
as a man in arms against him, Matthew. 12.30. He that is not with me, is against
me. And therefore Martial Law shall be executed upon them. God will blot out
their names, and hang them up as monuments of his justice and vengeance. Sirs,
do not deceive your own souls, no man was ever yet carried to glory in the
chariot of neutrality or mediocrity: he that is not throughout holy, is not
really holy, and he that is not really holy, can never be truly happy: it is
only throughout holiness that entitles a man to everlasting happiness. 1 Pet.
1.15. 2 Pet. 3.11. Matthew. 24.51.
The true mother would not have the child divided; she would have all or none;
you must be for all holiness, or for none. Neuters now devide and cut those
things asunder, that God has closely joined together: but at last God will
suite their punishment to their sin, and cut them asunder, Luke 12.46. Now the
neuter chooses here a piece, and there a piece: and at last God will cut him in
pieces, 1 Samuel 15.23.
as Samuel did Agag. Well, Neuters, now you divide one command from another,
one duty from another, one promise from another, one threatening from another,
one ordinance from another, and one way of God from another: But the day is a
coming wherein God will divide your souls from your bodies, and both from
himself, his Son, his Saints, and his Glory for ever.

(...).
Ephesians. 4.24. (or holiness of truth, as the Greek reads it) in opposition to
that feigned and counterfeit holiness, that is in the world: pretended holiness
is most opposite to the holiness of God. Hypocritical holiness is the greatest
unholiness; Ex. 30.32, 33. Who can with patience see Apes in the habit of
Nobles! says Lucianus.
and as God has, so certainly God will still suit the punishment to the sin.
If it was death in Moses his Law, to counterfeit that Ceremonial and figurative
ointment; what shall it then be to counterfeit the spirit of life and holiness?
Dissembled sanctity is double iniquity: He that professes religion without
being religious, and godliness without being godly: he that makes counterfeit
holiness a cloak to impiety, and a Midwife to iniquity; He that is a Cato
without, and a Nero within; a Jacob without, and an Esau within: a David
without, and a Saul within; a Peter without, and a Judas within: a Saint
without, and a Satan within: an Angel without, and a devil within, is ripened
for the worst of torments, Matthew. 24.5. And shall cut him asunder, and appoint
him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. Hypocrites are the freeholders of hell: all other sinners do but hold
under them: none have so large a portion in hell as hypocrites have: No man at
last will be found so miserable, as he that has the name of a Saint upon him,
but not the divine nature in him: that has a profession of holiness upon him,
but no principles of holiness in him: that has a form of godliness, but not
the power: that can cry up godliness, and court godliness, but in practice
denies it: that is a Jew outwardly, but an Atheist, a Pagan, a devil inwardly.
Who had a greater name for holiness, and who made a greater show of holiness,
and who did more despise and insult over men for the want of holiness, then the
Scribes and Pharisees? and who so miserable now as they? Mat. 23.14. Hypocritis
nihil est crudelius, impatientius, and vindictae cupidius. Luther. There is not
a more cruel creature, more impatient and vindictive then an hypocrite; said he
that had the experience of it in his own person.
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: for ye devour widows houses,
and for a pretense make long prayers, therefore ye shall receive the greater
damnation. Pretended holiness will double damn souls at last. Sirs, do not
deceive your own souls: A painted sword shall as soon defend a man, and a
painted mint shall as soon enrich a man, and a painted fire shall as soon warm a
man, and a painted friend shall as soon counsel a man, and a painted horse shall
as soon carry a man, and a painted feast shall as soon satisfy a man, and a
painted house shall as soon shelter a man, as a painted holiness shall save a
man. He that now thinks to put off God with a painted holiness, shall not fare
so well at last, as to be put off with a painted happiness. The lowest, the
hottest, and the darkest habitation in hell will be his portion, whose religion
lies all in shows and shadows. Well, spiritual Counterfeits, remember this, it
will not be long before Christ will unmask you, before he will uncase you,
before he will disrobe you, before he will take off your vizards, your hoods,
and turn your rotten insides outward, to your eternal shame and reproach before
all the world. Counterfeit Diamonds may sparkle and glister, and make a great
show for a time, but their luster will soon wear off (Nil fictum est diuturnum)
nothing counterfeit will last long. Maud, mother to King Henry the second,
being besieged in Winchester-castle, counterfeited her self to be dead, Anno
1141.
and so was carried out in a Coffin, whereby she escaped; at another time being
besieged at Oxford in a cold Winter, by wearing white apparel she got away in
the snow undiscovered, but at last vengeance did over-take her. So though
hypocrites may for a time seem to be dead to sin, Job 17.8. chap. 36.13.
and dead to the world, though they may cloth themselves with a snow-like
purity, and with the white satin of seeming sanctity, yet God at last will
unmask and unmuffle them, and vengeance will with a witness overtake them, Isa.
33.14. Hypocrites are like blazing Stars, which so long as they are fed with
vapors, Job 20.5. Hosea 6.4.
shine as if they were fixed Stars; but let the vapors dry up, and presently
they vanish and disappear: As the joy of the hypocrite, so the goodness of the
hypocrite is but for a moment; it is as a morning cloud and as the early dew;
an hypocrite is a mere comet, a flaunt, a flash; principles of holiness are
lasting, but hypocrisy makes a man only constant in inconstancy.

1 Cor. 12.4. Matthew. 7.22.
with a gift of knowledge, a gift of faith, a gift of prayer, a gift of
utterance, a gift of memory, etc. when they have nothing of real holiness in
them. Like chose in Mat. 22.23. who had great gifts, but were so far from real
sanctity, that they were workers of iniquity; they had a flood of gifts, but
not a drop of grace; they had many gifts, but not one saving grace; they could
work miracles, but that miracle of holiness being not wrote in them, Christ
takes an everlasting farewell of them, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity.
So they in Heb. 6. had enlightened heads, but where was their humbleness and
holiness of heart? they had silver tongues, but where was their sanctified
souls? they had some smack, some tastes and relishes of heavens glory, but
where was their inward and outward purity? Notwithstanding all their
extraordinary gifts of speaking with tongues, casting out of Devils, and
opening of prophesies, yet were they not renewed, regenerated and sanctified by
the Holy Ghost: As Nurses milk is of use to others, but of none to themselves.
Their gifts might be of singular use, to the enlightening, quickening,
edifying, comforting and encouraging of others, and yet never have any
influence upon their own hearts, to the changing, renewing and sanctifying of
them. Men of greatest gifts are not always men of greatest holiness: The
Scribes and Pharisees, Judas, D^mas, Tertullus, and Simon Magus, were men of
great gifts, and yet they had no real holiness; they had the ninety nine of
gifts which Christ looks not after, but wanted the one, viz. real holiness,
Matthew. 23.15.
which with Christ is all in all: Augustine trembled when he considered the
extraordinary gifts and parts that were in his base child, to think what God
meant in infusing so precious a soul, and in giving such rare gifts to such an
impure creature.
The Devil has greater gifts then any man on earth, and yet he is a Devil
still; gifts without holiness, will but make a man twice told the child of
hell: The more of gifts here, the more (without holiness) of hell hereafter.
The greatest Scholars have often proved the greatest sinners, the stoutest
opposers, and the worst of persecutors. There are none so wicked, as he that is
wittily wicked. The highest gifts many times prove but the fairest paths to
the chambers of death. As the richer the Ship is laden with bars of silver and
gold, the deeper it sinks; so the richer the soul is laden with silver parts
and golden gifts, and yet not balanced with real holiness, the deeper it sinks
under wrath and misery: And no wonder, for 1. Gifts do but tickle the ear, they
do not cleanse heart. 2. They do but stir the affections, they do not kill
corruptions. 3. They are but ornaments to a man's profession, they have no
saving influence upon a man's conversation. They tempt a man to take up with the
world, but they never help a man to overcome the world. 4. They make a man wise
to deceive, and wise to delude both himself and others; rare accomplishments
are many times turned into beautiful ornaments to adorn the Devil and error
withal. 5. The gifted man cares not who is most holy, so he may be most
honored; who is highest in favor with God, so he may be highest in favor
with men; who is most serviceable, so he may be most acceptable; who gets most
of another world, so he may have most of this world; and what should such an
one do in heaven? Gifts differ as much from real holiness, as an Angel in
heaven differs from a Devil in Hell. Zach. 7.5, 6. Romans 14.6, 7, 8.
6. Gifts makes a man work for life, but holiness makes a man work from life.
7. Gifts work a man to set up for himself, and to deal and trade for himself;
but holiness works a man to deal for God, and to trade for God and his glory.
8. Gifts takes up in ingenuous civilities and outward formalities, but holiness
takes up only in that holy one. Hab. 1.12. 1 Cor. 8.7.
9. Gifts only restrains the soul, but grace renews and changes the soul. 10.
Gifts puffs the soul, but holiness humbles the soul. 11. Gifts makes a man
beautiful like Rachel, but holiness makes a man fruitful like Leah. 12. Gifts
makes a man most studious and laborious about mending and reforming other men's
hearts and lives; but holiness makes a man most studious and industrious in
mending and reforming his own heart and life. Psalm 45.13.
13. Gifts makes all glorious without, but holiness makes all glorious within.
14. Gifts makes a good head, but holiness makes a good heart. 15. Gifts envies,
lessens, darkens, obscures, and disparages with buts, and ifs and ands, the
excellencies of others; but holiness makes a man rejoice in every Sun that
out-shines its own. John 4.14. 1 John 3.9.
16. Gifts are fading and withering, but holiness is an everlasting spring that
can never be drawn dry. 1 Cor. 13.1, 6.
17. Gifts draws from God, but holiness draws to God; though men of gifts may
bid fair for heaven, yea come so near as to hear the music of heaven, yet
without holiness they shall never enter into heaven. When night comes, the
Father will only take in his own child into his house, and though another child
which may be much like his own should attempt to come in, yet the Father will
keep him out, and wish him to repair to his own home; So when the night of
death comes, the Father of Spirits will only take into the family of heaven his
own child, viz. the child of holiness; but now if the child of gifts (which is
so like the child of holiness) should press hard upon God to come in, as that
child of gifts Baalam did, Numb. 23.10.
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his; God
will answer him, No, he will say to him as he did to that child of gifts Judas,
Acts 1.25. Mat. 8.12.
Go to your own place. In the night of death and judgment, the children of the
Kingdom shall be cast out: the children of the Kingdom, that is, of the Church;
now the children of the Kingdom are children of gifts, and yet there will come
a day when these children shall be cast out. Genesis 25.6, etc.
As Abraham put off the sons of the Concubines with gifts, but entailed the
inheritance upon Isaac: So God puts off many men now with gifts, but he entails
the heavenly inheritance upon holiness. Psalm 24.3, 4. Who shall ascend into
the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy place? He that has clean
hands, and a pure heart; who has not lift up his soul to vanity, nor sworn
deceitfully: Heaven is for that man, and that man is for heaven, who has clean
hands and a pure heart, whose holy conversation is attended with
heart-purification; a pure heart is better then a golden head; a heart full of
holy affections, is infinitely beyond a head full of curious notions; there is
no Jewel; there is no anointing to that of holiness; he that has that has
all, and he that wants that has nothing at all. But,

Eighthly and lastly, if real holiness be the only way to happiness; them,
Matthew. 23.14, 15. 2 Samuel 6.16, 20.
viz. holiness in pieces! These forlorn souls will not be holy themselves, nor
suffer others to be holy neither; they will neither go to heaven themselves,
nor suffer others to go thither who are strongly biased that way: Some despise
their gracious relations, even e^ nomine, for that very reason, because they
are holy; sometimes you shall hear them speak at such a rate as this; Well, our
relations are wise and witty, but so holy; they are very knowing and thriving,
but so precise; they have good parts and sweet natures, but they are so strict;
they are so round that they will not endure an oath, a lie, etc. and therefore
I cannot abide them, I cannot endure them. These are like he in Seneca, which
was so fearfully idle, that his sides would ache to see another work: So these
are so fearfully wicked, that it makes their sides, their heads, their very
hearts ache, to see others holy. How far these are in their actings below
Heathens, you may see in Romans 16.10, 11. Aristobulus and Narcissus that are
spoken of in this Scripture, were both Heathens, and yet they had in their
families those that were in the Lord, those that were gracious, etc. Heathens
were so ingenuous, that they would not despise that holiness in others, that
they wanted in themselves; they were so noble, that they would give holi^ess
house-room, though they knew not how to give it heart-room: Genesis 39.1, 2, 3, 4.
So Potiphar, though he was an Heathen, yet he gave holy Joseph both house-room
and heart-room: These and several other heathens of the like spirit with them,
will one day rise in Judgment against many in these days, that are so far
fallen out with holiness, as that they will not endure it under the roof of their
houses, yea as that they make it the greatest matter of scorn and derision:
Like those in Lam. 2.15, 16. All that pass by, clap their hands at thee; they
hiss and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the City
that men call the perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth? All thine
enemies have opened their mouth against thee; they hiss and gnash the teeth;
they say, We have swallowed her up, etc. Ah how many such monsters are there in
these days, who express their derision, disdain, and contempt of holiness and
holy persons, by all the scornful gestures, postures and expressions
imaginable; that clap their hands, that hiss, that wag their head, that gnash
their teeth, and that say, Lo these are your Saints, these are your holy ones,
your perfect ones, your beautiful ones! It is very sad to want holiness, but it
is saddest of all to deride holiness, to disdain holiness. Of this evil spirit,
Salvian complained in his time; Salvi. de Guber. lib. 4.
What madness is this (says he) amongst Christians, that if a man be good, he
is despised as if he were evil! if he be evil, he is honored as if he were
good! And as great cause have we to complain of the prevalency of the same evil
spirit in our times: If the wife be holy, 1 Cor. 7.16.
how is she despised (by her unholy husband) as if she were wicked! If she be
wicked, how is she honored as if she were holy! So if the child be gracious,
how is he disdained as if he were gracless! if he be gracless, how is he
admired as if he were gracious! So if a Servant be godly, how is he scorned as
if he were godless! if he be godless, how is he applauded as if he were godly!
Certainly God will never endure such to stand in his sight, who cannot endure
the sight of holiness. Doubtless, Psalm 1.5.
God will never give them any room in heaven, who will not so much as give
holiness a little house-room (I say not heart-room) here. He that now despises
and disdains holiness in others, shall at last be eternally despised and
disdained for want of holiness himself.

Use 2.
THe second Use is a Use of Trial and Examination; Is it so, that real holiness
is the only way to happiness? must men be holy on earth, or else they shall
never come to a blessed vision or fruition of God in Heaven? Oh then, what
cause has every one to try and examine, whether he has this real holiness
without which there is no happiness, or no! Now because this is a point of
great importance, and a mistake here may undo a man for ever; and considering
the great aversness and backwardness of men's hearts to this noble and necessary
work, I shall therefore in the first place propose some considerations to
provoke all your hearts to fall in good earnest upon this great point of Trial
and Examination. Now to this purpose consider,

See my Treatise of Assurance, page 1, to 26. where you have this truth made
fully evident.
by the light of the Word, and by the light of your own Consciences, to see
whether holiness, which is the image of God, be stamped upon your souls, or no:
Though it be impossible for thee to climb up to heaven to search the records of
glory, to see whether thy name be written in the book of life; yet it is
possible for thee to go down into the Chambers of thine own soul, to enter into
the withdrawing rooms of thine own heart, and there to read what impressions of
holiness are upon thee; though this work be hard and difficult, yet it is noble
and possible; though the heart be deceitful and full of shifts, yet it is
possible for a man to make such a curious, such a narrow, such a diligent, such
a faithful, and such an impartial search into his own soul, as that he may
certainly know whether he has that real holiness that is the pledge of
immortal happiness, or no; it is possible for him that has this Jewel, this
holiness, to know it, to find it, and in the beautiful face of holiness to
read his own everlasting happiness. I might call in the experiences of many
precious Saints, As Abraham, Noah, Jacob, David, Job, Paul, and others.
to bear witness to this truth; but I suppose it is needless. What great and
weighty, what high and hard, what hazardous and dangerous things do many
Soldiers, Sailors, sick Patients and others attempt and undertake, upon the
mere account of a possibility! it is possible that the Soldier may win the
field; it is possible that the Mariner may make a happy voyage; it is possible
that the sick Patient may recover; it is possible that he that strives for
mastery may overcome, etc. Now upon this very account, that it is possible,
what will they stick at? what will they not attempt and endeavor to effect?
And why then should not Christians upon the account of a possibility, make a
diligent search after that holiness, that will at last throne the soul in
everlasting happiness? Well, Christians, as a possibility of obtaining grace
and mercy, should bear up your hearts against despair: Matthew. 9.26. Mark 10 27.
Chap. 14.36. Mark 9.23. Luke 18.27.
as a possibility of obtaining a pardon, should keep up your hearts in a
seeking and a waiting way; and as a possibility of salvation by Christ, should
be argument sufficient to work a soul to venture it self upon Christ; so a
possibility of knowing whether you have this pearl of price, Holiness, should
work you to make a diligent search and enquiry after it. Let no man do more
upon the account of a possibility for this world, then you will do upon the
account of a possibility for another world: Let no man do more upon the account
of a possibility for his body, then you will do upon the account of a
possibility for your souls: Let no man do more upon the account of a
possibility for temporals, then you will do upon the account of a possibility
for eternals. It is possible for you to know whether this babe of grace,
Holiness, be formed in your souls or no; and therefore search and enquire after
it.

Secondly, Consider this, that it is a point of very great Psalm 4.5.
your All lies upon it; and an error here, may make a man miserable for ever;
it is good for thee to know the state of thy body, the state of thy family, the
state of thy flock; Prove. 27.25. Multi multa sciunt, se autem nemo.
but it is of infinite more consequence for thee to know the state of thine own
soul: No man lives so miserable, nor no man dies so sadly, as he that lives and
dies a stranger to his own soul: It is good for thee to set all reckonings even
between thy self and others, but it is far better to set all reckonings even
between God and thine own soul. Ah how many are there, who are better known to
others, Luke 12.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Chap. 16.19, 26.
then they are to themselves! and who are able to give a better account of
their Lands and Lordships, of their Treasures and Manors, yea of their Horses,
Hawks and Hounds, then they are of the state of their souls! Ah how many are
there that are very inquisitive to know things to come, Eccles. 7.10.
to know what will be hereafter, to know whether they shall be great and rich
in the world, to know whether they shall be prosperous and successful in their
undertakings; to know whether they shall be crowned with length of days, Job
21.23, 24. Isa. 41.22, 23. Chap. 43.9, 10. The heathens did admire that saying
as an Oracle, (Nosce te ipsum) Know thy own self.
or whether they shall be cut off in the flower of their age; to know the
secret counsels of Princes, and what will be the issue of such and such
mutations and revolutions that have happened amongst us: and yet are not at all
inquisitive after the state of their souls, nor whether they have this real
holiness, without which there is no happiness! They never enquire what will
become of them hereafter; They never enquire what state they shall enter upon
after death, whether upon a state of eternal woe, or a state of everlasting
b^^s: Of all acquaintances in this world, there is none to that of a man's being
acquainted with the state of his own soul. A mistake about my outward condition
may trouble me, but a mistake about my spiritual condition may damn me. There
are many ways to make up my mistakes about temporals, but there is no way to
make up my mistakes about eternals: If at last I shall be sound to be mistaken
in the great concernments of my soul, I am undone for ever. Well Sirs, you are
in a state of nature, or in a state of grace; you are in a state of darkness,
or in a state of light; you are in a state of life, or in a state of death; you
are in a state of love, or in a state of wrath; you are either Goats or Sheep,
Sons or Slaves; you are either in the broad way to destruction, or in the
narrow way of salvation; and therefore what can be of greater concernment in
this world to you, then to know in which of these two spiritual estates you are
in? How can you order aright your prayers, or your praises, or any religious
services, till you come to know in which of these two spiritual estates you
stand! whether you be in a state of nature, or in a state of grace; in a state
of sin, or in a state of holiness; for all religions duties must be ordered
according to men's spiritual estates. If a man be in a state of nature, his work
lies one way; if he be in a state of holiness, his work lies another way: By
all which it is most evident that it very nearly concerns you to search and
try, whether you have this bird of Paradise, Holiness, in your bosoms, or no:
And for a close, let me say, that a mistake about your spiritual estate will at
last be found, not only insufferable and inexcusable, but very terrible and
damnable.

Thirdly, Consider, That a cordial willingness to enter upon this work of
trial, is a hopeful evidence of your real integrity and sanctity. Unsanctified
souls hate the light; they had rather go to hell in the dark, then come to be
weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary. As pure gold fears neither fire nor
furnace, neither test nor touchstone; John 3.20.
neither one balance nor another, so a pure heart, a sanctified soul dares
venture it self upon trial: yea, Job 31.5, 6. Psalm 26 2. Psalm 139 23, 24.
Matthew. 12.20.
upon the very trial of God: For he knows that God never brings a pair of
scales to weigh his graces, but only a touchstone to try the truth of his
graces: he knows if his gold be true, though it be never so little, it will
pass for current with God. As Bankrupts care not for casting up their accounts,
because they know all is naught, very naught, stark naught with them: so
unsanctified souls, they care not to come to the trial, to the test, because
they know that all is naught, yea worse then naught with them: They have no
mind to cast up their spiritual estates, because at the foot of the account
they must be p^t to read their neck-verse Undone, undone, for ever undone. And
therefore as old deformed women cannot endure to look into the looking-glass,
least their wrinckles and deformity should be discovered, so unsanctified souls
cannot endure to look into the glass of the Gospel, least their deformities,
impieties and wickednesses should be discovered and detected. I have read of
the Elephant, how unwilling he is to go into the water, but when he is forced
into it, he puddles it lest by the clearness of the stream he should discern
his own deformity. So unholy persons are very unwilling to look into their own
hearts, or into the clear streams of Scripture, lest their souls deformity and
ugliness should appear to their own terror and amazement. And therefore as you
would have a hopeful evidence of your integrity and sanctity, fall upon this
work of trial. For as it is a hopeful evidence that the Clyents cause is good,
when he is ready and willing to enter upon a trial; and as it is a hopeful
sign that a man's gold is true gold, when he is willing to bring it to the
touchstone; and that a man thrives, when he is willing to cast up his books; so
it is a hopeful evidence that a Christian has real holiness, Gal. 6.4, 5.
when he is ready and willing to bring his holiness to the test to try whether
it be true or no: when he is willing to cast up his books, that he may see what
he is worth for another world.

Job 15.34. Prove. 30.12.
It is the easiest thing in the world for a man to deceive himself: there are
those that do but think that they stand, 1 Cor. 10.12. and these at last come
to fall from their seeming standing into a real hell: Matthew 23.
Yea, from their highest standing, into the lowest hell. There are many that
think themselves to be something, when they are nothing, Gal. 6.3. There are
many that have a form of godliness, Isaiah 9.17. Chap. 29.13. Jer. 7.4, 8, 9,
10, 11. Rev. 3.16, 17, 18. Isa. 65.2.3, 4, 5 Matthew 25.
but none of the power, 2 Timothy 3.6. There are many that have a name to live,
but are dead, Rev. 3.1. There are many that are very confident of their
integrity, and yet are full of horrible hypocrisy. There are many that carry
the Lamps of profession, that have no oil of grace in their hearts: There are
many that take a good nature for grace, civility for sanctity, and a garb of
godliness for real holiness; yea, there are those who dare say that they excel
others in holiness, when in truth they exceed most men in wickedness. Yea,
there are many now in hell, who have had a great confidence of going to heaven.
There are many that cry out with Agag, Surely the bitterness of death is past:
wrath is past, and hell is past, and damnation is past, when as vengeance is
ready to fall on them, and hell stands gaping to devour them. The heart of man
is full of self-love, full of self-flattery, and full of hypocrisy, and
therefore many a man who is only a Jew outwardly, Romans 2.28, 29.
thinks himself to be a Jew inwardly: many a man thinks himself to be as good a
Christian as the best, and to be as happy as the best, and to be as fair for
heaven as the best, till he comes to hear that tormenting word, Depart, I know
ye not. As many are kept off from Christ, by a conceit that they have him
already: so many are kept off from holiness, by a conceit that they have it
already. And therefore it does very much concern you to make a diligent
enquiry, whether you have that holiness without which there is no happiness, or
no. I have read of Plato, that when he did walk in the streets, if he saw any
disordered in speech, disguised in drink, or otherwise our of frame, he would
say to himself, Number ego talis, Am I such a one as this is? Am I such a swearer
as this is? Am I such a drunkard as this is? Am I such a wanton as this is? Am
I such a royotous person as this? etc. So should every Christian say when he
hears of any that does but think that they stand, Number ego talis: Am I such a
one as this is? When he sees one that thinks himself something when he is
nothing, he should say Am I such a one as this is? when he sees a man to have a
form of godliness but no power, he should say, Am I such a one as this is? when
he hears of a man that has a name to live, but is spiritually dead, he should
say, Am I such a one as this is, etc.? and when he hears or reads of one that
is really holy, he should say am I such a one as this is; As you would not put
a cheat upon your own souls, it highly concerns you to try whether you have
real holiness or no. Look, as many young children catch many a fall out of a
strong conceit of their abilities to go: so many a man out of a strong conceit
that he has holiness when he has none, catches many a fall in an eternal fall
at last. The best way to prevent an everlasting miscarriage, is to make a privy
search after holiness in thine own heart.

Fifthly, Consider that there is a great deal of counterfeit Bristows stones
and counterfeit Gemms do so shine and sparkle like true Jewels, that if a man
be not very careful, he may be easily cheated: so counterfeit grace,
counterfeit holiness does so shine and sparkle, they do so nearly resemble real
holiness, and the sanctifying and saving graces of the Spirit, that a man may
be easily mistaken, if he do not make a narrow search. Does the gracious soul
abstain from gross sins? Matthew. 25.1, 2, 3, 4. Ezra 8. Esther 4. Daniel 9. Mat.
6.16. Luke 18 11. Matthew. 27. Hebrews 12. Matthew 6. Acts 10.1, 2, 3, 4 Luke
19.11. Acts 21.8. 1 Samuel 15.24. Isaiah 58. 2 Chr. 32.26. 1 Kings 22.15. Jonah
3. Mark 6. Ezekiel 33.30, 31, 32, 33. Luke 18.11.
so does the formalist too. Do Saints fast and pray? so do Pharisees too. Does
Peter shed tears? so does Esau too. Does Peter repent? so does J^das too. Does
Cornelius give Alms? so do the Pharisees too. Does Zacheus believe? so does
Simon Magus too. Does David confess his sin? so does Saul too. Does David
delight in approaching to God? so does Isaiahs hypocrites too. Does Hezekiah
humble himself? so does Ahab and the King of Nineveh too. Does a gracious soul
hear the word with joy? so did Herod too. Does a gracious soul receive the word
with joy? so did the stony ground too. Does a gracious soul delight in his
teacher? so did Ezekiels worldlings too? Is a gracious soul in Closset duties?
so is the Pharisee too, etc. When counterfeit coin is abroad, you will not take
a piece, but you will try it; you will bring every piece to the touchstone. Ah
that you would deal so by your holiness! there is a great deal of counterfeit
holiness abroad, and therefore you had need bring yours to the trial. As all
is nor gold that glisters: so all is not holiness that men take for holiness,
that men count for holiness. The child is not more like the Father, nor one
Brother like another; Wine in the Bottle is not more like to Wine in the Butt,
nor water in the Cistern more like to water in the River, The difference
between these true and counterfeit graces, is largely discovered in my Treatise
on Assurance.
nor fire in the forge more like to fire in the chimney, nor milk in the sawcer
to milk in the breasts, then counterfeit grace and holiness is like to that
which is real. Counterfeit faith does so nearly resemble true faith, and
counterfeit love true love, and counterfeit repentance true repentance, and
counterfeit obedience true obedience, and counterfeit knowledge true knowledge,
and counterfeit holiness true holiness, that it is not an easy matter to
discover the one from the other. The Cyprian Diamond (says Pliny) looks so
like the true Indian Diamond, that if a man do not look warily to it, he may
easily be deceived and cheated. O Sirs, true grace and counterfeit, true
holiness and counterfeit look so like one another, that without a divine light
to guide you, you may be easily cheated and deceived for ever. In these days
of profession there is abundance of false ware put off; Satan is a subtle
Merchant; and where profaneness will not pass for current coin, there he
labors to furnish his customers with the shows and resemblances of grace and
holiness, that so he may hold them the faster in golden setters, and put them
off from looking after that real holiness without which no man can be blessed
here, or happy hereafter. And therefore it nearly concerns every ^an to search
and try whether he has real holiness or no.

Sixthly, Consider, If upon trial you shall find in you 1 Co. 3.11, 16.
yet so as by fire; he shall have a heaven at last, but he must pass to it by
the flaming sword. When a person is heir to a great estate, and knows it; when
a person is son to a King, and knows it; when a person is highly in favor, and
knows it; when a person is out of all hazard and danger, and knows it; when a
persons pardon is sealed, and he knows it: then the springs of joy and comfort
rises in him. So, when a man is holy, and knows it, Ezekiel. 47.2, 3, 4, 5. 2 Cor.
4.16, 17, 18.
then the springs of divine joy and comfort rises in his soul, as the waters
rise in Ezekiels Sanctuary. The knowledge of the goodness and holiness of thy
estate will make heavy afflictions light: long afflictions short, and bitter
afflictions sweet: the knowledge of the goodness and holiness of thy estate,
will make thee frequent, fervent, constant, and abundant in the work of the
Lord. The knowledge of the goodness and holiness of thy estate will
strengthen thy faith, raise thy hope, inflame thy love, 1 Cor. 15. ult.
increase thy patience, and brighten thy zeal. The knowledge of the goodness
and holiness of thy estate will make every mercy sweet, every duty sweet,
every ordinance sweet, and every providence sweet. The knowledge of the
goodness and holiness of thy estate will rid thee of all thy sinful fears
and cares; Phil. 1.22, 23. 2 Cor. 5.1, 10.
it will give thee ease under every burden, and it will make death more
desirable then life. The knowledge of the goodness and holiness of thy
estate will make thee more strong to resist temptation, more victorious over
opposition, and more silent in every condition. The knowledge of the goodness
and holiness of thy estate, will turn every Winter night into a Summers day;
every cross into a crown, and every wilderness into a Paradise. The knowledge
of the goodness and holiness of thy estate; will be a sword to defend thee, a
staff to support thee, a cordial to strengthen thee, a plaster to heal thee,
and a star to lead thee. And O who then will not take some pains with his own
heart, to know the goodness and holiness of his own estate! Well, remember
this, next to a man's being holy, it is the greatest mercy in this world to know
that he is holy. But if upon trial a man shall find that his estate is bad, and
that his holiness is not of the right stamp, yet this will be many ways a
mercy, and an advantage to him. For the way to be found, is to see your selves
lost; the way to infinite mercy, is to see your own misery: the way to Canaan,
is through the wilderness: the way to heaven, is by the gates of hell: upon
the knowledge of the badnesse and sadness of thy estate, thou will be awakened
out of thy security, and thou will be alarmed to loath thy self, to judge thy
self, to condemn thy self, to be sick of sin, Acts. 2.37, 42. Chapter 16.22, 35.
to break with Satan, and to close with Christ. Now the daily language of thy
soul will be, Men and Brethren, what shall I do to be saved? O what shall I do
to get my sinful nature changed, my hard heart softened, my blind mind
enlightened, my polluted conscience purged, and my poor naked soul with grace
and holiness adorned! Now the daily language of thy soul will be that of the
Martyr, O none but Christ, none but Christ. O none but Christ to pardon me;
none but Christ to justify me; none but Christ to command me; none but Christ
to save me: and none but Christ to reign over me. Now the language of thy soul
will be this, 1 Co. 1.30, 31.
O though I have formely thought my self to be wise, yet now I see my self to
be a fool! O that Christ would be wisdom to me! O now I see my self to be red
with guilt, and black with filth, O that Christ would be righteousness to me!
O now I see my self to be unclean, unclean, O that Christ would be
sanctification to me! Rev. 3.16, 17, 18,
O now I see my self to be in a damnable condition, Oh that Christ would be
redemption to me! O now I see my self naked, O that Christ would cloth me; now
I see my self poor and miserable, O that Christ would enrich me! now I feel my
self to be hungry, O that Christ would (be bread of life to) feed me! now I
perceive my self to be lost, O that Christ would seek me! Now I fear that I am
perishing, O that Christ would save me! 2 Kings 7.3, 4, 5, 6.
Now the language of your souls will be that of the Lepers, If we stay here we
die: if we stay in our unsanctified and unrenewed estate we die: If we stay in
our sins we die, if we stay on our duties we die: if we stay on a conceited or
counterfeit holiness we die: If we stay on a form of godliness we die: If we
stay on a name to live we die; If we stay where the world stays we die: if we
stay in any thing a this side Christ and real holiness, we die, we eternally
die; And therefore let us arise and make a venture of our souls upon Christ,
and pursue after that holiness without which there is no happiness. But,

Seventhly and Lastly, Consider, that there are many that 1 John 5.13. Psalm
4.6.
As it is one mercy for me to be beloved, and another mercy for me to know that
I am beloved. Psalm. 51.1, 2, 3.
As it is one mercy for me to be pardoned in the court of glory, and another
mercy for me to know that I am pardoned in the Court of conscience. As it is
one mercy for me to have my name written in the book of life, Luke 10.20.
and another mercy for me to be told that my name is written in that book. So
it is one mercy for me to have real holiness in me: and another mercy for me
to see it, and to know it: As we many times complain of the want of those
things that we have in our hands: so many dear Christians complain of the want
of that holiness that they have in their hearts. As the well, Gen 21 16, 17,
18, 19.
the spring of water was near to Hagar though she saw it not; so the spring of
holiness is near to many a Christian, yea it is in many a Christian, and yet
he sees it not, Genesis 28.16.
he knows it not. As Jacob once said, The Lord was in this place, and I knew it
not: So many a precious soul may say, I had real holiness in my heart, and I
knew it not. As the face of Moses did shine, Exodus 34.29. ult.
but he saw it not, he knew it not, though others did see it and take notice of
it: so holiness shines in many a Christians heart and life, yet corruptions
raise such a dust in his soul that he sees it not, he knows it not, though
others can see it, take notice of it, and bless and admire the Lord for it. As
there be some that think they are rich, Rev 3.16, 17. Prove. 13.7.
when they are not; and that say they are rich, when they are not; so there be
others that are rich, and yet they will not say it, nor believe it; So there be
some that think they have holiness, Isaiah 65.3, 4, 5, 6. Mark 8.18.
when they have not; yea that say they have holiness when they have not. So
there be others that have real holiness, and yet they dare not think so, they
dare not say so. Yea they are apt in times of temptation, desertion, sore
afflictions, and when they are under the sensible stirrings of strong
corruptions, to conclude that they have no holiness, no grace, when indeed
they have: witness Job, Chap. 13.24. And Chapter 19 9 witness David, Psalm 22.1,
2. witness Asaph, Psalm. 77.2.11. witness Heman, Psalm 88.1.17. witness
Jeremiah, Lam. 3.18. witness the whole Church, Isa. 49.15, 16. Ezekiel. 37.11,
12. And witness the Disciples, John 14.4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 20. compared. To know
our selves to be holy is very desirable, but woe were to many precious
Christians if they might not be holy and yet not know it; if they might not
have holiness in their hearts, when the appearance of holiness is hid from
their eyes. Look as sparks and coals of fire are often hid under the ashes and
we see them not; and as in Winter the sap and life is hid in the root of the
tree, and we perceive it not; and as precious flowers are hid in their seeds,
and we discern them not; so when it is Winter with a Christian, his holiness
may be so hid and covered under fears, doubts, sins, etc. that he may not be
able to see it, to discern it, or conclude that he has it: As the air is
sometimes clear, and sometimes cloudy, and the Sea sometimes ebbing and
sometimes flowing; so the holiness of the Saints is sometimes so clouded, and
at so low an ebb, that a Christian can hardly discern it, he can hardly say, Lo
here is my holiness; the being of holiness in the soul is one thing; the seeing
of holiness in the soul is another thing; the being of holiness is one thing;
the feeling of holiness is another thing. A Christian may as safely conclude
that there are no stars in the sky in a dark night, because he cannot see them;
and that there is no treasure in the Mine, because he cannot discern it, nor
come to the feeling of it, as he may conclude that he has no holiness in his
heart, because he cannot see it, he cannot feel it. As the treasures of this
world, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5, 6.
so the treasures of holiness oftentimes he low: a man must dig deep before he
can come at them. As the babe lives in the womb, but does not know it, and ^s
the Sun often shines into the house and a man does not see it; so the babe of
grace may be formed in the soul, and yet a Christian not know it; and the Sun
of holiness may shine in his soul, and yet he not see it. O therefore how
greatly does it concern Christians to make a diligent, a narrow, and a serious
search into their own hearts, whether they have this Jewel of glory, Holiness,
in their souls or no! And if these arguments will not provoke you to fall upon
this work of trial, I know not what will.

But me thinks I hear some of you saying, O Sir, how shall we do to know
whether we have this real holiness or no? we see it is our very great
concernment to know whether God has sown this heavenly seed in our souls, or
no: but how shall we come to know this? Now to this I answer, there are several
ways whereby this may be discovered. As,

Exodus 15.11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the Gods? Who is like
thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? In this stately
description of God, holy Moses is most taken up in magnifying and admiring the
holiness of God: Holiness is that glory of the Creator, that holy ones most
delight to glory in. So Psa. 78.41. and 89.19, etc. Isa. 43.3. and chap. 49.7.
So holy David, Psalm 71.22. Unto thee will I sing with the Harp, O thou holy
one of Israel: So Isa. 12.6. Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for
great is the holy one of Israel in the midst of thee. The inhabitants of Zion
must shout and hollow out (as the Hebrew word carries it) in token of joy,
because he that is great and in the midst of them, is the holy one of Israel.
So Hab. 1.12. Art not thou from everlasting, O Lord my God, my holy one? Among
holy ones, none to the holy One: Yea the more holy any are, the more deeply are
they affected and taken with the holiness of God: as you may see in Isaiah 6.3.
And one cried unto another (or this cried to this) and said, Holy, holy, holy
is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. The holy Seraphims
by trebling the acclamation of his holiness, Holy, holy, holy, do denote not
only the superlative eminency, glory and excellency of Gods holiness, but also
they do discover how greatly, how abundantly they are affected and taken with
the holiness of God. To the holy Angels, the holiness of God is the sparkling
diamond in the ring of glory: But now unholy persons are rather affected and
taken with any thing then with the holiness of God: The carnal secure sinner is
affected and taken with the patience, forbearance and long-suffering of God: O,
says he, what a God of patience is this, that has waited so many years for my
repentance? that he that might long since have damned me, waits still to save
me! that he who might long since have cast me into hell, is still willing that
I should go to heaven! Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19, 20, 21. Eccles. 8.11.
The presumptuous sinner is much affected and taken with the mercy and goodness
of God: Well, says the presumptuous sinner, though I have sinned thus and
thus, yet God has been merciful to me; and though I do sin daily thus and
thus, yet God is still merciful to me; and though I should still go on to sin
sevenfold more, yet he would be merciful to me: He does not delight in the
death of a sinner, nor in the damnation of souls: O what a merciful God is God!
The prosperous sinner, he is taken with the bounty and liberality of God; O,
says he, what a bountiful God, what a liberal God is this, who fills my barns,
fills my baggs, who prospers me at home and abroad, who has blessed me with a
healthful body, a fair estate, a saving wife, a full trade, laborious servants,
and thriving children! etc. But where is there a sinner in all the world that
is affected and taken with the holiness of God! Certainly there is nothing that
renders God so formidable and terrible to unholy persons as his holiness does.
Isa. 30.11. Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the holy
One of Israel to cease from before us: O that you would not preach so much, nor
talk so much to us of the holy One of Israel: O that you would once cease from
molesting and vexing us with message upon message from the holy One: Why cannot
you as well talk and preach to us of the merciful one, the compassionate one,
the affectionate one, the pitiful one, etc. as be still a talking to us of the
holy one, the holy one! Dan. 5.4, 5, 6. Hab. 1.13.
O we love not to hear it! O we cannot tell how to bear it! nothing strikes the
sinner into such a damp, as a discourse on the holiness of God; it is as the
handwriting upon the wall; nothing makes the head and heart of a sinner to
ache, like a Sermon upon the holy one; nothing gauls and gripes, nothing stings
and terrifies unsanctified ones, like a lively setting forth of the holiness of
God: But now to holy souls, there are no discourses that do more suit them and
satisfy them, that does more delight and content them, that does more please
and profit them, then those that do most fully and powerfully discover God to
be glorious in holiness. Well, this is an everlasting truth, he that truly
affects the holiness of God, and affects God for his holiness, is certainly
made partaker of his holiness; if you are really holy, you are much affected
and taken with the holiness of God. Souls, what say you to this! But,

Psalm. 119.6, 128. Bonum est sui communicativ^m.
it spreads it self over head and heart, lip and life, inside and outside.
Psalm. 45.13. The Kings daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of
wrought gold: (inward holiness, is the inward glory of the Kings daughter:) the
Kings daughter is all glorious within; her understanding is hanged with
holiness, her mind is adorn^d with holiness, her will is bowed to holiness, and
all her affections are sprinkled, yea clothed with holiness; her love is holy
love, her grief is holy grief, her joy is holy joy, her sorrow is holy sorrow,
her fear is holy fear, her care is holy care, her zeal is holy zeal; and her
clothing is of wrought gold, that is, her life and conversation (which is as
visible to others as the clothes she wears) is very sparkling and shining in
grace and holiness. True sanctification is throughout, it reaches to soul, body
and spirit, 1 These. 5.23. True holiness is a divine leaven, Mat. 13.33.
which leavens the whole man. Look as leaven diffuses it self through the whole
dough; so true holiness diffuses it self through the whole man: Look as
Absoloms beauty was spread all over him, even from the crown of his head to the
sole of his foot; 2 Samuel 14.25.
so the beauty of holiness spreads it self over every member of the body, and
every faculty of the soul: Look as Solomon's Temple was glorious both within and
without, so holiness makes all glorious both within and without. Look as Adams
sin spread it self over the whole man, 1 John 16.
so that holiness that we have by the second Adam, spreads it self over the
whole ^^n; so that that man that is not all over holy, that is not throughout
holy, that man was never truly holy: Look as that holiness which was in Christ
did diffuse and spread it self over all Christ; so that his person was holy,
his natures were holy, his heart was holy, his language was holy, and his life
was holy; so real holiness spreads it self over head, hand, 1 Pet. 1.15.
heart, lip, and life. The fruit of the spirit is in all goodness, Ephesians. 5.9.
he that is truly good, is all over good; he has goodness engraven upon his
understanding, and goodness engraven upon his judgment, and goodness engraven
upon his will, and goodness engraven upon his affections, and goodness engraven
upon his inclination, and goodness engraven upon his disposition, and goodness
engraven upon his conversation; he that is not all over good, is not really
good; there are those that have new heads but old hearts, new words but old
wills, new expressions but old affections, new memories but old minds, new
notions but old conversations: and these are as far off from true holiness, as
the Pope, the Turk, and the Devil are from real happiness. In every holy person
there are many divine miracles; there is a dead man restored to life, a dumb
man restored to speech, a blind man restored to sight, a deaf man restored to
hearing, a lame man restored to walking, a man possessed with Devils possessed with
grace, a heart of stone turned into an heart of flesh, and a life of wickedness
turned into a life of holiness; if it be thus with thee, I dare write thee and
call thee both holy and happy. But,

Thirdly, Persons of real holiness do set the highest price Chrysostom called
some holy men in his time (Aggelous) earthy Angels; and so Doctor Tailor looked
upon holy Bradford as an Angel.
so holy souls look not how rational men are, but how religious; not how
notional, but how experimental; not how great, but how gracious; not how high,
but how holy; and accordingly they value them. Psalm 16.3. But to the Saints
that are in the earth, and to the excellent in whom is all my delight. Prove.
12.26. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor: It is holiness that
differences one man from another, and that exalts one man above another; a holy
man is a better man then his neighbor; in the eye, account, and esteem of God,
Angels and Saints, there is no man to the holy man: The Sun does not more
excel and outshine the Stars, then a righteous man does excel and outshine
his unrighteous neighbor. Prove. 28.6. Better is the poor that walks in his
uprightness, then he that is perverse in his ways, though he be rich. A man of
holiness prefers an holy Job, though upon the dunghill, before a wicked Ahab
upon the throne; he sets an higher price upon an holy Lazarus, though clothed
with rags and full of sores, then upon a rich and wretched Dives, Luke 16.
who is clothed gloriously, and fares sumptuously every day. As King Ingo
valued poor ragged Christians above his Pagan Nobles, saying, that when his
Pagan Nobles in all their pomp and glory should-be cast down to Hell, those
poor Christians should be his consorts and fellow-Princes in heaven: this blind
mad world, rates and values men according to their worldly interest, greatness,
glory, and grandeur; but men of holiness, rate and value men by their holiness,
by their inward excellencies, and by what they are worth for another world: the
world judges him the best man in the Parish that is most rich; but a holy man
judges him the best man in the Parish that is most righteous; the world counts
him the best man in the Town that is clothed most gorgeously, but a holy man
counts him the best man in the Town, whose inside and outside, whose heart and
life, whose body and soul is clothed with sanctity and purity; the world
reckons him the best man in the City, whose bags are fullest, and whose estate
is largest; but a holy man reckons him the best man in the City whose heart is
fullest of holiness, and who has most to show for a fair estate in the other
world. Certainly to an holy man, there is no wife to an holy wife, no child to
an holy child, no friend to an holy friend, no Magistrate to an holy
Magistrate, no Minister to a holy Minister, nor no servant to an holy servant;
internal excellencies carries it with a holy man, before all external glories.
The Jews say that those seventy souls that went with Jacob into Egypt, were as
much worth as all the seventy Nations in the world. Doubtless seventy holy
persons in the esteem and judgment of those that are holy, are more worth then
a whole world, Plato could say, that no Gold or precious stones does glister so
gloriously, as the prudent spirit of a good man.
yea then seventy worlds of unrighteous souls. A soul truly holy, sets the
highest price upon those that are holy; holy Paul prized holy One simus as his
Son, Philem. v. 10. as himself, v. 17. yea as his own bowels, v. 12. 2 Samuel
22.27. With the pure thou will show thy self pure, or (as the Hebrew will bear
it) with the choice thou will show thy self choice. Pure souls are the choicest
souls in all the world: They are choice in every eye but their own. All worldly
excellencies in the judgment of a holy man, are but as Copper, Brass, Tin and
Lead; but holiness is the tried silver, the gold of Ophir, the pearl of price
in his eye that has purity in his heart. They only rate and value men aright,
who rate and value them according to their holiness; and if men were thus rated
and valued, most men in the world would be found not worth the money that Judas
sold his Master for. If thou prizest others for their holiness, thou art a holy
person; no man can truly prize and highly value holiness in another, but he
that has holiness in his own heart. Some prize Christians for their wit,
others prize them for their wealth; some prize them for their birth and
breeding, others prize them for their beauty and worldly glory; some prize them
for the great things that have been done by them, others prize them for the
good things that they have received from them; some prize them for their Eagles
eyes, others prize them for their silver tongues; but he that is truly holy,
prizes them for their holiness, he values them for their purity and sanctity.
But,

Fourthly, He that is truly holy, will be still a reaching and Psalm. 84.7.
Psalm. 119.106. Col. 1.10. 2 Cor. 7.1.
yea a man that is truly holy, can never be holy enough, he sets no bounds nor
limits to his holiness; the perfection of holiness is the mark that he has in
his eye; he hears, and prays, and mourns, and studies, and strives that he may
come up to the highest pitch of holiness. Phil. 3.12, 13, 14. Not as though I
had already attained, or were already perfect; but I follow after, if that I
may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren, I
count not my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting
those things which are behind; A Metaphor from runners in a race, who strain
and stretch out themselves to the utmost, that they may take hold on the mark
or prize that is set before them.
and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward the
mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Received
measures of holiness will not satisfy a holy soul; so much holiness as will
keep hell and his soul asunder, will not satisfy him; nor so much holiness as
will bring him to happiness, will not satisfy him; he will be still reaching
and stretching out after the highest measures of holiness; his desires are for
more holiness. Psalm 27.4. the beauties of holiness do so affect him and
inflame him, that he cannot but desire to be more and more holy. Lord, says
the soul, I desire to be more holy, that I may glorify thy name more, that I
may honor my profession more, and that I may serve my generation more. Lord, I
desire to be more holy, that I may sin less against thee, and that I may enjoy
more of thee; I would be more holy, that I may be more prevalent with thee, and
that I may be more victorious over all things below thee. And as a man of
holiness desires more holiness, so a man of holiness earnestly prays for more
holiness. Psalm 51.2, 7. Job 17.9. Prove. 4.18.
He prays that he may be filled with the fruits of righteousness, and that he
may go on from faith to faith, and from strength to strength; he prays that
his spark of holiness may be turned into a flame, his drop of holiness into a
Sea, and his mite of holiness into a rich Treasury; he prays that he may
like the Eagle fly higher and higher, and that his soul may be like the rising
Sun, that shines brighter and brighter till it be perfect day: he prays that
he may like the Giant refreshed, rejoice to run his course; and that holiness
in his soul, like the waters in Ezekiel's sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47.
may still be rising higher and higher. It was Beza's prayer, Lord, perfect
what thou have begun in me, that I may not suffer Shipwreck when I am almost at
heaven. And as a man of holiness prays for more holiness, so a man of
holiness believes for more holiness. Psalm 51.7. in your Translations you read
the words prayer-wise, but in the Hebrew the words run in the future thus: Thou will purge me from sin with Hyssop, and I shall be clean; thou will wash me and
I shall be whiter then snow: In the sense of all his sinfulness and vileness he
believes that God will give out greater measures of purity and sanctity to him:
Thou will purge me, and I shall be clean: thou will wash me, and I shall be
whiter then snow. So in Psalm. 65.3. Iniquities prevail against me: as for our
transgressions, thou shall purge them away. Though for the present iniquity did
prevail, yet he had faith enough to believe that God would purge him from his
transgressions, and that he would mortify prevailing corruptions. And as a man
of holiness believes for more holiness, so a man of holiness hopes for more
holiness, 2 Pet. 3.14.
1 John 3.2, 3, 4. In every ordinance he hopes for more holiness, and under
every providence he hopes for more holiness, and under every mutation and
change of his condition he hopes for more holiness. When he is in prosperity,
he hopes that God will make him more zealous, thankful, cheerful, fruitful
and useful; and when he is in Adversity, he hopes that God will inflame his
love, and raise his faith, and increase his patience, and strengthen his
submission, and quiet his heart in a gracious resignation of himself to God. I
dare boldly say that that man was never truly holy who endeavors not to get up
to the highest pitches of holiness: True holiness knows no restrictions, Ille
non est bonus, qui non vult esse melior.
nor limitation. But now counterfeit holiness is either like Hezekiahs Sun
which went backward: Or like Joshuahs Sun which stood still: or like Ephraims
morning cloud which soon passed away. No round but the highest round in Jacobs
Ladder will satisfy a holy soul: True holiness make a man divinely covetous.
Look as the victorious man can never make conquests enough, nor the Ambitious
man can never have honor enough, nor the voluptuous man pleasure enough, nor
the worldling Mammon enough, nor the wanton vain embraces enough, no more can a
man of holiness have ever holiness enough in this world. As the grave and the
barren womb are never satisfied, Pro. 30.15, 16.
they never say it is enough: So a holyman whilst he is a this side eternity,
he is never satisfied, he can never say that he has holiness enough.

Fifthly, Where there is real holiness, there is a holy hatred, True hatred is
((...),) against the whole kind.
detestation, and indignation against all ungodliness, and wickedness and
that upon holy accounts; Psa. 119.101. I have refrained my feet from every evil
way: (but why?) that I may keep thy word, ver. 104. Through thy precepts I get
understanding: therefore I hate every false way. The good that he got by divine
precepts, stirred up his hatred against every false way: ver. 128. Therefore I
esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right; and I hate every
false way. His high esteem of every precept, raised up in him a holy
indignation against every evil way. A holy man knows, that all sin strikes at
the holiness of God, the glory of God, the nature of God, the being of God,
and the Law of God: and therefore his heart rises against all; he looks upon
every sin, as the Scribes and Pharisees that accused Christ; and as that Judas
that betrayed Christ; and that Pilate that condemned Christ; and those
Soldiers that scourged Christ; and as those spears that pierced Christ; and
therefore his heart cries out for Justice upon all. He looks upon every sin as
having a hand in the death of his Savior, and therefore he cries out Crucify
them all, crucify them all; he looks upon every sin as a grieving of the
spirit, as a vexing of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. Isa. 63.10. 1 These. 5.19.
and as a quenching of the spirit; and so nothing will satisfy him but the
ruin of them all. He looks upon every sin as a dishonor to God, as an enemy
to Christ, as a wound to the Spirit, as a reproach to the Gospel, and as a moth
to (his) holiness: and therefore his heart and his hand is against every sin;
but now if you will but look into the Scriptures, you shall find that all those
that have been but pretenders to holiness, Isa 58.1.9. Zach. 7.4, 5, 6, 7.
their hearts have been always engaged to some one way of wickedness or
another. Jehu was very zealous against Idolaters; but yet his heart was engaged
to his golden calves. Mark 6. John 12.6.
Herod hears John Baptist gladly, and reforms many things, etc. but yet his
Herodias must still lie in his bosom. Judas was as forward in religious
Services as any others, but yet money did bear the masterie with him: The
Pharisees made long prayers, Matthew. 23.19. Chap. 16.23.
that they might the better make a prey upon widows house. The young man
offered fair for heaven; but yet his possessions had so possessed, and locked up
his heart, that Christ could get no entrance. Acts 8.13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23.
Though Simon Magus believed, and was baptized, and wondered at the miracles and
signs which were done by Philip: yet for all these shows of godliness, he was
a prisoner to his lusts; his condition was dangerous, poisonous and odious; he
was in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity. So those in Mat. 7.21, 22,
23. though they complemented with Christ, saying, Lord, Lord, though they
prophesied in Christ's name, and cast out devils in Christ's name; yea, though
they did not a few, Qui habet unium vitium, habet omnia; He that has any one
vice, has all other with it; says Seneca truly.
but many wonderful works in Christ's name; yet all this while they were
workers of inity, they were Artists in sin; they were so addicted to sin, that
they made a trade of sin. Look, as every Lion has his den, every Dog his
kennel, every Sow her stie, and ever Crow her nest; so every unholy person has
one sin or another, to which his heart is engaged and married. and that sin
will undo him for ever. As Lysimachus lost his earthly kingdom by drinking one
draught of water: So many lose a heavenly kingdom by indulging some one sin or
other. One flaw spoils the Diamond; one Treason makes a Traitor; one turn
brings a man quite out of the way; one Leak sinks the Ship; one wound strikes
Goliath dead; one Dalilah betrays Sampson: one broken wheel spoils the whole
Clock; Judges 8.
and one fly spoils the whole box of ointment. And as one Bastard destroyed
Gideons seventy sons: so one predominant sin is enough to destroy the soul for
ever. As by taking one nap Sampson lost his strength: and by eating one Apple
Adam lost Paradise: so many men by favoring one sin, lose God, heaven and
their souls for ever. He that favors any sin, though he frowns upon many, does
but as Benhadab, recover of one disease, and die of another: Yea, he takes
pains to go to hell; sin favored ever ends tragically. And as no unholy heart
rises against all sin; so no unholy heart disdains sin or rises against sin
upon noble accounts, upon holy and heavenly accounts: Sometimes you shall have
an unholy person angry with sin, and falling out with sin, because in has
cracked his credit, or clouded his honor, or hindered his profit, or imbittered
his pleasure, or enraged his conscience, or exposed him to shame here, and hell
hereafter: But never because a righteous Law is transgressed, a holy God is
dishonored, a loving Savior is (afresh) crucified, or the blessed Spirit
grieved. It is between a holy and an unholy soul, as it is between two
children; one will not touch the coal because it will smut him, and the other
will not touch it because it will burn him. A holy heart rises against sin,
because of its defiling nature; but an unholy heart rises against sin, because
of its burning and damning nature. A holy man is most affected and afflicted
with the evil that is in sin; but an unholy heart is most affected and
afflicted with the punishment that is due to sin: A holy person hates sin,
because it pollutes his soul; but an unholy person hates it, because it
destroys his soul. A holy person loathes sin, because it makes against Gods
holiness; but an unholy person loathes it, because it provokes Gods justice. A
holy person detests sin, because of the hell that is in sin; but an unholy
person detests sin, because of the hell that follows sin: a holy heart abhors
all sin, but an unholy heart is still in league with some sin. Romans 12.9. Cha.
7.15, 19. Isa. 28.15, 18.
Now because this is a point of great concernment, I shall a little more open
and evidence the truth of it in these three particulars.

I hate vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love. What more secret then vain
thoughts! and yet against these the heart of a holy man rises. When Joseph was
tempted to be secretly wicked with his Mistress, his heart rises against it; How
can I do this great wickedness, and sin against the Lord! Hezekiah humbled
himself for the pride of his heart. Genes. 39. 2 Chronicles. 32.24, 25, 26.
Heart sins lie most close and secrret: And yet for these a holy man humbles
himself. Job would not suffer his heart in an Idolatrous way secretly to kiss
his hand. Job 31.26, 27.
The heart of a holy man rises against wickedness in the dark, against folly
in a corner, Romans 7.23, 24.
against sin a Closet. So Paul was much affected and afflicted with the
operations of sin within him, with the Law in his members rebelling against the
Law of his mind. Paul after his conversion never fell into any scandalous sin:
those sins that did most trouble him and distress him, were of his own house,
yea, were in his own heart. A holy man knows that secret sins are sins, as well
as those that are open. Psalm 19.12.
He knows that secret sins must be repented of as well as others: he knows that
God takes notice of secret sins as well as of open. 2 Samuel 12.12. Thou did it
secretly: he knows that secret sins do often interpose between God and his
soul. Psalm 90.8.
Thou have set our iniquities before thee: our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance. Genesis 38.24, 25, 26, 27.
He knows that secret sins will quickly become public, except they are
presently loathed and speedily mortified: He knows that secret sins, like
secret diseases and secret wounds, do oftentimes prove most dangerous and
pernicious; He knows that secret sins are the price of blood, as well as open
sinnings. He knows that secret sins are a grief to the Spirit, as well as those
that are manifest. He knows that sometimes God punishes secret sins with
manifest Judgments, as you may see in that great instance of David, 2 Samuel
12.10.18. Upon all which accounts, a holy heart rises in a detestation of
secret sins. But,

Secondly, The heart of a holy man rises against the least 2 Kings 2.3. Matthew.
23.24. (...) 1 Samuel 24.5. 2 Samuel 24.10.
if you compare them with those that are more great and gross, that are more
heinous and odious. Now the hatred of a holy man rises against the least, Psalm
119.163. I hate and abhor lying: but thy Law do I love. I hate, I abhor with
horror, I loath, I detest, I abominate lying as I do hell it self: So much the
Original word imports. David's heart smote him for the cutting off the lap of
Saul's garment: And his heart smote him again for numbering of the people; and
yet neither of these sins were heinous or scandalous. Some write, that there is
suth a native dread and terror of the Hauk implanted in the Dove, that it
detests and abhors the very sight of the least feather that has grown upon the
Hauk. Certainly, there is such a holy dread of sin implanted in the heart of a
Saint, 1 Cor. 8.13. Daniel 8.1. Gal. 2 3, 4. Jude 23.
that he cannot but detest and and abhor the least sin; yea, the very
appearance of sin: his soul rises against the least motions or inclinations to
evil, though they are silverd over with the most specious shows, and most
glorious pretenses: for he knows that the least sins are contrary to a
righteous Law, a holy God, and to his blessed Savior, and the Spirit his only
Comforter.

2 Samuel 12.26. Mat. 26.70. ult.
David gives way to his wandering eye, and that led him to those scandalous sins
for which God broke his bones, hid his face, and withdrew his Spirit. So Peter
first denies his Master, and then forswears him, and then falls a cursing and
damning of himself, as the Greek word (...) imports, he imprecated the wrath of
God to fall upon him, and that he might be separated from the presence and
glory of God if he knew the man; and then concludes with a most incredible lie,
I know not the man; when as there was hardly a Jew which knew not Christ by
face, he being very famous for the many miracles that he daily wrote before
their eyes. Ah, to what a height will sin suddenly rise! Ge. 27.19, 20. So
Austin confesses that his Mother Monica by sipping and supping when she filled
the cup to others, came at last to take a cup of Nimis sometimes. Plutarch.
So Jacob, first he tells three lies in a Breath: 1. I am Esau, 2. Thy first
born; 3. I have done according as thou badest me: and then he dissembled in
calling his meat venison; and then he takes the name of God in vain, by
intitling God to that he did: The Lord thy God brought it to me. Ah of what an
incroaching nature is sin! how insensibly and suddenly does it get ground upon
the soul! I have read of a young man that was tempted to three great sins, viz.
to kill his Father, to lie with his Mother, and to be drunk; judging the last
to be the least, he yielded to it, and being drunk, he killed his Father, and
ravished his own Mother. Lesser sins usually are inlets to greater: As the
little Thief let in at the window opens the door, and makes way for the
greater: and the little wedge makes way for the greater. When Pompey could not
take a City that he assaulted by force, he pretended that he would withdraw his
Army: only he desired that they would entertain a few of his weak and wounded
Soldiers, which accordingly they did; these Soldiers soon recovered their
strength, and opened the gates of the City, by which means Pompeys Army entered
and subdued the Citizens. So little sins yielded to, soon gather strength, and
open the door to greater: and so a conquest is made upon the soul. This a holy
heart well understands, and therefore it hates and abhors the least sin. But,

Secondly, A holy heart knows that little sins have exposed Saul lost two
kingdoms at once; Nu. 15.30.37. 1 Samuel 15.23. Mat. 25.25.31. Acts 5.3, 4. Genesis
19.26. chapter 3. chapter 27.
his own kingdom, and the kingdom of heaven for sparing of Agag, and the fat of
the Cattle; he remembers how the unprofitable servant for the non-improvement
of his Talent, was cast into outer darkness. He remembers how Ananias and
Saphira were stricken suddenly dead for telling a lie. He remembers how Lots
wife for a look of curiosity was turned into a pillar of Salt. He remembers how
Adam was cast out of Paradise for eating an Apple, and the Angels cast out of
heaven for not keeping their standings. He remembers that Jacob smarted for his
lying to his dying day. He remembers how God followed him with sorrow upon
sorrow, and breach upon breach, filling up his days with grief and trouble. He
remembers how Moses was shut out of the holy land, because he spoke unadvisedly
with his lips. 1 Kings 13.
He remembers the young Prophet who was slain by a Lion, for eating a little
bread, and drinking a little water contrary to the command of God, though he
was drawn thereunto by an old Prophet under a pretense of a revelation from
heaven. Luke 1.19, 20, 21, 22, 23.62. 2 Samuel 6.7, 8.
He remembers how Zacharias was stricken both dumb and deaf, because he
believed not the report of the Angel Gabriel. He remembers how Vzzah was
stricken dead for staying up the Ark when it was in danger to have fallen. Yea,
he can never forget the fifty thousand men of Beth-shemesh who were slain for
looking into the Ark. 1 Samuel 6.19, 20, 21.
Now ah how does the remembrance of these things stir up the hatred and
indignation of a gracious soul against the least sins. A dram of poison
disfuseth it self to all parts, till it strangle the vital spirits, and
separates the soul from the body; A little coal of fire has turned many a
stately fabric into ashes. A little prick with a thorn may as well kill a man,
as a cut with a drawn sword: A little fly may spoil all the Alablaster Box of
ointment. General Norris having received a slight wound in his Arm in the wars
of Ireland, made light of it, but his Arm gangrened, and so he lost both Arm
and life together. Fabius a Senator of Room (and Lord Chief Justice besides)
was strangled by swallowing a small hair in a draught of milk. Three fits of an
Ague carried away Tamerlain, who was the terror of his time. Anacreon (the
Poet) was choked with the kernel of a grape. An Emperor died by the scratch
of a comb: One of the Kings of France died (miserably) by the chock of a Hog;
And his Brother with a blow of a ball at Tennis was struck into his grave. And
thus you see little things have brought upon many, great miseries. And so
little sins may expose and make persons very liable to great punishments: And
therefore no wonder if the heart of a holy man rises against them. Those sins
which are seemingly but small, are very provoking to the great God, and very
hurtful to the immortal soul: And therefore they cannot but be the object of a
Christians hatred.

Psalm 137.9.
God looks that Babylons little ones should be dashed against the stones. Not
only great sins but little ones must be killed, or they will kill the soul. The
Viper is killed by the little ones that she nourishes in her own bowels. So
many a man is eternally slain by the little sins that he nourishes in his own
bosom: as a little stab at the heart kills a man, so a little sin without a
great deal of mercy will damn a man. God expects that his children should
abstain from all appearance of evil. 1 These. 5.22. Bernard glosseth Quicquid
est male coloratum. Whatsoever id of an ill show, or ill report.
As thou would neither wound thy conscience, nor thy credit, God nor the
Gospel, thou must keep off from the very appearances of evil. A Christian is to
hate not only the flesh, but the garment; and not only the garment which is
besmeared, but the very garment that is (but) bespotted with the flesh. Jude
23. Our first Parents were not only forbidden to eat of the forbidden fruit,
but they were forbidden to touch it, Genesis 3.3. And certainly, he that would not
gape after forbidden fruit, must not gaze upon forbidden fruit: He that would
not long after it, must not look upon it; he that would not taste it, Numb.
6.3, 4.
must not touch it. The pious Nazarite was not only commanded to abstain from
wine and strong drink, but also from eating grapes, whether moist or dry: yea,
he was prohibited from eating any thing that was made of the vine-tree from the
kernels, even to the husk. Lest by the sweet and contentment of any of these,
he should be tempted or enticed to drink wine, and so forget the Law, Prove.
31.5. Difficile quis venenum bibet, and vivet. Cypr. A man can hardly drink
poison and live.
and break his vow, and make work for hell or repentance, or the Physician of
souls. Sin is so hateful a thing that both the remote occasion, and the least
occasion that might draw the soul to it, is to be avoided and shunned as a man
would avoid and shun hell it self. He that truly hates the nature of sin,
cannot but hate the least sin, yea, all appearances of sin. A holy heart knows
that the very thought of sin, if not thought on, will break forth into action,
action into custom, custom into habit, and then body and soul are undone for
ever. Look, as nothing speaks out more sincerity and real sanctity, then
shunning the very appearances of vanity: so nothing speaks out more indignation
against sin, then the avoiding the occasions of sin. But,

Fourthly, A holy heart knows, that the indulging of much reason to suspect
himself, and to be suspected by others, who dares break with God, and with his
own conscience for a trifle; he that will trangress for a morsel of bread,
Prove. 28.21.
will be ready enough to sell his soul for a groat. He that will pervert
Justice for a few pieces of silver, what will he not do for a hatful of gold?
he that will sell the poor for a pair of Shoos, Amos 2.6.
will destroy the poor for a brace of Angels. He that will sell souls
dog-cheap, that will slay the souls that should not die, Ezekiel 3.19.
and save the souls alive that should not live, for handfulls of barley, and
pieces of bread, will make no bones of making merchandise of souls for silver
and gold: Rev. 8.12, 13. Zech. 13.14.
He that will sell his Savior once for thirty pieces of silver, will sell him
as often as you please for a greater sum. He that makes no conscience of
betraying Christ into the hands of sinners for thirty shillings, Mat. 7, 4, 5,
6.
will make no conscience of betraying his own soul into the hands of the devil
at the price of a halter. He that dares lie to save a little of his estate,
what will not he do to save his life. Acts 1.11.
These things a holy heart well understands, and the serious remembrance of
them stirs up in him a holy indignation against the least transgression. But,

Hebrews 9.22.
nor no remission of little sins. He knows that the blood of Christ is as
requisite to cleanse the soul from the least sin, as it is to cleanse it from
the greatest, 1 John 1.7. And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all our sins. It is not the casting of a little holy water upon us: it is
not the Papists Purgatories, About little sins, you may see more in my Precious
Remedies against Satan's Devices. page 22.34.
nor their whippings, nor St. Francis his kissing or licking of our sores, nor
a Bishops blessing, nor a few knocks on the breast, nor a few tears dropping
from our eyes, that can cleanse us from the least sin. No, it is only the blood
of Christ that cleanses us from all our sins; there is not the least spot in a
Christians heart that can be washed out, but in the blood of the Lamb. When
Satan appeared and presented to a dying man in a long Parchment Role his Idle
words, his false words, his angry words, his wanton words, and his more wicked
words and deeds: The dying man answered, All this is true Satan, but yet there
is one thing more for thee to set down under all my sins, and that is this, The
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all our sins. Whereupon the
devil vanished, as being vanquished. Certainly, there is not a vain thought,
nor an Idle word, nor an angry word, not a wanton word that can be pardoned or
cleansed but by the blood of Jesus Christ. The remembrance of which cannot but
stir up a holy indignation in a gracious soul against the least corruption.
When Julius Caesar the Emperor was murdered, Antonius brought forth his bloody
Coat, and showed it to the people, which stirred up in them such an indignation
against the murderers, that they cried out, Slay the murderers, and went and
burnt their houses, and all that was in them. So when a holy heart looks upon
his sins, yea his little sins, as those that have murdered the Prince of glory,
ah what an indignation does it raise in the soul against them! A holy heart
knows that there is not the least sin, but does in a measure estrange the soul
from God; as little clouds do somewhat interpose between the Sun and us; so
little sins do somewhat interpose between God and our souls: and as sometimes a
little matter, a mistake or lending an ear; or a word out of joint, or an act
of forgetfulness does occasion some distance between dearest friends: so
sometimes little sins do occasion some distance between our dearest God and our
souls. Acts 15.36. ult. Prove. 16.28. Chap 17.9.
A holy heart knows that Christ looks upon those sins as great, which the blind
world accounts but little. Christ accounts hatred, murder, 1 John 3.15. A
wanton eye, adultery. Matthew. 5.28. And he reckons the officious lie, and the
merry lie amongst the most monstrous sins, and condemns it to the lowest hell.
Rev. 21.8. The consideration of all which raises no small indignation in a holy
heart against the least, the smallest sin. But now unholy hearts make nothing
of little sins; with Achan they will be bondslaves for a wedge of gold: with
Gehazi they will be servants of unrighteousness for a talent of silver, 2 Kings
5.22, 23.
and two changes of garments: with Adam they will transgress for n Apple: and
with Esau they will sell their birthright of grace here, and of glory
hereafter, for a mess of Pottage. The hearts of unholy persons may rise against
gross sins, such as are not only against the Law of God, but against the light
and laws of nature, and Nations; their souls may rise in arms against those
sins that makes them liable to the laws of men, or that lays them open to
shame, fear, grief, or loss: But as for vain thoughts, idle words, petty
oaths, sinful motions, and frequent omissions, they look upon these as
trifles, motes and gnats that are not to be regarded, or bewailed. But,

Dalilah was to Sampson, Herodias to Herod, Isaac to Abraham, and Joseph to
Jacob, Psalm 18.23. I was also upright before him; and I kept my self from mine
iniquity, That is, from my darling sin whereunto I was most inclined and
addicted. What this bosom sin was that he kept himself from, Psalm. 119.29.
is hard to say. Some suppose his darling sin was lying, dissembling; for it is
certain, he often fell into this sin: Others suppose it to be some secret
iniquity, which was only known to God and his own conscience. Others say it was
uncleanness, and that therefore he prayed, that God would turn away his eyes
from beholding vanity, Psalm 119.37. Others judge it to be that sin of
disloyalty which Saul and his Courtiers falsely charged upon him. It is enough
for our purpose that his heart did rise against that very sin, Jer. 44.15.20.
Isa. 1.29. chapter 57.5. Ier. 17.1, 2. Hosea 2.8. Isa. 31.6, 7.
that either by custom or some strong inclination he was most naturally apt,
ready and prone to fall into. Idolatry was the darling sin of the people of
Israel: they called their Idols delectable, or desirable things, Isa 44.9.
they did dearly affectand delight in their Idols; but when God should come to
put a spirit of holiness upon them, then their hearts should rise in hatred
and detestation of their Idols, as you may see in Isa. 30.18.25. mark ver. 22.
Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven Images of Silver, and the
ornament of thy molten Images of gold: thou shall cast them away as a menstrous
cloth, thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence. They were so delighted and
enamoured with their Idols, that they would deck then up in the greatest glory
and bravery, they would attire them with the most rich, costly, After the
return of the Jews out of Babylon, they so hated and abhorred Idols, that in
the time of the Romans they chose rather to die, then to suffer the Eagle which
was the Imperial Arms to be set up in their Temple.
pompous and glorious raiment. O but when a spirit of holiness should rise
upon them, then they should defile, deface, and disgrace their Idols, then they
should so hate and abhor them, they should so detest and loath them, that in a
holy indignation they should cast them away as a menstrous cloth, and say unto
them, get ye hence, pack, be gone, I will never have any more to do with you.
God has now made an everlasting divorce between you and me. And so in Isa.
2.20. In that day, (that is, in the day of the Lords exaltation in the hearts,
lives and consciences of his people, ver. 17.) a man shall cast his Idols of
silver, and his Idols of gold, which they made, each one for himself to
worship, to the moles and to the Bats. In the day of Gods exaltation they shall
express such disdain and indignation against their Idols, that they shall take
not only those made of trees and stones, but even their most precious and
costly Idols, those that were made of silver and gold, and cast them to the
moles and to the bats; that is, they shall cast them into such blind holes, and
into such dark, filthy, nasty and dusty corners as moles make under ground, and
as Bats roust in: So when holiness comes to be exalted in the soul, then all a
man's darling and bosom sins, which are his Idols of silver, and his Idols of
gold: these are with a holy indignation cast to the moles and to the bats; they
are so loathed, abandoned and casheered, that he desires they may be for ever
buried in oblivion, and never see the light more. Idols were Ephraims bosom
sin, Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joined (or glewed) to Idols, let him alone; but when
the dew of grace and holiness fell upon Ephraim, as it did in Chap. 14.5, 6,
7. Then says Ephraim what have I any more to do with idols! v. 8. Now Ephraim
loathes his Idols as much or more then before he loved them; he now abandons and
abominates them, though before he was as closely glewed to them, as the wanton
is glewed to his Dalelah, or as the Enchanter is glewed to the Devil, from whom
by no means he is able to stir. Ephraim becoming holy, cries out, What have I
any more to do with Idols? O I have had to do with them too long and too much
already! O how does my soul new rise against them! how do I detest and abhor
them! surely I will never have more to do with them. But now unholy hearts are
very favorable to bosom sins; they say of them as Lot of Zoar, Genesis 19.20.
Is it not a little one, and my soul shall live! And as David spoke of Absalom,
2 Samuel 18.5. Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom.
Beware that none touch the young man Absalom, ver. 12. And the King said, Mark
Acts 19.24.30.
Is the young man Absalom safe? ver. 29. An unholy heart is as fond of his
bosom sins, as Herod was of his Herodias; or a Demetrius was of his Diana; or
as Naaman was of the Idol Rimmon, 2 Kings 5.18.
which was the Idol of the Syrians: or as Judas was of bearing the bagg; or as
the Pharisees were of having the uppermost seats, and of being saluted in the
market place with those glorious titles Rabbi, Rabbi. Matthew 6.
Bosom sins have at least a seeming sweetness in them: and therefore an unholy
heart will not easily let them go. Let God frown or smile, stroke or strike,
lift up or cast down, promise or threaten, yet he will hide and hold fast his
darling sins: Job 20.12, 13.
let God wound his conscience, blow upon his estate, leave a blot upon his
name, crack his credit, afflict his body, write death upon his relations, and
be a terror to his soul, yet will he not let go his bosom lusts. he will rather
let God go, and Christ go, and grace go, and heaven go, all go, then he will
let some pleasurable, or profitable lusts go. An unholy heart may sigh over
those sins, and make war upon those sins, that war against his honors, profits
or pleasures, and yet at the same time make truce with those that are as right
hands and right eyes; an unholy person may set his sword at the breasts of some
sins, and yet at the same time his heart may be secretly courting of his bosom
sins. But now an holy heart rises most against the Dalilah in his bosom,
against the Benjamin, the son, the sin of his right hand. And thus you see how
an holy heart hates and disdains all sins; he abhors small sins as well as
great, secret sins as well as open, and bosom sins as well as others that have
not that acquaintance and acceptance with the soul. Real holiness will never
mix nor mingle it self with any sin, it will never incorporate with any
corruption: Wine and water will easily mix, so the wine of gifts and the water
of sin, the wine of civility and the water of vanity, the wine of morality and
the water of impiety will easily mix, but oil and water will not mix, they will
not incorporate; so the oil of grace, the oil of holiness, will not mix; it
will not incorporate with sin; the oil of holiness will be uppermost. Mark
natural and acquired habits and excellencies, as a pregnant wit, an eloquent
tongue, a strong brain, an iron memory, a learned head, all these with some
high speculations of holiness, and some profession of holiness, and some
commendations of holiness, and some visible actings of holiness, are consistent
with the love of lusts, with the dominion of sin, witness the Scribes and
Pharisees, Judas, Demas and Simon Magus; but the real infused habits of true
grace and holiness, will never admit of the dominion of any sin, whether great
or little, whether secret or open. But,

Sixthly, Persons of real holiness are cordially affected Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 31.
grieved and troubled about their own vileness and unholiness; you may see this
in holy Job, chap. 40. 3, 4, 5. Then Job answered the Lord and said, Behold, I
am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Once have
I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice, but I will proceed no further. So
holy Agur, Prove. 30.2, 3. Surely I am more brutish then any man, and have not
Binath Adam, the understanding of Adam.
the understanding of a man. I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge
of the holy. Though all men are brutish, yet holy men are most sensible of
their brutishness, and most affected and afflicted with it; wicked men are more
brutish then the beasts, Isa. 1.3, 4.
yet they see it not, they bewail it not; but holy Agur both sees his
brutishness and bewails it. Holy Agur looking upon that rare knowledge, that
depth of wisdom, and those admirable excellencies that Adam was endued with in
his integrity and innocence, confesses himself to be but brutish, to be as much
below what Adam once was, as a bruit is below a man. Psalm 51.
So holy David cries not Perii, I am undone, I shall perish, but peccavi, I
have sinned, I have done foolishly. And so for his being envious at the
prosperity of the foolish, Psalm 73.2, 3.
how does he befool and be-beast himself! Psalm 73.22. So foolish was I and
ignorant, I was as a beast before thee. The Hebrew word Behemoth, Therefore the
Elephant is called Behemoth, in Job 40.15.
that is here rendered beast generally, comprehends all beasts of the greater
sort. As an aggravation of his folly, he confesses that he was as a beast, as
a great beast, yea as an Epi^ome of all great beasts. So the holy Prophet
Isaiah complains that he was undone, Isa. 6.5.
that he was cut off, not upon any worldly account, but because he was a man of
unclean lips, and dwelt in the midst of a people of unclean lips. Dan. 9.
So holy Daniel complained not that they were reproached and oppressed, but
that they had rebelled. So Peter, Luke 5.8. Depart from me, for I am a sinful
man, O Lord: Or as the Greek has it, I am a man, a sinner; O Lord depart from
me, for I am a mixture and compound of all vileness and sinfulness. Romans 7.23,
24.
So holy Paul cries not out of his opposers or persecutors, but of the Law in
his members rebelling against the Law of his mind. Paul's body of death within
him, put him to more grief and sorrow, then all the troubles and trialls that
ever befell him. An holy heart laments over those sins that he cannot conquer;
a holy person labors to wash out all the stains and spots that be in his soul,
in the streams of godly sorrow; that his sins may never drown his soul; Zach.
2.10. Isa. 59.1, 2.
he will do what he can to drown his sins in penitential tears. A holy person
looks upon his sins as the crucifiers of his Savior, and so they affect him;
he looks upon his sins as the great incendaries, make-bates, and separatist
between God and his soul, and so they afflict him; he looks upon his fins as so
many reproaches to his God, blemishes to his profession, and wounds to his
credit and conscience, and so they grieve and trouble him; he looks upon his
sins as those that make many a righteous soul (besides his own) sad, whom God
would not have sadded; and that opens many a sinful mouth that God would have
stopped, Ezekiel. 13.22.
and that strengthens many a wicked heart, that God would not have
strengthened; and so they fetch many a sigh from his heart, and many a tear
from his eyes. When a holy man sins, he looks upwards, and there he sees God
frowning; he looks downwards, and there he sees Satan insulting; he looks
within himself, and there he finds his conscience either a bleeding, raging, or
accusing; he looks without himself, and there he finds gracious men lamenting
and mourning; and graceless men deriding and mocking; the sense of which does
sorely and sadly afflict a gracious soul. Some say that Saint Peter's eyes
(after his great falls) were always full of tears, insomuch that his face was
furrowed with continual weeping for his horrid thoughts, his desperate words,
his shameful shifts, and his damnable deeds, which made him look more like a
child of hell, then like a Saint whose name was written in heaven. Some say of
Adam, that when he turned his face toward the Garden of Eden, he sadly
lamented his great fall. Some say of Mary Magdalen, that she spent thirty years
in Galba in weeping for her sins. David's sins were ever before him, and
therefore no wonder if Tears instead of Gemms were so constantly the ornaments
of his bed. Wicked Pharaoh cries out, Psalm. 115.3.
Oh take away these filthy frogs, take away these dreadful judgments; but holy
David cries out, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant. Pharaoh cries
out because of his punishments, but David cries out because of his sin. Anselm
says, that with grief he considered the whole course of his life; I found
(says he) the infancy of sin in the sins of my infancy; the youth and growth
of sin, in the sins of my youth and growth; and the ripeness of all sin, in the
sins of my ripe and perfect age; and then he breaks forth into this patheticall
expression, What remains for thee, wretched man, but that thou spend thy
whole life in bewailing thy whole life! By all which it is most evident, that
holy hearts are very much affected and afflicted with their own unholiness and
vileness. Now certainly those persons are as far off from real holiness, as
hell is from heaven, who take pleasure in unrighteousness, who make a scoff and
mock of sin, who commit wickedness with greediness, who talk wickedly, who live
wantonly, who trade deceitfully, who swear horribly, who drink stiffly, who lie
hideously, and who die impenitently. But,

1 Pet. 1, 2. Jam. 5.15.
Hence prayer is called the prayer of faith, because holy faith naturalizeth a
man's heart to prayer; it is as natural for a holy man to pray, as it is for him
to breath, or as it is for a bird to fly, or fire to ascend, or a stone to
descend: Romans 16.26. Psalm 119.166.
And hence it is that obedience is called the obedience of faith, because holy
faith naturalizes a man's heart to obedience. As soon as ever this plant of
renown was set in the heart of Paul, he cries out, Lord, what will thou have me
to do? Acts 9.6. Gal. 3.2.
And hence it is that hearing is called the hearing of faith, because this holy
principle naturalizes a man's heart to hearing. Psalm 122.1, 2.
I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. And
so in Isa. 2.3. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to
the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach
us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth
the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. 1 These. 1.3.
And hence patience is called patience of hope, because this holy principle of
hope naturalizes a man's heart to a patient waiting upon God. Romans 8.25. But if
we hope for that we see not, Heb. 6.10.
then do we with patience wait for it. So holy love naturalizes the soul to
holy service; in 1 These. 1.3. you read of the labor of love; holy love is very
laborious; nothing makes a Christian more industrious, painful and diligent in
the service and ways of God, then holy love; holy love will make us to pray
and to praise, Romans 14.7, 8. 2 Corin. 12.14, 15, 16.
it will make us wait and work, it will provoke souls to study Christ, to
admire Christ, to live to Christ, to lift up Christ, to spend and be spent for
Christ; and to break through all difficulties that it may come nearer to
Christ, and cleave closer to Christ. As Jerome once bravely said, If my father
(said he) should stand before me, my mother should hang upon me, and my
brethren should press about me, I would break through my brethren, throw down
my mother, tread under-feet my father, that I might the faster cleave unto
Christ my Savior. O the laboriousness of holy love! So far as a Christian is
holy, so far holy services will be delightful and easy to him. Romans 7.22. I
delight in the Law of God after the inward man. ver. 25. So then with the mind
I my self serve the Law of God. Psalm 119.16. I will delight my self in thy
Statutes: I will not forget thy Word. Ver. 35. Make me to go in the path of thy
Commandments; for therein do I delight. Ver. 47. And I will delight my self in
thy Commandments which I have loved. Ver. 92. Unless thy Law had been my
delights, I should then have perished in mine affliction. Ver. 143. Trouble and
anguish have taken hold on me; yet thy Commandments are my delights. Sirs,
Honor is not more suitable, delightful, and pleasing to an ambitious man, nor
pleasure to a voluptuous man, nor flattery to a proud man, nor gold to a
covetous man, nor excess to an intemperate man, nor revenge to an envious man,
Psalm 27.8. Psalm. 81.8. ult.
nor pardon to a condemned man, then Religious duties and services are
suitable, pleasing and delightful to a holy man; but now unholy hearts are very
averse to holy duties and services: they are averse to hearing, averse to
praying, averse to reading, averse to meditating, averse to self-judging,
averse to self-examining, averse to holy worship, averse to holy Sabbaths. Amos
8.5. When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the Sabbath
that we may set forth Wheat? Isa. 26.10, 11. Jer. 5.1, 6.
You may sooner draw a Coward to fight, or a Malefactor to the Bar, or a Bear
to the stake, Wicked hearts are habitually averse to all that is good, etc.
then you shall draw unholy hearts to holy services. But if at any time, by the
strong motions of the Spirit, the close debates of conscience, the powerful
persuasions of the Word, the education of godly parents, the pious example of
bosom friends, the rich treasures in precious promises, the dreadful evils in
terrible threatenings, or if at any time by the displeasure of God, the smarting
rod, the bowels of mercy, the woings of love, or if at any time by some flashes
of hell, or glimpses of heaven, or by the heavy sighs, the deep groans, and the
bleeding wounds of a dying Savior, their hearts are wrote over to Religious
services, Ah how soon are they weary of them! What little delight or pleasure
do they take in them! Isa. 43.22. Isa. 58.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, (that is, thou have not worshipped
nor served me sincerely, faithfully, feelingly, heartily, affectionately,
humbly, holily, as thou should, and as thou ought) but thou have been
weary of me, O Israel; that is, thou have been weary of my worship and service,
and thou have counted it rather a burden then a benefit, a damage then an
advantage, a reproach then an honor, a disgrace then a favor, a vexation then
a blessing, and for all thy formal courtings and complementings of me, thou
have been secretly weary of me. So in Mal. 1.12, 13. Ye say, The table of the
Lord is polluted, and the fruit thereof, even his meat is contemptible: Ye said
also, Behold what a weariness is it! and ye have snuffed at it, says the Lord
of hosts, etc. They did God but little service, and that they did was after the
worst manner too, and yet they snuff, and puff, and blow, and sweat, and swell,
and fall into a fustian fume, as if they had been over-tyred and wearied with
the burden and weight of those sacrifices which they offered up to the great
God. A holy heart thinks all too little that he does for God; but an unholy
heart thinks every little too much that he does for God. An holy heart, like
the holy Angels, loves to do much and make no noise; but an unholy heart makes
most noise when he does least service; an unsanctified soul has a Trumpet in
his right hand, when he has but a penny to give in his left hand, as here. But,

Eighthly, Where there is real holiness, there will be the viz. the honor of
God, the command of God, the will of God, the credit of the Gospel, etc. Real
holiness toward God, is always attended with righteousness toward men. Ephesians.
4.24. And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, or, holiness of truth. Titus 2.11, 12. For the
grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all men. Teaching us,
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godlily in this present world. These words contain the sum of
a Christians duty, to live soberly toward our selves, righteously toward our
neighbors, and godlily toward God, The common shekel is about 20. pence, so
then 400. shekels amount to 33. pound, six shillings and eight pence, after
five shillings sterling the ounce. -- And in this purchase is prophetically
showed that Abraham's posterity should have the inheritance of that land. As
Jeremiahs buying of his Uncles field, was a sign of the Jews return, and of
their policy there again to buy and sell.
is true godliness indeed, and the whole duty of man. So holy Abraham in Genesis
23.16. And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron, and Abraham weighed to Ephron the
silver which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred
shekels of silver, current money with the Merchant. It is recorded to holy
Abraham's everlasting honor and fame, that he paid for the field that he bought
of Ephron current money not counterfeit, pure not adulterate, shekels of
silver, not shekels of brass silvered over; he paid the price that was pitched,
and he paid it in such coin as would go current in one Country as well as
another. So holy Jacob in Genesis 43. supposing that the money that was returned
in the sacks of corn that his sons brought out of Egypt, was through some
mistake or oversight, he very honestly and conscientiously ordered them to
carry the money back again. Ver. 12. And take double money in your hand: and
the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in
your hands; peradventure it was an oversight. A holy heart will not, a holy
heart dares not take an advantage from another error to do him wrong; it is
but justice to return and restore to every man his due. So holy Moses in Numb.
16.15. And Moses was very wroth, and said unto the Lord, Respect not thou their
offering: I have not taken one Ass from them, neither have I hurt one of them:
He sought their good, not their goods; he preferred their safety before his own
life; he did right to every man, he did wrong to no man; he did every man some
good, he did no man the least hurt. So holy Samuel, in 1 Samuel 12.3, 4, 5.
Behold here am I, witness against me before the Lord, and before his anointed:
whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded?
whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine
eyes therewith? And I will restore it you. And they said, Thou have not
defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither have thou taken ought of any man's hand.
And he said unto them, the Lord is witness against you, and his anointed is
witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand. And they answered,
he is witness. He makes a solemn protestation before the Lord, before his
anointed, and before the people, that he had so lived in the exercise of
justice and righteousness amongst them, that they could not accuse him of the
least unrighteousness, they could not say, black was his eye, they could not
say that he had lessened them to greaten himself, or that he had impoverished
them to enrich himself, or that he had ruined them to raise himself; upon his
appeal they unanimously declare his innocence and integrity. So holy Daniel, in
Dan. 6.4, 5. Then the Presidents and Princes sought to find occasion against
Daniel concerning the Kingdom, but they could find no occasion nor fault;
forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was there any error or fault found in
him. Then said these men, we shall not find any occasion against this Daniel,
except we find it against him concerning the Law of his God. Though envy be the
father of cruelty and malice, the mother of murder and ambition, the plotter of
others destruction; yet holy Daniel was so just and righteous, so innocent and
prudent, so careful and faithful in the administration of his high office, that
none of his envious, malicious, and ambitious enemies could (after their unity
in a hellish and cruel conspiracy) charge him with the least spot of injustice
or show of unrighteousness; they narrowly scanned all his administrations, and
diligently weighed all his actions, and yet themselves being Judges, Daniel is
found innocent: They could not so much as charge him with a colorable fault.
Luke 1.5, 6.
So Zacharias and Elizabeth, they walked in all the Commandments and Ordinances
of the Lord blameless; they walked not only in the Ordinances, but also in the
Commandments of the Lord, and they walked not only in some Commandments, but in
all the Commandments of the Lord; they walked in the Commandments of the second
Table, as well as in the Commandments of the first Table; they were as well for
righteousness toward man, as they were for holiness toward God. So the
Apostles in 2 Corin. 7.2. Receive us, we wronged no man, we have corrupted no
man, we have defrauded no man. The Apostle would have the Corinthians to make
room for them in their hearts and houses (as the Greek word (...) imports) for
that they had wronged no man in his name or reputation, as the false Apostles
had; neither had they corrupted any man in his judgment by false Doctrines or
evil Examples, as the false Apostles had; neither had they defrauded any man in
his estate, as the false Apostles had, who made a prize of their followers and
hearers; of the same import is that of the Apostle in 1 These. 2.10. Ye are
witness, and God also, how holily, justly, and unblamably we behaved our selves
among you that believe. He takes God and them to witness, that they had lived
holily in respect of God, and righteously in respect of the world, and
unblameably in respect of them that believe. By all which it is most evident,
That where there is real holiness toward God, there will be the exercise of
righteousness toward men.

But now where there is but the shows and appearances of holiness, Mat. 23.14.
there persons make no conscience of exercising righteousness toward men:
witness the Scribes and Pharisees, who under a pretense of praying, made a prey
of widows houses; who under a pretense of piety, exercised the greatest
covetousness, unrighteousness and cruelty, and that upon widows, who are
(usually) the greatest objects of pity and charity; they made no bones of
robbing the widow, under pretense of honoring of God. So Judas, John 12.6.
who was a Cato without, but a Nero within; who under a pretense of laying up
for the poor, robbed the poor; he made use of counterfeit holiness, as a cloak
to cover all his thievish villainies; he pretended to lay up for the poor, but
he intended only to lay up for himself, and to provide against a rainy-day; it
is like he had no great mind to stay long with his Lord, and therefore he was
resolved to make the best market he could for himself; that so when he should
lay down his Stewardship, he might have something to live upon. Judas acted the
part of a Saint in his profession, and discourses, that so he might be the less
suspected to act the part of a thief in his more secret practices. Judas had
not been long in office, before he put Conscience out of office, and Conscience
being put out of office, Judas sets up for himself, and under a Cloak of
holiness, he practices the greatest unfaithfulness: Though the Eagle sores
high, yet still her eye is upon her prey; so though Judas did sore high in
profession, yet his eye was still upon his prey, upon his bags, and so he might
have it, he cared not who went without it; so he might be rich, he did not care
though his Lord and his retinue grew never so poor. 2 King. 5.20, 26.
Judas had Jacobs voice, but Gehazies heart and hands, and therefore he screws
up his Consciencee till he makes all crack again. Under all his shows of
sanctity, he had not so much as common honesty in him. Counterfeit holiness is
often made a stalking horse, to the exercise of much unrighteousness: Certainly
that man is as far from real holiness, as the Devil himself is from true
happiness; who lives not in the exercise of righteousness toward men, as well
as in a profession of holiness toward God. Well Christians, remember this, it
were better with the Philosopher, to have honesty without Religion, then to
have Religion without honesty. But,

Sampson had tasted honey, Judge. 14.8, 9.
he gave his father and mother some with him. Holiness is so sweet a morsel,
that a soul cannot taste of it, 1 These. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.
but he will be a commending of it to others. As you may see in holy Moses, in
Numb. 11.29. And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? Lilmod le
lammed, we therefore learn that we may teach, is a proverb among the Rabbines.
would God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put
his Spirit upon them. A holy soul will never make a monopoly of holiness; the
Prophets you know were men of greatest grace and holiness; now holy Moses is
very importunate and earnest with God, that he would not only make the two that
prophesied, but all the Lords people eminent and excellent in grace and
holiness; such was Moses his holiness and humbleness, that he desires that all
others might either equal him, or excel him in gifts and grace. The Heathen:
could say, I do therefore lay in and lay up, that I may draw forth again for
the good of many.
A heart eminently holy, is so far from envying of the gracious excellencies of
others, that it can rejoice in every Sun that out-shines his own: and every
light that burns more dim then his, he desires that it may be snufft, (not put
out) that so it may give a clearer and a greater light to others. So holy Paul
in Acts 26.29. And Paul said, I would to God, that not only thou, but also all
that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except
these bands. True holiness is no Churl: nothing makes a man more noble in his
spiritual desires, wishes, and actings for others, then holiness. Real
holiness, like oil, is of a diffusive nature; like light, it will spread it
self over all, like Mary's box of ointment, it fills all the house with the
sweet scent thereof. Art thou a holy Father, then thou will with holy Abraham,
labor to make thy children holy. Genesis 18.17, 18, 19. A holy heart knows, that
both by his first birth, but especially by his new birth, he stands obliged to
promote holiness in all, but especially in those that are parts and pieces of
himself. Art thou a holy Master, then thou will with holy Joshua, labor to
make all under thy charge holy. Josh. 24.15. But as for me, and my house, we
will serve the Lord. True holiness cannot be concealed, it will be a stirring
and a provoaking of others to be holy; as a holy man does not love to be happy
alone, so a holy man does not love to be holy alone. A holy master loves to see
a Crown of holiness set upon every head in his family: Holiness is a very
beautiful thing, and it makes those beautiful in whom it is; in a holy Masters
eye, there is no servant so lovely and beautiful, as he that has the beauty of
holiness upon him. George Prince of A^halt his family is said to have been
(Ecclesia, Academia, Curia) A Church, an University and a Court.
A holy Magistrate will labor to make both his servants and his subjects holy.
As holy David, holy Asa, holy Josiah, and holy Ezekiah did, he knows that the
souls of his servants and subjects are the choicest treasure that God has
committed to his care; he knows that every soul is more worth then his Crown
and Kingdom; he knows that he must one day give up an account for more souls
then his own, and therefore he improves his power and interest every way for
the making of all holy under him. As Lewis the ninth King of France took pains
to instruct his poor Kitchin-boy in the way to heaven, and being asked the
reason of it, he answered, The meanest have a soul to save as precious as mine
own, and bought by the same blood of Christ. It is said of Constantine (that in
this he was truly great) that he would have his whole Court gathered together,
and cause the Scriptures to be read and opened to them, that they might be made
holy Courtiers, Rev. 21.27.
and so fitted for the Court of heaven, into which no unclean person or thing
can enter. It grieved an Emperor, that a neighbor of his should die before he
had done him any good. Ah, it is the grief of a holy Magistrate to see others
die before they are made holy; the great request of a holy Magistrate living
and dying, is this, Lord make this people a holy people! O make this people a
holy people! Art thou a holy kinsman, a holy friend, then thou will labor to
make thy kindred holy, and thy friends holy: As holy Cornelius did, So in 1
John 39, 49. Chap. 4.28, 29, 30.
as you may see in Acts 10.24, 27. And the morrow after they entered into
Cesaria: and Cornelius waited for them, and had called together his kinsmen and
near friends. And as Peter talked with him, he went in, and found many that
were come together. And in ver. 33. says Cornelius to Peter, Thou have well
done that thou art come: Now therefore we are all here present before God, to
hear all things that are commanded thee of God. Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Devout Cornelius gets his kinsmen and near friends together, that they also
might be partakers of the grace and mercy of God with him: he had experienced a
work of grace and holiness upon his own heart, and he uses his best endeavors
that they might experience the same on theirs. A holy Christian is like a
loadstone that draws to it self first one iron ring, and that another, and that
a third. It is a true saying in natural Philosophy, that it is (Naturalissimum
opus viventis generare sibi simile) the most natural act or work of every
living thing to produce another like unto it self.
As there is a natural instinct in all creatures to propagate their own kind,
as in beasts, birds and fishes; so there is a holy, a spiritual instinct in all
gracious hearts to propagate grace and holiness in whatever hearts they can.
Look as fire will assimilate and turn every thing that comes near it into its
own nature; so will a holy heart labor to make all that comes near him like
himself. Look as one drunkard labors to make another, and one swearer another,
and one wanton another, and one thief another, and one idle person another, and
one fearful person another, and one doubtful person another, and one erroneous
person another, etc. So one holy heart labors to make another, one gracious
heart labors to make another, he that is humble will labor to make others
humble, he that is sincere will labor to make others sincere, he that is
faithful will labor to make others to be faithful, he that is fruitful will
labor to make others fruitful, and he that is watchful will labor to make
others watchful. A heart that is truly holy, will labor by prayers, reproofs,
tears, example, counsel, and commands, to make others like himself: He knows
that there is no love, no wisdom, no care, no pains (next to that which he
takes with his own heart) to that which is laid out to make unholy hearts holy.
And therefore he prays and weeps, and weeps and prays, that holiness may be
written upon all that his name is written upon; he learns and teaches, and he
teaches and learns, and all that he may teach and learn others to be holy; he
counts it not worth while to live in this world, were it not for the glory of
God, and the good of his own and others souls; but now what shall we say of
those persons who are so far from being holy, who are so far from drawing
others to be holy, that they do what they can to make those that are holy to
become unholy; and who strongly tempt those that are unholy to be more unholy;
these are factors for hell, and certainly such solicitors shall at last be most
dreadfully handled by hellish tormentors. But,

Titus 1.15.
He will be spiritual in the use of carnal things, and heavenly in the use of
earthly things. There is a silver vein of sanctity that runs through all his
worldly concernments. If you look upon him in his eating and drinking; you
shall find him holy, 1 Cor. 10.31. If you look upon him in his buying and
selling, in his paying and receiving, you shall find him holy, Isa. 23.18. And
her Merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord. Before Tyres
conversion she labored to enrich her self by hook and by crook: all was fish
that came to Tyres net. Tire could say any thing, or do any thing, or be any
thing for gain. Oh, but when Tire is converted and sanctified, then all her
merchandise and hire, then all her gettings and earnings shall be holiness to
the Lord. Tire now shall write holiness upon all her wares and commodities:
Tire shall buy nothing, nor sell nothing, nor exchange nothing, but there shall
be holiness written upon it. And Tire shall be as well holy in using and
improving of her merchandise and hire, as she has been holy in the getting of
them; for so it follows in the same verse, It shall not be treasured nor laid
up: for her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat
sufficiently, and for durable clothing. Tire before her conversion hoorded up
riches; and laid up her merchandise to spend upon her lusts; to spend upon her
pride, and wantonness, and luxuriousness, etc. But now being converted she
uses and improves what she has in the Service of the Lord, and for the
comfort, support and relief of the poor and needy. When Tire is once made holy,
Calvin renders it Stables of horses, which are the most stinking and
contemptible places; and yet these should be holily used.
then Tire will be holy in the use of all her earthly enjoyments. If you look
upon a holy man going to war, then you shall find holiness written upon the
bridles of his horses, Zach. 14.20, 21. In that day shall there be upon the
bridles (or bells) of the horses holiness unto the Lord. Yea, every Pot in
Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness unto the Lord of Hosts. Here is
holiness written upon the bridles of the horses they ride on, and holiness
written upon the cups and pots they drink in: a holy heart will be holy in the
use of the meanest things; that are for common use. Every piece of his civility
shall savor of sanctity, and in all the parts of his common conversation you
shall be able to discern something of the power of religion, Job 5.24. And thou
shall visit thy habitation, and shall not sin. Thou shall be holy in thy
commerce, and holy in thy converse; holiness shall be written upon thy
dealings with thy servants, and holiness shall be written upon thy carriages
toward thy children, and holiness shall be written upon all thy behaviors
toward thy friends. What ever thou put thy hand to in thy habitation,
shall have holiness written upon it: thou shall make a Jacobs ladder of all
thy earthly enjoyments, all the comforts that be in thy habitation, shall be as
so many bright morning stars to lead thee on in a way of holiness, and to lead
thee up to a holy God. Look upon a holy man in his calling, and you shall find
him holy: Look upon him in the use of the creatures, and you shall find him
holy: Look upon him in his recreations, and you shall find him holy. The
habitual frame and bent of his heart is to be holy in every earthly thing that
he puts his hand unto. A spirit of holiness runs and shines in all the common
actions of his life. But now look upon those who have only the shows and
appearances of holiness, and you shall find that they have but a common spirit
in common things; take them out of their duties, and you shall find them in a
course to be earthly in the use of earthly things, and carnal in the use of
carnal things, and worldly in the use of worldly things. All their religion,
all their holiness lies in a few duties; take them out of these, and you shall
find them as carnal, as vain, as foolish, as filthy and as frothy, as light and
as slight as those that have not so much as a cloak of holiness upon them. But
he that is really holy, will be holy as well out of duties, as in duties: If
you look narrowly upon him in all his worldly concernments, you shall find some
footsteps of the aw, fear, dread, authority and glory of God upon his spirit.
Look as an unholy heart is carnal in spiritual things, and earthly in heavenly
things, and unholy in holy things, so a man that is truly holy, he is as well
holy in the ordinary affairs and actions of this life, as he is holy in any of
the exercises of Religion. But,

1 John 2.6.
Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of
judgment, because as he is, so are we in this world; there is no grace in
Christ, which is not in some degree formed in a holy heart: and therefore the
work of grace and holiness is called a forming of Christ in the soul, Gratiam
super gratiam, say some; Gratiam gratiae accumalatam, say others. Certainly
Christ is a seminary of graces. He is clara Epitome virtutum, An exact Epitome
of graces.
Gal. 4.19. Holy hearts have the very prints, stamps and impressions of the
graces of Jesus Christ upon them, 1 John 16. Of his fullness we have all
received grace for grace. Look as face answers to face, so the graces that are
in real Christians, answer to the graces that are in Jesus; there is such love
as answers to the love of Christ; and such lowliness as answers to the
lowliness of Christ, and such heavenly mindedness as answers to the heavenly
mindedness of Christ; and such meekness as answers to the meekness of
Christ; and such patience as answers to the patience of Christ; and such faith
as answers to the faith of Christ; and such zeal as answers to the zeal of
Christ; and such fear as answers to the fear of Christ, in truth and reality,
though not in degree and quantity. Look, as in generation, the child receives
member for member; or as the paper from the Press, letter for letter; or the
glass from the face, image for image; or as the wax from the seal, stamp for
stamp; so holy hearts receive from Christ grace for grace. Look as wine in the
bottle is conformable to that in the Butt, and as water in the Cistern is
conformable to that in the river; and as light in the Air is conformable to
that in the Sun; and as milk in the sawcer is conformable to milk in the
breasts; and as money in the pocket is conformable to money in the bagg. So the
graces that are in a holy Christian are conformable to the graces that are in
Christ, 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. To be a Philosopher (says Plato) is to know God, to
be in love with God, and to imitate God. So say I, to be a holy person, is to
know a holy Christ, to be in love with a holy Christ, and to imitate the
virtues of a holy Christ. It was the height of Caesar's glory, to walk in the
steps of Alexander; And of Selymus (a Turkish Emperor) to walk in the steps of
Caesar. And of Themistocles, to walk in the steps of Miltiades: so it is the
height of a Christians glory, to tread in the virtuous steps of his dearest
Lord. And as Scipio accounted it no small disparagement for him to walk one
foot awry from that course of life which Cyrus in Xenophon had gone before him
in: so a holy heart counts it no small disparagement to him in the least, to
step awry from that holy pattern that Christ has set him. Look as the holy
Prophet did lay his mouth to the Shunamites child's mouth, 2 Kings 4.34.
and his eyes to his eyes, and his hands to his hands: So a holy Christian
lays his mouth to the mouth of Christ, and his eyes to the eyes of Christ, and
his hands to the hands of Christ, and his breasts to the breasts of Christ, and
his heart to the heart of Christ: that is, 1 Pet. 2.9.
he does in all things labor to resemble Christ, to be like to Christ;
especially in those holy virtues which were most shining in the heart and life
of Christ. Now certainly, they are far from being holy, who count it a crime to
be virtuous: and so are they who walk directly contrary to Jesus Christ: he was
holy, but they are profane; he was humble, but they are proud; he was
heavenly, but they are earthly; he was spiritual, but they are carnal; he was
zealous, but they are lukewarm; he was meek, but they are contentions; he was
charitable, but they are covetous; he was courteous, but they are malicious.
Will you call these men holy? surely no. But,

Twelfthly, He that is truly holy, Joshua 7.9. Psalm 69.9. Ezra 9.3. Nehemiah
9. Daniel 9. Micah 1.8. Ierem. 13.17.
is much affected and afflicted Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the
wicked that forsake thy Law. Ver. 158. I beheld the transgressors, and was
grieved, because they kept not thy Word. Ver. 136. Rivers of waters run down
mine eyes; because they keep not thy Law. By this Hyperbolical phrase, he sets
forth the greatness of his sorrows, and that not because his enemies had
wronged him, but because they had dishonored his God. It was a great grief to
him to see others a grieving his God. So Jer. 9.1, 2, 3. O that my head were
waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night! Oh
that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men, that I might
leave my people, and go from them. But why does the holy Prophet thus take on?
why does he thus lament? why does he wish himself turned into waters, and into
a fountain of tears? why does he prefer a habitation amongst the wild beasts,
before his habitation among his own people? Why, the cause you have in the
following words, for they be all Adulterers, an Assembly of treacherous men;
And they bend their tongues like their bow, for lies: but they are not valiant
for the truth upon the earth; for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know
not me, says the Lord. So Ezekiel. 9.4. And the Lord said unto him, Go through
the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the
foreheads of the men that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations that be
done in the midst thereof. There were holy hearts in Jerusalem, that did sigh
and cry, and cry and sigh for the wickedness of the times; the abominations of
the times did lie in such full weight upon them, that they did fetch many a
sigh from their hearts, and many a tear from their eyes. Holy hearts are able
to tell you many sad stories of the groans, griefs and gripes, that other men's
sins has cost them. When most were a sinning, Gods marked ones were a
mourning; when others were with a high hand a cursing, blaspheming, and a
rebelling, Gods marked ones were deeply sorrowing; they mourned cordially, they
sighed greatly, they grieved wonderfully, they groaned lamentably, and that not
for some, but for all, for all Court sins, and Church sins, and City sins, and
family sins. And so holy Paul could not with dry eyes make mention of those
belly-gods, and earthworms that were in his time, Phil. 3.18. So holy Lot was
much affected and afflicted with seeing and hearing of the wickedness of those
among whom he lived, 2 Peter 2.7, 8. The Greek word for vexed, in verse 7.
((...)) signifies to be oppressed under the wanton and wicked conversation of
the ungodly Sodomites, as a man that is oppressed under a heavy burden which he
labors under, and would fain be delivered from; Or to be oppressed as the
Israelites were under their cruel Egyptian Taskmasters. Ah, the sins, the
wickedness of others sets hard upon the hearts of the Saints. The Israelites
did not more labor, and sigh, and groan under all their loads and oppressions,
then many holy hearts do labor, and sigh, and groan under the load of wicked
men's sins. And the Greek word for vexed, in ver. 8. It is a Metaphor taken from
Engines that they did torment people withal.
((...)) signifies to be tortured, tormented and wracked. Oh their wickedness
did torment and wrack his righteous soul, he could not see, nor hear of their
wickedness, but his soul was as upon a wrack. Pambus in Ecclesiastical History
wept when he saw an Harlot take so much pains to deck and dress her self in
curious and costly apparel, and all to entertain a wanton lover, and so to
make work for hell. Oh it cannot but grieve a gracious soul to see what pains
poor sinners take to go to hell! A holy heart looks upon other men's sins as
great dishonours done to his Father, his King; And therefore he cannot but cry
out with Croesus his Son (who though he was born dumb, yet seeing some going
about to kill his Father, his tongue-strings unloosed, and he cried out) O kill
not King Croesus, kill not my Father. Oh kill not my God, and my King! Oh kill
not, Oh dishonor not my dear Father, and Savior, says a holy heart. Such is
the love, and high respects that holy hearts bear to their heavenly Father,
that they cannot but grieve, and mourn, and cry out when they see others to act
Treason against the Crown and dignity of heaven. Elijah had rather dye then to
see Ahab and Jezebel to cast contempt and dishonor upon his God.

1. A holy heart mourns for sin as sin, he weeps over breach of a holy Law, He
that hates a Thief as a Thief, will hate a Thief in another man's house, as well
as in his own.
and as it is a dishonor to a holy God, etc. and therefore he cannot but mourn
for other men's sins, as well as his own. He that hates a Toad as a Toad, will
hate a Toad in other men's bosoms as well as his own. He that hates poison as
poison, will hate poison in another man's hand as well as his own: So he that
hates sin as sin, will hate it wherever he sees it. And he that mourns over
sin as sin, cannot but mourn over sin wherever he observes it.

Bernard makes mention in one of his Homilies of an old man, who when he saw
any man sin, wept and lamented for him, and being asked why he grieved so for
other men's sins, answered, Ille hodie, and ego cras, he fell to day, and I may
fall to morrow: the falls of others puts a holy man in mind of the roots of
bitterness that be in himself: other men's actual sins are as so many glasses
through which a holy man comes to see the manifold seeds of sin that be in his
own nature, and such a sight as this cannot but melt him, and break him.

1 Timothy 5.22. 1 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 5.11.
He that makes conscience of weeping over other men's sins, will rarely be
defiled with other men's sins; he that mourns not over other men's sins, is
accessory to other men's sins: and first or last may find them charged upon his
account: He that mourns not for other men's sins, is in danger of being ensnared
by other men's sins. And how then can a holy man look upon other men's sins with
dry eyes?

Barabbas before Christ, and this makes him groan: He looks upon hypocrites as
kissing and betraying of Christ; and he looks upon drunkards and wantons, as
giving gall and vinegar to Christ, and this makes him mourn: He looks upon
other men's sins, as having a hand in all Christ's torments, and this puts him
upon the wrack, and makes his very soul heavy, even to the death.

5. A holy heart knows that by mourning for other Psalm 106. Ezekiel. 9.4.6.
How often did holy Moses by his tears quench the wrath of an angry God? However
if wrath should break forth upon a Nation, Isa. 26.20.
yet they that mourn for the abominations of the times, they shall be hid in
the day of Gods public visitation. When the house is on fire, the Father has
a special care to provide for the safety and security of his children: when the
lumber is on fire, a man will be sure first to secure his (box of) Jewels. In
times of common calamity, God will be sure to look after his Jewels, his
mourning ones: Isa. 43.2, 3. Dan. 3.17, 18, 19, 26, 27, 28.
though the lumber (the wicked) be burnt up on every hand in the day of Gods
wrath; yet he will be sure to preserve his jewels in the midst of the flames.
Augustine coming to visit a sick man, found the room full of mourners; he found
^he wife sobbing, the children sighing, and the kindred lamenting: whereupon he
suddenly breathed forth this short, but sweet ejaculatory prayer, Lord (says
he) what prayers do thou hear, if not these? So in times of common calamity,
holy hearts may look up and say, Ah Lord, whose sighs, whose groans, whose
tears will thou hear, if not ours? Who are mourners in Sion, and who will thou
save and secure, in this day of thy fierce indignation, if not we who have
labored to drown both our own and other men's sins in penitential tears!

6. A holy heart looks upon sinners sins to contribute Psalm. 107.33, 34.
he knows that sinners sins may turn Rivers into a wilderness, and
water-springs into dry ground, and a fruitful land into a barren wilderness:
he knows that sinners sins may have a deep hand in provoking God to rain hell
out of heaven upon a sinful Nation, as he did of old upon Sodom and Gomorrah,
Eccles. 9.18. Witness Achan, Manasseh, Jeroboam, Saul, Herod, Ahab, etc.
and this sets him a mourning; if one sinner destroys much good, as Solomon
speaks, Ah, says he, what a world of good will a world of sinners destroy
then! the serious thoughts of this makes him sigh.

7. A holy heart looks upon other men's sins, as their bonds Acts 8.23. and this
makes him mourn. When Marcellus the Roman General saw the multitude of captives
that were taken in the City of Syracuse, the tears trickled down his cheeks. Ah
how can tears but trickle down a Christians cheeks, when he sees multitudes
fast bound with the cords of their iniquity trooping to hell! Who can look upon
a sinner as a close prisoner to the Prince of darkness, and not bemoan him!
Now if holy persons thus mourn for the wickedness of others: Romans 1.21. To
applaud to them, and take pleasure in them who take pleasure in sin is the
highest degree of ungodliness.
then certainly they are far from being holy, who take pleasure in the
wickedness of others, who laugh and joy, who can make a sport, a pastime of
other men's sins! These are rather monsters then men; there are none so nearly
allied to Satan, as these; nor none resemble Satan to the life, so much as
these: The devil always joys most when sinners sin most. Neither doubtless
are they holy who tempt and entice others to be unholy: nor are they holy who
only cry out of other men's sins, but never sigh for other men's sins; nor are
they holy who insult over the iniquities of others, but never mourn for the
iniquities of others; nor are they holy, who can rail, reproach, and revile
others for their sins, but have neither skill, nor will to lament over others
sins, and yet this age is full of such wretches. Certainly that man's holiness
will be found to be of the right stamp at last, who can Evangelically mourn for
other men's sins as well as his own. But,

1 Pet. 2.2. Psalm. 12.6, 7. and 18.30. Sacrae Scripturae tuae sunt sanctae
delicia meae. August.
Psalm. 119.140. Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it. A pure
heart embraces the word for its purity. So holy Paul in Romans 7.12. Wherefore
the Law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just and good. Well, and what
then? why says he, ver. 22. I delight in the Law of God after the inward man.
But is this all? No says he, ver. 25. With the mind I my self serve the Law of
God: Holy Paul delights in the Law as holy, and serves the Law as holy, just,
and good. These several Titles, Law, Statutes, Testimony, Commandments,
Judgments, are used promiscuously for the whole word of God, commonly
distinguished into Law and Gospel.
A holy heart is taken with the word for its spirituality, divinity and purity.
So in Psalm 19.8, 9, 10. The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the
heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure enlightening the eyes. The fear of
the Lord is clean, (that is, the Doctrine that teaches the true fear of God)
enduring for ever: the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous
altogether; More to be desired are they then gold, yea, then much fine gold:
Sweeter also then honey, and the honey comb: or as the Hebrew has it, Sweeter
then the dropping of hony-combs. The whole word of God as it is a pure word, a
clean word; so it rejoices a holy heart; and so it is sweeter then the very
droppings of honey-combs. It is more sweet then those drops which drop
immediately and naturally without any force or art, which is counted the purest
and the sweetest honey. There is no profit nor pleasure to that which the
purity of the word yields to a holy heart. But now unholy hearts they are
affected with the word as it is dressed up with fine high notions (which are but
mysterious nothings) they are taken with the word, as it is clothed with Arts,
In great Fairs and Markets, the Pedlar and the Ballad-singer who sell toys and
trifles, have most Children and fools hanging upon them; but they that are wise
and prudent attend those shops where there is best and richest commodities, you
know how to apply it.
Parts and Elegancy of phrase they are pleased with the word; as it is
apparelled with a spruse wit, or with silken Expressions, or with some delicate
Elocution. Augustine confesses, that the delight which he took before his
conversion in St. Ambroses Sermons, was more for the eloquence of the words,
then the substance of the matter; so many are taken more with the wit,
elocution, action, high notions, and far fetch expressions that be in a Sermon,
then they are taken with the spirituality, divinity, weight, and holy worth
that is in a Sermon; these are like those children, who are more taken with the
fine flowers that are strewed about the dish, then they are with the meat that
is in the dish; and that are more taken with the red weeds, and blew bottles
that grow in the field, then they are with the good corn that grows there. But
now as the prudent Farmer is taken more with a few handfulls of sound corn,
then he is with all the gay weeds that be in the field. So a holy heart is more
taken with a few sound truths in a Sermon, then he is taken with all the strong
lines, and high strains, and flourishes of wit with which a Sermon may be decked
up. Some are taken with the word as the profession of it brings in customers
into their shops, and keeps up their credits in the world. Others are taken
with the word as it seems to tickle their ears, and please their fancies. Some
are affected with Sermons because of the elegancy of the style, delicacy of the
words, smoothness of the language, and gracefulness of the delivery. And
these deal by Sermons as many men do by their Nosegays, that are made up of
many picked (sweet) flowers, who after they have smelt to them a while, cast
them into a corner. So these after they have commended a Sermon, after they
have applauded a Sermon, they cast away the Sermon: they smell to the Sermon,
and say it is sweet, it is sweet, and presently they throw it by as a Nosegay
that is withered, and of no further use. When a man that is sick, crazy and
unsound, is at a Table that is furnished with variety of dishes, you know he
easily and readily passes over all the most wholesome and nourishing dishes,
and falls a pidling and picking here and there upon kickshaws and puff-paste,
that have little or no substance in them. So unsound, unholy hearts when God
has prepared his Table, and made a feast of fat things for their souls in the
Ministry of his word, they can easily and readily pass over those sound,
solid, and savoury truths that are prepared for their strength and nourishment,
and fall a pidling and picking upon some new coined phrases, or some quaint
expressions, or some Seraphical notions: And no wonder, for they are not sound
within, they are under a great distemper. As the Israelites would not be
satisfied with wholesome diet, but they must needs have Quails as picking meat;
Well they had them, and whilst they were at their picking meat, the wrath of
God came upon them: the Application is as easy, as it is dreadful. But now a
holy heart savours the word, and relishes the word, and is affected and taken
with the word as it is a holy word, a substantial word, a pure word, a clean
word, and as it begets holiness, and cherishes holiness, and increases
holiness, and as it works toward the completing and perfecting of holiness.

Quest. But how may a person know whether he loves the Word, and is affected
and taken with the Word, as it is an holy Word, or no?

Answ. First by what has been already said; but because the question is
weighty, Psalm 119.6, 128. Acts 24.16. Heb. 13.18. As the wise Philosopher
delights in all Aristotle, and the prudent Physician in all Galen, and the
grave Orator in all Tullie, and the understanding Lawyer in all Justinian; so a
holy man delights in all the Bible. The Jewish Rabbines were wont to say, That
upon every letter of the Law, there hangs mountains of profitable matter. Genesis
12. and ^hap. 22.
I further answer in the second place; He that loves the Word, and that is
affected and taken with the Word, as it is a holy Word, he loves the whole Word
of God, and he is affected and taken with one part of the Word as well as
another; every Law of God is a holy Law, and every Statute is a holy Statute,
and every command is a holy command, and every promise is a holy promise, and
every threatening is an holy threatening, and every exhortation is a holy
exhortation; and therefore he that loves any part of the Word as a holy Word,
he cannot but love every part of the Word, because every part of the Word is
holy. And indeed he loves no part of the Word as holy, who loves not every part
of the Word as such. Every chapter in the book of God is a holy chapter, and
every verse is a holy verse, and every line in that book is a holy line, and
every word in every line is a holy word; he that loves a chapter as it is a
holy chapter, he loves every verse in that chapter as a holy verse; and he that
loves every verse as a holy verse, he loves every line as a holy line; and he
that loves every line as a holy line, he loves every word in every line as a
holy word: Upon easy commands he reads holiness, and upon difficult commands
he reads holiness; upon comfortable commands he reads holiness, and upon costly
commands he reads holiness, and upon dangerous commands he reads holiness, and
therefore he loves all, and closes with all, and endeavors a conformity to
all. A holy heart dares neither to dispute with that word, nor make light of
that word, where he reads holiness engraven upon it; to a holy heart, there is
no command of God unjust or unreasonable; but now an unholy heart, though it
may for some worldly advantages court and cry up some parts of the word, yet it
is ready with Judas, to betray and crucify other parts of the word. The whole
Scripture is but one entire love-letter, dispatched from the Lord Christ to his
beloved Spouse on earth, and this letter is written all in golden letters, and
therefore a holy heart cannot but be taken and affected with every line in this
letter; in this love-letter there is so much to be read of the love of Christ,
the heart of Christ, the kindness of Christ, the grace of Christ, and the glory
of Christ, that a holy heart cannot but be affected and taken with it. The
whole word of God is a field, and Christ is the treasure that is hid in that
field; it is a ring of gold, and Christ is the pearl in that ring, and
therefore a holy heart cannot but be taken with the whole Word of God. Luther
was wont to say, that he would not take all the world for one leaf of the
Bible. And Rabbie Chija in the Jerusalem Talmud says, that in his account all
the world is not of equal value with one word out of the Law.

Psalm 119.59. Thy Statutes have been my songs (I but where we) in the house of
my pilgrimage, or pilgrimages, The Saints have commonly looked upon themselves
as Pilgrims and Strangers in this world. Genesis 47.9, 39. Psalm. 12.19. Heb. 11.9,
10, etc.
as the Hebrew has it. When David was in his banishments by reason of Saul,
Absalom, and others, now the Word of God was music to him, now it was matter
of joy and rejoicing to him, his whole life was the life of a Pilgrim and
Stranger; now as a Pilgrim he sojourns here, and anon as a Stranger he sojourns
there; no man could take more pleasure, joy and contentment in the rarest and
choicest music, then David did in the Word of God, and that not only when he
was in his royal Palace, but also when he was in the house of his Pilgrimage;
he that loves the Word, and that delights in the Word for its holiness and
purity, Psalm. 119.67, 69, 70, 72.
he will love it and delight in it, in health and sickness, in strength and
weakness, in honor and disgrace, in wealth and want, in life and in death. The
holiness of the Word is a lasting holiness, and so will every man's affections
be toward it, who affects it, and is taken with it for its holiness and
pureness. Some there be that cry up the Word, and that seem to be much
affected, delighted, and ravished with the Word, (as Herod, Ezekiels hearers,
Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32, 33. Mar. 6, etc.
and the stony ground was) whilst the Word is either a cheap Word to them, or
a profitable and pleasing Word to them, or whilst it is courted and
countenanced in the world, or whilst it is the path to preferment, or a key to
enlargement, etc. But when the Word gets within them, and discovers their own
sinfulness and wretchedness to them, when it shows them how Christless, and
gracel^ss, and lifeless, and helpless, and hopeless they are; when it discovers
how far they are from heaven, and how near they are to hell. O! Ier. 44.15, 29.
then their hearts begin to rise against it, and to cry out, Away with it, it
was never good days since we have had so much preaching and hearing: Or when
the Word comes to be scorned, slighted, disgraced, opposed or persecuted, oh!
then they turn their backs upon it, and quickly grow weary of it. As the
Jussians in Strabo delighted themselves with the music of an excellent Harper
till they heard the market bell ring, and then they run all away save a deaf
old man, that could take but little delight in the Harpers ditties. So let
these men but hear the bell of lust, or the bell of profit, or the bell of
pleasure, or the bell of applause, or the bell of honor, or the bell of
error, or the bell of superstition sound in their ears, and presently they
will run from the sweet music of the Word, to follow after any of these bells:
But now a man that loves the Word, and that is affected and taken with the Word
as it is a holy Word, no bell can ring him from the Word, no disgrace, no
affliction, no opposition, no persecution can take him off from affecting the
Word, and from taking pleasure in the Word: The cause of his love is abiding
and lasting, and therefore his love cannot but be lasting and continuing. Not
but that a holy heart may sometimes be more affected and taken with the Word,
then at other times. As first, when a man enjoyes much communion with God in
the Word. Or 2. when God speaks much peace and comfort to the soul by the Word.
Or 3. when God assures a man more clearly and fully of the goodness and
happiness of his condition by the Word. Or 4. when God lets in very much
quietness, or quickness, or sweetness, or seriousness, or spiritualness into a
man's spirit by the Word. Oh then a man may more then ordinarily be affected and
taken with the Word. But now though a holy Christian is not at all times in the
same degree and measure taken with the Word, yet take such a Christian when he
is at worst, and you shall find two things in him. 1. You shall find in him a
holy love to the Word. And 2. you shall find in him a real love to holy
Christians.

Pet. 1.15.16. But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation; because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy. (I
shall give you light into these words, when I come to open the holiness of God
to you. Ad similitudinem, non aequalitatem. Calv.
) So Mat. 5.48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven
is perfect. Our summum bonum in this world, consists in our conformity to the
heavenly pattern; in all imitations it is best to choose the most perfect
pattern: There is nothing more laudable and commendable, then for a Christian
to endeavor more and more to resemble his God in the highest perfections of
righteousness and holiness. So Ephesians. 5.15, 16. See then that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise; (...).
Redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Christians must walk
precisely, curiously, exactly, accurately: As the Carpenter works by line and
rule, so a Christian must walk by line and rule, he must labor to get up to
the very top of godliness, he must go to the utmost of every command, as the
original word imports. So Phil. 2.15. That ye may be blameless and harmless
(or sincere) the sons of God, without rebuke, (...), i. e. Sine querela, sine
reprehensione.
in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye shine (or shine
ye) as lights in the world. Gods sons should be spotless sons, as the Greek
imports, that is, they should be without all such spots as are inconsistent
with Sonship or Saintship. And so in Col. 2.6. As ye have therefore received
Jesus Christ the Lord, so walk ye in him. They had received Jesus Christ as
their Lord and Lawgiver, they had received Christ as a ruling Christ, as a
reigning Christ, and as a commanding Christ; and now the great duty incumbent
upon them, is to walk at such a rate of holiness as may evidence that they have
thus received Christ. And so in 1 John 2.6. John 13.15.
He that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk even as he walked.
Christians are to set all Christ's moral actions before them as a pattern for
their imitation; in his life a Christian may behold the lively picture or
lineaments of all virtues, and accordingly he ought to order his conversation
in this world: To walk as Christ walked, is to walk humbly, holily, justly,
righteously, meekly, lowly, lovingly, fruitfully, faithfully, Matthew. 4.
uprightly, with an As of quality or similitude, but no^ with an As of
equality; for that is impossible for any Saint on earth to walk so purely, so
holily, so blamelesly, Mat. 5.44, 45, 46, 47.
so unspottedly, so spiritually, so heavenly as Christ walked; that is, with an
as of equality. To walk as Christ walked, is to slight the world, and contemn
the world, and make a footstool of the world, and to live above the world, and
to triumph over the world as Christ did; that is, 1 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22, 23.
with an As of quality, but not with an As of equality: To walk as Christ
walked, is to love them that hate us, to pray for them that persecute us, to
bless them that curse us, and to do good to them that do evil to us; but still
with an As of similitude, but not with an As of equality: To walk as Christ
walked, is to be patient, and silent, and submissive, and thankful under the
vilest reproaches, the heaviest afflictions, and the greatest sufferings, with
an As of quality, but not with an As of equality. Now a holy heart that is
taken with the holiness of the Word, he is certainly taken most with those
parts of the Word that do most call for holiness, and that do most strongly
press the soul to make a progress in holiness. I have given you a taste of some
of the most principal Scriptures that do incite most to holiness, and I shall
leave it to your own consciences to give in witness for you, or against you,
according to what you find in your own spirits. Certainly to a holy man, there
are no Prayers, no Sermons, no Discourses, no Conferences, no books, nor no
parts of Scripture, to those that do most encourage and provoke to holiness.
But,

Acts 10.24, 25, 26. Gal. 4.14.
Isa. 52.7. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that brings
good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of good, that
publishes salvation, that says unto Zion, thy God reigns! If the very feet
of those that brought good tidings, though they were afar off, and sweaty,
dusty, and dirty with traveling upon the mountains, (...).
were so desirable and amiable, honorable and comfortable: Oh then what was
their faces, what was their messages! surely they were much more amiable and
desirable. So in 1 These. 5.12, 13. And we beseech you, Brethren, to know them
which labor among you in the Lord, Acts 26.16, 17, 18. If a Minister had as
many eyes as Argus to watch, as many heads as Typheus to dispose, and as many
hands as Briareus to labor, he might find employment enough for them all, in
the faithful discharge of his Ministerial function.
and admonish you: And to esteem them very highly (or, more then abundantly, as
the Greek has it) in love for their work sake, and be at peace among your
selves. Their work is to bring Christ and your souls together, and to keep
Christ and your souls together. Their work is to turn you from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to Jesus Christ: Their work is gradual;
first they are to bring you to a saving acquaintance with Christ, and then they
are to bring you to a holy acceptance of Christ, and then they are to bring you
to a willing resignation of your selves to Christ, and then they are to bring
you to a sweet and blessed assurance of your interest in Christ, and so to fit
you and prepare you for a glorious fruition of Christ; and therefore certainly
their work is high and honorable, excellent and eminent, laborious and
glorious, and why then should you not have a high and honorable esteem of
them, even for their work sake! I have read of Ambrose, that being once to
leave the Church of Milan, the people of the place flocked about him, laid hold
of him, protesting that they had rather lose their lives then lose their
Pastor, beseeching him to remain, and to promote among them the Gospel and
Government of Christ, professing and promising (for his encouragement) their
ready submission to Christ. Chrysostoms hearers were wont to say, that they had
as good be without the Sun in the Firmament, as to be without Chrysostom in the
Pulpit. Some of the ancients have long since concluded that Herod might have
kept his oath ( Mark 6.23.) and yet have spared John Baptists head, because
John's head, John's life, was more worth then all Herod's Kingdom. O Sirs! Shall
Titus Sabinus his dog bring meat to the mouth of his dead master, and hold up
his head in Tyber from sinking, because sometimes he gave him a crust of bread!
And will not you highly love, honor, and esteem of those Pastors who feed your
souls with the bread of life, yea with that bread that came down from heaven?
Certainly the more any man is affected and taken with the holiness of the Word,
the more highly they will honor and prize the holy and faithful dispensers of
the Word: Holy men know that their place is honorable, their calling
honorable, and their work honorable, and therefore they cannot but honor
them. Holy men know that if they do not honor them, they dishonor him whose
Ambassadors they are. Holy men know that Christ takes all the affronts that are
put upon them, Luke 10.16. Mat. 22.4, 8. chap. 21.33, 44. and chap. 23.37, 38,
39. 2 Chronicles. 36.14, 22. 2 Samuel 10.1, 7. compared with chap. 12. ver. 31.
as put upon himself, and will accordingly revenge them, as you may see by
comparing the Scriptures in the margin together. Ambassadors are inviolable by
the Law of Nations. David never played any such harsh part, as he did to the
Ammonites that despitefully used his Ambassadors that he sent unto them, when
they shaved off one half of their beards, and cut off their garments in the
middle, etc. I have read that Rome was destroyed to the ground for some abuses
that were offered to an Ambassador that was sent unto it. And the Romans sacked
the famous City of Corinth, and razed it to the ground, for a little
discourtesie that they offered to their Ambassadors. No wonder then if God deal
so severely with those that slight his Ambassadors, who come with messages of
grace and favor from the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and whose great work
is to make a firm, an everlasting peace between God and sinners souls, and that
all differences between God and them may be for ever decided, and a free trade
to heaven fully opened and maintained. As for such as slight, scorn and despise
the holy and faithful dispensers of the word, I think they are as far from
real holiness, as hell is from true happiness. And so doubtless are they
that grumble at the expense of a penny for the maintenance of that divine
Candle that wastes it self to give light to them: 2 Cor. 12.14, 15, 16.
that will rather die to save charges, then spend a little money to save their
lives, yea, their souls.

In the fourteenth place, A man that is really holy; will Psalm. 119.112. Psalm.
106.3. 1 John 3.9, 10.
let the times be never so unholy. Principles of grace and holiness are
lasting, they are not like the morning cloud, nor the early dew. Holy Abraham
was righteous in Caldea; holy Lot was just in Sodom; holy Job was upright in
the land of Vzz, which was a place of much profaneness and superstition: Holy
Nehemiah was courageous and zealous in Damasco: And so was holy Daniel in
Babylon. The several generations wherein these holy men lived, were wholly
devoted to wickedness and superstition, and yet these precious souls had
wholly devoted themselves to godliness. And of the same spirit, mind and
metal was holy David, Psalm 119.20. My soul breaks for the longing it has
to thy judgments at all times. Let the times be never so dangerous,
licentious, superstitious, or erroneous, yet David's heart was strongly carried
forth to Gods judgments; that is, to his word: for under this title
Judgments, you are to understand the whole word of God. And so there were some
in Sardis that were of the same spirit (with the Worthies above mentioned) Rev.
3.4. Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their
garments, Rev. 14.4, 5.
and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy. In polluting times,
pure hearts will keep themselves pure. A holy heart will keep himself
undefiled, even in defiling times; when others are besmeared all over, he will
keep his garments white and clean. Let the times never so often turn, you shall
find that he that is really holy, will be holy under every turn: no turns shall
turn him out of a way of holiness, Job 17.9. The righteous shall hold on his
way, and he that has clean hands, Finis coronat opus.
shall be stronger and stronger. A man that is really holy, will be holy among
the holy, and he will be holy among the unholy. If you look upon him among
unholy friends, unholy children, and unholy servants, you shall find him holy.
If you look upon him among unholy neighbors, you shall find him holy; and if
you look upon him among unholy buyers and sellers, you shall find him holy: If
you take him at his Table, you shall find him holy; if you take him in his
shop, in his commerce, you shall find him holy; if you take him in his family,
you shall find him holy; if you take him in his Closet, you shall find him
holy; if you take him in his journeyings, you shall find him holy; or if you
take him in his recreations, you shall find him holy. True holiness is like
that famous Queen Elizabeth, Semper eadem, always the same. The Philosophers
good man is (Tetra-gonos) four square, cast him where you will, like a Dye, he
falls always sure and square. So cast a holy man where you will, and into what
company you will, yet still he falls sure and square for holiness. True
holiness is a part of the divine nature, it is of such a heavenly complexion,
that it will never alter. If the times should be so sad and bad; that holy
persons should not be able to hold fast their estates, their liberties, their
trades, their lives, their religion, 2 Cor. 18.13.
yet they will still hold fast their holiness. A holy Christian is like gold;
Now cast gold into the fire, or into the water, cast it upon the dunghill, or
into the pleasant garden, cast it among the poor, or among the rich, among the
religious, or among the licentious; yet still it is gold, still it retains its
purity and excellency; so cast a holy Christian, a golden Christian into what
condition you will, and into what company you will, Genesis 39.
yet still he will retain his purity, his sanctity; yea, the worser the times
are, the more a holy man studies holiness, and prefers holiness, and prizes
holiness, and practices holiness, that he may keep up the credit of
holiness, and the credit of a holy God, and the credit of his holy profession
in the world. But now such as have only a show of holiness, an appearance of
holiness, these will be religious among the religious, and vicious among the
vicious. They will be righteous among the righteous, and licentious among the
licentious, they will be as the company is amongst which they are cast: with
the good they will be good, and with the bad they will be bad; with the zealous
they will be zealous, and with the superstitious they will be superstitious;
and with the lukewarm they will be lukewarm, etc. they are for all times and
tides, they are for any turn that will serve their turn, Isa. 9.17.
for any mode that will bring pleasure or profit to them; they are like
Alcibiades, of whom it was said, that he was (omnium horarum homo) a man for
all times; for he could swagger it at Athens; and take any pains at Thebes; he
could live most sparingly at Lacidaemon, and bib among the Thracians, and hunt
among the Persians. So these men can accommodate themselves to the times, and
comply with them, what ever they be: with Proteu^s, they will transform
themselves into ^ll shapes; as the times change, so will they; what the times
favor, that they will favor: what the times commend, that they will commend:
and what the times cry up and admire, that they will cry up and admire, and
what the times frown upon and condemn, that they will frown upon and condemn.
Look as curious and well drawn pictures seem to turn their eyes every way, and
to smile upon every one that looks upon them; so these can turn with the times,
they can look as the times look, and smile as the times smile; they can say
with the times, and sail with the times. Sometimes they can act one part, and
sometimes another part, as the times require: if the times require a large
profession, they can make it; if the times require a rigid Spirit against such
as cannot comply with the times, they can act it: If the times bespeak them to
leave their religion at the Church door, they can leave it, etc. If the times
call upon them to worship God according to the prescriptions of men, they can
do it. Oh but give me a man that is really holy, and he will be holy though the
times should be never so unholy; yea, the more licentious the times are, the
more gracious he will labor to be.

In the fifteenth place, He that is really holy, propounds John 7.18. Genesis
41.16. Dan. 2.23. Titus 2.10. 1 Cor. 10. ult. Rev. 12.11.
the white that holy men have in their eyes, Romans 14.7, 8. They live not to
themselves, but they live to him who lives for ever; they live not to their own
wills, lusts, greatness and glory in this world; but they live to his glory,
whose glory is dearer to them then their very lives. They make divine glory
their ultimate end, 2 Cor. 4.5. Quod non actibus, sed sinibus pensantur
officia. That duties are esteemed not by their acts, but by their ends, is most
certain.
We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord: that is, in our preaching
we woo not for our selves, but for Christ. We are no kin to those who speak two
words for themselves, and hardly one for Christ. In all our preaching we eye
the glory of Christ, we design the honor and exaltation of Christ; Real
holiness is commonly attended with a single eye; as counterfeit holiness is
commonly attended with a squint eye; squint eyd aims, and squint eyd ends do
usually wait upon double hearts. Take a holy man in the exercise of his gifts
and graces for the good of men's souls, or take him in the exercise of charity
for the good of men's bodies, and in both you shall find his eye fixed upon the
glory of God. Suitable to that 1 Pet. 4.11. If any man speak, let him speak as
the oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which
God gives, that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ; to
whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. Look as bright shining
golden vessels do not retain the beams of the Sun which they receive, but
reflect them back again upon the Sun: So those that are really holy, they do
return and reflect back again upon the Sun of righteousness the praise and
glory of all the gifts, graces and virtues that they have received from him.
The daily language of their Souls, is, Non nobis Domine, Romans 13.7.
non nobis Domine. Not unto us Lord, not unto us Lord, but to thy name be all
the glory. Holy men make conscience of giving men their dues: 1 Chronicles. 29.10.18.
how much more then do they make conscience of giving God his due. So in Psalm.
96.7, 8.
Now glory is Gods due, and God stands upon nothing more, then that we give him
the glory due unto his name, as you may see in Psalm 29.1, 2. There are three
gives in those two verses, Give unto the Lord, give unto the Lord, give unto
the Lord the glory that is due unto his name. Glory is Gods right, and he
stands upon his right; and this holy men know, and therefore they give him his
right; they give him the honor and the glory that is due unto his name. Holy
hearts do habitually eye the glory of Christ in all things. 1 Cor. 10.31.
Quicquid agas, propter Deum agas: was an Eastern Apothegm, says Drusius.
When they eat, they eat to his glory; and when they drink, they drink to his
glory; and when they sleep, they sleep to his glory; when they buy, they buy
for his glory; and when they sell, they sell for his glory; and when they give,
they give for his glory; and when they recreate themselves, they recreate
themselves for his glory; so when they hear, they hear for his glory; and when
they pray, they pray for his glory; and when they fast, they fast for his
glory; and when they read, they read for his glory; and when they come to the
Lords Table, they come to his glory in all natural, moral and religious
actions. Holy hearts have an habitual eye to divine glory. Do not mistake me, I
do not say that such as are really holy, do actually eye the glory of Christ in
all their actions: Oh no, this is a happiness desirable on earth, but shall
never be attained till we come to heaven. By and base ends and aims will too
often creep into the holiest hearts, but holy hearts sigh and groan under them;
they complain to God of them, and they cry for Justice, Justice upon them: And
it is the strong and earnest desires of their souls to be rid of them. But take
a holy Christian in his ordinary, usual and habitual course, and so he has
holy aims and ends in all his actions and undertakings. But now such whose
holiness is counterfeit, they never look at divine glory in what they do;
sometimes their eye is upon their credit, Mar. 6.5. John 6.26. Zach. 7.5, 6, 7.
and sometimes their eyes are upon applause, sometimes they have pleasure in
their eyes, and sometimes they have profit in their eyes, and sometimes they
have preferments in their eyes, etc. They will be very godly when they can make
a gain of godliness; they will be very holy, when holiness is the way to
outward happiness; but this religious wickedness will double damn them at
last. This is most certain, that some carnal or worldly consideration or other,
always acts him who has not real, principles of holiness in him: but he that
is really holy makes the glory of God his Center. Propter te Domine, propter
te, was once, and is still a holy man's Motto.

Quest. But how may a person know when he makes the glory of God his aim, his
end, in this or that service which he performs? I shall answer this Question
briefly, thus.

Answ. First, Such a man as makes the glory of God his aim, his end, he will do
duty when all outward encouragements to duty fail; when the eye of men, the
favor of men, Antimachus the famous Poet held on in his exercise, when all his
hearers had left him but Plato: saying (Plato est mihi pro omnibus) Plato is to
me instead of all. So a holy Minister, when he is deserted by some, and cast
off by others, yet he will hold on in his work.
the respects of men, and all other encouragements from men fails, yet then a
holy man will hold up, and hold on in his work and way, yea, when all outward
encouragements from God shall fail, yet such a person will keep close to his
duty, Hab. 3.17, 18. Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall
fruit be in the vines; the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall
yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no
herds in the stalls* Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of
my salvation. When all necessary and delightful mercies fail, yet he will not
fail in his duty: though God withholds his blessings, yet he will not withhold
his service: in the want of a livelihood he will be lively in his duty; when he
has nothing to subsist by, yet then he will live upon his God. Though war and
want come, yet he will not be wanting in his duty. There are three things in a
holy heart that strongly incline it to duty when all outward encouragements
fail: The first is a forcible principle, divine love: The second is a mighty
aid, the Spirit of God: The third is a high aim, 2 Cor. 5.14. Phil* 4.12, 13.
the glory of God: but now it is otherwise with those that have only a show of
godliness: let but their outward encouragements fail them: let but the eye,
the ear, the applause of the creature fail them: if they cannot make some gain
of their godliness, some profit of their profession, some advantage of their
religion, they are ready with Demas, to throw up, and throw off all. Profit and
applause are usually the baits that these men bite at; Hac omnia tibi dabo: was
the devils great argument to prevail with Christ.
and if they miss these baits, then farewell profession, farewell religion,
farewell all. But now look as Ruth kept close to her mother in the want of all
outward encouragements, Ruth 1. So souls that eye the glory of God in duties,
they will keep close to duties when all outward encouragements fail. Though
outward encouragements be sometimes as a side wind, or as oil, or as chariot
wheels, means to move a Christian to go on more sweetly, easily and comfortably
in the ways of God, yet when this wind shall fail, and these chariot wheels
shall be knocked off, a real Christian will hold on his way, Job 17.9.

And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling. And my
speech, and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the Spirit, and of power: That your faith should not stand in
the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. Holy Paul handled holy things in
such a manner, as much of God, and little (or nothing) of man could be
perceived. In religious exercises, Paul seems to say to humane eloquence, and
fleshly wisdom, to affected Rhetoric, and flattering Oratory, Stand a far off,
come not near; I have now to do with God, and to do with souls, and to do with
eternity, and therefore what have I to do with you? Paul had an eye to divine
glory in what he did, and therefore he durst not tip his tongue, and store his
head with aerie notions, or with the enticing words of man's wisdom. Of all the
Apostles, At a festival time, when Bernard had preached very eloquently, and
the people much admired and applauded him, he was much sadded; the next day he
preached a plain and powerful Sermon without any Rhetorical dresses, at which
many curious itching ears were unsatisfied, but himself and his meaner
capacitated Auditors were much pleased and delighted; and being asked the
reason of it, he returned this answer, Heri Bernardum, hodie Jesum Christum:
yesterday I preached Bernard, but to day Jesus Christ.
Paul was most eminent and excellent in all humane Arts, Parts, and Gifts, and
yet in religious exercises he lays them all by, 1 Cor. 14.18, 19. I thank my
God, I speak with tongues more then you all: Yet in the Church I had rather
speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others
also, then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. The Church of Corinth
excelled all other Churches in gifts (I do not say in grace) and many among
them prided themselves up in the exercise of their gifts and tongues in their
Church Assemblies, that so they might win the more credit and repute to
themselves of being men of great learning, reading and parts; but the holy
Apostle by his own example labors to win them to decline all vain ostentation,
and to work them to express themselves so as might be most for the
information, conviction, edification and salvation of their hearers souls. Holy
Paul had much learning, and yet in religious exercises he used little. The
Corinthians had less, and yet made such shows and flourishes of it (even in
their religious duties,) as if in their breasts all the Libraries in the world
had been locked up. This puts me in mind of what once I have read concerning a
Rabbi that had but little learning and less modesty and ingenuity; for he
usurping all the discourse at Table where many were, one much admiring of him,
asked one of his friends in private, Whether he did not take such a man for a
great Scholar? to whom he answered, For ought I know he may be learned; but I
never heard learning make such a noise. The more learning, the less noise; the
less learning, the more noise men will make. The Sun shows least when it is at
the highest; and those waters are most deep, that run most silent: they usually
are men of the greatest parts, that use them least in religious works. Famous
Mr. Dod was wont to say, that so much Latin was so much flesh in a Sermon. The
gilt upon the Pill may please the eye, but it profits not the Patient; The
paint upon the glass may feed the fancy, but the room is rather the darker then
the lighter for it. Painted glass in Churches is more glorious, but plain
glass is most perspicuous: when men come to Church-work, to Pulpit-work, all
plainness must be used: Starched Oratory may tickle the brain, but its plain
Doctrine that informs the judgment, that convinces the conscience, that bows
the will, and that wins the heart. That Sermon has most learning in it, that
has most plainness in it. And therefore a great Scholar was wont to say, Lord,
give me learning enough, that I may preach plain enough. Silly ignorant people
are very apt to dote upon that most, and admire that most which they understand
least; But prudent Christians judge of Ministers not by their lungs, but by
their brains: not by their throats, but by their hearts and lives: not by their
voices and tones, but by the plainness, spiritualnesse, suitableness and
usefulness of their matter: Like Demost henes, Erasmus.
who when he heard an Orator bellowing with a loud and roaring voice, said (
Non quod magnum est been est, sed quod been est magnum est.) I mark rather the
goodness then loudness of an Oration. It is observable, that throughout the
Scriptures, Holy Moses covered his glistering face with a vail when he spoke to
the people.
that the profoundest Prophets, and the greatest Apostles, yea, and Christ
himself did commonly accomodate themselves to their hearers capacities: they
kept in, and kept under all those humane excellencies, the discovery of which
might any ways cloud divine glory. Men that have their eyes upon divine glory,
do know that the more any acquired parts, 1 Cor. 9.8.
gifts and excellencies do appear in holy exercises, the more the name, honor
and glory of God is clouded, and the more those that have most of the
indwellings of God are dissatisfied and disadvantaged and therefore those that
have real respect to divine glory, Eusebius tells us of some in his days, who
to win upon the minds of men, did amaze them with new words. Eusebius. Hist. l. 4.
c. 7.
they draw as it were a curtain between all their humane excellencies, and
religious exercises. That none may think this is my private opinion, let me add
a few sayings of theirs that have been eminent in acquired excellencies. Greg.
Naz* a holy and a weighty Writer compares curiosity and novelty of speech in
the things of God unto lascivious dancing, and the arts of Juglers whereby they
deceive the senses of those that look on. And further says that simple proper
genuine language was in holy things wont to be esteemed godliness. And it was
a remarkable saying of golden-mouthed Chrysostom (as some call him) When I
first began to preach (said he) I was a child, and delighted in Rattles, in the
applause of the people; but when I was a man, I began to depise them. New
phrases and expressions do many times make way for the introducing of new
doctrines, as learned Paraeus in his Comment on 1 Cor. 1.1. observes; for the
most part, says he, those who in points of Divinity devise new terms and
unusual expressions, do hide under them some new and strange doctrines; they
wrap up their error in some intricate words and distinctions; The Orators of
Athens were then suspected, when they began to make excursions with florid
expressions.
when our words in preaching differ from the style of the Holy Ghost, the
people be in danger of turning aside to vain jangling, says Danaeus. Loquamur
verba Scripturae, etc. said that incomparable man, Peter Ramus, let us speak
the words of Scripture, let us make use of the language of the Holy Ghost, and
for ever abominate those that profanely disdain at the stately plainness of
Gods blessed book, and that think to correct the divine wisdom and eloquence
with their own infancy and sophistry. Non quanta eloquentia, sed quanta
evidentia, says Aug. Melius est ut nos reprehendant Grammatici, quam ut non
intelligunt populi, the same Author in Psalm 138. Such as mind more (says
another) the humouring of their hearers fancies, then the saving of their
souls, do little consider that of Seneca, (Aeger non quaerit medicum eloquentem
sed sanantem) Sick men are not bettered by Physicians sugared words, but by
their skilful hands. Doctor Sibbs was wont to say, That great affectation and
good affection seldom go together. Truth is like Solomon's Spouse, all glorious
within; she is most beautiful when most naked, as Adam was in innocence. The
King of Persia having sent to Antalcidas the Lacedemonian Captain a Garland of
Roses wonderfully perfumed with Spices and other sophistications, he accepted
of his love, but misliked the present, and sent him word, ( Rosarum odorem
artis adulteratione perdidisti) Thou have marred the sweetness of the Roses
with the sweetness of thy perfumes. So many mar the sweetness of the Word by
perfuming it with their humane eloquence and oratory. For a close, remember,
that God himself the great Master of speech, when he spoke from heaven, he made
use of three several Texts in a breath, Matthew. 17.5. This is my beloved son.
Psalm 2.7. In whom I am well pleased. Isaiah 42.1. Hear ye him. Deuteronomy. 18.15.
which you may note against the curious queasiness of such nice ones

Christus opera nostra non tam actibus quam finibus pensat. Zanchius.
Thirdly, If thou do really and actually aim at the glory of God in what thou
do, then the glory of God will swallow up all by-aimes and ends that may
thrust themselves in upon the soul, whilst it is at its work. Look as Aarons
rod ( Exodus 7.10, 11, 12.) swallowed up the Magicians rods, so the glory of God
will swallow up all carnal aims and ends. Look as the Sun puts out the light of
the fire, so the glory of God will put out and consume all other ends. This is
most certain, That which is a man's great end, that will work out all other
ends. If thou set up the glory of God as thy chief end, that will by
degrees eat out all low and base ends. Look as Pharaohs lean kine ( Genesis 41.4.)
eat up the fat, so the glory of God will eat up all those fat and worldly ends
that crowd in upon the soul in religious work. The keeping up of the glory of
God as thy great end, will be the keeping down and the casting out of all other
ends.

Romans 16.19. Obedientia non discutit Dei mandata, sed facit. Prosper.
though nothing for the present comes of it: If his eye be truly fixed upon
divine glory, a command of God shall be enough to carry him on in his work.
Psalm 27.8. When thou said, Seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, Thy
face Lord, will I seek. When the glory of God is a man's mark, his heart will
sweetly echo and graciously comply with divine commands. Jer. 3.22. Return ye
backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings: Behold we come unto
thee, for thou art the Lord our God. Gods commands fall with great power and
force upon that man's heart, that has divine glory in his eye. One word from
God will command such a soul to a gracious compliance with what God requires,
Psalm 119.4, 5. Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently: O that
my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes! As soon as God lays a command
upon a Christian, he look: Tota vita boni Christiani sanctum desiderium est.
Austin. The whole life of a good Christian is a holy wish.
up to heaven for power to turn that precept into practice, O that my ways
were directed to keep thy Statutes! O that I were as holy as God would have me
to be! O that I were as humble and lowly as God would have me to be! O that I
were as heavenly and spiritual as God would have me to be! O that I were as
pure and perfect as God would have me to be! So ver. 48. My hands will I lift
up to thy Commandments which I have loved. Many there be which thrust away with
all their might thy Commandments, but I lift up my hands to thy Commandments.
Many there be that will strain themselves to take a comfort, Prior est
Autoritas imperantis quam utilitas servientis. Tertul. The chief reason of
obedience, is the Authority of the Lord, not the utility of the servant.
but I strain my self to lift up thy Commandments. Many there are who will
stretch out their hands to take a reward, but I stretch out my hands to take
hold on thy Commandments. To give a little more light into these words,
Sometime the lifting up of hands betokens admiration; when men are astonished
and ravished, they lift up their hands; I will lift up my hands to thy
Commandments; that is, I will admire the goodness, the holiness, the
righteousness, the purity and excellency of thy Commandments. Again, we lift up
our hands when we betake our selves to refuge; why Gods commands are the Saints
refuge; when they house and shelter themselves under the wings of Gods
commands, they are safe. Again, men lift up their hands when they take hold on
a thing; now gracious souls do take hold on Gods Commandments to do them, to
practice them, and to express the life and power of them. Again, men lift up
their hands to those things that are high and above them; now the commands of
God are high, they are sublime, they are above us; they are sublime and high,
in regard of their original, they come down from God; they are sublime and high
in regard of the matter of them, they are heavenly Oracles, they are dictates
of divine wisdom; they are sublime and high in regard of the difficulty of
keeping of them, they exceeding all humane strength; and they are sublime and
high in regard of their situation, they are situated in heaven: Thy word
(says David) endures for ever in heaven; but yet as sublime and as high as
they are, a man that has his eye upon divine glory, will lift up his hands
unto them; he will do all he can to express the pleasure that he takes in them,
and the readiness of his soul to a holy compliance with them. Compare these
Scriptures together; Psalm 44.12, 20. Can. 3.1, 2, 3. Isa. 26.8, 9. chap. 59.8,
9, 10, 11. Hab. 2.1, 2, 3. Micha. 7.7, 8, 9. Lam. 3.8, 44. compared with ver.
24, 25, 26, 31, 32, 40, 41, 55.
A man that has his eye upon divine glory, he will keep close to his work, to
his hearing work, to his praying work, to his mourning work, to his repenting
work, to his believing work, to his waiting work; though nothing comes on it,
though he make no earnings of it, though comfort does not come, though joy and
peace does not come, though assurance does not come, though enlargements do not
come, though answers and returns from heaven do not come, though good days do
not come, though deliverance does not come, yet such will keep close to their
work, that have their eye upon divine glory. But now such who eye not the glory
of God in what they do, they quickly grow weary of their work; if they can make
no earnings of their seekings, and fastings, and prayings, they are presently
ready to throw up all, and to quarrel with God himself, as if God had done them
an injury, Isa. 58.1, 2, 3, 4.

Psalm 63.1, 2, 3. and without this sight he cannot be quieted. Here is the
Ordinance, but where is the God of the Ordinance? Here is prayer, but where is
the God of prayer? Here is the duty, but where is the God of duty? Here is
enlargements, but where is the God of enlargements? Here are meltings and
breakings of spirit, but where is the God of these meltings and breakings?
Psalm 84.2. My soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord: My
heart and my flesh cries out for the living God. The Courts of the Lord
without spiritual converses with the living God, could not satisfy his soul: O
says he, Here be the Courts of the Lord, the Courts of the Lord, but where is
the living God? where is the living God? where is that God that makes men to
live, and that makes Ordinances to be living and lively Ordinances to his
childrens souls? O the Courts of the Lord are very desirable, but the living
God is much more desirable! The Courts of the Lord are precious and glorious,
but the living God is infinitely more precious and glorious! Here is the mantle
of Elijah, but where is the God of Elijah? 2 Kings 2.12, 13, 14. Mr. Fox, Acts
and Mon.
Here are the Courts of the Lord, but where is the Lord of these Courts? It was
the speech of holy Mr. Bradford, That he could not leave a duty, till he had
found communion with Christ in the duty; he could not give off a duty, till his
heart was brought into a duty frame; he could not leave confession, till he had
found his heart humbled and melted under the sense of his sin; he could not
give over petitioning, till he had found his heart taken with the beauties of
the things desired, and strongly carried out after the enjoyment of them.
Neither could he leave thanksgiving, till he had found his spirit enlarged, and
his soul quickened in the return of praises. And so it was with holy Bernard,
who was wont to say, O Lord, I never come to thee but by thee; Nunquam abs te
absque te recedo. Bern. M^ditat.
I never go from thee without thee. A man that has his eye upon the glory of
Christ, he cannot put off his soul with any thing below communion with Christ,
in those Religious services and duties that he offers up to Christ: Though the
breasts of duty are sweet, yet those breasts will not satisfy the soul, except
Christ lies betwixt them. Can. 1.13. But now men that have base, poor, low, and
by-ends in what they do, they can come off easily from their duties, though
they find no spirit, no life, no warmth in duty; yet they can come off with
content from duty, though they have no communion, no converse at all with God
in duty, though they have no pledges of grace, no pawns of mercy, no tastes of
love, no relishes of heaven in a duty, yet they can come off from the duty with
content and satisfaction of spirit; let but others applaud him, and his own
heart hug him, and he has enough.

Psalm 45.1, 2. Zeph. 3.9. Can. 4.3. Compare these Scriptures together. Prove.
11, 30. chap. 1^.18. chap. 25.11. Mat 7.6. cha^. 12.35. Col. 4.6. Ephesians. 4.29.
Acts 26.25. John 6.25. 1 Pet. 4 11.
In the sixteenth and last place, A man that is really holy, speaks a holy
language; a holy heart and a holy tongue are inseparable companions; if there
be grace in the heart, there will be grace in the lips; if the heart be pure,
the language will be pure. Christ says, his Spouses lips are like a thread of
scarlet; they are red with talking of nothing but a crucified Christ; and they
are thin like a thread, not swelled with other vain discourses. And ver. 10. he
tells you, That the lips of his Spouse drop as the honey-combs (or drop
honey-combs) and that honey and milk are under her tongue. You know that Canaan
was a land that flowed with milk and honey; why the language of the Spouse was
the language of Canaan; her lips were still dropping such holy, spiritual and
heavenly matter, as was as sweet, pleasant, profitable, desirable and
delectable to men's souls, as ever honey and millk was to men's palates or
appetites; and as many were fed and nourished by milk and honey, so many were
fed and nourished by the holy droppings of her lips; Psalm 37.30. The mouth of
the righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment. If the
heart be holy, the tongue will be a talking wisely, fruitfully, feelingly,
affectionately of that which may profit both a man's self and others. Prove.
10.20. The tongue of the just is as choice silver; Quod hominis dignitas and
excellentia nulla alia re magis cognoscitur quam oratione. Pet. Martyr. 2. page
4. Qui in Christum credunt, loquuntur novis.
the heart of the wicked is little worth. Good men's words are of more worth
then wicked men's hearts: and look as choice silver is known by its tinkling, so
holy men are known by their talking. And as choice silver gives a clear and
sweet sound, so the tongue of the just sounds sweetly and pleasantly in the
ears of others. Look as choice silver is highly prized and valued among men, so
is the tongue of the righteous among those that are righteous: And look as
choice silver allures and draws the hearts of men to a love and liking of it;
so the tongues of the righteous do allure and draw the hearts of men to a love
and liking of virtue and goodness. Ver. 21. The lips of the righteous feed
many. They feed many by their exhortations, instructions, admonitions and
counsels: The mouths of the righteous are like the gates of some hospitable
persons, where many are fed. The lips of the righteous are a free and well
furnished table, at which many are fed and nourished with the dainties of
heaven to eternal life. Righteous men keep open house, they keep free
hospitality for all comers and goers; and if they have not always bread in
their hands, yet they have always grace in their lips to feed many. Though
they may be outwardly poor, yet they have a treasure within to enrich many. The
tongue is the instrument of a Christians glory, and is so interested in the
quality it expresses, that in the original it is taken for it, Cavod
signifying both glory and the tongue, (by the authority of no less Rabbines
then Jacob and David) as thereby intimating that the chiefest glory of man is
his tongue. The Primitive Christians talked so much and so often of high and
heavenly things, that the Ethnicks began to surmise that they affected the
Roman Empire, when indeed their ambition was of another, a nobler and a higher
nature. But now men that have only a show of godliness, they do practically
say, Our tongues are our own, and who shall control us? Their speech is so far
from administering of grace to their hearers, that it administers usually either
matter of carnal mirth, or of contempt, or of scorn, or of sorrow and mourning;
certainly they have no holiness in their hearts, who have so much of hell, Jam.
1.26, 27. chap. 3.8.12. Matthew. 26.73.
and the Devil, and lusts in their mouths. I may say to most, You are unholy
persons, your speech bewrayes you, your worldliness, your profaneness, your
cursing, your swearing, your lying, your slandering, your reviling, your
railing, your deriding, etc. does plainly evidence that you have no holiness,
in you. Well, remember this, a tongue that is set on fire from hell, is in
danger to be set on fire in hell. Hell is for that man, and that man is for
hell, that has so much of hell in his mouth; the Devil is for that man, and
that man is for the Devil, that has so much of the Devil in his mouth;
Damnation is for that man, and that man is for damnation, that has so much of
damnation in his mouth; the world is for that man, and that man is for the
world, that has so much of the world in his mouth. Whatever is in the heart,
will break out in the lips; if wickedness be in the heart, it will break out in
the lips. Physicians say that the nature of diseases is as well known by the
tongue, as by the pulse or urine. The spiritual diseases that be in the heart,
will quickly discover themselves by the tongue. Wherever holiness is in the
heart, it will break forth in the lips; a holy heart and a holy tongue are
married together, and it is not in man to put them asunder; you shall sooner
separate the soul from the body, then you shall separate a holy tongue from an
holy heart. And thus I have done with this use of examination; the Lord make
you wise to lay these things to heart, that so you may know how it is like to
go with you in another world.

Use 3.
THe third Use shall be a Use of Exhortation, and that both to unsanctified and
sanctified ones. First, let me speak to unsanctified ones; is it so, that real
holiness is the only way to happiness, and that without men are holy on earth,
they shall never come to the beatifical vision or blessed fruition of God in
heaven: O then, how should this provoke and stir up all unholy persons to
strive and labor, as for life, after this real holiness, without which they
shall never come to have any thing to do with God in everlasting happiness, etc?

Now that I may the better prevail with unsanctified souls; I shall,

etc.





For the first, I shall propound these following considerations to provoke all
unsanctified persons to look after holiness.

No holiness here, no happiness hereafter. The Scripture speaks of three
bodily inhabitants of heaven: Enoch before the Law; Elijah under the Law; and
Jesus Christ under the Gospel; all three eminent in holiness, to teach us,
that even in an ordinary course there is no going to heaven without holiness.
There are many thousand thousands now in heaven, but not one unholy one among
them all: There is not one sinner among all those Saints; not one Goat among
all those Sheep; not one weed among all those flowers; not one thorn or prickle
among all those Roses, not one Pibble among all those glistering Diamonds:
There is not one Cain among all those Abels: nor one Ishmael among all those
Isaacs; nor one Esau among all those Jacobs in heaven: Rev. 5.11. Chap 7.9.
Heb. 12.22, 23. Those that would be immortally happy, they must live holily and
justly, says Antisthenes the Heathen.
there is not one Seth among all the Patriarchs: not one Saul among all the
Prophets: nor one Judas among all the Apostles; nor one Demas among all the
Preachers: nor one Simon Magus among all the professors. Heaven is only for the
holy man, and the holy man is only for heaven: Heaven is a garment of glory,
that is only suited to him that is holy. God who is truth it self, and cannot
lie, has said it, that without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Mark that
word, no man; without holiness the rich man shall not see the Lord: nor
without holiness the poor man shall not see the Lord; Without holiness the
Noble man shall not see the Lord; nor without holiness the mean man shall not
see the Lord. Without holiness the Prince shall not see the Lord; nor without
holiness the Peasant shall not see the Lord. Without holiness the Ruler shall
not see the Lord; nor without holiness the Ruled shall not see the Lord.
Without holiness the learned man shall not see the Lord; nor without holiness
the ignorant man shall not see the Lord. Without holiness the husband shall
not see the Lord; nor without holiness the wife shall not see the Lord.
Without holiness the Father shall not see the Lord; nor without holiness the
child shall not see the Lord. Without holiness the Master shall not see the
Lord; nor without holiness the servant shall not see the Lord. For faithful
and strong is the Lord of hosts that has spoken it. Josh. 23.14.
In this day some cry up one form, some another; some cry up one Church State,
some another: some cry up one way, some another: but certainly the way of
holiness is the good old way; it is the King of Kings highway to heaven and
happiness, Jerem. 6.16.
Isa. 35.8. And a highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called
the way of holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be for
those: the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein. Some men say,
lo, here is the way; Other men say, lo, there is the way; but certainly the way
of holiness is the surest, the safest, the easiest, the noblest, and the
shortest way to happiness. Among the Heathens, no man could enter into the
Temple of Honor, but must first enter into the Temple of Virtue. There is no
entering into the Temple of happiness, except you enter into the Temple of
holiness. Holiness must first enter into you, before you can enter into Gods
holy hill. As Sampson cried out, Give me water, or I die: or as Rachel cried
out, Give me children or I die; so all unsanctified souls may well cry out,
Lord give me holiness or I die: Psalm 15. throughout.
give me holiness, or I eternally die. If the Angels, those Princes of glory
fall once from their holiness, they shall be for ever excluded from
everlasting happiness and blessedness. If Adam in Paradise fall from his
purity, he shall quickly be driven out from the presence of divine glory.
Austin would not be a wicked man, an unholy man one hour for all the world,
because he did not know but that he might die that hour: and should he die in
an unholy estate, he knew he should be for ever separated from the presence of
the Lord, and the glory of his power. O Sirs, do not deceive your own souls:
holiness is of absolute necessity, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9, 10.
without it you shall never see the Lord; it is not absolutely necessary that
you should be great or rich in the world: but it is absolutely necessary that
you should be holy: it is not absolutely necessary that you should enjoy
health, strength, friends, liberty, life, but it is absolutely necessary that
you should be holy. A man may see the Lord without worldly prosperity; but he
can never see the Lord except he be holy. A man may to heaven, to happiness
without honor or worldly glory, but he can never to heaven, to happiness,
without holiness: without holiness here, no heaven hereafter, Rev. 21.27. And
there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles. God will at last
shut the gates of glory against every person that is without heart purity. Ah
Sirs, holiness is a flower that grows not in natures garden. Men are not born
with holiness in their hearts, as they are born with tongues in their mouths:
holiness is of a divine offspring: it is a pearl of price, that is to be
found in no nature but a renewed nature, in no bosom but a sanctified bosom.
There is not the least beam or spark of holiness in any natural man in the
world. I have read that the Isle of Arren in Ireland has such a pure Air that
it was never yet infected with the Plague, but such is not the nature of man.
Genesis 6.5. Every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart is only evil
continually. Job 25.4. How can man be clean that is born of a woman? The
interrogation carries in it a strong negation, How can man be clean? that is,
man cannot be clean that is born of a woman: man that is born of a woman, is
born in sin, and born both under wrath and under the curse. And who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean? Job 14.4. Isa. 64.6. But we are all as an
unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Romans 3.10, 11.
There is none righteous, no not one; there is none that understands, there is
none thot seeks after God. Every man by nature is a stranger, yea, an enemy
to holiness. Romans 8.7. Every man that comes into this world, comes with his
face toward sin and hell, and with his back upon God and holiness. Such is
the corruption of our nature, that propound any divine good to it, it is
entertained as fire by water, or wet wood with hissing. Propound any evil, then
it is like a fire to straw; it is like the foolish Satyr that made haste to
kiss the fire; it is like that unctious matter which the Naturalists say,
sucks and snatches the fire to it, with which it is consumed. All men are born
sinners, and there is nothing but an infinite power that can make them Saints.
All men would be happy, and yet they naturally loath to be holy. By all which
you may clearly see that food is not more necessary for the preservation of
natural life, then holiness is necessary for the preservation and salvation of
the soul. If a man had the wisdom of Solomon, the strength of Sampson, the
courage of Joshua, the policy of Ahitophell, the dignities of Haman, the power
of Ahashueros, and the eloquence of Apollos, yet all these without holiness
would never save him.

Prove. 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Holiness is a golden mine that may be come at if you will but digg, and sweat,
and take pains for it; it is a flower of Paradise that may be gathered: it is a
crown that may be put on; Romans 13.12, 13, 14.
it is a pearl of price that may be obtained, if you will but part with the
wicked man's Trinity, the world, the flesh, and the devil to enjoy it. Though
some of the Attributes of God be incommunicable, yet holiness is a
communicable attribute; and this should mightily encourage you to look after
holiness. Well sinners, remember this, it is possible that those proud hearts
of yours may be humbled, it is possible that those hard hearts of yours may be
softened, it is possible that those unclean hearts of yours may be sanctified;
it is possible that those blind minds of yours may be enlightened; it is
possible that those stubborn wills of yours may be tamed; it is possible that
those disordered affections of yours may be regulated; it is possible that
those drowsy and defiled consciences of yours may be awakened and purged; it
is possible that those vile and polluted natures of yours may be changed and
purified. There are several things that do witness that holiness is attainable.
As,

If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children: how
much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him!
The holy Spirit is a gift more worth then a world, yea, then heaven it self,
and yet to make men holy, God is willing to give his holy spirit upon very
easy terms; They shall have it for asking: John 3.6. Titus 3.5. 1 Cor. 6.11.
the Spirit is a spirit of holiness, he is holy in himself, and the Author of
all that holiness that is in man; it is he that most powerfully moves and
persuades men to holiness: it is he that presents holiness in its beauty and
glory to the soul; it is he that sows seeds of holiness in the soul; and it is
he that causes those seeds to grow up to maturity and ripeness. Nil nisi
sanctum a sancto spiritu prodire potest: Nothing can come from the holy spirit,
but that which is holy. The holy Spirit is the great principle of all the
holiness that is in the world; and this holy Spirit God has engaged himself to
give to those that are unholy, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. I will sprinkle clean water
upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from all your
Idols will I cleanse you. A new heart will I also give you, and a new spirit
well I put within you, and I well take away the stony heart out of your flesh,
and I will give you a heart of flesh, and I will put my spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my Statutes and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them.
The holy spirit is a gift, a free gift, a noble gift, a precious gift, a
glorious gift, 2 Timothy 2.21.
that God will bestow upon the unclean, upon the unsanctified, that they may be
cleansed and sanctified, and so fitted for the Lords service and use. It is
possible that you may be holy: Witness,

2. His holy word that he has given on purpose to make Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7, 8, 9.
Romans 7.12. Luke 1.70 to 76.
his commandments are holy, just and good; his threatenings are holy, just and
good; and all his promises are holy, just and good. The holy Scriptures were
written with a finger of holiness, so as to move to holiness, and to work
holiness; the whole word of God is an entire love-letter to provoke to
holiness, and to promote holiness. Holy commands should sweetly persuade us to
holiness, and holy threatenings should divinely force us to holiness, and holy
promises should effectually allure us to the love of holiness, to the embracing
of holiness, and to the practice of holiness. The great design of God in
sending this sacred volume in golden letters from heaven, was to enamour men
with the love and beauty of holiness. Again, it is possible that you may attain
to true holiness; Witness,

3. Those holy Ambassadors that he has sent on purpose darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to Jesus Christ. Acts 26.18. 2 Corin. 5.18, 19, 20.
Their great business and work is to treat with you about holiness, it is to
woo you to match with holiness, and to follow after holiness; it is to remove
all lets and impediments that may any ways hinder your embracing of holiness;
and it is to propose all manner of encouragements that may win you over to make
holiness your great All. Again, it is possible that you may be holy: Witness,

Praecepta docent, exempla movent.
and Saints that are left on record, on purpose to provoke you to an imitation
of them in holiness; their holy examples, as so many shining stars, are left
upon record, to influence us to holiness. In the holy examples of those that
are now triumphant in heaven, you may run and read that holiness is attainable.
In their holy examples, as in so many looking-glasses, you may see that
holiness is a Jewel that may be procured; by that holiness that others have
reached to, sinners may see that it is possible that they may be made Saints.
Again, it is possible that you may be holy: Witness,

Adam you know was created in an estate of innocence, Genesis 1.26.
integrity and perfect holiness; he being made in the image of God, and after
the likeness and similitude of God; it was agreed upon in the Parliament of
heaven, that man should be made glorious in holiness, In this Scripture he
speaks plainly of the Renovation of that knowledge, holiness, and righteousness
that Adam sometimes had, but lost it by his fall. Psalm. 8.4, 5, 6. Genesis 2.20.
and so he was, for he was made after Gods own image. And this the Apostle
clearly and fully evidences in that famous Scripture, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. That
Adam was invested and endowed with righteousness and holiness in his first
glorious estate; with righteousness, that he might carry it fairly, justly,
evenly, and righteously toward man; and with holiness, that he might carry it
wisely, lovingly, reverentially and holily toward God; And that he might take
up in God as his chiefest good, as in his great All, might be fufficiently made
good out of this Scripture last cited: but I shall not now stand upon the
discovery of Adams beauty, authority, dominion, dignity, honor, and glory with
which he was adorned, invested and crowned in innocence. Let this satisfy,
that Adams first estate was a state of perfect knowledge, wisdom, and
understanding; it was a perfect state of holiness, righteousness, and
happiness; there was nothing within him, but what was desirable and delectable;
there was nothing without him, but what was amiable and commendable; nor
nothing about him, but what was serviceable and comfortable; and yet in the
height of all his glory, he falls to Apostasy and open Rebellion against God;
he takes part with Satan against God himself; he transgresses his righteous
Law, he affronts his justice, he provokes his anger, he stirrs up his wrath
against himself and his posterity. The sin of Adam was a voluminous sin, all
kinds of notorious sins were bound up in it, as backsliding, rebellion,
treason, pride, unbelief, blasphemy, contempt of God, unthankfulness, theft,
murder and idolatry, etc. The Philosopher being asked which was the best member
of the body, answered, The tongue; for if it be good, it is the best Trumpet of
Gods glory; And being asked again which was the worst, answered, The tongue;
for if it be bad, it is the worst firebrand of hell. So if any should ask me,
Which was the best creature of God? I would answer, Man in honor before his
fall: If you should ask me, Which is the worst? I must answer, Man in his fall.
Adam was once the wonder of all understanding, the mirror of wisdom and
knowledge, the image of God, the delight of heaven, the glory of the creation,
the worlds great Lord, and the Lords great darling; but being fallen, ah how low,
how poor, how miserable, how sottish, how senseless, how brutish, yea how much
below the beast that perishes was he! and yet God pardoned, changed, and
sanctified him, and stamped his image of holiness afresh upon him, when he made
a Covenant with him in Christ, Genesis 3.

So Manasseh, he was a notorious sinner, he was a sinner of the greatest
magnitude, his sins reached up to heaven, his soul was ripe for hell, he had
sold himself to work all manner of wickedness, as you may see in 2 Chronicles. 33.
in verse. 3. He reared up Altars for Baalim, and made groves, and worshipped all
the host of heaven, and served them. verse. 4. He built Altars in the house of
God. verse. 5. Yea for all the host of heaven did he build Altars in the Courts
of the house of God. This was a horrid piece of impudence to provoke God to his
very face, by equalizing his Altars to Gods Altar. verse. 6. And he caused his
children to pass through the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom. Here was
inhumane superstition, and inhumane cruelty, to offer his own children in
sacrifice to the Devil. Also he observed times, and used witchcraft, and dealt
with a familiar spirit, and with wizards; he wrought much evil in the sight of
the Lord, to provoke him to anger. The complaint is ancient in Seneca, that
commonly men live not ad rationem, but ad similitudinem. Seneca de vita beata.
cap. 1.
verse. 9. He made Judah and Jerusalem to err, by his example, and to do worse
then the Heathens. The actions of Rulers, are most commonly rules for the
peoples actions, and their example passes as current as their coin. The common
people dare practice the very worst of wickedness that they see acted in a
scarlet Robe; they are like tempered wax, easily receiving impressions from the
seals of great men's vices; they make no bones on it to sin by prescription, and
to damn themselves with authority. The heathen brings in a young man, who
hearing of the adulteries and wickednesses of the gods, said, What, do they so,
and shall I stick at it? so say most, when great ones are greatly wicked, Why,
they do thus and thus, and why should we stick at it? The Egyptians esteemed it
graceful and their duty, to halt on that leg on which their King limped; most
men think it a grace to imitate the greatest authority in their most graceless
actings: Which made the Poet say, Subjects and Kingdoms commonly do choose,
The manners that their Princes daily use.
Verse. 10. And the Lord spoke unto Manasseh, but he would not hearken. He was
settled in idolatry, and stopped his ears against all the counsel and admonitions
of the Prophets that were sent to reclaim him. Now who would ever have thought
that one so abominably wicked and wretched, should ever have obtained such
favor with God, as to be pardoned, renewed and sanctified! and yet verse. 12,
13. He besought the Lord, and humbled himself greatly before the Lord, and
prayed unto him, and God was entreated of him, and heard his supplication, and
brought him again to Jerusalem into his Kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the
Lord he was God. He now acknowledges Jehovah to be the true God, and renounces
all other gods, that he may cleave to God alone. There is no heart so wicked,
but grace can make it holy.

So Paul was once so great a sinner, that had he stepped but one step further, he
had fallen into the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost; in 1 Timothy 1.13. you
have a brief survey of his great transgressions.

He was a Blasphemer, he blasphemed God, and Christ, and his ways and truth;
he made a mock and scoff at holiness; he made nothing of blaspheming that God
that he should have feared, and of blaspheming that Christ that he should have
sweetly embraced; and of blaspheming those Truths that he should have readily
entertained. Paul was a great proficient in the School of blasphemy, he made
nothing of belching out blasphemy in the very face of heaven. And he was a
persecutor too, Acts 9. Chap. 26.11.
he persecuted holiness to the death; yea he was mad in persecuting the poor
Saints and servants of Christ; he did all he could to make their lives a hell,
and to rid them out of this world; he thought them not worthy to live, though
they were such Worthies of whom this world was not worthy; Chap. 8.3.
he was a ravening and an untired Woolf that was never weary in worrying
Christ's little flock, and in sucking out the blood of his Lambs. Yea, and he
was an injurious person too, he made no conscience of wronging others, Mat.
7.12.
or of squaring his carriage by that golden rule, Do to others, as you would
have others do to you: This Royal Law, this standard of equity he regarded not;
he made nothing of haling men and women to prison, and of compelling them to
blaspheme by his cruelty and wicked example; he spared no sex, but practiced
the highest cruelty upon all that had any thing of sanctity in them; he would
adventure the torments of hell, rather then not be a tormenter of the Saints
here; and the more active any were in holiness, the more injurious was he to
them. And yet behold this blasphemer, this persecutor, this injurious person,
became a sanctified Christian, an eminent Saint, a pattern of holiness to all
Christians in all ages.

Once more, witness that sad bed-rool of unsanctified persons that are
mentioned in 1 Cor, 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. These monstrous sinners and prodigious sins, were
enough to have brought another flood upon the world, or to have provoked the
Lord to rain hell out of heaven upon them, as once he did upon Sodom and
Gomorah, or to have caused the ground to open and swallow them up, as once it
did Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and yet behold some of these are changed and
sanctified! v. 11. And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. Oh! the infinite goodness, Matthew, Zacheus, Mary Magdalen,
the Jailer, and the murderers of Christ, Acts. 2. are clear instances of this
truth. 1 Cor. 7.14.16. 1 Pet. 3.1.6.
Oh! the infinte grace, Oh! the infinite wisdom and power of God, that has
pardoned, washed, sanctified and cleansed such guilty, filthy, and polluted
souls! The worst of sinners should never despair of being made Saints,
considering what unholy ones have been made holy. It is possible that you may
be made holy. Witness,

6. All those sanctified ones among whom you live, who once were as unholy or
more unholy it may be, then ever you were; the sanctified husband is a clear
witness to the unsanctified wife, that she may be sanctified; the sanctified
father is a witness to the unsanctified child that he may be sanctified; the
sanctified master is a witness to the unsanctified servant that he may be
sanctified; the sanctified Prince is a witness to his unsanctified people that
they may be sanctified; and the sanctified Minister is a witness to his
unsanctified hearers that they may be sanctified; the same Spirit, the same
Grace, the same Power, the same Presence that has sanctified any of these, may
sanctify all of these; there is no heart so unholy, but a holy God can make it
holy; there is no spirit so unclean, but a holy Spirit can make it clean. Well
sinners, there are many living and standing witnesses of divine grace among
you, and about you, that do sufficiently declare that it is possible that you
may be sanctified and saved. Again, it is possible that you may be sanctified
and made holy. Witness,

7. The Oath of a holy God, Ezekiel. 33.11. Say unto them, Ezekiel. 18.31, 32.
I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from
his way and live; Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will you die,
O house of Israel? As I live, is the form of an Oath, and is much used in the
Scripture by God himself; wicked men are very hardly persuaded to believe that
God is willing that they should be sanctified and saved, and therefore God
takes his oath on it, that he is infinitely more willing that wicked men should
turn from their evil ways and be sanctified and saved, then that they should
perish in their sins, and be damned for ever. As I live, is a weighty oath, and
imports the certainty of that which follows; it is absolute without evasion or
revocation; As sure as I live and am God, I have no pleasure in destroying and
damning of souls, but desire that they would turn from their evil ways, and
that they would be sanctified and saved; let me not live, let me be no longer a
God, if I would not have the wicked to live and be happy for ever: The
possibility of your being holy, God has confirmed by an oath, and therefore
you may no longer question it. As Paulus Fagius observes in his comment on
Genesis.
The Egyptians (though Heathens) so hated perjury, that if any man did but
swear by the life of the King, and did not perform his oath, that man was to
die, and no gold was to redeem his life: And do you think that a holy God does
not stand more upon his oath then Heathens, yea then the worst of Heathens?
Certainly he does.

8. Lastly, it is possible that you may be a holy; Witness, lost man holy. His
great design in leaving his fathers bosom and coming into this world, (...),
dissolve, unravel the works of the Devil.
was the destroying, the dissolving of the works of the Devil. 1 John 3.8. For
this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of
the Devil. Sin is Satan's work, and Christ comes to destroy it, and break it all
in pieces. Men's sins are Satan's chains by which he links them fast to himself;
but Christ was therefore manifested, that he might loose and knock off these
chains; Satan had knit many sinful knots in our souls, but Christ comes to unty
those knots; he had laid many snares, but Christ comes to discover and to break
those snares. It was the great design of Christ in the divesting of himself (as
it were) of his divine honor, glory, and dignity, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 15.
and in his taking on him the nature of man, to destroy Satan, and to sanctify
the souls of men. Heb. 2.11, 14, 15. It was the great design of Jesus Christ in
giving of himself for us, in giving his soul, his body, his life, to justice,
to death, to wrath for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, Titus
2.14.
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. The crown
of holiness was fallen from our heads, and Christ freely and willingly uncrowns
himself, that once more we might be crowned with holiness, immortality and
glory. Christ was resolved that he would lose all that was near and dear unto
him, but he would recover our lost holiness for us. Christ knew that heaven had
been but a poor purchase, had he not purchased holiness for us. As heaven is
but a low thing without God, so heaven is but a low thing without holiness. It
is holiness that is the sparkling Diamond in the Ring of happiness; a man were
better be holy in hell, then unholy in heaven; and therefore Christ ventures
his All for holiness. The great design of Christ in redeeming of souls with the
choicest, the purest, the costliest, the noblest blood that ever run in veins,
Luke 1.74, 75.
was that they should serve him in righteousness and holiness all the days of
their lives. In a word, Christ had never taken so great a journey from heaven
to earth, but to make men holy; he had never taken upon him the form of a
servant, but to make us the servants of the most high God. He had never lain in
a manger, he had never trod the Wine Press of his fathers wrath, but to make
you holy; he prayed, he sweat, he bled, and he hung on the Cross, and all to
make you holy; he was holy in his birth, and holy in his life, and holy in his
death, and holy in all his sufferings, and all to make you holy: The great
design of Christ in all he did, and in all he suffered, was to make man holy.
And thus you see by all these Arguments, that holiness is attainable.

Thirdly, Consider this, that real holiness is the honor These. 4.3, 4. 2 Cor.
3. ult. Ephesians. 5.27.
For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain
from fornication; That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel
in sanctification and honor. The vessel is man's body (which is the great
utensil or instrument of the soul, and contains it as in a vessel) now the
sanctity and chastity of this vessel, is the honor of a Christian; even bodily
purity is a Christians glory; he that keeps his vessel in holiness, keeps it in
honor: A heathen could say, Nobilitas sola est atque unica vertus; Virtue is
the only true nobility.
Holiness is the greatest dignity that mortal man is capable of; it is man's
highest promotion, it is his highest exaltation; holiness is the true
gentility, and the true nobility of the soul. Deuteronomy. 26. ult. And to make thee
high above all Nations which he has made, in praise, and in name, and in
honor, and that thou may be an holy people unto the Lord thy God. There is
nothing that lifts a people so high, and that makes them so truly famous and
glorious, as holiness does: Holiness is the praise, the renown, the crown, and
glory of a people: Holiness is the diadem, the beauty, and the excellency of a
people: Holiness is the strength, the honor, and the riches of a people:
Holiness is the image of God, the character of Christ; it is a beam of the
divine nature, a spark of glory, it is the life of your lives, and the soul of
your souls; it is only holiness that makes men to excel in honor all other
people in the world. Look as Gods holiness is his glory, Exodus 15.11. Isa. 6.2,
3. Psalm 93.5. Ephesians. 5.27.
and the Angels holiness is their glory, and the Churches holiness is their
glory; so the holiness of any particular person, is the glory of that person.
Why was Jabez reputed more honorable then his brethren, but because he was
more holy then his brethren! 1 Chronicles. 4.9, 10. And Jabez was more honorable
then his brethren; And his mother called his name Jabez, saying, because I bare
him with sorrow. And Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou
would bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thine hand might be
with me, and that thou would keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me!
And God granted him that which he requested. Holiness is the truest and the
greatest nobility and honor in the world. It is very observable, that among
Turks, Jews, Indians, Persians, and Papists, the strictest and holiest among
them are most highly esteemed and honored. Romanus the Martyr, who was born of
noble parentage, entreated his persecutors that they would not favor him for
his nobility; for it is not (said he) the blood of my ancestors, but my
Christian faith that makes me noble. David thought it not so happy, nor so
honorable a thing to be a King in his own house, as to be a doorkeeper in
Gods house. Solomon did prefer the title of Ecclesiastes, (that is, a soul
reconciled to the Church) before the title of the King of Jerusalem: Holy
Theodosius the Emperor preferred the title of membrum Ecclesiae, a member of
the Church, before that of Caput imperii, the head of the Empire, professing
that he had rather be a Saint and no King, then a King and no Saint. And holy
Constantine rejoiced more in being the servant of Christ, then in being the
Emperor of the world. And Luther had rather be ( Christianus rusticus, then
Ethnicus Alexander) a Christian clown then a Pagan Emperor. These holy men
well knew that holiness was the top of all their honor and glory. Well
sinners, remember this, that holiness is the high and ready way to the highest
honor; and therefore as ever you would be truly honorable, labor to be truly
holy. Great swelling titles are but as so many Rattles, or as so many Feathers
in men's caps, without holiness; he that can be content to live without
holiness, must be contented to see his honor intombed whilst he lives. Honor
without holiness, is but a wind that will blow a man the sooner to hell. Honor
without holiness, Acts 25.23. (...), with great fantasy or vain show; all the
honor, pomp and state of this world is but a fantasy.
is but magnum nihil, a great nothing, a glorious fancy. Many a man has been
the worse, but where lives that man that has been ever the better for his
worldly honor? A man swelled with honor (without holiness) is like a man in a
Dropsy, whose bigness is his disease. Well, let Ambitionists and all others
who hunt after the breath of popular applause, know, that that honor which
attends holiness, is the truest honor, the highest honor, the greatest
honor, the happiest honor, the surest honor, the purest honor, and the most
lasting and abiding honor. Mollerus upon Psalm 73.20. concludes that wicked
men's earthly honors and dignities are but as idle dreams, and their splendid
braveries, but lucid fantasies. Adonibezek, a mighty Prince, is quickly made a
fellow-commoner with the dogs, Judge. 1.7. And Nebuchadnezzar, a mighty
conqueror, Dan. 4.28. Acts 12.23.
turned a grazing among the Oxen. And Herod reduced from a conceited god, to be
the most loathsome of men, a living carrion arrested by the vilest of creatures,
upon the suit of his affronted Creator. And great Haman feasted with the King
one day, Est. 7.10.
and made a feast for Crows the next; but that honor that waits on holiness,
is honor that will abide with a man, that will to the grave with a man, yea
that will to heaven with a man. Some heathens have been weary of their honors,
Maximus, etc.
but the honor that attends holiness is no burden to a Christian; and others
have rejected honors when they have been offered them, because of the cumber
and danger that attends them: High seats are never but uneasy, and Crowns are
usually stuffed with thorns. But the honor that attends holiness, is a Rose
without prickles, it is a Crown without thorns; that honor that springs from a
root of holiness, shall be both sanctified and sweetened by God, so as that it
shall not hurt nor harm a gracious soul. Ah sinners, sinners, if you will be
ambitious, be ambitious of that honor that comes in upon the foot of holiness,
for there is no honor to that honor. The Romans were insatiable in their
desires after worldly honor, which is but as a blast, a shadow, a dream. O!
how much more insatiable should you be in your desires and endeavors after
that honor that is linkt to holiness, and that is substantial and lasting!

History tells us of many Infidels that have been won to the Christian faith
by the holy lives of the Saints, etc.
drawing, and winning; it draws love, it draws desire, it draws delight.
Holiness is like a precious perfume, whose savor spreads it self, and is
pleasing and delightful to all that come near it. 2 Kings 4.9, 10. And she said
unto her husband, Behold now, I perceive that this is a holy man of God, which
passes by us continually. Let us make a little chamber I pray thee, on the
wall, and let us set for him there a bed, a table, and a stool, and a
candlestick; and it shall be, when he comes to us, that he shall turn in
thither. The holiness of the Prophets spirit, the holiness of his principles,
the holiness of his behavior, and the holiness of his conversation, did so
allure and win upon this great Lady, that she becomes an importunate suitor to
her husband, that he might be lovingly, freely, courteously, and commodiously
entertained and accommodated as often as he came that way. So Acts 2.46, 47.
And they continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from
house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart;
Praising God, and having favor with all the people. That which did grace and
ingratiate these holy Converts into the favor of the people, was the exercise
of their grace and holiness. It was their sweet unity, their noble charity,
their holy familiarity, their blessed harmony, their singular sincerity, and
their Christian constancy, that brought them into favor with all the people;
visible holiness is a loadstone that will draw eyes and hearts after it. 1 Pet.
3.1. Likewise ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands, that if any obey
not the Word, they also may without the Word be won by the conversation of the
wife. A holy conversation is a winning conversation; Phil. 2.15. 1 Cor. 7.16.
the holy conversation of the wife, may be the conversion of the husband; the
holy, the wise, the watchful, the circumspect conversation of the wife, may
issue in the salvation of the husband; many a husband has been won to Christ
by the holy conversation of the wife, and many a wife has been won by the
holy conversation of the husband; Monica won her husband Patricia from being
an impure Manichee, not by force of argument, but by purity and chastity of
life, says Augustine.
many a servant has been won by the holy conversation of the Master; and many
a Master has been won by the holy conversation of the servant. Zozomen
reports, that the holy life of a poor captive Christian maid, made a King and
all his family to embrace the Christian faith. I have read of Cicilia a poor
virgin, who by her holy and gracious behavior in her martyrdom, was the means
of converting four hundred to Christ. Many a soul has been won by the dumb
Oratory of a holy life. Justin Martyr confesses, that the constancy of
Christians in their piety and sufferings, was the chiefest motive that
converted him to Christianity. For I my self (says he) was once a Platonist,
and did gladly hear the Christians reviled: but when I saw they feared not
death, nor any of those miseries which did most frighten all other men, I began
to consider with my self, that it was impossible for such men to be lovers of
pleasure more then lovers of piety; and that made me first think of turning
Christian. 1 Pet. 2.12. Chap. 15.3, 16.
There is nothing that has that influence upon the judgments of men to
persuade them, upon the consciences of men to awe them, upon the mouths of men
to stop them, upon the hearts of men to convince them, and upon the lives of
men to reform them, as holiness. What Plato once said of his moral virtue, viz.
that if it could be seen with bodily eyes, it would be beloved of all, and draw
all hearts to it self: That is most true of this Theological grace, holiness;
holiness is so beautiful and so lovely a thing, that it renders men amiable and
lovely in the very eyes of their enemies. Tilligny for his rare virtues, Vide
the French History in the life of Charles the ninth.
was rescued from death by his greatest enemies, at the massacre of Paris.
Holiness makes a man's face to shine, as it did Moses his, and Stephens; nothing
pleases the eye, nor wins the heart, like holiness: What is gold to godliness,
gifts to grace, parts to piety? a spark, a ray, a beam of holiness, will
certainly have an influence upon the spirits of men, either to restrain them,
or change them, or allay them, or sweeten them, or win them, or one way or
another to better them. Look as the unholy lives and conversations of many
professors do occasion some to blaspheme God, others to belie God, others to
withstand God, and others to forsake God; Look as the looseness of many
Christians does work some to reproach Christ, others to deny Christ, others to
refuse Christ, others to revile the good ways of Christ, and others to oppose
and despise the faithful followers of Christ: As Lactantius reports, that the
loose lives of many Christians was made by the Heathens the reproach of Christ
himself, (Quomodo bonus Magister, cujus tam pravos videmus discipulos?) How can
we think the Master to be good, whose disciples we see to be so bad? And
Salvian also complains, that the loose walking of many Christians, was made by
the Heathen the reproach of Christ himself, saying, If Christ had taught holy
doctrine, surely his followers had led better lives. Salvianus de G. D. l. 4.
And further the same Author relates, how the Heathens did reproach some
Christians, who by their lewd lives made the Gospel of Christ to be a reproach:
Where (said they) is that good Law which they do believe? Where are those rules
of godliness which they do learn? they read the holy Gospel, and yet are
unclean; they hear the Apostles writings, and yet are drunk; they follow
Christ, and yet disobey Christ; they profess a holy Law, and yet do lead impure
lives. Now, I say, look as the holiness of many professors is a dishonor to
God, Ezekiel. 13.22.
a reproach to Christ, a scandal to Religion, a blot to profession, and a grief
to many whom God would not have grieved: So the power of holiness, the practice
of holiness, is very influential upon the worst of men, to win and work them to
the Lord, and to a love and liking of his ways. The holy lives of the Saints
made the very Heathens to say, Surely this is a good God, whose servants are so
good! Ambrose his holiness did very much draw out the heart of Theodosius the
Emperor to him; and the holiness of Paphnutius did very much draw out the
heart of Constantine the great to him; there is nothing that gives a man that
heart-room and that hearty room in the souls of others, 2 These. 1.3, 4, 5. read
it.
as holiness, it is the holy man that is a man of a thousand. But,

part of the divine nature, a spark of heaven, a ray of glory; so it is the
excellency of all a man's excellencies, it is the excellency of all our natural
excellencies, it is the excellency of all our moral excellencies, and it is the
excellency of all our intellectual excellencies. Look as Gods holiness is the
excellency of all his excellencies, as the Angels, who best know what is the
top of his excellency, do evidence by that threefold repetition, Holy, holy,
holy, Isa. 6.3. Rev. 4.8. Some Greek Copics have the word (...), holy, nine
times over, etc.
these multiplied acclamations of holiness, denote the superlative eminency,
excellency, and perfection of Gods holiness. Both among the Hebrews, and among
the Grecians, the holiness of God is the excellency of his omnisciencie,
omnipotency, and omnipresence; it is the excellency of his eternity,
immutability, and fidelity; it is the excellency of his wisdom, love, care and
goodness. Psalm 111.9. Holy and reverend is his name. Gods name comes to be
reverend by holiness; if his name were not holy, it would never be reverend;
and why is God called so often the holy one, but to show us that holiness is
the very top of all his glory, and excellency! God could not be glorious in any
thing, Exodus 15.11. That which God accounts his highest honor, is his holiness.
if he were not glorious in holiness; That which speaks his power to be
glorious power, is his holiness; and that which speaks his wisdom to be
glorious wisdom, is his holiness; and that which speaks his mercy to be
glorious mercy, is his holiness, etc. Were not the power of God a holy power,
it could never be a glorious power; were not the wisdom of God a holy wisdom,
it could never be glorious wisdom; and were not the mercy of God holy mercy, it
could never be glorious mercy, etc. So the holiness of a man, is the glory and
excellency of all a man's excellencies; it is the perfection of all a man's
perfections; in Paradise, Heb. 12.23.
man's perfect holiness was his perfect blessedness; and in heaven, man's perfect
holiness will be his perfect happiness. Holiness adds an excellency to all a
man's excellencies; that which adds an excellency to a man's wisdom is holiness;
when a man's wisdom is a holy wisdom, then it is excellent wisdom. So holy
courage is excellent courage; and holy zeal is excellent zeal, and holy
knowledge is excellent knowledge, and holy faith is excellent faith, and holy
love ^s ex^ellent love, and holy fear is excellent fear; it is the adding of
holiness to all these, that renders these virtues truly excellent; it is
holiness that is the top of all these royalties. 0000000 these signify
nothing, but if you do but add a figure to them, 10000000. then they signify
much.
Look as all ciphers signify nothing except you add a figure to them: so all
the excellencies that be in men, whether they are natural, moral, or acquired,
they signify nothing, except you add holiness to them. Birth and breeding,
wit and wealth, honor and learning, are but the shadows and shapes of
nobleness and true excellency; it is holiness that is the soul and substance
of all; and without holiness all other things are of no worth, all other
excellencies have no excellency at all in them. 2 King. 5 1.
Naaman was General of the Kings Army, he was a man in great favor with his
Prince, a man much honored among the people for being a savior and deliverer
to them. He was also a mighty man in valor, but he was a Leper; this But he
was a Leper, was a cloud upon all his glory, it was a vail upon all his honor,
greatness and nobleness: So to say, there is a wise man, but unholy; and
there is a great man, but unholy; and there is an ingenuous man, but unholy;
and there is a nobleman, but unholy; and there is a valiant man, but unholy;
and there is a good natured man, but unholy; and there is a learned man, but
unholy, etc. What is this But unholy, but a cloud of darkness upon all the
excellencies that are in these persons? But let now holiness be but added to
each of these, and then they will shine as so many Suns. Holiness is a garment
that sets off arts, and parts, and all other excellencies that be in man; let
but this garment be wanting, and the nakedness of all things will quickly
appear. And this made Hierom to say, that he had rather have Saint Paul's coat
with his heavenly graces, then the purple of Kings with their Kingdoms. Look as
a precious Jewel set in gold, makes that much more conspicuous and glorious,
which was glorious before: So holiness adds beauty, splendor and glory to a
man's parts, birth, honor, and estate, etc. But,

an honor and an ornament both to the persons and places to whom he stands
related; the holiness of the father is an honor and ornament to the child, So
holy Eliakim was a throne of glory to his fathers house. Isa. 22.23. The Hebrew
is, A woman of of strength, or a valiant woman; that is, a woman that is made
strong and valiant by grace, by holiness, to withstand sin, to conquer
temptation, and to triumph in affliction, etc.
so was Abraham's to Isaac; and the holiness of the child is an honor and an
ornament to the father, so was Isaacs to Abraham; the holiness of the husband
is an honor and ornament to the wife, so was Abraham's to Sarah; and the
holiness of the wife is an honor and an ornament to the husband, so was
Sarahs to Abraham: So in Prove. 12.4. A virtuous woman is a crown to her
husband. (A crown is the top of honor, it is the top of royalty and glory;
why a virtuous wife is such a thing.) A sweet, a good natured wife, is as a
gold ring upon her husbands finger; a gifted wife is as a gold chain about her
husbands neck, but a holy virtuous wife is as a crown upon her husbands head.
The holiness of the Prince is an honor and an ornament to the people; and the
holiness of the people is an honor and an ornament to the Prince. The
holiness of the master is an honor and an ornament to the servant; and the
holiness of the servant is an honor and an ornament to the master. And the
holiness of one brother, is an honor to another brother. Jude glories in
this, that he was the brother of James, Verse. 1. James was famous for his
sanctity; for his holiness he was called the just, as Eusebius writes; Eusebius.
lib. 2. c. 23. where you have many memorable things concerning the holiness of
his life, and the manner of his death.
his holiness did so sparkle and shine, that the Jews were generally convinced
that in holiness he was more eminent and excellent then others. Now Jude took
it for a very high honor to be related to one so eminent in holiness: Holy
persons reflect a credit and an honor upon their relations: It was the speech
of a Heathen notably qualified, though but meanly bred and born, to a dissolute
person well born, upbraiding him with his birth, I am a grace to my stock, but
thou art a blot to thy lineage. Yea holy persons are an honor to the places
where they have been born and bred. Psalm 87.5, 6. And of Zion it shall be
said, this and that man was born in her: and the highest himself shall
establish her. The Lord shall count when he writes up the people, that this
man was born there. Selah. God seems to be very much affected and taken with
the very places where holy men are born; Some Antiquaries say, that the
Primitive Church had her public Tables, where^n the names of the persons that
were most noted for piety and holiness were recorded.
he loves the very ground that holy men tread on, and he delights in the very
air that holy men breath in; holy persons reflect honor upon the very places
where they were born; the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, were the
honor and the glory of the ages and places where they lived. They were as so
many bright morning Stars, they were as so many rising Suns in the places where
they were bred and born. Melancthon was called the Phoenix of Germany, and
Luther was the glory of the age wherein he lived. And so were many of the
ancients before them, and many since, who have been burning and shining lights
in the places of their abode. Look as an unholy person is a plague and a curse
to the very place he lives in, and hasteneth down wrath and vengeance upon it:
as Bias the Philosopher has long since observed; for he being at Sea in a
great tempest, among many profane debauched fellows, and perceiving them to
call upon their gods (as the worst of men usually do in such cases) he comes to
them, and desires them to hold their peace, lest the gods should take notice
that they were in the Ship, and so not only themselves but others also should
suffer for their sakes. It was the wickedness of the wicked, that brought the
sweeping flood upon the old world; and it was the wickedness and filthynesse
of the Sodomites, that caused God to rain hell out of heaven upon the Cities
where they lived: Let men be never so honorable, or never so potent, or never
so witty, or never so wealthy, etc. yet if they are profane, if they are
wicked, they will hasten down the wrath and vengeance of God upon the places of
their abode. So a holy person is an honor and a blessing to the very place he
lives in: As you may see in Jacob and Joseph, who were choice and noble
blessings to the very families where they lived. O Sirs, as ever you would be
an honor to your relations, to your Country, and to the places of your abode,
labor for holiness. Some venture life and limb, As many of the Romans did.
and many a better thing, to reflect honor upon their relations, and upon
their Country; and why then should not you venture far, and venture high for
holiness, which will be not only an honor to your selves, but also an honor
and a glory to all persons and places that you have relation to?

Seventhly, Consider, that holiness is the very ear-mark, Isa. 63.8. For he
said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie; so he was their
savior, And ver. 18. they are called the people of his holiness. Gods people
are too holy to lie, they will not lie for his glory, nor for their own worldly
good. They will rather die then lie, Job 13.7. Romans 3.7, 8. Rev. 14.5.
with that brave woman that Jerome writes of, who being upon the Rack, bade her
persecutors do their worst; for she was resolved rather to die then lie.
Neither the merry lie, nor the jesting lie, nor the officious lie, nor the
pernicious lie, will down with those that are the people of Gods holiness, or
that are his holy people: says God, It is said of golden mouthed Chrysostom;
that he never lied, answerable to this, Isa. 63.8.
I have been at so much cost and charge about them, I have carried it so
kindly, so bountifully, so sweetly, so favorably, so nobly, to them I have
been such an all-sufficient Savior, such a mighty preserver, and such a
glorious deliverer of them, that certainly they will not lie, they will not
deceive my expectation, they will not deny me, they will not deal disloyally
nor unworthily by me; they are of Augustines opinion, who has long since told
us, that we must not tell so much as an officious lie, though it were to save
all the world. So Jer. 2.3. Israel was holiness unto the Lord, and the first
fruits of his increase: all that devour him shall offend: evil shall come upon
them says the Lord. Holiness to the Lord, is the mark that God sets upon all
his precious ones. Psalm 4.3. Know that God has set apart him that is godly
for himself. God has wonderfully, gloriously, marvelously, yea miraculously
set apart the pious, the holy, the merciful, the godly man, the gracious Saint,
by some mark of distinction for himself, The Hebrew word, Chasid, imports as
much, Josh. 2. Judge. 11. 2 King. 9. Matthew. 26.
that is for his own honor, and glory, and service, and delight. Look as
Rahahs house was known by a red thread, and the Ephraimites by their lisping,
and Jehu by his driving, and Peter by his speaking: so real Christians are
known by their holiness. Holiness is King Jesus his Livery, by which all his
subjects and servants are known and differenced from all other persons in the
world. And in the Primitive times a Christian was known from another man, only
by the holiness of his conversation, as Tertullian witnesses. Look as our Lord
Jesus Christ by the spirit of holiness raising him up from the dead, Romans 1.4.
was declared to be the Son of God: so it is the spirit of holiness, it is
principles of holiness, it is the life and practice of holiness, 2 Cor. 6.17,
18.
that declares us to be the sons of God. Holiness is that golden character by
which God differences and distinguishes his people from all others in the
world. Rev. 13.16. chap. 14.9, 10. and chap. 19.20. A man were better be a
beast, then to have the mark of the beast upon him.
Look as the worshippers of the Beast are known by the mark of the Beast that
is upon them, so the worshippers of Christ, the people of Christ, are known by
that mark of holiness that Christ has set upon them. This title, this
compellation, Saints, is given fourscore times to the people of God in
Scripture, as if God took a greater delight to have his children known by this
badge and livery, then by any other. As for such that have the name of Saints
upon them, The Title of a Saint is but an empty thing without holiness.
but nothing of the nature of a Saint in them; that have a name to be holy, and
yet are unholy; that have a name to be gracious, and yet are graceless; that
have a name to live, and yet are dead; these God will in that day unmask, when
he shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity. An unholy Saint is a
white Devil, he is a monster among men. Christ sweat, and prayed, and died, and
was raised to make sinners Saints, to make the rebellious religious, and the
licentious conscientious; all he did and suffered was to stamp the seal and
impresse of holiness upon them. And therefore as ever you would be owned and
honored by Christ another day, look that the holy Spirit sets the seal of
holiness upon you. If the impresse of holiness be upon you in the day that
the Lord makes up his Jewels, he will declare you to be his before all the
world. He will say, These are my sheep, these are my sons, I know them by that
mark of holiness that I find upon them. But,

the better for a holy man; all in the family, all in the Court, all in the
City, all in the Country fare the better for the holy man's sake. Genesis 30.27.
chap. 19.21, 22, 23, 24. chap. 41, etc.
All in Labans family did fare the better for Jacobs sake; and all in the City
of Zoar did fare the better for Lots sake; and all Pharoahs Court, and the
whole Country of Egypt did fare the better for Joseph's sake. Sodom was safe
whilst holy Lot was in it: 2 Kings 2.12. Psalm 106.23.
Holy Elijah was the chariots and horsemen of Israel: whilst holy Moses stood
in the gap, destroying judgments were diverted: when holy Phineas took up his
Censer and stood between the living and the dead, the plague was stayed. Numb.
26.46, 49.
Holy persons are public mercies, public blessings. Job 22.30. God will
sometimes deliver a whole Country, for the sake of the inocent, etc.
He shall deliver the Island of the innocent: and it is delivered by the
pureness of thine hands: or as some read the words, the innocent shall deliver
the Island; that is, the inhabitants of the Island; the innocent shall deliver
those that are not innocent; had there been but ten innocent, but ten righteous
persons in Sodom, Sodom might have been a glorious city to this day; had there
been but ten righteous souls among them, Genesis 18.32. to the end.
God would never have rained hell out of heaven upon them. The guiltless shall
deliver the guilty in an Island; the guiltless by lifting up pure hands to God
in prayer, shall stay the hand of God, that it destroys not the guilty. It is
the holy seed that upholdeth the civil state. Isa. 6.13. I will seek thy good,
was holy David's royal and religious resolution, Psalm. 122.9. Kings are for
Kingdoms, not Kingdoms for Kings.
But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall he eaten: as a
teyltree, and as an oak whose substance is in them, when they cast their
leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof. The holy seed were the
stay and prop of their Land, and this the Lord evidences by a very familiar
instance or similitude; it is as if he should say, You see the way or cawsey
leading from the Kings house to the Temple (spoken of in 1 Kings 10.5. and 2
Kings 12.21. 1 Chronicles. 26.16, 17. and 2 Chronicles. 9.11.) how by reason of the oaks
and trees on either side thereof, the earth between is stayed and held up firm,
which otherwise would fall to decay and moulder away: So says God, it is the
holy seed that bears up the whole state, and were it not for them, desolation
and destruction would come in as a flood upon you. Prove. 10.25. The righteous
is an everlasting foundation; the Hebrew Doctors sense it thus, The righteous
are the foundation of the world, which would soon shatter and fall to ruin,
but for their sakes. The whole world fares the better every day for the
righteous sake. If it were not for this holy seed, the chaff of this world
would soon be set on fire; if the number of the holy seed were but called and
converted, God would quickly turn the whole world into flames and ashes; it is
they that bear up the pillars of the earth. Psalm 75.3. I bare up the pillars
of the earth; holy persons are the true Atlasses both of Church and state; they
are the pillars on whom all do rest, the props on whom all do lean; do but
overturn these pillars, and all will fall about your ears, as the house did
about the Philistines when Sampson shook it; let but Kingdoms and
Commonwealths wrack these, and they shall quickly be ship-wrackt themselves.
There is not a sinner in the world, but enjoyes his estate, his relations, his
outward accommodations, yea his very life, upon the account of the Saints, and
therefore they must needs be bewitched, or fools, or mad men, that are still a
lifting and a thrusting at these very pillars that bear them up. Look as
Sampsons strength did lie in his locks, so the strength and safety of the
Nation lies in the holy seed, they are the Bullwarks and Ammunition of the
Nation; the safety and felicity of the whole is bound up in them; it is not
Armies, nor Navies, nor walled Cities, nor fortified Casiles, nor golden Mines,
nor grave Counsels, that will secure a Nation; if once the people of Gods
holiness be cast by as broken pitchers: Lam. 4.1, 2. Est. 4. and chap. the
last compared.
it is their piety and prayers that keeps off sweeping judgments from a
Nation, and that brings down variety of mercies upon a Nation. Holy persons are
the clouds that water the earth, as a common blessing; and they are the rising
Sun that scatters all clouds and darkness. A holy man is ((...)) a publke
diffusive blessing in the place where he lives; look as one sinner destroys
much good, Eccles. 9.18.
so one Saint may save a Land, a Country. Jer. 5.1. Run ye to and fro through
the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in the broad places
thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that executes judgment, If
among the rabb^^, if among the noble, if among the rich, if among the fearned,
a man could have been found that loved holiness, that was stout for
righteousness, and that practiced uprightness, God would have spared Jerusalem.
that seeks the truth, and I will pardon it. Though Jerusalem was far larger
and more populous, I say not only then Sodom, but then all the other Cities
that sinned and perished with it, yet God makes so large and noble an offer,
that if there could be found in it but one man divinely qualified, but a man of
justice, a man of faithfulness, a man of uprightness, a man of holiness, the
Lord would pardon it, that is, he would spare it, he would not destroy it,
not ruin it: God once made an offer to Abraham, that if there were but ten
righteous souls in Sadome, he would save it; but here he falls so low as to
make an offer, that if there could be but one righteous soul found in
Jerusalem, he would not destroy it. One Saint may save a City, yea, a world of
sinners from confusion and destruction. Luther, whilst he lived, by Faith and
Prayer, kept off troubles from Germany, but soon after he was gone to his grave
in Peace; O! the wars, the miseries and mischiefs, the distractions and
confusions that came in like a stood upon them! Possidonius in the life of
Augustine tells us, that the famous City of Hippo could never be spoiled
whilst Augustine lived. The flood could not drown the old world till holy.
Meth^s^lah was laid up in peace. O Sirs! as ever you would be a public
blessing, labor to be holy. But,

Ninthly, Consider the antiquity of holiness; holiness Deuteronomy. 32.7. etc. Genesis
1.26.
Let us make man (says God) in our own Image: Sin is against nature, it is a
def^ct in nature, it came in by a lie, and by the by, through the subtilty of
the Father of lies. Joh. 8.44.
God stamped his Image of holiness upon man, before ever Satan assayed to tempt
him. Holiness is of the antientest house, of the greatest antiquity. Sin is
but an upstart, holiness is the firstborn; the way of holiness is the oldest
way. Jer. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways and see and ask for
the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find^
rest for your souls, but they said we will not walk therein. Lin sh^b^th
gnolam; paths of eternity, the paths of piety; the paths of purity are paths of
eternity, etc.
The way of holiness was that old way in which Adam at first, and in which all
the holy Patriarchs and Prophets walked. In this sense it is most certain, that
the oldest way is the best way; the way of sanctity is of greatest antiqui^y:
Let Papists and carnal superstitious Protestants cry up their superstitious
ways, as waie^ of greatest antiquity, yet when they have said all they can,
there is no Antiquity to that of holiness; the way of Will Worship was not the
first way of worshipping God in the world. Many carnal men cry out that they
are for the good old way, they care not for this new way, they care not for
this new Religion (as they call it), they say that we have never had good days
since there has been so much Praying, and so much Preaching, and so much
Fasting, and so much Printing, and so much ado about c^ose walking with God:
It Is most certain that a carnal Religion is best pleasing to a carnal heart;
and this you may see evidently among the Turks, whose Religion gives much
carnal liberty to the professors of it; and whose Religion promises them a
Paradise of sensual pleasures in another world: And the same is very observable
among the Papists, and all the carnal Protestants in the world, who cry up that
for the best Religion, and for the true Religion, and for the good old
Religion, that is most suitable to their carnal reason, and most pleasing and
indulging to their lusts. Socrates is sufficiently condemned, for his
prescribing of men to worship God according to the manner of the country where
they lived; and what was this, but to gratify the lust of men by subjecting
the rule of Gods worship, to the laws and customs of men, but from the
beginning it was not so. Holy Noah, holy Enoch, and the rest of the holy
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, walked only in ways of Piety and Purity.
Holy Abraham, holy Isaac, and holy Jacob; never walked in those ways that are
now by loose, formal, carnal and superstitious persons, cried up for the good
old way, but in ways of holiness and righteousness. I have read of the
Cretians, that when they cursed their enemies, they did not wish their houses
on fire, nor a sword at their hearts, but that they might be delighted and
given up to an ill custom. It is one of the greatest and bitterest Curses and
Woes, to be delighted and given up to ill customs; and the older the custom
is of evil, the worse it is; and ah how many are fallen under these curses in
these days, wherein multitudes are addicted and given up to carnal and
superstitious customs and choose rather to follow an ill custom, though it be
never so absurd, irregular, vain, and superstitious, then to walk in a way of
peace and holiness. Well Sirs, shall the Antiquity of holiness provoke you to
be holy? Many will do much for Antiquity sake, and why then should not you do
much for holiness sake? Holiness is Gods firstborn, it is as ancient as the
ancient of days: The way of holiness is gray headed, and of antientest
institution; all other ways are but of yesterday, they are but new ways to
the way of holiness. And O that this might alaram you to look after holiness!
The Gibeonites cheated Joshua with their old clouted shoes, and with their old
sacks, and old boots, Josh. 9.4, 5.
and old garments; And so does Rome this day cheat and delude multitudes of
poor, blind, ignorant souls, with their old customs, and with their old
ceremonies, and old traditions, and old inventions, under a pretense of the
good old way, and the good old religion; but certainly the way of holiness, the
way of purity, is of the greatest Antiquity, and therefore O embrace it! O walk
in it! Look as the stamp of Antiquity upon some things is a disparagement and a
dishonor to them, as an old garment that is past wearing, and an old house
that is past mending, and an old ship that is past rigging; so the stamp of
Antiquity upon other things is a praise and an honor to them, as old gold, old
friends, old manuscripts, old monuments, old scars, and old holiness; the
stamp of Antiquity upon holiness, is the praise and honor of holiness. Look
as it is an honor to a man to be descended of an ancient house; so it is an
honor to a man to be allied to holiness, because sanctity is of greatest
Antiquity; and therefore above all gettings, get holiness. But,

Tenthly, Consider, that of all things holiness will render of God, Exodus
15.11. Plato called God the horn of plenty, and the ocean of beauty, without
the least spot of injustice. God is ipsa essentialis pulchritudo, beauty it
self, the very essential Idea, and pure Sampler of all beauties.
and the beauty of Angels, so it is the beauty and glory of a Christian too:
holiness is a Christians greatest honor and ornament. Psalm, 93.5. Holiness
becomes thine house (that is thy Church) O Lord for ever. There is no garment
that suits the Church, that becomes the Church, like the garment of holiness;
it is sancti^y that is the Churches excellency and glory; it is purity that is
the Churches ornament and beauty. Holiness is a beauty that beautifies the
Church; it is the gracefulness and comeliness of the Church; holiness is so
beautiful a thing, that it puts a beauty on all things else; as holiness is
the greatest ornament of the Church Triumphant, so it is the greatest ornament
of the Church Millitant, Ephe. 5.26, 27. The redness of the Rose, the whiteness
of the Lilly, and all the beauties of Sun, Moon, and Stars, are but deformities
to that beauty that holiness puts upon us. If all natural and artificial
beauty were contracted into one beauty, yet it would be but an obscure and an
unlovely beauty, to that beauty that holiness puts upon us. Psalm. 29.2. Give
unto the Lord the glory due unto his name, worship the Lord in the beauty of
holiness. Psalm. 96.9. O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. Psalm.
110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauty of
holiness. You see beauty and holiness is by God himself still linked
together, and those whom God has so closely joined together, no man may put a
sunder. The Scripture last cited does not only speak our holiness to be a
beautiful thing, but it speaks out many beauties to be in holiness. Those
Christians that are volunteers in the beauties of holiness, they shall be very
beautiful and shining through holiness: Holiness casts such a beauty upon man,
as makes him very amiable and desirable. The holiness of parents renders them
very amiable and desirable in the eyes of their children; and the holiness of
children renders them very amiable and desirable in the eyes of their paren^s.
When that incomparable Lady Cornelia presented her sons to the Commonwealth;
Isa. 22, 22.
she said, (Haec sunt mea ornamenta) these are my Jewels, these are my
ornaments. Holy children are their parents crown, their parents ornaments; no
glistering gold, no sparkling diamonds, Xenophon in Plutarch never prayed that
his son Gryllus might be long lived, but that he might be a good man.
no shining or glittering apparel, renders children so amiable and lovely in
the eyes of their parents, as holiness does. The holiness of the husband
renders him very amiable in the eyes of the wife, and the holiness of the wife
renders her very desirable in the eyes of her husband. The holiness of the
master renders him very lovely in the eyes of his servants, and the holiness
of the servants renders them very comely in the eyes of their masters, etc.
Jewels holiness, Bradfords holiness, and Bucers holiness, rendered them very
amiable and lovely, not only in the eyes of their friends, but also in the eyes
of their enemies. There is nothing in this world that will render all sorts and
ranks of people so glorious and famous in the eyes of one another, as holiness
will do: Were all ranks and orders of men more holy, they would certainly be
more lovely in the eyes of one another. O that all men would cease from being
injurious one to another, and labor to be more holy, and then I am sure they
would be more comely in one another eyes. Holiness is lovely, yea loveliness
it self; purity is a Christians splendour and glory; there is no beauty to that
of sanctity; nothing beautifies and bespangles a man like holiness: Holiness
is so lovely and so comely a thing, that it draws all eyes and hearts to an
admiration of it. Holiness is so great a beauty, that it puts a beauty upon
all other excellencies in a man. That holiness is a very beautiful thing, and
that it makes all those beautiful that have it, is a truth that no Devil can
deny. And therefore, O Sirs, as ever you would be ebautiful and lovely, labor
to be holy. The natural beauty of Sarah, Rebeccah, Rachel, 2 Samuel 14.25.
Joseph and Absalom was no beauty to that beauty, luster and glory that
holiness puts upon a man. Demetrius (says Plutarch Plutarch in the life of
Demetrius.
) was so passing fair of face and countenance, that no Painter was able to draw
him; Holiness puts so rare a beauty upon man, that no Painter under heaven is
able to draw him. Scipio Africanus was so comely a person, that the Barbarians
in Spain stood amazed at his comeliness: Holiness puts such a comeliness,
Mark 6.20.
and such an amiablenesse upon a person, that many admire it, and stand amazed
at it. O Sirs, as ever you would be amiable and desirable, be holy; as ever you
would be lovely and comely, be holy; as ever you would be famous and glorious,
be holy; as ever you would outshine the Sun in splendour and glory, labor to be
holy. Many have ventured their names, their estates, their liberties, their
lives, yea their very souls to enjoy a lovely Bathsheba, David, Theseus, Prince
Paris, Mark Antony, etc.
a fair Helena, a beautiful Diana, a comely Cleopatra, etc. whose beauties have
been but clay well colored: O how much more then should you be provoked to
labor and venture your All for holiness, that will imprint upon you that most
excellent and most exquisite beauty, that will to the grave and to glory with
you; yea that will render you not only amiable and excellent in the eyes of
men, but also lovely and comely in the eyes of God! I remember Bernard writing
to a noble Virgin that was holy, tells her, that others were clothed with
purple and silk, Psalm 45.13, 14.
but their consciences were poor and beggarly; they glistered with their
Jewels, but were loose in their manners; but you, (says he) are without meanly
clad, but within shine exceeding beautiful, not to humane, but to divine eyes;
both in the eyes of God, Angels and men, Ezekiel. 16.1, 12.
none shine and glister so gloriously, as those that are holy. Unholy souls are
foul souls, ugly souls, deformed souls, withered souls, wrinkled souls, they
are altogether unlovely and uncomely souls. I have read of Acco an old woman,
who seeing her deformity in a glass, run mad. Should God but show unholy men
their deformity in the glass of the Law, it would either make them spiritually
mad, or else it would make them fall in love with holiness; that so they might
be made comely and lovely, by being made pure and holy. But,

Tim. 6.6. But godliness with contentment is great gain. Though godliness it
self be great gain, Godliness is the greatest riches, the best treasure, the
highest honor, and the most lasting fame.
yet godliness brings in a great deal of gain besides it self. The godly man
is still of the gaining side, his piety brings him in the greatest plenty.
chap. 4.8. Godliness is profitable to all things. A man is as well able to
tell the stars of heaven, and to number the hairs of his head, as he is able to
tell the several commodities, or to number up the variety of blessings, or
multitude of mercies that comes flying in upon the wings of godliness.
Godliness has the promise of both lives, that is, both of earthly favors,
and of eternal blessings also. It is profitable, not for some things, but for
every thing; both temporal, spiritual and eternal blessings do grow upon this
Tree of life, holiness. There is no trade to the trade of godliness. Prove.
22.4. By humility and the fear of the Lord, are riches, and honor, and life.
Godliness has the promise of Gold as well as of Grace, of honor as well as
of heaven; of life and happiness here, as well as of glory and blessedness
hereafter. The good things of this life, as well as the great things of a
better life, follows holiness hard at heels. Holiness is not a barren but a
fruitful womb; it is like that tree in Rev. 22.2. which did bear twelve manner
of fruits, and that yielded fruit every month. What is of greater value among
men then riches? and what is more glorious among men then honor? and what is
more sweet among men then life? Why, all these fruits and ten thousand more,
grow upon the tree of holiness. The bag of riches, the robe of honor, and
life, that is the comfort and sweet of both, hangs all upon the back of
holiness. There is no argument to that which is drawn ab utili. Haec omnia tibi
Dabo, said Satan to Christ.
But that I may the more effectually win upon you, and provoke you to look
after holiness, let me by an induction of particulars, further confirm the
truth of this last consideration, especially considering that there is no
argument under heaven that is so taking with all men as this of gain. Profit is
a bait that all bite at; it is the great god of the world. And therefore thus,

First, Consider that holiness brings in present gain; and in present profit.
Romans 6.22. But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye
have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. The Apostle does
not say, Ye may have your fruit unto holiness; but, Ye have your fruit unto
holiness; he does not say, Ye shall have your fruit unto holiness; but, Ye
have your fruit unto holiness; he does not say, O that ye had your fruit unto
holiness; but, Ye have your fruit unto holiness. So Psalm 19.11. Not only for
keeping, but also in keeping of his commands, there is great reward. Holiness
is its own reward; whilst a Christian is in the very exercise of holiness, O
what blessed sights, what sweet tastes, what glorious incomes from heaven has
he! O the secret visits, the secret whispers, the secret joggings, the secret
love tokens that Christians meet with in the very practice of holiness!
Holiness brings in present comfort and joy. Seneca a Heathen has confessed,
that the best receipt to drive away sadness, was to live well.
2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our consciences, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to
you-wards. There is no mirth, no joy, to that that holiness brings in; let a
man's load be never so heavy, yet holiness will bring in that joy that will
make him bear up bravely and cheerfully under it. Holiness brings in present
peace; hence it is that you read of the peaceable fruits of righteousness,
Heb. 12.10, 11. And holiness will bring in present communion with God. 1 John
1.7. But if we walk in the light, as he is the light, we have fellowship one
with another: (that is, God and we have fellowship togegether, as it is ver.
3.) Now to walk in the light as he is in the light, what is it but to walk in
holiness, to walk in paths of sanctity? for only in such paths the Lord
walks. And therefore as you love present gain, labor after holiness. But,



R^v. 2.9. I know thy poverty, but thou art rich; though the Church of Smyrna
was poor in goods, Jam. 2.5.
yet she was rich in grace, she was rich in faith, and rich in hope, and rich
in patience, and rich in contentment, etc. she was rich in Christ her head, and
rich in promises, and rich in experiences, she had spiritual riches in
possession, and glorious riches in reversion; so in 2 Cor. 6.10. As poor, yet
making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. A holy man
cannot be a poor man: A holy man is still the richest man: But this is a riddle
the world understands not. The riches of a Christian have no bottom; all a
Saints baggs are bottomless baggs. Experience tells us, 1 Cor. 3. chap. 22, 23.
that unholy men's baggs, purses, coffers, and mints may be drawn dry; but the
Treasury, the riches of a Saint, can never be exhausted, for he still possesses
all things in Christ and with Christ; Though he has nothing in hand, yet he
has all things in hope; Though he has nothing in the cistern, yet he has all
things in the fountain. Genesis 33.9. Esau could say (Li Rab) I have much; and it
was much that an Esau should say he had much: but says holy Jacob, v. 11. (Li
col) I have all. Esau had much, but Jacob had all, because he had the God of
all: He had him that was all in all. It has been said of the great Duke of
Guise, that (though he was poor as to his present possessions) yet he was the
richest man in France, in bills, bonds, and obligations, because he had engaged
all the Noble men in France to himself, by preferring of them. A holy man is
the richest man in the world in promises and obligations, for he has the great
and glorious God engaged by many thousand promises to own him, to bless him, to
stand by him, to give grace and glory to him, Psalm 84.10, 11.
and to withold nothing from him that may be good for him. When wicked men
brag of their Lordships and Manors, and boast of their great possessions, and
glory in their thousands a year: A holy man may make his boast of God, and say,
God is mine, God is mine: he is my great all, he is my all in all; and
therefore I am richer and a greater possessor then any wicked man in the world,
yea then all wicked men in the world put together. But,

Secondly, By holiness you will gain a good report, a Heb. 11.39. And these
all having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise:
Nothing raises a man's name and fame in the world like holiness. A good renown
is better then a golden girdle, says the French Proverb.
The seven Deacons that the Church chose were holy men, Acts 6.5. and they were
men of good report, ver. 3. they were men well witnessed unto, well testified
of, as the Greek word imports. Cornelius was a holy man, Acts 10.1, 2, 3, 4.
and he was a man of good report among all the Nation of the Jews. ver. 22.
Ananias was a holy man. Acts 9.10, 20. and he was a man of a good report. Acts
22.12. Gaius and Demetrius were both holy men, and they were men of good
report, witness that third Epistle of John. The Patriarchs and Prophets were
holy men, and they were men of a good report. Heb. 11.1, 2. For by it the
Elders obtained a good report: their holiness did eternalize them. The Apostles
were holy men, 1 These. 2.10. And they were men of a good report, 2 Cor. 6.8.
Now certainly it is none of the least of mercies to be well reputed and
reported of; next to a good conscience, a good report is the noblest blessing.
Good fare does not more rejoice and strengthen the outward man, the ignoble
part of man, then a good report does rejoice and strengthen the inward man, the
noble part of man. Prove. 15.30. A good report makes the bones fat. Yea and I
may add, it makes the heart fat too. It is no small pleasure to a man, to know
that others are pleased with him. Beautiful objects do not more delight the
eyes, then a good report delights the ears. O Sirs, as ever you would obtain a
good report, you must labor after holiness. You may obtain a great report
without holiness, but you can never obtain a good report without holiness.
There is no such way to perpetuate your names, Holy Abel has been dead above
this five thousand years, and yet his name is as fresh and fragrant as a Rose
to this very day. Heb. 11.4.
as to labor after holiness. Holiness will inbalm your names, it will make
them immortal. Psalm. 112.6. The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.
Prove. 10.7. The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall
rot. Wicked men many times outlive their names, but the names of just men
outlive them. When a holy man dies, he leaves his name as a sweet and as a
lasting scent behind him; his fame shall live when he is dead. According to the
Hebrew, the words may be read thus, The memory of the just shall be for a
blessing. The very remembering of the just shall bring a blessing upon them that
remember them. Whilst the just, the holy man lived, he was a blessing to those
amongst whom he lived, and when he is dead, his memory is a blessing to
posterity. But the name of the wicked shall not: whilst a wicked man lives, he
laeis his name under disdain and disgrace, and when he dies, he leaves it under
an odious stink. Wickedness corrupts not only the heart but the name: And look
as wickedness makes a man's soul stink in the nostrils of God, so wickedness
makes a man's name stink in the nostrils of men. Look as a wicked man's body
(when he is dead) stinks under ground, so his name stinks above ground. His
very name casts forth so stinking a savor, that all the perfumes in the world,
and all the spicery of hell can never sweeten it. Well, once more remember,
that these words, The name of the wicked shall rot, are a Metaphorical speech
taken from a tree, which though for a time it grows green and flourishes, yet
at length it grows rotten; so though wicked men may flourish and be green and
glorious for a time, yet at last they shall rot, their names shall rot on
earth, their bodies shall rot in the grave, and their souls shall rot in hell:
but the memory of the just shall be blessed. Next to a holy man's soul, there is
nothing so near and dear to him as his name: and this God will so perfume, as
that the fragrancy of it shall last for ever. The name of a holy man shall be
always as an ointment poured forth: but the name of a wicked man shall be
always as a stinking Jakes. O Sirs! what a deal of stir do many men make to
get a name, to get a name to be wise, a name to be knowing, As Nimrod, Cain,
Absalom, Alexander, Pompey, Adrian, etc.
a name to be learned, a name to be skilful, a name to be rich, a name to be
great, a name to be mighty, and a name to be valiant, etc. And why then should
you not labor after holiness, that so you may get a good name, which is rather
to be chosen then riches, Prove. 22.1. and which is better then precious
ointment! Eccles. 7.1. O Sirs, shall many Romans and others run the hazard of
damning their souls to immortalize their names, and will not you labor after
holiness to eternalize yours? There is no way to a good name, to a good report,
but by getting of holiness.

Prove. 11.6. Isa. 3.10. Isa. 26.20, 21.
The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them: but transgressors shall
be taken in their own naughtiness. Let a holy man's enemies, dangers, snares,
hazards be never so many, yet his righteousness shall shelter him against all.
In the midst of trouble, Isa. 43.2, 3, 4. John 14.1.
holiness will keep a man from trouble; and in the midst of dangers, holiness
will keep a man from dangers: Holiness is the most sovereign Antidote in the
world, against all the troubles of this life. Noah's sanctity was Noah's safety
in the midst of a deluge: And Lots piety was Lots security, in the day of
Sodoms ruin and misery: And the three childrens innocence, They walked up and
down in the fiery furnace, as a man walks up and down in a pleasant Garden.
was a wall of fire about them in the midst of the fiery furnace: And David's
integrity was a shield and buckler against Saul's rage and cruelty; so in Prove.
13.6. Righteousness keeps him that is upright in the way: but wickedness
overthrows the sinner. There is no guard, no protection against troubles and
dangers, to that of righteousness. Righteousness and holiness is the most
puissant Army, and the strongest Tower of defense against all hazards and
enemies. The Hebrew word that is here rendered keeps, is from Natsar, that
signifies to keep with the greatest care, Deuteronomy. 32.14.
diligence, and vigilance that can be; it signifies to preserve and keep, as a
man would preserve and keep the Apple of his eye, which is the chiefest and the
tenderest piece of the tenderest part; and it signifies to keep, as a man would
keep ammunition and provision from fire, Nah. 2.1.
or from treacherous hands, when a powerful and enraged enemy is drawing near.
Why says he, look how careful and diligent, etc. men are to keep and preserve
those things that are most near and dear unto them, and that are most highly
prized and valued by them; So will righteousness and holiness preserve and keep
the righteous man in times of trouble and danger: So in Ezekiel. 14.14, 20. Though
these three men, Noah, Daniel and Job were in it, they should deliver but their
own souls by their righteousness, says the Lord. Though Noah, Daniel and Job
were in it, as I live says the Lord God, they shall deliver neither son nor
daughter: they shall but deliver their own souls by their righteousness. Saints
may prevail with God for themselves, when they cannot prevail with him for
others.
These three, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were very holy men, they had great
interest in God, and were very prevalent with God. But the Decree being gone
forth, they could not prevail with God for others; yet their righteousness
should be their own preservation, safety and security, in days of calamity and
misery. So in Isa. 33.15, 16. He that walks righteously, and speaks
uprightly, he that despises the gain of oppressions, that shakes his hands
from holding of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and
shuts his eyes from seeing of evil, He shall dwell on high; his place of
defense shall be the munition of rocks, bread shall be given him, his waters
shall be sure. Let us dive a little into this admirable promise, He shall dwell
on high, but rather as the Hebrew has it, He shall dwell on hights; if the
holy man were among his enemies, he might be in danger, but he shall dwell on
hights, on many hights, and many ascents, he shall be out of harms way, out of
Gunshot, he shall be above the reach of danger. O! but his enemies may raise
up mounts, and so get as high as he is; Well, grant that, but yet they shall
not hurt him; for he is in a place of defense. O! but though he be in a place
of defense, yet his defense is not so strong, but it may be broken down and
destroyed. No, not so, for his place of defense shall be the munitions of
rocks; many rocks, and many munitions of rocks, shall be the place of his
defense, and therefore his defense is impregnable, and invincible. O! but
though his defense be munitions of rocks, yet he may be famished, he may be
starved out, for rocks are barren places, and there is no plowing and sowing
upon rocks: No, he shall not be starved nor famished out of his strong place of
defense; for bread shall be given him, God will spread a Table for him. O! but
though he has bread, yet he may perish for want of water; for he has no
faith, skill nor power to fetch water out of a Rock. Moses had not, and he has
not, and therefore he may be forced to deliver up his place of defense for
water to quench his thirst, as King Lysimachus and others have done; no not so,
for he shall have water too. O but his water may be spent, his water will not
always last, his Well, as well as Hagars bottle, may be dry; his pipes may be
cut off, or the water that now supplies him may be turned another way. No, not
so, for his water shall be sure. O! the safety and security of holy men.
Plutarch in the life of Alexander tells us, that when he came to besiege the
Sogdians, a people who dwelt upon a Rock, (or such as had the munition of Rocks
for their defense) they jeered him, and asked him whether his soldiers had
wings or not? for, said they, except your soldiers can fly in the air, we fear
you not. Such is the safety of Gods holy ones, that they need not to fear:
There are no ladders long enough to scale their place of defense, nor no
Artillery or Engine strong enough to batter down their munitions of Rocks.
There is an Apologue how the Dove made moan to her fellow birds of the tyranny
of the Hawk; one counsels her to keep below, but says another, The Hawk can
stoop for his prey; another advised her to soar aloft, but says another, the
Hawk can mount as high as she; another wished her to shroud her self in the
woods, for there she should be secure, but says another, alas, there is the
Hawks Manor, the place where he keeps Court; another bids her keep the Town,
but says another, that is to become a prey to man; but at last one bids her
rest her self in the holes of the Rock, and there she should certainly be safe,
for violence it self could not surprise her there, and there she was safe.
Dove-like Saints, they have their munitions of Rocks to fly to, and there they
shall be safe. O Sirs! there is no breast plate to that of Righteousness, there
is no Armor of proof, no munitions of Rocks to that of holiness. Heylin.
Cosm. lib. 3.
Noah's holiness was an Ark to save him, when Nimrods Tower of Babel which was
raised five thousand one hundred forty six paces high, could not secure him:
And therefore as you tender your own safety and security in times of trouble
and calamity, O labor to be holy.

Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivers from
death: and Chap. 10.2. Treasures of wickedness profit nothing, but
righteousness delivers from death. Nugas the Scythian King despised the rich
presents and ornaments that were sent unto him by the Emperor of
Constantinople, because they could not ward off sorrow, sickness, diseases,
death.
Many Treasuries of the most precious Jewels that be in the world cannot ward
off a blow, a disease, a sickness in the day of Gods wrath. It is not the
Crown of gold, that can cure the headache; nor the golden Scepter, that can
cure the Palsy hand; nor the Neck-lase of Pearl, that can cure the Aching
teeth; nor the Honorable Garter, that can ease the Gowt; nor the Purple Robe,
that can chase away the burning Fever; nor the Velvet Slipper, that can heal
the kibe-heel; no more can Treasures of gold or silver deliver from wrath, or
help in a day of death! O, but Righteousness that delivers from death. Look
what the Sword, the Shield, the Helmet, the Breast Plate, the Coat of Mail is to
the Soldier in the heat of battle, that, all that, and more then that, is
righteousness to the righteous in the day of death. Righteousness or
holiness of affection, of action, of life and conversation, delivers from
spiritual death, and from eternal death, yea, it delivers from the evil, the
hurt, the horror, the terror, the dread, and the stinge of temporal death.
Piety delivers not only from the second death, but also from all the evils and
miseries of the first death too. As the righteousness of the righteous will be
a royal protection to him, both against the day of wrath, and the wrath of the
day: So the righteousness of the righteous will be a royal protection to him,
both against death, and against all the evils of death. Righteousness unstings
death, it takes away the venom, the poison and bitterness of death: It turns
that curse into a blessing, that punishment into a benefit, that night of
darkness into a day of light, that wilderness into a Paradise, that hell into
a heaven, Prove. 12.28. In the way of righteousness is life, and in the path
thereof, there is no death In the way of righteousness is (chaiim) lives: so
the Hebrew has it, in the way of righteousness there are many lives: in that
way there is spiritual life, and eternal life, and natural life, and all the
comforts, and sweets, and blessings, and happiness of that life, without which
man's life would be but a lingering, a languishing death; yea, a hell rather
then a heaven unto him. And in the path thereof there is no death. There is no
spiritual death, there is no eternal death, yea, there is no corporal, no
temporal death to hurt or harm the them, Death is not mors hominis, but mors
peccati, not the death of the man, but the death of his sin. Phil. 1.23. 2 Cor.
5.12.4.7, 8. Death is a Christians Quietus est, it is his discharge from all
trouble and misery.
to sting or terrify them, to damage or disadvantage them: for death is an
outlet, and an inlet to a holy man: it is an outlet to sin, to sorrow, to
shame, to suffering, to afflictions, to temptations, to desertions, to
oppressions, to confusions, and to vexations; and it is an inlet to a more
clear, full and constant fruition of God and Christ, and an inlet to the
sweetest pleasures, the purest joys, the highest delights, the strongest
comforts, and the most satisfying contentments. Death is the funeral of all a
holy man's sins and miseries, and it is the resurrection of all his joys, and
the perfection of all his graces and spiritual excellencies. Death to a holy
man is nothing but the changing of his grace into glory, his faith into vision,
his hope into fruition, and his love into perfect comprehension. The Persians
had a certain day in the year in which they used to kill all Serpents and
venomous creatures: such a day as that will the day of death be to a holy man.
(Peccatum erat obstetrix mortis, and mors sepulchrum peccati.) Sin was the
Midwife that brought death into the world, and death shall be the bearers that
shall carry sin out of the world. When Sampson died, the Philistines died
together with him: so when a holy man dies, his sins die with him. Death came
in by sin, and sin goes out by death: As the worm kills the worm that bred it;
so death kills sin that bred it. Vltimus morborum medicus mors. Acts and Mon.
fol. 1733.
Death cures all diseases, the aching head and the unbelieving heart: the
diseased body and the defiled soul. At Stratford Bow were burned (in Queen
Mary's days) a lame man and a blind man; after the lame man was chained,
casting away his crutch, he bade the blind man be of good comfort; for says
he, Death will cure us both, it will cure thee of thy blindness, and me of my
lamenesse. Death will cure the holy man of all natural and spiritual
distempers. Death is the holy man's Jubilee, it is his greatest advantage, it
puts him into a better estate then ever he had before. It is Gods Gentleman
Usher to conduct us to heaven; it will blow the bud of grace into the flower of
glory. O! Death is but an entrance into life. Miseri infideles mortem
appellant, fideles vero quid nisi pascham? Bernard. Miserable ^nbelievers call
it death, but to faithful believers, what is it but a Passover, but a Jubilee?
who would not go through hell to heaven! who would not go through a temporary
death to an eternal life! who would not willingly march through mortality to
immortality and glory! O Sirs, holiness will make you look upon death as a
welcome guest, a happy friend, a joyful messenger: it will make you kiss it
and embrace it, as Favinus the Italian Martyr kissed and embraced his
executioner: it will make you desire it, and long after it with tears, as holy
Bradford did. By all this you see, that holiness will deliver you from death in
death; and therefore I shall close up this head, as that wise (and witty) man
Sr. Francis Bakon closed up a paper of verses, What then remains, but that we
still should cry,
Not to be born, or being born, to die?


Fifthly, and lastly, by holiness you shall gain the greatest Job 19.25.
(...), signifies boldness of face, a lifting up of the face and countenance in
the sight or face of many beholders. It signifies a freedom and liberty of
speech.
nothing will imbolden a man in that great day like holiness; holiness will
then make the face to shine indeed, 1 John 4.17. Herein is our love made
perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment: because as he is,
so are we in this world. That which will make Christ's last appearance
delightful to Christians, will be their likeness to Christ in holiness: in
nature and grace likeness begets the greatest boldness. As there is no child
so bold with the Father, as he that is most like the Father, so there is no
Christian so bold with Christ, as he that is most like to Christ. A holy Christ
is most famiiar with a holy Christian; and a holy Christian is most bold with a
holy Christ. The more a Christian is like to Christ in holiness of heart and
life, in holiness of affecti-and conversation, the more divinely bold and
familiar will that man be with Christ, both in this world, and in the great day
of account; when he that was a brat of Satan's, is made a Saint, when he that
was like hell, is made like heaven, when he that was most ugly and uncomely, is
made like him that is the holy of holies, this is that which gives boldness
both here and hereafter. O Sirs, it is not wit, nor wealth, but holiness; it
is not race nor place, but holiness: it is not power nor policy, but
holiness; it is not honor nor riches, but holiness: it is not natural
excellencies, nor acquired abilities, but holiness that will give boldness in
the day of Christ's appearing, 1 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. A well-tried faith (which is
but a branch of holiness) shall be found unto praise, and honor, and glory,
at the appearing of Jesus Christ. At the coming of Christ, holiness shall be a
man's praise, and honor, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17.
and glory. In that great day when shame and everlasting contempt shall be
poured forth upon the great Monarchs of the world, who have made the earth to
tremble, when the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and
the chief Captains, and the mighty men, etc. shall cry out to the mountains and
rocks to fall upon them, and to hide them from the face of him that sits on
the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: then, I say then shall the
righteous shine as the Sun in the firmament. Dan. 12.1, 2, 3. Prove. 28.1.
In life and death, and in the day of account a righteous man will be as bold
as a Lion. Real holiness will make a man death proof, and hell proof, and
judgment proof. The day of judgment will be to a holy man a marriage day, a
day of redemption, a day of coronation, a day of exaltation, and therefore he
may well lift up his head and rejoice. Look as the Israelites who had the blood
of the Passover on their door-posts, Exo. 12.7.11.
though the destroyer was abroad, and a dreadful cry was all over Egypt, yet
they were not slain, not stricken; they did not fear, not tremble, but had
their loins ready girt, and staves in their hands, boldly and cheerfully
expecting when the happy and joyful hour of their redemption would come. Heb.
9.14.
So those that have the door-posts of their hearts and consciences sprinkled
with holiness, in this terrible day of the Lord, they shall with boldness and
cheerfulness lift up their faces, because the day of their redemption is come.
Sermon de Signis prae. extr. Jud.
And this made Luther say, that he had rather never have been born, then not to
be in hope of this day. This day to Gods holy ones will be (melodia in aure,
Psalm 1.5. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8, 9, 10.
jubilum in cord.) like music in the ear, and a Jubilee in the heart. It is
true, the ungodly shall not stand in Judgment: Stand they must to be
arraigned, sentenced and condemned. Stand they shall, but not with any
boldness or cheerfulness, comfort or content. Stand they shall, but not to be
approved, acquitted, or absolved. Chaff and stubble cannot stand before that
God that is a consuming fire. When Belshazzar saw the hand writing upon the
wall, Heb. 12. ult. Dan. 5.5, 6.
O how was he affrighted, how was his countenance changed, his joints loosed,
and his knees dashed one against another! O how do many ungodly men now tremble
at a thunder-crack in the clouds, and at a flash of lightning in the air! but
how will they tremble and quake, when the whole frame of heaven and earth shall
break in pieces, and be set in a flame about their ears! O, what trouble of
mind? what horror and terror of conscience? what weeping and wailing? what
crying and roaring? what wringing of hands? what tearing of hair? and what
gnashing of teeth will there be among the ungodly in this day, when they shall
see their sins charged on them on the one side, and divine Justice terrifying
them on the other side! when they shall look upward, and there see an angry God
frowning upon them, and look downward, and there see hell gaping ready to
receive them; and look inward, and there find conscience accusing and gnawing
of them! When they shall look on their right hands, and there behold the good
Angels standing with so many flaming swords, to keep them out of heaven; and
look on their left hands, and there behold the devil and his Angels ready pressed
to dragg them down to the lowest hell! O now how will they wish for the Rocks
to fall upon them, and the mountains to cover them! how will they wish that
they had never been born, or that they might now be unborn? how will they now
wish that their immortal souls were mortal, or that their souls might be turned
into the nature of Beasts, Birds, Stones, Trees or Air, or any thing rather
what they are! I have read a story of two Soldiers, Holcot.
who being in the valley of Jehosaphat in Judea, the one said to the other,
Here in this place shall be the general Judgment, and therefore I will now
take up my place where I will then sit; and so lifting up a stone, he sat down
upon it, as taking possession before hand, but being sat, and looking up to
heaven, such a quaking and trembling fell upon him, that falling to the earth,
he remembered the day of Judgment with horror and amazement for ever after. But
alas, what heart is able to conceive, or what tongue is able to express the
fear and dread, the horror and terror, the astonishment and amazement that will
fall upon all ungodly persons in this day! And yet even now Gods holy ones
shall lift up their heads and hearts: they shall be bold and steadfast, they
shall be far from fear, shame or trembling. And thus you see that godliness,
that holiness is the most gainful trade: And therefore Sirs, as you love
gain, as you tender your own profit and advantage, labor to be holy. But,

Job 29.8, 9, 10, 11. vide Prove. 12.26.
There is nothing that imprints such a reverence and Majesty upon man, as
holiness does: There is nothing that is such a grace to man as grace. It is
holiness that puts the greatest excellency and majesty upon man, Psalm 16.3.
But to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent in whom is all my
delight. Saints are the most excellent ones; Arias Montanus, Junius, etc.
The Hebrew word ( Veadire from Adar) that is here rendered excellent, signifies
(magnificis) the magnificent ones, or the noble, glorious, or wonderful ones.
Saints or holy persons are the most excellent, magnificent, noble and glorious
ones. And in Dan. 8.24. the holy people are called mighty, because there are no
people upon the earth, that have might and Majesty stamped upon them as they
have. Cant. 6.10. Some by the Moon understand inherent righteousness, and by
the Sun, they understand imputed righteousness.
Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the
Sun, and terrible as an Army with banners! The light, grace, glory and
holiness of the Church rises by degrees: and this makes her terrible to all
her enemies. Every degree of holiness is terrible to the unholy: but the
higher the Church rises in holiness, the more terrible and majestical it
grows. Holiness puts such a splendour and graceful Majesty upon all persons
that have it, as even dazles the eyes sometimes of wicked men, and begets in
them an awe and reverence: As it is evident in Saul, 1 Samuel 24.17. And Saul
said to David, Thou art more righteous then I: for thou have rewarded me good,
whereas I have rewarded thee evil. So Herod in Mark 6.20. it is said That he
feared John, knowing that he was a just man, and holy, and observed him.
Holiness is very Majestical; the greatest Monarchs fall down before it. Herod
reverences John not for his birth or breeding, but for his holiness: not for
his Arts or Parts, but for his holiness; not for his Schollarship or
greatness, but for his holiness. 2 Kings 11.1, 2.
So that great Monarch King Joash fell down before the holiness of Jehojada
whilst he lived. And so did the holiness of the three children command
tespect and honor from that great Monarch Nebuchadnezzar. And so did the
holiness of Daniel Daniel 3.
cause King Darius to reverence him, and to cast a favorable Aspect upon him.
And so did the Holiness that was written upon Judas the High Priest, cause
Alexander the Emperor to reverence him, and to fall down before him. In
holiness there is such a sparkling luster, that none can behold it, but must
admire it, and bow before the graceful majesty of it. It is not greatness but
grace, it is not riches but righteousness, it is not outward pomp or
splendor, but holiness that can overawe the vain spirits of men. A holy life
is the upbraiding of that which is corrupt, Wisdom 2.15.12. He is grievous unto
us, even to behold him; for his life is not like other men's, his ways are of
another fashion, he upbraideth us with our offending the Law. Grace will make a
man majestical among those that have no grace. Bradford was had in so great
reverence and admiration for his holiness, that a multitude that never knew
him but by fame, greatly lamented his death, yea, Acts and Mon. page 1458.
and a number of Papists also wished heartily his life. Holy men have a
daunting presence and majesty with them, as Athanasius had, and Basil had;
Greg. Orat. de laud Basilii.
for when Valens the Emperor came to surprise him, he being in holy exercises,
such a splendor and majesty was upon him, thnt it struck such a terror into
the Emperor, that he reeled, and had fallen backward, had he not been upheld
by those that were with him. Epist. hist. Gal. 82.
Henry the second King of France being present at the martyrdom of a certain
Tailor who was burnt by him for his Religion, and so terrified by the boldness
of his countenance, and by his holy and gracious behavior in his sufferings,
that he swore at his going away that he would never be present at such a sight
more. It is very observable, that the moral virtues of the Heathen did put a
great deal of splendor and majesty upon them: Valor. Max. l. 2. cap. 5.
To instance only in Cato; Cato was a man of much justice and integrity; he was
a man of an unspotted conversation and of high reputation among the Romans: Now
his morality put such a splendor and majesty upon him, that when he was
present, the very worst of the worst durst not in speech or gesture discover
any impiety or immodesty, any wantonness or wickedness. Now certainly, if
morality puts such a splendor and majesty upon men: true sanctity will put
much more upon them. And therefore Sirs, as ever you would have a splendor and
majesty upon you, labor to be holy. Maximilian the Emperor had such a
presence and majesty with him, that a stranger that never saw him before,
pointed him out among thirty great persons. O Sirs, it is not the gray beard,
nor the purple Robe, nor the grim look that makes a man so much a man of
presence and majesty as holiness does; and therefore as you would indeed be
men of presence, men of majesty, labor to be holy. But,

And it came to pass when Joram saw Jehu, that he said Is it peace, Jehu? And
he answered, What peace so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel, and her
witchcrafts are so many? The interrogation carries with it a strong negation,
What peace? that is, there is no peace to such a wicked wretch as thou art:
thou may wish for peace, and dream of peace, and long for peace, and look for
peace, and pursue after peace; and yet thou shall be far off from peace. What
Jehu said to Joram, I may say to all unholy persons; What peace, and what
prosperity can you expect whilst your drunkenness, and uncleanness, and
wantonness, and lukewarmnesse, and dead-heartednesse, and wantonness, and
wickedness remains? what good days, what happy year can you look for whilst
your formality, and indifferency, and hypocrisy, and infidelity do bear
witness against you? Verse 3 doubtless relates to Jeroboams and the ten Tribes
first revolt from the house of David, and from the house of God, and from all
his Ordinances; and this was a very wicked and unholy time, as is evident in
several Scriptures.
So when Israel was very superstitious and vain in her worship, then there was
no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexati^ns
were upon all the inhabitants of the Countries, and Nation was destroyed (or
beaten in pieces) of Nation, and City of City: for God did vex them with all
adversity, 2 Chronicles. 15.5, 6. When men are unholy, God will vex them, he will
vex them with adversity, he will vex them with all adversity. When Nations are
ungodly, God will destroy them, he will beat them in pieces, he will beat them
in pieces one against another. When there is no holiness in him that comes in,
nor in him that goes out, then there shall be no peace to him that goes in, or
to him that goes out; When all is said that can be said, and when all is done
that can be done, wicked men will still be as unquiet as the raging and foaming
sea, Isa. 57.20, 21. God will one day or another be still at war with that man
that is at peace with his sin. It is said of the Locusts that came out of the
bottomless pit in Rev. 9.7, 8, 9. that they were like unto horses, and on
their heads were as it were Crowns of gold, and their faces as it were faces of
men, and their hairs as the hair of a woman, and their teeth were as it were
the teeth of Lions, etc. Here are quasi Horses, quasi Crowns of gold, quasi
faces of men, quasi hairs of a woman, and quasi teeth of Lions, etc. Now just
such things are all the comforts and contentments of unholy persons, their gold
and silver, is but as it were gold and silver; and their prosperity and plenty
is but as it were prosperity and plenty; their peace and tranquillity is but as
it were peace and tranquillity; and their victories and triumphs are but as it
were victories and triumphs; and their joys and rejoycings are but as it were
joys and rejoycings. But mark when the holy Evangelist comes to set down a
description of the Locusts tails, he does not say that there were as it were
strings in their rails; but in plain positive downright terms he tells you that
there were stings in their tails, ver. 10. he tells you that their stings were
true stings, real stings, certain stings; And so while men remain unholy, there
are sure and certain stings in the tails of all their comforts, Job 29.14.
contentments and enjoyments. The best way on earth to have a sure, a sound, a
solid, a lasting peace with God, with our selves, and with others, is to put
onholinesse as a Robe upon us, and to put all inquity far from us, Job 11.13,
20.

O Sirs, the worser the times are, the better should every man labor to be.
Many complain of burdens, Taxes, oppressions, Isa. 59.9, 10, 11, 14, 15.
and vexations, and they say with those, That Judgment is turned backward, and
that Justice stands afar off, and that truth is fallen in the street, and
that equity cannot enter, and that he that departs from evil makes himself a
prey, that judgment is far from us, and that Justice does not overtake us,
that we wait for light, but behold obscurity: for brightness, but behold
darkness; that we grope for the wall like the blind, that we grope as if we
had no eyes, that we stumble at noonday, that we roar all like Bears, and
mourn sore like doves: that we look for Judgment, but there is none: and for
salvation, but it is far off from us. These and a thousand more such complaints
may be found amongst us. This Scripture last cited, puts me in mind of a
strange, but yet of a very true saying, viz. That there is more justice and
equity in hell, then there is in France: for in hell, the oppressor is
oppressed: in hell he that would not give a crumb of bread, shall not have a
drop of water. In hell such as shed innocent blood, have blood to drink; in
hell there are no bribes, in hell there is none to plead an unrighteous cause,
in hell there is no respect of persons; in hell every man has according to his
deserts: but in France it is otherwise, etc. And do not the strong cries,
tears, sighs, groans and complaints of the poor and needy, of hirelings,
orphans, and widows, etc. in most Nations strongly demonstrate that there is
more Justice and Equity in hell, then there is in most of the Nations of the
earth? But now what is the choicest salve for all these fores? certainly
holiness. What is the most sovereign Remedy against all these maladies?
nothing but holiness. O Sirs, the more holiness rises in a Nation, the more
will righteousness run down as mighty streams, and the more the hearts of the
poor and needy will leap and sing for joy. There is no way to make a Nation
happy but by making of it holy. O Sirs! as you are men, as you are Englishmen,
as you love your Country, as you honor your King and Country, and as you
desire the peace, prosperity and felicity of your Country, labor to be holy.
O England, England, it is holiness that will be a wall of fire about thee, and
a glory in the midst of thee: it is holiness that will make thee happy at
home, and prosperous abroad. Among all English men, there is no man to the holy
man: Certainly that man that is most busy about mending his own heart and
life, contributes most to the mending of the times. There are many sturdy
blades that will talk stiffly for their Country, and that say that they will
stand stoutly for their Country, and yet by their daily ungodliness they do
undo their Country: these men destroy by their lives, what they seem to build
with their hands. And therefore as ever you would have all things that are out
of order in order, labor for a well ordered heart, and a well ordered life.
Holiness of conversation is the best means under heaven to prevent confusion
and desolation.

Again, If you will look upon the present times as times wherein the Judgments
of God are abroad in the world, I say if you will thus look upon them, then I
say the times call aloud upon you for holiness. Isa. 26.9. When thy Judgments
are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness! O Sirs! when garments are rowld in blood, when the sword
devours the flesh of the slain, when Justice lays heap upon heap; when
pestilence and famine destroys all on the right hand and on the left. O! then
every one will say, Come let us break off our sins, let us turn to the Lord,
let us mend our ways, and reform our lives, and get holiness into our hearts.
We behold many sorer, heavier and worse judgments then these are upon us this
day, if we had but eyes to behold them. O! that hardness of heart, Psalm 78.
Psalm 81.12. That which was wont to be said of Asrick, that it was ever a
producing some new monster or other, may be said of the Age, yea, of the land
wherein we live.

2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. Amos 8, 11, 12.


that barrenness of soul, that blindness of mind, that searednesse of
conscience, that perverseness of Spirit, that Superstitious Will Worship, and
that loosnesse of life that multitudes are given up to this day! O! those
God-dishonouring, those Christ-denying, those Ordinance-despising, those
Conscience-wasting, those life-corrupting, and those Soul-damning opinions,
principles, blasphemies, and practices that multitudes are given up to this
day! O! the spiritual decays, the spiritual witherings, the spiritual
slumberings, the spiritual faintings, the spiritual langiushings that are to be
found among a professing people this day! Now certainly there are no judgments
to spiritual judgments; none reach the soul like these, none separate between
God and the soul like these: none lay men open to temporal and eternal
judgments like these. Spiritual judgments are the most insensible judgments,
they are the most dreadful judgments, they are the most incureable
judgments, they are the most damnning judgments of all judgments. Spiritual
judgments have most of wrath and most of horror, and most of hell in them. O
that now these terrible judgments are abroad in the earth, you would learn
righteousness that you would learn to be holy! For as there is no such sense
against, temporal judgments, as holiness; so there is no such sense against
spiritual judgments as holiness. O the spiritual strokes, the spiritual
Arrows, the spiritual diseases, the spiritual sicknesses, the spiritual plagues
that are abroad in the world! and O that the dread and sense of these might
provoke you, and prevail with you to labor after real holiness, to labor
after the power of godliness, which will be your greatest security against
these most deadly and soul-killing maladies!

Again, the days and times wherein we live, call aloud for holiness; if you
look upon them as days and times of grace, what greater and higher engagements
to holiness were ever put upon a people, then those that God has put upon us,
who enjoy so many ways, means and helps to make us holy? O the pains, the
care, the cost, the charge that God has been at, and that God is daily at, to
make us holy! Has he not sent, Jer. 7.13, 25. Chap. 25.3, 4. and chap. 35.14,
15. Isa. 49.4, 5. 2 Cor. 12.14, 15. Romans 13.11. ult.
and does he not still send his Messengers, rising up early, and going to bed
late, and all to provoke you to be holy? Have not many of them spent their
time, and spent their strength, and spent their spirits, and spit up their
lungs, and spent their very lives, to make you holy? O Sirs! what do holy
Ordinances call for, but holy hearts and holy lives? What do days of light
call for, but walking in the light, and casting off the deeds of darkness? What
is the voice of all the means of grace, but this, O labor to be gracious? And
what is the voice of the holy Spirit, but this, O labor to be holy? And what
is the voice of all the miracles of mercy that God has wrote in the midst of
you, but this, Be ye holy, be ye holy? O Sirs, what could the Lord have done
that he has not done, to make you holy? Has he not lifted you up to heaven,
in respect of holy helps? Has he not to this very day followed you close with
holy offers, and holy entreaties, and holy counsels, and holy encouragements,
and all to make you holy? And will you be loose still, and proud still, and
worldly still, and malicious still, and envious still, and contentious still,
and unholy still? O what is this, Rev. 2 4, 5. Isa. 32.25.
but to provoke the Lord to put out all the lights of heaven, to drive your
Teachers into corners, to remove your Candlesticks, and to send his everlasting
Gospel, that has stood long a tip-toe, among a people that may more highly
prize it, and dearly love it, and stoutly defend it, and conscientiously
practice it, then you have done to this very day? By what has been said, I
suppose there is nothing more evident, then that the times and seasons wherein
we live, calls aloud upon every one to look after holiness, and to labor for
holiness; never complain of the times, but cease to do evil, and labor to do
well, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18, 19.
and all will be well; Get but better hearts, and better lives, and you will
quickly see better times.

Gold being the most precious metal, you lay it over those things that are
most precious to you; so does God lay holiness over all those things that are
most precious to him.
Angels are holy, and Saints are holy, but it is God alone that is the holy
one. His person is holy, Isa. 6.3. his name is holy, Luke 1.49. his works are
holy, Psalm 45.17. his judgments are holy, Psalm 22.1, 2, 3. his habitation is
holy, Isa. 57.15. his Temple is holy, 1 Cor. 3.17. his Kingdom is holy, Rev.
21.27. his Word is holy, Psalm 19. and his Sabbaths are holy, Exodus 16.23. Now
this is Gods own Argument, Be ye holy, for I am holy, Lev. 19.2. 1 Pet. 1.15,
16. Concerning the holiness of God, I shall speak at large (by divine
assistance) when I come to press you upon perfecting of holiness, and
therefore let this touch suffice for the present. Sirs, you cannot be l^ke to
God in many other things, but you may be like to God in this one thing, in this
noble thing, in this most necessary thing, Holiness; and therefore labor
after it.

Again, as holiness will render you most like to a holy God, so holiness will
render you most like to a holy Christ. The Apostle calls him the holy one, 1
John 2.20. Christ is essentially holy, he is infinitely holy, he is originally
holy, he is singularly holy, he is eminently holy, he is perfectly holy, he is
transcendently holy, and he is immutably holy: And so much the Devil himself
confesses, in Mark 1.24. I know thee who thou art, Alluding, as some think, to
Exodus 28.36.
the holy one of God, or rather as the Greek has it, ((...)) that holy one by
way of excellency and eminency. Yea Christ takes delight to characterize
himself by this title, in Rev. 3.7. These things says he that is holy: And in
Dan. 9.24. he is called the most holy; or as the Hebrew has it, Kodesh
k^dashim.
the holiness of holinesses. These abstracts speak out the vigor and strength,
the eminency and excellency of Christ's holiness: Christ is holiness it self,
yea holinesses; and what do these abstracts speak out, but that perfect and
complete holiness that is in Christ: The Angels in Isa. 6.3. do three times
iterate or repeat, holy, holy, holy; now though some do conceive that this
threefold repetition has reference to all the three persons, holy Father,
holy Son, and holy Spirit, yet they that will but compare the Text with John
12.37, 42. shall plainly see that it relates only to our Lord Jesus Christ: and
so the threefold repetition denotes only the superlative eminency of Christ's
holiness. Christ is holy in his natures, in his offices, in his purposes, in
his counsels, in his word, and in his works: Acts 4.23. Luke 1.35. Ephesians. 4.
Gal. 2.20.
His conception was holy, his conversation was holy, his converse was holy,
etc. Holiness is the image of Christ, it is the picture of Christ, the
perfections of Christ, it makes a man conformable to the life of Christ.
Christ's Holiness, is that noble copy, after which we should all endeavor to
write: Subjects may without Treason or offense attempt to be like their Prince,
in wisdom, goodness, righteousness, holiness, peace, piety, clemency, and
sanctity; though they cannot without rebellion and disobedience endeavor to be
like him in power, greatness, might, majesty, splendor and glory; so we may
safely and honorably attempt to be like to Jesus Christ in wisdom,
righteousness, and holiness, etc. It is Christ's particular honor to be
imitated in all morals absolutely.
Though we may not attempt to be like him in his miracles, signs and wonders. O
Sirs! Some have counted it their greatest honor and glory in this world, that
they have been like such and such, who have been high and glorious in the
world; and why then should not you reckon it your greatest glory and happiness
to be like to Christ in holiness, though not in measure or quantity, yet in
truth and reality. As you would resemble Christ to the life, labor to be holy;
in other things you cannot be like to Christ, but in holiness you may; you
cannot be like to Christ in his greatness, majesty, or glory, nor yet in his
omnipotency, omnisciency, nor omnipresence, nor yet in his general or special
providence, nor in a thousand other things, but you may be like to Christ in
his holiness: Look as face answers to face (as Solomon speaks) so you may reach
to that holiness that in reality may answer to the very holiness of Christ: And
this is your only way to be like to Christ.

All Angels in respect of their nature are alike, but what the particular
differences are between Angels, Archangels, principalities and powers, and what
their distinct offices are, I confess (with Austin) I understand not, neither
is it my duty to know, nor my danger to be ignorant of these things, etc.
Again, as holiness will render you most like to a holy Christ, so holiness will
render you most like to the blessed Angels. The blessed Angels are holy in
their nature, and holy in their offices, and holy in their actings; they are
called holy Angels, Mat. 25.31. When the son of man shall come in his glory,
and all his holy Angels with him; and so in Rev. 14.9, 10. And he that
worshippeth the beast, or that receives his mark in his forehead, or in his
hand, he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy
Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. The Angels holiness is their
conformity to the original pattern of purity and excellency. The Crown of
holiness was set upon the heads of Angels at their Creation; those Princes of
glory were crowned with holiness (as it were) in the cradle. The Angels are
holy in their praises, and holy in their waitings, and holy in their
operations, and holy in all their ministrations. Boddin tells a story of one,
who desired of God the guidance and assistance of an holy Angel, and
accordingly he had sensible manifestations of a holy Spirit that assisted him,
and followed him to his death; if in company he spoke any unwary words, he was
sure to be advertised and reproved for it by a dream in the night; or if he
read any book that was not good, the Angel would strike upon the book, to cause
him to leave reading in it. When that Sorcerer Balaam went to curse the people
of God, a holy Angel stood in the way, drew his sword upon him, and justled his
bones against the wall, and all to prevent the execution of his wicked and
cursed intentions, Numb. 22.22. O! how much more then do they stand in the way
of the Saints, to prevent those weaknesses and miscarriages which Satan and
their own corruptions would otherwise carry them to. And doubtless as they have
a hand to restrain the Saints from evil, so they have an eye and an influence
upon them for good: 1 Timothy 5.21. I charge you before God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Elect Angels, etc. The holy Angels have their eyes and their
influences upon us; they are our observers and overseers; they are called
watchers in Dan. 4.17. for they watch our words, and they watch our works, 1
Cor. 11.10. Hebr. 1. ult. Rev. 22.9. The Angels watch you in all places, cases
and conditions, etc.
and they watch our ways; they watch us before duties, and they watch us in
duties, and they watch us after duties; they watch us before duties, to see how
we prepare and fit our selves to meet with God; and they watch us in duties, to
see how our graces are acted upon God, and how our hearts and affections are
running out after God; and they watch us after duties, to see whether we walk
worthy of God, and worthy of our duties, and worthy of our profession, and
worthy of our high calling. In times of health, strength, peace, prosperity,
etc. they watch to see how wisely, holily, humbly, fruitfully, cheerfully, and
thankfully we will walk with God; and in times of adversity, they watch to see
how believingly, how contentedly, how self-denyingly, and how patiently we will
submit to God, etc. All which speaks out the holiness of the Angels. O! Sirs,
you cannot in this world be like to the Angels in power, strength, might, nor
in agility, activity, splendor, beauty or glory; but yet you may be like to
them in purity and sanctity. Sirs, do not deceive your selves, you shall never
be like to the Angels in glory, if you will not be like to them now in grace;
if you will not with them now put on the robe of holiness, you shall not with
them hereafter put on the crown of happiness. We are to follow the examples of
the best men, 1 Cor. 11.1.
not an inch further then they were followers of Christ. Christians (says
father Latimer) are not bound to be the Saints Apes, they are not to imitate
them in every thing; where their examples were good, it is good to imitate
them; and where they were bad, it is duty to decline them. The fairest copies
that ever were written by Saints, have their blots, their blurs, and their
errata's, and therefore it is best, it is safest, it is noblest, to set the
most exact, the most perfect, and the most excellent copy of the Angels before
us; who as they excel in strength, so they excel in holiness also. Psalm
103.20. Bless the Lord ye his Angels, that excel in strength, that do his
Commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his Word. The Angels obey divine
commands readily, cheerfully, faithfully, universally, reverentially, humbly,
affectionately, and unweariedly. O Sirs, such obedience, such holiness will be
your honor here, and your happiness hereafter. To gather up all; as ever you
would be like to a holy God, a holy Christ, and the holy Angels, labor to be
holy. In holiness you may be like them, in other things you cannot resemble
them. But,

viz. That without it no man shall see the Lord: The expression is exclusive;
now, to see, is an Hebraeism, and implies both vision and fruition; now without
holiness, no man, be he high or low, noble or ignoble, rich or poor, etc. shall
ever come to a blessed acquaintance with God here, or to a glorious fruition of
God hereafter. Genesis 3. chap. 4.13. and Levit. 14. 2 Samuel 14.13, 14. Jonah 2.
Rev. 1.9.
O friends, if it were so great a misery to Adam to be cast out of Paradise,
and so great a punishment to Cain to be cast out of his fathers family (which
was the only visible Church of God on earth) and such a sore affliction for the
Lepers in the Law to be shut out from all converse with men, and so great a
trouble and torment to Absalom to be banished his fathers Court, and so great a
hell to Jonah to be seemingly cast out of Gods sight, and so great a
tribulation to John to be confined to the Isle o^ Patmos? O! how great a
misery, how great a punishment, how great an affliction, how great a trouble
and torment, how great a tribulation, how great a hell will it be for all
unholy persons for ever and ever to be banished the Court of heaven, and to be
shut out from the presence of the Lord, 2 These. 1.7, 11.
and from the glory of his power? If it were such an unspeakable grief and
misery to the Primitive Christians (as indeed it was) to be debarred of one
another society and company, by being confined to Isles, and Mines, and strong
holds: O then, what an unspeakable grief and misery will it be to all unholy
persons to be for ever debarred of the blessed society of God, Christ, Angels,
and Saints, and to be everlastingly confined to the strong holds of hell, and
to the society and company of that damned crew who will be still a cursing and
a blaspheming of God, and adding to one another torments! O Sirs, it is the
sight of God in heaven, wherein man's happiness and blessedness does consist; it
is the fruition of God in heaven, that is the life, the honor, the crown and
glory of Angels and Saints: Heaven it self would be but a low thing, yea it
would be but magnum nihil, a great nothing, without the sight and fruition of
God there. Now without holiness there is no seeing of God, there is no
possessing or enjoying of God, there is no possibility of ever obtaining a part
or portion in God. Ah friends, without holiness all is lost; thy soul is lost,
thy Christ is lost, thy God is lost, thy Crown is lost, thy Heaven is lost, thy
glory is lost, and what are all other losses to these losses? Demorrathus (of
Corinth) says, they lost the chiefest part of their lives happiness, that did
not see Alexander sit on the throne of Darius, but what was their loss, to that
unconceivable and unexpressible loss, that all unholy persons must sustain, who
shall never see the King of Kings in his beauty, who shall never behold the
Lord on the throne of his glory! Well Sirs, if none of these Arguments can
prevail with you to labor after holiness, I must conclude that divine Justice
has hardened you, and that Satan has blinded you, and that your lusts have
besotted you, and that this world has bewitched you, and that it had been ten
thousand thousand times better for you, that you had never been born, then to
live without holiness, and to die without holiness, and to be everlastingly
damned for want of holiness. And thus much for the Motives.

I come now to lay down some means and helps to holiness. Supposing that the
language of some of your souls may be this: O, what shall we do to be holy! O
what course, what way, what means must we use that we may obtain this holiness,
without which we now clearly see that we shall never come to a fruition of
happiness! Methinks I hear some of you crying out, Oh none but holiness, none
but holiness: As that Martyr once cried out, Oh none but Christ, none but
Christ: Methinks I hear you crying out, O give me holiness or I die: As Sampson
once cried out, Give me water or I die: Or as Rachel once cried out, Give me
children or I die: So you cry out, O give us holiness or we die, give us
holiness or we eternally die. O what shall we do to be holy! we see we are
undone without holiness, we shall be damned without holiness. O! that we were
but made holy, that hereafter we may be assuredly happy.

Well then, if you are in good earnest resolved to be holy, I would thus advise
and counsel you: First take heed of some things: Secondly, Labor to put in
practice other things. The things that you are to avoid and shun, even as you
would shun poison in your meat, or a Serpent in your way, yea as you would shun
the Devil himself, or hell it self, are these.

Ezekiel. 14.6. Chap. 18.30, 31, 32. and Chap. 33 11, 14, 16, 19. from these and
such like Scriptures, many unholy hearts are apt to conclude that they can
repent when they please, and that though they do defer their repentance, yet it
is no such difficult thing to confess their sins at last cast, and to be sorry
for their sins at last cast, and to forsake their sins at last cast, and to beg
the pardon of their sins at last cast: And that if they do so, God has given
his Word for it, he has given it under his own hand, that he will pardon their
sins, and save their souls. Now to prevent these soul-undoing mistakes, thou
must know O sinner, First, that thou can as well wash a Blackamore white at
pleasure, as thou can repent at pleasure; thou can as well raise the dead
at pleasure, Jer. 13.23. chap. 31.18. Lam. 5.21. Acts 5.31. Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19.
2 Timothy 2.25. Acts 11.18.
as thou can repent at pleasure; thou can as well make a world at pleasure,
as thou can repent at pleasure; thou can as well stop the course of the Sun
at pleasure, as thou can repent at pleasure; thou can as well put the Sea
in a Cockle-shell at pleasure, and measure the earth with a span at pleasure,
as thou can repent at pleasure; witness the proofs in the margin. I confess
that if to repent, were to hang down the head like a Bull-rush for a day, or to
whine with Saul for an hour, or to put on sackcloath and walk softly with Ahab
for a short space, or to confess with Judas, I have sinned, or to say with
Simon Magus, Pray to the Lord for me, or to tremble with Felix for a moment; I
say, if this were to repent, doubtless you might repent at pleasure; but alas
friends, to repent is another thing, to repent is the hardest and difficultest
work in the world; and that will appear in the next particular. And therefore,

Secondly, To repent, is to turn a flint into flesh, it is to Ezekiel. 36.25, 26.
Acts 26.18. Ezekiel. 16.61, 62, 63.
To repent, is to make all clean, inside clean, and outside clean; it is to
make a clean head and a clean heart, a clean lip and a clean life; and is this
easy? True repentance includes a true sense of sin, a deep sorrow for sin, a
hearty loathing of sin, and a holy shame and blushing for sin; chap. 29.43.
and is this easy? To repent, is for a man to loath himself as well as his
sin; and is this easy, for man, that is so great a self-lover, 2 Corin. 7.10,
11.
and so great a self-exalter, and so great a self-admirer, to become a
self-loather? To repent, is to cross sinful self, it is to walk contrary to
sinful self, yea it is to revenge a man's self upon himself; and is this easy?
To repent, is to pluck out right eyes, and to cut off right hands, and offer up
only Isaacs; and is this easy? True repentance is a daily turning of the soul
further and further from sin, and a daily turning of the soul nearer and nearer
to God. It is a repentance not to be repented of; it is a repentance from sin,
as well as a repentance for sin: Sin has cast the soul at such a distance from
God, that though the soul be every day a turning nearer and nearer to God, yet
it can never (in this life) get so near him as once it was, and as in heaven it
shall be. And now tell me, O soul, is this such an easy thing to be every day
a turning thy back upon sin, and a turning thy face nearer and nearer to God?
surely no: True repentance lies in a daily dying to sin, and in a daily living
to him who lives for ever. The very life of repentance, is the repentance of
the life; and is this easy? But,

Thirdly, True repentance is a turning, not from some sin, Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent
and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not he
your ruin. Ezekiel. 18.21.31. and chap. 20.43. He that had the spot of Leprosy
in any one part of his body, was accounted a Leper, although all the rest of
his body were sound and whole, Levit. 13. So he that has but one spot, one sin
which he does not endeavor to wash out in the blood of Christ, and in the
tears of true repentance, he is a Leper in the account of God. It was an
excellent saying of Luther, Optima and aptissima poenitentia est nova vita.
Every sin strikes at the Law of God, the honor of God, the being of God, and
the glory of God, and therefore the penitent must strike at all. Every sin
fetches blood from the heart of Christ, and every sin is a grief and vexation
to the Spirit of Christ, and therefore the penitent must set upon crucifying of
all: Every sin is an enemy to a man's peace, and to a man's comfort, and to a
man's confidence, and to a man's assurance, and to a man's communion with God, and
therefore he must set upon forsaking of all. If ever thou art saved, O man,
thou must repent as well of thy Achans as thy Absaloms, of thy Rimmons as of
thy Mammons, of thy David's as of thy Goliahs, of thy secret as well as thy open
sins, of thy loved as well as of thy loathed lusts, of thy babe-transgressions
as well as of thy Giant-like provocations: If thy repentance be not universal,
it will never be effectual: If a ship spring three leaks, and only two be
stopped, the third will certainly sink the ship; or if a man has two dangerous
wounds in his body, and takes only order for the cure of one, the other will
undoubtedly kill him; or if a man has two grievous diseases upon him, and will
only deal with the Physician for remedies against the one, he will without all
peradventure perish by the prevalency of the other. Herod turned from many
sins, but not from his Dalilah, his Herodias, which was his ruin. Judas you
know was a Devil in an Angels habit, he seemed to be turned from every sin, but
he was not; he was a secret thief, he loved the bag, and that golden Devil,
Covetousness, choked him, and hanged him at last. Saul for a time turned from
several evils, but his sparing one Agag, cost him his soul and his Kingdom at a
clap. I have read a story of a devout man, who amongst other gifts, had the
gift of healing, and many persons resorted to him for cure: Among the rest, one
Chromatius, who being sick, sent for him, and told him of his sickness, and
desired that he might have the benefit of cure, as others had before him: The
devout man replied, I cannot do it till thou have beaten all the Images in thy
house to pieces. O that shall be done said Chromatius; Here take my keys, and
where you find any images, break them in pieces; which accordingly was done;
upon this the devout man went to prayer, but no cure was wrought; whereupon the
sick man cried out, O I am as sick as ever, O I am very weak and sick still: It
cannot be otherwise, replied the devout person, neither can I help it, for
there is doubtless one Idol yet in your house undiscovered, and that must be
defaced too: True (says Chromatius) it is so indeed, it is all of beaten gold,
it cost 200. l. I would fain have saved it, but here take my keys again, you
shall find it fast locked up in my chest, break it also in pieces; which being
done, the devout man prayed, and Chromatius was healed. The moral of it is
good; the sin-sick soul must break, not some, but all its Idols in pieces,
before a cure will follow. It must deface its golden Idols, its most costly
Idols, its most darling Idols; the returning sinner must make head against all
his sins, and trample upon all his lusts, or else he will die and be undone for
ever; and though this be as difficult as it is noble, yet it is no more then
what God has engaged to do, and to see done, as you may see by comparing Ezekiel.
36.25, 26, 27. with Isa. 30.21, 22. Now is this an easy thing, to turn from
every sin, to loath every sin, and to abandon every sin, with a Get you hence,
for what have I more to do with you? Hos. 14.8. Surely no. As Nehemiah cast out
Tobiah and all his household stuff, in Nehem. 13.6, 7, 8. so true repentance, it
casts out Satan and all his retinue; As Moses would not leave so much as a hoof
behind him, Exodus 10.26. So true repentance will not leave so much as a lust
behind; a dispensatory conscience is always an evil conscience; he that can
dispense with one sin, will, when opportunity presents, commit any sin. And as
the flood made clean work, it swept away all Noah's friends, and drowned all his
servants; so the flood of penitent tears makes clean work, it sweeps away every
lust, it drowns every corruption in respect of love and dominion. And as some
Conquerours would not give so much as one of their enemies Quarter; so true
repentance will not give one lust quarter; it falls heavily upon the bones of
every sin, and nothing but the blood and death of sin will satisfy the
penitent soul; the true penitent is for the mortifying of every lust that has
had a hand in crucifying of his dearest Savior. It was worthily (and wittily)
said by one, that true repentance strips us stark naked of all the garments of
the old Adam, and leaves not so much as the shirt behind. Well Sirs, remember
this, to repent of sin, and yet to live in sin, is a contradiction; And if thou
repentest with a contradiction (says Tertullian) God will pardon thee with a
contradiction; thou repentest and yet continuest in thy sin, God will pardon
thee, and yet send thee to hell; there is a pardon with a contradiction.

Again fourthly, if repentance be such an easy work as you suppose, I beseech
you tell me, why do many men lie under such horrors and terrors of conscience
as they do, for not repenting, when as repentance would quickly give them ease,
and turn their hell into a heaven! I was last Winter with a young man, who upon
his dying-bed for several hours together, being in a dreadful agony, lay crying
out, I am damned, I am damned, I am damned, I am damned! Ah how soon would this
poor wretch have got out of this hell, if it had been so easy a thing to have
repented, as you imagine it is! and how many, when they have been pressed to
repent, have professed, that if they might have a thousand worlds to repent,
they could not repent! And will you say that repentance is easy? How many have
sought repentance with tears, and would have bought repentance with the price
of their dearest blood, but could not obtain it? and will you say that
repentance is easy? O Sirs, is it good to be damned? is it good to go to hell?
is it good to dwell with a devouring fire, and to live in everlasting burnings?
Is it good to have your habitations amongst Devils and damned spirits? Is it
good to be banished the Court of heaven, and to be separated for ever from the
glorious presence of God, and the sweet enjoyments of Christ, and the blessed
society of Angels and Saints, and the fruition of all the happiness that heaven
affords? O no! O no! O why then do not men prevent all this by repentance, if
it be such an easy thing to repent! But,

Lastly, If repentance be such an easy work, why then do your hearts so rise
both against the Doctrine of repentance, and against those that preach it and
press it? of all words, is not the word of repentance the hardest word to read?
and of all sayings and Sermons, Joh. 6.60.
is not that of repentance the hardest to hear and bear? Luther confesses that
before his conversion he met not with a more displeasing word in all the
Scripture, nor in all his study of Divinity, then that word Repent. O man! if
repentance be so easy, why does thy spirit rage, and why does thy heart so
swell and rise against those that preach repentance unto life? Of all
Preachers, Mat. 3.2. Acts 2. etc.
there are none that do so displease and move thee, that do so cut and gall
thee, as those that are still a crying out, Repent, for the Kingdom of heaven
is at hand. Repentance is the vomit of the soul; and ah how do sinners hearts
rise against that Physic, and those that bring it? Repentance is the bleeding
of the soul; and ah how do wicked men storm and take on at that hand that lets
them blood? Isa. 30.10. Jer. 5.30, 31. chap. 14.14. chap. 23.11. to the end.
You love those that preach pleasing things, that tickle your ears, though they
never touch your hearts; that please your fancies, though they never meddle
with your consciences; and one Sermon of mercy you prefer before a thousand
Sermons of repentance. Now certainly if repentance were so easy to you, the
Doctrine of repentance would be more pleasing to you. For a close, know, that
that white Devil who now presents repentance to thee as the easiest thing in
the world, He will at last cast, to work thee to despair, and to cut the throat
of thy soul, present it not only as a hard and difficult work, but as an
impossible work. O that these things may be so blessed unto you, as to preserve
you from being deceived and deluded with a conceit that repentance is easy,
and so by this means keep you from laboring to be holy!

Now as to that part of the plea (from the Scriptures formerly cited) viz. That
hereafter will be time enough to repent; I shall thus reply, Certainly the
present call of God, the uncertainty of the Spirits motion, and the danger of
delay, calls upon thee for present repentance; it is a dangerous thing to deal
with God, as ill Debtors do by their Creditors; first they put them off one
week, and then another week, and then a third week, etc. till at last they
provoke their Creditors to cast them into prison, and to practice all severity
upon them; they that thus deal with God, shall be as severely dealt with by
God, as you may see in Prove. 1.24. to 32. The ancient warriers would not
receive an old man into their Army; and do thou think O vain man, It is
reported that God should say to a man who desired to repent in his old age, Vbi
consumpsisti farinam, ibi consume furfurem: Where you have spent your flour,
there go spend your bran, etc.
that when thou have spent thy time, and wasted thy strength, and exhausted thy
spirits in the work of Satan, and in the service of thy lusts, that God will
receive thee to his grace and favor? If thou do thus flatter thy self, it is
ten thousand to one but that thou will deceive thy self; that God that has
made a promise to late repentance, has made no promise of late repentance; and
though true repentance is never too late, yet late repentance is seldom true:
Ah how many millions are now in hell, who have thought, and resolved, and said,
that they would repent hereafter, but that hereafter never came! Thou say to
morrow, to morrow thou will repent, when thou know not what a to morrow will
bring forth. Alas! how many thousand ways may death surprise thee, before to
morrow comes? Though there be but one way to come into the world, yet there is
a thousand thousand ways to be sent out of the world. O the diseases, the
hazards, the dangers, the accidents, the deaths, that daily, that hourly attend
the life of man! A Jewish Rabbin pressing the practice of repentance upon his
Disciples, exhorted them to be sure to repent the day before they died; to
which one of them replied, that the day of a man's death was very uncertain; to
which the Rabbin made answer, Repent therefore every day, and then you shall be
sure to repent the day before you die. O Sirs, except you do repent to day, you
cannot tell that you shall repent the day before you die; for who knows to day,
but that he may die to morrow? It was once demanded of one, Austin.
What he would say of a wicked man who had lived loosly, but died penitently?
etc. to whom he replied, What would you have me say? That he is damned? I will
not, for I have nothing to do to judge him. Shall I say that he is saved? I
dare not, for I would not deceive thee; what then? Why this, repent thou out of
hand, and thou art safe, whatever is become of him. Ah friends, you are never
safe till you repent; it is repentance that puts you out of all danger of
miscarrying for ever. Shall the husbandman take his present seasons for sowing
and reaping? Shall the good Tenant repair his house while the weather is fair?
Shall the careful Pilot take his advantage of wind and tide, and so put out to
Sea? Shall the Traveller mend his pace, when he sees the night comes on? and
shall the Smi^^ strike when the Iron is hot? and shall not we take the present
opportunity of repenting and turning to the Lord? Remembering that there will be
a time when time shall be no more; He. 12.17. Luke 13.24, 27.
and when there shall be no place found for repentance, though it should be
sought carefully with tears; and remembering that there will be a time when thy
glass will be out, and when the door will be shut, and when there will be no
entrance at all. And remembering that it is a safer course with prudent
Prometheus to foresee a danger and shun it, then with foolish Epimetheus to go
on unadvisedly, and be punished.

Ah friends, it is a dangerous thing to make repentance, What madness and folly
is it for a man that has many young, strong, stout horses, and a long journey
to go, to let these pass by, and to lay his carriage, and get up himself upon
an old feeble jade, that can hardly bear himself! The application is easy.
Mal. 1.13, 14.
which should be the practice of all your days, to be the task of old Age.
Does not common experience tell us, that the longer the Ship leaketh, the
harder it is to be emptied; and that the longer the house goes to decay, the
worse it is to repair; and that the further the nail is driven, the harder it
will be to get out? and so certainly the longer any man defers his repentance,
the more difficult it will be for him to repent; his heart will every day grow
more and more hard, and his will more and more perverse, and his judgment more
and more corrupted, and his affections more and more disordered, and his
conscience more and more benumbed or enraged, and his whole life more and more
defiled and debauched. Friends, do not deceive your selves, old age is but a
sad, a sandy, a tottering and sinking foundation for you to build your hopes
and happiness upon; for you to build your everlasting condition, your eternal
making or marring upon. Are the dog days of old age, are the trembling hands,
the wrinckled face, the dazeled eyes, the stinking lungs, the fainting heart,
the feeble knees, and the failing legs, are these a sacrifice worthy of God?
is a body full of sores, aches, and diseases, and a soul full of sin, an
offering becoming a God? surely no. O what madness, what wickedness is this,
to serve Satan, your lusts, and this world with full dishes, and to put off God
with scraps? to serve these in the flower, in the prime and primrose of you
days, and to put off God with the dregs of old age? Certainly repentance is
rather a work for youth then old age, it is a work rather for strength then
weakness; and for health then sickness. O do not let Satan deceive you, do
not let your own hearts delude you, but fall upon the work of repentance
presently, knowing, that as you have one day more to repent of, so you have one
day less to repent in. What a piece of vanity is it, that while the Ship is
sound, the tackling sure, the Pilot well, the Sailers strong, provisions laid
in, and the wind favorable, that the Mariners and passengers should lie in the
Rode, carding, drinking, diceing, dancing and idling! And when the Ship is
leak, the Pilot sick, the mariners faint, provisions spent, and the winds
boisterous, then to weigh Anchors, and hoist up sail, to make a voyage into a
far Country! And yet such is the vanity of most men, who in the days of their
youth, health and strength, who when their memories are strong, and their
fancies quick, and their Reason ripe, etc. do sin away, and fool away, and
trifle away the day of grace, the offers of mercy, the motions of the Spirit,
and the entreaties of Christ; and when old age comes, when their wits are
cracked, their souls distracted, their senses stupefied, their hearts astonished,
their minds darkened, and their bodies diseased and distempered, O then they
think to leap into heaven, with a Lord have mercy upon me in their mouths: and
though they have lived like devils, yet they hope they shall die like Saints;
and though they never took no care of Gods honor, yet they hope that God will
take care of their souls; but when the thread of their lives is cut, the next
news that ever you shall hear of these, is, that they are gone to hell.

I have read of a young man, who being admonished of the evil of his way, and
course, and being pressed to leave his wickedness, and to break off his sins
by repentance, upon the consideration of Judgment, Eternity and Death a
coming: he answered, what do you tell me of these things? I warrant you I will
do well enough, for when death comes, I will speak but three words, and that
will help all, and so he went on in his wickedness: but in the end coming to a
Bridge on Horseback to go over a deep water, the Horse stumbling, and he
laboring to recover his Horse, could not, but at last he let go the Bridle,
and gave up himself and his Horse to the waters, and was heard to say these
three words, Devil take all: Here were three words with a witness. And o that
all that think to repent at last, with a Lord have mercy upon me, would lay
this instance to heart. The light of thy life may be put out before thou can
once say, (Miserere mei Deus) Lord be merciful to me a sinner. Though the
Chariot wheels run all the day long very near one another, yet they never
overtake one another. O, take heed of delaying thy repentance; for the more
thou delayest it, the more will thy account be increased, thy debt augmented,
Satan strengthened, thy body infeebled, thy lusts imboldned, thy soul
endangered, and all the difficulties of conversion more and more multiplied; by
delaying of thy repentance, thou go the way to gratify Satan, to cozen thy
self, to lose the opportunities of grace, and to damn thy soul for ever and
ever. Well, remember this, if thou will not repent to day, God may swear in his
wrath to morrow, that thou shall not enter into his rest, and then woe to thee,
that ever thou were born. And thus much for the preventing of these sad
mistakes about repentance, which mistakes keep off many a man from looking and
laboring after that holiness without which there is no happiness.

Secondly, If ever you would be holy, O then take heed of a Witch; take heed of
the world; the world ^eut. 32.15.22.
it makes men forget God, neglect Christ, slight Ordinances, and despise
holiness. Ah the time, the thoughts, the strength, That Cardinal was wretched
as well as rich, that would not leave his part in Paris for a part in Paradise.
the spirits that this enticing world has made many to spend and consume,
whilst their souls have lien a bleeding, and eternity has been posting upon
them! Oh the deadness, the barrenness, the listlesnesse, the heartlesnesse to
any thing that is good, that does attend a worldly temper! Many men are so
bewitched with the profits, pleasures and honors of the world, that they mind
not holiness, they regard not holiness, they care not for holiness, nor the
means that lead to holiness, Philip. 3.18, 19. For many walk, of whom I have
told you often, and now I tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of
the Cross of Christ: whose end is destruction; whose God is their belly: and
whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things. Who were those that walked
disorderly? why those that minded earthly things: Who were those that fetched
tears from the Apostles eyes? why those that minded earthly things: Who were
those that were enemies to the cross of Christ? why those that minded earthly
things: Who were those whose end is destruction? why those that minded earthly
things: who were those whose God was their belly? why those that minded earthly
things: Who were those whose glory was their shame? why those that minded
earthly things. Sicily is so full of sweet flowers, that dogs cannot hunt
there: and what do all the sweet contents and delights of this world, Diodorus
Siculus.
but make men lose the scent of heaven and holiness! The world proves silken
halters to some, and golden fetters to others: to some it is like the Swallows
dung that put out Tobias eyes, to others it is like the waters of Nilus, that
makes the inhabitants deaf. All the flowers of this world are surrounded with
many briars. The world is all shadow and vanity, its like Jonahs gourd; man may
sit under its shadow for a while, but it soon decays and dies. He that shall
but weigh man's pains with his pay, his miseries with his pleasures, his sorrows
with his joys, his crosses with his comforts, his wants with his enjoyments,
etc. may well cry out Vanity of vanity, and all is vanity. The whole world is
circular, If the whole earth were changed into a globe of gold, it could not
fill thy heart.
the heart of man is triangular, and we know a circle cannot fill a triangle. O
Sirs, if your hearts be not filled with holiness, they will be filled with the
world, the flesh and the Devil. Either holiness or Satan must possess you:
Some there be that have much holiness, and much of the world too, as Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Job, David, Hezekiah, Daniel, etc. And others there be
that have no holiness, nor nothing of the world neither; these men are fair
for two hells, a hell of misery here, and a hell of torment hereafter. Some
have much of the world, but not a spark of holiness: as Saul, Haman, Dives,
Herod, etc. who had a world of wealth, but not a dram of grace; and others have
a great deal of holiness, James 2.5. Mat. 11.5.
that have but little or nothing of the world, as the Apostles, and Lazarus,
etc. Now is it not infinitely better, to have holiness without the world, and
so be happy for ever, then to have much of the world without holiness, and so
be damned for ever?

A man bewitch't with the world, will loose many precious opportunities of
grace, which are more worth then a world; Act. 24.24. ult.
witness Rich Felix, who had no leisure to hear poor Paul, though the hearing
of a Sermon might have saved his soul. A man bewitch't with the world has his
sinning times, and his eating times, and his sleeping times, and his trading
times, and his feasting times, and his sporting times, etc. but he has not his
hearing times, nor his praying times, nor his reading times, nor his mourning
times, nor his repenting times, nor his reforming times, etc. He can have time,
yea and he will have time for every thing but to honor his God, and to make
himself happy for ever.

A man bewitch't with the world, will, when it is put to his choice, rather part
with Christ to enjoy the world, Mat. 19.16.23.
then part with the world to enjoy Christ; witness the young man in the Gospel,
who preferred a drop before a Sea, a crum before a Crown, and his treasure on
earth, before treasure in heaven; he would not leave that on earth which he
could not long keep, for the enjoyment of that in heaven, which he should never
loose; rather then he would let his possessions go, he would let God, and
Christ go, and heaven go, and all go, etc. If Heaven can be had at no cheaper a
rate, then parting with his possessions, Christ may keep his Heaven to himself,
and make the best on it he can if he will, for he will have none on it upon those
terms.

Again, a man bewitch't with the world, will prefer the most base and
contemptible things before the Lord Jesus Christ, he will with the Gergesens,
prefer his very Swine before a Savior; Mat. 8.28, ult.
when they saw what a sad market their Hoggs were brought to, they desired
Christ to depart out of their country; these Gergesites had rather loose
Christ, then loose their Porkets; they had rather that the devil should possess
their souls, then that he should drown their Pigs; they prefer their Swine
before their salvation, and present a wretched petition for their own
damnation; they besought him that he would depart out of their coasts, though
there be no misery, no plague, no curse, no wrath, no hell to Christ's departure
from a people, yet men bewitched with the world will desire this. Men bewitched
with the world will prefer a Barabbas before a Jesus, they will with Judas
betray Christ, and with Pilate condemn Christ, and with the Scribes and
Pharisees they will cry out, Crucify him, Crucify him, away with this Jesus,
away with this Jesus, let Barabbas live, but let Jesus dye, let Barabbas be
saved, but let Christ be hanged. Ah what incarnate Devils will such men prove
who are bewitched with this world?

A man bewitch't with the world will gain no good by the Ministry of the Word;
witness Ezekiels hearers, Ezekiel. 33.31, 32, 33. and witness the stony ground,
Mat. 13.22. and witness Christ's followers, John 6. Some Writers say that
nothing will grow where Gold grows, certainly where the love of this world
grows, there nothing will grow that is good: A heart filled either with the
love of the world, or the profits of the world, or the pleasures of the world,
or the honors of the world, or the cares of the world, or the businesses of the
world, is a heart incapacitated to receive any divine counsel or comfort, it is a
heart shut up against God and holiness, it is a heart posses't with many devils;
and therefore no wonder if such a heart loathes the honeycomb of holiness; yea
it is no wonder to see such a heart to deride and scorn holiness as the greatest
foolishness, Luke 16.14. The Poets tell of Licaon being turned into a Wolf; but
when a worldling is made holy there is a Wolf turned into a man, yea a devil
turned into a Saint; therefore the Holy Ghost speaking of Zacheus (who had long
been bewitch't by the world) brings him in with an Ecce, Behold, as if it were
a wonder of wonders that ever such a worldling should be made holy.

A man bewitch't with the world will venture the loss of his soul to enjoy the
world, Mat. 16.26. As that Pope that sold his soul to the devil, for the
enjoyment of the Popedom six years. We hate the Turks for selling of
Christians for slaves, but, Ah, how many be there among us that call themselves
Christians, who yet sell themselves and their souls to the devil for slaves for
half a crown, yea for a half penny? Look as Shemei by seeking his servant lost
his life, so many by seeking of the world have lost their souls. Now though of
all losses the loss of the soul is the greatest, the sadest, the sorest, the
heaviest, and the most intolerable, inconceiveable and irrecoverable loss, yet
a man bewitch't with the world will run the hazard of losing it, of damning it
to enjoy the world. You know the Reubenites in Josh. 22. preferred the country
that was commodious for the feeding of their cattle (though it were far from
the Temple, where they might have fed their souls, and have got heaven and
holiness for their souls) before their interest in the Land of Promise; We so,
men that are bewitch't with this world in these days, O! how do they prefer
their sensual delights, their brutish contentments, and their carnal enjoyments
before the heavenly Canaan, and before the beauties of holiness, and before the
Temple of Gods holiness, where holiness sparkles and shines in all its bravery
and glory, and where their souls might be abundantly satisfied and delighted
with the most ravishing joys, the most surpassing delights, and the most
transcendent pleasures which are at Gods right hand. To draw to a close, the
Arabic Proverb says, That (Mundus cadavar est, and petentes eum sunt canes)
the world is a carcass, and they that hunt after it are dogs. If this Proverb
be true, what a multitude of professors will be found to be dogs, who hunt
more after earth then heaven, who hunt more after Terrestial then Celestial
things, who hunt more after nothingnesses and emptinesses, then they do after
those fulnesses and sweetnesses that be in God, Christ, Heaven and Holiness.
Well friends, as ever you would obtain that real holiness, without which there
is no happiness, take heed of a Witch, take heed of this world; and to that
purpose, O that you would always look upon the things of this world, as you
will look upon them when you come to dye. O that you would now look upon all
the pomp, state, bravery, and glory of the world, as you will look upon it
when your souls shall sit upon your trembling lips. O with what a disdainful
eye, with what a weaned heart do men look upon those things then? do so now,
and I dare assure you, that though the world may trouble you, yet it shall
never bewitch you. I have read of a man that lying in a burning Fever, professed
that if he had all the world at his dispose, he would give it all for one
draught of Beer, at so low a rate do men value the world at such a time as that
is, if men were so wise to value the world at no higher a rate in health, then
they do in sickness, in life, then they do at the time of their death, it would
never bewitch them, it would never be as a wall of separation between holiness
and them: As ever you would be holy here, and happy hereafter, take heed of
this Witch, and believe it to be a Witch before it has bewitched you, or else
you may believe it too late.

Luke 18. who thought himself a far better man then the poor Publican, and yet
he was not half so honest, nor half so just, nor half so righteous, nor half so
good as he was; the poor Publican was ashamed of himself, he loathed himself,
he abased himself, he judged himself, and he condemned himself; the poor
Publican acknowledged God, he adored God, he dreaded God, he admired God, and
he justified God, in all which he exceeded the proud Pharisee; and yet, O! how
scornfully does this proud Pharisee look upon him? and how disdainfully and
disgracefully does he speak of him? And this was the general frame and temper
of the Scribes and Pharisees, who thought no man's penny so good silver as their
own, who thought themselves better then the best, when they were the very worst
of the worst; for Publicans and Harlots believed and repented, and entered into
the Kingdom of God before them, Mat. 21.31, 32. And so they in that of Isa. 65.
were naught, very naught, yea, stark naught, they were the basest among the
base, they were the vilest among the vile, they were the most rebellious among
the rebellious, and the most superstitious among the superstitious, witness v.
2, 3, 4. And yet, O! how do they stroke themselves, and bless themselves, and
commend themselves, and cry up themselves, and exalt themselves as the only
holy ones, v. 5. they could deifie themselves, and yet damn and devilifie
others, though they were such monsters as God abhorred, v. 6. Ah! how many be
there who by comparing themselves with those that are worse then themselves, do
judge themselves to be good enough, and holy enough? they are good negative
Christians, and they think that is enough to bring them to heaven; they bless
themselves that they are no Nabals for drunkenness, nor no Sodomites for
filthiness, nor no Hamans for haughtiness, nor no Ammons for lustfulness, nor
none of the old world for idleness, nor no Zacheus's for covetousness, nor no
Laodiceans for lukewarmness, etc. They bless themselves that they are no
Gehazies for lying, nor no Shemeies for cursing, nor no Joabs for swearing, nor
no Rabshakehs for railing, nor no Doegs for cruelty, nor no Judases for
treachery, nor no Demases for Apostasy, etc. And thus they cheat themselves,
and find out fine ways to delude and damn their own souls; they think it grace
enough, and holiness enough, that they have attained to this, viz. not to be so
bad as the worst, though they fall infinitely short of coming near unto the
best. Well sits, remember this; if you are not so great sinners as others, your
horrors, your terrors, your torments, your hell shall not be so great, nor so
hot as others, but without holiness you shall be as certainly damned as others;
and what a cold comfort is this to have a cooler and a lighter hell then
others, and yet this is all the comfort that can be handed to unholy hearts.
But,

Fourthly, Take heed of flatterers: Ah! how good might darkness, they dare say
that that man has grace that has none, yea they dare swear that such and such
shall be saved, though for the present they live as if they were resolved to be
damned; they dare take upon them to tell you that such and such men's names are
wri^ten in Heaven, and that such and such belong to the election of Grace,
though their lives speak them out to be void of all Grace. Ah, how many a man
has been kept off from the thoughts of holiness, and from the ways of holiness,
and from the love and liking of holiness, by flatterers who have flattered
them, that doubtless they are in the favor of God, and that certainly God did
not make men to damn them, and that without all peradventure they have an
interest in Christ, and that there is no question but that their hearts are as
good as the best, and that their conditions are good, and their souls happy;
yea, they are so confident of their happiness that they dare venture a going to
hell, if ever such should go to hell whom they fondly flatter; they dare pawn
their souls and their salvation on it, that such shall never miscarry; and by
these fla^teries they harden men in sin, and arm them against holiness:
flattery is that sweet poison that has destroyed many a soul; witness Rehoboam,
Ahab, Herod, Nero, Alexander, etc. So true is that of the wise man, Prove. 26.
ult. A lying tongue hates those that are afflicted by it, and a flattering
mouth works ruin. A flattering mouth ruins name, fame, estate, life, body
and soul, it ruins a man both temporally and eternally, The Hebrew word Dachah
signifies to throw down, to drive on forwards till a man falls into
destruction; none drive so furiously to the ruin and destruction of souls as
flatterers do.
it often undoes a man in both worlds, it makes a man miserable both here and
hereafter: flatterers are devouring Caterpillars: flatterers tongues do more
mischief then persecutors swords, for their swords can but destroy the bodies
of men, but flatterers tongues destroy the souls of men: flatterers are the
greatest soul-cheaters, and soul undoers in the world; flatterers dare call
vice virtue, they dare call pride neatness, covetousness good husbandry,
drunkenness good fellowship, prodigality liberality, wantonness a trick of
youth, passion zeal, revenge courage, etc. They dare call enormities
infirmities, and wickednesses weaknesses, they dare call great sins little
sins, little sins no sins, they gild over all their poisonous Pills with gold,
they draw the fairest Glove upon the fowlest hand, they lay their neatest
colors upon the filthiest sores, they put their best paint upon the worst
faces, and the richest robes upon the most diseased bodies; and by these
devices they entangle many to their utter ruin, Prove. 29.5. A man that
flattereth his neighbor spreads a net for his feet. The Hebrew word (
Machalik from Chalak) that is here rendered flatterer, signifies a
smooth-boots, a soft butter-spoken man, because flatterers, the better to
deceive, do use to oil their tongues, and to butter their lips, that so by
their smooth soft speeches they may the more insinuate themselves into men's
affections, and so make way for their destruction: flat^erers have their silken
nets to ensnare and entangle poor souls to their eternal ruin. Look as Fowlers
strew corn and lay baits, to draw Birds into their nets; or look as Hunters
spread their nets, that they may take beasts and prey upon them, or make a prey
of them; so flatterers they spread their nets that they may catch poor souls,
and either prey upon them, or else make make a prey of them. Flattery is the
devils invisible net, and happy is that soul that escapes it: the flatterers
net is worse then his sword, for his sword may be the more easily seen, feared,
and avoided, then his net. Of all arms the flatterers net is the most perilous
and dangerous, both to the lives, estates, and souls of men; 'twere ten
thousand times better to trample a flatterer under a man's feet, then for a man
to suffer his feet to be taken in the flatterers net. A flatterer is a sore
enemy in the habit of a friend, he is a Wolf in Sheeps clothing, he is a devil
transformed into an Angel of light; and what punishment can be too great for
such? The severity of many Heathen Princes and Emperors has been very great
against flatterers; take one instance for all, Augustus Caesar, and Tiberius
Caesar, and Sigismund the Emperors, all were great enemies to flatterers.
Alexander Severus commanded one Turinus a great flatterer, to be tied to a
stake and stifled with smoke, with an Herald standing by, and proclaiming to
all the people, that 'twas but just that he that lived by the smoke of
flattery, should dye by smoke. Now what a shameful thing is it that such as are
called Christians should affect to be flattered, when Heathens have so severely
punished flatterers. Well sirs, as ever you would be holy, take heed of
flatterers, and take heed of flattery; let Solomon's counsel be always in your
eye, and let it always lie warm upon your hearts, Prove. 20.19. He that goes
about as a talebearer, reveals secrets: therefore meddle not with him that
flattereth with his lips. A man that loves his soul, and would be happy in
another world, should shun flatterers as he should shun a Thief, a Serpent, a
Wolf, a Lion, a Devil; till thou stoppest thine ears against a spirit of
flattery, there is little hopes that ever thou will be holy.

Ezekiel, Behold they of the house of Israel, say the vision that he sees is
for many days to come, Amos 6.3. Ezekiel. 12.27. Luke 12.
and he prophesies of the times that are afar off. So the rich man in the
Gospel reckoned upon many years, when he had not many months, no not many
weeks, no not many days, no not many hours to live in this world. Unholy
persons are very apt to say to death as Pharaoh said to Moses, Get thee from
me, Exodus 10.28.
and let me see thy face no more: When death knocks at the poor man's door, he
sends it to the rich man's gate, and the rich man translates it to the Scholar,
and the Scholar posts it away to the Citizen, and the Citizen to the Courtier,
and the Courtier to his Lady, and his Lady to her Maid, and so death is posted
away as it were from one to another, every one crying out to death, O let me
not see thy face, O let me not see thy face. 'Twas even a death to Queen
Elizabeth, Sigismund the Emperor, Jews the 11 of France, Cardinal Beauford and
others, to think of death, or to hear of death; and therefore they strictly
charged all their servants about them, that when they saw them sick, they
should never dare to name that bitter word Death in their ears. And Pashur
cannot cast his eye upon death, but he is presently a Magor Missabib, a terror
to himself, Jer. 20.3. And Saul though he was a valiant King, yet at the news
of death he falls on his face, 1 Samuel 28.20. And so Belshazzar though he was a
mighty Emperor, Dan. 5.1, 7. yet a letter to him, from him whom Bildad calls
the King of terrors, Job 18.14. Ah how does it amaze, astonish, affright, and
terrify him! and how many are there who with Mecaenas in Seneca, had rather
live in many diseases then die; and with the most famous Heathens, prefer the
meanest life on earth; above all the hopes they have of another world; like
Achilles who had rather be a servant to a poor country Clown here, then to be a
King to all the souls departed; or like Withipoll a rich and wretched man, who
when he was in danger of death, earnestly desired that he might live five
hundred years, Vitellius looking for the messenger of death, made himself drunk
to drown the the thoughts of it.
though it were but in the shape of a Toad. Near Jews in Sussex a woman being
ill, one of her neighbors coming to visit her, told her that if she died she
should go to heaven and be with God and Jesus Christ, and with Angels and
Saints, the sick woman answered that she had no acquaintance there, she knew no
body there, and therefore she had rather live with her and her other neighbors
here, then to go thither to live amongst strangers. And thus you see how apt
persons are to shrug at death, which is a common lot, and to say to it as
Ephraim did to his Idols, Get you hence, what have we more to do with you? but
this is and must be for a lamentation, that men put off the thoughts of their
latter end, to the latter end of their thoughts. Man naturally is a great
life-lover, and therefore he will bleed, sweat, vomit, purge, part with an
estate, yea with a limb, I limbs, to preserve his life; like him that cried
out, O give me any deformity, any torment, any misery, so you spare my life.
And upon this account it is that he desires that such a guest as death may not
knock at his door; but, Ah, that all such vain men would consider, that by
putting the day of their death far from them, they do but gratify Satan,
strengthen their sins, provoke the Lord and make the work of faith and holiness
more hard and difficult, and so lay a deep foundation for their own eternal
destruction.

Well sirs, remember this, the serious thoughts and meditations of death (if
any thing) will work you to break off your sins, to mend your lives, and to
look to the salvation of your souls; there is nothing that will sooner work a
man to a holy fear of offending God in any thing, and to a holy care of
pleasing God in every thing, then the serious meditation of death: Though that
text, Remember thy latter end, and thou shall never do amiss, be Apocryphal,
yet the truth asserted is Canonical. I have read a story of one that gave a
young prodigal a Ring with a Deaths-head, on this condition that he should one
hour in a day, for seven days together, think and meditate upon Death, which
accordingly he did, and it bred a great change and alteration in his life and
conversation. O! man, thou do not know but that the serious thoughts of
death may work that desirable thing in thee, viz. holiness, which yet has not
been wrought in thee by all the holy counsels, the gracious examples, the
fervent prayers, and the sorrowful tears of thy dearest friends; thou do not
know but that the serious meditation of Death, may do thee more good then all
the Sermons that ever thou have heard, or then all the books that ever thou
have read, or then all the prayers that ever thou have made, or then all the
sighs or groans that ever thou have poured out; and why then should thou put
the thoughts of death far from thee? Certainly, as he is a sinner in grain,
that dares look death in the face and yet sin, that dares cut a purse when the
Judge looks on; so he is a monster rather then a man, that dares look death in
the face, and yet satisfy himself to live without holiness; that dares look
death in the face, and yet say I Will drink and be drunk, I Will swear and swagger,
I Will roar and whore, I Will cheat and cozen, I Will hate and oppose, I Will quarrel
and kill, and my hands shall be as bloody as my heart, and let death do her
worst; if such a person be not in the ready way of being miserable for ever, I
know nothing.

Well sirs, remember these three things.

Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return, Genesis 3.19. will take hold of
all the sons of men: There is no man that lives and shall not see death. Psalm.
89.48. Genesis 32.
Though Jacob wrestled with an Angel and prevailed, yet death was too hard for
him; though Hazael was as light of foot as a wild Roe, yet he could not outrun
death, 2 Samuel 2.18.
and Absalom could not out-ride it, nor Pharaoh out-drive it; though Saul and
Jonathan were as swift as Eagles, and as strong as Lions, yet were they slain
among the mighty: 'Twas not Solomon's wisdom that could deliver him, nor
Sampsons strength that could rescue him, nor Hamans honor that could secure
him, nor Goliahs sword that could defend him, nor Dives riches that could
ransom him from the grave; and therefore why should men put this day so far
from them? But,

Secondly, As there is nothing more certain then death, so Sodom, when Pharaoh,
when Hagar, when Amalek, when Haman, when Nebuchadnezzar, when Belshazzar, when
Dives, when the Rich fool, and when Herod, were all in their prime and pride,
when they were in their most flourishing estate, when they were at the very top
of their glory, Ah how suddenly, how sadly, how strangely, how unexpectedly,
and how wonderfully were they brought down to the Grave, yea to Hel^? O! the
thousand thousands of crosses, losses, diseases, sicknesses, calamities,
dangers, and deaths which attends the life of man, and by the least of which he
may be suddenly surprised and carried into another world; and therefore why
should man cry out cras, cras, to morrow, to morrow, when he does not know
whether he shall have a to morrow, when he does not know but that he may dye
before he had begun to live? Waldus a rich Merchant of Lions in France, seeing
one suddenly drop down dead in the streets, went home, repented, changed his
life, studied the Scriptures, and became a worthy Teacher, Father and Founder
of the Christians called the Waldenses, or poor men of Lions; And O! that the
serious thoughts of the suddenness of death might have that happy effect upon
your souls, as to work you to break your league with sin, and to fright you (as
it were) into a love of holiness, and into a life of holiness. O! swearer what
do thou know, but that death may seize on thee whilst the oath is in thy
mouth? And what do thou know, O drunkard, but that death may step in between
the cup and the lip, as it did to Belshazzar? And what do thou know, O
adulterer, but that a poisoned dart may strike thorough thy liver whilst thou
art in the very flagrancy of thy lust, as it did tho^ough Zimries and Cozbies?
And what do thou know, O proud Haman, but that thou who art thus noblely
feasted one day, may be a feast for the Crows the next day? And what do
thou know who art so crafty, O Ahitophel, but that if thy subtle counsel be
rejected one hour, thou may hang thy self the next hour? And what do thou
know, O thou opposing and murmuring Corah, but that the earth may suddenly open
and swallow thee up? and therefore why should you put that day so far from you,
that may so suddenly overtake you?

Berline in Germany charged Saint Paul with a lie in the Pulpit, Scultet Annal.
and was suddenly smitten with an Apoplexy, and fell down dead in the place:
And what do thou know, who art so apt to charge the people of God with
lying, but that God may strike thee both dumb and dead, whilst the lie is in
thy mouth? Bibulus a Roman General riding in Triumph in all his glory, a Tyle
fell off from a house in the street and knocked out his brains: And what do
thou know, O vain glorious man, but that whilst thou art triumphing in thy
world glory, by some unexpected blow thou may be sent into another world?

Lepidus and Avsidius stumbled at the very threshold of the Senate and died,
the blow came in a cloud from heaven; God by an invisible blow may send thee
out of this visible world.

Sophocles died suddenly by excessive joy, and Homer by immoderate grief;
excessive joy or excessive grief may suddenly bring thee to thy long home.
Theater of Gods judgments, lib. 1. cap. 9. p. 64.
Olympus the Arrian Heretic speaking against the Holy Trinity as he was a
Bathing himself, was struck dead by a threefold Thunderbolt: We may run and
read some men's sins in the very face of their punishments. Mr. Perkins speaks
of One, who when it thundered, scoffingly said, It was nothing but Tom Tumbrel
a hooping his Tubs, etc. and presently he was struck dead with a thunderbolt
from heaven. There would be no end of recounting the several judgments that
have suddenly surprised all sorts of sinners; let these few instances suffice
to stir up every unholy heart, to take heed of putting far off the day of
death. But,

Job 8.9. Psalm. 102.11. Psalm. 73.20, and 90.5. Job 20.8. chapter 7.7.
and why then should you put the day of your death so far from you? If you
consider the life of man absolutely, it is but short, it is but as a span, a
shadow, a dream, a bubble, a blast, a puff of wind, a pile of dust, a fading
leaf, or a tale that is told, etc. The life of man is as a dream that vanishes
when one awaketh, it is a wind that goes away and comes not again, it is as a
cloud that is soon dispersed with the wind, it is as a vapor that appears for
a time, and then vanishes away, it is as the grass that soon withers, it is as
the flower that soon fades, it is as the candle that every light puff of wind
blows out: The life of man is rather made up of days then years, Psalm. 90.12.
So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom. Moses
does not say Lord teach us to number our years, but Lord teach us to number our
days; fallen man is apt to misreckon, and to compute days for years; and
therefore this holy Prophet desires, that God would teach them this Divine
Arithmetic of numbering their days, it being a lesson that none but a God can
teach. So Job 14.1, 2. Man that is born of a woman, is of few days (or short of
days) and full of trouble. He comes forth like a flower and is out down: he
floeth also as a shadow and continues not. He speaks not of an Age, nor of
years, nor of many days, but of a few days; man's days are short in themselves,
and shorter in respect of the troubles that attends this present life. Man's
life is so short, Aug. l. 1. Confess.
Austin doubts whether to call it a dying life, or a living death. Now these
few days of man's life are upon the wing, hastening and flying from us as the
Eagle hastneth to his prey; and therefore man had need set a greater price upon
every moment and minute of time, then he does upon all the world, and
accordingly improve it.

Secondly, If you consider the life of man comparatively

First, If you compare the life of man to what man might Romans 5.12. ult.

Psalm. 90.10. And where one man lives to this age, how many thousands die
before they come to it? But what is this age to the age that men lived to in
former times? Enoch lived as many years as there be days in the year, and Adam
lived nine hundred and thirty years, and Methuselah lived nine hundred sixty
and nine years, Genesis 5. Now what were Platoes eighty years, or Thomas Pars 160.
years, or Johannes de Temporibus, John of the times, three hundred threescore
and one years, to the long lives of the Patriarchs? and though in David's time
old age and seventy often shook hands, yet it is otherwise in our times; for as
men's wickedness do more and more increase, so their days do more and more
decrease; the more wicked any generation is, the shorter lived, that generation
shall be; God will quickly dispatch them out of the world, who make quick
dispatches in ways of wickedness.

Thirdly, The life of man is but short, if you compare it to (unum perpetuum
hodie) one perpetual day that shall never have end; when men after the
resurrection begin to live, they shall never dye after that day, every man
shall live in everlasting bliss, or in everlasting woe; when the last Trumpet
has sounded man shall live for ever and ever.

Psalm. 39.5. Mine age is nothing before him, all time is nothing to eternity,
man's life is but a minute, it is but a point of time to the days of eternity;
what head, what heart can conceive or reckon up the duration of God, who ever
was, who still is, and who ever will be? every child, and every fool can tell
you their age; but what man on earth, or what Angel in heaven can tell you the
years of the Most High? surely none.

feathers yearly, and so gets new, whereby her youth and strength is renewed,
Pliny, August. Calvin, Psalm. 103.5.
by which means she will live till she be an hundred years old, she dies not
till her upper Bill be so grown over her under that she cannot take in her
meat, and so at last she is staryed. And some Elephants live three hundred
years, witness Aelian, Solinus and Strabo, etc. by all which you see the
brevity of man's life; And why then should man be so weak, so vain, as to put
the day of his death so far from him? I have read of the Birds of Norway, that
they fly faster then the fowls of any other Country; they knowing by an
instinct that God has put into them, that the days in that Climate are very
short (not above three hours long say some) do therefore make the more haste to
their nests. And O! that all that hear me this day would learn by these birds
of Norway, to make haste to believe and to make haste to repent and to make
haste to love God, and to make haste to be holy, etc. seeing their day of life
is so short, and their night of death is posting toward them.

And as the life of man is very short, so it is very considerable, that a very
small matter, a very little thing may quickly put an end to man's life. When the
Emperor threatened the Philosopher with death, he replied, Conrad. Ves. perg.
Nancler. and Jo. Boel. in Adrian Paulus. Jovius, Elog. lib. 2.
what is that more then a Spanish fly may do? An ordinary fly flying casually
into the mouth of the proud Pope Adrian stifled him, that made the highest
state then in the Christian world stoop, even to the holding of his stirrup.
Tamberlain a Scythian Captain, the terror of his time, died with three fits of
an Ague. Anacreon the Poet, was choked with the kernel of a Grape. Aeschylus
was killed by the shell of a Tortoise, which fell from an Eagles Talons, who as
some conceive took his bald head for a white rock. The Lord Mountaigne tells us
of a Duke of Britany that was stifled to death in such a throng of people, as
is in some great congregations on the Lords day. An Emperor died by the scratch
of a Comb; and one of the Kings of France died by the chock of an Hogg; and one
that was brother to a great Lord, playing at Tennis, received a blow with a
ball a little above the right ear, which struck him into his grave. There is
nothing so small but may be a man's bane; The paring of a Toe, the cutting off a
corn, the scratch of a nail, the prick of a pin, a fish-bone, a hair, a drop of
water, a crum of bread, a bad air, or an evil smell may bring a man to his long
home, yea a little smoke may soon stifle him, or his own spittle, let down
unwarily may suddenly choke him.

And O! that all that I have spoken upon this account might be so blessed, as to
work you to take heed of putting the day of your death so far from you. The
evil servant when he thought his Master was gone afar off, Luke 12.45.
then he lays about him, distempers himself, Prove. 7.19, 20.
and beats his fellow servants. And so the lewd woman in the Proverbs, when the
good man was gone a long journey, when he was far from home, then she grew
wanton, vain, and secure; so when men put afar off the day of their death, then
they grow more loose, profane, and unholy; whereas a serious and frequent
eying and minding of death, as at hand, as at a man's elbow, would alarm a man
to break off his sins by repentance, and to labor for holiness, as a man would
labor for life it self. I have read of the women in the Isle of Man, that the
first Web they make is their winding sheet, wherewith they usually gird
themselves when they go abroad, to show that they are still mindful of their
mortality. Ah friends, a constant minding of your mortality, would contribute
very much toward the making of you holy: He that daily looks upon death, will
be daily a looking after holiness; the oftener any man looks into the grave,
the oftener that man will be looking up to heaven, and a begging that God would
make him holy even as he is holy. But,

Isa. 9.16. The leaders of his people have caused them to ert. The sins of
Teachers are the teachers of sins; as the corrupt glosses, so the lewd
practices of many Preachers, makes many to stumble at that word, and to shuff
and chat, and contest, and kick against that word whereby they should be made
holy and happy for ever; a scandalous Minister is the greatest Pest, the worse
plague, and the sorest mischief that can be to a people, for his enormities,
his wickednesses will have the strongest influences upon the souls and lives of
men to make them miserable in both worlds; his falls will be the fall and ruin
of many, for people are more prone to live by examples then by precepts, and to
mind more what the Minister does then what he says, and to eye more how he
walks then how he talks. It was said of One (long since) that was an excellent
Preacher, but a very bad liver, that when he was in the Pulpit, it was pity he
should ever come out of it, he preached so well, and when he was out of it, it
was pity that ever he should go into it he lived so ill. Certainly it is pity
that ever such should go into a Pulpit, who preach well but live ill, who have
much of God in their mouths, and much of the devil in their lives, who have the
earth as much at their fingers end, as they have heaven at their tongues end,
who puts a loud lie upon the truth, and whose lives puts their words to a
blush, who have much of heaven in their expressions, and nothing of heaven in
their conversations, who have much holiness in their books, but none in their
bosoms, and much holiness in their lips, but none in their lives; The lewd
lives of such persons causes people to slight and abhor the holy things of God,
1 Samuel 2.17. yea their bad lives often raise doubts in their hearers hearts,
Romans 2.22. Mal. 2. ult.
whether those things be true that they preach or no; hearers will be ready to
object and say, if these things be true that the Minister says, why does he not
practice what he preaches? why does he not do as well as say? and with what
face or confidence can he appear against that in the Pulpit, which he
countenanceth and patronizeth in his life; who will credit that man's Doctrine
who has Jacobs voice but Esaus hands, who is a Saint, yea an Angel in the
Pulpit, but a debauched sinner, yea an incarnate devil out of it? I have read
of a woman, who living in professed doubt of the Godhead, after better
illumination and repentance, did often protest, Mr. Wards Sermons.
that the vicious life of a great Scholar, under whose Ministry she did live,
did conjure up those damnable doubts in her soul: There is nothing that brings
holy truths so much into question, as the unholy conversations of such
preachers neither; is there any thing that exposes a Ministers person and
office to so much scorn and contempt as an unholy life. Let a Minister be never
so learned, solid, quaint, elegant, zealous, judicious, sententious, etc. yet
if he be carnal, covetous, worldly, vain and loose in his life and
conversation, his hearers will rather deride his doctrine, then reform by his
doctrine, they will rather contemn it, then study how to profit by it;
therefore he said right that said Turpe est doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
Unto a teacher it is no small disgrace,
When his own faults reprove him to his face.
There is nothing in all the world that is more powerful and prevalent to
corrupt and mislead unholy men, and to harden, strengthen, Ezekiel. 13.22. Jer.
23.15.
and encourage them in ways of wickedness, then the looseness of their lives,
whose office binds them to look to the salvation of their souls, Mal. 2.8. Ye
are departed out of the way, ye have caused many to stumble at the Law. When
the preacher departs out of the way of holiness, the people will quickly
stumble at the Law of holiness; when Ministers are as wandering stars, no wonder
if their hearers wander from all that is good; he whose life is not a standing
reproof to sin, will by his life encourage sinners more and more in a way of
sin; there is nothing that keeps men so off from a good opinion of holiness,
and from the love of holiness, and the liking of holiness, and from the
pursuing after holiness, then the unholy lives of their teachers; and therefore
as ever you would be holy, fly their Tents and abandon their company and
society. Ministers whose lives are lewd, though their parts may be high, are
like a stone gutter that conveyeth water into a garden, Augustine.
but receives no benefit it self thereby; or like a Harp that makes others
melody, but hears nothing it self; they are like those Carpenters that built
the Arc to save others, and were drowned themselves; or like Porters at great
men's gates, that let in others, but lodge without themselves; or like Sea-marks
that rot themselves, and yet give others warning to avoid Shipwreck; or like
Casars soldier that dug a fountain for Caesar, and perished himself for
want of water. O! the folly and madness of such Ministers that give light to
others, and yet walk in darkness themselves, that feast others souls, but
starve their own, that rescue others from a devouring enemy, and yet suffer
themselves to be devoured, that forewarne others of the horrible pit, and yet
fall into it themselves, that give good counsel to others, and yet cannot take
good counsel themselves, that study and strive to bring others to heaven, and
yet have no mind to go thither themselves. Certainly society and company with
such upon choice, cannot but be a mighty hinderance to holiness; he that is in
good earnest resolved to be holy, must resolutely be resolved to have nothing
to do with such unholy persons. And thus you see the several things that you
must decline if ever you would be holy. But,

Secondly, As there are several things that you must decline if ever you would
obtain that real holiness, without which there is no happiness; so there are
several things that you are to do, that you are to put in practice, without
which you will never be holy here, nor happy hereafter. Q. But what are they?
A. They are these.

First, Greatly lament and mourn over thine own unholiness, Joel 2.12. Turn ye
to the Lord with weeping and with mourning. The foundation of a thorough
reformation must be laid in a deep humiliation; the best way to be holy, is to
accuse, Ezra. 6.2. Jer. 50.4. Psalm. 51.5.
indict, arraign, and condemn thy self for thy unholiness; you shall as soon
espouse light and darkness, and marry midnight to the noon day, as you shall
espouse or marry a holy God to an unhumbled sinner. O! who can look upon sin as
an offense against a holy God, as the breach of a holy law, as the wounding and
crucifying of a holy Savior, as the grieving and sadding of a holy sanctifier,
and as an eternal loss and undoing of his own soul, and not mourn over it? O!
who can cast a serious eye upon the nature of sin, or upon the exceeding
sinfulness of sin, or upon the aggravations of sin, and not have his heart
humbled, his soul grieved, and his Spirit melted for sin? O! who can look upon
sin as it strikes at the honor of God, the name of God, the being of God, the
glory of God, and the design of God, and not have his mouth full of penitential
confessions, his eyes full of penitential tears, and his heart full of
penitential sorrow? Some (as they say of witches) cannot weep for sin; but they
that weep not for sin here (where there are handerchiefs in the hands of Christ
to wipe off their tears) shall weep out their eyes in hell hereafter; it is
better to weep bitterly for thy sins on earth, then to weep eternally for thy
folly in hell. Ah how hard is that heart that can, sadly lament and bewail the
loss of a groat, a chick, a child, a sheep, a ship, a friend, etc. and yet
cannot let fall a tear to save a lost soul? Jacob weeps and prevails with God,
Hosea 12.4. His tears made a happy conquest upon God; Jacob weeps and prevails
with God for his life, and what do thou know but that by thy penitential
tears thou may prevail with God for thy soul? he weeps and prevails with God
for temporals, and why may not thou by weeping prevail with God for
eternals; he weeps and prevails with God for some outward happiness, and why
may not thou by weeping prevail with God for inward holiness? It Is an old
observation, that the tears of repenting sinners, are the wine of Angels.
Certainly God himself can smile to see a sinner grieve for his sins, and to see
him grieve that he can grieve no more, Psalm. 51.17.
for that he has sinned against a God so great, so gracious, so bountiful, so
merciful, etc. though God be displeased with a sinners sins, yet he is very
well pleased with a sinners tears, and therefore as he has a bagg for the one,
so he has a bottle for the other: It cannot but be a pleasure to God to see a
sinner drown his sins in a deluge of penitential tears; though tears of
indignation, as was Esaus, and tears of dissimulation, as was Ishmaels, and
tears of desperation, as was Judas's, be abominable to God, yet tears of godly
compunction and contrition, are acceptable and delightful unto God. A sinner
never looks so sweetly, as when he weeps most penitentially, witness Mary
Magdalen, Manasseh, and those murderers of Christ, Acts 2. A sinners face never
shines so beautiful, as when it is bedewed with penitential tears; tears have a
voice as well as blood, Psalm. 6.8. And God has an eye as well upon a man's tears
as upon his prayers. Penitent tears are divine Ambassadors, that never return
from the throne of grace without answers of grace, Isa. 38.5. Peter said
nothing, but went out and wept bitterly, and obtained mercy, Mat. 26. ult.
Tears are a kind of silent prayers, that will at last prevail for mercy. Naaman
the Syrian was cleansed of his leprosy by the waters of Jordan; 2 King. 5.
penitential tears may do much toward the cleansing of thy leprous soul from
sin; he that really grieves that he cannot grieve for sin, is grieved for sin;
he that is truly sorry that he cannot be sorry for sin, is in a measure sorry
for sin; he that truly desires to drown his sins in his tears, he has in Divine
account, drowned his sins in his tears. The Maid in Scaliger swooned at the
sight of a Lilly. O! how much more should you at the sight of your unholiness.
Basil wept when he saw the Rose, because it brought to his mind the first sin
from whence it had the prickles. O! how should a sinner fall a weeping when he
looks upon the greatness of his wickedness, and his want of holiness. As ever
you would be holy mourn over your own unholiness. But,

Secondly, If ever thou would be holy, thou must seek the Romans 1.4. he is
frequently called the holy Spirit, Cast me not away from thy presence, and take
not thy holy spirit from me, Psalm. 5.11. But they rebelled and vexed his holy
spirit, Isa. 63.10. And grieve not the holy spirit of God whereby ye are sealed
unto the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. He therefore that despises, despises
not man, but God, who has also given unto us his holy Spirit, 1 These. 4.8. In
whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed by the holy spirit of promise,
Ephesians. 1.13. To make a man holy, is more then to create a world, it is a work too
high and too hard for Angels or men, it becomes none, and it can be done by
none but by the holy spirit; sanctification is made the spirits personal
operation in that 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. and in that 1 Pet. 1.2. It Is the great work of
the spirit to shape, form, and fashion the new creature holiness in all the
vessels of glory. The spirit is the root of all holiness, and therefore the
several parts of holiness are called the fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5.22. It Is
true, God purposes holiness to his people, and Christ has purchased holiness
for his people, but it is only the spirit that is the efficient cause or worker
of holiness in his people; though the Father, Son, and Spirit has designed to
re-imprint holiness upon man's heart, yet the spirit has the greatest hand in
that work. When man was in his primitive glory, holiness was his loveliness and
his likeness to God, but being now fallen, that image is so broken and marred,
that no hand can repair it or restore it, but the hand of the spirit. The
great principle of holiness which was in Christ (as to his humane nature) was
the holy Spirit which he had above measure, for he was anointed with the
Unction of the Spirit above his fellows. So that look which way you will, the
Spirit still appears to be the great principle of holiness; holiness is the
very picture of God, and certainly no hand can carve that excellent picture but
the spirit of God; Holiness is the divine nature, and none can impart that to
man but the Spirit. A man never comes to see his sins, nor to be sick of his
sins, nor to loath his sins, nor to arraign his sins, nor to condemn his sins,
nor to judge himself for his sins (evangelically) till he comes to be possessed
of the holy Spirit. A man never comes to spit out the sweet morsels of sin, he
never come to make a sacrifice of his only Isaac, and to cut his delicate Agag
in pieces, and to strangle his Dalilah, and in good earnest to set upon an
utter exterpation of those sins that his constitution, inclination, custom,
calling, and interest does most incline him to, till a spirit of holiness comes
upon him; till this holy Spirit which is a spirit of judgment and burning,
falls upon the hearts of sinners, they will never be fired out of their pride,
formality, carnality, sensuality and security; when this holy Spirit comes as a
Spirit of Glory and Power to change thy heart, to destroy thy sins, to reform
thy ways, and to save thy soul, etc. Oh then cry out, let him still go on
conquering and to conquer, till all his enemies ate made his footstool. Oh let
him cut off every right hand, and pluck out every right eye, etc. that does
offend; O let him do justice upon every sin, upon every open sin, upon every
secret sin, upon every bosom sin, upon every pleasing sin, and upon every
gainful sin; Oh set your selves under the Celestial influences and sweet
distillings of the holy Spirit; Oh prize his motions, Oh welcome his motions,
Oh comply with his motions, Oh follow his motions, that so you may be holy and
happy for ever. When David asked counsel of God, whether he should go up
against the Philistines or no, he received this answer, When thou hear the
noise of one going in the top of the Mulbery-trees, 2 Samuel 5.24.
then remove, for then shall the Lord go out before thee to smite the
Philistines. So should every one wisely observe, when the Spirit sweetly and
strongly moves them to mind holiness, to fall in love with holiness, to press
after holiness; when the spirit moves them to leave off their sins, to turn to
God, to open to Christ, to tremble at threatenings, and to embrace promises; Oh
make much of these holy motions, Oh cherish these divine breathings, Oh don't
quench these heavenly sparks, least the Spirit never move thee more, nor never
strive with thee more, Genesis 6.3. Oh when thou hear a voice within thee, or a
voice behind thee, saying, Come with me from Lebanon, my sister, Isa. 30.21.
Cant. 4.8.
my spouse, etc. Come away from thy cups, thou drunken wretch; come away from
thy wanton Dalilahs, thou unclean wretch; come away from thy sinful pleasures,
thou voluptious wretch; come away from thy baggs, thou worldly wretch; come
away from thy honors, thou ambitious wretch; and come away from thy fraud, thou
cheating wretch: Oh hearken to this voice, Oh obey this voice that it may go
well with thy soul for ever; if now thou strikest whilst the iron is hot; if
now thou hoistest up sail whilst the wine is fair, thou may be made for ever.
In that 5 Joh. 4. there were certain times when the Angel came down and
troubled the waters, and whosoever did then step in, was healed of whatsoever
disease he had: So there are certain times and seasons wherein the Spirit of
holiness stirs the heart and affections, and moves and breaths upon the soul;
now if men were wise to observe these times and seasons, they might be happy
for ever; the time of the spirits moving is the acceptable time, if you observe
it you are made, if you neglect it you are marred; all the movings and motions
of the spirit are in order to an eternity of felicity and glory: Oh therefore
don't grieve the Spirit, don't cross the Spirit, don't vex the Spirit, don't
tempt the Spirit, Spiritus sanctus est res delicata.
don't quench the Spirit, don't oppose the Spirit, don't resist the Spirit,
don't deal harshly or unkindly with the Spirit, by sinning against
illumination, conviction, resolutions and promises of reformation: Oh be more
tender of the gracious motions of the Spirit, then thou art of thy name, thy
estate, thy liberty, thy life; for he designs thy internal good in this world,
and thy eternal good in the other world; and therefore don't affront him, nor
carry it unworthily toward him, if thou should, it may be as much as thy
life and thy soul is worth; if a man slip the opportunity of a favorable gale,
he may lie wind-bound till all be spent: when the Spirit moves salvation, and
all the glory of heaven stands waiting at thy door, if now thou will but open,
the King of glory will enter in, and bless thee for ever. Saul by neglecting
his opportunity lost an earthly kingdom; take heed least thou by slighting the
motions of the Spirit, come to loose a heavenly kingdom; the letting slip one
season when the Spirit moves may undo a man in both worlds, and some think
Felix found it so. Well sirs, as ever you would be holy, you must labor for a
Spirit of holiness; and for your encouragement remember this, that though the
holy Spirit be the great Jewel of Glory, yet God is more ready to give it then
you are to ask it, witness that 11. of Luke from the 9. to the 14. verse. But,

Thirdly, If ever you would be holy, then you must wait upon the word; the
word of God faithfully preached, is the ordinary means by which holiness is
wrought in sinners hearts; the word is that triumphant Chariot of the Spirit,
wherein he rides conquering and to conquer the souls of men; the holy word is
designed by God to beget holiness in sinners hearts, and to countenance,
cherish, nourish, and strengthen holiness where it is begotten; John 17.17.
Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth. And for their sakes, etc.
I sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified through the truth,
ver. 19. So Chap. 15.3. Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken
to you. The ordinary way of making unclean souls clean, unholy souls holy, is
the Ministry of the word; Phil. 5.26. As there is a cleansing virtue in the
blood of Christ, 1 John 1.7. so there is a cleansing virtue in the word of
Christ; Psalm. 119.9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking
heed thereto according to thy word. Of all men, the young man is (usually) most
wild and wicked, most licentious and rebellious, and yet the word of God is the
power of God to his conviction and conversion, to his sanctification and
salvation; though the cleansing of a young man's heart be one of the hardest
works in the world, yet this may be done by the word: There are no lusts so
strong, but the word can cast them down, nor no stains so deep, but the word
can wash them out. Three thousand sinners were made Saints by one Sermon, Acts
2.41. and five thousand more were converted and sanctified by another Sermon,
Chap. 4.4. Here were eight thousand men cleansed, sanctified, and saved by two
Sermons, and doubtless most of them were young. Oh Sirs, as ever you would have
holy principles laid in your souls, and holy affections raised in your souls,
and holy ends aimed at by your souls, hear the word in season and out of
season, oh attend it, oh wait on it, 'twill be soap to cleanse you, and fire
to purge you, and water to wash you, and a wind to turn you from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to Jesus Christ, Acts 26.16, -- 24. The
Gospel preached has been the power of God to the salvation of multitudes of
souls, Romans 1.16. The word is that immortal seed, by which holiness, which is
not only a grace, but the conjunction of all graces, is formed in the soul, 1
Pet. 1.23. It Is the word that gives a spiritual Birth and Being to men, Gal.
4.19. The word enlightens the eye, Psalm. 119.105. It softens the heart, Deuteronomy.
32.2. It purges the conscience, and it converts the soul, Psalm. 19.7. It
dethrones Satan, it casts down strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. It quickens the
dull, Psalm. 119.50. and it raises the dead, Joh. 5.24, 25. Oh therefore hear
it, and wait on it, and come to it, that you may be made holy by it; many come
to hear the word to censure it, others to mock at it, others to enrich their
curious notions by it, and others come to catch the Minister at it; but do
thou come to it that thou may be made holy by it, and doubtless first or
last thou shall obtain thy end; yea it is good for a man to come to the word,
though his design in coming be bad; it is good for a man to sit under that
great ordinance of the word, though he sits upon thorns, as it were, all the
while he is there: They that come to see who has got the newest fashions, may
have their hearts fashioned into a conformity with the word. They came to
catch, but were caught in that John 7.46. Austin coming to Ambrose to have his
ears tickled, had his heart touched and turned. Come, says old Father Latimer
(in a Sermon before King Edward the Sixth) to the public meeting, 1550.
though thou come to sleep, it may be God may take thee napping. When thou
come, though it be but to taste the Ministers spirit, yet then God may take
hold on thy spirit, and make it the day of his power upon thy soul; though
thou come with a heart full of prejudices against Christ, yet by the word
thou may be brought to a love of Christ, to a liking of Christ, and to a
choice of Christ, and to a blessed close and resignation of thy self to
Christ. They that came to surprise Christ, were so taken with Christ, that
being filled with admiration they could not but proclaim his divine
Excellencies; Never man spoke like this man. The word is the word of the Lord,
let the hand be what it will that brings it. When gold is offered, men care not
how noble or ignoble, how great or how base he is that offers it; so men should
not look so much at the hand that brings the word, as at the word it self; the
word of the Lord was as much the word of the Lord, in the hand and mouth of
Amos, who was raised a Prophet from amongst the Heardsmen of Tekoa, as it was
the word of the Lord in the hand and mouth of Isaiah, who, as some think, was a
Prophet of the blood-royall. Ambrose observes of the Woman of Samaria, John
4.7. that she came peccatrix to Jacobs Well, but she went away praedicatrix,
she came a sinner, but she went away a Prophetess. Oh Sirs, let nothing hinder
you from coming to the word! oh come to the word; though you come sinners, yet
come, for though you do come sinners, yet you may go away Saints; though the
dew of heaven has richly and sweetly fallen upon your hearts, and yet, like
Gideons sleece, you are still dry, yet come to the word still, for who can tell
but that by the very next Sermon, God may make thy soul like a watered garden,
and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not, Isa. 58.11. It is reported
of young King Edward the Sixth, Sir John Hayward in vita.
that being about to lay hold on some thing that was above the reach of his
short Arm, one that stood by espying a great Boss'd Bible lying on the Table,
offered to lay that under his feet to heighten him, but the good young King
disliked the motion, and instead of treading it under his feet, he laid it to
his heart: oh come to the word, but come not to trample upon it, come not to
scoff or mock at it, come not to despise it, or to revile it, but come and lay
it to your hearts, and it may do you good for ever; there is no better way to
make thee holy, then to attend on the holy word. But

Fourthly, If ever you would be holy, then associate your Prove. 13.20.
so he that walks with the holy shall certainly be pressed and provoked to be
holy: As Socrates made it his business to better others by his company, so a
holy man will make it his business to make others holy by his counsel,
prayers, and example; he knows that it is one of the most noble and divine
employments in the world to make others holy, and therefore he sets upon that
work with all his might: Psalm. 119.115. Psalm. 1.1.
Look as there is no greater a hinderance to holiness, then the society of the
wicked, so there is no greater a help to holiness, then the society of those
that are godly: Look as the beginning of ungodliness is to keep Company with
those that are ungodly, so the beginning of holiness is to keep company with
those that are holy: Look as one drunkard makes another, and one swearer makes
another, and one proud person makes another, and one worldling makes another,
and one formalist makes another, so one holy man makes another; or look as one
sober man makes another, and one prudent man makes another, and one resolute
man makes another, and one zealous man makes another, and one heavenly minded
man makes another, so one holy man makes another. Ah sinners, sinners, there
are no companions in the world that will pity you as these, that will weep and
mourn over you as these, Romans 10.1. 1 Pet. 3.1.
that will strive and wrestle with God for you as these, there are none that
will be so tender of your salvation as these, nor none that will labor so much
for your conversion as these, nor none that will so spend themselves to prevent
your damnation as these, 2 Cor. 12.15. Oh Sirs, upon trial you will find that
there are none so able to counsel you, nor none so faithful to reprove you,
nor none so ready to help you, nor none so compassionate to simpathize with
you, nor none so strong to support you, nor none so advantaged to convert you,
as those that are holy; and why then will you not labor to be one of this
society? Oh Sirs, of all fellowships the fellowship of Saints is the most
noble, the most honorable, the most pleasant, the most amiable, the most
desirable, the most profitable, and the most commendable fellowship; and why
then will you still live strangers, yea enemies to this fellow^hip? Ah Sirs,
holy men will still be awakening and alarming of your drowsy spirits, they
will be still a knocking at the door of your hearts, and asking of you,
whether it be good going to hell; they will still be enquiring of you, what
provision you have made for another world, and how all things stands within;
they will still be jogging at your elbowes, that you may not dye in your sins,
and they will still be whispering in your ear, that your souls may live for
ever. The Jews have a Proverb, That two dry sticks put to a green one, will
kindle it. Oh there is nothing in all the world, that contributes so much to
the kindling, to the firing, and to the inflaming of men's hearts after
holiness, as the society of those that are holy. Algerius (an Italian Martyr)
had rather be in prison with Cato, then to live with Caesar in the
Senate House. Oh it is ten thousand times better to live with those that are
holy, though in a dark prison, then to live amongst those that are unholy,
though in a Royal Palace. Vrbanus Regius, Adam in vita Regii. p. 78.
having one days converse with Luther, tells us, that it was one of the
sweetest days that ever he had in all his life. Oh sinners, did you but
experience for one day the sweet and happiness of the communion of Saints,
you would then cry out, Oh there is no society to the society of Gods holy
ones. And therefore as ever you would be holy, let holy men have more
heart-roome and house-roome with you. But

Fifthly, If ever you would be holy, then dwell much upon David by an oath
bound himself to keep Gods righteous judgments, Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn
and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments, (a religious
vow is nothing else but a solemn promise or oath, whereby a man engages
himself to the great God, that he will decline such ways, means, and methods,
as lead to wickedness, and that he will set in good earnest upon the practice
of all the ways and means of holiness, by the strength and assistance of
divine grace) so you have by many vows and promises engaged your selves to
cast off the works of darkness, Romans 13.12.
and to put on the Armor of light, suitable to the Apostles exhortation. And as
the people in Nehemiah's time did enter into a curse and an oath to walk in
Gods Law, and to observe and do all his Commandments, Neh. 10.29. So you have
in the times of your outward and inward distresses vowed to the Lord, that you
would observe all his Statutes, and walk in all his holy ways, and do all
his righteous Commandments. Job 31.1, 2.
Job once made a covenant with his eyes, that he would not lustfully look upon
a maid; but how often have you made a covenant with your thoughts, that you
would not think of vanity, and with your eyes, that you would not behold
vanity, and with your ears, that you would not hear vanity, and with your
tongues, that you would not speak vanity, and with your hearts, that you would
not contrive vanity, and with your hands, that you would not act vanity; now
your vows and your covenants are upon you, Prove. 2.17.
oh that you would not with the strange woman in the Proverbs, forget the
covenant of your God; oh it is better ten thousand times not to vow, Eccl. 5.5.
then to vow and not to pay: God can take no pleasure in such as are off and on
with him, nor in such who are forward to vow, but make no conscience to pay
their vows; these are fools in folio, and therefore God cannot but detest
them, and turn his back upon them. If good Jacob who is called the father of
vows, was so backward to pay his vows, that God was forced, not only to round
him in the ear again and again, with a go up to Bethel, and there build me
a Chapel, but also severcly to punish his delays, both in the rape of his
daughter, and in the cruelty of his sons, etc. Genesis 35. Ah how severely then
may God deal with such, who do not only delay the paying of their vows, but
who live also in the daily breach of their vows. Most men have need of that
counsel which the Bishop of Colen gave Sigismund the Emperor, that ask't him
what he should do to be happy; Live (said he) as you promised and vowed to do
when you were last sick of the Stone and Gout. Ah that all men would make more
conscience of living out, and of living up to the covenants, vows, and
promises, that they have made to God in the days when the hand of the Lord has
gone out many ways against them, and when terrors of conscience have been
strong upon them, O what repentance, O what reformation, O what amendment have
they promised in those days, and yet no sooner have these outward and inward
storms been over, but they have been as vain, and loose, and base as ever. In
the time of the great Sweat in King Edwards days, as long as the heat of the
plague lasted, O how did every one cry out, peccavi, peccavi, I have sinned, I
have sinned, mercy Lord, O mercy, mercy good Lord. Then Lords and Ladies, and
people of all sorts, cried out to the Ministers, for the Lords sake, Sirs, tell
us what shall we do to avoid the wrath of the Lord? what shall we do to be
safe in this evil day? O take these bags and pay so much to such a one whom I
have deceived, and restore so much to such a one whom I have in bargaining
overreached, O give so much to the poor, and so much to other pious uses,
etc. But after the sickness was over, they returned with the dog to the vomit,
and with the sow to the wallowing in the mire again; and so their latter end
was worse then their former. There was a very great sinner, who in the time of
his sickness was so sorely terrified in his conscience for his many heinous
sins, that he made the very bed to shake upon which he lay, and cried out all
night long, I am damned, I am damned, I am damned, etc. and in this his
sickness he made many great protestations of amendment of life, if God would
but be pleased to recover him, and prevent his going down to the grave at this
time; Well, in a short time after, he did recover, and being recovered he was
as base, wretched and wicked, as ever he was before: This man with those that
were cited before him, were like that cunning Devil, of whom the Epigrammatist
thus writes; Aegrota Demon, Monachus tunc esse volebat,
Convaluit Demon, Monachus tunc esse nolebat


Which is thus Englished; The Devil was sick, the Devil a Monk would be;
The Devil was well, the Devil a Monk was he.


But those who are now like to Satan in sin, may hereafter be like to him in
torment; such who now outlive their vows, shall when they dye have hell
enough. You count it a very shameful thing to break promise or covenant with
men, but is it not far more shameful to break with God? The Egyptians
(though Heathens) so hated perjury, that if any man did but swear by the life
of the King, and did not perform his oath, that man was to dye, and no gold
was to redeem his life. As Paulus Fagius observes in his Comment on Genesis,
etc.
When the Romans made Covenants, they took Stones in their hands and said, If I
make this Covenant seriously and faithfully, then let the great Jupiter bless
me, if not, so let me be cast away from the face of the gods as I cast away
this Stone. Covenant Breaking was a sin greatly detested and abhorred among the
very Heathens, and shall Christians make nothing of breaking their vows,
promises, and covenants with the great God. Well Sirs, remember this, those
sins that you have vowed against, must be deserted, and that holiness which you
have vowed to follow, must be pursued, or a worse thing then the curse of Meroz
must be expected, Judge. 5.23. compared with that, Joh. 5.14. But

Math: 16.26. Christ left his Fathers bosom, and all the glory of heaven for
the good of souls, he assumed the nature of man for the happiness of the soul
of man, be trod the wine press of his Fathers wrath for souls, he wept for
souls, he sweat for souls, he prayed for souls, he paid for souls, and he bled
out his heart-blood for souls. The soul is the breath of God, the beauty of
man, the wonder of Angels, and the envy of Devils, it is of an Angelical
nature, it is a heavenly spark, a celestial plant, and of a divine offspring,
it is a spiritual substance, capable of the knowledge of God, and of union with
God, and of communion with God, and of an eternal fruition of God; there is
nothing that can suit the soul below God, nor nothing that can satisfy the
soul without God; the soul is so high and so noble a piece, that it scorns
all the world in point of acceptance, justification, satisfaction, and
salvation. What are all the riches of the East or West Indies? what are rocks
of Diamonds, or mountains of gold, or the price of Cleopatra's draught, to the
price that Christ laid down for souls? 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Christ made himself an
offering for sin, that souls might not be undone by sin, the Lord dyed that
slaves may live, the Son dies that servants may live, the natural Son dies
that adopted sons may live, the only begotten Son dies that bastards may live,
yea the Judge dies that malefactors may live. Ah friends, as there was never
sorrow like Christ's sorrow, so there was never love like Christ's love, and of
all his love none to that of soule-love. In a word, the spiritual enemies
which daily war against the soul, the glorious Angels which hourly guard
the soul, and the precious ordinances which God has appointed as means, both
to convert and to feed the soul, do all speak out the preciousness and
excellency of the soul. There was once a great contest among some Nations
about Homer (an excellent Poet) they severally pleaded their interest in him;
and truly so it is this day about the soul of man, many lay claim to it, sin
lays claim to it, and the world lays claim to it, and Satan lays claim to
it, and Christ and holiness lays claim to it, and O that Christ and holiness
might have it before all others. O Sirs, there is no wisdom nor policy to that
of securing our precious souls, for they are Jewels of more worth then all the
world; all the honors, riches, greatness, and glory of this world, are but
chips and pibbles to these glorious pearls; therefore before all and above all
other things, make sure work for your souls, if they are safe all is safe, but
if they are lost all is lost: Other things cannot be made sure, riches cannot,
for as they are lying, so they are flying vanities, they make themselves wings,
and they fly away; Honors cannot, Haman is feasted with the King one day, and
made a feast for Crows the next; Herod is one hour cried up for a God, and
the next hour he is eaten of worms; Princes Courts are very slippery, a man
may quickly get a fall there, that may easily break both back and neck, as many
in all ages have experienced; the applause and favor of creatures cannot, for
many men's favors are got with an Apple, and lost with a Nut; Math. 27.4, 5.
Judas his heart was hardly warmed with the high Priests favor, before they
shut their doors upon him, with a what is that to us? look thou to that; most
men's favors are as light as a feather, and so tos't up and down with every
breath of windy vanity; the Moon does not so often vary and change, as the
respects of most men do vary and change; how many men have had their names
written in golden Characters one year, and in letters of blood the next? what
is the favor of man, but a blast, a Sun-shine-houre, a puff of wind, a magnum
nihil, a great nothing? and who then would spend an hours time to secure it?
near and dear relations cannot, for the delight of Ezekiels eyes is taken
away with a stroke; Ezekiel. 24.16. Job 1.10.
and all Jobs children are snatched away in a day; all our nearest and dearest
relations are like a Nose-gay, which the oftener we smell to it, the sooner it
withers. But now holiness may be made sure, witness the spirits of just men
made perfect in heaven, Heb. 12.23. and witness the many thousands of
Christians this day in the world, who do experience the principles of holiness
in their hearts, and who do evidence the power of holiness in their lives. O
Sirs, if the serious consideration of the preciousness and worth of your souls,
will not draw you out to study holiness, to love holiness, to prize holiness,
and to press after holiness, what will? O Sirs, it is only holiness that is the
happiness of the soul, the safety and security of the soul, the prosperity and
felicity of the soul, and the luster and glory of the soul; and therefore why
should you not labor, as for life, after this inestimable Jewel holiness? O
let the remembrance of the preciousness of your souls, be an effectual means
to draw you to hear that you may be holy, and to pray that you may be holy,
and to read that you may be holy, and to mourn that you may be holy, and to
sigh and groan after holiness, as after that which is the souls only
happiness. O Sirs, there is nothing below heaven so precious and noble as your
souls, and therefore do not play the Courtier with your souls; now the
Courtier does all things late, he rises late, and dines late, and sups late,
and repents late; O do not poison your precious souls by gross enormities, O
do not starve your souls by the omission of religious duties, O do not
murder and damn your souls, by turning your backs upon holy Ordinances. I
have read of a Woman, who when her house was on fire, so minded the saving of
her goods, that she forgot her only child, and left it burning in the fire; at
last being minded of it, she cries out, Oh my child, oh my poor child, but
all too late, all too late; so there are many men now so mad upon the world,
and so bewitched with the world, that they never mind, they never regard their
poor souls, till they come to fall under everlasting burnings, and then they
cry out, O our souls, O our poor souls, O that we had been wise for our souls,
O that we had got holiness for our souls, O that we had made sure work for our
souls, but all too late, all too late; the Lord make you wise to prevent
soul-burnings at last. If he be rather a monster then a man, that feasts his
slave, but starves his wife, what shall we say of those that pamper their
bodies but starve their souls, and that have threadbare souls under silk and
satin Clothes, and that please themselves with deformed souls under beautiful
faces? surely it had been good for these that they had never been born. I have
read of a Scythian Captain, who having for a draught of water yielded up the
City, cried out, Quid perdidi? quid prodidi? What have I lost? what have I
betrayed? So all unholy persons will at last cry out, we have betrayed our
immortal souls, we have lost a precious Father, we have lost a dear Redeemer,
we have lost the company of glorious Angels, we have lost the society of the
spirits of just men made perfect, and we have lost all the pleasures and joys
and delights that be at the right hand of the most High; We have lost these, we
have lost all these, and we have lost them for ever and ever; surely there is
no hell to this hell. For a close of this direction, remember this, that as the
soul is the life and excellency of the body, so holiness is the life and
excellency of the soul, and as the body without the soul is dead, so the soul
without holiness is dead; This my Son was dead, and is alive: if you get
holiness into your souls, your souls shall live for ever, but if you die
without holiness, your souls shall die for ever and ever. I have read, that
there was a time when the Romans did wear Jewels on their shoes; oh that in
these days most men did not do worse, oh that they did not trample under
feet that matchless Jewel their precisouls. But

Seventhly, If ever you would be holy, then set in good earnest Luther com. in
Genesis cap. 19.
The Bible is the book of books, it is the only book, all other books in the
world are but waste paper to it: Augustine cries out, away with our writings,
that room may be made for the book of God: notwithstanding the greatness and
multiplicity of the affairs of Princes, yet they were diligently to read the
word, Deuteronomy. 17.19. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the
days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the
words of this Law and these Statutes, to do them. God looks that the greatest
Princes on earth should make use of this Library. Though David was a great
Prince, and had a multitude of weighty businesses upon his hand, yet he was so
much in reading and meditating on the word, that he made it his Counselors;
the word was David's Learned Counsel, Psalm. 119.24.
to which he reforted for counsel, advice, and comfort in all his necessities
and miseries. Alphonsus King of Arragon has been highly extolled for reading
the Scriptures fourteen times over, with glosses and expositions,
notwithstanding his great public employments. And Alphonsus King of Naples
read over the Bible forty times, notwithstanding many great affairs were upon
his hand. Theodosius the Emperor, and Constantine the Great, were much taken up
in reading of the Scriptures. So Queen Elizabeth, when she passed in triumph
through the streets of London after her Coronation, and had the Bible presented
to her at the little Conduit in Cheap Side, she received the same with both her
hands, and kissing it, Speeds Hist.
laid it to her breasts, saying, That the same had ever been her chiefest
delight, and should be the rule whereby she meant to frame her Government. And
it is very observable, that the Eunuch was reading the Scripture, when Philip
was commanded, Acts 8.26.40.
by Commission from the Holy Ghost, to join himself to his Chariot, and to
instruct him in the knowledge of Christ, which proved his conversion and
salvation. And Junius was converted by the reading of that first of John, In
the beginning was the Word, etc. being amazed with the strange majesty of the
style, Lib. 8. conf. cap. 12.
and the profound mysteries therein contained. And Augustine was strangely
converted by hearing a voice from heaven, saying, Toll lege, Toll lege, Take
and read, take and read; and taking up the Bible, the first passage of
Scripture that he cast his eyes upon, was that Romans 13.13, 14. Let us walk
honestly as in the day, not in gluttony and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, not in strife and envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: and no sooner
had he read the verses, but the work of conversion was finished, and pious
resolutions for a through reformation of life was settled in him. The Gospel
read is sometimes the power of God to salvation, as well as the Gospel heard,
Romans 1.16. Cyprian confesses that he was converted from Idolatry and
Negromancy by hearing the history of the Prophet Jonas read and expounded by
Cecilius, whom therefore he calls the father of his new life: And Luther
confesses that he was converted by reading. I have read of a scandalous
Minister that was struck at the heart and converted in reading that Romans 2.21,
22. Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not thy self? thou
that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that say a man
should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? thou that abhorrest
Idols, do thou commit sacrilege? There is a Scholar now alive, who being
persuaded by an honest poor man, to leave reading of Poetry, and to fall upon
reading of the Bible, did so, and before he had read out Genesis, his heart was
changed, and he was converted. O sirs, as you tender your conversion, your
salvation, make more conscience of reading the Scripture then ever you have
done; be often in wheting of these Scriptures upon your hearts, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7,
8, 9. chapter 31.11, 12. Jer. 36.6, 7. John 5.39. In these Scriptures God requires
all sorts of people, both men, women, children, and strangers, both learned and
unlearned, to read the Scriptures, and to search after the heavenly treasures
that are laid up in them, as men search for Gold and silver in the Oar. And
Paul charges Timothy that he gives attendance to reading; And blessed is he,
says John, 1 Timothy 4.13. Rev. 1.3.
that hears and reads the words of this Book. Yea Christ himself has
highly honored reading with his own example, for coming to Nazareth, as his
custom was, he stood up to read the Scriptures; Luke 4.16.21.
and the Bereans for reading and searching of the Scriptures are styled more
noble then the Jews of Thessalonica, or as the Greek has it, Acts 17.11. (...).
they were better born and bred, they were better Gentlemen, they were of a
more noble and ingenious disposition (though they did belong to the Country
Town of Barea) then the Thessalonians were who dwelt in the rich and stately
City of Thessalonica: sometimes there is more true nobility and ingenuity under
a Russet coat, then there is under a Satin suit. The Holy Ghost gives a very
large Encomium and high commendation of the Scriptures, in that 2 Timothy 3.15.
And that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. It Is
observable that in these words you have not simply (...) Holy Scriptures, but
(...) the Holy Scriptures; the Article (...) there is very emphatical, and it is
used by the Holy Ghost to distinguish these sacred writings from all profane
writings, and to note the eminency and excellency of the holy Scriptures above
all other men's writings what^oever. Now the Scriptures have this adjunct, this
Epithet, Holy, given them in five respects.

1. In respect of their Author and original, viz. a Holy God.

2. They are holy in respect of the Penmen, who were holy men of God, 2 Pet.
1.21.

3. They are holy in respect of their matter, they treat of the holy things of
God, a vein of holiness runs through every line of Scripture; the Scripture
calls for holy hearts, and holy lives it calls for holy principles, and holy
practices, holy words, and holy works, holy affections, and holy conversations,
1 Pet. 1.15.

4. They are holy in respect of their effects and operations, they are a means
to effect and work holiness, and they are a means to complete and perfect
holiness, Joh. 17.17. The word is not only a pure word, but also a purifying
word, it is not only a clean word, but also a cleansing word, Psalm. 19.8, 9.

5. They are called holy by way of distinction, and in opposition, not only to
all humane and profane writings, but also to the writings of the best and
choicest men that ever wrote, for they have had their failings, weaknesses and
infirmities, and therefore must have their many grains of allowance, but the
holy Scripture is most perfect and complete. Now sirs, if ever you would be
holy, it stands you upon to make more conscience of reading the holy Scriptures
then ever yet you have done; many a man has been made holy by reading the holy
Scriptures; and why may not thou also be made holy by reading of the same
holy word? Certainly all the Angels in heaven, and all the men on earth cannot
tell to the contrary, but that thou may be made holy even by reading of the
holy word, the Holy Ghost is a free Agent, and he can as well work holiness in
thy heart by reading, as by hearing, and therefore set thy self about this
noble and necessary work. Ah friends, the Scriptures are Gods Epistle, they are
Gods love-letter to the sons of men, and why then will you not read them? Count
Anhalt (that princely preacher) was wont to say that the Scriptures were
Christ's swaddling bands, the child Jesus being to be found almost in every page,
in every verse, and in every line; Oh who would not therefore be often in
looking upon and in handling of these swaddling bands? O sirs, there are no
histories that are comparable to the histories of the Scripture.

First, For Antiquity; Moses is found more ancient then all Grecians make most
ancient, as Homer, Hesiod, and Jupiter himself, whom the Greeks have seated in
the top of their divinity.

Secondly, For rarity.

Thirdly, For brevity; here you have much wrapped up in a little Homers Iliads
comprised in a Nut-shell.

Fourthly, For perspicuity; the foundations of Religion and happiness are so
plain and clear, that every one may run and Augustine (Inclinavis Deus
Scripturas, ad infantium and lactentium capacitatem,) That God has bowed down
the Scriptures to the capacities even of Babes and Sucklings.

Fifthly, For harmony; though there may seem to be a contrariety

Sixthly, For verity; the Scriptures are most sure and certain,

Seventhly, For variety; there are no varieties to those that Noah's Ark all
sorts of creatures were to be found, so in this heavenly Ark, the Scriptures,
all varieties are to be found; here you may find Physic for every disease,
and Balm for every wound, and a plaster for every sore; Here the Lamb may
wade, and here the Elephant may swim; here is milk for Babes, and here is meat
for strong men; here is comfort for the afflicted, and succor for the tempted,
and support for the distressed, and ease for the wearied; here is a staff to
support the feeble, and a sword to defend the mighty. That which a Papist
reports lyingly of their Sacraments, of the Mass, viz. That there are as many
mysteries in it, as there are drops in the sea, dust on the earth, Angels in
heaven, Stars in the sky, Atoms in the Sunbeams, or sands on the Sea shore,
etc. may be truly asserted of the holy Scriptures; there are many thousand
thousand varieties in this garden of Paradise, the Scripture.

Tertullian, Adoro plenitudinem scripturarum, I adore the fullness of the
Scripture. Many men talk much of the Philosophers Stone, that it turns Copper
into Gold, and of Cornucopia, that it had all things necessary for food in it,
and of the Herb Panaces, that it was good for all diseases, and of the Drugg
Catholicon, that it is instead of all purges, and of Vulcans armor, that it was
full proof against all thrusts and blows; but that which they vainly attribute
to these things for bodily good, may safely and honorably be attributed to the
blessed Scriptures in a spiritual manner; the Scriptures turns hearts of Copper
into hearts of Gold; it is a Paradise that is full of the Trees of life, Rev.
22.2.
and these trees of life are both for food and Physic; here is all manner of
fruit to feed you and fill you, to delight you and satisfy you, and the very
leaves of these Trees are singular medicines to heal you and cure you; the
Scripture prescribes the choicest druggs to purge you, viz. Repentance, and the
blood of Christ; and it is the Scripture that furnishes you with the best armor
of proof against all principalities and powers, and against all spiritual
wickednesses in high places. Ephesians. 6.11.18.
Oh how should the consideration of all these things, work you to be much in
reading of the holy Scriptures? if you will but make trial, you should be sure
to find in them stories more true, more various, more pleasant, more
profitable, and more comfortable then any you will find in all ancient or
modern writers. Ah friends, if you would but in good earnest set upon reading
of the holy Scriptures, you may find in them so many happinesses as cannot be
numbered, and so great happinesses as cannot be measured, and so copious
happinesses as cannot be defined, and such precious happinesses as cannot be
valued, and if all this wo^^t draw you to read the holy Scriptures
conscientiously and frequently, I know not what will.

It Is said of Mary, that she spent the third part of her time in reading of the
word; and Caecilia a Roman Maiden of noble parentage, carried always about her
the New Testament, and spent much time in reading it. Alfredus once King of
England, compiled Psalms and prayers into one book, and called it a Manuel,
which he always carried about him, and spent much time in the perusal of it.
Augustine Vide Pos. in vita Aug.
caused David's penitential Psalms to be drawn upon the walls of his Chamber,
that he might read them as he lay in his bed; he read and wep't, and wept and
read. Well if all this will not prevail with you to be much in reading of the
Scriptures, consider, that Agesilaus an excellent King of Sparta would never go
to bed, nor rise up before he had looked into Homer, whom he called Amasium
suum, his sweet heart; but what was Homers books to Gods Book, which is the
book of books, as Charles the great did signify when he crowned it with his
own crown. And Scipio Africanus was much commended, Plutarch. Moral.
for that he usually had in his hands the books of Xenophon: But, Oh how much
more commendable will it be for you to have always in your hands the book of
God? Alphonsus had always in his bosom the commentaries of Caesar, and he was
so much delighted with the history of Titus Livius, that he once commanded
certain Musicians that were very skilful in that Art, to depart his presence,
saying, he could read a more pleasant story out of Livius; Alas what are Livius
his stories to the blessed stories that be in the Bible? Oh sirs, if Lipsius
when he did but read Seneca, thought that he was even on the top of Olympus,
above mortality and humane things. And if Julius Scaliger thought twelve verses
in Lucan better then the German Empire; O then of what infinite worth and value
is the blessed Scripture! shall Heathens take such pleasure in reading of the
Works of Heathens, and shall not Christians take as much pleasure in reading of
the holy Scriptures, wherein there is so much of the Spirit, hand, and heart of
God? Shall they set so high a price upon the books of Heathens? and shall we so
slight and undervalue the books of God, as not to think it worth a opening
once a day; verily, I am afraid, I am afraid, that there are some among us,
that hardly open their Bibles once a week, and others that hardly open their
Bibles once a month, and not a few that hardly open their Bibles once a
quarter, etc. Certainly, as the rustiness of some men's gold, Jam. 5.1, 2, 3.
will be a witness against them in the great day of the Lord, so the mustiness
of some men's Bibles will be a witness against them in that great day.

Quest. But is it not lawful for a man to read other men's books, to read
other men's holy works, etc.

Answ. Doubtless it is lawful; and that,

etc.

etc.

John Hus confesses that the reading of Luthers works was the maine cause of
his conversion. And whilst Vergerius read Luthers books with an intent to
confute them, himself was converted by them. I doubt not but that there are
many now in heaven, and multitudes now on earth, that have been converted by
the books and writings of holy men; and therefore it cannot but be lawful to
read such books, etc.

Gods book that is indeed the book of Books. Lib. 20. cap. 4.
Josephus in his book of Antiquities, makes mention of one Cumanus, a Governor
of Judea, that though he were but a Heathen, and a wicked man, yet he caused a
Soldier to be beheaded for tearing a Copy of the book of Moses Law, which he
found at the sacking of a Town. And venerable in all Ages and among all
Nations, have been the books wherein the Laws either of their belief or polity
have been contained. As the Talmud among the Jews, and the Laws of the twelve
Tables among the Romans, and the Alcoran among the Turks, yea all Pagans have
highly valued the Laws of their Legislators, and shall not Christians much more
set an high esteem upon the holy Scriptures, which are the Map of Gods mercy
and man's misery, the touchstone of truth, the shop of remedies against all
maladies, the Hammer of vices, and the treasury of virtues, the displayer of
all sensual and worldly vanities, the Balance of equity, and the most perfect
Rule of all Justice and honesty. What Chrysostom said of old to his hearers,
viz. Get you Bibles, for they are your souls Physic; that I say to you all, oh
get you Bibles, for they are your souls Physic, your souls food, your souls
happiness. Ah friends, no book becomes your hands like the Bible; 'twas this
book that made David wiser then his Teachers; this is the book that makes the
best preachers, and this is the book that is the best preacher; This book, this
preacher will preach to you in your Shops, in your Chambers, in your Closets,
yea in your own bosoms; This book will preach to you at home and abroad,
'twill preach to you in all companies, whether they are good or bad, and 'twill
preach to you in all conditions, whether they are prosperous or afflictive; by
this book you shall be saved, or by this book you shall be damned; by this book
you must live, by this book you must die, and by this book you shall be judged
in the great day, John 12.48. Oh therefore love this book above all other
books, and prize this book above all other books, and buy this book before all
other books (in king Henry the Eighths time, and in Queen Mary's days,
Christians would have given Cart-loads of Hay and Corn, for a few Chapters in
the new Testament; and will not you part with three or four shillings to buy a
Bible, that may save your souls, that may make you holy here, and happy
hereafter?) and read this book before all other books, and study this book
more then all other books; for he that reads much and understands nothing, is
like him that hunts much and catches nothing. And let this suffice for this
7th direction.

Hosea 14.4.
Jacob wep't and prayed, and prayed and wep't, and in the close as a Prince he
prevailed with God; so many a sinner has wep't and prayed, and prayed and
wep't, and in the close as a Prince he has prevailed with God. Ah Sirs, it may
be that there are but a few weeks, nay a few days, peradventure but a few
hours, between your souls and eternity, between your souls and everlasting
burnings, between your souls and a devouring fire, between your souls and
damnation, and will you not then pray and mourn, and mourn and pray for that
holiness, without which there is no happiness, yea without which hell and
destruction will be for ever your portion. Oh take that blessed promise, Ezekiel.
36.25, 26, 27. and urge God with it; oh tell him that he has said, that he will
sprinkle clean water upon you, and that ye shall be clean from all your
filthiness, and that from all your Idols he will cleanse you, etc. Oh tell him,

give his holy Spirit to them that ask it, Luke 11.13.





Manasses, Mary Magdalen, Paul, the murderers of Christ, and those vile
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.6, 9, 10, 11.

deny it to them that seek it? surely if he has been found of them that sought
him not, he will not hide himself from them that seek him, Isa. 65.1, 2.

Sixthly, Tell him that thou had rather that he should deny

Seventhly, Tell him that thou did never read of any I will be thou clean,
Math. 8.2, 3. Christ does neither delay him nor deny him; the poor Leper could
no sooner desire to be clean, but Christ commands him to be clean, I will be
thou clean; his prayer was short and sweet, and his answer was sudden and
gracious.

Eighthly, Tell him that thou art unwilling to be miserable etc.

It is observable amongst the worst of men, the Turks, yea amongst the worst of
Turks, the Moors, that by their Law it is a just exception against any
witness, that he has not prayed six times every natural day, it being a usual
custom with them to pray for day before the day brake, and when it is day they
give thanks for day light, and at noone they give thanks to God that half the
day is past, and then at last they pray that they may have a good night after
their day: Ah sinners, sinners, shall not these Turks rise up one day in
Judgment against you that think not holiness worth a praying for.

Object. But the prayers of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord, Pro.
15.8. Chap. 28.9. and he casts their sacrifices as dung in their faces, Isa.
1.11. -- 16. Chapter 58.1. -- 7. their very prayers are sinful, and therefore they
were better neglect prayer till God shall work graciously and savingly upon
them, then to pray, and so to sin as often as they pray, etc. To this I answer.

Chron. 25.2. Amaziah did that which was perfect in the sight of the Lord (as
to the matter) but not with a perfect or sincere heart; he failed not in the
matter, but in the manner; he did not do that good he did from principles of
faith, love, etc. nor to a right end, divine glory; many unsanctified persons
may have the gift of prayer, that have not the spirit of prayer, Psalm. 78.36,
37. Pro. 1.27, 28. Isa. 58.1, 2, 3, 4.
nor the grace of prayer, Math. 7.21. Chapter 23.14. Now certainly where God gives
such a gift, he requires the use of it; the gift of prayer is from the Spirit,
as well as the grace of prayer; and who can tell but that upon the use of the
gift of prayer, the Spirit may give the grace of prayer; however, it is
dangerous to neglect a gift; the sloathfull servant was not cast into utter
darkness for rioting out his Talent, but for not improving of his Talent. Math.
25.30. That the prayers of a wicked man are not formally good, must be granted,
yea that they are abominable and ineffectual, cannot be denied; they are like
the precious stone Diacletes, which though it has many excellent Soveraignties
in it, yet it loses them all if it be put in a dead man's mouth; so prayer
though it has many virtues and excellencies in it, yet it loses them all,
when it is performed by a man that is spiritually dead, that is dead God-wards,
and Christ-wards, and heaven-wards, and holiness-wards; but if you consider the
matter of a wicked man's prayers, so they may be good, yea so good as that they
may prevail with a good God for much temporal good, as I shall show you before
I close up all my answers to this objection. But

one of them, he must choose the least, he must choose rather to sin in the
manner, in not doing of it so well as he should, then to fail in the matter,
and so quite neglect the duty it self; for this is most certain, when God
commands a duty absolutely to be done, it is a greater sin not to do it at
all, then to do it amiss, and the reason is evident, because our disobedience
is total in not doing at all, and but only partial in doing it otherwise then
we ought. As for a man wilfully and peremptorily to refuse to hear the word,
is a greater and a fouler fault, then to hear it with a forgetful or a
disobedient heart, there being more hope of the latter, then of the former; for
some that have come to catch, have been caught by the word, John 7.46. And
therefore come, says Latimer, to the word, though thou come to sleep, it
may be God may take thee napping. Joh. Sleidani. Comment.
When Mr Henry Sulphen was preacher at Breme, several Roman Catholics sent
their Chaplains to trap him in his words; but the power of God was so
wonderfully seen in his preaching, that the greatest part of them that came to
ensnare him were converted by him: It Is good to come to the word, though a man
comes with an ill intent; to come, though he should come with a purpose to
catch, for in so coming he may be caught, as Augustine was by Ambrose: without
doubt there is no disobedience to that which is total; partial disobedience is
no disobedience to that which is total; That wife that totally disobeys her
husband, and that child that totally disobeys the father, and that servant that
totally disobeys his Master, is much more to blame, and do much more provoke,
then those that are only partial in their disobedience, and so it is between
God and sinners, etc.

Thirdly, If there were any strength in this objection, it Prove. 21.4. The
plowings of the wicked is sin; not only the prayers of the wicked, but also the
plowings of the wicked are sin, not only the spiritual but also the natural and
civil actions of a wicked man are sin; and therefore according to their
arguing, a wicked man must not exercise himself in his calling, in his plowing
and sowing, etc. because that his civil actions are sinful as well as his
religious, and it is as impossible for him to please God in the one, as it is to
please him in the other; but surely all men that are in their wits, will either
sigh or laugh at such kind of reasonings. But

viz. their eating, drinking, and sleeping, etc. as it does against their
praying; 1 Cor. 10.31.
when a wicked man eats, he is to eat to divine glory, and when he drinks, he
is to drink to divine glory, and when he recreates himself, he is to recreate
himself to divine glory, and when he sleeps, he is to sleep to divine glory;
in all these natural and common actions, he is to make the glory of God his
supreme scope. Now there is not a wicked man on earth, that does or can eat o^
drink, etc. to divine glory, he does not nor cannot set up the glory of God as
the chief and ultimate end of his natural and common actions. Now who but
fools in folio will reason thus, wicked men are to eat and drink, etc. to
divine glory, but this they cannot do, Titus 1.15. and therefore wicked men
must neither eat nor drink, etc. But

etc. as it does against prayer, and who but such who are sadly left of God,
and woefully blinded by Satan, will be so wretched as to say, wicked men must
neither hear the word, nor read the word, nor meditate on the word, because
they cannot do these actions in faith, and whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
Romans 14. ult. But



Seventhly, Sinful omissions lead to sinful commissions, Adam, who fell in
paradise from the highest pinnacle of glory, to the lowest step of sin and
misery. Those Reprobates in that 25 Math. did not rob the Saints, but only
omitted the relieving of them, and this proved a damning to them: Rich Dives
did not rob the poor, but his not relieving of them was his ruin, Luke 16.
Moab and Ammon were banished the Sanctuary to the tenth Generation for a mere
omission, because they met not Gods Israel in the Wilderness with bread and
water, Deuteronomy. 23.3, 4, 6. Look as the omission of good diet breeds natural
diseases in the body, so does the omission of good duties breed spiritual
diseases in the soul; all ^^nful omissions make work for hell, or for the
Physician of souls: Oh man thou do not know what deadly sin, what deadly
temptation may follow upon a mere single omission. Origin going to comfort and
encourage a Martyr that was to suffer, was apprehended by the Officers, and
constrained either to offer to the Idols, or to have his body abused by a
Blackamore that was ready pressed for that service; being thus hard put to it, to
save his life he bowed to the Idols, but afterward when he came to himself,
he sadly bewailes his sin, and confesses that he went forth that morning
without making his prayers unto God, which sinful omission God did so severely
punish, by leaving of him to fall into so great a sin, which pierced his soul
through with many sorrows. I am apt to think that many a sin, many a snare, and
many a fall, might have been prevented, if such and such religious duties had
not been omitted; sinful omissions prepare the way to sinful commissions, and
both prepare the way to a fatal destruction. I believe many men had never been
so abominable vicious, if they had not first cast off religious duties; he that
lives in the neglect of prayer, tempts more Devils then one to beset his soul,
yea to destroy his soul, etc. But,

Eighthly, and lastly, there are several weighty arguments etc. Among the many
that may be brought forth, I shall only give you these fix.

Isa. 55.6, 7. Acts 8.21, 22, 23. Psalm. 65.2. 1 These. 5.17. Pray without
ceasing, is an indefinite injunction; and who art thou oh man, that dare to
prohibit what God commands? are not his commands oblieging? and may not
disobedience to the least of them, cost thee thy life, thy soul, thy all? Gods
commands are neither to be slighted, censured, nor neglected; woe to him that
looks upon great commands as little commands, and little commands as no
commands, Math. 23. Oh Sirs, it is a very dangerous thing to act or run
Counter-cross to Gods express command, it may cost a man dear, as you may see
in that sad Story, 1 Kings 13.24. The Heathens indeed would frequently run
cross to their gods commands, for when their gods commanded them to offer up a
man, they would offer up a Candle; and so Hercules when he was to offer up a
living man, he offered up a painted man: but does it become Christians to deal
thus with the great God, with the living God, with the God of gods, as the
Heathens did by their gods? surely no: Gods commands are not like unto the
commands of the Heathens that might be contradicted and changed, but they are
like to the commands of the Medes that cannot be reversed nor changed, they
must be Evangelically obeyed, or you will be eternally destroyed. Jer. 35.2, 5,
6, 7. Psalm. 103.20.
The Rechabites were very rigid observers of their fathers commands, and will
you make slight of Gods commands? and the Angels that excel in strength, do
his Commandments, and will you despise them? why should the peasant scorn
that work, in which the Prince himself is engaged? But,

Jonah 1.^. The Mariners cried every man to his god. That there is a God, and
that this God is to be called upon, are lessons that are taught in natures
School; Isa. 45.20. They pray to a god that cannot save; for any man to say, a
wicked man ought not to pray, is to say a wicked man ought not to worship God,
nor acknowledge him to be his maker; and who but such who are either blind or
mad, dare speak such language? Certainly they that live in the neglect of
prayer under the Gospel, sin against a double light, the light of nature, and
the light of the Gospel, and therefore they shall be double-damn'd; there is no
hell to these men's hell, who sin against a double light, etc. But,

Thirdly, The neglect of prayer is charged upon wicked Psalm. 14.2, 4. Psalm.
10.4. Jer. 10.21. Hosea 7.7. Zepha. 1.6. Now doubtless, if it were not a duty
for unregenerate persons to pray, it could never stand with the holiness,
justice, and righteousness of God, to charge the omission of prayer upon them
as a sin; but the omission of prayer is charged upon them as a sin, and
therefore without all peradventure it is their duty to pray. But,

Fourthly, Wicked and unregenerate persons are again and Psalm. 79.6. Pour out
thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the kingdoms
that have not called upon thy name. So Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy fury upon the
Heathen that know thee not, and upon the families that call not upon thy name.
Now certainly, if prayer were not a duty incumbent upon wicked men, they would
never be thus imprecated against for the omission of it; to imprecate that
vials, that full vials, that full vials of wrath and fury should be poured
forth (as water is poured forth) suddenly and plentifully upon those kingdoms
and families, that do not call upon the name of the Lord, is so dreadful a
thing, that it had never been mentioned in the Scripture, had it not been to
alarm the worst of men to the work of prayer. But,

Fifthly, If absolute promises or precious promises of special ergo, That such
promises are made over to poor sinners as sinners, is evident by comparing
these Scriptures together, Isa. 57. 17, 18, 19. These words drop nothing but
myrrh and mercy; if Ennius could pick gold out of a dunghill, oh what gold,
what comfort may be picked out of these golden promises? In these words, let us
consider two things; First, the precious promises that are here made; Secondly,
the persons to whom they are made. In the words you have four precious promises
of special grace and favor, they are as so many streams of grace flowing from
the covenant of grace.

ver. 18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him, or as you may read the
words, though I have seen his ways and courses, and well observed how
unworthily, how untowardly, and how obstinately he has carried it, yet I will
heal him, I will heal his backsliding nature; though his disease be
dangerous, though it be very dangerous, yet to an Almighty Physician, no
disease is uncurable; I will heal his inside by pardoning his sin and purging
his conscience, Psalm. 103.3. Jer. 3.22. Mala. 4.2.
and I will heal his outside, by removing of judgments and calamities from
him; and all this I will do upon the account of my promise and covenant, Hosea
14.4. Jer. 32.38. and 40.2. compared.

I will lead him also, or as the Hebrew has it, and I will lead him, I will
conduct him in safety to his own Country, so some sense it, but you may
understand it doubtless of a spiritual, as well as of a providential leading; I
will lead him by my word, and I will lead him by my Spirit, and I will lead him
by my counsel, suitable unto many precious promises of grace that are scattered
up and down in the Scripture.

I will restore comforts to him, not comfort, but comforts, that is, in the
room of all those discomforts, sorrows, calamities and miseries that he has
been exercised with, I will (says God) lay in abundance of comfort, yea I will
store him with all sorts of comforts, both temporal, spiritual, and eternal,
suitable to that word of grace that you have in Isa. 40.1, 2.

v. 19. I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace to him that is far off,
and to him that is near, says the Lord; the gemination of the word (Shalom,
Shalom) peace, peace, imports a large extent of peace, it notes true peace,
firm peace, sure peace, great peace, abundance of peace, yea constant and
lasting peace; under the name of peace in the Hebrew is denoted all manner of
prosperity, and the Geminating of the word always notes a large measure of
tranquillity, plenty, prosperity, and felicity. Oh sirs, peace with God, and
peace with conscience, and peace with the creatures, are all the products of
Gods creating power and grace, 2 Ephesians. 16.17, 18. and so must be referred to the
Covenant of Grace.

Secondly, Let us consider the persons to whom these precious

First, Their sin, and this you have in verse. 17. For the iniquity The sin that
is charged upon him is a very great and grievous, it is a very vile and heinous
sin, it is called not only covetousness, but the iniquity of his covetousness,
to show the height and transcendency of this their wickedness, for covetousness
is a Mother-sin, 2 Timothy 6.10.
it is a breeding sin, it is a sin that has all sin in the womb of it, it is a sin
not only against the light and law of grace, but also against the light and
law of nature, for it makes the soul terrene which should be celestial; and
therefore the Persians, though Heathens, have a law that no man ought to covet
what belongs to any other man; And they have another Law, that they ought not
to be worldly minded: No sin lays men under greater woes: Woe to him that
joyneth house to house; and woe to you Scribes, Pharisees and Hypocrites, Mat.
23: It Is an evil that subjects men to the basest and vilest evils, it is the
root of all evil, it makes a man a fool, Luke 12.20. Thou fool, this night thy
soul shall be taken from thee; It robes a man of all true peace, comfort,
content, and quiet; it brings men into snares which drowns their souls in
perdition; It renders men unsatisfied under all their outward enjoyments;
though a covetous wretch may have enough to sink him, yet he can never have
enough to satisfy him; first he wishes for a bagg full, and then a chest full,
and then a chamber full, and then a Church full, etc. The plague of
unsatisfiedness is none of the least of plagues that covetous men are under.
Certainly you shall as soon fill a triangle with a circle, and a chest with
grace, and the body with air, as you shall be able to fill and satisfy a
covetous mind with money: In a word, covetousness is a sin that renders a man
unserviceable in his generation; a covetous man is like a Swine, that is good
for nothing whilst he lives; the Horse is good to bare and carry, the Ox is
good to draw, the Sheep is good for cloth, the Cow is good to give milk, and
the Dog is good to keep the house, but the Hogg is good for nothing whilst he
lives; so a covetous man is neither good for Church nor State, he is no ways
serviceable in his generation, only when he is dead; that Scripture often
proves true, viz. That the riches of a sinner are laid up for the just, Job 27.
By all which you may see the greatness of this sin of covetousness that is so
closely charged upon them. But,

I was wroth, and smote him, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart;
They were like pevish, froward, stubborn children, that grow more cross,
crooked, and perverse under all the chastenings of their Father; and this was
no small aggravation of their sin, Lib. de superstitione.
that they grew worse under the Rod. Plutarch writes, that it is the quality of
Tygres, that if the Drums or Tabou^s sound about them, they will grow mad, and
rend and tear their own flesh in pieces; and so 'twas with these sinners in the
text; Oh how did they fret and fume, and tear, and take on, when they were
under the rebukes of God? But,

I have seen his ways, that is, I have seen his obstinacy and incorrigibility
in sin: Ah poor creature (says God) he sees not his present misery and slavery,
he takes no notice of his own folly and vanity, of his own frowardness and
pevishness, he scorns to bend or bow under my mighty hand, he is resolved to
stand it out to the death, he will persist on in his own ways, though he
eternally perishes; though hell stands at the end of his ways, yet on he will:
Well what is the issue of all this? God says, I have seen his ways, and will
heal him; it is not I have seen his ways, and will curse him, no, but I have
seen his ways, and will heal him; it is not I have seen his ways, and will never
have any more to do with him, no, but I have seen his ways, and will heal him;
it is not I have seen his ways, and will damn him, no, but I have seen his ways,
and will heal him. Oh the freeness, Oh the unsearchableness, Oh the riches of
Gods grace! And thus you see that the precious promises last cited, are
promises that are made over to sinners as sinners; And this is further evident
in that Isa. 43.22, 23, 24, 25. For sins of omission and sins of commission,
what can be more charged upon a sinful people, then here is charged upon them?
they were not only negligent of his worship and service, but they were also
weary of his worship and service, and counted it rather a burden then a
benefit, a toil then a pleasure; in all their outward observances they did but
court the Lord, they did but complement with God, for whilst they were in his
service, their hearts were secretly weary of his service; and by their sinful
commissions, Oh how did they grieve, vex, oppress, and burden the Holy one of
Israel? and yet in verse. 25. God does passionately and emphatically proclaim
their free pardon, I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for
mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. The Metaphor is taken from men's
blotting out of debts out of their debt-book; now when a debt is blotted out of
the debt-book, it is never charged upon the debtor more, it is never regarded nor
remembered more; so when God proclaims the sinners pardon, when he forgives
him his transgressions, he blots, he rases, he crosses his books, and cancels
all bonds, so as that he will never object his sins against him, and never
charge his sins upon him, but being once forgiven, they shall be for ever
forgotten, they shall never come into his remembrance more: And all this he
will do for his name sake, and for the praise and glory of his own Free Grace.
So in Ezekiel. 36.26, 27, 28. and 37. compared. Now by all these Scriptures it is
most plain and evident, that the precious promises of special grace and mercy,
are made over to sinners as sinners; and if so, then doubtless sinners may
lawfully put these promises into suit. Oh sirs, don't you know that desire is
the soul of prayer? and who but such as are witless and graceless, will say
that a wicked man may not desire the accomplishment of Gods gracious promises,
that will say an unregenera^e man may not desire to be pardoned, sanctified and
renewed, and that the Lord would bestow his spirit upon him, and that by the
finger of the same spirit, the Law of the Lord may be written in his heart,
that he may observe his Statutes, and do them; these are things that God has
engaged himself to do for poor sinners, and therefore certainly sinners may put
God in mind of his engagements. But,

Kings 21.19 -- ult. Jonah 3.4. -- ult. 2 Chronicles. 26.5. Vzziah sought God in the
days of Zechariah, and when he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper; had he
been really godly, had he had the root of the matter in him, had he been a
sincere, a throughout Christian, he would have sought the Lord all his days, he
would have held on and held out in well-doing, but being carnal hypocritical
and unregenerate, his Religion dies with Zechariah. Another instance you have
of this among the sailors, that usually are the worst of sinners, Psalm. 107.23.
-- 30. And another you have in that known case of Jehu; from all which we may
well conclude, that God expects and looks that wicked men, that unregenerate
men should be found in the exercise of Religious duties. It is an excellent
observation of Calvin upon Gods rewarding the Rechabites obedience, Jer. 35.19.
God (says he) often recompenceth the shadows and seeming appearances of virtue,
to show that complacency he takes in the ample rewards he has reserved for
true and sincere piety. To conclude, It was as easy for Boaz to have given
Ruth as much corn at once as would have yielded her an Ephah of Barley, and so
have sent her home without any more ado, but he would not, being resolved that
she should use her endeavor to gather and glean it, and beat it out too when
she had gleaned it; so it is as easy a thing for God to give his Christ, to
give his Spirit, and to give his Grace immediately to poor sinners without
their using of the means, but he will not, being resolved that they shall use the
means of hearing, reading, praying, and conference, etc. and when they have
done, leave the issue of all their labors and endeavors to his good Will and
pleasure. I have taken the more pains fully and clearly to answer this
objection, that it may never more have a resurrection in any of your souls.

Ninthly, If ever you would be holy, then when you have Jam. 5.7, 8.
and the Merchant for good returns? and the Watchman for the dawning of the
day? and the Patient for a happy cure? and the poor Client for a day of
hearing, etc? and will not you wait for Christ, and wait for the spirit, and
wait for pardon, and wait for grace, and wait for glory, etc? Oh sinners,
sinners, remember you are at the right door, and therefore wait; Oh remember
that whilst you are waiting for mercy, God is preparing of mercy; Oh remember
that it is mercy that you may wait for mercy; devils and damned spirits cannot
wait for mercy, wait they must, but, O it is for more wrath, anger, and fiery
indignation: Oh remember your condition bespeaks waiting, for you are poor,
halt, lame, blind, and miserable creatures: Oh remember that mercy is sweetest
when it comes after a patient waiting, Deuteronomy. 32.13. He made him to suck honey
out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock; That is, he made him to suck
water that was as sweet as honey out of the rock, out of the flinty rock: Oh
remember that a patient waiting for mercy, is the only way to greaten your
mercy. The longer, said the Emperors son, the Cooks are a preparing the meat,
the better the cheer will be; his meaning was, the longer he staid for the
Empire, the greater it would be: So the longer a soul waits for mercy, the
greater and the better it will be when it comes; as you may see in that famous
instance of the poor man that lay eight and thirty years at the Pool of
Bethesda. Joh. 5.2.16.
Famous was the patience of Elijah's servant, 1 King. 18.8.
who in obedience to his Masters command, went seven several times up and down
steep Carmel, which could not be without danger and difficulty, and all to
bring news of nothing, till his last journey, which made a recompense for all
the rest, with the tidings of a cloud arising: Oh so do but patiently wait upon
the Lord, and that grace, that favor, that mercy will come at last, which will
fully recompense you for all your waitings; remember that the mercies of God
are not styled the swift, Isa. 55.3.
but the sure mercies of David; (mercy may be sure, though it be not presently
upon the wing flying toward us) And the same Prophet says, the glory of the
Lord shall be thy rereward; Isa. 58.8.
now this we know comes up last to secure and make good all the rest, for where
Grace leads the Front, Glory at last will be in the Rere. Oh do but patiently
wait, Heb. 10.37.
and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, not a year, not a
quarter, not a month, not a week, not a day, no not an hour beyond the prefixed
time that he has set of showing mercy to poor sinners. O how sad was it that
Saul should lose his Kingdom for want of two or three hours patience? but O how
much more sad will it be if thou should lose all the prayers that thou have
made, and all the Sermons that thou have heard, and all the tears that thou
have shed, and all other pains that thou have taken, and all for want of a
little more patience? yea how woeful sad would it be if thou should lose thy
God, and lose thy Christ, and lose thy soul, and lose an eternity of glory, and
all for want of a little patience to wait the Lords leisure? O therefore
resolve to hold on waiting to the death, and if thou must perish, to perish in
a waiting way, (which if thou should, thou would be the first that ever so
perished:) O remember that if God should come, and mercy come, and pardon come,
and grace come, when thy Sun is near setting, when thy glass is almost out, and
when there is but a short step between thee and eternity, it will infinitely
recompense thee for all thy waiting; and therefore wait still: and to keep up
thy spirits, and to uphold thy soul in a waiting way, O! that thou would
make these following promises thy daily food, thy daily friends, thy daily
companions; Psalm. 27.14. Want on the Lord: be of good courage, and he shall
strengthen thine heart; wait, I say, on the Lord. Prove. 20.22. Wait on the
Lord, and he shall save thee. Isa. 30.18. And therefore will the Lord wait,
that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may
have mercy upon you: for the Lord is a God of judgment. Blessed are all they
that wait for him. Chap. 40. ult. But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew
their strength: they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and
not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint. Chap. 49.23. They shall not be
ashamed that wait for me. And Chap. 64.4. For since the beginning of the world
men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God,
besides thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for him. Pro. 8.34.
Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the
posts of my doors. O how should these precious promises encourage your hearts
to wait on the Lord? O how should they lengthen and draw out your patience to
the utmost. But,

Tenthly and lastly, Dwell much upon the memorable judgments Lots wife. O!
remember her sin and punishment, that so fearing the one, Luke 17.32.
you may learn to take heed of the other. Isa. 26.9. When thy judgments are in
the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness; that is, they
should learn righteousness (for so the words may be read) they should learn to
fear thee, and learn to turn unto thee, and learn to forsake their sins and
amend their lives; When thy judgments, thy memorable judgments are abroad in
the world, it highly concerns all the sons of men to look after holy
dispositions, holy affections, and holy conversations, that so it may go well
with them in the day of the Lords wrath: others sense the words thus, When thy
judgments are on the earth, the inhabitants of the world (that is sinners as
well as Saints) shall learn righteousness, that is, they shall learn to fear
thee upon the account of thy righteous judgment, suitable to that, Job 37.23,
24. Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out: he is excellent in power,
and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: Men do therefore fear him: he
respects not any that are wise of heart; and to that Rev. 15.4. Who shall not
fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy: for all
nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments are made
manifest. The judgments of God upon Antichrist, shall so awaken, alarm, and
affect the nations, that they shall cast off all false ways of worship, and
worship the Lord in a more pure, spiritual, high and noble way then ever yet
they have done. God is a free Agent, and he can make sinners Saints, as well by
judgments, as by mercies. Waldus (from whom the Waldenses had their name) when
many were met together to be merry, seeing one among them suddenly fall down
dead, it struck so to his heart, that he went home a penitent, and proved a
very precious holy man. Rabbi Solomon on Prove. 9.25.
Pharaoh was not a pin the better for all the plagues that came upon him; but
Jethro taking notice of Gods heavy judgments upon Pharaoh, and likewise upon
the Amalekites, was thereby converted, and became a Proselyte, as some observe.
O sirs, who can tell but that a fixed eye upon the remarkable judgments of God
that has been inflicted upon notorious sinners, may be a means to change you
and turn you to the Lord? forget not the plagues that came upon bloody Pharaoh;
Remember how crafty Achitophel, and proud Haman, and covetous Judas, came all
to the halter; forget not how the earth opened her mouth and swallowed up Corah
and his companions; forget not the Angel that drew upon Balaam, nor Samuels
sword that cut Agag in pieces, nor the Royal Oak on which Absalom was hanged,
nor the Javlin by which Phinehas, in his zeal for God, thrust through Zimri and
Cozbi; remember how Ananias and Saphira were struck dead with a lie in their
mouths; remember how God rained hell out of heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah;
remember how suddenly, how unexpectedly, and how inevitably the flood came upon
the old world; and remember how the Angels that kept not their first station of
holiness, See the Theater of Gods Judgments, by Dr. Beard, and Dr. Tailor; and
see Mr. Clarks Looking-glass both for Saints and sinners.
are now in chains under everlasting darkness. O who can seriously dwell upon
the severe judgments of God upon these persons, and not resolve upon breaking
off his sins, and pursuing after that holiness, without which there is no
happiness. O! remember that God is as holy a God as ever, and as just a God as
ever, and as jealous of his glory as ever, and therefore turn from the evil of
your doings that your souls may live. O! that the dreadful judgments of God
that has been executed upon others, might so alarm all unholy hearts, that they
may with all their might cast off the works of darkness, and put on the Armor
of light, that so they may be children of the light, and their souls may live
for ever. And thus much for the means whereby men may reach to that holiness,
without which there is no happiness.

I come now in the third place to answer those objections which usually are
made against men's pursuing after holiness. As,

Object. First, We have no power to make our selves holy, we are as well able
to make a world, to command the winds, and to raise the dead, as we are able to
cleanse our own hearts, or change our own natures, or sanctify our own souls;
and therefore to what purpose should we be so strongly pressed to do that which
we have no power to do? Now to this objection I shall give these following
answers.

First, That thou have no power to perform any supernatural Ephesians. 2.1.
and feeling, cannot be denied; it is certain that thy nature is so corrupted
that thou can not think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. Mat. 12.34. Joh. 6.44. 1
Cor. 2.14.
nor speak a good word, nor do a good work; thou art not sick, but dead
God-wards, and Christ-wards, and heaven-wards, and holiness-wards, etc. I have
read of the Lyoness, how that she brings forth her whelps dead, and so they
remain, till after some time by her roaring aloud over them, they come to live;
certainly all unholy hearts are spiritually dead, and till Christ the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah comes to roar over them, by uttering his voice in the
Gospel, they cannot live, John 5.25. it is Christ only that can quicken the
dead; 'twas never known since the creation of the world, that ever a dead man
could make himself alive. 1 King. 8.38.
Sin in Dominion is the plague of the heart; now as there is no disease so
deadly as the plague, so there is no plague so deadly as the plague of the
heart; O this is a disease that none can cure, but he who is the Physician of
souls; an unsanctified person is not half dead, as the Pelagians, Arminians,
and Papists say, but as to spirituals he is stark dead, Col. 2.13. An
unsanctified soul is dead.

1. Respectu operis, In respect of working, and therefore his works are called
dead works, Heb. 9.14. There is death written upon all he does.

2. Respectu honoris, He is dead in respect of honor, he is dead to all
privileges, he is not fit to inherit mercy; who will set the crown of life
upon a deads man head? the crown of life is for the holy Christian, and the
holy Christian is for the crown of life, Rev. 2.10. 2 Timothy 4.8. When he in
Plutarch had tried all manner of ways to raise a dead man, and to make him
stand upon his feet, and saw he could not do it, then he cried out, there must
be something within, there must be something within. So when men have said and
done all they can, there must be something within, there must be something of
the power and Spirit of Christ within, that must raise up spiritual life in
those that are spiritually dead. But,

Adam to obey him in all his commands, Genesis 1.26. Eccles. 7.29. Psalm. 8.4. --
ult.
and though by Adams fall thou have lost thy power to obey, yet God has not
lost his right and power to command thee to obey. Suppose a father should
furnish a Child with moneys, and all other necessaries to go a journey, and he
should be drawn in by some strong temptation to spend his money, his time, and
his strength, so as that now he is not able to go his journey, whose fault is
this? will you now say that the father has lost his power to command, because
his son has lost his power to obey? Surely no, it is no iniquity in God to
require that of us, which once he gave unto us. It Is no injustice in the
creditor to call for his debt, when the debtor is fallen into extreme poverty
through his own default. But,

etc.) yet he is able to perform all natural actions, as to eat, drink, work,
walk, etc. and he is able to perform all Political actions also, as to trade,
bargain, buy, sell, plant, and build, etc. the soul even in an unsanctified
person is not dead, but a living principle; and therefore it is able to
understand, will, desire, discourse, reason, and to attend the means of grace;
though he be not able to work grace in his own heart, yet he is able to attend
on the means of grace. An unsanctified person may as well go to a Sermon, as to
a Tavern, he may as well read the Scriptures, as read Play books and Pamphlets,
he may as well associate himself with those that fear an oath, as he does with
those that delight to blaspheme that name that all should tremble at, etc. Man's
impotency lies in his obstinacy, man pretends he cannot believe, Mat. 23.37.
Luke 13.34. Joh. 5.40. Act. 7.5.
nor he cannot come to Christ, nor he cannot repent, etc. when he is resolved
that he will not believe, nor he will not come to Christ, nor he will not
repent, etc. Christ in the Gospel comes and offers pardon, and peace, and
reconciliation, and thou turnest thy back upon him; he woes and intreates, 2
Cor. 5 18, 19, 20.
and beseeches thee by his Ambassadors, but thou will not hear, etc. he sets
life and death, heaven and hell, mercy and misery before thee, but thou
slightest all; Christ brings a cordial in one hand to strengthen thee, and a
remedy in the other hand to cure thee, Rev. 3.18.
but thou dispifest both; Christ offers tried gold to enrich thee, and white
raiment to cloth thee, and precious eye salve to enlighten thee, and thou
shuttest up thy heart against all his offers. Well sirs, remember this, Hosea
13.9.
in the great Day all unsanctified persons will be damned, not for can-nots,
but for will-nots, it is neither men nor devils; it is neither the greatness of
thy sins, nor the numberless number of thy sins that can damn thee, were it not
for thy wilfulness in sin. O sinners, sinners, Prove. 28. t3. 1 John 1.9. Luke
19.41, 42.
if you are but heartily willing to forsake your sins, and to accept of Christ
as your Lord and King, and to resign up your selves to him to be really his, to
be wholly his, to be only his, and to be eternally his, he will certainly
change you, and sanctify you, and save you; but if you will not be holy, if
you will not be happy, if you will not be sanctified, if you will not be saved,
if you will not go to heaven, but are resolved upon going to hell, what can be
more just with God, then that you should be Satan's bond slaves, and firebrarnds
of hell, and vessels of wrath to all eternity? But,

Fourthly, I answer, If thou do but stir up thy self to obey Mat. 9.1. -- 9.
Christ bid the Palsy man rise and walk, take up thy bed, and go unto thine
house; the Palsy man might have objected, Alas, I am carried by four, I am not
able to stir a limb, muchless to rise, but least of all to take up my bed and
walk, etc. Oh but he puts forth himself as well as he could, and a power went
forth with the command, that enabled him to do what was commanded. So in that
Mat. 12.10. -- 14. There was a poor man that had a withered hand, and Christ
commands him to stretch forth his hand; he might have objected, my hand is
withered, and if I might have a thousand worlds to stretch it forth, I could
not stretch it forth, yea, if my life, if my salvation did lie upon stretching
forth my withered arm, I could not stretch it forth; Oh but he throws by all
objections, and complies as well as he could, and a power went forth and healed
his hand. God commanded Moses to go and deliver his people out of Egypt; Moses
might have objected his old age, the power of Pharaoh, and his want of an Army
to force their way, etc. But he turns his back upon these objections, and
addresses himself to the work, and such a mighty power went along with him as
did effect it; Josh. 6.
he commanded the Israelites to take Rams horns, and with them to go and blow
down the walls of Jericho; they might have said, Lord these are weak and
contemptible means, yea Lord, if we may speak after the manner of men, they are
such ridiculous means as will expose us to scorn and laughter; but they pass
over these things, and apply themselves to those weak and despicable means that
God had appointed, and such a divine and glorious power went along with the
means as made the walls of Jericho, not only to tremble, but to tumble down
before them. Christ commanded Lazarus to come out of the grave, and there went
a Divine power and virtue with that call of Christ, which made him to rise. The
means are the Spirits triumphing Chariot, in which he pleases to ride
conquering and to conquer the souls of men; 2 Cor. 2.14. Acts 10.44.
Whilst Peter yet spoke, the holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the word. O
man, thou can not tell but that whilst thou art in the use of Divine helps, a
secret power of the Spirit may break in upon thee, and make the means effectual
to thy conversion and salvation; many thousands have found it so, and therefore
address thy self to the use of the means, and wait at the pool, thou can
not tell how soon the Spirit may come and move upon thy soul, it may be this
day, this hour, yea this very moment wherein I am thus speaking to thee. But,

Fifthly, I answer, that the sense of thine own inability, 5. Isa. 26.3, 4.
insufficiency, and impotency, should provoke thee to run to Christ, and to lay
hold on his everlasting strength, and to ply the throne of grace, and to give
God no rest till he has renewed and sanctified thy soul, Acts 26.18.
till he has effectually turned thee from darkness to light, till he has
bespangled thy soul with grace, and filled thee with his Spirit, Heb. 12.10.
and made thee partakers of his holiness. 'Twas a good saying of One (Da quod
Jubes, Augustine.
and jube quod vis) Give what thou command, and command what thou will. O
go to God and tell him, that what he has commanded in some Scriptures, he has
promised to give in other Scriptures, and therefore press him to make good his
promises, that so you may obey his precepts; O tell him, that if he will but
sprinkle clean water upon thee, and put his Spirit within thee, Ezekiel. 36.25,
26, 27, 28.
and give a new heart unto thee, according to his promise, that then thou will
walk in his Statutes, and keep his Judgments, and do them; O tell him, that
if he will but put his fear into thy heart, according to his promise, Jer.
32.40.
that then thou will never depart from him; O tell him, Phil. 1.29. James 5.17.
that he has commanded thee to believe, and that he has also promised to give
thee faith, and therefore if he will but make good his promise, thou shall be
sure to obey his precepts; O tell him, that he has frequently commanded thee to
repent, Acts 5.31. 2 Timothy 2.25.
and that he has also graciously promised to give repentance, and therefore if
he will but perform his promise, thou shall not fail to obey his precepts,
etc. O tell him, that thou have no mind to be damned, tell him, that thou
tremblest at the thoughts of hell, tell him that thou can not without much
horror think of dwelling with a devouring fire, of dwelling with everlasting
burnings; O tell him, Isa. 33.14. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9, 10.
that thou dreadest an eternal separation from him, and therefore earnestly
beseech him, for his Sons sake, and for his glory sake, and his promise sake,
and thy souls sake, that he would renew thy nature, and sanctify thy soul,
that so thou may not perish to all eternity. But,

Harlots door, Prove. 7.
thou have power to keep thy mouth of blasphemy shut, thou have power to keep
thy hands from stealing, James 3.10. Ephe. 4.28. Romans 3.15.
and thy feet from being swift to shed innocent blood; thou have power to
bring thy body to an Ordinance, though thou have not power to bring thy soul to
the Ordinance; the Noble Bereans brought their bodies to the Ordinance, Acts
17.11, 12.
and they took the heads of the Apostles Sermon, and compared them with the
Scripture, and yet they were in an unrenewed and unsanctified estate. O Sirs,
you have power to come to public Ordinances, and to set your selves under the
droppings of a Gospel powerful Ministry, you have power to lie at the poole of
Bethesda, and there to wait till the cure be wrought; but where is the
unsanctified soul that improves the power he has? Tell me, O vain man, why
should God trust thee with a greater power, when thou make no conscience of
improving that power thou have? Why should God trust thee with Ten Tallents,
when thou have no heart to improve the two that he has already trusted thee
withal? What wise Father or Master will trust that child or servant with
hundreds or thousands, who makes no conscience of improving far lesser sums to
the honor and advantage of the Father or the Master? how do thou know, O
man, but that upon the faithful improvement of that power thou have, God may
add a greater power to thee? if thou will but go that two miles thou can,
God may strike in with thee, and enable thee to go Ten. It Is a dangerous thing
to neglect the doing of that which thou can do, because that thou can not
do every thing that thou should do. Suppose a Father or a Master should
say to his Son or servant, take such and such wares and commodities, and carry
them to such and such places, for such and such Chapmen, and the Son or servant
should say, well, though there be some small light burdens that I can well
enough carry, yet there are many heavy burdens that I cannot carry, and
therefore I will carry none at all; may not the Father of such a Son, or the
Master of such a servant in much Justice and righteousness severely punish such
a Son or servant? doubtless yes; Why this is the very case of all unsanctified
souls; God commands them to believe and repent, and to love him with all their
hearts, and to set him up as the object of their fear, and to give him the
pre-eminence in all things, etc. But these are supernatural acts beyond their
power; And he commands them to attend on the means of grace, and to waire at
Wisdoms door; he commands them to apply themselves to public ordinances, and
to keep close to family duties, and to turn their backs upon such and such
vicious societies, etc. and these are things they can do; and yet because they
cannot do the former, they wilfully and wickedly refuse to do the latter;
because they cannot bare the heaviest burden, they are resolved they will bare
none at all; and because they cannot do every thing they should, they will do
nothing at all, except it be to complain that God is a hard Master, and
expects to reap where he does not sow; now how just and righteous a thing it
is with God to deal severely with such, I will leave you to judge. And let
this suffice for answer to the first objection.

Object.

First, Thou will not say that thou can be saved too soon, nor esteem with
men (especially with great men) too soon; and why then should thou be so mad
and foolish, as practically to say that thou can be holy too soon? and yet
thus much thou do proclaim upon the housetop, when thou cryest out,
hereafter, hereafter will be time enough to seek after holiness. But,

Eccl. 7.14.
thou say now, that hereafter may be time enough to look after holiness. O
set another maybe against this may-be, Isa. 55.6.
and say, if I now neglect this season of grace, it may-be I shall never have
another; if I now slight the offers of mercy, Pro. 1.20. to the 33. Heb. 2.1,
2, 3. Luke 19, 41. -- 45. Genesis 6.3.
it may be I shall never have such offers more; if I now despise this day of
salvation, it may be I shall never have such another day; if I now withstand
the tenders of Christ, it may-be Christ will never make a tender to me more; if
I now resist the strivings of the Spirit, it may be the Spirit will never
strive with my soul more, and then woe woe to me that ever I was borne. O don't
put off God, don't put off thy soul, don't put off the thoughts of holiness,
don't put off eternity with may-bees, Heb. 3.18.
least the Lord should swear in his wrath, that thou shall never enter into
his rest: and seeing that thou will not suffer holiness to enter into thee,
thou shall never enter into thy Masters joy: O! why should thou put off thy
poor soul, so as thou would not have God to put it off; thou would not
have God to put off thy soul with may-bees, as with a may-bee I will pardon
thee, it may-bee I wilt lift up the light of my countenance upon thee, it
may-bee I will change thy nature, and save thy soul, it may-bee I will fill
thee with my Spirit, and adorn thee with my grace, it may-bee I will bring
thee to my kingdom and glory; O thou would not have God to put thee off with
such may-bees, and why then should thou deal more hardly and cruelly with
thine own soul, then thou would have God to deal with thee? But,

did thou but see that wrath that hangs over thy head, did thou but read
the curses that are pronounced in the book of God against thee, did thou but
behold how hell gapes to devour thee, did thou but see how far off thou
art from God, Christ, the Covenant, Acts 2.39. Ephe. 2.12.
and all the glory and happiness of another world; ah how would thou every
day cry out, give me holiness or I die, give me holiness or I eternally die.
The Patient that is truly sensible of his disease, will not say, hereafter will
be time enough to send for the Physician, nor the wounded man will not say,
hereafter will be time enough to fetch the Surgeon, nor the condemned man will
not say, hereafter will be time enough to sue for a pardon, nor the needy man
will not say, hereafter will be time enough to look for relief, nor the fallen
man will not say, hereafter will be time enough to lift me up, nor the drowning
man will not say, hereafter will be time enough to bring a Boat to save my
life; now this is the very case of all unsanctified persons in the world, and
why then should they cry our, hereafter, hereafter will be time enough to be
holy. The Boar in the Fable being questioned why he stood wherting his teeth
so when no body was near to hurt him, wisely answered, that it would then be
too late to whet them when he was to use them, and therefore he whetted them so
before danger that he might have them ready in danger. Ah Sirs, there is
nothing more dangerous then for you to have your holiness to seek, when
temporal, spiritual, and eternal dangers are at your heels; there is no wisdom
to that which leads men forth to a present pursuit after holiness, nor no hell
to that for a man to have his holiness to seek when he should use it.

Fourthly, I answer, that the brevity, shortness, and preciousness Sumptus
protiocissimus tempus. Theophrastus.
calls aloud upon thee to pursue after holiness without delay; time past is
irrecoverable, time to come is uncertain, the present time is the only time,
and on this moment of time depends eternity; this very day is a day of grace, O
that thou had but grace to take notice of it; this very time is an acceptable
time, O that thou had but a heart to accept of it, and to improve it: he that
has a great way to go, and a great deal of work to do in a little time,
had not need to trifle away his time; and this is the case of every
unsanctified soul; O the sins that such a soul has to repent of, O the graces
that such a soul has to seek, O the evidences for heaven that such a soul has
to secure, O the miseries that such a soul has to escape, O the mercies that
such a soul has to press after, etc. and therefore of all men in the world, it
stands unsanctified persons upon well to husband and improve their present
time; O it is a dangerous thing to put off that work to another day which must
be done to day, or else thou may be eternally undone to morrow; the old
saying was (Nunc aut nunquam) now or never, if not now done, it may be never
done, and if so, then thou art undone for ever. Many sinners are now in hell,
who when they were on earth were wont to put off the motions of the Spirit by
crying out, eras, cras, to morrow, to morrow. Time is so precious a thing that
mountains of gold and rocks of pearl cannot redeem one lost moment; which
that great Lady well understood, when on her deathbed she cried out, Queen
Elizabeth.
Call time again, call time again; a world of wealth for an inch of time: ah
what a precious and gainful commodity would time be in hell, where for one day
to repent, yea for one hour to seek after holiness, a man would give ten
thousand worlds, were they in his hands to dispose of. Time is so costly a
Jewel that few know how to value it and prize it at a due rate, witness that
sad and frequent complaint among many, O what shall we do to drive away the
time, come let us go to Cards to drive away the time, or let us go to Tables to
drive away the time, or let us go to the Tavern, and take a pint and a pipe to
drive away the time, or lets go and take a walk in the fields to drive away
the time, etc. Thus most are lavishly and profusely prodigal of that precious
time which is their greatest interest to redeem. Time is a precious Talent, and
the non-improvement of it God will charge upon men at last, as he did upon
Jezabel, Rev. 2.21.
especially upon such who trifle away, who play away, who idle away, yea who
grossly sin away their precious time; how many are there like children, who
play till their Candle be out, and then they go to bed in the dark? so these
play and fool away their precious time, till the Candle of life be out, and
then they go to their beds, they go to their graves in sorrow, yea they go
to hell in the dark. Drexellius.
I have read of a young man, who living vainly and loosely, was very fea^ul of
being in the dark, who after falling sick and could not sleep, cried out, Oh if
this darkness be so terrible, what is eternal darkness? he that makes no
conscience of trifling away his precious time, shall one day experience the
terribleness of eternal darkness. The Poets paint time with wings, Sophocles.
Phocilides, etc.
to show the volubility and swiftness of it; O Sirs, if the one sense of the
brevity, shortness, and preciousness of time, did but lie in its full weight
upon your spirits, it would certainly put you upon a speedy and earnest pursuit
after holiness; O then you would never say, hereafter, hereafter will be time
enough to seek after holiness, but you would address your selves to a fervent
and a constant pressing after holiness as the one thing necessary, and be
restless in your own spirits, till you had experienced the power and sweetness
that is in holiness. But,

Fifthly, and lastly, I answer, that it is the greatest folly and that does more
incense, inrage, and provoke a Prince against his Subjects, a Lord against his
servants, a father against his child, and a husband against his wife, then the
putting off of their services and commands, with may-bees or with hereafters;
so there is nothing that does more incense, inflame, and provoke the great God,
then to put him off with may-bees, or with hereafters, Psalm. 95.6. to the end.
Heb. 3.7. to the end.
as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the margent together. And O that
for time to come you would tremble at the very thoughts of a may-bee, and at
the very mentioning of an hereafter, that so you may never put off the commands
of God, to pursue after holiness with a maybe, or with an hereafter any more.
And let this susfice for answer to this second Objection.

etc.

Now to this grand objection, I shall give these eight answers.

Zion stand, but did thou but cast an eye on thy right hand, there thou
would see many of the precious sons and daughters of Zion rejoicing and
triumphing; Isa. 61.1, 2, 3, 10, 11. Chap. 35. ult.
Now thus to look, what is it but to look for a straw to thrust out thine own
eyes with. O Sirs, it is neither wisdom nor righteousness to look only upon
those who mourn, and not upon those that rejoice, Isa. 52.8, 9. Jer. 31.7.12.
upon those that sigh, but not upon those that sing. Before you pass a
judgment upon the people of God, or the good ways of God, look on both hands,
I say again, look on both hands, and then you will be sure to see some Saints
in their wedding attire, as well as others in their mourning weeds; no man in
his wits will argue thus, because such and such men of such a Calling or Trade,
are in their mourning weeds, therefore all men of that Calling or Trade, are in
their mourning weeds, and yet so witless are many men as thus to argue against
the people of God, and the ways of God. But,

Secondly, I answer, As there are tears of sorrow, so there are Jacob weeps
over Joseph, Compare these Scriptures together, Genesis 43.30. Chap. 45.2. and Ch:
46.29.30. 1 Samuel 1.13. to the 20. John 4. etc.
but 'twas with tears of exceeding joy; the sweetest joy is from the sowrest
tears; tears are the breeders of spiritual joy: A holy man's heart is usually
fullest of joy, when his eyes are fullest of tears; when Hannah had wept, she
went away and was no more sad. The Be gathers the best honey of the bitterest
herbs; Christ made the best wine of water: The best, the purest, the strongest,
and the sweetest joys are made of the destilled waters of Evangelical
repentance. Gospel mourning is no way inconsistent with holy joy; though it
must be granted that the love of sin and true joy are inconsistent, and that
the reign and dominion of sin and true joy are inconsistent, yet it must be
confessed that mourning for sin and holy joy, are consistent in one and the same
heart; and though Legal terror and Evangelical joy are inconsistent, Zach.
12.10. 1 Pet. 1.8.
yet Evangelical sorrow and Evangelical joy are consistent in one and the same
soul; the same eye of faith that drops tears of sorrow, drops also tears of
joy: A clear sight of free grace, of pardoning mercy, and of a bleeding dying
Savior, will at the same time fill the soul both with sorrow and joy, as the
experiences of a thousand Christians can testify: A Christian always joys
most, and mourns most, Luke 7.
when he is most under the sense of divine love, the influences and incomes of
heaven, the hopes of glory, the reports of mercy, and the precious sealings of
the blessed Spirit. Look as Physic is the way to health, so godly sorrow is
the way to holy joy; Prove. 14.13.
and look as a wicked man's joy ends in sorrow, so a godly man's sorrow ends in
joy. Isa. 61.3. To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them
beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of gladness for the
spirit of heaviness, that they may be called trees of righteousness, the
planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. Godly sorrow is the Parent of
holy joy; a Godly man's mourning time, is his most joyful time. I have read of
a godly man, who lying upon his dying bed, and being asked which was the
joyfullest time that ever he had in all his life, cried our, O give me my
mourning days again, O give me my mourning days again, for they were the
joyfullest days that ever I had. The more a Christian sowes in tears, Psalm.
126.6.
the greater (even in this world) shall be his harvest of joy, his merry days
shall be always answerable to his mourning days. But,

Psalm. 138.5. Yea they shall sing in the ways of the Lord; for great is the
glory of the Lord. When the Kings of the earth shall be generally converted and
sanctified, as it is in ver. the 4th, Then they shall sing in the ways of the
Lord; when they shall come to experience and taste the power, excellency, and
sweetness of holiness, then they shall sing in the ways of the Lord.
Conversation and sanctification administer the highest grounds of joy and
rejoicing; 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more
abundantly to you-wards. A holy conversation affords the greatest ground of
rejoicing: There is no joy to that which springs from the testimony of a
sanctified conscience. God has given it under his own hand, Pro. 3.17.
that the ways of wisdom (which are always ways of holiness) are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. There is no pleasure nor felicity to
that which flows from the ways of sanctity: The sweetest Roses, the strongest
comforts, and the greatest pleasantness is to be found in the ways of
holiness. O! the joy, the peace, the tranquillity, the serenity that attends
the ways of purity. I might call in many millions of Saints, who from their
own experiences are able to give the lie to this objection, and further to tell
you, that they have met with more comforts, sweetness, and pleasantness in one
hours communion with God, in one hours walking with God, then ever they have
found in all the ways of ungodliness and wickedness, wherein they have
wandered. O! they are able to tell you, Isa. 57.20, 21.
that when they walked in ways of impiety, they found by experience that God
had made a separation between sin and peace, between sin and joy, Romans 6.21.
between sin and assurance, between sin and the light of his countenance, etc.
and they are able to tell you from what they have found, that there is no
fear, no terror, no horror, no gripes, no grief, no stings, no hells to those
that attend the ways of ungodliness; and this were enough to blow off this
objection. But,

Fourthly, I answer, that the joy of the Saints is chiefly and Sharon; so no
man can paint out the sweetness and spiritualness of a Christians joy, it lies
so deep and low in a gracious heart; and look as the life of a Christian is hid
with Christ in God, Col. 3.3.
so the joy of a Christian is hid with Christ in God; as their life is a hidden
life, so their joy is a hidden joy; the joy of a Christian is hidden Manna,
it is the new name and white stone, Rev. 2.20.
that none knows but he that has it. Pro. 14.10. The heart knows his own
bitterness, and a stranger does not intermedd^e with his joy: The joy of a
Saint is a Jewel that falls not under a strangers eye. Look as the greatest
terrors and torments of the wicked are inward, so the greatest joys and
comforts of the Saints are inward; and look as the heart of man is deep, Jer.
17.9, 10.
so holy joy is a treasure that lies deep, and it is not every man that has a
golden key to search into this Treasury. As a man standing on the Seashore,
sees a great heap of waters, one wave riding upon the back of another, and
making a dreadful noise, but all this while though he sees the water rouling,
and hears it raging and roaring, yet he sees not the wealth, the gold, the
silver, the Jewels, and incredible Treasures that lie buried there; so wicked
men they see the wants of the Saints, but not their wealth, they see their
poverty, but not their riches, their miseries, but not their mercies, their
conflicts, but not their comforts, their sorrows, but not their joys: 1 Cor.
2.14.
O the blind world cannot see the joys and rejoycings, the comforts and
consolations of the Saints, that lie at the bottom of their souls; their joys
are inward and spiritual, and so must the eye be that discernes them; the joy
of the Saints is like a Garden enclosed, Cant. 4.12.
a spring shut up, a fountain sealed: Psalm. 45.13.
And as the glory of the Church is inward, so the joy of the Church is inward;
Isa. 12.3.
The waters of consolation lie deep in the wells of salvation: The richest
veins of Oar lie deepest under ground; and so does the strongest and the
choicest joys of the Saints lie deep. The Moon is often dark to the world,
when yet that part which faceth the Sun, is very lightsome, beautiful, and
glorious; so many times if you look upon the outside of a Christian, which is
his dark side, you may see his countenance clouded, and his carriage and
behavior as to the world, either damped or obscured; but if you could but now
look upon his inside, which is his best side, and which faces the Sun of
Righteousness, O then you should see the light of joy and comfort sweetly and
gloriously shining forth. O Sirs, look as there are many rich men in the world,
who make no show of it by their Garb, or Table, or Attendance, etc. so there
are many Christians that are rich in divine consolations, who yet don't show it
in such or such an outward carnal way, as the men of the world do usually
express their joy in: And look as many a wicked man has heaviness in his heart,
when he has laughter in his face; as the wisest of Princes has long since
observed, in Pro. 14.13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end
of that mirth is heaviness; the heart often weeps when the mouth laughs; every
laughter is not hearty, for laughter being but a sign of joy, the sign may be
where the substance is not; many wicked men are inwardly sad, when they are
outwardly glad. 2 Cor. 5.12. The false Apostles did glory in the face, (...),
in the face.
and not in the heart, they set a good face on it and seemed to be upon a merry
pin, and yet all their smiles were but counterfeit smiles, all their joys were
but skin-deep, the joy that was in their faces, was nothing to the terrors,
horrors, and torments that were in their hearts; so the godly many times
rejoice in heart, when sadness and blackness seems to cover their faces; 2
Cor. 6.10. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, etc. It Is very observable that
the Apostle brings in the sorrow of the godly with a quasi, as it were sorrow,
not that it is sorrow indeed, but as sorrowful, as if their sorrow had been
rather a painted sorrow then a real sorrow; but when he speaks of their joy,
there is no quasi, but true joy, he does not say as rejoicing, but always
rejoicing, their joy was a real joy, but their sorrow was but a seeming sorrow
to the weak and childish opinions of vain men. When a Christian is at worst,
as to the eye of the world, he may say of his joy, as Christ speaks of his
meat, etc. when he said, John 4.33.
I have meat to eat that you know not of; so he may say, I have joy, I have
great joy that the world knows not of. Look as there is life and sap and juice
in the root of the Tree, even in the winter season, when there is no leaves,
nor blossoms, nor fruit hanging on the Tree; so there is joy, and comfort, and
peace in the heart of a Saint, when there are no outward visible discoveries of
it to others; And you may as rationally conclude, that there is no life, sap,
and juice in the root of the Tree, because the Tree has no leaves, blossoms or
fruit on it, as you may conclude that the Saints have no joy in their hearts,
because they do not express it in such outward visible acts, as may convince
the world that they have it, etc. But,

Fifthly, I answer, That it is horrid injustice and dis-ingenuity Ezekiel. 13.22,
23.
lukewarmness, filthiness, carnalness, etc. and then to cry out against them,
that they are the saddest and uncomfortablest people in the world; What is this
but with Nero to set the City of Rome on fire, and then to lay it upon the
Christians, and punish them for it? What is this but to deal by the Saints as
the Devil deals by them, he loads them and follows them with most sad
grievous blasphemous, horrid and hellish temptations, on purpose to make them
walk heavily, mournfully, and uncomfortably, and when he has accomplished his
design, then he accuses them sometimes to God, sometimes to themselves, Rev.
12.10.
and sometimes to others, for their heavy and uncomfortable walking. O what
inhumanity, cruelty, and vanity, was it in the Egyptians, to double the
Israelites tale of bricks, Exodus 5.8.17.
and to take away their straw, and then to cry out, that they were Idle, they
were Idle; so O what inhumanity and cruelty is this in unsanctified persons, to
sad, Psalm. 119.136, 158. Jer. 9.1, 2. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
grieve, and afflict the people of God with their drunkenness, wantonness, and
lewdness, and with their cursing, swearing and lying, and with their scorning
and scoffing at Godliness, and with their slandering of the Lord, his people
and ways, and with their resisting and quenching of the blessed motions of the
Spirit, and with their shifting off the glorious offers of grace and mercy,
Romans 2.4, 5.
and with their treasuring up of wrath against the day of wrath, etc. And then
to cry out, O how sadly, O how mournfully do these men walk! O what
uncomfortable lives do these men live! O what sorrow and pensiveness does
still attend them! But is this just? is this fair? Suppose a husband should
do all he could to afflict and grieve his wife, and a father his child, and a
Master his servant, and a friend his friend, etc. and when they had done, then
fall a complaining that there were none so melancholy, nor none so sad and
sorrowful as they, O what folly, what madness, and what injustice were this?
Dan. 4.27.
and yet this is the common dealing of unsanctified persons with the people of
God. Ah sinners, sinners, if you would but break off your sins by repentance,
and cease from doing evil, and turn to the Lord with all your hearts, and
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and fall in with the ways of God, and
trample upon this wicked world, and seek after the things of a better life, O
how soon would the Saints sighing be turned into singing, and their mourning
into rejoicing? O the music, the mirth, the melody, that your conversion would
make, both in their hearts and in their ears! It is very observable, that
Abraham made a Feast at the weaning of his Son Isaac; Genesis 21.8.
he did not make a Feast on the day of his Nativity, nor on the day of his
Circumcision, but on that day when he was taken from his mothers Breast: O
Sirs, if you were but once weaned from your lusts, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Hosea 6.7.
and from the vanities of this world, if you were but once weaned from old
corrupt customs, and from following after your sinful lovers; O how would all
Gods faithful Abraham's rejoice! O what a feast of fat things! O what a
heavenly Banquet would this make in all their hearts! About three hundred years
after the Apostles time, Cajus Marius Victorius an old Pagan, was converted
from his paganism, infidelity and impiety, and brought over to the Christian
faith; which when the people of God saw, there was wonderful rejoicing, and
shouting, and dancing for gladness, and Psalms were sung in every Church,
Caius Marius Victorius is become a Christian, Caius Marius Victorius is become
a Christian; This was written as a wonder, and sung as a wonder, that this old
Pagan, this gray headed Pagan should become a gracious Christian, that he
should in his old age be renewed and sanctified: Ah friends, if you were but
once converted and changed, if you were but once turned from darkness to light,
if you were but once brought to Christ, if the people of God could but once see
that you had past the pangs of the new birth, and that Christ and holiness was
but formed in your souls; ah how would their hearts be filled with joy, and
their mouths with laughter! O what songs of salvation would they sing! O how
would the high praises of God be in their mouths! Thou say, O there are none
so sad and sorrowful, etc. as such and such Christians; but what is the cause
of their sorrow and sadness? is it not thy wickedness and ungodliness? is it
not thy unconverted and unsanctified estate? surely yes; O that thou would
therefore cease from complaining against them, and fall amending of thine own
heart and ways, and then all tears will be quickly wiped away from their eyes.
But,

Sixthly, I answer, that all the joys, delights, and pleasures Romans 1. ult. 2
These. 2.12. Amos 6.13. Zeph. 3.11. 2 Pet. 2.13.
they rejoice to do evil, they make a sport of sin, and delight to dishonor
their God, and damn their own immortal souls. Pro. 2.14. They rejoice to do
evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked. And this is brought in as
an aggravation of Jerusalems sin, Jer. 11.15. When thou do evil, then thou
rejoycest. Ah how madly merry are they that can take delight and content in
that which is their shame and misery? ah how is man fallen from his primitive
glory, that he can now rejoice in that which is a dishonor to God, a reproach
to Christ, a grief to the Spirit, a provocation to divine wrath, a blot upon
his name, a curse upon his estate, a wound upon his conscience, and a plague
upon his soul? Now what a mercy must it be to be taken off from that carnal
mirth that ends in mourning, and from those vain delights that ends in
unspeakeable torments, Rev. 18.17.
and from that foolish jollity that leads to everlasting misery. I have read of
King Lysimachus, that when he and his Army were besieged in one of his Cities,
Plutarch.
and in great danger of perishing by thirst, for a Cup of cold water he
delivered up the keys of the City to his enemy, which cold comfort he had no
sooner tasted, but his tongue bewrayed the grief of his heart, saying, O that
in lieu of so momentary a pleasure, I should be made of a Sovereign a Servant,
of a King a Captive. Ah what folly and madness is it for men to run the hazard
of losing the kingdom of heaven, Psalm. 16.11. Momentaneum est quod delectat,
aeternum quod cruciet. Ber.
and the pleasures that be at Gods right hand, for those short lived pleasures
that are but like a blaze, or like the lightning, or like a morning cloud, or
the early dew which soon passes away? ah who would endure an Ocean of
torture, for a drop of sensual pleasure, or for a few bitter sweets? And
therefore, doubtless, God cannot do the soul a greater pleasure, then to take
it off from such vanishing pleasures; all sensual pleasures defile the soul,
they debase the soul, yea they debauch the soul, they take off the heart from
God, and they deaden the heart toward God. The widow whilst she lived in
pleasure is reckoned dead, 1 Timothy 5.6. She is dead God-wards, and dead
Christ-wards, and dead Duty-wards, and dead Heaven-wards, and dead
Holiness-wards, etc. Aristotle writes of a parcel of ground in Sicily, that
sends forth such a strong, such a sweet smell of fragrant flowers, that no
Hounds can hunt there; so the carnal pleasures of this world do send forth so
strong a scent, that unsanctified persons cannot hunt after God, nor Christ,
nor holiness, nor the great concernments of another world, and therefore it is
rather man's felicity then his misery to be taken off from such vain pleasures:
sensual pleasures and delights cannot satisfy the soul of man, they are but
frothy and flashy, they only wet the mouth, they never warm the heart; a man
may sooner break his neck, then satisfy his heart with sensual pleasures; they
are Juno's in the pursuit, and but clouds in the enjoyment. Xerxes being weary
of his sensual pleasures, promised great rewards to them that should invent new
pleasures; and when they had invented new pleasures and delights, yet then he
could not be satisfied nor contented, he would fain have had one pleasure to
have taken off the weariness of another, but it could not be; there is nothing
in carnal delights but imagination and expectation, for they can neither fill
the heart nor satisfy the heart.

O sirs, there is no real pleasure in sin, all the pleasures of sin are
counterfeit pleasures, they are but the shapes and shaddows of pleasure, they
are the seeds of future grief, they are but an earnest laid down for sorrow or
ruin. It is observed by the Mythologists, that pleasure went on occasion to
Bathe her self, and having stripped off her clothes by the water side, sorrow
having hid her self at hand, steals the clothes away, puts them on, and so
departs: So that carnal pleasures are nothing but sorrow in pleasures clothes.
Certainly if there were the lest real delight in sin, hell could never be hell,
yea then it would follow that hell should be the greatest place of pleasure,
for doubtless hell is the greatest place of sin. O don't deceive your own
souls, there can be no real joy in sensual pleasures. What real delight or
pleasure can there be in Tippling and Fudling in an Alehouse or Tavern, in
swaggering and swearing, in Dicing and Carding, in Dancing, Masking and
Whoreing, in slighting of Sabbaths, in scoffing at Saints, in despising of
Ordinances, and in pursuing after lying vanities? surely none. And as for those
seeming pleasures that attend the ways of sin; Ah how soon do they vanish and
leave a sting behind them. Now all the pleasures that holiness deprives you of,
are only such that you may better ten thousand times want, then enjoy. Look as
all the pleasures that manhood takes a man off from, are Babish and toyish
pleasures; as from delighting in a Rattle, a Pipe, a Feather, a Hobbyhorse, a
wooden Sword, etc. So all the pleasures and delights that holiness takes a man
off from, they are babish and foolish, yea they are base, dangerous, and
devilish; and therefore it must needs be rather a high felicity, then a misery,
for God to take thee off from such sinful pleasures and delights, by laying
principles of holiness into thy heart. O! remember that holiness will be no
loss unto thee; it will be only an exchange of sinful delights, for those that
are holy, and of carnal for those that are spiritual, and of earthly for those
that are heavenly; Genesis 22.
Isaac was not to be sacrificed, but the Ram; all the delights that holiness
will put thee upon to sacrifice, are but the Rammish and rank delights of sin
and the world, which may better be sacrificed then spared; holiness will secure
thy Isaac, that is, thy spiritual laughter, thy spiritual joy, and thy heavenly
delights and pleasure. Well for a close remember this, that sensual pleasures
are below a man; witne s Tully, who says, that he is not worthy of the name of
a man (qui unum diem velit esse in voluptate) that would entirely spend one
whole day in pleasures; and witness Julian the Apostate, who professed that the
pleasures of the body were far below a great spirit: he that delights in
sensual pleasures shall find at last his greatest pleasures, to become his
bitterest pains; all that holiness will do, is but to ease thee of thy pains,
and therefore thou have more cause to pursue after it, then to turn thy back
upon it. But,



First. Psalm. 51. Multi conscientiam habent, non ad remedium, sed ad judicium,
says One. And Toll conscientiam toll omnia, says another.
For first, It may be some wound or guilt at present, may lie hard upon their
consciences, as once it did on David's; and who then is able to rejoice under a
wounded conscience, a guilty conscience? As long as Adam did Fast in Paradise,
he stood fast, but having once wounded his conscience by eating the forbidden
fruit, though he tarried a while in Paradise, yet he could take no delight nor
content in Paradise; it is true the Sun did shine as bright as ever, and the
Rivers ran as clear as ever, and the Birds sang as sweetly as ever, and the
Beasts played as pleasantly as ever, and the Flowers smelled as fragrantly as
ever, and all the Trees and fruits of the Garden did flourish as bravely as
ever, etc. Ah but now Adam had contracted guilt upon his conscience, and this
marrs his joy, and spoils his delight, and unparadises Paradise to him; his
fall had made so deep a wound in his conscience, that he could take no delight
in any of the delights of Paradise; guilt as an arrow did stick so fast in his
conscience; that instead of sucking sweetness from the fairest fruits, Genesis
3.10. Jer. 20.4.
he runs to hide himself under the broadest leaves. Guilt makes a man a
Magor-Missabib, a terror to himself. Put never such stately Robes upon a
wounded man, he minds them not; set never such dainty fair before a wounded
man, he rellisheth it not; lay him on never so soft a bed, yet it pleases him
not; and let him hear never such sweet music, yet it delights him not; the
smart and sense of his wound takes off the sweet of all: and so does a wound in
the conscience take off the sweet of all a man's enjoyments and contentments. A
guilty conscience like Prometheus's Vulture, Desperare est in infernum
descendere. Isid. Mat. 8.19.
lies ever gnawing. What the probationer-Disciple said to our Savior, viz.
Master I will follow thee whithersoever thou go, that a guilty conscience
says to a fallen sinner; if thou fast, I will follow thee, and fill thy mind
with black and dismal apprehensions of God, of justice, of hell; if thou feast,
I will follow thee, and show thee the handwriting on the wall, Dan. 5.5.
that shall make thy countenance to change, thy thoughts to be troubled, and
thy joints to be loosed, and thy knees to be dashed one against another; when
thou go forth, I will follow thee with terrors, and when thou returnest
home, I will follow thee with horrors; when thou go to board, I will follow
thee with stinging accusations; and when thou go to bed, Job 7.14.
I will follow thee with terrifying and affrighting dreams: Now what joy can be
in such a man's heart? 'Twas guilt that made that despairing Pope say, That the
Cross could do him no good, he had so often sold it.
what gladness can be in such a man's face? surely none. I remember a saying of
Luther (una guttula malae conscientiae totum mare mundam gaudii absorbet) one
drop of an evil conscience, swallows up the whole Sea of worldly joy. O it is
better with Enagrius to lie secure on a bed of Straw, then to lie with a guilty
conscience on a bed of Down, having the Curtains Imbroidered with Gold, and the
Fringes bespangled with Pearls. Sin brings such a stain, and such a sting with
it, as spoils all a man's joys and delights. And if this be the present case of
a Christian (as it may) then never wonder to see him hang down his head, and
to walk mournfully before his God.

Or Secondly, Secondly.
This may arise from some great and heavy affliction, which for the present may
sadly distress and oppress a Saints spirit, as Jobs did his, or as Hezekiahs
did his, Job 3.38. Isa. 9. -- 16. Genesis 37.30. to the end.
or as Jacobs did his, etc. The disease may be so violent, the Physic may be
so strong, the wound may be so deep, the Plaster may be so corroding, the
melting-por may be so hot, the Iron chains may be so heavy, the Gaul and
Wormwood may be so bitter, that a Christian may be so far from joy and
rejoicing, as that he may for the present be so shut up under trouble and
amazement, and under sorrow and grief, Psalm. 77.4.
as that he may not be able, if you would give him all the world, to open his
case unto you; his eyes may in some sort tell what his tongue can in no sort
utter: usually they are the smallest miseries, when he that has them can
presently tell all the world of them; the greatest sorrow has for the most
part the deepest silence attending on it; what Christian ever had joy in his
heart or gladness in his face, when God was carrying of it harshly and roughly
toward him? Or,

Thirdly. Lam. 1.16. Genesis 31.2, 5. Psalm. 30.7. Read the 77. and the 88. Psalms.
Isa. 8.17. Mich. 7.7, 8, 9, 17. Psalm. 4.6. Psalm. 42.5, 11, etc.
Thirdly, It may be they are deserted, happily God is withdrawn from them, and
he that should comfort them, stands afar off. Ah what Christian can rejoice
when the countenance of God is not toward him as of old? who can be pleasant
when God is displeased? who can smile when God frowns? who can sing when God
sighs? who can be merry when God is sorry? surely none that have ever
experienced what the shinings of his face means. O sirs, the proper work of a
deserted soul lies not in joy and rejoicing, but in mourning and waiting, and
in seeking and suing at the throne of Grace, that God would lift up the light
of his countenance, and cause his face to shine, and his favor to break forth,
that the bones that he has broken may rejoice: As Hudson the Martyr, when he
was deserted at the stake, he slipped from under his chain, and praying
earnestly, he was comforted immediately, and suffered valiantly. Look as when
Sampsons Locks were cut off, his strength was gone; So when God is gone, a
Christians Locks are cut off, his strength is gone, his strength to joy and
rejoice in God is gone, his strength to delight, and to take pleasure in God is
gone: And as Sampson when his Locks were cut off, and his strength was gone,
fell to prayer, Judge. 16.28. And Sampson called unto the Lord, and said, O Lord
God, remember me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, that I may be at once
avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes. So when God is gone, the work of a
Christian lies more in praying then it does in rejoicing. Though Joseph's heart
was as full of love to his brethren as it could hold, Genesis 42.7.25.
yet when he looked sowrely upon them, and spoke roughly to them, they were
much afflicted and distressed; See the 3. and 5. Chapters of Solomon's Song.
so though the heart of Jesus be as full of love to his people as it can hold,
yet when he looks sowrely, and speaks roughly to them, they cannot but be
grieved and saded. But,

Fourthly, Fourthly. 2 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.
It may be they are sadly tempted, and strangely buffeted by Satan, as Paul
was, and from thence their present sadness may arise. Tempted souls can tell
you that it is one of the hardest works in the world to rejoice in the School of
temptation, Genesis 3. 1 Chronicles. 21. Job 3.
and to be merry when Satan's fiery darts stick fast in the soul. Adams tempting
time was not his rejoicing time, but his sinning time; and David's tempting time
was not his rejoicing time, but his miscarrying time; and Jobs tempting time
was not his rejoicing time, but his complaining time; and Peter's tempting time
was not his rejoicing time, Mat. 26. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8. Our whole life, says
Austin, is nothing but a continued tentation.
but his cursing and blaspheming time; and Paul's tempting time was not his
rejoicing time, but his humbling time. The best men are most tempted, and
oftentimes they are followed with the sadest, darkest, vildest, basest, and
most amazing, affrighting, tormenting, and astonishing temptations; and how is
it possible that they should be able to rejoice and be glad, when such dreadful
storms beat upon them? Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 16, 17, 18.
Certainly the work of a Christian in the day of temptation, lies in his
putting on the whole Armor of God, and in a prudent handling the sword of the
Spirit and the shield of Faith, and in earnest praying, and vigilant watching,
and a stout resisting of all Satan's fiery darts; for he who thinks by disputing
and reasoning, to put Satan off, Jam. 4.7. 1 Pet. 5.9.
does but shoot with him in his own Bow, and will find to his cost that Satan
will be too hard for him; it is open defiance, it is down right blows that makes
Satan fly, and that secures the victory; now joy and rejoicing attends not the
combat but the conquest: The Romans never used to ride in triumph, but after
conquests obtained: A Christians triumphing time is his conquering time; joy is
most seasonable and suitable, when a Christian has beaten Satan out of the
field. The Cock in the Arabic Fable, began to crow and clap his wings, as if
he had obtained a perfect conquest, but behold on a sudden a Vulture comes and
snatches this great conqueror away; they that triumph and rejoice over Satan
before they have overcome him, are in no small danger of being worsted by him.
But,

Fifthly, Fifthly.
and lastly (to gather up many things together) I say that their present sorrow
and sadness may arise from their going astray into some by-Path of vanity and
folly, Gal. 6.1. (...). Set him in joint again again; it is a Metaphor from
Chyrurgions and Bone-setters, who handle their patients gently and tenderly.
wherein they have got a fall, or broke a bone, or put their souls out of
joint: As children sometimes get a fall, and then they come home by
weeping-cross; so Christians too often go astray, and get a fall, and then they
are fain to weep it out. When men keep not the Kings highway, they are often
robbed of their money, and stripped of their clothes, and wounded too, as he was
in the Gospel who fell among Theives: So when Christians keep not in the King
of Kings highways, which are ways of righteousness and holiness, then they are
often robbed of their comfort, and joy, and peace, and assurance, and communion
with God, etc. and sorely wounded and bruised, and then it is no wonder if they
are brought home with tears in their eyes: Or it may be their evidences for
heaven are so blotted and blur'd, Luke 10.30. Isa. 35.8. Psalm. 119.176.
that they they cannot read their Title to heaven, and then it is no wonder if
they are perplexed and grieved; or it may be they call in question former
grants of favor and grace; or it may be a deeper sense of misspent time lies
harder then ever upon them; or else the littleness and smallness of their
graces under such soul-enriching opportunities and advantages, do sorely
oppress them; or else the lateness of their conversion may sadly afflict them,
etc. Now how absurd and unreasonable a thing is it for any men to argue thus,
that surely godly men have no joy, no delight, no pleasure, etc. because there
are some particular cases and conditions, wherein they may be cast, which
rather bespeaks sorrow then joy, grief then gladness, mourning then mirth.
Certainly you may as rationally and as righteously expect mirth, joy and
gladness, from carnal, worldly, and ungodly wretches, when they are under
burning Feavors, loathsome diseases, or violent pains of the Stone, or Gout,
etc. as you may expect upon a rational or Religious account, joy and gladness,
etc. in the Saints in the forementioned cases that are incident to them. 'Twas
a very unreasonable request that they made to the people of God, in that Psalm.
137.3, 4. For there they that carried us away captive, required of us a song,
and they that wasted us, required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the songs
of Zion. How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange Land? And it is as
unreasonable to expect or look that the people of God should sing and be merry,
rejoice, and be glad when they are under soul-distresses, and under the sore
rebuks of God, and poured from vessel to vessel, etc. Music in times of
mourning is as unreasonable as it is unseasonable and unsavory; Jer. 48.11.
Prove. 25.20. As he that takes away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar
upon nitre: so is he that sings songs to an heavy heart. Music and mourning,
singing and sorrow, agree like Harp and Harrow; there is such a contrariety
between singing and sorrow, that he that sings does but add weight to his
sorrow that cannot sing. O sirs, As there is a time for rejoicing, so there is
a time for mourning; Eccles. 3.4.
as there is a time to laugh, so there is a time to weep; and as we must
rejoice with them that rejoice, so we must mourn with them that mourn, Romans
12.15.
and weep with them that weep. The condition of Gods people in this life, is a
mixed condition; in this life they have their rejoicing times, and their
mourning times, their laughing times, and their weeping times, their singing
times, and their sorrowing times, etc. It Is true, in heaven there is all joy
and no sorrow, all gladness and no sadness; and in hell there is all sorrow and
no joy, all grief and no gladness, all howling and no singing, all madness and
no mirth; but in this life it is otherwise, for if there should be nothing but
joy, many would look for no other heaven; and if there should be nothing but
sorrow, most would look for no other hell; if men should have nothing but joy,
how sadly would they be puffed up? And if they should have nothing but sorrow,
how easily would they be cast down? but now by a divine hand, our sorrows being
mixed with our joys, our hearts come to be the more effectually weaned from the
vanities of this life, and to long more earnestly after the pure and unmixed
joys of a better life, etc. But,

Eighthly, I answer, that it is possible that the sadness, sorrow, The cure of
Melancholy belongs rather to the Physician then to the Divine, to Galen then to
Paul.
and grief of those particular Saints, that thou have thine eye upon, may arise
from the natural temper and constitution of their bodies; many Saints are often
cast into a melancholy mould, for though grace changes the disposition of the
soul, yet it alters not the constitution of the body. Now there is no greater
enemy to holy joy and gladness, then melancholy, for this pestilent humor will
raise such strange passions and imaginations, 'twill raise such groundless
griefs, and fears, and frights, and such senceless surmises and jealousies as
will easily damp a Christians joy, and mightily vex, perplex, trouble, and
turmoyle, daunt, and discourage a Christians spirit. A Melancholy constitution
is Satan's Anvil, upon which he forms many black, It is an old saying, That
Melancholia est vehiculum Daemonum.
dark, and dismal temptations, which do exceedingly tend to the keeping down
of Divine consolation from rising high in the soul; this black, dark, dusky
humor disturbs both soul and body; it tempts Satan to tempt the soul, and it
unables the soul to resist the temptation; yea it prepares the soul to hearken
to the temptation, and to close and fall in with the temptation, as the
experiences of all Melancholy Christians can testify. Look as colored glass
makes the very beams of the Sun seem to be all of the same color with it self;
if the glass be blew, the beams of the Sun seems to be blew; if the glass be
red, the beams of the Sun seems to be red; or if the glass be green, the beams
of the Sun seems to be green: So this black Melancholy humor represents all
things to the eye of the soul, as duskish and dark, and as full of horror and
terror, yea many times it represents the bright beams of Divine love, and the
shinings of the Sun of righteousness, and the gracious whispers of the blessed
Spirit, as delusions, and as slights of Satan to cosen the soul. I have read
of a foolish Melancholy bird that stands always but upon one leg, for fear her
own weight (though she be very small) should sink her into the center of the
earth, and holding her other leg over her head, lest the Heavens should fall
upon her and crush her; I shall not dispute the credibleness of the relation:
but certainly there is nothing that fills a Christian so full of fears and
frights as a Melancholy humor does; and all know that know any thing, that
there are no greater adversaries to joy and gladness, then such fears and
frights, Now how absurd and unreasonable is it to father that upon holiness, or
upon all holy persons, that proceeds from the special constitution of some
particular Saints? and yet this is the trade that unsanctified souls drive. And
let thus much suffice for answer to this grand objection; and O that this
objection may never have a resurrection in any of your hearts more. But,

Fourthly, some may further object and say, We see that no persons Now to this
great and sore objection, I shall give these following answers.

First, It must be granted, that afflictions and persecutions has Abel was
persecuted by Cain, Witness the sufferings of the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles and Saints in all ages. Act. 7.52. Rev. 12.13. Act. 9.16. Lam. 5.5.
The common cry of persecutors have bin, Christianos ad Leones.
1 John 3.12. and Isaac by Ishmael, Gal. 9.29. That seems to be a standing Law,
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12.
A man may have many faint wishes, and cold desires after Godliness, and yet
escape persecution; yea he may make some assays and attempts as if he would be
godly, and yet escape persecution; but when a man is thoroughly resolved to be
godly, and sets himself in good earnest upon pursuing after holiness, and
living a life of godliness, then he must expect to meet with afflictions and
persecutions: It Is neither a Christians gifts, nor his graces; it is neither his
duties, nor his services that can secure him; whoever escapes, the godly man
shall not escape persecution in one kind or another, in one degree or another;
he that will live up to holy rules, and live out holy principles, must prepare
for sufferings: All the Roses of holiness are surrounded with pricking Briers.
The History of the ten persecutions, and that little book of Martyrs, the 11.
of the Hebrews, and Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments, with many other Treatises
that are extant, do abundantly evidence, that from age to age, and from one
generation to another, they that have been born after the flesh, Gal. 4.29.
Within the first 300. years after Christ, all that made a profession of the
Apostles doctrine were cruelly murdered.
have persecuted them that have been born after the spirit; and that the seed
of the Serpent have been still a multiplying of troubles upon the seed of the
woman. Would any man take the Churches picture (says Luther) then let him
paint a poor silly Maid, sitting in a wilderness, compassed about with hungry
Lions, Wolves, Bores and Bears, and with all manner of other cruel hurtful
Beasts, and in the midst of a great many furious men assaulting her every
moment and minute, for this is her condition in the world. As certain as the
night follows the day, so certain will that black angel, persecution, follow
holiness wherever it goes. In the last of the ten persecutions, seventeen
thousand holy Martyrs were slain in the space of one month. And in Queen
Mary's days, or if you will in the Marian days, not of blessed, but of most
abhorred memory, the Popish Prelates in less then four years, sacrificed the
lives of eight hundred innocents to their Idols; and O that that precious
innocent blood did not still cry to Heaven for vengeance against this Nation.
But,

Mat. 10.22. And ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake; but he that
endures to the end, the same shall be saved. Chap. 16.24. Then said Jesus unto
his Disciples, if any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross and follow me. Luke 21.12. But before all these they shall lay their
hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the Synagogues, and into
prisons, being brought before Kings and Rulers for my names sake. John 15.20.
Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater then the
Lord: if they have persecuted me, Non potest qui pati timet, ejus esse qui
passus est. He that is afraid to suffer, cannot be his disciple, who suffered
so much. Tert.
they will also persecute you: if they have kept my saying, they will keep
yours also. Ah Christians, since they have crowned your head with thorns,
there is no reason why you should expect to be crowned with Rose-buds. God-fry
of Bullen, first King of Jerusalem, refused to be crowned with a crown of Gold,
saying, That it became not a Christian there to wear a crown of Gold, where
Christ for our salvation had sometime worn a crown of thorns. Chap. 16. ult.
These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace, in the
world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world. Acts 14.21, 22. And when they had preached the Gospel to that City, and
had taught many, they returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium, and Antioch,
confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the
faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.
As there was no way to Paradise, but by the flaming sword, nor no way to Canaan
but through a wilderness, Loddela Corda computeth forty four several kinds of
torments wherewith the Primitive Christians were tried. Adv. Sacr. cap. 128.
so there is no way to heaven but by the Gates of hell; there is no way to a
glorious exaltation, but through a Sea of tribulation. They do but dream and
deceive their own souls, who think to go to heaven upon Beds of Down, or in a
soft and delicate way, or that think to be attended to glory with mirth and
music, or with singing or dancing; the way to happiness is not strewed with
Roses, but full of Thorns and Briers, as those of whom this world was not
worthy have experienced. Ecclesiastical Histories tells us that all the
Apostles died violent deaths; Peter was crucified with his heels upward, Christ
was crucified with his head upwards; but Peter thought this was to great an
honor for him to be crucified as his Lord, and therefore he chose to be
crucified with his heels upward; and Andrew was crucified by Egeus King of
Edessa; Acts 12.2.
and James the son of Zebedee was slain by Herod with the sword; and Philip was
crucified at Hierapolis in Asia; and while Bartholomew was preaching the
glad-tydings of salvation, multitudes fell upon him, and beat him down with
staves, and then crucified him, and after all this, his skin was fleaed off,
and he beheaded; Thomas was slain with a Dart at Calumina in India; and Matthew
was slain with a Spear, say some, others say he was run through with a sword;
and James the son of Alpheus (who was called the Just) was thrown down from off
a Pinnacle of the Temple, and yet having some life left in him, he was brained
with a Fullers club; Lebbeus was slain by Agbarus King of Edessa; and Paul was
beheaded at Rome under Nero; and Simon the Canaanite was crucified in Egypt,
say some, others say that he and Jude was slain in a Tumult of the people; and
Matthias was stoned to death; Rev. 1.9.
and John was banished into Patmos, and afterward as some Histories tells us
he was by that cruel Tyrant Domitian cast into a Tun of scalding Lead, and yet
delivered by a miracle. Thus all these precious servants of God (except John)
died violent deaths, and so through sufferings entered into glory; they found
in their own experience the truth of what Christ had foretold concerning their
sufferings and persecutions. About the year 1626, A book formerly printed, and
entitled, A preparation to the cross of Christ (composed by John Frith Martyr)
was brought in the belly of a Fish to the Market in Cambridge, Mr. Jer. Dyke in
a Fast Sermon at Westminster.
and that a little before the Commencement time; when there was a confluence of
much people from all places of the Land, which was construed by them that
feared the Lord, to be no less then an heavenly warning to all the people of
England, to prepare for the cross; But ah, since that year, who can recount the
heavy crosses that has generally attended the people of this Nation? most have
walked cross to God, and cross to one another, and God has walked as cross to
them; you have cross't the commands of God, and the truths of God, and the ways
of God, and the works of God, and the designs of God; and God has cros't you in
your hopes, desires, prayers, and endeavors, and God gave you warning of this
before hand by a Fish, by a miracle, to provide for the cross, but you would
not, and therefore it is that the cross lies so heavy upon you this day. When
Mr. Bradford was told that his chain was a buying, and that he must be burnt,
he lifted up his eyes to heaven and said, I thank God for it, I have looked for
this along time, it comes not to me suddenly, but as a thing waited for every
day, yea every hour in the day, the Lord make me worthy thereof. If upon Gods
warning you will but prepare for sufferings, you will never fear nor faint
under sufferings, yea then you will be able under the greatest persecutions to
bare up bravely, and with holy Bradford bless the Lord that has called you to
so high an honor, as to count you worthy to suffer for his name. But,

in your main and great concernments. Exodus 3.2. The Hebrew word (...)
signifies a dry bush, a bramble bush, and therefore it was the more strange and
miraculous, that it was not consumed. Deuteronomy. 4.24. Heb. 12.29.
And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the
midst of a Bush; and he looked, and behold the bush burned with fire; and the
bush was not consumed. Here you have a bush, a dry bush, a bramble bush all on
a light fire, and yet not consumed; this burning-bush was an excellent emblem
of the Church in the fire of tribulation and persecution; though the Church may
seem to be all on fire by reason of afflictions and persecutions, yet it shall
be preserved, it shall not be destroyed, though God be a consuming fire, yet he
will never consume the bramble-bush; the bush was on fire, and yet the fire did
not in the least hurt or harm the bush, it did not one whit prejudice or wrong
the bush: So though the Church of God be on fire by the means of fiery trials,
yet these fiery trials shall never hurt nor harm the Church, they shall never
prejudice it nor wrong it: Psalm. 105.12, 13, 14, 15. when they were but a few
men in number, yea very few, and strangers in it, when they went from one
Nation to another, from one Kingdom to another people, he suffered no man to do
them wrong, yea he reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, That is the King of
Egypt and the King of Gerar. Genesis 12.17. and Chapter 20.3. and Chapter 35.5. Zach. 2.8.
Touch not mine anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm. God would not suffer his
anointed ones, his sanctified ones, so much as to be touched, hurt, or harmed
by those who had malice enough in their hearts, and power enough in their
hands, not only to hurt them, but even to destroy them. Sanctified persons are
sacred persons, and they that touch them touch the Apple of Gods eye, and
whosoever shall be so bold to touch the Apple of Gods eye shall dearly smart
for it; 'twas no small affliction to have no settled habitation, to fly from
place to place, from Kingdom to Kingdom, and from Nation to Nation, was without
all peradventure, an afflicted condition; doubtless many fears and frights,
many hazards and dangers did attend them, when they considered that they were
as Lillies among the thorns, and as a few Sheep among a multitude of Wolves.
Deuteronomy. 7.1.
In the Land of Canaan there were seven mighty Nations now for the people of
God, who were so few in number, (that they might easily and quickly be told) to
sojourn and wander among these, As David laid a charge upon his soldiers, 2 Samuel 18.5. That by no means they should hurt his son Absalom; so God laid a
prohibition upon the enemies and persecutors of his people, that they should
not touch them, that they should not in in the least hurt or harm them.
could not but be very dangerous and perilous, and yet such was the love of God
to them, and the care of God over them, that he suffered no man, whether he was
high or low, honorable or base, rich or poor, civil or profane, to hurt or
harm them. Dan. 3.25, 27. And the King answered and said, Lo, I see four men
loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of
the fourth is like unto the Son of God. And the Princes, Governors and
Captains, and the Kings Counselors being gathered together, saw these men,
upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed,
neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them.
Though these holy men were cast into a furnace, into a fiery furnace, into the
midst of a hot fiery furnace, yet God will work a miracle, yea a glorious
miracle, rather then the fire shall in the least hurt or harm them: God gives a
commission to the fire, to burn those mighty men that made the fire, and that
cast his children into the fire, and whom the King would have to be spared and
saved; and he lays a law of restraint upon the fire, that it should not hurt
nor harm them whom the King would have destroyed: Those whom the King of kings
will not have hurt, shall not be hurt, let Kings and Princes do their worst;
that fire that burnt their bonds, had no power to burn (no nor to touch) their
bodies: God would not suffer the fire to singe a hair of their heads, nor to
change the color of their coats, nor to leave so much as an ill smell upon his
people, that those heathen Princes might see how tender he was of them, and how
willing he was to put forth his Almighty power, rather then he would see them
wronged or harmed. So Chap. 6.21, 22, 23. Then said Daniel unto the King, O
King live for ever. My God has sent his Angels, and has shut the Lions
mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocence was found
in me; and also before thee, O King, have I done no hurt. Then was the King
exceeding glad for him, and commanded that they should take Daniel up out of
the Den: so Daniel was taken up out of the Den, and no manner of hurt was found
upon him, because he believed in his God. Holiness, innocence, and integrity
will preserve a man even among Lions. Daniel preferred the worship of his God
before his life; he made no great reckoning of his life, when it stood in
competition with divine glory, and therefore rather then Daniel shall be hurt,
God will by a miracle preserve him, he will stop the mouths of the hungry
Lions, and he will tame their rage, and overmaster their cruelty, rather then a
hair of Daniels head shall perish; when Daniel was taken out of the Den, there
was no hurt, no wound, no sore, no bruise found upon him: Daniel was a harmless
man, and God keeps him from harms in the midst of harms. Acts 18.9, 10. Then
spoke the Lord to Paul in the night by a vision, be not afraid, but speak and
hold not thy peace, For I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee, to hurt
thee, for I have much people in this City. Paul met with many trials and
troubles, bonds and prisons, oppositions and persecutions, Acts 20.23.
and yet none of all these hurt him, but God miraculously preserved him, even
to old age. All the troubles, Phil. 9.
afflictions and persecutions that attends holiness, can never reach a
Christians soul, they can never diminish a Christians treasure, they reach the
shell, not the kernel, the Case, not the Jewel, the lumber, not the goods, the
out-house, not the Palace, the ribbon in the hat, not the gold in the purse;
the most fiery trials and persecutions can never deprive a Christian of the
special presence of God, nor of the light of his countenance, Psalm. 23.4. 2
Cor. 1.8, 9, 12.
nor of the testimony of a good conscience, nor of the joys of the spirit, nor
of the pardon of sin, nor of fellowship with Christ, nor of the exercise of
grace, nor of the hopes of glory; and therefore certainly they cannot hurt a
Christian, they cannot wrong a Christian in his greatest and chiefest
concernments. O Christian, let persecutors do their worst, they cannot reach thy
soul, thy God, thy comfort, thy crown, thy Paradise, etc. and therefore let no
man be kept off from pursuing after holiness, because of afflictions or
persecutions, seeing none of these can reach a Christians great concernments.
When the Emperor Valens threatened to confiscate Basils goods, and to torment
him, and to banish him, or kill him, Basil makes this noble reply, He needs not
fear confiscation of goods, that has nothing to loose, nor banishment, to whom
heaven only is a country, nor torments, when his body may be dash't with one
blow, nor death, which is the only way to set him at liberty; the Emperor
hearing of him thus undantedly to speak, told him that he was mad, to whom he
replied (opte me in aeternum sic delirare) I wish that I may be for ever thus
mad. Basil knew that no torments nor sufferings could hurt him or harm him, and
therefore he bravely triumphs over them. They may kill me said Socrates of his
enemies, but they cannot hurt me: So may a Saint say, they may kill my body,
but they cannot hurt my soul; they may take away my natural life, but they
cannot take away my spiritual life, for that is hid with Christ in God; Col.
3.3.
they may take away this and that outward comfort, Heb. 11.
but they cannot take away my Christ; they may take away my costly ornaments,
but they cannot take away that Robe of righteousness that Christ has put upon
me; Isa. 61.10.
they may take away my earthly crown, but they cannot take away that crown of
righteousness which Christ the righteous Judge, 2 Timothy 4.8.
has laid up for all that love his appearing. Methinks, said one of the
Martyrs, I tread upon pearls, when he trod upon hot burning coals, Vincentius.
and I feel (said he) no more pain, then if I lay in a bed of Down, and yet he
lay in flames of fire. I have read of Nero, that he had a shirt made of a
Salamanders skin, so that if he walked through the fire in it, it would keep
him from burning, it would keep him from being hurt or harmed by the fire; our
Lord Jesus Christ is this Salamanders skin that will keep the Saints from
burning, yea from being hurt or harmed by the most fiery afflictions and
persecutions that can befall them in this world. But,



Psalm. 35.3. -- 9. Psa. 69.22, 29. Neh. 4.3, 4, 5. turn to it.
Draw out the Spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me: say unto
my soul I am thy salvation. Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek
after my soul: let them be turned back and brought to confusion, that devise my
hurt. Let them be as chafe before the wind: and let the Angel of the Lord
chase them. Let their way be dark and slippery, (or darkness and slipperiness)
and let the Angel of the Lord persecute them. For without cause have they hid
for me their net, Both good and evil Angels are at Gods beck ready to execute
vengeance upon his and his peoples enemies and persecutors; and therefore the
Text may be understood of both.
in a pit, which without cause they have dug for my soul. Let destruction
come upon him, ar unawares; and let his net that he has hid, catch himself:
into that very destruction let him fall. So in that 83 Psalm, David sighs out
his sad complaints against his persecutors, from ver. 2. to ver. the 9th; and
from ver. the 9. to ver. the 18. he prays against them; turn to it, it is a
text that is worthy of your most serious meditation, Psalm. 119.84. How many are
the days of thy servant? when will thou execute judgment on them that
persecute me? Jer. 15.15. O Lord, thou know, remember me, and visit me, and
revenge me of my persecutors; take me not away in thy long suffering: know that
for thy sake I have suffered rebuke. Chap. 17.18. Let them be confounded that
persecute me, but let not me be confounded, let them be dismayed, but let not
me be dismayed; bring upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with double
destruction, or break them with a double breach. Lam. 3.61. -- ult. Thou have
heard their reproach, O Lord, and all their imaginations against me. The lips
of those that rose up against me, and their device against me all the day.
Behold their sitting down, and their rising up, I am their music, (or I am
their song) Render unto them a recompense, O Lord, according to the work of
their hands. Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them. Persecute and
destroy them in anger, from under the heavens of the Lord. 2 Timothy 4.14.
Alexander the Copper-smith did me much evil, the Lord reward him according to
his works. Thus you see how the hearts of the Saints have been drawn out
against their persecutors. Prayers are the Arms that in times of persecution
the Saints have still had recourse to. The Romans being in great distress, were
put so hard to it, that they were feign to take the weapons out of the Temples
of their gods to fight with their enemies, and so they overcame them; so when
the people of God have been hard put to it, by reason of afflictions and
persecutions, the weapons that they have fled to, has been prayers and tears,
and with these they have overcome their persecutors, as is evident in the three
Children, in Daniel, and many others, etc. But,

See Acts 4.17.21, 29, 31. compared. Luke 18.7. Lam. 5.59, 60, 61, etc.
Rev. 6.9, 10. And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the Altar the
souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which
they held. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth? The blood Blood has as many tongues as drops to cry for vengeance;
which made King James say, that if God did leave him to kill a man, he would
think God did not love him. 1 Cor. 6. ult. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
of the persecuted cries aloud for vengeance upon the persecutors. By the souls
under the Altar, you are to understand the persons of the Saints which were
martyred and lay slain upon the ground, like sacrifices at the foot of the
Altar, under the Roman persecuting Emperors. There is no blood that cries so
loud, and that makes so great a noise in heaven, as the blood of the Martyrs,
as the blood of butchered persecuted Saints. Persecutors, like these Roman
Emperors, in all ages have causlesly and cruelly destroyed the people of God;
they delight in the blood of Saints, they love to wallow in the blood of
Saints, they take pleasure in glutting themselves with the blood of Saints,
they make no conscience of watering the earth, nor of coloring the Sea, nor of
quenching the flames with the blood of the Saints, yea if it were possible they
would willingly swim to heaven through their hearts-blood, whom Christ has
purchased with his own most precious blood, (as all Historians know, and as you
may all know if you would but search a little into Ecclesiastical Histories)
and therefore it is no wonder if the blood of the Martyrs cry aloud for
vengeance upon such desperate persecutors: The blood and prayers of persecuted
Saints, will first or last bring down wrath and ruin upon their persecutors.
Persecution puts an edge, yea a sharp edge upon the prayers of the Saints; Acts
12.5. Peter therefore was kept in prison, but prayer was made without ceasing
of the Church unto God for him: The Greek word ((...)) signifies earnest and
stretched-out prayer. When Peter was in prison, All these circumstances do
wonderfully declare the power of God in his deliverance. Some say he had 16.
others say he had 20 Soldiers for his Guard; the greater was his deliverance.
sleeping between two Soldiers, and bound with two chains, and the keepers
standing before the prison door; O how earnest! O how instant! O how fervent!
O how vehement! O how constant were the Saints in their prayers for his
deliverance! O their hearts, their souls, their spirits were in their prayers;
O their prayers were no cold prayers, no formal prayers, no lukewarm prayers,
nor no dull or drowsy prayers, but their prayers were full of life, and full
of warmth, and full of heat; they knew Herod's bloody intention to destroy this
holy Apostle by his imprisoning of him, and by the chains that were put on
him, and by the strong Guards that were set upon him, and by his bathing of his
sword in the innocent blood of James, James was the first of the Apostles that
dyed a violent death.
that his hand might be the more apt and ready for further acts of murder* and
cruelty; and O how did the consideration of these things whet and provoke their
spirits to prayer! O now they will have no nay, now they will give God no rest,
till he has overturned the Tyrants counsel and designs, and sent his Angel to
open the prison doors, and to knock off Peter's chains, and to deliver him from
the wrath and fury of Herod; and their prayers were successful, as is evident
in the 12. ver. And when he had considered the thing, he came to the house of
Mary the mother of John, This house is thought by many to be the house, where
the Apostles commonly had their meetings.
whose surname was Mark, where many were gathered together, praying, or rather
as the Original has it, where many thronged together to pray: the violence and
rage of their persecutors did so raise, whet, and encourage them to prayer,
that they throng together, they crowded together to pray, yea when others were
a sleeping they were a praying, and their prayers were no sleepie prayers, they
were no lazy dronish prayers, nor they were no book-prayers, but they were
powerful and prevalent prayers; for as so many Jacob's, or as so many Princes
they prevailed with God; they prayed and wept, and wept and prayed, they called
and cried, and cried and called, they begged and bounc'd, and they bounc'd and
begged, and they never left knocking at heavens Gates, till Peter's chains were
knocked off, and Peter given into their Arms, yea their bosoms, as an answer
of prayer. O the power and force of joint prayer, when Christians do not only
beseech God, but besiege him, and beset him too, and when they will not let him
go till he has blessed them, and answered their prayers and the desires of their
souls. I have read that Mary Queen of Scots (that was mother to King James) was
wont to say, that she was more afraid of Mr. Knox's prayers, and the prayers of
those Christians that walked with him, then she was of a knocking Army of ten
thousand men. And that is a remarkable passage of the Psalmist, Psalm. 109.3, 4.
They compassed me about also with words of hatred; and fought against me
without a ca^se; The like speech you have in that Psalm. 120.7. Vaani
uzephillah. But I prayer.
For my love they are my adversaries, but I give my self unto prayer; or as
the Hebrew has it, But I am prayer, or a man of prayer. Persecuted Saints are
men of prayer, yea they are as it were made up all of prayer. David prayed
before, but O when his enemies fell a persecuting of him, then he gave up
himself wholly to prayer, O then he was more earnest, more fervent, more
frequent, more diligent, more constant, and more abundant in the work of
prayer. Plutarch in the life of Numa.
When Numa King of the Romans was told that his enemies were in Arms against
him, he did but laugh at it, and answered, and I do sacrifice; so when
persecutors arm themselves against the people of God, they do but divinely
smile and laugh at it, and give themselves the more up to prayer; when men arm
against them, then they a^me themselves with all their might to the work of
prayer; and woe woe to them that have Armies of prayers marching against them.
But,

Deuteronomy. 28.15. -- ult.
Deuteronomy. 30.7. And the Lord thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies,
and on them which hate thee, which persecuted thee. Nehe. 9.9, 10, 11. And
did see the afflictions of our fathers in Egypt, Exodus 3.7. Chap. 14.10. etc.
and heardest their cry by the red Sea: And showed signs and wonders upon
Pharaoh, and on all his servants, and on the people of his Land: for thou
knew that they dealt proudly against them: So did thou get thee a name, as
it is this day. And thou did divide the Sea before them, so that they went
through the midst of the Sea on the dry land, and their persecutors thou
threwest into the deeps, as a stone into the mighty waters. Pharaoh and his
Princes and people were very great oppressors and persecutors of Gods Israel,
As you may see in the 7, 8, 9, 10. and 12 Chap. of Exodus.
and therefore God visited them with ten dreadful plagues, one after another;
but when after all these plagues, God saw that their enmity against his people
was as great, or rather greater then ever, and that they were still set upon
persecuting of his people, then God takes up Pharaoh and his mighty Host,
Exodus 15.10.
and throws them as a stone into the mighty waters. Psalm. 7.11, 12, 13. God
judges the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day. If he turn
not, he will whet his sword; he has bent his bow, and made it ready. He has
also prepared for him the instruments of death; he ordains his arrows
against the persecutors. God whets before he strikes, he bends his bow before
he shootes, he prepares instruments of death, before he brings men down to the
grave, his hand takes hold on Judgment, before his Judgments take hold of
men; but if all these warnings will not serve their turns, God will overturne
them with a witness; He ordains his arrows against the persecutors, or as
the Hebrew has it, against the hot burning persecutors; (...) from (...) and
from Dalak is Daleketh that signifies a burning Ague.
God has his hot burning Arrows for hot burning persecutors; let persecutors
be never so hot against the Saints, God will be as hot against them; and let
them be never so much inflamed against the people of God, God will be as much
inflamed against them. Jer. 20.10, 11. For I heard the defaming of many, fear
on every side: Report, said they, and we will report it: All my familiars
watched for my halting, saying, peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall
prevail against him, After the Reign of Decius, under whom the seventh
persecution began; God sent a plague Ten years together, which made diverse
places of the world desolate, especially where the persecution most raged, etc.
and we shall take our revenge on him. But the Lord is with me as a mighty
terrible one: therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not
prevail, they shall be greatly ashamed, for they shall not prosper; their
everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten. When malicious and mischievous
persecutors have done all they can, to vex and fret, to daunt and affright, to
dismay and discourage the people of God, then God will terrify the most
terrible among them, and they shall not prevail nor prosper, yea they shall
stumble and fall, they shall be ashamed and confounded. Isa. 33.1. Woe to thee
that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they
dealt not treacherously with thee: when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall
be spoiled; and when thou shall make an end to deal treacherously, they shall
deal treacherously with thee. When the time is expired that God has prefixed
for his peoples sufferings, then God will retaliate upon their persecutors,
then they that spoiled his people, shall be spoiled, and they that dealt
perfidiously and treacherously with them, shall be dealt perfidiously and
treacherously withal; 2 These. 1.6. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God, to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you: It Is but Justice that God
should trouble those that are the troublers of his people; it is but Justice
that persecutors should be punished, and that the persecuted should be righted;
it is but Justice that God should trouble them in both worlds, who would be
troublers of his people in both worlds; it is but Justice that God should
trouble them to all eternity, who would be a troubling of his people to all
eternity, if their power were but answerable to their malice: And God has even
in this life been a swift witness against the persecutors of his people; Cain
was a persecutor, and his Brothers blood pursued him to hell; Pharaoh was a
great oppressor and persecutor of his people, and God followed him with plague
upon plague, and Judgment upon Judgment, till he had overthrown him in the
red Sea; Saul was a persecutor, and falls by his own sword; Haman was a great
persecutor of the Saints, and he was Feasted with the King one day, and made a
Feast for Crows the next; Jer. 20.1, 2, 3.
Pashur was a great persecutor, he smote the Prophet Jeremiah, and put him in
the Stocks, and God threatened to make him a Magor-missabib, a terror to
himself, 1 Kings 22.
and to all his friends; Zedekiah was a persecutor, he smote the Prophet
Micaiah on the cheek for dealing plainly and faithfully with the Kings, and in
the day of trouble and distress, he goes from chamber to chamber to hide
himself. Chap. 18.4.13. verses. 2 Kings 9.30. -- ult. Eusebius.
Jezabel was a great persecutor, she slew the Prophets of God, and she was
thrown out of a window, and eaten up of dogs. Herod the Great, who caused the
babes of Bethlehem to be slain, hoping thereby to destroy Christ, shortly
after was plagued by God with an incurable disease, having a slow and slack
fire continually tormenting his inward parts; he had a vehement and greedy
desire to eat, and yet nothing would satisfy him; his inward bowels rotted,
his breath was sho^t and stinking, some of his members rotted, and in all his
members he had so violent a Cramp, that nature was not able to bare it; and so
growing mad with pain he dyed miserably.

Herod Antipas, who beheaded John Baptist, Eusebius.
not long after falling into disgrace with the Roman Emperor, with his
incestuous Herodias, the suggester of that murder, they were banished, and fell
into such misery and penury, that they ended their wretched lives, with much
shame and misery.

Herod Agrippa was a great persecutor of the Saints, Acts 12. Joseph. Antiq. l.
19. chapter 7.
and he was eaten up of worms. In the third year of his Reign, as Josephus
observes, he went to Caesarea to keep certain Plays in the honor of Caesar;
the Gown he was in (as the same Author relates) was a Gown of silver
wonderfully wrought, and the beams of the Sun reflecting upon it, made it so
glister that it dazzled the eyes of the beholders; and when he had made an end
of his starched Oration in this his bravery, his flatterers extolled him as a
God, crying out, It Is the voice of a God, Acts 12.21, 22, 23. Joseph: Antiq:
lib. 18. chapter 13. Thales Milesius the prime wise man of Greece, being demanded
what he had observed to be of most difficulty in the world; Answered Tyrannum
senem, To see a Tyrant live to be an old man.
and not of a man; whereupon he was presently smitten by the Angel of the Lord,
and so dyed with worms that eat up his very intrailes; the blow the Angel
gave him was an inward blow, and so not visible to others, and his torments
more and more increasing upon him, the people put on sackcloth and made
supplication for him, but all in vain, for his pains and torments growing
stronger and stronger every day upon him, they separated his wretched soul
from his loathsome body within the compass of five days; And it is very
probable that the prayers of the persecuted Church did help to speed this
persecutor out of the world. Eusebius.
Caiaphas the high Priest, who gathered the Council, and suborned false
witnesses against the Lord Christ, was shortly after put out of his Office, and
one Jonathan substituted in his room, whereupon he killed himself.

Eusebius. Hist. li. 2. c. 7.
Not long after Pontius Pilate had condemned our Lord Christ, he lost his
Deputiship, and Caesar's favor, and being fallen into disgrace with the Roman
Emperor, and banished by him, he fell into such misery that he hanged himself.

Nero that Monster of men, who raised the first bloody persecution, (to pick a
quarrel with the Christians) set the City of Rome on fire, and then charged it
upon them; under which pretense he exposes them to the fury of the people, who
cruelly tormented them, as if they had been common burners and destroyers of
Cities, and the deadly enemies of mankind; yea Nero himself caused them to be
apprehended, and clad in wild Beasts skins, and torn in pieces with Dogs;
others were crucified; some he made Bonfires of to light him in his
night-sports; to be short, such horrid cruelty he used toward them, as caused
many of their enemies to pity them; but God found out this wretched persecutor
at last, for being adjudged by the Senate an enemy to mankind, he was
condemned to be whipped to death, for the prevention whereof he cut his own
throat.

Domitian the Author of the second persecution against the Christians, was by
the consent of his wife slain by his own household servants with daggers in his
privy chamber, his body was buried without honor, his memory cursed to
posterity, and his Arms and Ensigns were thrown down and defaced.

Trajan raised the third persecution against the Church, and the vengeance of
God followed him; for first he fell into a Palsy, then lost the use of his
senses, afterward he fell into a Dropsy, and dyed in great anguish.

There was not one of those persecuting Emperors that carried on the Ten
bloody persecutions against the Saints, but came to miserable ends; yea
Histories tell us of three and forty persecuting Emperors, who fell under the
revenging hand of God, and came to untimely ends. Among the many thousand
thousands of instances that might be given of the Judgments of God that have
fallen upon the persecutors of the people of God in these latter days, I shall
only give you a few. Faelix Earl of Wartenburge was a great persecutor of the
Saints, and swore that ere he dyed he would ride up to the spurs in the blood
of the Lutherans; but the very same night wherein he had thus sworn and vowed,
he was choked with his own blood: nothing would serve him but the blood of
Gods people, and God makes him drunk with his own blood. Sir Thomas More, once
Lord Chancelour of England, was a sworn enemy to the Gospel, and persecuted the
Saints with fire and faggot; and amongst all his praises, he reckons this the
chiefest, that he had been a persecutor of the Lutherans, i. e. the Saints; but
what became of him? he was first accused of Treason, and then condemned, and at
last beheaded. Judge Morgan was a great persecutor of the people of God; but
shortly after he had passed the sentence of condemnation upon that virtuous
Lady, the Lady Jane Gray, he fell mad, and in his mad raving fits he would
continually cry out, Take away the Lady Jane, take away the Lady Jane from me;
and in that horror he ended his wretched life. Drahomira, after the death of
her husband, usurped the Government of Bohemia, and was a cruel persecutor of
the people of God; but by a righteous hand of God it so fell out, that on that
very place where the Ministers bones lay unburied, the earth opened of it self,
and swallowed her up alive, with her Chariot and those that were in it, which
place is now to be seen before the Castle of Prague. Acts and Mon. 1911.
The Archbishop of Toures was an earnest Suitor for the erection of a Court
called Chamber Ardent, for the condemning of the French Protestants to the
fire, but before he dyed he had fire enough, for he was stricken with a disease
called, The Fire of God, which began at his feet, and so ascended upward,
which occasioned one member to be cut off after another, and so he ended his
miserable days. Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury, was a grievous
persecutor of the people of God, and a great suspender and silencer of good
Ministers; he made use of his tongue, brains, and power to stop the mouths,
and tie up the tongues of Gods faithful Ministers; but God in his righteous
Judgment so struck him in his tongue, that it swelled so big, that he could
neither swallow nor speak for some days before his death, and so he was
starved, choked, and killed by this strange tumor of his tongue. Mr. Groves
Gleanings. p. 155, 156.
I have read of one Mr. W. who was very busy in prosecuting an Indictment
against his Minister at a Quarter Sessions, for omitting the Cross in Baptism;
and being a man in high favor with the Justices, he made no question of
prevailing; at night (according to his usual manner) he falls to drinking, till
he was so extreme drunk that he was feign to be carried home; in the morning
his wife began mildly to blame him for his acting against the Minister the day
before, at which he with fearful oaths swore, that he would soon rid the
Town of that Puritan; but behold the hand of God, for as this wretched man was
about to rise, and having put one arm in his Dublet (even as the oaths were
uttering) he was taken speechless, yea and senseless, and so dyed. To conclude,
the Judgments of God upon the persecutors of the Saints in Bohemia was such,
that it was used as a Proverb among the adversaries themselves, that if any man
were weary of his life, let him but attempt against the Piccardines (for so
they called the Saints) and he should not live a year to an end. And thus you
see by these instances, that most severe Judgments have still followed the
persecutors of the people of God: Let me close up this argument thus; look as
in Princes Courts they are judged but silly shallow, brained men, that profess
open and mortal hatred to the greatest favorites of the King, because in so
doing they take the right and ready way to ruin themselves and families; so
they are doubtless the most silly shallow-brain'd men in the world (how wise
soever they may be in their own eyes, or in others eyes who are like unto
themselves) who persecute the favorites of the King of Kings, that being the
ready way to their own ruin and destruction. But,

Psalm. 9.12. When he makes inquisition for blood, (...) Damim bloods in the
plural; it notes the killings and murderings of Gods afflicted ones. Genesis 4.10.
1 Kings 9.26. 2 Chronicles. 24. Chap. 22.
he remembers them; he forgets not the cry of the humble: There is a time
when God will make inquisition for innocent blood; the Hebrew word Dor^sh from
Darash, that is here rendered inquisition, signifies not barely to seek, to
search, but to seek, search, and enquire with all diligence and care
imaginable. O there is a time a coming, when the Lord will make a very diligent
and careful search and enquiry after all the innocent blood of his afflicted
and persecuted people, which persecutors and Tyrants have spilt as water upon
the ground; and woe to persecutors when God shall make a more strict critical
and careful enquiry after the blood of his people, then ever was made in the
inquisition of Spain, where all things are carried with the greatest
diligence, subtilty, secrecy, and severity. O persecutors, there is a time a
coming, when God will make a strict enquiry after the blood of Hooper,
Bradford, Latimer, Tailor, Ridly, etc. There is a time a coming, wherein God
will enquire who silenced and suspended such and such Ministers, and who stopped
the mouths of such and such, and who imprisoned, confined, and banished such
and such, who were once burning and shining lights, and who were willing to
spend and be spent, that sinners might be saved, and that Christ might be
glorified. There is a time when the Lord will make a very narrow enquiry into
all the actions and practices of Ecclesiastical Courts, High Commissions,
Committees, Assizes, Sessions, etc. and deal with persecutors as they have
dealt with his people. Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of the poor, for the
sighing of the needy, now will I arise, (says the Lord) I will set him in
safety from him that puffs at him. When oppressors and persecutors do snuff
and puff at the people of God, when they defy them, and scorn them, and
think that they can with a blast of their breath blow them away, then God will
arise to judgment, as the Chaldee has it; at that very nick of time when all
seems to be lost, and when the poor oppressed and afflicted people of God can
do nothing but sigh and weep, and weep and sigh, then the Lord will arise, and
ease them of their oppressions, and make their day of extremity, a glorious
opportunity to work for his own glory, and his peoples good. Math. 22.6, 7. And
the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them:
But when the King heard thereof, he was wroth; and he sent for his Armies, and
destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their City. Christ sent his Apostles
and Disciples to invite the Jews to a marriage feast, to a stately feast, to a
feast made by a King, upon the account of his Son, of his only Son, of his
beloved Son, of his Son that is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 1.5.
Compare these Scriptures, Acts 5.40. chapter 7.58. and ch 12.2. and chapter 21.32. 2
Cor. 11.24. Heb. 11.37, 38.
but they entreated them spitefully, calling them pestilent fellows, and movers
of sedition, and some they imprisoned and scourged, and others they put to
death, as Stephen and James, etc. and O what spitefulness and ingratitude was
this to return evil for good, to requite them with reproaches, prisons,
scourges, and death, for their endeavoring to save their souls, and to make
them happy for ever: But will this great King put up these injuries,
indignities and abuses that are done to his servants? no, he will not; for as
soon as he heard of it, he was wroth, and sent forth his Armies to be revenged
on them: The murderers in the text were the Jews, and the Armies were the
Romans; now they are called Gods Armies, Dan. 9.26.
because God employed them as the executioners of his wrath upon Jerusalem; now
these Roman Armies did burn up their City, Josephus. Antiq: lib. 20. c. 8.
which was once the Paradise of the world, and brought to ruin and destruction
a 11 millions of men, women, and children, besides multitudes that were sold
for slaves, and others that were scattered among all nations; and thus God took
vengeance on these persecutors, and turned their Temple and City into ashes.
Plutar: Lib. de superstitione.
Plutarch writing of the quality of Tygres, says, That if Drums or Tabours
sound about them, they will grow mad, and rend and tear their own flesh in
pieces; O there is a day a coming when the last Trumpet shall sound, and then
all the persecutors of the Saints will grow mad, O then they will fret and
fume, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17.
and tear and torment themselves, and wish for the mounta^^s and rocks to fall
upon them, and to hide them from the wrath of the Lamb, who in that day will
with a witness avenge all his afflicted and persecuted ones. Alas, all the
sorrows, troubles, afflictions, vexations, torments and punishments that befall
the persecutors of the Saints in this life, they are but quasi tales, as it
were such, they are but the beginnings of sorrows, they are but Types and
Figures of those easeless, endless, and remediless torments and punishments
that will at last inevitably fall upon all the persecutors of the Saints. But,

Mr. Bradford looked upon his sufferings as an evidence to him that he was in
his right way.
Phil. 1.28. And in nothing terrified by your adversaries, which is to them an
evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God.
Persecuted Christians ought not to be disheartened or discouraged, but rather to
take heart and courage by all the persecutions that are raised against them,
because they are most certain witnesses and evidences from God himself, both
of their own salvation, and of their persecutors perdition and destruction. A
state of unbelief, John 3.18.36. Isa. 6.9, 10. 1 Timothy 4.2. John 3.19, 20.
Psalm. 81.12.
hardness of heart, blindness of mind, searedness of conscience, perverseness of
spirit, slighting and despising of that which is good, hating of the light, and
a man's being given up to the ways and lusts of his own heart, are dreadful
tokens of perdition, and fearful witnesses and evidences of destruction; and
these tokens and evidences, all persecutors are under, though it may be they
want eyes to see them, and hearts to be affected with them: plain and evident
tokens of wrath and ruin are stamped in Roman Characters upon all persecutors,
and did they but see those tokens, they would be as so many hand-writings upon
the wall against them. And thus you see by these five things, that there is no
condition under heaven that is so sad and deplorable a condition, as the
condition of persecutors is. But,

Fifthly, I answer, that God will bare his people company Exodus 3.2, 6. Math.
10.17, 18, 19, 20. Acts 6.9, 10. Romans 8.33, 34, 35.
the Angel of the Covenant will be in the midst of it. Isa. 43.2. When thou
passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they
shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be
burnt; neither shall the flames kindle upon thee. Both in the waters of
affliction, and in the fire of persecution, God will bare his people company.
So in that Dan. 3.24, 25. Then Nebuchadnezzar the King was astonished, and rose
up in have, and spoke and said unto his Counselors; Did not we cast three men
bound into the midst of the Fire? they answered and said unto the King, true, O
King. He answered and said, lo, I see four men loose walking in the midst of
the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like unto the
Son of God. Christ is never so near to his people as when they are in their
fiery trials; and the hotter the Furnace is, the more eminently present will
Christ be with his people; Saints never enjoy so much of the supporting,
imboldning, comforting, and encouraging presence of the Lord, as they do when
the Sun of persecution shines hottest upon them. Though Mr. Glover wanted the
presence of God for a time, yet when he came near to the stake where he was
burnt, he clapped his hands for joy, and cried out, He is come, he is come. 2
Cor. 4.8, 9. We are troubled on every side, yet not destroyed; we are
perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not
destroyed. Divine help is nea^est when a Saints danger is greatest: It is the
deriding question which persecutors put to the Saints in the time of their
trials and troubles, Vbi Deus? Where is now your God? Psalm. 79.10.
but they may return a bold and confident answer, Hic Deus, Our God is here,
our God is nigh unto us, our God is round about us, our God is in the midst of
us, our God has given us his promise, that he will never, Heb. 13.5.
never leave us, nor forsake us; in every trouble, in every danger, in every
death the Lord will be sure to keep us company: Hos. 2.14.
God will bare his children company, not only whilst they are in a delightful
Paradise, but also when they are in a howling wilderness. August. de Civit.
Dei. lib. 2. cap. 39.
When a company of poor Christians were going into Banishment, one standing by
to see them pass along, said that it was a very sad condition that those poor
people were in, to be thus hurried from the society of men, and to be made
companions with the Beasts of the field; True, said another, it were a sad
condition indeed, if they were carried to a place where they should not find
their God, but let them be of good cheer, for God goes along with them, and
will exhibit the comforts of his presence whithersoever they go; his presence
is infinite, Psalm. 139.
and fills all places. The Rabbis put Makom, which signifies place, among
the names of God; Bithner brings them in expounding that text, Esth. 4.14.
thus; Deliverance shall arise from another place, that is, from God; now they
called God place, because he is in every place, filling heaven and earth with
his presence. Where ever God scatters his people, he will be a little Sanctuary
A little Sanctuary is opposed to that fair and glorious one that was at
Jerusalem.
to them. Ezekiel. 11.16. Therefore say, thus says the Lord God, although I have
cast them far off among the heathen, and although I have scattered them among
the Countries, yet will I be to them as a little Sanctuary in the Countries
where they shall come. The Heathens were wont to say of a valiant man (Omne
solum forti patria) every soil is his Country; so I may say of a Christian,
every Country is his home, who enjoyes the presence of God with him, who finds
God to be a little Sanctuary to him; persecuted Saints shall be scattered no
where but God will be a little Sanctuary to them; in the want of a visible
Sanctuary, God will be an invisible Sanctuary to them; in the want of outward
ordinances, they shall have the presence of his grace and favor, God will be a
protection to them, and a spring of joy and comfort in them; his power shall be
as a wall of fire about them, and his Spirit shall be the Guide and Leader of
them. Though the Jews at Jerusalem, who enjoyed their glorious Temple, and
their pompious worship, and solemn assemblies, and precious ordinances, looked
upon their Brethren in Babylon as a poor, miserable, despicable, forlorn, and
forsaken people, yea as a people without God, and without his worship and
ordinances, and as those that had nothing to do with their magnificent Temple,
they having no outward splendour or glory at all upon them; yet says God by
Ezekiel, I will have them to know that I have other thoughts, and better
thoughts concerning their Captived Brethren; for I have thoughts of grace, and
thoughts of mercy, and thoughts of love, etc. for I will dwell among them, and
be a little Sanctuary to them, and make up the want of all outward ordinances
and privileges to them. I have read of the Tyrians, that they bound their Gods
with chains, Josh. 1.5. Psalm. 89.33, 34. Jer. 32.38, 39, 40, 41.
that they might not leave them in their greatest need; but our God has bound
himself with many Golden chains, I mean promises, that he will never leave
nor forsake his people in their greatest necessity and extremity. Theodoret had
a precious presence of God with him in his sufferings; for he sound so much
sweetness when he was on the Rack in the midst of his tortures, that he professed
he did not find any anguish in his torments, but a great deal of pleasure; and
when they took him down from the Rack, he complained that they did him wrong in
taking of him down, and in ceasing to torment him; for, said he, all the while
I was on the Rack, and you were venting your malice against me, I thought there
was a young man in white, an Angel that stood by me, which wiped off the sweat,
and I found a great deal of sweetness in my sufferings, which now I have lost.
O! Christians, in all your sufferings the Angel of Gods presence will bare you
company, and he will sweeten the most cruel torments, and wipe off all the
sweat, Isa. 63.9.
and take away all the pain, yea he will turn your pains into pleasure. If
Joseph be cast into prison, Genesis 39.20, 21. Jer. 36.6. to the 14. Psalm. 23.4, 5.
the Lord will be with him there; If Jeremiah be thrown into the Dungeon, the
Lord will be with him there; If David walk through the valley of death, Gods
Rod and his Staff shall comfort him; If the three Children be cast into a
fiery Furnace, the presence of the Son of God shall preserve them; if Daniel
must to the Lions Den, God will keep him company there, and chain up the Lions
nature, and sow up the Lions mouths, and lay a law of restraint upon the Lions
paws, that they shall not have so much as a disposition to touch him, or in
the least to hurt him, or harm him; 2 Timothy 4.16, 17, 18.
If Paul be brought before Nero's Judgment seat, God will stand by him,
though all men forsake him, and bring him off with credit and triumph. Thus you
see that in all the afflictions and persecutions that do befall the people of
God, God will not fail to keep them company; and therefore let not troubles
trouble you, let not afflictions afflict you, nor let not persecutions
discourage you. But,

Sixthly, I answer, That he shall be sure to suffer from Christ, that refuses
to suffer, or that is afraid to suffer for Christ's sake, or holiness sake, or
the Gospels sake; no man can suffer so much for Christ, as he shall be sure to
suffer from Christ, if he disdain and refuse to suffer for Christ. Mark 8.35.
For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his
life for my sake, That Husbandman that keeps his wheat looses his wheat, but
he that sowes his wheat renewes his wheat.
and the Gospels, the same shall save it: He that shall attempt to save his
life by crossing his light, by shifting off of truth, or by forsaking of
Christ, shall lose it; he that thinks to shun suffering by sinning, shall be
sure to suffer with a witness; it is a gainful loss to suffer for the truth,
it is a lossfull gain by time-serving and base complying with the lusts and
humors of men, to provide for our present safety, security, plenty, peace, and
ease, etc. either by denying the truth, or by betraying the truth, or by
exchanging the truth, or by forsaking the truth. When Henry the fourth of
France French History.
had conquered his enemies, he turned Papist, and gave this reason of it, That
he might settle himself in peace and safety. Ravilliak, who slew him as he was
riding abroad in his Coach to refresh himself, confessed that the reason why he
stabbed him was, because he was of two Religions; and thus by endeavoring to
save his life he lost it. One Philbert Hamlin in France, having converted a
Priest to the profession of the truth, was together with the Priest apprehended
and cast into prison at Bordeaux: But after a while, the Priest being terrified
with the prison, and fear of death, renounced Christ, and was set at liberty;
whereupon Philbert said to him; O unhappy and more then miserable man, is it
possible that to save your life for a few days, you should so deny the truth?
Know therefore, that though you have avoided the corporal fire, yet your life
shall not be prolonged, for you shall die before me, and you shall not have the
honor to die for the cause of Christ, but you shall be an example to Apostates;
And accordingly as he went out of the prison, two Gentlemen that had a former
quarrel with him, met him and slew him: And thus he also lost his life by
endeavoring sinfully to save it. Though life be sweet, and every creature makes
much of it, from the highest Angel to the lowest worm, yet woe to him that is
set upon saving of it, when Christ calls upon him to be divinely prodigal of
it; no fool to him who thinks to avoid a less danger by running himself into a
greater danger, who thinks to save his body by losing his soul, and to save his
temporal life by losing eternal life; there is no loser to him, who by sinful
attempts to saved his life, shall lose a better life then ever he can save. So
ver. 38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this
adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed
when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels. Ah friends,
what are prisons and dungeons, and racks, and flames, to Christ's being ashamed
of a man in the great day, when he shall be attended with Troops of Saints, and
millions of Angels? when in the face of the Court of Heaven, when all the
Princes of glory shall set upon their thrones, Christ shall disdain a man, and
scorn so much as to look upon him, or take any notice of him, or show the least
respect or favor toward him: O what a Sea of sorrow, and a hell of horror will
this raise in him? I have read that when Sapores King of Persia raised a
violent persecution against the Christians, Sozom. Hist. l. 2. c. 8.
Vsthazares, an old Nobleman, and one of King Sapores Eunuchs and Courtiers,
being a Christian, was so terrified, that he left off his profession, and
setting at the Court-gate, when Simeon an aged holy Bishop was led to prison,
and rising up to salute him, You may see the same story in Mr. Fox his book of
Martyrs, fol. 97. 98.
the good Bishop frowned upon him, and turned his face with indignation from
him, as disdaining to look upon a man that had denied the faith; upon this,
Vsthazares fell a weeping, and went into his Chamber, and put off his Courtly
garments, and then brake out into these (like) words, Ah how shall I appear
before that God that I have denied? with what face shall I behold that God of
whom I have been ashamed, when Simeon my old Familiar acquaintance will not
endure to look upon me, but disdains to bestow a civil salute upon me? if he
frown now, O how will God behold me when I shall stand before his
Tribunal-Seat? And this Physic so wrought with him, that he recovered his
spiritual strength, and went boldly and professed himself a Christian, and dyed
a glorious Martyr; the application is easy. Well Sirs, remember this, it is
infinitely better to suffer for God, then to suffer from God, 1 Pet. 3.17. For
it is better, Non poena, sed causa facit martyrim. It Is not the punishment, but
the cause that makes the Martyr. Acts and Monu. fol. 835.
if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well-doing, then for evil-doing;
It Is better to suffer for well-doing from men, then to suffer for ill-doing
from God. Cyprian in his Sermon de lapsis, makes mention of diverse, who
forsaking the profession of their faith, were given over by God to be possessed
by evil spirits, and so died fearfully and miserably. The Angrognians that
yielded and complied with the Papists that came against them, were more sadly
and cruelly handled by them, then their neighbors that continued constant in
the truth. Under the fourth persecution there were some Christians, who for
fear of torments and death, denied their faith, and sacrificed to idols, yet
did not their bloody persecutors spare them; and it was observed, that being
full of guilt, they went to their deaths with dejected and ill-favored
countenances, so that the very Gentiles took notice of it, and reproached them
as degenerous persons, and worthy to suffer as evil doers. West that was
Chaplain to Bishop Ridley, Acts and Mon. fol. 1570.
refusing to dye in Christ's cause with his Master, said Mass against his
conscience, and soon after pined away with sorrow. A Smith in King Edward the
sixth's days, called Richard Denson, was a forward professor of Religion, and
by his Christian instructions, the happy instrument of the conversion of a
young man to the Faith; afterward in the reign of Queen Mary, this young man
was cast into prison for his Religion, who remembering his old friend and
spiritual father the Smith, (to whom he always carried a reverend respect for
the good that he had received by him) sent to know whether he was not
imprisoned also, and finding that he was not, Fox Acts and Mon. fol. 873.
desired to speak with him, and when he came, he asked his advise, whether he
thought it best for him to remain in prison? and whether he would encourage him
to burn at a Stake for his Religion? To whom the Smith answered, that his cause
was good, and that he might with comfort suffer for it; But for my part (said
the Smith) I cannot burn: But shortly after, he that could not burn for
Religion, by Gods just Judgment was burned for his Apostasy, for his Shop and
house being set on fire, and he over-busie to save his goods, was burnt in the
flames. They that will not burn for Christ when he calls them to it, shall burn
whether they will or no. O how much better had it been for this Smith to have
burnt for Christ, then that Christ should set his house on fire, and burn him
in the midst of it? He that will not suffer for Christ, shall be sure to suffer
worse things from Christ, then ever he could have suffered for Christ; Ibid.
1382.
and therefore Doctor Tailor the Martyr hit it, If I shrink from Gods truth
(said he) I am sure of another manner of death then Judge Hales had; who being
drawn for fear of death to do things against his conscience, did afterward
drown himself.

In the Bohemian persecution, The famous Poet.
John Campan having forsaken his Religion, said to his wife, this day is
salvation come to our house, whereunto she answered, this day a curse is
brought into our house, and so it proved, for he ended his life in despair.

Those Apostates that left Galeacius, to enjoy their sinful pleasures and
delights, etc. were taken by the bloody inquisition, and forced publicly to
recant and abjure their Religion, and when they had done it, they became the
subjects of misery and infamy, and were equally odious to both parties.

Christ seems to say to all that refuse to suffer for him, as King Rehoboam
said to the Ten Tribes (the order of the words being only inverted) My little
finger shall be thicker then your persecutors loins, and I will add to your
yoke, 1 King. 12.10. -- 15.
and whereas they would have chastised you but with whips, I will chastise you
with Scorpions. O my friends, it is ten thousand times worse to be given up to a
proud heart, a hard heart, a worldly heart, a formal heart, an hypocritical
heart, a persecuting heart, an impenitent heart, or a desparing heart, etc. for
this is to be whipped with Scorpions, then it is to be given up to prisons, or
Racks, or Lions, or flames, or banishment, etc. for this is only to be
chastised with whips, yea with such whips that can only reach our bodies, but
can never touch our immortal souls. And therefore as you would not suffer such
hard things from Christ, O take heed of being unwilling to suffer any thing for
Christ's sake, or the Gospels sake. But,

Luke 21.13.
afflictions, and persecutions that shall befall you for righteousness sake,
for holiness sake. Persecutions are the workmen that will fit you and square
you for Gods buildings, they are the rods that will beat off the dust, and the
Skullions that will scour off the rust from your souls; they are the fire that
will purge you from your dross, and the water that will cleanse you from your
filthiness. Physicians, you know apply Horse-leeches to their destempered
Patients; now the Horse-leech intends nothing but to satiate and fill himself
with the blood of the sick patient, but the Physician has a more noble aim,
even the drawing away of that putrified and corrupt blood that endangers the
life of his patient: So though persecutors aim at nothing more then to draw out
the heart-blood of Gods people, that they may satiate and fill themselves with
it, yet God has other thoughts, and other aims, even the drawing away of that
corrupt blood, that pride, that self-love, that worldliness, that carnalness,
and that luke-warmness, that otherwise would endanger the life, the health, and
welfare of their souls. But this great truth I shall make more evident by an
induction of particulars, thus:

Phil. 1.27, 28, 29.
Afflictions, and persecutions, will discover what metal men are made of: All
is not Gold that glisters; many there be that glister, and look like golden
Christians, but when they come to the fire, they prove but dross; he is a
golden Christian indeed, who remains gold when under fiery trials. The stony
ground did glister and shine very gloriously, Mat. 13.20, 21.
for it received the word with joy for a time, but when the Sun of persecution
rise upon it, it fell away. Men that now embrace the Word, will in times of
persecution distaste the Word, if it be not rooted in their understandings,
judgments, wills, affections, and consciences; men may court the Word, and
complement the Word, and applaud the Word, and seemingly rejoice in the Word,
but thy will never suffer persecution for the Word, if it be only received
into their heads, and not rooted in their hearts. Mat. 7.26, 27.
The House built upon the sand, was as lovely, as comely, as goodly, and as
glorious a house to look upon, as that which was built upon the Rock; but when
the rain of affliction descended, and the floods of tribulation came, and the
winds of persecution blew and beat upon that house, it fell, and great was the
fall of it. No professors will be able to stand it out in all winds and
weathers, but such as are built upon a Rock, all others will sink, shatter,
Mal. 3.2.
and fall when the wind of persecution blows upon them; as sure as the rain
will fall, the floods flow, and the winds blow, so sure will an unsound heart
give out when trials come; no heart but a sound heart will hold out bravely,
when hardships attends holiness on both hands; no heart but a holy heart will
bear the brunt of persecution for holiness sake. The three children, Shadrach,
Meshech, and Abednego, Dan. 3.17, 18.
would rather burn then bow, they would rather suffer then sin, which was an
evident proof of their sincerity and ingenuity; they would be non-conformists,
though Court, City and Country cried up conformity, which was a sure argument
of their integrity; but now unsound hearts will exceedingly shuffle and shift
to shift off persecution; witness those false Teachers in Gal. 6.12. As many as
desire to make a fair show (or as the Greek has it, to set a good face on it)
in the flesh, (...).
they constrain you to be circumcised: only lest they should suffer
persecution for the cross of Christ. At this time the Jews out of zeal to their
Law, did sorely persecute those that did either preach or practice any thing
contrary to their Law: Now these false Teachers set a good face on it, and make
a fair show, as if they were all for carnal Rites and Ceremonies, and they
urged circumcision upon the Galathians, but not out of any affection or zeal
that they did bare to the Law, but only to procure favor on the one hand, and
to avoid and escape the malice and persecution of the Jews on the other hand:
they that were no Jews to avoid persecution, would comply with them that were;
they would seem to be very earnest for Judaism, but not for Christianisme, that
so they might escape the fury of the Jews. Unsound hearts will say any thing,
and do any thing, and be any thing to avoid persecution, and to ingratiate
themselves with persecutors. Joseph Hist. Lib. 13.
The Samaritans, as long as the Jewish Religion flourished and was in honor,
caused a Temple to be built on Mount Garazin, that therein they might not be
inferior to the Jews; and they boasted themselves to be of the progeny of
Joseph, and worshippers of God with them, but when they perceived that the Jews
were cruelly afflicted and persecuted by Antiochus Epiphanes, for worshipping
of the true God, and fearing least they should be handled in the like manner,
they changed both their coat and their note, affirming that they were but
Israelites, but Sidonians, and that they had built their Temple, not unto God,
but to Jupiter. Thus times of affliction and persecution will distinguish the
precious from the vile, 'twill difference the counterfeit professor from the
true. Persecution is a Christians Touchstone, it is a Lapis Lydius that will
try what metal men are made of, whether they be Silver or Tine, Gold or dross,
Wheat or Chafe, shadow or substance, carnal or Spiritual, sincere, or
hypocritical; nothing speaks out more soundness and uprightness, then a
pursuing after holiness, even then when holiness is most afflicted, pursued,
and persecuted in the world; to stand fast in fiery trials argues much
integrity within. But,

Israelites in Egypt were oppressed, afflicted, and persecuted, the more they
increased and multiplied, Exodus 1.10, 11, 12, 13. Cyprian speaking of the
Christians and Martyrs in his time, says, Occidi poterant sed vinci non
poterant. They may kill them* but they cannot overcome them.
Come, say they, let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply; let us
increase their task, let us lay heavy burdens upon them, etc. and accordingly
they did, thinking by low, this means to cow out their spirits, and to have
brought them low, and to have lessened their number; but did this stratagem
prevail? O no, As you may see in verse. 12. But the more they afflicted them,
the more they multiplied and grew. There were but seventy souls that went down
to Egypt, but they multiplied to six hundred thousand, besides children, as is
evident by comparing Exodus 1.5.7. with Chap. 12.37, 38. So the Jews that were
carried captive to Babylon, were but twelve thousand six hundred, but they
returned forty two thousand three hundred and threescore, besides their
servants and their Maids, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred
thirty and seven. Neh. 7.66, 67, etc. Ezra 2.64, 65. The Kingdom of Christ is
set forth by a little stone cut out of a Mountain without hands; Dan. 2.34, 35.
and though in all ages there has been many hammers at work to break this
little stone in pieces, yet they have not been able to do it, but this little
stone has proved a growing stone, and in spite of the devil, and a persecuting
world will grow more and more, till it comes to be a-great mountain, and
fills the whole earth. In the 8. of the Acts you read of a great persecution,
and the storm beat so hard upon the Churches, that it dispersed and scattered
them up and down; and this was so far from lessening of the number of believers
that it did mightily increase their number; witness verse. 4, 5, 6, 8. Therefore
they that were scattered abroad, went every where preaching the word. Then
Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and preached Christ unto them. And the
people with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip spoke, hearing
and seeing the miracles which he did. And there was great joy in that city.
Samaria was a very wicked corrupt place, and bewitch't by the Sorceries of
Simon Magus, yet God had his people there, Verse. 14, 15, 16, 17.
and by the Ministry of Philip (not Philip the Apostle, but Philip the Deacon)
who was a persecuted brother, he called them home to be partakers of his Spirit
and Grace. And thus the scattering of the Church was the great advantage and
increase of the Church; Witness Faber, Farellus, Ruffus, and many others in
France, and witness our Brethren who were forced to fly to New England.
the persecution of one Church may be the gathering, edifying, multiplying, and
erecting of many Churches. Such Ministers who have been by persecution driven
from their own Churches, have been eminently instrumental in the planting of
many other Churches. Though the Gospel, and the faithful Preachers and
professors of it was by the Scribes, Pharisees, High Priests, Elders, and great
council, exploded, blasphemed and persecuted at Jerusalem (which was once the
holy City) yet it was with joy received in the poluted, bewitched, scorned and
despised City of Samaria. O the Freeness! O the riches of grace! Persecution is
the multiplication of the people of God; in all ages the more the Saints have
been afflicted, oppressed, and persecuted, the more they have increased. The
removing of the seven Churches in Asia, brought the Gospel to Europe and
Africa. During the ten cruel persecutions of the Heathen Emperors, the
Christian faith was spread through all places of the Empire, because the oftener
they were mowen down, the more they grew, as Tertullian witnesses; and the
more we are cut down by the sword of persecution (says the same Author) the
more still we increase. Persecuted Saints are like Cammomile which grows and
spreads by being trod upon; the more persecutors tread upon the people of God,
the more they will spread and grow. Austin has long since observed, that though
there were many thousand Christians put to death for professing Christ, yet
they were never the fewer for being slain. Julian the Apostate devised all
manner of torments to terrify the people of God, and to suppress them, and yet
they increased and multiplied so fast, that at last he thought it his best
course to give over persecuting of them, and this he did not out of love to
them, but because the more they were persecuted, the more they increased.

In Dioclesians time under whom the last and worst of the ten persecutions
fell, for then Christian Religion was more desperately opposed and persecuted
then ever, and yet then Religion prospered and prevailed more then ever;
Ruffinus.
so that Dioclesian himself observing that the more he sought to blot out the
name of Christ, the more legible it was, and the more he labored to block up
the way of Christ, the more passible it was, and that whatever of Christ he
though to root out, it rooted the deeper, and rose the higher, thereupon he
resolved to engage no further, but retired to a private life.

And it is very observable, that the reformation in Germany, was much furthered
by the very opposition that the Papists made against it; yea, and it is not to
be forgotten, that when two Kings wrote against Luther, viz. Henry the eighth
of England, and Ludovicus of Hungary, this Kingly Title being entered into the
controversy, made men more diligently and curiously to examine the matter, by
which means there was stirred up in men a general inclination to Luthers opinion.

I have read of one who observing the Christian Religion to be so furiously
persecuted by bloody Nero, concluded that surely that must needs be good, yea
very good which was so cruelly persecuted by Nero who was so bad, so very bad:
if men would sit down and study which way to make most proselytes to such and
such opinions and practices that are different from their own, certainly they
cannot pitch upon a better way then to persecute those that differ from them;
it is the sword of the Spirit, and not the sword of persecution that will reduce
the erroneous; when the disease lies in the head, the remedy must be answerable
to the disease: certainly a man shall as soon conquer a Castle by Spiritual
arguments, as he shall conquer a conscience by club-law; when our Lord Jesus
Christ sent forth his Disciples to make a conquest upon an ignorant, erroneous,
and deluded world, he did not send them forth with swords, pistols, or any such
military weapons; O no, but he sent them forth under the choice anointings of
his Spirit, and with his everlasting Gospel, and by these means he turned the
world upside down; these were the means by which he turned sinners from
darkness to light, Acts 26.18.
and from the power of Satan to Jesus Christ. The weapons that the Apostles
used were not carnal, but Spiritual. 2 Corinthians. 10.4, 5. For the weapons of our
warfare are not carnal, but Spiritual, Vide Calvin, Beza, and Estius.
and mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.
Satan had many strong holds, and sin had many strong holds, and carnal reason
had many strong holds, and the world had many strong holds in sinners hearts;
and yet all these strong holds, Forts, Towers, Castles, etc. were not able to
stand before the Apostles Spiritual weapons: they all come tumbling down before
the Spirit and the word of the Lord in the mouths of his faithful Ministers; by
these Spiritual weapons Satan was disarmed, and rebellious transgressors were
conquered, captivated, and subdued to the obedience of the Lord Jesus. But,

Thirdly, The troubles, afflictions, and persecutions that befall you in the
pursuit after holiness, may issue in the conversion and salvation of others, as
is evident in Acts 8. which Chapter I recommend to your most serious perusal.
So in that 2 Timothy 2.9, 10. Wherein I suffer trouble as an evil doer, even unto
bonds, but the Word of God is not bound, (though Paul was fettered, (...), For
this cause.
yet the word was free) Therefore I endure all things for the Elects sakes,
that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal
glory. Paul for preaching of the Gospel clearly and faithfully was imprisoned
at Rome, and handled as if he had been a malefactor, all which he was contented
to suffer upon these very grounds, that the Elect might be called, converted,
saved and glorified. It Is very observable, that though Paul was a prisoner, yet
he preached; though he was in bonds, Several of Paul's Epistles were written when
he was in bonds.
yet he preached; and though he was accounted as an evil doer, yet he preached,
that the Elect might be sanctified and saved; Though his persecutors did lay
Irons upon his legs, yet they did not lay a law of silence upon his lips; and
though they shut him up from going to others, yet they did not shut out others
from coming to hear him; for even in bonds he exercised his ministerial office:
As cruel as his persecutors were, they would not shut the prison doors upon
them that waited on his Ministry. So Philemon was converted by Paul when he was
in bonds, Phil. v. 10. I beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten
in my bonds. Paul had a blessing going along with his Ministry, when he was in
bonds as well as when he was at liberty. Onesimus was converted when Paul was a
prisoner; God made Paul's prison to be a Paradise to Onesimus; Paul by his
preaching, patience, and cheerfulness in suffering, converts Onesimus to the
faith: prisons in these times were turned into Churches; And so they were in
Queen Mary's days; Act. and Mon. fol. 1457.
for as bloody as her Reign was, most of the prisons in England were turned
into Christian Schools and Churches (says Mr. Fox) so that there was no
greater comfort then for Christians to resort to prisons, and to hear the
Martyrs to pray and preach, and to behold their holy, humble, heavenly,
gracious conversation. Ibid. 1381.
So the afflictions and persecutions of the Saints in the primitive times
issued in the conversion and salvation of many souls. We read that Cicilia a
poort Virgin by her gracious behavior in her martyrdom, was the means of
converting 400. to Christ. Adrianus by seeing the Martyrs suffer so patiently
and cheerfully, was converted to the faith, and afterward sealed to the truth
with his blood. Justin Martyr was also converted in the same way. In the third
persecution, Faustus and Jobita, Citizens of Brixia, suffered Martyrdom with
such invincible patience, courage, and cheerfulness, that Caeloccrius cried out
(Vere magnus Deus Christianorum) Verily great is the God of the Christians;
Upon which words he was presently apprehended, and so suffered martyrdom with
them. And that was a remarkable saying of Luther (Ecclesia totum mundum convert
it sanguine and oratione) the Church converteth the whole world by blood and
prayer. Now if by your troubles, afflictions, and persecutions, and the
exercise of grace under them, you shall be instrumental to convert and save a
soul or souls from wrath to come, it will turn wonderfully to your advantage,
and you shall shine as the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. That same power,
presence, wisdom, and grace, that converted others by the sufferings of former
Saints, is able to accomplish the same glorious effects by the sufferings of
the Saints of this Generation; and therefore bear up bravely, and neither fear
nor faint under your present sufferings. But,

Fourthly, The troubles, afflictions, and persecutions that Psalm. 69.7, 8, 9,
12.
Let me instance in that grace of zeal: I remember Moulin speaking of the
French Protestants, says, When Papists hurt us for reading the Scriptures, we
burn with zeal to be reading of them; but now persecution is over, our Bibles
are like old Almanacks, etc. All the reproaches, frowns, threatenings,
oppositions, and persecutions that a Christian meets with in a way of holiness,
does but raise his zeal and courage to a greater height. Micha's scoffing at
David did but inflame and raise his zeal: 2 Samuel 6.20.21, 22.
If this be to be vile, I will be more vile. Look as fire in the winter burns
the hotter (by an Antiperistasis) because of the coldness of the air; so in the
winter of affliction and persecution, that divine fire, the zeal of a
Christian, burns so much the hotter, and flames forth so much the more
vehemently and strongly. In times of greatest affliction and persecution for
holiness sake, a Christian has, first, a good Captain to lead and encourage
him; Secondly, a righteous cause to prompt and embolden him; Thirdly, a
gracious God to relieve and succor him; Fourthly, a glorious heaven to receive
and reward him; and certainly these things cannot but mightily raise him and
inflame him, under the greatest opposition and persecution; These things will
keep him from fearing, fawning, fainting, sinking, or flying in a stormy day;
yea these things will make his face like the face of an Adamant, as God
promised to make Ezekiels: Ezekiel. 3.7, 8, 9. Job 41.24. Pliny.
Now an Adamant is the hardest of stones, it is harder then a flint, yea it is
harder then the nether-milstone. The Naturalists observe, that the hardness of
this stone is unspeakable; the fire cannot burn it (nor so much as heat it
through) nor the hammer cannot break it, nor the water cannot dissolve it, and
therefore the Greeks call it an Adamant from its untameableness; and in all
storms the Adamant shrinks not, it fears not, it changes not its hue; let the
times be what they will, the Adamant is still the same; in times of
persecution, a good cause, a good God, and a good conscience will make a
Christian like an Adamant, 'twill make him invincible, and unchangeabl^. When
one desired to know what kind of man Basil was, there was presented to him in a
dream, says the History, a Pillar of fire with this motto (Talis est Basilius)
Basil is such a one, he is all on a light fire for God; persecutions will but
set a Christian all on a light fire for God. Look as Well-water is warmest in
the winter time, so real Christians are warmest for God, his glory, truth, and
ways, in the winter of affliction and persecution: true grace rises by
opposition and persecution; many a man had not been so good if the times had
not been so bad; many a man had not been so gracious, if the times had not been
so dangerous; many a man had not been so holy, if the times had not been so
profane; many a man had not been so zealous, if the times had not been so
lukewarm; many a man had not been so stout and resolute against bowing the knee
to Baal, if multitudes had not been worshppers of Baal. Rev. 14, 1. -- 6.
All the afflictions and persecutions that befall the people of God, do but add
to their spiritual life, light, and luster. As Stars shine brightest in the
darkest nights, and as Spices smell sweetest when pounded, and as Vines are the
better for bleeding, and Gold the brighter for scowring, and Palm Trees the
better for pressing; so the graces of the Saints shine brightest, and smell
sweetest, and rise highest in times of affliction and persecution. The
Naturalists have long since observed, that though the South wind be more
pleasant, yet the North wind is more healthful; for the South wind with his
warmth raises vapors, which breed putrefaction, and cause diseases; but the
North wind with his cold dries up those vapors, purging the blood, and
quickening the spirits: so the North wind of affliction and persecution,
contributes most to the drying up of sinful vapors, and to the quickening up of
a Christians Graces. Though the wind may blow, and the rain in stormy weather
may beat upon a painted Post or Sign, whose color is laid in oil, yet the
wind and rain is so far from blowing or washing off the color or beauty that
is upon the Post or Sign, that it rather adds to their beauty, and makes them
shine more beautiful then before; so the rain of affliction and the wind of
persecution, do rather add to the beauty and luster of a Christians graces,
then any way cloud them, or take off the spiritual beauty and glory of them.
But,

Fifthly, Persecuting times are uniting times; oh the discord, unites them
together. In persecuting times the Saints have been but as one man; which made
their very persecutors to say (Ecce ut invicem se diligunt!) see how these
Christians love one another, see how they knit and close together! Eusebius in
Hist. Psalm 83.3. to verse 9. 2 Chronicles. 20.1, 4, 12.
Though the sheep in Sunshine days feed at a distance, and wander one from
another; yet when a storm comes, or the Wolf comes, then they run all together;
and so it is with Christians: Some Religious Bishops that could by no means
agree when they had their freedom and liberty, yet could well enough agree when
they were in prison together. Though children in a Family may fall out among
themselves, yet they quickly unite when a common enemy assaults them.
Persecuting times unite Christians closer together in their affections,
resolutions and prayers: they who formerly could hardly be brought to eat
together, or trade together, or live together, or walk together, in persecuting
times will be brought to hear together, and pray together, and fast together,
and communicate experiences together, and stand together, and fall together,
and rise together, etc. When Gebal and Ammon and Amaleck did combine, the
people of God kept close together: for they very well knew that broken forces
were soon dissipated. I have read of Ptolomeus Philadelphius King of Egypt,
that he caused the Bible to be translated by seventy Interpreters, which
seventy were severally disposed of in seventy several Cells, and though they
knew not the names of one another, nor never saw the faces of one another, yet
they did so well agree in their several Translations, that there was no
considerable difference betwixt them in rendering the Text: so when the people
of God shall be put into Cells and Prisons, and Goals, then they will so agree
together, Acts 7.
that there will be little or no difference betwixt them. As all the stones
that came about Stephens ears, did but knock him closer to Christ the corner
stone: so all the stones that come about the Saints ears, will but knock them
the nearer to Christ, and the closer one to another. But,

Phil. 1.12, 13, 14. But I would ye should understand, Brethren, that the
things which happened unto me, have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the
Gospel; So that my Bonds in Christ are manifested in all the palace, Veritas
vincit.
and in all other places. And many of the Brethren in the Lord waxing confident
by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word without fear. Both Court,
City, and Country did ring of Paul's bonds, and the cause thereof; Paul's Iron
chain made more noise, and was more glorious, and wrought more blessed effects
then all the Golden chains in Nero's Court: for by his bonds and chains many of
the Brethren were mightily imboldned and encouraged to preach the word without
fear; the Brethren when they saw that Paul preached, and kept up the exercise of
his Ministry, though a prisoner, and though he was in bonds and chains, could
not but reason thus with themselves; Si veritas est causa discordiae, mori
possum, tacere non possum: If truth be the cause of our discord, I may dye, but
I may not be silent, said Jerome to Helvidius.
if Paul a prisoner holds up and holds on in preaching the word, though he be
in bonds and chains; ah how much more ought we who are at liberty to hold up
and hold on in preaching the truth, and advancing the truth, and in spreading
of the truth! There were many that took an occasion from Paul's imprisonment,
bonds, and sufferings, to disgrace his Apostleship; the Apostle meets with
these, and tells them, that though they designed and intended the disgrace and
hinderance of the Gospel by his imprisonment and bonds; yet God had by his
wonderful providence and goodness so ordered the matter, that his bonds and
imprisonment turned to his great honor and fame, and an occasion of further
spreading and advancing the Gospel. Though Satan and his instruments may
disturb the truth, yet they cannot suppress it; for (magna est veritas and
praevalebit) great is truth, and shall prevail. So upon the persecution of
Stephen many of the Brethren preached the word far and near, and the hand of
the Lord was with them to the conversion of many, Act. 11.19. -- 25. Now they
which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that arose about Stephen,
traveled as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the word to
none but the Jews only; and some of them were men of Cyprus, and Cyrene, which
when they were come to Antioch, spoke unto the Grecians, preaching the Lord
Jesus; and the hand of the Lord was with them; and a great number believed, and
turned unto the Lord. Then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the
Church which was in Jerusalem; and they sent forth Barnabas, that he should go
as far as Antioch: who when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad,
and exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the
Lord. For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost, and of faith; and much
people were added unto the Lord. The Brethren that were dispersed and scattered
by reason of persecution, fall upon preaching of the Lord Jesus; and though
they were Laymen, yet the hand of the Lord was mightily with them, so that a
great number believed and turned to the Lord. God is a free agent, and can work
the hearts of men over to himself by what hand he pleases, and many times he
does the greatest works by the most despised hands, 1 Cor. 1.21, 25, 27.
as it is evident in this instance. The Apostles did not fret, and fume, and
storm, and take on, because these Brethren preached the Lord Jesus without
ordination to the work of the Ministry. O no; but they were glad and rejoiced
in their bringing in of souls to Christ, and they made it their work to exhort,
encourage and build up those that were brought in; neither did they prohibit
these Brethren from preaching, because they had not Apostolical hands laid on
them. By these Laymens preaching, Christ is revealed, and multitudes are
converted, and truth is advanced* and the Apostles are gladded. Now by what
has been said, it is most evident that persecuting times are truth-advancing
times. But,

Acts. 5.41. Acts 7.55, 56. Chap. 16.25. Oh how my heart leapeth for joy (said
Mr. Philpot) that I am so near the apprehension of eternal life! Ephesians. 3.1.
Chap. 4.1. 2 Timothy 1.8. Phil. 1.9.23.
And they departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for his name: They counted it an honor to be
dishonored for Christ, they took it as a grace to be disgraced for Jesus.
Stephen found the joys of heaven in his heart as the stones came clattering
about his ears. So Paul and Sylas when they were in prison, their hearts were
so full of joy that they could not hold, but at midnight when others were a
sleeping, they must fall a singing out the praises of the most High; they found
more pleasure then pain, more joy then sorrow more comfort then torment in
their bonds; the Rods with which they were whipped, Col. 4.10. Romans 16.7. Paul
rattles his chain which he bears for the Gospels sake, and was as proud of it,
as a woman of her ornaments, says Chrysostom.
were as Rods made up all of Rosemary branches; divine consolations rise so
high in their souls, that their prison was turned into a Palace, yea into a
Paradise. Paul was a man that took a great deal of pleasure in his sufferings
for Christ; 2 Cor. 12.10. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: He
did not only bare his sufferings patiently, but cheerfully also; he often sings
it our, I Paul a prisoner (as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the
margent together) of Jesus Christ; not I Paul an Apostle, nor I Paul wrapped up
in the third heaven, nor I Paul that have more gifts, parts, and learning then
others, but I Paul a prisoner, to show how much he rejoiced in his bonds and
sufferings for Christ. Chrysostom did not hold Paul so happy for his rapture
into Paradise, as he did for his imprisonment for Christ. So Romans 5.3, 4. And
not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation works
patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope. Old Soldiers could
not glory and joy more in their marks and scars of honor, then these Saints
did in their tribulations and persecutions for Christ's sake. Rabbi Simeon Ben
Jochai lived twelve years in a dark Dungeon for fear of the Roman persecution
in the Reign of Trajane the Emperor; and he called his dark Dungeon Zohar,
that is, splendour, because God had turned his darkness into light, and made up
the want of the light of the Sun, by the light of his countenance, and by the
shinings of the Sun of righteousness upon his soul. Eusebius tells us of
Algerius the Italian martyr, how that writing to his friend from a stinking
Dungeon, he dates his Letter from my delicate Orchard; Acts and Mon. fol. 857.
And Master Glover the Martyr wept for joy of his imprisonment. William Hunters
Mother (that suffered under Bonner) told him that she was glad that ever she
was so happy, as to bear such a child as could find in his heart to die for
Christ's sake.
such were his divine consolations that they turned his Dungeon into a pleasant
Orchard. I with my Fellows, says Mr. Philpot, were carried to the Cole-house,
where we do rouse together in the straw, as cheerfully (we thank God) as
others do in their beds of down. Mr. Bradford put off his Cap, and thanked
the Lord, when his Keepers wife brought him word that he was to be burnt the
next day: And Mr. Tailor fetched a frisk when he was come near to the place
where he was to suffer. Henry and John (two Augustine Monks) being the first
that were burnt in Germany, and Mr. Rogers the first that was burnt in Queen
Mary's days, did all sing in the flames. If men did but know by experience the
sweet that is in suffering for Christ, they would desire with Chrysostom, if it
were put to their choice, rather to be Paul a prisoner of Jesus Christ, then
Paul wrapped up in the third heaven. One of the holy Women that suffered
Martyrdom in this Nation, rejoiced that she might have her foot in the same
hole of the Stocks, in which Mr. Philpots had been before. And Luther Luther.
Fire, sword, death, prison, famine, are all pleasures, they are all delightful
to me, says Basil. Modestus Lieutenant to Julian the Emperor, told him, that
when the Christians suffered they did but deride them, and the torments (said
he) with which Christians are tormented, are more terrible to the tormentors,
then they are to the tormented.
r^ports of that famous Martyr Saint Agatha, that as she went to prisons and
tortures, she said she went to Banquets and Nuptials. Vincentius laughing at
his Tormentors, said, that death and tortures were to Christians (Jocularia and
ludicra) matters of sport and pastime, and he joyed and gloried when he went
upon hot burning Coals, as if he had trod upon Roses. Philip Lansgrave of
Hesse, being a long time prisoner under Charles the fifth, 'twas demanded, what
upheld him all that time, and he answered, that he felt the divine consolations
of the Martyrs. Basil in his Oration for Barlaam that famous Martyr, says,
that he delighted in the close prison as in a pleasant green meddow, and he
took pleasure in the several inventions of tortures, as in several sweet
flowers. William Tims Martyr, in a Letter to a friend of his a little before
his death, writes thus, Now I take my leave of you till we meet in heaven, and
hie you after; I have tarried a great while for you, and seeing you are so long
in making ready, I will tarry no longer for you: you shall find me merrily
singing, Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath, at my journeys end, etc. And
when they kindled the fire at the feet of James Bainkam, methinks, said he,
you strew roses before me. And Hawks the Martyr lifted up his hands above his
head, and clapped them together when he was in the fire, as if he had been riding
in state and triumph. And holy Mr. Saunders speaking of his consolations in his
sufferings, says, that he found a wonderful sweet refreshment flow from his
heart unto all the members of his body, and from all the parts of his body to
his heart again. By all these instances it is most evident that persecuting
times are the Saints rejoicing times; God reserves the best and strongest wine
of consolation to a day of persecution; suitable to that 2 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5.
Blessed be God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of mercy,
and the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we
may be able to comfort them which are in trouble, by the comfort wherewith we
our selves are comforted of God. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us,
so our consolation also abounds by Christ. Oh the sweet looks, the sweet
words, the sweet hints, the sweet in-comes, the sweet joggings, the sweet
embraces, the sweet influences, the sweet discoveries, the sweet love letters,
the sweet love tokens, and the sweet comforts that Christians experience in
their sufferings for Christ; in all their afflictions and persecutions, they
may truly say, we have sweetmeats to eat, and waters of life to drink, and
heavenly honey-combes to suck, that the world knows not of; and indeed when
should the Torch be lighted, but in a dark night? and when should the fire be
made, but when the weather is cold? and when should the cordial be given, but
when the patient is weak? and when should the God of comfort, the God of all
kinds of comfort, and the God of all degrees of comfort, comfort his people,
but under their afflictions and persecutions? for then comfort is most proper,
necessary, seasonable and suitable, and then God will be sure to pour in of the
oil of joy into their hearts. And thus you see the great and glorious
advantages that will redowne to the people of God by all their afflictions and
persecutions. But,

Eighthly, I answer, That to suffer affliction and persecution To die for
Christ, is the greatest promotion that God can bring any in this vale of misery
unto, said Mr. Philpot the Martyr.
the crown of a Mrtyrdom is a crown that the Angels those Princes of glory
are not capable of winning or wearing; and O who art thou! what art thou, O
man! that God should set this crown upon thy head. 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye be
reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of glory, and
of God rests upon you; on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part
he is glorified. The very suffering condition of the people of God, is at the
present a glorious condition, for the Spirit of glory rests upon them, and they
must needs be glorious, yea very glorious, upon whom the Spirit of glory
dwells. Dan. 3.
The sufferings of the three Children tended very much to their honor and
advancement, even in this world; and had those vessels of honor slipped their
opportunity of suffering, they had lost their glory. In the primitive times,
when some good people came to comfort some of the Martyrs that were in prison,
and ready to suffer, they called them blessed Martyrs; O no, said they, we are
not worthy of the name of Martyrs. These holy humble hearts thought Martyrdom
too high an honor for them.
The Apostles all along counted their sufferings for Christ their highest
honor. And that is a remarkable Scripture that you have in that 11 Heb. 36,
37, 38. And others had trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings, yea moreover
of bonds and imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they were
tempted, they were slain with the sword; they wandered about in sheepskins,
and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented: O but these were
surely the most sad, miserable, wretched, and forlorn creatures in all the
world; O no; and that is most evident if the testimony and judgment of the
holy Ghost may be received; for ver. 38. They were such of whom the world was
not worthy; the persecuting world was not worthy of their love, nor worthy of
their prayers, nor worthy of their presence, nor worthy of their fellowship,
and therefore God called them home, and set them down upon thrones by himself.
And to me it is very observable, that when that great Apostle Paul would glory
in that which he accounted his honor, glory, and excellency, he does not glory
in his high Office, nor in his being wrapped up in the third heaven, nor in the
interest that he had in the hearts of the Saints, nor in his arts or parts,
etc. but he glories in his sufferings, in that 2 Cor. 11.23. -- 28. In stripes
above measure; in prisons more frequent; in deaths often. Of the Jews five times
received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with Rods, once was I
stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck: a night and a day have I been in the deep.
In journeying often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by my
own Country men, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in
the wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in perils among false brethren. In
weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Thus you see that this blessed Apostle
looks upon his sufferings as his greatest glory. To suffer for Christ is the
greatest honor and promotion that God gives in this world, said old Father
Latimer. John Noyes Latimer. John Noyes.
took up a Faggot at the fire and kissed it, saying, Blessed be the time that
ever I was borne to come to this preferment. When they had fastened Alice Driver
Alice Driver.
with a chain to the stake to be burnt, Never (said she) did Neckarchief
become me so well as this chain. Balilus Balilus.
the Martyr, when he was to die, requested this favor of his persecutors, viz.
that he might have his chains buried with him, as the Ensigns of his honor.
When Ignatius Ignatius.
was to suffer it, it is better for me (says he) to be a Martyr, then to be a
Monarch. What are we poor worms full of vanities and lies, that we should be
called to be maintainers of the truth; for sufferings for Christ are the
Ensigns of heavenly Nobility, said Calvin. Calvin.
'Twas a notable saying of a French Martyr, when the rope was about his fellow,
Give me (said he) that Golden chain, and dub me Knight of that noble Order. I
am the unincetest man for this high office of suffering for Christ that ever
was appointed to it, said blessed Sanders. I shall conclude this head with that
excellent saying of Prudentius; Their names (says he) that are written in red
letters of blood in the Churches Calender, are written in Golden letters in
Christ's Register, the book of life. And thus you see on all hands that
suffering for Christ is the highest honor that you are capable of in this
world: And therefore there is little reason why a Christian should shrink or
shrug at sufferings. But,

Ninthly, I answer, That the afflictions, persecutions, and Hebrews, Heb.
12.4. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin; many have, but
you have not, you have only met with hard words, when others have met with
blows and wounds; you have been only a contending with men, when others have
been a contending with beasts; you have been only whipped with Rosemary branches,
when others have been whipped with Scorpions; you have been only bound with
silken bands, when others have been bound with Iron chains. Will you be so
favorable to your selves as to compare your sufferings with the sufferings of
former Saints, and that you may, let me give you a little Breviate of their
sufferings of whom the world was not worthy. History tells us that in the Ten
primitive persecutions, they exercised all manner of cruelty and torments that
could be devised against the Christians: 1. in the Reign of Adrian the
Emperor, there were ten thousand Christians crucified in the Mount Ararat,
crowned with crowns of Thorns, and thrust into the sides with sharp darts. 2.
Others were so whipped, that their very inward arteries and veins appeared, and
their intrailes and bowels were seen, and afterward they were set upon sharp
shells, (taken out of the Sea edged and sharp) and certain nails and thorns
were sharpened and pointed (called Obelisci) for them to go upon, and after all
this cruelty they were thrown to wild beasts to be devoured. 3. Multitudes
were banished. 4. Others were drawn asunder with wild Horses. 5. Some were
Rackt with bars of Iron. 6. Others were cast into loathsome Dungeons. 7. Some
were burnt in the fire. 8. Others were knocked down, and had their brains
beat out with Staves and Clubs. 9. Some were pricked in their faces and eyes
with sharp Reeds. 10. Others were stoned to death with stones, as Stephen was.
11. Some were dashed in pieces against Millstones. 12. Others had their teeth
dashed out of their Jaws, and their joints broken. 13. Some were cast down
from very high places. 14. Others were beheaded. 15. Some were tormented with
Razors. 16. Others were slain with the sword. 17. Some were run through with
Pikes. 18. Others were driven into the wilderness, where they wandered up and
down, suffering hunger and cold, and where they were exposed to the fury both
of wild beasts, and also to the rage of the barbarous Arabians. 19. Some fled
into Caves, which by their persecutors were rammed up with stones, and there
they dyed. 20. Others were trodden to death by the people. 21. Some were hanged
on Gibbets, with fire under their sides. 22. Others were cast into the Sea and
drowned. 23. Some were slain in metal Mines. 24. Others were hanged by the
feet, and choked with the smoke of a small fire, their legs being first
broken. 25. Some were poudered with salt and vinegar, and then roasted with a
soft fire. 26. Others were hanged by one hand, that they might feel the weight
of their whole bodies, scorching and broyling over burning Coals. 27. Some
were shot through with Arrows, and afterward thrown into stinking Jakes. 28.
Others were stripped stark-naked as ever they were borne, and turned out of
doors in cold frosty nights, and burnt the next day. 29. In Syria, a company
of Christian virgins were stripped stark-naked to be scorned by the multitude,
then shaved, then covered with swill and draffe, and then torn in pieces and
devoured by swine. 30. Lastly, many women had one joint of their bodies pulled
from another, And another cruelty that they practiced in the primitive times
was this, They would make Fathers to kindle the Faggots to burn their own
children, etc.
and their flesh and sides scratched with Tallons of wild Beasts to the bones,
and their breasts seared with Torches till they dyed. And thus you have an
account of thirty several ways, by which the precious sons and daughters of
Zion have formerly been afflicted, tormented, and destroyed; and what heart of
stone can read over this bill of particulars with dry eyes? And now tell me,
Sirs, whether your fufferings are worth a naming in that day, wherein the
sufferings of the precious servants of God in the primitive times are spoken
of? O no; well then, take heed of making Mole-hills mountains, and of crying
out, is there any sorrow to our sorrow, or any sufferings to our sufferings?
But,

Tenthly, I answer, That unholy persons have suffered as Witness Jehu, Ahab,
Jezebel, Balaam, Judas, etc.
or are like to suffer for your pursuing after holiness. O the hazards, the
dangers, the deaths that many have run through to gratify their lusts. Petrus
Blesensis has long since observed, that the Courtiers of his time suffered as
many vexations, with weariness and painfulness, with hunger and thirst, and
with all the Catalogue of Paul's afflictions that is reckoned up in that 2 Cor.
11. as good Christians did for the truth. I have read of a Roman servant, who
knowing his Master was sought for by Officers to be put to death, he to save
his Masters life, put himself into his Masters Clothes that he might be taken
for him, and accordingly he was taken and put to death for him, and all this
out of a humor of vain glory. The Romans desire of the praises of men (says
Augustine) made them bountiful of their purfes, and prodigal of their lives.
This was in Anno 1555. etc.
Servetus at Geneva gave all his goods to the poor, and his body to be burnt,
and all for a name, for a little glory among men, says Calvin. Ah what
cutting, what lancing, what bleeding, what vomitting, and what searching will
many men endure upon the advice of their Physicians, and all for a little
health, a little ^trength, or to preserve a wretched life for a few days, yea
for a few hours sometimes? O the tortures and torments that many Romans and
others have undergon, sometimes out of love to their Country, and sometimes to
maintain their credit and reputation among men, and sometimes out of an
affectation of future fame and renown, and to eternalize their names! and why
then should Christians think so much of suffering afflictions and persecutions
for holiness sake, the least dram of which being more worth then a thousand
thousand of those things, for which they have suffered such exquisite pains
and torments? Ah what great things, what hard things do many men daily suffer
to gratify their own lusts, and to satisfy the lusts of others? Ah how
frequently do many venture their lives, their estates, their names, their
consciences, yea their very souls to court a Dalilah? Oh the hell of horrors
and terrors (which are worse then a thousand deaths) that many a sinner daily
wades thorough to enjoy his sin! and why then should thou be startled in thy
pursuit after holiness, because of afflictions and persecutions that may attend
thee? when they are nothing to what many suffer from within and without, to
enjoy that which will undo them to all eternity, etc. But,

2 Timothy 3.11. Compared with that 13 and 14. of the Acts.
Several afflictions and persecutions befell Paul, at Antioch, at Iconium, at
Lystra, but out of them all the Lord delivered him: As a righteous cause led
him into sufferings, so a righteous God led him out of sufferings; both Jews
and Gentiles, Barbarians and Grecians, Princes and people, were as madly set
upon persecuting of him, as he was once madly set upon persecuting of the
Saints, but God delivered him from every hand of violence; divine power and
wisdom wrought gloriously for him, both in six troubles and in seven it brought
him clearly off, and bravely out, not of some, but out of all his dangers and
distresses, afflictions and persecutions, etc.

First, Now God sometimes preserves his people from being Genesis 41.32. Chap.
11.33. Chap. 4. and chapter 31.29 compared.
by laying a law of restraint upon the spirits of their persecutors, as he did
upon Labans and Esaus, that they could not hurt him, yea in stead of kicking
and killing, behold kissing and embracing: God tied up those cursed Dogs, and
laid such a restraint upon their wrath, rage, and malice, that they could not
so much as touch a hair of Jacobs head; God stopped their mouths, and bound
their hands that they were not able to act any thing to the prejudice of Jacob.
That God that laid a restraint upon the fierce wild creatures in Noah's Ark,
that they might not prey upon the tamer, and that chained up the Lions from
preying upon Daniel, that God chained up these two Lions, that they could not
make a prey of innocent Jacob. But,

Secondly, God does this sometimes by setting persecutors Moabites were
confederated with the Ammonites and those of Mount-Seir against Judah, 2 Chronicles.
20.22,23,24. Judge. 1.22. Chap. 9.55. 56, 57. compared.
God made them turn their swords into one another bowels, and so they mutually
became their own executioners, and by this means poor Judah escaped. God
sometimes saves his Lambs by setting the Wolf and the Dog together by the
ears. When that Wolf Saul was even ready to devour David the Lamb, God lets
loose those Dogs the Philistines upon Saul, 1 Samuel 23.27.
and so by this means David was p^eserved and secured. Acts 23.6, 7, 8.
And so Paul by setting the persecuting Pharisees against the persecuting
Scribes, he escaped persecution. And so the Lord by stiring up the Persians
against the Babylonians, he brought about the deliverance of the Jews out of
their captivity; and afterward by stirring up the Grecians against the
Persians, and the Romans against the Grecians, and the Goths and Vandals, and
other barbarous Nations against the Romans, he brought about the deliverance of
his people: In all Ages God by engaging one furious Lion against another, has
preserved his sheep in quiet. When the Emperor of Germany threatened utter ruin
to all the Protestants within his Empire, God let loose the Turk to fall with
great fury upon his Empire, and by that means diverted the Emperors rage, and
preserved his poor people, which were as sheep appointed to the slaughter. Ah
England, England, if God had not set thine enemies together by the ears, year
after year, how had they combined and conspired together to have swallowed thee
up long before this day. But,

Herod, he gave rest, liberty and quiet to his people, Acts 12.23, 24. And so
by his vengeance on persecuting Emperors, he gave rest to his people. When
Julian the Apostate had vowed to to make an oblation of all the lives of the
surviving Christians (as Gregory Nazianzen reports) God struck him with an
Arrow from heaven, Orat. 4. in Iul.
so that he died reviling of Christ, and casting up his blood to heaven, as if
he would have cast it into the very face of Christ. And when Eugenius the
Tyrant endeavored to destroy the Armies of the Christians, under the Emperor
Theodosius, God gave the very winds a command to wrest the weapons out of their
enemies hands, and so preserved his people. And in 88. how did God make the
very winds to fight for his people, and so saved them from that bloody
invasion, by causing his winds to blow, and their enemies to sink as Lead in
the mighty waters. And by giving Achitophel Rope enough, he preserved David
from perishing. But,

Paul's nature, Acts 9.31.
by turning that Wolf into a Lamb, that devil into a Saint, he gave the
Churches rest throughout all Judea, Galilee and Samaria; and this is one of the
most desirable things in the world, that God would save his people from outward
ruin, by ruining their persecutors sins, and by changing their hearts and
saving their souls. This way God has taken, and this way God may take (being a
free Agent to work, when and where, and how, and on whom he pleases) but I
cannot turn to a promise, wherein he has engaged himself to make converts of
persecutors; his common way of dealing with such, is to give them up to
blindness of mind, and hardness of heart, and searedness of conscience, and
perverseness of spirit, that so their hell may be the hotter at last. But,

Fifthly, God does this sometimes, by taking persecutors feet Psalm. 9.16. Psalm.
57.6.
The wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion Selah. Higgaion
Selah signifies matter of great admiration, and of deep meditation; that the
wicked should be snared in the work of his own hands is matter of perpetual
admiration, and of most serious meditation. Who will not admire that Goliath should
be slain with his own sword, and that proud Haman should hold Mordecaies
stirrup, and be the Herald of his honor, Psalm. 7.15, 16. He made a pit and
dug it, Histories would furnish us with many hundred instances of this
nature.
and is fallen into the ditch which he has made. His mischief shall return
upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate.
The wicked shall be undone by their own doings, all the Arrows that they shoot
at the righteous, shall fall upon their own pates. Maxentius built a false
bridge to drown Constantine, but was drowned himself. Henry the third of France
was stabbed in the very same Chambe, where he had helped to contrive the cruel
Massacre of the French Protestants. And his brother Charles the ninth, who
delighted in the blood of the Saints, had blood given him to drink, for he was
worthy. Afterward he was made Lord Cobham.
Soon after Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury had condemned Sir John
Oldcastle, a godly Knight, it pleased the Lord to strike the Archbishop so in
his tongue, that he could neither swallow down any food, nor speak a word
before his death, and so he was starved to death. The Duke of Somerset (in King
Edward the sixth's days) by consenting to his brothers death, made way for his
own, by the same Ax and hand that beheaded his brother. It Is usual with God to
take persecutors in the snares and pits that they have laid for his people, as
many thousands in this Nation have experienced; and though Rome and her
confederates are this day a laying of snares and traps, and a digging of pits
for the righteous, who will rather burn then bow to their Baal, yet do but wait
and weep, and weep and wait a little, and you shall see that the Lord will take
them in the very snares and pits that they have laid and dug for his people.
But,

Mat. 10.23. If they persecute you in one city, fly to another: God has always
found one City of refuge or another, to shelter his persecuted people in. And
so when bloody persecuting Jezebel had cut off many of the Lords Prophets, God
provided an Obadiah to hide an hundred of them by Fifty in a Cave. 1 Kin.
18.4.13. The Learned judge that there were several others in Israel that kept
other Prophets of the Lord from Jezabels fury besides those that Obadiah hid.

Three years before Titus Vespasian besieged Jerusalem, there was a voice
frequently heard, go up to Pella, go up to Pella, which very many of the Jews
did and were saved.


God never wants a Chamber of presence, a chamber of providence, a chamber of
protection, a chamber of salvation to hide his people in, Isa. 26.20. I have
read of one that in the time of the Massacre at Paris, crept into a hole to
hide himself, and as soon as he was in, there came a spider and weaved a Web
before the hole, the next morning the murderers came to search for him, search
in that hole, said one, and see if he be not there, O no said another, he cannot
be there, for there is a Cob-web at the holes mouth, upon which they did not
suspect his being there, by which means he was preserved from the rage and fury
of those men of blood. Constantius the Emperor promised a reward to those
Captains or Soldiers that should bring Atharasius head to him, but God hid him
in a pit, and fed him there a long time by the hand of a friend; but being at
last discovered by a Maidservant, the very night before his adversaries
searched for him, the providence of God opened away for his escape, and sent
him into the West, by which means he was preserved from the rage and fury of
his adversaries. I think no men under heaven have had larger experience of this
truth then English men. Ah what Cities of refuge, what hiding places has God
provided for them to hide them from the wrath and rage of their persecutors for
many years? And thus I have given you a brief account of some of those ways
which God takes to deliver his people out of persecuting hands. But,

Quisquis volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercidi meae; says Augustine.
Twelfthly and lastly, I answer, That all the persecutions that you meet with on
earth, shall advance your glory in heaven; the more Saints are persecuted on
earth, the greater shall be their reward in heaven; as persecutions do increase
a Christians grace, so they do advance a Christians glory. Mat. 5.10, 11, 12.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is the
kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you,
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice, and
be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they
the Prophets which were before you. Luke 6.22, 23. Blessed are ye when men
shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall
reproach you, and Excommunicate and Anathematize you as notorious, shameful,
and abominable offenders.
cast out your name as evil, for the son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day,
and leap for joy: for behold your reward is in heaven, for in the like manner
did their fathers unto the Prophets. They that are now opposed and persecuted
by men, shall at last be owned and crowned by God; yea and the more afflictions
and persecutions are multiplied upon them in this world, the greater shall be
their recompense in another wo^ld. The Original words ((...)) in Matthew, and
((...).) in Luke signifies exceeding great joy, such as men usually express by
skipping and dancing; let your hearts leap, and let your bodies leap for joy,
for great is your reward in heaven. Look as wanton young cattle in the Spring,
when every thing is in its prime and pride do use to leap and skip for joy, so
says Christ, do you leap and skip under all the afflictions and persecutions
that befalls you for righteousness sake, for great is your reward in heaven.
Bernard speaking of persecutors, says, That they are but his Fathers
Goldsmiths, who are working to add Pearls to the Saints Crowns. It is to my
loss said Gordius the Martyr if you abate me any thing of my present
sufferings; sufferings for Christ, are the Saints greatest glory; they are
those things wherein they have divinely glorified (Crudelitas vestra gloria
nostra) your cruelty is our glory, say they in Tertullian, and the harder we
are put to it, the greater shall be our reward in heaven. Chrysostom hit the
nail, when he said, if one man should suffer all the sorrows of all the Saints
in the world, yet they are not worth one hours glory in heaven. By the consent
of the Schoolmen, all the Martyrs shall appear in the Church Triumphant,
bearing the signs of their Christian wounds about them, as so many speaking
testimonies of their godly courage, that what here they endured in the behalf
of their Savior, may be there an addition to their glory. O Christians, all
your sufferings will certainly increase your future glory; every affliction,
every persecution will be a grain put into the scale of your heavenly glory, to
make it more weighty in that day wherein he will richly reward you for every
tear, for every sigh, for every groan, for every hazard, and for every hardship
that you have met with in the pursuit of holiness, etc. for light afflictions,
you shall have a weight of glory; and for a few afflictions you shall have as
many joys, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18.
pleasures, delights, and contents, as there be Stars in heaven, or sands on
the Seashore; and for momentary afflictions you shall have an eternal crown of
glory. If you have suffering for suffering with Christ on earth, you shall have
glory for glory with Christ in heaven. Ah Christians, your present sufferings
are but the seeds of your future glory, and the more plentifully you sow in
tears, the more abundant will be your harvest of glory. Cyrus in a great
expedition against his enemies, the better to encourage his soldiers to fight,
in an Oration that he made at the head of his Army, promised upon the victory
to make every foot soldier an horseman, and every horseman a Commander, and
that every Officer that did valiantly should be highly rewarded; but Christ our
General promises more, for he promises a Crown ( Rev. 2.10. And a throne, Chap.
3.21.) to all his afflicted and persecuted ones, which are the greatest rewards
that a God can give, or that man can crave. It troubled one of the Martyrs when
he was at the stake, that he was going to a place where he should be for ever a
receiving of wages for a little work. Aristippus being demanded in a storm, Why
he was not as fearful as others were? answered, That there was great reason for
it, For (says he) they fear the torments due to a bad life, but I expect the
reward due to a good life. Ah Christians! shall not the hopes of that great
reward that attends suffering Saints bare you up bravely, and carry you out
sweetly under all the storms that may beat upon you whilst you are sailing
heaven-wards, and holiness-wards? Surely yes. I have read that Lycurgus could
draw the Lacedaemonians to any thing by temporal rewards: And, O then how much
more should I draw all your hearts to a readiness and willingness to do any
thing, to be any thing, and to suffer any thing for Christ's sake, and holiness
sake, upon the account of that great reward, that sure reward, and that eternal
reward that attends suffering Saints. And let thus much suffice for answer to
this fourth objection. I hope none of you will think that I have been too long
in answering this Objection, considering the present times. But,

Fifthly, Others may object and say, We would labor after this etc. Now to
fence and arm you against this objection, give me leave to propose these six
following considerations.

First, Consider that it is not absolutely necessary that you Luke 16.19. -- 31.
and doubtless it is infinitely better with ragged naked Lazarus to go to
heaven, then it is with Dives to go rich and bravely clad to hell; it is better
to go to heaven poor, and halt, and maimed, then to go to hell sound and rich;
poverty and outward misery with salvation, is far better then worldly
prosperity and felicity with everlasting perdition: Holiness and not riches is
the One thing necessary; if thou have holiness, nothing can make thee
miserable, but if thou want holiness, nothing can make thee happy. Outward
blessings are no infallible evidences of a blessed estate. Was Abraham rich? so
was Abimelech to: Was Jacob rich? so was Laban to: Was David a King? so was
Saul to: Was Constantine an Emperor? so was Julian to. It Is only holiness that
sets the crown of happiness upon a Christians head. But,

Prove. 24.33, 34. Chapter 28.19.22.
but wickedness, that exposes men to the greatest poverty and misery; Prove.
6.26. For by the means of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of
bread. Whoredom is a very costly sin; the prodigal had quickly spent his
portion among his Harlots. Luke 15.
Whoredom cannot be a greater Paradise to the flesh, then it is a purgatory to
the purse, and many great ones have found it so. Mar. 6.23, 24.
Herod that old fornicator was so inflamed and bewitched with the immodest
wanton dancing of his Damosel, that he swore he would give her to the half of
his kingdom. And it is very observable, that whilst Solomon in his younger days
kept holy, 1 King. 10.27, 28. Chron. 1.15, 16, 17.
chaste, and pure, silver and gold was as plentious at Jerusalem and at Court,
as the stones of the street; but when Solomon had given himself up to his
Concubines, they quickly exhausted his Treasuries, and brought him to so low an
ebb, that he was forced to oppress his subjects with such heavy taxes, 1 Kings
12.1. -- 20.
burdens and tributes, which occasioned the revolt of the ten Tribes. Josephus
in his Antiquities, tells us of one Decius Mundus, that offered to give so many
hundred thousand Drachmes that came to six thousand pound English money to
satisfy his lusts one night with a whore, and yet could not obtain his desire.
There is no sin that has brought more men, and greater men to beggary and
misery then this has; it is a great misery to be brought to a piece of bread,
to a scrap, a little bit of bread, but to be brought into so low a condition by
Harlots, doubles the misery; for he that is by a whorish woman brought to a
piece of bread on earth, shall be brought to a drop of water in hell, except
there be sound repentance on his side, and pardoning mercy on Gods. Take
another instance in that Prove. 23.20, 21. The glutton and the drunkard were to
be stoned to death.

Deuteronomy. 21.20, 21. Basil calls drunkenness a self chosen devil. When Aechines
commended Philip King of Macedon for a jovial man that would drink freely,
Demosthenes being by, told him that was a good quality in a Sponge, but not in
a Prince.


Be not among wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of flesh. For the drunkard
and the glutton shall come to poverty; and drowsiness shall cloth a man with
rags. Many Dukes, Earls, Lords, and Gentlemen of great estates, have ^adly
experienced the truth of this Scripture; society, and luxurious company has
brought many a man to extreme poverty. The full cup makes an empty purse, and
the fat dish makes a lean bagg; he that fills thee wine with one hand, and sets
before thee dainty dishes with the other hand, will be sure to pick thy pockets
with both hands; and this Caligula the Roman Emperor found by experience, for
his gluttony brought him to incredible poverty. Diogenes hearing that the house
of a certain prodigal was offered to sale, said, I knew that house was so
accustomed to surfeting and drunkenness, that ere long it would spue out the
Master. Excessive drinking is now so great in England, that the Germans may
fear the loss of their Charter. There was a street in Rome, called
vicussobrius, the sober street, because there was never an Alehouse in it; but
this I think is hard to say of any street in London, yea of any street in
England. It is an observation amongst the Mariners, that as the Sea grows
daily shallower and shallower on the shoars of Holland and Zealand; so the
Channel of late waxes deeper and deeper on the Coasts of Kent and Essex. Ah
sirs! what is more evident then this, that as drunkenness ebbs in Holland, so
it flows in England? O what a deal of ground has this sin got within this few
months upon English hearts! there was a time when drunkards were as rare in
England as Wolves, but now they are as common as Swine. Ah what staggering,
reeling, and shameful spewing is to be found, both among the great ones, the
Priests and people of this Nation. The Prophet Hosea Hos. 7.5.
complained in his time, that the Princes upon their Kings day made him sick
with bottles of wine. This day of their King was either his birth day (and so
Pagnine renders it here) Die natalis ejus.
or his Coronation day (and so the Chalde paraphrast carries it) or the day
wherein their King Jeroboam set up his golden Calves at Dan and Bethel, as some
others conceive. Now in this day of their King, there was such carnal
triumphing, and such pampering of the flesh, and such roaring, carouzing,
Richard the third drowned his brother in a Butt of Sack.
and drinking of bottles of wine, that the Princes drank themselves sick,
drowning their bodies and souls in bottles and Butts of wine. Memorable is the
Kings late Proclamation against all such debauched persons, who pretending to
drink His Health, destroy their own by a shameful abusing of the precious
creatures of God. But if the Prophet Hosea were now alive in this Nation, If
one may credit relations, many have drunk themselves dead within this few months.
Ah what cause would he have to complain, that both high and low, men and
women, young and old have given themselves to this beastly sin, that unmans a
man, and that besots the soul, and that destroys the body, and that proves a
Canker-worm to men's estates? What are most Alehouses, but hell-houses, but the
Devils-houses, in which the name of God is notoriously blasphemed, Religion
scorned, the Saints derided, the Sabbaths profaned, young ones impoysned, and
old ones hardened, and many thousand families impoverished? And why then should
it be almost as easy a task to conquer the West Indies, to overcome the Turk,
and to bring down the Pope, as it is to bring down such wretched Alehouses, as
are the very Nurseries of all sin (and the Synagogues of incarnate Devils) and
the very sinks of all misery, poverty, and beggary. By these instances it is
most clear, that it is not holiness, but wickedness that exposes men to the
greatest poverty and misery. But,

1 Kings. 17.10. -- 17. Mr. Fox in his Act. and Mon. page 1874. edit. ult.
Speaks of a poor woman, who being threatened that she should have but a little
bread one day, and a little water on the next, replied, If you take away my
meat, I hope God will take away my hunger, and then 'twill be all one as if I
had meat.
Thirdly, Consider, That God can make a little with holiness go a great way. A
little with holiness shall serve the turn, and then enough is as good as a
feast. God can make a handful of Meal in the Barrel, and a little Oil in the
Cruse hold out a long while. So Deuteronomy. 8.4. Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee,
neither did thy foot swell these forty years. Chap. 29.5. And I have led you
forty years in the wilderness, your clothes are not waxen old upon you, and
thy Sh^o is not waxen old upon thy foot: Their raiment in forty years time was
not the worse for wearing, their garments were not worn out with wearing, in
all that time they were not grown old and so unfit to wear; O no, but they were
as fresh and strong, and fit for use at the last, as they were when they first
came into the wilderness, and this was by a divine power that preserved them
from decay. God supplied all the backs and bellies of the Israelites in such
state, as if every Israelite had been a Prince. When God brings his people into
a wilderness condition, he will make their mercies last and hold out as long as
their wilderness condition continues. Some of the learned are of opinion, that
the garments and Shoos of children and young men grew up with their persons; so
that as their stature increased, so their apparel and Shoos waxed larger and
longer. But I suppose that it is not safe for us to imagine or multiply miracles
without necessity and clear warrant from Scripture; and therefore I shall
rather fall in with those worthy men who thus judge, viz. That when any began
to out-grow their Apparel and Shoos, they laid them aside, and took others that
were fit for their present stature, and that those which they laid aside, were
as sound and fresh, and fit for service as when they first began to use them,
and so those they put off were fit for others to put on that were of a less
stature; and thus God lengthned out their mercies in their wilderness
condition. So in that Prove. 15.16, 17. Better is a little with the fear of the
Lord, Sheep can live upon bare Commons, where fat Oxen would be quickly
starved, etc.
then great treasure and trouble therewith. Better is a dinner of herbs where
love is, then a stalled Ox, and hatred therewith. Chap. 16.8. Better is a
little with righteousness, then great revenues without right. Chap. 17.1.
Better is a dry morsel and quietness therewith, then a house full of sacrifices
with strife. Psalm. 37.16. A little that a righteous man has, is better then
the riches of many wicked. Where there is a holy God, and a holy heart, a
little of the world will go far; a little will be a sufficiency to him, who
with it enjoys that holy one that is All Sufficiency it self. Though a whole
world will never fill nor satisfy an unsanctified heart, yet a little, Phil.
4.11. -- 20.
a very little of the world will satisfy and content a holy heart. There are
two things that an unholy heart can never find, it can never find any
sweetness in Spirituals, Esth. 5.9. -- 14.
nor it can never find any satisfaction in Temporals; but a holy heart always
finds the greatest sweetness in Spirituals, and is as easily satisfied with
the least and meanest of Temporals. Genesis 28.20, 21. And Jacob vowed a vow,
saying, if God will be with me, Bread and water with the Gospel is good cheer,
said holy Greenham. He is rich enough that lacks not bread, and high enough
that is not forced to serve. Jerome.
and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and
raiment to put on, so that I come again to my fathers house in peace, then
shall the Lord be my God. Holy Jacob does not indent with God for costly
Apparel, or delicate fare, he does not make a bargain with God to be housed
bravely, and fed daintily, and clothed gorgiously, and lodged easily, and
waited on noblely; O no, bread to eat, and clothes to wear is as much as holy
Jacob looks after. Ah friends a little will serve nature, and less will serve
grace, though nothing will serve or satisfy an unsanctified man's lusts. O
sirs, the very pulse and locusts which a holy man eats, relishes better then
all the Gluttons delicious fare; and the very Sheepskins and Goat Skins which
he wears, wear softer and finer then all the purple and soft raiment that is in
Princes houses; and the very holes, and Caves, and Dens, wherein holy men live,
are more pleasant and delightful, then the stately Palaces of the great ones of
the world; It is great riches not to desire riches, and he has most that
covets least. Socrates.
godliness and contentment does so sweeten and so lengthen out all a Christians
mercies, that he cannot but reckon himself a happy man, though he may be the
poorest among many men. Let me conclude this third Answer thus, This worlds
wealth that men so much desire,
May well be likened to a burning fire;
Whereof a little can do little harm,
But profit much our bodies well to warm:
But take too much, and surely thou shall burn;
So too much wealth to too much woe does turn.


But,

Fourthly, Consider, That worldly riches and holiness do Abraham and Lot were
as wealthy men as most in their time, Genesis 13. Isa. 41.2. Abraham is called the
righteous man.
and yet behind none for faith and holiness; David, and Solomon, and
Jehosaphat, and Hezekiah had crowns on their heads and Scepters in their hands,
and very great revenues at their commands, and in all these grace and greatness
sweetly meet. Job 1.3.8.
Job was a very holy man, and yet a very rich man; if you cast your eye upon
the first of Job, and survey his estate, you shall find that he had seven
thousand Sheep, three thousand Camels, five hundred yoke of Oxen, five hundred
she Asses, and a very great Family; but if you will look into the last of Job,
and survey his estate, there you shall find it doubled. Joseph, Nehemiah,
Mordecai, Daniel, and the three children were very gracious, and yet very high
and great in the world. As every wicked man is not a rich man, so every holy
man is not a poor man; if you will but set the gracious against the graceless,
the holy against the profane, I doubt not but for one holy man, whose estate
is low and mean, you will find thousands of wicked men, whose conditions are
beggarly and low in this world. God many times delights to confute the devils
Proverb, viz. That plain dealing is a Jewel, but he that uses it, shall die a
Beggar. Now God by heaping up riches and honor, and greatness upon the
righteous, gives the devil the lie, and lets the world see that holiness many
times is the ready way to worldly greatness.

It Is observable, that when all the sons of Jacob returned with corn and money
in their sacks from Egypt, Genesis 44.
Benjamin had not only corn and money in his sack, but he had over and above
the silver cup put into the mouth of his sack, as a singular pledge of his
brother Joseph's favor; so God many times gives to his Benjamines, the sons of
his right hand, not only as much of the world as he does to others, but more
of the world then he does to others; he does not only give them corn and money
in common with others, but he also gives them the Silver-cup, the Grace-cup, he
puts in some singular temporal blessings into their sacks more then into other
men's, for he is the great Lord of all, and therefore may dispose of his own as
he pleases. But,

Fifthly, Consider, Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3, 4.
That most men are best in a low condition. David was never better then when he
was in a wilderness condition, for degrees of Grace, and for the exercise of
Grace, and for communion with the God of Grace; 'twas best with David when his
condition was low in the world; 'twas never better with Jacob, Genesis 32.10.
then when he past over Jordan with a staff in his hand; Jobs Job 1.
graces never shined so gloriously as when he sat upon a dunghill, and could
bless a taking God as well as a giving God; though John was poor in the world,
yet the Holy Ghost tells us, Mat. 11.11.
that he was the greatest that was born of women; Paul was but a poor
Tent-maker, Phil. 3.20.
and yet his conversation was in heaven; The Church of Smyrna was the poorest
Church, Rev. 2.8, 9.
but yet the best of all the seven Churches in Asia. Christ knew very well that
his Disciples would be best in a low condition, and therefore he fed them but
from hand to mouth; Learned Ainsworth had but nine pence a week to live on,
whilst he wrote his excellent Commentary on the Penteteuch. Mat. 8.20, 21.
he that could have turned stones into bread, could as easily have turned
stones into gold, and so have made his Disciples rich and great in the world,
but he would not; Christ could easily have changed their rags into Robes, and
their Cottages into stately Palaces, and their Barley loaves into costly
Banquets, but he knew that their hearts would be best when their condition was
lowest; and therefore he makes them live upon short Commons. As there was none
so holy as Christ, so there was none so poor as Christ; Christ lived poor and
died poor, for as he was born in another man's house, so he was buried in
another man's Tomb. Austine has long since observed, that when Christ died, he
made no Will, he had no crown lands, If there were any happiness in riches, the
Gods would not want them, said Seneca.
all he had was a coat, and that the soldiers parted amongst them; had there
been any true happiness or blessedness in Gold and Silver, gay clothes, stately
Mansions, brave attendants, or in well furnished Tables, etc. Christ who was
(and still is) the Lord of all, would certainly have been so favorable to
himself, and so kind to his disciples, as not to have deprived himself or his
Family of that happiness and blessedness which they might have enjoyed, by
enjoying the brave things of this world; but he very well knew that true
happiness and blessedness was too great and too glorious a thing to be found in
any such worldly enjoyments, and upon that foot was willing to be without them
himself; and in his wise providence he so ordered the affairs of his own house,
that those whom he loved best should have least of those things wherein there
was no true happiness. Lazarus was very poor, but very holy; he was houseless,
but not Lordless; his body was clothed with rags, but his soul was adorned
with grace; he had no bread to eat, and yet he had bread to eat that the world
knew not of; whilst he lived, the Dogs (being more kind then their Master)
lick't his sores, but when he died, the Angels carried him into Abraham's bosom.
In all Ages this has been an experienced truth, that most men are best in at
low condition. Pope Martin reports of himself, that whilst he was a Monk, and
lived in the Cloister, he had some evidences for heaven, but when he was a
Cardinal, then he began to fear and doubt whether ever he should go to heaven;
but afterward when he came to be Pope, he utterly despaired of ever going
thither. Ah how holy, how humble, how heavenly, how gracious, how serious, how
zealous, how prudent, how vigilent, and how diligent have many men been in
these late years, whilst their condition was low, and poor, and mean in the
world? but when under various changes they changed their Brass into Silver,
their Copper into Gold, their Cottages into Palaces, their Shops into
Lordships, and their Shipskins into Scarlet, etc. Ah how proud, how stately,
how earthly, how carnal, how careless, how cold, how formal, how lukewarm, how
indifferent, how light, how slight, how vain, how loose did they generally
grow. I think since Christ was on earth, there has not been a more evident
proof of men's being best when their condition was lowest, then what has been
given within these late years. Mandrobulus in Lucian offered to his god the
first year Gold, the second year Silver, and the third year nothing at all; so
many in our times, who were forward in the days of their poverty and adversity
to offer Gold and Silver (I mean prayers and praises) to God, yet in the days
of their prosperity and worldly glory, they offered either nothing to God, or
else that which was next to nothing. I have read of the Pine Tree, that if you
pull off the Bark it will last a long time, but if the Bark continue on, it
will rot the Tree. Ah how has the Bark of honor, the bark of riches, the bark
of pleasure, the bark of success the bark of applause, and the bark of
preferment, etc. rotted, and corrupted, and worsned many glorious professors in
these days? And, O that now their bark is taken off, they may with the
Pine Tree grow better and better; O that now they may grow more holy then ever,
and more humble then ever, and more heavenly then ever, and more spiritual then
ever, and more watchful then ever, and more faithful then ever, and more
friendly then ever, and more united then ever, etc. Now if most men are best in
a low condition, then there is no reason why any man should turn his back upon
holiness because of poverty, that often treads upon holiness heels. The
Cypress-Tree is high, but barren, and the Olive Tree is low, but fruitful. Ah
Christians it is infinitely better to be an Olive Tree, low and fruitful, to be
low in the world, and full of the fruits of righteousness and holiness, then to
be a Cypress-Tree, high in honors, riches, and worldly greatness, etc. and to
be barren of all grace and goodness. But,

Solus sapiens dives, says the Philosopher.
James 2.5. Hearken my beloved brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this
world, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he has promised to them
that love him? Though they have never a penny in their purses, nor never a ragg
to hang on their backs, nor never a bit to put in their bellies, yet they are
rich heirs, and their heads are destinated to the Diadem; usually the poorest
Saints are the richest Christians in comforts, 2 Cor. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. Romans 5.3.
in Graces, in promises, in experiences, and in spiritual enjoyments, etc. The
holy soul drives the freest and the greatest Trade heaven-wards; the holy soul
may sail to any Port that lies in Gods Dominions, and Trade freely, and what
inriches men like a free and a full Ttade? There are infinite Treasures laid up
in precious promises, and all these treasuries lie open to the holy soul; a
Christian may lade his soul as deep as he pleases with the precious commodities
of heaven. I have read of Tiberius the Emperor, who seeing a Cross set in a
Marble stone lying in the ground, In the year of our Lord, 577.
commanded it to be dug up, and when 'twas dug up, he found a rich
Treasure under the Cross. O sirs, under the cross of poverty, there are
treasures, spiritual treasures, lasting treasures, and satisfying treasures to
be found; though holiness may be attended with cross upon cross, loss upon
loss, and misery upon misery, and calamity upon calamity, and sorrow upon
sorrow, and vexation upon vexation, etc. yet under every cross and every loss,
etc. a Christian shall be sure to find such spiritual and Heavenly treasure,
that for weight, worth, use, delight, and duration, all the treasures of the
world, are not to be compared to it.

O Sirs, what is a cup of pleasant wine to a condemned man? or a Ships Lading
of Gold to a drowning man? or a sumptuous Feast to a sick man? or Royal Robes
to a diseased man, etc? no more are all the riches or treasures of this world,
to those spiritual riches and heavenly treasures that attends the poorest
Saints. Austin has long since told us, that (Divitiae corporales paupertatis
plenae sunt) earthly riches are full of poverty; they cannot enrich the soul;
for oftentimes where the purse is full of Gold, the heart is empty of grace,
and under many silken Coats, there are Threadbare souls to be found. Now what
are all the riches of this world to those riches of consolation, and riches of
sanctification, and riches of Justification, and riches of salvation, and
riches of glorification, that attends the poorest Saints? Suppose that poverty
should break in upon you like an Armed man, whilst you are in the pursuit of
holiness, yet if the best of riches, if spiritual riches shall attend your
poverty, as certainly they shall, what cause have you to be discouraged? surely
none. And let thus much suffice for Answer to this fifth objection.

But Sixthly, Some may further object and say, Should we etc.

Now to fence and arm you against this objection, give me leave to propose to
your most serious thoughts, these following Considerations, etc.

First, That holiness is man's greatest honor and excellency, In the other
motives you will find holiness to be the honor of God, Christ, and Angels, etc.
and glory of all a man's excellencies and glories, as has been fully proved in
the fifth motive to holiness, yea and that which is yet more, holiness reflects
honor not only upon a man's own person, but it reflects honor also upon a man's
near and dear relations, yea upon the very Country, City, or Town, where he
was borne, as is made good at large in the six^h motive to holiness, to which I
refer you for more full and complete satisfaction to this objection. But,

Mercury could not kill Argus till he had cast him into asleep, and with an
enchanted rod closed his eyes; so the Devil can never hurt the soul, nor kill
the soul, till he has cast the sinner into a deep sleep of carnal security.
which in innocence was the top and crown of all his glory and felicity! Ah
how has sin blinded, be beasted and besotted the sons of men, that they should
look upon that to be their reproach, which is their highest honor in this
world; and to look upon that to be their disgrace, which alone puts a grace
upon them; and to look upon that to be their discredit, which can only bring
them into credit with God, Angels, and good men. August. Confess. lib. 2. cap.
3.
Augustine confesses that it was just thus sometimes with him, for he was
stricken with such blindness, that he thought it a shame unto him to be less
vile and wicked then his companions, whom he heard boast of their lewdness, and
glory so much the more by how much they were the more filthy; therefore, says
he, least I should be of no account I was the more vicious, and when I could
not otherwise match others, I would feign that I had done those things which I
never did, least I should seem so much the more abject, by how much I was the
more innocent, and so much the more vile, by how much I was the more chaste.
Ah, what will not a soul blinded by sin say and do, when the work of holiness
is not formed in him? Sin has certainly cast that sinner into a woeful
Lethargy, who is the father of this objection; now it is observed of those that
are fallen into a Lethargy, that their bodies are subject to a continual
drowsiness, and their memories are so weak that they cannot remember any thing
that they speak or do, nay it does so far debase them, that they forget the
very necessary actions of life; and just so has sin dealt with these Objectors
souls, it has cast them under such a spiritual drowsiness, yea it has cast
them into such a deadly and fearful sleep, that it makes them forget the unum
necessarium, the one thing necessary, viz. holiness. Souls under a spiritual
Lethargy, forget their lost and lamentable condition, they forget how far off
they are from God, Christ, heaven, and salvation, and they forget how near
they are to hell, to ruin, to everlasting burnings, and to utter perdition and
destruction. It is observable of the Smiths dog, that neither the noise of
hammers by him, nor the sparks of fire flying about him, nor those that light
upon him, do any whit awaken him, but he snorts and sleeps on securely in the
midst of all; so sin has cast the sinner into so deep a sleep, that though the
sparks of hellfire in the threatenings fly about him, and the hammers of Gods
Judgments makes a noise on all sides of him, yet he is so stupefied and
benumbed, that nothing will awaken him to behold his spiritual and eternal
hazard, but he sleeps on securely, and so is like to do (if infinite grace and
mercy does not prevent) till he awakes with everlasting flames about his ears.
When a man is in a deep Lethargy, if you pinch him with pincers, or prick him
with needles, he feels it not, if you scourge him he cries not, if you threaten
him he fears not, or if you speak him fair he regards it not, etc. Now this
is the condition of such that are in a spiritual Lethargy, let the Judgments
of God be denounced, and let the terrors of the Law be preached they tremble
not, let the flames of hellfire flash upon their souls they regard it not, for
they are Sermon-proof, and Judgement-proof, and hell-proof. Now this is thy
very case O sinner, who cryest out that the pursuit of holiness will turn to
thy disgrace and discredit in the world; for were thy eyes but open to see the
necessity, beauty, and excellency of holiness, O then thou would call for
holiness, and cry for holiness, and search for holiness, and press for
holiness, as that which is the chiefest ornament, and the only honor and glory
of the Creature. But,

Thirdly, I answer, That it is not holiness but wickedness, Pro. 14.34.
Righteousness exalts a nation; but sin is a reproach to any people, or as the
Hebrew has it, to nations. (...) Nations or peoples.
The world usually accounts either beggerliness of estate, or badness of
situation, or rudeness of behavior, or changes in Government, or dullness of
invention, or a disuse of Arms, or some such like imperfections to be the
reproach of Nations; but the holy Ghost tells us, that it is sin, it is sin that
is the reproach of nations, that is the shame of nations, that is the contempt
and scorn of nations, and that blots and blurres all the excellencies and
glories of nations; impious persons makes the nations infamous, and the more
impious any nation, City, or person is, the more infamous that nation, City, or
person is. Pro. 6.32, 33. But who so commits adultery with a woman, What an
indeleble blot was this still upon David, viz. That his heart was upright in
all things save in the matter of Vriah.
lacks understanding: he that does it destroys his own soul. A w^und and
dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away. There is
nothing that is such a blemish and such a wound to a man's honor as sin; sin
leaves such a blot, such a blurr, and such a reproach upon a man's name, fame,
and reputation, that no Art, no pains shall ever be able to wipe it out; all
the water in the Sea cannot wash away, nor all the rubbing in the world cannot
wipe away the disgrace, disdain, and contempt, that enormities, that
wickednesses lays a people under. Jer. 24.9. And I will deliver them to be
removed, into all the kingdoms of the earth for their hurt, to be a reproach,
and a proverb, a taunt and a curse in all places whether I shall drive them.
'Twas not for their holiness, their godliness, but for their wickedness and
ungodliness, that God was resolved to make them a reproach and a proverb, a
taunt and a curse in all places. Pro. 10.7. The memory of the Just is blessed:
but the name of the wicked shall rot. The wickedness of the wicked heaps so
much disgrace, disparagement, and dishonor upon them, that it makes their very
names to rot and stink above ground; their carcasses do not more rot and
stink under ground, then their very names do rot and stink above ground; the
wickedness of the wicked, will make their very names such a detestation and
such an abhorring, that they shall either not be remembered at all, or if they
be, they shall be only remembered as a rotten stinking putrified thing. As the
curse of God follows the soul of a wicked man to hell, so the curse of God
follows the name of a wicked man on earth, so that it becomes most noisome and
loathsome among the sons of men. Sin does so debase and bebeast the great ones
of the world, that the Prophets (as Grotius has rightly observed) use to set
forth wicked Kings by the names of Beasts, Dan. 7, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Pro. 28.15,
16.
as the Goat, the Ram, the Leopard, the Bear, to note the beastliness of their
conditions, and because they commonly maintain and exercise their government
by brutish violence and Tyranny. And Christ himself who never spoke Treason
nor Sedition, terms king Herod a Fox in that Luke 13.32. And he said unto
them, go ye and tell that Fox, behold I cast out devils, and I do cures to
day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected. Herod was as crafty
and as subtle as Fox, he was as cruel and as fraudulent as a Fox; and
therefore he is very fitly termed by Christ a Fox. And so Paul describes Nero
by the name of a Lion, 2 Timothy 4.17. And I was delivered out of the mouth of the
Lion, that is, out of the mouth of Nero, who for his power and cruelty was like
a Lion, for he was a most cruel and desperate persecutor of the Christians,
and made a bloody decree, that whosoever confessed himself a Christian, should
without any more ado be put to death a^ a convicted enemy of mankind. Now by
what has been said you see that it is not holiness but wickedness that is the
greatest disgrace, dishonor and disparagement imaginable to the sons of men;
and therefore there is no reason why the great ones of the world should
disdain to pursue after holiness upon the account of this objection. But,

Fourthly, I answer, That this objection savours strongly of Zech. 4.7. Calvin
has this note on that 1 Pet. 5.5. viz. (Regis animum quisque intra se habet,)
every man has in him the mind of a King.
or what art thou O mighty man? but that thou may be dishonored, and
disparaged for holiness sake? what are thy great swelling Titles, but as so
many Rattles? what are thy Honors, but as so many Meteors? and what is all thy
worldly greatness, but a wind that may blow thee the sooner to hell? all thy
glory is but a glorious fancy, a magnum nihil, a great nothing; and this Haman
and Herod found by experience, and so did Julius Caesar, and Augustus Caesar,
who gave a charge to the Pretors of Rome, that they should not suffer his name
to be worn threadbare. Bajazet who was one of the greatest Commanders in the
world, was carried about in an I^on-grate to be a footstool to an insulting
Conqueror. And Belisarius the most famous General that the latter Age of the
Roman Empire knew, and in greatest favor with Justinian his Prince, was
reduced to that great want that he was feign to beg his bread. And thus in all
Ages men have quickly fallen from the highest pinnacle of honor, to sit with Job
upon the dunghill. The true honor of a Soldier lies not in boasting of the
nobleness of his lineage, nor in the blazing of his Arms, nor in telling of
large Stories of his Pedigrees and Genealogies, nor in his brave Clothes, nor
in his rich plunder, etc. but his honor lies in a torn Buckler, a cracked
Helmet, Of these Biron the French Marshall boasted at his death. And so did
many of the Romans.
a blunt Sword, and in the scarres and wounds that he has received in the
defense of his Country; so thy true honor, O thou great piece of vanity, (that
make this objection) does not lie in thy Coat of Arms, nor in thy great
Titles, nor in thy great Lordships and Manors, nor in thy high Birth, etc. but
in thy interest in Christ, in thy new birth, in thy being an heir of the
promises, in thy Title to heaven, and in thy pursuit after holiness; and
verily, if you should live and dye without these things, it had been ten
thousand times better that you had been brought up in a Cave, then that you had
been brought up at Court, and that you had all your days lain under a hedge,
then that you have sit so long upon seats of honor, and that you had begged
your bread from door to door, then that you have had your full Cups and full
Tables, and that you had been clothed with Rags, then that you have put on
costly Robes, and that you had rather been a turning of Spits, then a tossing
of Pots or Pipes, for the great things of this world does but lay men the more
open to great Temptations, and to great provocations, even to commit the
greatest abominations. O! Sirs, Suppose a criminous person, who is led to
execution, should ingrave his Coat of Arms upon the Prison-Gate, would he not
be accounted vain and mad? and yet such is the madness and vanity of the great
ones of this world, that they endeavor with the greatest industry to leave
monuments of their dignity in the prison of this world, Psalm. 49.10. -- 15.
but take no care to make provision for another world; and all this is out of
the horrid pride and loftiness of their spirits. Psalm. 10.4. The wicked through
the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God: God is not in all his
thoughts. There is nothing that hinders a man from seeking after a holy God,
and from pursuing after holiness like pride; A proud heart is too stout to
think of holiness, or to mind holiness, or to prize holiness, or to press
after holiness: Exodus 5.2.
Who is the Lord, says proud Pharaoh, that I should serve him? so says the
proud heart, who is holiness? and what is holiness, that I should seek it, and
press so hard after it? As there is no sin that fortifies the heart against
holiness like pride, so there is no sin that weakens and dis-inables the heart
to pursue after holiness like pride. O! you proud and lofty ones of the world,
who look upon holiness as a poor low contemptible thing; tell me, what are all
your noble births, and great estates, etc. but trisles that God bestows upon
the worst and basest of men? The whole Turkish Empire, says Luther, is but a
Crust that God casts to a Dog. Tell me, whether the Fly and the Worm, yea
the most contemptible creature (if there be any such) was not man's elder
Brother at his first creation, and if so, why then should vain man be proud? O
tell me, whether thou have ever laid to heart that soul-abasing and
soul-humbling text, Psalm. 39.5. The original runs elegantly.
Verily every man at his best estate is altogether vanity. Selah: Verily lets
that in, and Selah shuts that up, verily every man, not some man, but every
man, Col Adam, Col Hebel, all Adam is all vanity, or every man is every vanity;
(...)
every man is a comprehensive vanity, every rich man is every vanity, and every
great man is every vanity, and every mighty man is every vanity, and every
Noble man is every vanity; yea and that which is yet more, every man at his
best estate, not in his childhood or decrepit age, but in his best estate, when
he is best constituted and under-laid, when he is most firmly fixed and settled
on his best bottom, yet even then he is vanity. The Original runs thus, every
man standing, that is, (...)
(as some carry it) standing a Tip-toe in all his Gallantry and bravery, in all
his beauty and glory, and in all his pomp and majesty, is vanity, yea every
vanity. Well Sirs, remember this, that as rotten wood and Glowworms make a
glorious show in the night, but when the day appears, they appear to be poor
despicable base creatures; so though now the high, the great, and mighty ones
of the earth shine and gloriously sparkle in the darkness of this world, yet in
that day when the Sun of righteousness shall arise, and manifest the secrets of
all hearts to the world, and strip the great ones of all their Titles of honor,
and their noble parentage, and their rich and royal Robes, and their Troops
and Trains, and their crowns and chains, then they will appear to be but base
and despicable creatures, then their poverty and misery, their nakedness and
vileness will appear to all the world, then the world shall see that riches
without righteousness, power without piety, and greatness without holiness,
will do the Gods of this world no good. O that thou had now a heart to weep
over that pride of heart that keeps thee from pursuing after holiness, that so
thou may not weep to all eternity in utter darkness. But,

Sweden say, that it is only for Pro. 29.12.
or for much evil. If the mountains overflow with waters, the valleys are the
better; and if the head be full of ill humors, the whole body fares the worse.
The Actions of Rulers are most commonly rules for the peoples actions, and
their examples passes as current as their Coin: Esth. 1.10, 11, 15, 16, 17,
18. Vide. Its noted in King Alphonsus sayings, that a great man cannot commit a
small sin.
If their examples are evil, there are none so dangerous as theirs. Jeroboam
the Son of Nebat, is never mentioned in the Scripture, nor never read of in the
Chronicles of Israel, but he draws a Tail after him, like a blazing Star, who
made Israel to sin. A sick head disordereth all the other parts, and a dark eye
benights the whole body. The evil examples of great men, corrupts the Air
round about. The common people are like tempered wax, easily receiving
impressions from the Seals of great men's vices. If a Peasant meet with Luxury
in a scarlet Robe, he dares be such, having so fair a cloak for it. If the
vulgar people meet with drunkenness under a black Cassock, they dare be such;
they make no bones on it to sin by prescription, and to damn themselves with
Authority. Austin brings in some excusing their compliances with the sinful
customs of those times in drinking healths, thus, Great personages urged it,
and it was at the Kings Banquet, where they judged of Loyalty by Luxury, and
put us upon this election, drink or die; they thought it a sufficient excuse to
plead the examples of great men.

And if their examples are virtuous, there are none so winning and drawing as
theirs. Carus the Roman Emperor used to say, Bonus duae bonus comes, A good
leader makes a good follower.
It is observable in the very course of nature, that the highest Spheres are
always the swiftest in their motion, and carry about with them the inferior
Orbs by their celerity; so men that are high and eminent in Authority, power,
and dignity, and eminent also in grace and holiness, they carry the inferior
people by their examples to a liking of holiness, and to a love of holiness,
and to a pursuit after holiness. As the biggest Stars in the Firmament are
always the brightest, and gives the greatest luster to those of a lesser
magnitude; so those that in respect both of Greatness and grace, are as so many
shining Stars, they give the greatest light and luster to others by their
shining conversations. O! what a world of good will the gracious example of a
good Prince provoke unto. 'Twas the saying of Trajanus a Spaniard, Qualis Rex,
Talis Grex, Subjects prove good by a good Kings example. Stories tells us of
some that could not sleep when they thought of the Trophies of other Worthies
that went before them; the gracious examples of great men are very awakening,
quickening, and provoking to that which is good; as is most evident in all those
Kingdoms, Countries, Cities and villages, where such men live. And therefore
great men are the more obliged to be good men, and honorable men to be holy
men. But,

Fourthly, Of all men under heaven you will have the greatest Luke 12.48. It
was excellent counsel that the Heathen Orator gave his hearers; Ita vi vamus
ut ^ationem nobis reddendam arbitremur; Let us so live as those that must give
an account of all at last.
there he looks for much: O Sirs, God will bring you to an account for that
Talent of honor, and that Talent of wealth, and that Talent of birth, and that
Talent of power, and that Talent of Authority, and that Talent of interest, and
that Talent of Time, etc. that he has entrusted you with; and how will you be
able to stand in the day of account without holiness in your hearts? King
Philip the third of Spain, whose life was free from gross evils, professing
that he would rather lose all his Kingdoms, then offend God willingly; yet
being in the Agony of death, and considering more thoroughly of his account that
he was to give to God, fear struck into him, and these words brake from him;
Oh, would to God I had never reigned! oh, that those years I have spent in my
kingdom, I had lived a private life in the Wilderness! oh, that I had lived a
solitary life with God! how much more securely should I have now dyed? how much
more confidently should I have gone to the Throne of God? What does all my
glory profit me, but that I have so much the more torment in my death? Well
Gentlemen, there is a day a coming wherein the Lord will call you to a strict
account, both for the principal, and also for the interest of all those
Talents of honor, riches, and greatness, etc. that he has put into your hands;
and how will you be ever able to hold up your heads in this day of account,
without you experience principles of holiness in your hearts, and hold forth
the power of godliness in your lives? If Saul was astonished when he heard
Jesus of Nazareth but calling upon him; Acts 22.7, 8.
Mark 6.16. 1 Samuel 21.9. Number. 7.10.
If Herod was affrighted when he thought that John Baptist was risen from the
dead; If the Philistians were afraid when they saw David's Sword; If the
Israelites were appalled when they saw Aarons Rod; Den. 38.2.
If Judah was ashamed when he saw Thamars Signet and Staff; And if Belshazzar
was amazed when he saw the hand writing on the wall; Dan. 5.9.
O! how astonished? how affrighted? how ashamed? and how amazed will the great
ones of the world be, who live and die without holiness, when God shall bring
them to the Bar, and command them to give an account of all the Talents that
he has put into their hands? If the Carthagenians were troubled when they saw
Scipio's Sepulcher; If the Saxons were terrified when they saw Cadwallon's
Image; And if the Romans were dashed when they saw Caesar's bloody Robe; Ah how
will all the Great unholy ones of the earth be troubled, terrified, and dashed
in the great day of their accounts? there are none that will have such large
accounts to give up as the great ones of the world, and therefore there are
none that stand so strongly engaged to look after holiness as they do. But,

Fifthly, The greater any men are on earth, if they live and Math. 23.14.
and these Christ lays under the greater damnation. The Germans have this
proverb, The pavement of hell (say they) is made of the bare sculs of the
Priests, and the glorious Crests of Gallants; Their meaning is, that the more
eminent any are in Church or State, and do not employ their eminency, power
and Authority, in ways of piety and sanctity, the lower they shall lie in
hell, yea these men of all others shall lie lowest in hell. Rev. 18.7. Isa.
47.8.
How much (or in as much as) she has glorified her self, and lived
deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her: for she says in her heart, I
sit a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Babylons torment and
sorrow must be suitable to her sin. Babylon excelled all others in pride,
haughtiness, luxury, and blasphemy, etc. and her punishments must be
answerable; So the Great, the rich, the high, and the mighty men of the world,
they usually exceed all others, in pride, drunkenness, uncleanness, filthiness,
oppression, vainglory, Gluttony and Tyranny, etc. and answerable to their
sins, will be their torments and their punishments in hell. Isa. 30.33. For
Tophet is ordained of old (I it may be for the poor, mean, and beggarly of
the world) yea for the King it is prepared, he has made it deep and large,
Tophet is the name of a place in the valley, lying on the South side of
Jerusalem. Josh. 18.16. Now in this vale stood Tophet, wherein the Idolatrous
Jews used to burn their children in sacrifice to the Idol Moloc, and it had
that name from the Drums or Tabrets that their Idolatrous Priests used to beat
upon at the time of their detestable services, to drown the hideous shrieks
and lamentable cries of the poor sacrificed children.
the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a stream
of Brimstone, does kindle it. Alas, the Brick-kilns of Egypt, and the Furnace
of Babel, were but as a blaze of straw to this Tormenting Tophet, that has been
prepared of old for the great and mighty ones of the earth. Oh how dreadful
must that fire be that is prepared by God himself, and that is kindled by the
breath of the Lord, and that shall never be quenched? and yet such is the fire
that is prepared for the great and mighty ones of the world. O! the easeless,
the endless, the remediless, the unsufferable, and yet the inevitable Torments
that are prepared for those that are great and graceless; in hell their wanton
eyes shall be tormented with ugly and fearful sights of ghastly Spirits, and
their ears that used to be delighted with all delightful music, shall now be
filled with the hideous cries, howlings, and yellings of Devils and damned
Spirits, and their tongues of blasphemy shall now be tormented with drought and
thirst, and though with the Glutton they cry out for a drop to cool their
tongues, yet Justice will deny them drops, who have denied others crumbs; and
their hands of bribery, cruelty, and tyranny, shall now be bound with
everlasting chains, and so shall their feet which were once swift to shed
innocent blood. In a word, their torments shall be universal, they shall
extend to every member of the body, and to every faculty of the soul. Ah Sirs,
fire, sword, famine, prisons, Racks, and all other torments that men can
invent, are but as flea-bitings to those Scorpions, but as drops to those vials
of wrath, and but as sparks to those eternal flames that all unsanctified
persons shall lie under. Look as the least joy in heaven infinitely surpasses
the greatest comforts on earth, so the least torments in hell, do infinitely
exceed the greatest that can be devised here on earth: for a close remember
this, as there are degrees of glory in heaven, so there are degrees of torment
in hell; and as those that are most eminent in grace and holiness, Math. 10.15.
Chap. 11.22. Luke 12.47, 48.
shall have the greatest degrees of glory in heaven, so those that are most
vile and wicked on earth, shall have the greatest degrees of torments and
punishments in hell. Now common experience tells us, that the rich, the great,
the high, the honorable, and the mighty ones of the world, are usually the most
excelling in all wickedness and ungodliness; and therefore their condemnation
will be the greater, they shall have a hotter and a darker hell then others,
except they labor after this holiness, which will be their only fence against
hell, and their sure path to heaven. But,

Psalm. 127.1, 2.
Lord we have rise early, and gone to bed late, we have labored, and sweat,
and droyl'd, and all little enough to get bread to eat, and clothes to wear,
As the poor people on the Northern borders, when to suppress their
Theeveries, some pressed upon them the eighth Commandment; they to excuse
themselves replied, that that Commandment was none of Gods making, but thrust
into the Decalogue by King Henry the eighth.
and to keep the Sargeant from the door, and to pay every man his own, had we
had but the time, the means, the advantages, that such and such Gentlemen have
had, and that such and such Nobles have had, and that such and such Princes
have had, etc. O how would we have minded holiness, and studied holiness, and
pressed after holiness! but seeing it has been otherwise with us, we hope Lord we
may be excused; but what excuse will you be able to make, O ye great ones of
the earth, who have had time, and opportunities, and all advantages imaginable,
to make your selves holy and happy for ever, and yet you have trifled away your
golden seasons, and forgotten the one thing necessary, and given your selves up
to the lusts and vanities of this world, as if you were resolved to be damned.
Let me a little allude to that John 15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloak or excuse for their sin:
So will God one day say to the great ones of the wo^ld; Had I not given you
riches, and greatness, and honor, etc. to have encouraged you to look after
holiness, and that you might have time, and leisure, and opportunity to seek
holiness, and pursue it, you might have had some ^loak, some excuse for your
neglecting so great, so glorious, so noble, and so necessary a work; O but now
you have no cloak, no excuse at all for your sin; now you can show no reason
under heaven, why an eternal doom should not be past upon you; and ah how
silent, how mute, how speechless, Titus 3.11. (...). Selfcondemned, or self
damned.
and how self-condemned, will all the great ones of the world be, when God
shall thus expostulate with them? O! that such would seriously lay to heart
that Math. 22.11, 12. And when the King came in to see the Guests, he saw there
a man which had not on a wedding Garment: And he says unto him, Friend, how
came thou in hither, not having a wedding Garment? and he was speechless. By
the wedding Garment the Learned understand holiness of heart and life; now when
the King questions him about the want of this wedding Garment, he is
speechless, or as the Greek word ((...)) imports, He was muzzled or haltered
up, that is, he held his peace, as though he had a bridle or a halter in his
mouth, he was not able to speak a word for himself, his own conscience had
past a secret sentence of condemnation upon him, and he sat silent under that
sentence, as having nothing under heaven to say, why he should not be cast into
utter darkness. And this will be the very case of all the rich, the great, and
the mighty ones of the world, who shall be found without the garment of
holiness, when the Lord shall enter into Judgment with them. And thus you see
by these six Arguments, that there are no persons under heaven that are so
eminently engaged to look after holiness, as the rich, the great, and the
mighty ones of the earth. But,

Should we pursue after holiness, we shall be sure to be reviled, slandered,
and reproached on all hands, every one will hoote and hiss at us, we shall
become a scorn and a byword to all that live in the family with us, and to
all our neighbors round about us, every one will scorn us, and hate us, and
we shall be their Table-talke, and their song, and the Butt at which they will
shoot in all their meetings and discourses, etc.

Now that you may be sufficiently armed against this objection, I desire you
seriously to consider of these five following Answers.

Jude 10. 1 Timothy 1.7.
they speak evil of things they know not, of things they understand not; not
to know is man's misery, but to speak evil of that which a man understands not,
is the height of folly, 1 Cor. 2.8.
and this these revilers do. Had they known (says the Apostle) they would
not have crucified the Lord of glory; Scientia non habet inimicum praeter
ignor^ntem.
so I say, had these revilers known the splendour, the beauty, and the glory of
holiness, they would never have reviled it, and scorned it: Had the Jews known
the Godhead of Christ, the divinity of Christ, the glory of Christ, they would
never have cried up Barrabas, and have railed on Jesus, as they did; so had
these Railers but known the worth, and the weight of holiness, they would never
have cried up wickedness, and decry'd holiness as they do. Now, oh what shame,
what folly, what vanity is it for a man to turn his back upon holiness,
because such revile it, and scorn it, who never knew feelingly, nor
experimentally, what holiness was? Would not a man either sigh or laugh at him,
that should turn his back upon riches, honors, and preferments, etc. because
the blind, poor and beggarly sort of people, who never experienced what these
things mean, casts dirt, dung, scorn and reproach upon them; and is not this
the present case? surely yes. The Fox in the Fable, when he could not come at
the Grapes, cried out, That they were sower, they were sower; so men that
cannot reach to the Riches, the honors, and the great things of the world, O
how do they cry out against these things! O what disgrace, scorn, and
contempt, do they cast upon these things! and all because they cannot reach
them, because they cannot graspe them; the application is easy. It Is men's
ignorance of holiness that makes them cry out so much of holiness. That heathen
Aristotle hit the mark when he cried out (Ignorant sane improbus omnis)
Ignorance is the source of all sin; the very wellspring from whence all
wickedness flows; for ignorance inslaves the soul to Satan, it lets in sins by
Troops, and then locks them up in the heart, and it shuts out all the means of
recovery, etc. And who then will wonder to see ignorant persons let fly at
holiness? Suppose a Geometrician should be drawing of lines and Figures, and
there should come in some silly ignorant fellow, who seeing him, should laugh
at him, would the Artist, think you, leave off his employment, because of his
derision? surely no; for he knows that his laughter is but the fruit of his
ignorance, as not knowing his Art, and the grounds upon which he goes; and
therefore he holds on drawing, though the silly fellow should hold on in his
laughing. O Sirs, though ignorant persons deride holiness, and laugh at
holiness, yet be not you ashamed of holiness, but hold on, and hold out in your
pursuit after holiness; for they understand not the rules and principles by
which you are acted, and therefore it is that they throw dirt in the face of
holiness; but 'twill be your wisdom to wipe that off, and so much the more to
pursue after holiness, by how much the more the silly ones of the world slight
holiness, and laugh at holiness. But,

Secondly, There is no fence against an evil tongue, a man and against an
evil head, etc. but there is no fence against an evil tongue, an evil tongue
is such an unruly, such a mischievous, such a dangerous, such a killing, and
such a destroying member, that there is no fence against it; a man may fence
off the st^oak of a sword, the thrust of a Rapier, and the shot of an Arrow,
but he can never fence off the reproach and the reviling of an evil tongue; If
the heart be sanctified, the tongue is the best member in the body, if the
heart be unsanctified, it is the worst. Bias one of the seven wise men, told
Amasis King of Egypt, that the Tongue was the best or worst member of the body.
Tota vita homines linguae delictis est referta; The whole life of man is made
up of the sins of the tongue, Basil.
Aesop being by his Master sent to buy up all the best meat he could get in the
Market, bought up all the tongues; and being sent again to buy up all the
worst meat he could get in the Market, he bought up all the tongues again, and
when he was asked why he did so, he answered, that there was no flesh better
then a good tongue, nor no flesh worser then a bad tongue; which the Apostle
confirms fully in that 3 James, from verse the second to verse the 12th, Vide.
An evil tongue is wilder then the wildest Beast, the Horse, the Ass, the
Camel, the Elephant, yea the Lion, the Leopard, the Bear, and all other Beasts
have been tamed by man, but the tongue no man, no Monarch on earth have ever
been able to tame. An evil tongue in some respect is worse then the devil;
for the devil may be shunned and avoided, but an evil tongue no man can shun;
and if you resist the devil, he will fly from you, but the more you resist an
evil tongue, the more it will fly upon you. Pro. 16.27. An ungodly man diggeth
up evil: and in his lips there is a burning fire. An ungodly man, or a man of
Belial, as the Original has it, diggs up evil; such old evils that have been
long since buried in the Grave of oblivion and forgetfulness, he diggs up to
cast in the Saints dishes, and to reproach them with: The teeth of malice will
be still a digging to find out something against the people of God, and if
they can pick up any thing out of the dunghill of false reports to object
against them, their lips presently are as so many burning Beacons, to discover
it to all the world; now their tongues will be set on fire of hell, and now
they will labor to fire the hearts and tongues of others against the people of
God. A wicked tongue (as Bernard observes) kills three at once; first, it kills
his name and fame by ill report who is slandered; Secondly, it kills his belief
with a lie, to whom the report is made. 3. It kills the slanderer himself with
the s^^^ of detraction. David who fell oftener under the sad lashes of evil
tongues, compares reviling tongues to three fatal weapons, a Razor, a Sword,
and an Arrow: 1. To a Razor, in that Psalm. 52.2. Now you know a Razor meets
with every little hair, and many times instead of shaving the hair, it slashes
the flesh; and sometimes by missing the Beard, it endangers the throat. And so
the reviling tongue will take the least advantage imaginable, to slash and cut
the names and reputations of those that fear the Lord in a thousand pieces:
Psalm. 57.4.
2. To a sword that cuts and wounds deep, and so does the revilers tongue cut
deeply into the names, fames, and credits of the people of God: And 3. To an
Arrow; the sword only cuts when we are near, Psalm. 64.3.
but the Arrow hits at a distance; the sword cannot cut except we be at hand,
but the Arrow may hit us when we are afar off; the reviler can easily shoot his
Arrows of reproach a great way off; he can shoot them from one Town to another,
Psalm. 73.9.
from one City to another, from one kingdom to another, yea from one end of the
earth to the other; when the hands are manacled, and the feet fettered and
stocked, the tongue travils freely all the world over, and loads the names of
men with what reproaches it pleases. The tongue is the great interpreter of
the heart; the tongue is the key that unlocks those treasures of wickedness
that be in the heart; Mat. 12.34. That man has commonly most of the devil in
his heart, that has most of the devil in his mouth. The strokes in Music
answer to the notes that are pricked in the Rules.
the corruptions of men's hearts commonly breaks forth at their lips. Look as a
pimpled face discovers a distempered Liver, and as a stinking breath discovers
corrupted Lungs, so a reviling tongue discovers a base rotten heart. When the
Pumpe goes you may quickly know whether the water that is in the Fountain or
Well, be clear or muddy, sweet or stinking; and when the clapper strikes, you
may soon guess of what metal the Bell is made of: and so by men's tongues you
may easily guess what is in their hearts; if the tongue be vil'd, the heart is
so; if the tongue be bloody, the heart is so; if the tongue be adulterous, the
heart is so; if the tongue be malicious, the heart is so; if the tongue be
covetous, the heart is so; and if the tongue be cruel, the heart is so, etc.
men's minds are known by their mouths; if the mouth be bad, the mind is not
good; he that is rotten in his talk, is commonly rotten ^n the heart. Of all
the members of the body, there is none so serviceable to Satan as an evil
tongue; and therefore when all the body is full of sores, Chrysostom.
Drexelius, and others.
he will keep the tongue from blisters, that so a man may the more freely and
fully curse God and die: And this was the reason why Satan spared Jobs tongue,
when he sadly paid all other members of bis body, that so his grand design
which was to provoke Job both to curse God, and to charge him foolishly, might
take place; but Jobs tongue be oyled with grace, proved his glory in his trying
hour, and instead of cursing he blesses a taking God, an angry God. O! sirs,
the world is as full of evil tongues as Nilus of Crocodiles, or as Sodom of
Sulphur, or as Egypt of Lice; and there is no fence, no guard against these
evil tongues; and therefore why should any man be discouraged from pursuing
after holiness, because of the revilings of evil tongues. Munster writes of men
in India, which speak not like men, but barks like dogs, and who regards such
men? no more should we regard such foul mouthed persons, who are still barking
against holiness, as the dogs bark against the Moon; but as the Moon runs her
race and holds her course, though all the dogs in the Town bark never so much
at it; so should you pursue after holiness, though all the tongues in the Town
should be barking and scoffing at you. But,

Numb. 23.10.
and awake with everlasting flames about their ears; O, how will they then wish
that they had never reviled holiness! How will they then wish that they had
prized holiness, and that they had spent their All in pursuing after holiness!
O how will they then charge themselves, and censure themselves, and arraign,
and condemn themselves for their scorning and condemning of holiness! O how
will they then wish that they had never heard of holiness, nor read of
holiness, nor thought of holiness! O how will they then wish that their mothers
wombs had proved their Tombs, and that they had rather lived and died in a
land of darkness, then thus to live and dye without holiness! Now, O what folly
and madness is it for thee to neglect the pursuit of holiness, because such and
such revile it, who perhaps before the next year, the next month, yea it may be
the next Sabbath comes about, will wish ten thousand times over and over, that
they had pursued after it, and that they had made it their greatest work in
this world to obtain it? But,

Fourthly, Such persons who are revilers, deriders, and haters Ezekiel. 13.19. ult.
O how may thy neglect of holiness upon the account of revilings and scornings,
strengthen the hands and the hearts of revilers and scorners, etc? and
therefore it is much better divinely to slight and disdain them, then by sinful
omissions, to gratify and please them. See how slighting Elisha carries it to
wicked Jehoram, though he was a King, 2 Kings 3.13, 14. The Prophets here
spoken of, were the remaining Prophets of Baal, of the idolatrous groves, and
of the Calves of Jeroboam.
And Elisha said unto the King of Israel, what have I to do with thee? get thee
to the Prophets of thy father and Prophets of thy mother. And the king of
Israel said unto him, Nay, for the Lord has called these three kings together,
to deliver them into the hand of Moab. And Elisha said, as the Lord of Hosts
lives, before whom I stand, surely, were it not that I regard the presence of
Jehosaphat the King of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee. 'Twas
not the great distress and danger that they were in (being like to perish for
want of water) nor the dignity of Kings, nor the number of three, but the
goodness, the graciousness and holiness of Jehoshaphat that wrought upon Elisha
to work a miracle to preserve them and their people alive; the holy Prophet
carries it very high toward this unholy Prince, for had it not been for
Jehoshaphat, he would not have honored him with a look, no not with a cast of
his eye; these words, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee, are words of
a very high strain, and speak out a great deal of holy-loftiness, stateliness
and contempt toward King Jehoram. And the same spirit was working in Mordecai
toward wicked Haman, as you may see in that Esth. 3.2. And all the Kings
servants that were in the Kings gate, bowed, and reverenced Haman, for the King
had so commanded concerning him; but Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence.
The Persian The Persians manner was to kneel down and reverence their Kings,
and such as he appointed in chief authority, which Mordecai would not do to
this proud ambitious, wicked Haman, though all the Courtiers and the Kings
Lifeguard, and all that had occasions to attend the Court did.
Kings (as many other heathenish Kings) were reverenced by their subjects, with
a kind of Divine honor or service; and such reverence and honor the King
commanded should be showed to his great favorite Haman; but this renowned
Mordecai refused to do; he was so Divinely noble and stout, that he would not
reverence such a wicked wretch in his heart, nor yet yield to him that outward
worship that was required by the King, it being more then was due to a man.
Some of the Rabbis say (As Aben Ezra, etc.) that Haman had the Image of some
false god about him, and that therefore Mordecai would not bow before him,
least he might seem to bow to the Idol that Haman carried about him: Others of
the Rabbis say (as R, Solomon, etc.) that Haman did make himself a God, and
required such worship as was due only to the true God, and that therefore
Mordecai would not reverence him, nor bow before him: And so Junius and other
Expositors say, that it was more honor then did belong to a man, that they gave
to Haman; and that therefore Mordecai refused to bow to him. And it is very
remarkable that some of the wisest and best of Heathens have forborne to come
into their Kings presence, because there was expected greater honor and worship
to be done to their Kings, then was meet to be done to a mortal man; but that
which is most considerable, and most probable, is this, that therefore Mordecai
refused to reverence Haman, and to bow unto him, because he was a wicked
Amalekite, and a bitter enemy to the people of God, and of that Nation, of that
stock whose remembrance God would have blotted out under heaven, Exodus 17.14.
Deuteronomy. 25.19. and with whom the Lord had sworn that he would have war from
generation to generation, until they were utterly wasted and destroyed, Exodus
17.16. Compared with that 1 Samuel 15.3.

It has been usual with the Saints to slight such who have been slighters of
Christ and holiness. I shall look upon Auxentius no otherwise then as upon a
devil, so long as he is an Arrian, said holy Hilary.
When Amphilochius the Bishop came into the presence of the Emperor Archadius
and his son (who was then partner with his father in the Empire) he saluted the
Emperor with all reverence, but slighted his son, whereupon the Emperor was
very much displeased, and demanding the reason why he so slighted his son, the
Bishop answered, Because he had slighted and neglected the eternal Son of God
(he being at that time a professed Arrian) whereupon the Emperor received the
Bishop again into favor, and banished all Arrians out of his Dominions. I have
read of one Maris a godly Bishop of Calcedon, who being blind, and Julian that
Apostate Emperor giving him some opprobrious words, calling him blind fool,
because he had rebuked him for his Apostasy, the good man answered thus, I
bless God that I have not my sight to see such an ungracious face as thine is.
Do your worst, do your worst, said Justin Martyr slightingly to his pe
secutors, but this I will tell you, you may put all that you are like to gain
by the bargain into your eye, and weep it out again. When a great Lord of this
Land (who was as graceless as he was great) met Mr. Fox in London streets, and
ask't him how he did, Mr. Fox said little or nothing to him; whereupon says
this great Lord, Sir, do you not know me, No not I, said Mr. Fox, says the
Lord, I am such a one; Sir, said Mr. Fox, I desire to know nothing but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. Policarpus meeting at a certain time with Marcion
the Heretic, says Marcion, don't you know me? yea said Policarpus, Eusebius.
I know thee to be (primo genitum Diaboli) the first begotten child of the
devil. And indeed why should we prefer him before a piece of Copper, that
prefers a piece of Gold before his God, yea that prefers his lusts and every
toy and trifle before Jesus Christ, his immortal soul, and the great
concernments of another world? God commanded in the old Law, that whatsoever
did go with its breasts upon the ground, should be an abomination to us: O how
much more should we abominate that man, whose heart and soul is glued unto a
piece of earth, or to this or that defiling and destroying lust? Pro. 29.27. An
unjust man is an abomination to the just: and he that is upright in the way, is
an abomination to the wicked. The quarrel between the seed of the Woman, Genesis
3.15.
and the seed of the Serpent, is almost six thousand years old; light and
darkness, heaven and hell, The Antipathies that are in nature between the
Elephant and the Boar, the Lion and the Cock, etc. is nothing to that which is
between the just and the unjust.
are not more opposite and contrary one to another, then these are contrary one
to another; that seed of enmity that was at first between them, is now grown up
on both sides to an abomination, and an abhorring of each other; the just man
says, what have I to do with thee thou son of Belial? and the unjust man
says, what have I to do with thee thou son of David? the original in the text
last cited is observable, the just abhors (...), vir iniquitatis, the man of
iniquity, i. e. the man that is made up of iniquity, that is nothing but
iniquity; now this shows that it is iniquity in the man that makes the man to be
an abomination to the just; but now wicked men they abhor the upright for their
very uprightness, they abhor him that is upright in the way, and could wish him
quite out of the way, and will do what they can to make him away; the
uprightness of the upright is such a terror to the wicked, that they cannot but
abominate and abhor the upright, and therefore no wonder if the upright
abominate them; and indeed who can look upon wicked men, as enemies to God, as
adversaries to Christ, as murderers of their own souls, as fighters against the
Church, as Champions for Satan, and as the Pests and Plague of a Nation, and
not abhor them, and not abominate them? O sirs, not to contemn the wicked is an
argument that you your selves are wicked, and not to contemn the wicked, is a
means to make them more wicked, not to contemn the wicked is to encourage and
tempt the wicked to be sevenfold more wicked, yea not to contemn the wicked who
contemn God, Christ, Heaven, and holiness, etc. is to contemn God himself. As
for such that advance the wicked, that magnify the wicked, that flatter the
wicked, that strengthen the hands of the wicked, that are most In with the
wicked, that joy and glory in the prosperity of the wicked, and that sigh and
mourn, that stamp and take on at the downfall of the wicked; these are
certainly wicked, yea they are eminently wicked, and therefore the more to be
slighted and scorned by men of integrity and sanctity. But,

Fifthly and lastly, To neglect the pursuit of holiness upon etc. in worthless
man to hurt and harm thee, then there is power, allsufficiency, wisdom,
goodness, and graciousness in God to defend thee, and secure thee, and arm thee
against all the reproaches and revilings of slanderous tongues. Now who art
thou, and what art thou, O vain man, that thou should dare to lessen God and
greaten man, to debase God and exalt man, yea to set up man above God himself,
and to ungod him as much as in the lies? and yet all this thou do when thou
turnest thy back upon holiness, because of the revilings and reproaches of
wicked men.

But I shall say no more to this objection, because I have spoken very largly
to this objection in my former books. If you desire further satisfaction to
this objection, turn to that Treatise called Apples of Gold, etc. and from Page
311. to Page 327. you will find seven more distinct answers to it. And see
also my Mute Christian under the smarting Rod, and from Page 304. to Page 326.
you will find eight answers more to this objection. I confess several other
objections might be made against your pursuing after holiness, but because I
have spoken to them at large in my former writings; therefore I shall not
trouble you with them here; and therefore let thus much suffice for answer to
those objections that usually men make when they are pressed home to follow after
holiness.

And so I shall come now to the second part of the Exhortation, and that
relates to Gods holy ones, to his sanctified ones, to those that have obtained
holiness, that have experienced the principles, the power, the life, and the
sweetness of holiness. And here let me exhort such.

First, To express, declare, evidence, and hold forth both the

First, By keeping your selves free from gross enormities Romans 2.23, 24, 25.
O remember that one scandalous sin will obscure and cloud all your graces and
spiritual excellencies. Look as one spot in the face spoils all the beauty; The
Schoolmen say that if a Sow do but wallow in one miry or dirty hole, she is
filthy, etc.
and one blot upon the copy obliterates the whole copy, and as one drop of Ink
colors a whole glass of clear water, so one scandalous sin will blot and
blur all former acts of piety and holiness, it will stain all a man's duties and
services, it will deface all a man's contentments and enjoyments, it will dash
and raze out all those golden Characters of righteousness and goodness that has
been stamped upon the soul, Ezekiel. 36.20. The Babylonians beholding the
enormities of the Jews, cried out, These are the people of the Lord, these are
come out of the Lords land. David's one act of folly with Bathsheba made the
enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. When one commended Alexander for his many
noble acts, another objected thus against him, I, but he killed Calisthenes; He
was valiant and successful in the wars, Plutarch in vita.
I, but he killed Calisthenes; He overcame the great Darius, I, but he killed
Calisthenes; his meaning was, that this one unjust and unrighteous action
clouded and darkened all his most noble deeds. A Christian cannot after his
conversion fall into a scandalous sin, but 'twill be objected against him by
every one, to the defacing and darkning of all his spiritual glory. When Naaman
the Syrian was cured (and as some think converted) by the Prophet Elisha, he
offers gold and rich garments, 2 Kings 5.1, One flaw in a Dyamond takes away
the luster and the price of it; and if we fall but once into a puddle, it will
defile us, and make every one point at us.
but he bows in the house of Rimmon; he seems to be very devoute and religious,
but he bows in the house of Rimmon; he promises to offer to none but the Lord,
but yet he bows in the house of Rimmon; this Rimmon like the fly in the
Alabaster box, spoiled all his best intentions, and highest resolutions; and
thus one scandalous vice disgraceth all the Noble virtues that be in a
Christian. O such a man is a very holy man, but; and such a one is a very
gracious experienced Disciple, but; and such a one is a very wise and
understanding man, but; and such a one is a very active stirring Saint, but,
etc. and this but marrs all. If there be but one crack in the honey-glass,
there the waspe will be buzing; and if there be but one scandalous sin that a
Christian falls into in all his life, how will the wicked be still a buzing of
that about, both in City and Country? O sirs, there are no sins that opens so
many mouths, and that sads so many hearts, and that swells so many eyes, and
that endangers so many souls, as scandalous sins do; and therefore above all
keeping keep off from them. O Sirs, as you would not harden sinners, as you
would not encourage sinners, as you would not tempt sinners, Romans 14.13.
as you would not stumble sinners, yea as you would not have a hand in the
damnation of sinners, take heed of scandalous sins. O! Sirs, 1 Kings 11.9.
as you would not provoke the great God, as you would not crucify afresh the
Lord of glory, and put him to an open shame, as you would not set the Comforter
a mourning, that alone can comfort you, as you would not raise a hell in your
own consciences, and as you would not darken the Churches Glory, fly from
scandalous sins as you would fly from hell it self. I have read of holy
Polycarp (that religious Martyr and Bishop of Smyrna) how that in the time of
the fourth persecution (under Marcus Antonius Verres) when he was commanded to
swear but one Oath, made this Answer, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 15.
Fourscore and six years have I endeavored to do God service, and all this
while he never hurt me, and how then shall I speak evil of so good a Lord and
Master, who has thus long preserved me? And being further urged to swear by
the Proconsul, he answered, I am a Christian and cannot do it, let Heathens
and Infidels swear if they will, I cannot do it were it to the saving of my
life: This holy man would rather sacrifice his life, then fall into a
scandalous sin. O Christians, pray and watch, and watch and pray, that you may
never be left to stain your own honor, or the honor of your profession, by
falling into scandalous sins. Well friends, remember this, it is not
infirmities, but enormities, it is not weaknesses, but wickednesses, that will
cast the crown from off your heads, and that will strip you of all your glory;
and therefore as you would hold fast your crown, keep at an everlasting
distance from scandalous sins, etc. But,

Secondly, Declare and evidence the reality and power of Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4,
5. or as the original will bare, bow the knee, O my soul.
and for so great a mercy; O Sirs, one drop, one spark of holiness is more
worth then heaven and earth, and how then can you but be thankful for it? Will thou be thankful to that God that made thee a man; and will thou not be
thankful to the same God that made thee a Saint? Will thou bless him that made
thee a creature, and will thou not bless the same God that has made thee a new
creature? Will thou praise him for the heavens that are but the workmanship of
his hands, Psalm. 8.
and will thou not praise him for holiness, Augustine writ his 49. Ep. to one
called Deo gratias.
which is the workmanship of his heart? Tell me, O Christian, is not holiness a
soul-mercy? and what mercies will thou be thankful for, if not for
soul-mercies? Tell me, O Christian, is not holiness of all mercies the most
necessary mercy? the want of other mercies might have troubled thee, I but the
want of holiness would have damned thee; and will thou not be thankful for
holiness, which is the one thing necessary? Tell me, O Christian, is not
holiness an incomparable mercy? what is thy health, thy wealth, thy wit to
holiness? dare thou mention thy birth, thy breeding, thy arts, thy parts, thy
honor, thy greatness, or thy advancement in the world, in that day wherein
holiness is spoken of? surely no; and will thou not then be thankful for such
an incomparable mercy as holiness is? Tell me, O Christian, is not holiness a
peculiar mercy, a peculiar treasure that God intrusts but few men with? 1 John
5.19.
Don't the world lie in wickedness? are not the multitude in all places
strangers, yea enemies to holiness? and how then can thou but be thankful for
holiness? Yea once more, tell me, O Christian, is not holiness a mercy
sweetning mercy? is it not the beauty of holiness that puts a beauty upon all
thy mercies? is it not holiness that bespangles all thy comforts and
contentments? O how sower would all thy mercies taste? and how pale and wan
would all thy mercies look, were it not for holiness? It Is the want of holiness
that makes all a man's mercies look as ill-favored as Pharaoh's lean kine,
Genesis 41.2, 3, 4.
and it is the fruition of holiness that makes all a man's mercies look as
well-favour'd as Pharaoh's fat-kine; it is holiness that both puts a color upon
all our mercies, and that gives a taste and a relish to them: All our mercies
without holiness, will be but as the waters of Marah, Exodus 15.23, 24, 25.
bitter; it is only holiness that is the Tree that will make every bitter sweet,
and every sweet more sweet; and how then can thou but be thankful for
holiness? O remember how far off thou were from God, Ephesians. 2.12.
and Christ, and the promise, and heaven, and happiness, when thou wast without
holiness in this world; O remember what a child of wrath, what a bond-slave to
Satan, what an enemy to God, and what an apparent heir to hell thou were; when
thou were an opposer of holiness, and a secret despiser of holiness, and then
be unthankful for holiness if thou can; O remember, that now by holiness of a
slave thou art made a Son, and of an heir of wrath, Rev. 8.16, 17.
thou art made an heir of heaven, and in stead of being Satan's bondman, thou
art now made Christ's freeman, John 8.36.
thy Iron-chains are now knocked off (as sometimes Joseph's were) and the Golden
chain of holiness is now put upon thee, Genesis 41.14.42.
and what does all this call aloud for, but thankfulness? This saying is also
fathered on Socrates, etc.
Thales a Heathen gave thanks to God for three things. 1. That he had made him
a man, and not a beast. 2. That he had made him a man, and not a woman. 3. That
he was borne a Greek, and not a Barbarian: And O then what cause of
thankfulness have thou for thy supernatural being, and for all those noble
principles of holiness that the Lord has stamped upon thy soul, etc? Shall the
husbandman be thankful for a plentiful Harvest, and the Merchant for quick
returns, and the Shopkeeper for a full Trade, and the Mariner for a good
voyage, and wilt not thou be much more thankful for holiness? Shall the beggar
be thankful for a crust to feed him, and shall the blind be thankful for a
dog to lead him, and shall the naked be thankful for rags to cover him,
Ingratum dixeris omnia dixeris.
and shall the Aged be thankful for a Staff to support him, and shall the
diseased be thankful for a cordial to raise him, and wilt not thou be thankful
for holiness, yea, for that holiness that is bread to strengthen thee, and a
Guide to lead thee, and raiment to cloth thee, and a Staff to support thee,
and a cordial to comfort thee? O remember, that ingratitude is a monster in
nature, a solecisme in manners, and a paradox in grace, damming up the course
of all donations, both divine and humane. Lycurgus (as Musculus observes) among
all his Laws made none against the ungrateful, because ingratitude was thought
a thing so prodigious as not to be committed by man. And the Persians and
Athenians condemned the ungra^eful to death; Ah unthankful Christians, how can
you think of these Heathens and not blush? Shall they bless God for crumbs, and
will not you bless God for crowns? shall they bless God for the gifts of
nature, and will not you bless God for the gifts of grace, etc? Next to a holy
Christ, holiness is the greatest gift that God can give, and therefore be
thankful for it, etc. But,

Hosea 6.3. 1 These. 3.12, 13. 2 Pet. 1.5.^ 10. Phil. 3.14, 15, 16. 2 Pet. 3,
17, 18. 1 These. 4.1.
by your perseverance in holiness; this exhortation, Follow peace with all men,
and holiness, was given forth to such as had a spirit of holiness, and
principles of holiness in them; and these are the men that the holy Apostle
presses to press after holiness. That holiness will do us no good, that is not
made good by perseverance. O Sirs, shall the ambitious person pursue after his
honors, and the voluptuous person after his pleasures, and the worldling pursue
after his gain, and the wanton pursue after his Harlots, and the drunkard
pursue after his full Cups, etc. And shall not Christians much more pursue
after holiness? not to go forward, is to go backward, Non progredi est
r^gredi. Rev. 2.10, 17. Jude 20. 1 Cor. 9.24. Heb. 12.1, 4. Pro. 18.6. Cant. 9.
and not to grow better, is to grow worse, and not to grow more holy, is to
grow less holy; the crown, the new name, and the white stone, is for him that
holds out, and that holds on in his pursuit after holiness. A progress in
holiness is fitly compared to a Building, to a Race, to the morning light, and
to the increasing Moon: Now you know, Houses are are raised from the
foundations to the walls, and from the walls to the first story, and then to
the second story, and then to the third, and so higher and higher, till you
come up to the roof; And in a Race, you know, men run on till they come to the
Goal; And the morning light shines brighter and brighter till it be perfect
day; And the Moon increases more and more till it come to the full; And so
must Christians persevere and hold on in adding grace to grace. O! Christians,
you must not be like to a morning cloud, nor to the early dew; you must not
stand still in the ways of holiness, Josh. 10.13. 1 Kings 10, 11.
as the Sun stood still in Gibeon, much less are you to go back, like the Sun
on Ahaz's Dyal; but as a Bridegroom which comes out of his chamber, and
rejoices as a strong man to run his race; Psalm. 19.5. Psalm. 119.32.
so must you delight to run the ways of Gods commands; you must maintain your
progress in piety what ever comes on it. O Sirs, the way of holiness is the
safest way, Pro. 3.17.
the noblest way, the sweetest way, the cleanest way, the pleasantest way, and
the happiest way, and therefore hold on, and hold up in that way, though the
world, the flesh, and the devil should cry out, Pro. 26.13.
There is a Lion in the way, there is a Lion in the way. It is said of
Hannibal, that notwithstanding the rough rocks, and the craggy clifts of the
Alps, yet he proceeded onward in his design for Italy, with this resolution,
that he would either find a way or make a way; and so must Christians hold on
in a way of holiness, notwithstanding all the Rocks and lets and difficulties
that they meet with in that way. Psalm. 44.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
It Is an observation of some of the Learned, Ezekiel. 9.4.
that those that were marked to be preserved in Jerusalem, were marked with the
letter Tau, which is the last of all the Hebrew letters, to signify that they
must run the race of holiness, even to the last. O Sirs, in the face of all
your sins and unworthiness, God holds on in ways of mercy toward you; and why
then should not you hold on in ways of sanctity toward him? Shall Satan
persevere in his enmity against holiness? and shall wicked men persevere in
their opposition to holiness? and shall formalists persevere in their neglect
of holiness? and will not you persevere in your pursuit of holiness? a good
Husbandman will not give over sowing, till he has sowed all his Land; nor a
good Physician will not give over his patient, till he has cured him; nor a
good workman will not give over his work, till he has finished it; no more
should a good Christian give over his pursuit of holiness, till he is come up
to the highest perfection of holiness. Look as God carried on the work of
Creation from day to day, till he had finished it; Genesis 1. John 17.
and as Christ carried on the work of our Redemption from day to day, till he
had completed it; so Christians should look to a daily carrying on of the work
of holiness in their hearts and lives, till that work be perfected and
completed. The Philosopher being asked in his old age, why he did not give
over his practice, and take his ease? answered, when a man is to run a Race of
forty furlongs, would you have him sit down at the nine and thirtieth, and so
lose all his pains, and the prize for which he runs? surely no. O Christians,
you are Racers, Heb. 12.1.
and you must run to the end of your Race; it is not enough to begin well, and
to run well for a time, but you must hold out in running, What had it availed
Peter to have escaped the first and second watch, if he had stuck at the Iron
Gate, and had not passed through that also? Finu coronat opus.
till you come to the Goal, or else you will lose all the pains and labor that
ever you have taken in Religion, you will lose all the prayers that ever you
have made, and you will lose all the Sermons that ever you have heard, and you
will lose all the fasts that ever you have observed, and you will lose all the
tears that ever you have shed, and you will lose all the Alms that ever you
have given, if you do not hold out to the end; if you do not persevere in
welldoing, you will lose your crown, and be undone for ever after all your
doings; a progress in holiness is requisite not only to your consolation, but
also to your salvation, Math. 24.13. But,

James 1.27.
in opposition to all mixtures and corruptions whatsoever. O Sirs, the great
God stands upon nothing more in all the world then upon purity in this worship;
there is nothing that does so provoke and exasperate God against a people as
mixtures in his worship and service; Math. 21.12, 13. John 2.15, 16, 17.
polutions in worship do sadly reflect upon the name of God, the honor of God,
the truth of God, and the wisdom of God; and therefore his heart rises against
them: The very spirit, life, and soul of the second Commandment lies in these
words, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc. In matters of
divine worship God abhors that men should mix their water with his wine, their
dross with his Gold, their chafe with his wheat, etc. when once men come to
be so bold as to defile his worship with their mixtures, Lev. 10.1, 2. Ezekiel.
5.11, 12. Chapter 23.38, 39. Jer. 7.29, 30. Ezekiel. 8.17, 18. Rev. 2.22, 23. Deuteronomy.
4.2. Chap. 12, 32.
then God is resolved to be a swift and a terrible witness against them, as you
may clearly see by comparing those notable places of Scripture together in the
Margent; there is no sin that does so incense and provoke God to Jealousy and
wrath against a people, as mixtures in worship; God can bare with defilements
any where rather then in his worship and service: And that

etc?

guide, and direct us in all matters of worship; The Scriptures are sufficient
to direct us as to all the parts of worship. As 1. That of public prayer. 2.
And that of reading and expounding. 3. And that of preaching, 4. And that of
singing. 5. And that of the Seals both of Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.
then how do thou, O man, detract from the sufficiency of the Scripture, who
minglest thine own or other men's inventions with divine institutions, and
set up thy posts by Gods posts? O Sirs, the Scriptures are sufficient to
direct us fully in every thing that belongs to the worship and service of God;
so as that we need not depend upon the wisdom, prudence, care, or Authority of
any men under heaven to direct us in matters of worship. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable, for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: That the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works: The Scriptures are
sufficient to inform the ignorant, to confute the erroneous, to reform the
vicious, and to guide and direct, support, and comfort those that are gracious;
here a Lamb may wade, and an Elephant may swim; here is milk for babes, and
meat for strong men; here is comfort for the afflicted, and succor for the
tempted, and ease for the troubled, and light for the clouded, and enlargement
for the straightened, etc. O how full of light, how full of life, how full of
love, how full of sweetness, how full of goodness, how full of righteousness
and holiness, etc. is every Chapter, and every verse in every Chapter, yea and
every line in every verse. The Rabbis say that a mountain of matter hangs
upon every word of Scripture, yea upon every tittle of Scripture: God never
sends his people to the shop of men's traditions and inventions, but he still
sends them to the Scripture. Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the testimony; if
they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light (or no
morning) in them. Chap. 34.16. Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read;
no one of these shall fail, (...)
none shall want her mate: for my mouth it has commanded, and his Spirit it
has gathered them. And in the New Testament Christ sends his hearers to the
Scriptures. John. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have
eternal life, and they are they which testify of me. The Greek word (...),
that is here rendered Search, signifies a strict, narrow, curious, diligent
search; we must search the Scripture, as we would search for Gold, or for some
precious stones which we would feign find; we must search the Scriptures, as
Hunters seek and search out their Game. And so the Apostle sends his hearers to
the Scriptures. 2 Pet. 1.19. -- 22. As to a surer word then that of Revelation.
All which speaks out the sufficiency of the Scripture, to direct us in all
matters that concern our internal or eternal welfare. O that you would for ever
remember these two things.



etc. about Ceremonies, Liturgey, forms, Gestures, etc. has been men's not
keeping close to the blessed word of God; when men forsake this perfect Rule,
whether will not they run? and what will not they do? Ah who art thou, O vain man,
that accuses the holy Scriptures of insufficiency? and how will thou blush,
and be ashamed and confounded, when in the great day, the Lord shall plead the
excellency, and vindicate the sufficiency and Authority of his blessed book,
in opposition to all the mixtures of men's Traditions with divine institutions?

Heb. 3.4, 5, 6. John 4.23, 24.
as if God were not careful enough, nor faithful enough, nor mindful enough,
nor wise enough, nor prudent nor understanding enough, to order, direct, and
guide his people in the matters of his worship, but must be beholding to the
wisdom, Psalm. 39.5.
prudence, and care of man, of vain man, of sinful man, of vile and unworthy
man, of weak and foolish man, to complete, perfect, and make up something that
was wanting in his worship and service, etc.

Isa. 29.13, 14. Math. 15.3, 6, 8, 9.
and makes the worship a vain worship; as the mixing of water with wine is the
debasing of the wine; and the mixing of Tin with silver, or brass with gold, is
the debasing of the silver and gold, so for men to mix and mingle their
Traditions and inventions with Gods institutions, is to debase the worship and
service of God, and to detract from the excellency and glory of it. The Kings
and Princes of this world, have most severely punished such, who by their base
mixtures have imbased their coin; and there is a day a coming, wherein the
King of Kings will most severely punish all such who have imbased his worship
and service, by mixing their Romish traditions with his holy institutions. Rev.
22.18. Rev. 22.18.
For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the prophecy of this
book, if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the
plagues that are written in this book: And no wonder; for what horrible pride,
presumption, stoutness and baseness of spirit is it in foolish man to be so
bold with the great God, as to dare to mix any thing of his own with his
worship and service, which, according to divine institution, is so perfect and
complete? God will never bare it, to see men lay their dirt upon his gold, and
to put their Rags upon his Royal Robes. Ah Christians, Christians, evidence
your holiness by standing up for holy ordinances and pure worship, in
opposition to all mixtures whatsoever; oh don't you touch a poluted worship,
don't you plead and contend for a poluted worship, but let Baal plead for Baal,
and though all the world should wander after the Beast, yet don't you wander,
and though every forehead should have the mark of the Beast upon it, yet do
you abhor his mark, and what ever else it be that does but smell and savor of
the Beast. It is observable that in Kings and Princes Courts, children, fools,
and the rude Rabble, are much taken with fine pictures, and rich shows, and
glistering gaudy clothes, etc. but such as are wise, serious, grave Statesmen,
they mind not, they regard not such poor things, they look upon those things as
things that are much below the nobleness and the greatness of their spirits,
who have honorable objects, and the great and weighty affairs of the State to
busy themselves about; so my Brethren, though the children, the fools, and the
Rabble of the world are much affected and taken with such polutions and
mixtures, as makes up a glorious pompious worship, yet you that have a spirit
of holiness, and principles of holiness in you, O how should you slight such
things, and pass by such things as things below you, as things not worthy of
you, who have a holy God, a holy Christ, a holy Gospel, and a holy worship, to
busy your thoughts, your minds, your heads, and your hearts about. But,

Lam. 5.16.
O the leanness of souls! O the spiritual witherings and decays in grace and
holiness, Its very uncomfortable to see the days grow shorter, and to see
friends grow behind-hand in the world.
that is to be found among many Christians this day! Some complain of the loss
of Trade, and others complain of the loss of estate; some complain of the
loss of c^edit, and others complain of the loss of friends; but what are all
these losses to the loss of holiness? and yet how few be there that complain
of the loss of holiness! holiness is fallen in our hearts, in our families, in
our streets, and in our Churches, and yet how few are there to be found that
laments the fall of holiness! O Sirs, will you lament such as are fallen from
riches to poverty, from honor into disgrace, and from the highest pitch of
prosperity to the lowest step of beggary and misery; and will you not lament
such who are fallen from the highest round to the lowest round in Jacobs
Ladder? O Sirs, will you mourn over a decayed estate? will you weep over
decayed friends? and will you sigh and sob over a decayed body? and will you
not much more lament and mourn over decayed souls, etc? Ah how many have lost
that love, Rev. 2.4, 5.
that life, that heat, that zeal, that readiness, that forwardness, and that
resoluteness that once they had for God and godliness. Some are fallen from
their holiness by giving themselves elbow-roome to sin against the checks and
lashes of conscience; Psalm. 51.
others are decayed in holiness, by their secret resisting and smothering the
gracious motions of the Spirit: Acts 7.51.
Some are fallen frpm holiness, either by their neglect of precious means, 1
These. 5.20.
or else by their heartless using of the means; others are fallen from their
holiness, either by the allurements and enticements of a tempting world, 2 Timothy
4.10.
or else by the frowns and threatenings of a persecuting world: Some are fallen
from holiness, by their non-exercise of grace; and others are fallen from
holiness, by not discerning their first decays in grace. So that upon one
account or another, multitudes in these days are fallen from that holiness
which was once their glory. If you look into families, there you shall find
Masters complaining that their servants are so careless, foolish, frothy,
light, slight, slothful, unfaithful, proud and lofty, that they are not to be
spoken to, nor trusted; and if you look again into the same Families, there
you shall find servants complaining that their Masters and Mistrisses are so
exceeding froward, pevish, passionate, worldly, neglective of duties, and
careless of their souls, that it is even a hell to servants to live with them.
Now what speaks all these sad complaints, but either a total want of holiness,
or else a very great decay of holiness: And if you look among all other
relations, as husbands and wives, parents and children, Magistrates and people,
Ministers and Christians; oh what sad divisions, what fiery contentions, and
what fearful Jars are there to be found? oh what slightings, what revilings,
what under-valuings, what heart-risings, what heart-swellings, and what
heart-burnings are to be found amongst them? and what do all these things
declare, but that the Glory of God is departed from Israel, and that holiness
is fallen to a very low ebb? ah friends, were there but more holiness among
you, there would be more union among you, and more love among you, and more
sweetness and tenderness among you, and more forbearance and patience among
you; Oh then you would never be snarling one at another, nor biting one of
another, nor plotting one against another, nor devouring one of another any
more. Again, if you look among men, whose parts are great, whose gifts are
high, whose profession is glorious, and whose expressions and notions are very
seraphical, ah what a little holiness will you find? O Sirs, shall the men of
this world vex and fret, shall they weep and wail, and shall their lamentation
and mourning be like that of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo, 2 Chronicles.
35.24, 25.
and that for the loss of a little wealth, or for a punctilio of honor, or a
day of pleasure, or the smiles of a Prince, etc? and will not you lament and
mourn for the loss of holiness, which is the choicest Jewel in a Christians
Crown? Tears instead of Gemmes were the ornaments of David's bed, when he was
fallen from his holiness. Psalm. 51.
And though the Persian Kings would have no mourning nor mourning apparel worn
in their presence, yet the King of kings loves to see his people a mourning for
the falls of holiness, as well as for the heights of wickedness. When news was
brought to Xenophon of his Sons death, Val. Max. lib. 5. c. 10.
he put off his Crown from his head, and wept. O my Brethren, who can hear of
the death of holiness, and behold the death of holiness in men's hearts, lives,
and families, and not put off his crown, and weep, and not put off his
ornaments, and weep till he can weep no more, etc. But,

Bernard in Cant. cries out, I would not upon the sudden attain to my highest
pitch, but grow toward it by little and little. 2 Pet. 1.5. -- 13. Romans 1.17.
Psalm. 84.7. Mushromes grow up to perfection in one night.
O sit not down satisfied with some drops or sips of holiness, but labor after
the perfection of holiness; O don't content your selves with so much holiness,
as will bring you to happiness, or with so much holiness as will keep wrath and
your souls asunder, or hell and your souls asunder, or eternal ruin and your
souls asunder. The exhortation in the Text, Follow peace with all men and
holiness, is an exhortation that was given out to Saints that were holy before,
and the life and force of it lies in this, that those that were holy, should
labor to be more and more holy, they should still be adding of grace to grace,
holiness to holiness, they should still be a going on from faith to faith, and
from strength to strength. As holiness has its conception, birth, and infancy,
so it has its full growth, and after that all Christians must strive. Holiness
is not like to Jonahs Gourd, that shoot up in a night, but it is like Plants
and Trees that grows up by degrees, Psalm. 92.14. and after the highest degrees
we must endeavor. 1 Kings 19.4, 5.
After the Prophet Elias had traveled a days journey in the wilderness, he
sat down and slept under a Juniper Tree, and there God calls upon him, up and
eat; and when he found him the second time he calls again upon him, Ver. 7.
up and eat, because thou have a great journey to go. O Christians, you have
a howling wilderness to travel through, you have a great journey to go, you
have many a mountain to walk over, and many an enemy to vanquish, (even the
world, the flesh, and the devil) and many a cross to bare, and many a mercy to
improve, etc. and therefore you have very great cause to up and eat, I say, to
up and eat, that is, to grow stronger and stronger in holiness, and to walk
from grace to grace, and from virtue to virtue, and to come off from your
milk, Heb. 5.12, 13, 14.
and to feed upon strong meat, that you may hold out to the end of your
journey, and not faint nor fall short of that great salvation, which attends
perfection of holiness. And this progress in holiness is that maine thing that
the Apostle presses upon the believing Corinthians in that 2 Cor. 7.1. Having
therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
The Apostle having in the former Chapter armed the believing Corinthians with
many strong Arguments against all communion and fellowship with Idolaters, he
comes at last to touch upon those great and glorious promises, Ver. 16, 17, 18.
which upon the account of their high and holy calling they were interested in,
and he presents them as singular motives, and as choice and precious
encouragements to move them to perfect holiness in the fear of God. There is
no work on earth that so well becomes the Heirs of such precious promises, as
that of cleansing themselves from all filthiness on the one hand, and that of
perfecting holiness in the fear of God on the other hand. Now this being a
point of the highest concernment, and of the greatest importance imaginable to
the Saints, I shall therefore endeavor these three things.

First, To lay down some motives to provoke you to perfect etc.

Secondly, I shall propound some means, some directions etc.

Thirdly, I shall show you how you may know whether you have attained to such a
perfection of holiness as we are all to etc.

I shall first begin with the motives, that may whet and stir up your spirits
to labor after greater degrees and higher measures of holiness, then yet you
have attained to; and to that purpose, I beseech you seriously to consider of
these following particulars.

First, Consider that notwithstanding all the means, and all this very day: And
this sad charge I shall briefly make good against you by an Induction of eight
particulars, thus:

Romans 7.22, 23, 24. Isa. 59.12.
Oh my Brethren, are not many of your corruptions as powerful and as strong,
as they were five, ten, yea twenty years ago, notwithstanding all the prayers
that you have made, and all the Sermons that you have heard, and all the tears
that you have shed, and all the resolutions that you have taken, and all the
promises that you have made, and all the conflicts that you have had? and what
does this speak out, but that holiness is at a low ebb in your souls? O Sirs,
were but holiness risen to a greater height in your souls, Chapter 8.10.
how readily would you trample upon your lusts? and how easily would you lead
captivity captive? As the house of David grew stronger and stronger, 2 Samuel 3.1.
so the house of Saul grew weaker and weaker; As holiness rises in the soul by
degrees, so sin dies in the soul by degrees; and the more any man abounds in
holiness, the more he abounds in his spiritual conquests over the world, Gal.
8.14.
the flesh, and the devil. O Sirs, your pride testifies to your faces, and
your self-love testifies to your faces, Hosea 5.5. Chapter 7.10.
and your worldliness testifies to your faces, and your passion testifies to
your faces, and your diffidence testifies to your faces, and your hypocrisy
testifies to your faces, and your carnality testifies to your faces, etc. that
yet you are not got up many rounds in Jacobs Ladder, that your degrees in
holiness may be easily cast up. But,

As Jonah did upon his Gourd.
Ah at what a rate do men value the empty honors, the fading riches, and the
declining greatness of this world? Democritus the Philosopher esteemed his
Room covered over with green branches, Genesis 24.30, 31. Math. 17.4. 2 Cor. 5.1,
2. Math. 18.1, 2. Mark 9.33, 34, 35, 36.
above the Royal Palace. And did not Peter prefer a Tabernacle on earth, before
a Royal Palace not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens? But what do I
talk of Peter, when this disease had again and again and again overspread
the hearts of all the Disciples, as you may evidently see by comparing the
Scripture in the Margent together; they had dispute upon dispute, Luke 9.46,
47. Chap. 22. to the 28. vide.
which of them should be accounted greatest; they had often sharp contests
among themselves, which of them should have the greatest honor, the best
office, and the highest preferment in Christ's earthly kingdom; and indeed
their thoughts, heads, and hearts were so taken up about an outward kingdom, a
worldly kingdom, that they little minded either the spiritual kingdom of God
within them, or the glorious kingdom of God above them. As the foolish Indians
prefer every toy and trifle before their Mines of Gold; so many Christians (who
are low in holiness) prefer the trifling vanities of this world, before the
glorious treasures and endless pleasures that be at Gods right hand: Psalm. 16.
ult.
O but where holiness is risen to any considerable height, there men will make
a very footstool of their crowns for Christ to get up and ride in triumph;
Rev. 4.10, 11.
there all the glory and bravery of this world will be but as dross and dung,
Phil. 3.7, 8.
there men would like the woman (the Church) in the Revelation, Rev. 12.1.
trample the Moon (that is, all the things of this world which are as changeble
as the Moon) under their feet; were there but more holiness in your hearts,
all the gay and galllant things of this world, would be more contemptible in
your eyes. O Sirs, if Midas was condemned to wear Asses ears, because he
preferred Pans Pipe before Apollo's Lute, (that is, humane policy before divine
providence) how severely are they to be censured, who prefer the poor, low,
empty nothings of this world, before all the glory and happiness of another
world, etc. But,

Thirdly, You have attained to but little holiness, witness Isa. 51.12, 13. Chapter
41.10.14.
yet in a day of calamity, how easily and frequently does your fears get above
your faith? and what fainting fits does then attend you? Pro. 24.10. If thou
faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small, or as the Hebrew has it,
Tsar (...) It signifies to be straightened as men are straightened that are closely
besieged in time of war, etc.
thy strength is narrow or straightened. Look as bodily faintness discovers bodily
weakness, so soul faintness discovers soul weakness; it is troubles that are the
trialls of a Christians strength; afflictions will try what sap and life we
have within us. As the man is for holiness, so is his strength under trials; he
that has no holiness, has no strength, and he that has but a little holiness,
has but a little strength, but he that has much holiness, has much strength,
and accordingly will bare up bravely in a day of trial; Genesis 49.23, 24.
his bow with Joseph's will then abide in strength. Though Noah in the building
of his Arc met with many a sore trial, and many a sad affront, and many a
broad jest, and many a bitter scoff; and though the people generally laughed at
the good old man, thinking that he did not only dote, but dream, not of a dry
summer, but of a wet winter (as we say) yet Noah being eminent in holiness, his
bow abode in strength, and he held on building of the Arc, till he had
finished the work that God had commanded. But O the sadness, the weakness, the
faintness that attends most persons in the day of their adversity. Jer. 8.18,
21. When I would comfort my self against sorrow, my heart is faint in me. For
the hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt; I am black; astonishment has
taken hold on me. Chap. 45.3. Thou did say, woe is me now, for the Lord has
added grief to my sorrow; I fainted in my sighings, and I find no rest. Lam.
1.22. For my sighs are many, and my heart is faint. Chap. 5.17. For this our
heart is faint, for these things our eyes are dim. Now this faintness in the
day of adversity speaks out much spiritual weakness; for where holiness is
risen to a noble height, there men will bare up courageously, even in a day of
calamity. The Eagle is the King of Birds, Aristotle l. 9. de Historia
Animalium, etc.
and therefore the Romans, who were the greatest Potentates on earth, still bore
the Eagle in their Standards; now the Naturalist observes concerning this Royal
Bird, that whereas all other Birds make a noise when they are hungry, this
Princely Bird makes no noise at all, though he be never so hungry, for such is
the greatness, and the nobleness of his spirit, that what ever befalls him, he
will not cry, and whine, and repine as other Birds will do when they want their
food; his Princely spirit carries him above all hunger, thirst, or danger: So
men that are eminent in holiness, are men of such noble princely spirits, that
they will not faint, nor vex, nor fret, nor complain, nor whine, whatever their
wants, trials, or straits may be; such afflictions as would break other men's
hearts, cannot so much as break their sleep, they still hold on their way, and
whatever they meet with, they will be still amounting nearer and nearer to
heaven. But now where there is but a little holiness, there men will be like
the common fowls of the air, still a making a noise, they will still be a
crying, whining, and repining under every trial and trouble they meet with. But,

Fourthly, You Have but a little holiness, witness your easy, Joseph, Job,
Daniel, Genesis 39. Job 1.3. and 6. chapters of Daniel.
the three children, etc. Austin thanks the Lord that his heart and the
temptation did not meet together. The Devil tempting Bonaventure told him that
he was a Reprobate, and therefore persuaded him to drink in the present
pleasures of this life, for says Satan, thou art excluded from the future joys
with God in heaven; to whom he answered, No, not so Satan, for if I must not
enjoy God after this life, I will labor to enjoy him as much as I can whilst I
live. When one of the Martyrs was offered riches and honors if he would recant,
And the young convert when he was tempted, answered, Ego non sum ego, I am not
the man that I was, etc.
he gave this excellent answer, Do but offer me somewhat that is better then my
Lord Jesus Christ* and you shall see what I will say to you. When Vale^ce the
Emperor offered large preferments to Basil, and told him what a great man he
would make him, he answered, offer these things to children, and not to
Christians. When Bernard was tempted, tell me not Satan, said he, what I have
bee^, but what I am and will be through grace. And so when Beza was tempted in
the like case, he answered, whatsoever I was, I am now in Christ a new
creature, and that is it which troubles thee Satan; I might have continued in
my sins long enough ere thou would have vexed at it, but now I see thou do
envy me the grace of my Savior. And when Augustine was sadly reviled by the
Donatists for the wickedness of his youth, he answered, The more desperate my
disease was, so much the more I admire the Physician. Thus men eminently holy
have stood their ground in the face of all temptations and motions to sin; but
alas, in these times how easily, how readily, and how frequently do multitudes
fall before every temptation? Josh. 7.21.
As soon as Acan had but cast his eye upon the Babylonish garment and shekels
of Silver, and wedge of Gold, his fingers itch't to be handling of them; so
many in these days, as soon as they do but see the way to honor or preferment,
or a great place, or a high office, etc. O how do their fingers itch, how do
their souls long after these things? and though they savor and smell never so
strong of Babylon or of Rome, yet have them they must; such persons may do well
to remember, that Acans Babylonish garment was but a shrowed to shrowed him,
and his golden wedge was but a wedge to cleave him, and his shekels of silver
were but shekels to hold him the faster, both under the wrath of God and man.
Such as can turn with every wind, and close with every worship, and bow to
every Idol that man sets up, have either no holiness, or else but very little
holiness in their hearts; such as easily and readily fall before temptations
from within or without, have never it attained to any great measures of
holiness. But,

Joseph, or touch your Isaac, or call for your Benjamine, Jer. 31.15. Genesis
37.35. 2 Samuel 18.33. Jonah 4.9.
or wither your Gourd, O now with Rachel you will not be comforted, or with
Jacob you will go mourning into the grave, or with David you will cry out, O
Absalom my son, my son, would God I had died for thee; or with Jonah you will
tell God to his face that you do well to be angry. O! now you cannot look up and
trust in God, you cannot look up and delight in God, you cannot look up and hope
in God, you cannot look up and solace your selves in God, you cannot look up and
lie down in the good pleasure of God, you cannot look up and justify God, you
cannot look up and say, God is your God, etc. O now God has touched you in your
first born, you can neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep; now you can taste no
sweet, nor take no comfort, nor find no content in any of all your enjoyments;
now God has touched the apple of your eye, you can neither think well of God,
nor speak well of God, nor carry it well toward God. O! now no body can please
you, nor nothing can satisfy you; now you think that there is no sorrow to
your sorrow, Lam. 1.12.18.
no cross to your cross, nor no loss to your loss, etc. now every sweet is
bitter, and every comfort is a cross; and accordingly you carry it both toward
God and toward man; all which speaks out holiness to be at a very low ebb in
your souls. O! sirs, were holiness but risen to some considerable height in
your souls, you would with Job Job 1.21.
(who was eminent in holiness) bless a taking God, as well as a giving God; and
you would carry it sweetly and ingeniously toward God, as well when he writes
bitter things against you; as when he is a multiplying of favors and kindnesses
upon you, but if when the rod smarts you kick, and sling, and fret, and fume,
and vex, and tear your comforts in pieces, and your souls in pieces, and your
God in pieces (as much as in you lies) certainly the streams of holiness runs
low in your souls. But,

Sixthly, You have but little holiness, witness the ebbings Can. 2.11, 12. Jer.
8.22. Chap. 46.11. and chap. 51.8.
and anon you say you see the clouds grow darker and thicker; now you say the
Winter is past, and the singing of birds is come; and anon you say your Winter
is like to be longer then ever; now you say there is Balm in Gilead, and anon
you say your wound is incurable; now you say all is your own, and anon you are
ready to give up all as lost, etc. and thus your hearts rise and fall according
to the working of second causes. When you have full purses, and powerful
Armies, and subtle Counselors, Psalm. 30.6, 7, 8.
and great Allies, then you are ready to say, surely our mountain is strong,
and we shall never be removed; but when your bags are empty, and your forces
broken, and your counsels dissipated, and your Allies fallen off, then you are
ready to cry out, O now there is no hope, there is no help. O but now were you
eminent in holiness, then under the saddest and crossest workings of second
causes, 2 Chronicles. 14.11.
you would say with Asa, O Lord it is nothing with thee to help, whether with
many, or with them that have no power; 2 Kin. 6.16, 17. Exodus 14.13.
and with Elisha, They that be with us, are more then they that be with them;
and with Moses, Stand still, Psalm. 118.6.
and see the salvation of God; and with David, The Lord is on my side, I will
not fear what man can do unto me. Holiness in any considerable height, will
set the power of God in opposition to all the power of the world, Psalm. 65.6.
-- 11.
and then divinely triumph over them. Plutarch in vita Pomp.
Pompey once gloried in this, that with one stamp of his foot, he could raise
all Italy up in Arms; but the great God with one stamp of his foot (or with
one word of his mouth) can raise not only Italy, but also all the Angels in
heaven, and all the men on earth in Arms at his pleasure; and in the power of
this God, raised holiness will enable a man to glory all the day long: Where
holiness is weak, there men stand and fall as second causes work, but where
holiness is eminent, there men will live upon the first cause; and however
second causes may wheel about, yet such a man will live upon him, and look up
to him that has a wheel within every wheel, Ezekiel. 1.15. -- 22. But,

Psalm. 106.15. Isa. 24.16. and Chap. 10.16.
barrenness, and unfruitfulness that is among you at this very day. Ah how may
most cry out with the Prophet Isaiah, O my leanness, my leanness; O our
leanness, our leanness, our barrenness, our barrenness, etc. though God has
waited many three years for fruit, yet behold nothing but leaves. I have read
of the Indian Fig Tree, how that its leaves are as broad as a Target, Athenaeus
de Ipnosoph. lib. 3.
but its fruit is no bigger then a Bean: Ah how many Christians be there in
these days, whose leaves of profession are very broad, but their fruits of
righteousness and holiness are very small; and as the Indian Fig Tree, though
it be of fair and goodly dimensions, yet it riots out all its sap and juce into
leaves and blossoms. So many in these days, who though they carry it fair, and
make a goodly show, yet they riot out all that spiritual sap and life that is
in them into the mear leaves and blossoms of an empty profession. Ah how are
many of our hearts like to the Isle of Pathmos, which is so barren that nothing
that is good will grow on it, all the good things that grow there is from the
earth that is brought from other places. Look as a company of Ants are very
busy about a Molehill running to and fro, and wearying themselves in their
several movings and turnings this way and that, and yet never grow great, for
after all their motions and stiring, they are still the same as to the slender
proportion of their bodies; so, many Christians in these days run to and fro,
they run from one duty to another, and from one ordinance to another, and from
one opinion to another, and from one principle to another, and from one
Minister to another, and from one Church to another, and from one way to
another, and from one notion to another; and yet they make little progress in
holiness, 2 Pet. 3.18. 2 Timothy 3.6, 7.
they grow but little in the love, the life, the likeness, and the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ; they are like those silly women that Timothy speaks of,
who were ever learning, and yet never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth; and they are like Nazianzens country of Ozizala, which abounded, with
gay flowers, but was barren of corn; so these abound in gay notions, and
flourishing parts, but are barren of grace and holiness. Seneca has long since
observed, that as the Philosophers in his time grew more and more learned, so
they grew less and less moral; and is there any thing more evident in these
days then this, viz. that as men grow more and more in empty airy notions, and
in a pompous Religion and profession, so they grow less and less zealous and
religious. The reason (say some) why Christ cursed the Fig Tree, though the
time of bearing fruit was not come, was because it made a glorious show with
leaves, and promised much, but brought forth nothing. What Is a barren tree, a
barren ground, or a barren womb to a barren heart? Many in our days are like
the Cypress-tree, Joh. 15.6.
which the more it is watered, the more it is withered; so the more many are
watered with the means of grace, the more they wither; the more the dews of
heaven falls upon them, and the more heavenly Manna is daily rained round about
them, the more lean, fruitless, and barren they grow; Such souls may do well to
remember, that those trees that are not for fruit, are for the fire, Heb. 6.8.
Augustine.
For a close let me tell you, that I fear (with that Father) that many grieve
more for the barrenness of their lands, then they do for the barrenness of
their lives, and for the barrenness of their trees, then they do for the
barrenness of their souls, and for the loss of their Cattle, then they do for
the loss of Gods countenance. But,

My Lord Paulet kept both great favor and places under Henry the eighth a
Papist, and under King Edward the sixth a Protestant, and under Queen Mary a
Papist, and under Queen Elizabeth a Protestant, and being asked how he could do
so, he answered that he always imitated the willow and not the oak.
Ah how many Christians are there in these days of Gospel Light, who are
indifferent who they hear, or what they hear; who are indifferent whether they
pray or not, or walk in Gospel Order or not, or keep Sabbaths or not, or
maintain closet communion with God or not, or enjoy the Lords Supper or not,
etc. And, O what inconstancy is to be found among many in these days; many
persons are only constant in inconstancy; now they are for Ordinances, and
anon they are against them; now Ordinances are precious and glorious things,
and anon they are poor low things; now they cry up this and that for glorious
truths, and anon they cry down the same things as dangerous and pernicious
errors; now they cry up Paul, and cry down Apollo, and anon they cry up Apollo,
and cry down Paul; now they are for this form, and anon they are for that; now
they are very zealous, and anon they are very lukewarm; now they are for
worshipping of God according to rule, and anon they are for worshipping of God
according to the prescriptions of men; now they have their gales of devotion,
and anon they are quite becalmed; now they are full of life, and anon they are
very lumpish; now they stand fast, and anon they are wavering; now they are
confident all will be well, and anon they give up all as lost; now they will
lay down their lives for Christ, and anon they are afraid to own Christ, etc.
Now what does this indifferency and inconstancy speak out, but either a total
want of holiness, or else that holiness is at a very low ebb in these men's
souls. Now these eight Arguments do clearly evidence that many (O that I could
not say that most Christians) have attained but to small measures and degrees
of holiness. But,

Secondly, To provoke you to labor after higher degrees

First, By many precious promises that are scattered up and down in the blessed
Scriptures; as that Job 17.9. The righteous Or as the Hebrew has it, (...)
he shall add strength, that is, he shall go on from one degree of spiritual
strength to another, he shall go on from a lesser degree to a greater degree,
and from a lower degree to a higher degree of spiritual strength; a holy man
shall not only have his spiritual strength maintained, but increased; he shall
not only retain that spiritual strength he has, but he shall be still a adding
of strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7. Me chaiil el chaiil (...) properly
signifies vigor, courage, alacrity, power, success, and an Army wherein usually
most power is required and manifested.
They go from strength to strength, or from power to power, or as the word may
be read, from company to company, or from Troop to Troop, in allusion to the
custom of the Jews, when all the Males went up thrice a year to Jerusalem; now
when they went up to Jerusalem, they went up with their flocks, and in Troops;
now those that were lively, active, and strong, they over took this company and
that, and this Troop and that, and so they went on, their power and strength
increasing daily more and more, till they appeared before God in Zion; or look
as the Be goes from flower to flower to gather Honey, so those that had a
principle of grace and holiness in them, they went from one good company to
another, from one Troop of Christians to another, still gathering up heavenly
honey as they went. O Sirs, there is no such way to perfect holiness, as to be
still a going on from duty to duty, and from ordinance to ordinance; from
praying to hearing, and from hearing to praying; from reading to meditating,
and from meditating to reading; from public duties to closet duties, and from
closet duties to public duties, etc. Psalm. 92.12, 13, 14. The righteous shall
flourish like the Palm Tree, he shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. Those that
be planted in the house the Lord, Ille non est bonus qui non vult esse molior.
shall flourish in the Courts of our God. They shall still bring forth fruit in
old age, they shall be fat and flourishing. The promise of flourishing is three
times repeated in these three verses, they shall flourish, they shall flourish,
they shall flourish, to note the more then ordinary flourishing estate of the
Saints even in their old age. I have read of an old Christian, who being asked
whether he grew in goodness or no, answered, I believe I do, because the Lord
has promised that his people shall bring forth fruit in old age. Pliny writing
of the Crocodile, tells us, that she grows to her dying day, so Christians that
are rooted in Christ, and planted in the house of the Lord, they will be still
growing up in grace and holiness even to their dying day. It Is with real
Christians as it is with wine, the older the better, or as it is with the Sun
which shines most gloriously and amiably when it is near seting. Gracious souls
are like the Laurel (or the Bay Tree) whose leaves are always green, not only
in the Summer of youth, but also in the Winter of old age. Pliny.
The Palm Tree is always green, it never loses his leaves or fruit, and the
more it is loaded the deeper it is rooted; and so it shall be with throughout
Christians. So in that Isa. 46.3, 4. God has promised to carry us on to old
age. Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of
Israel, which are born by me, from the belly, which are carried from the womb.
And even to your old age I am he, and even to hoar hairs will I carry you: I
have made, and I will bear, even I will carry and will deliver you. That God
that begins a work of Grace and Holiness in his peoples hearts, that God will
perfect and carry on that work. Mothers and Nurses express their tender care,
love, and delight, by carrying their Babes in their arms, till they can go
alone; but God surpasses them in his love, care, tenderness, and divine
fondness, for he will carry them even to hoary hairs. This word I, that is Six
times repeated in verse the fourth, is doubtless of very great importance, and
signifies not only Gods eternal Essence, and that he will be ever like
himself, but also his unchangeableness in regard of us; for whatever our
thoughts may be concerning God, yet we shall always find him one and the same,
he will be as good to his people at last as he was at first, even to old age he
will carry them. So in that Prove. 4.18. But the path of the just is as the
shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day. A holy man
proceeds from grace to grace, from virtue to virtue; he goes from faith to
faith, and from strength to strength, till at length he shines as the Sun in
his strength. So in that Hosea 14.5, 6, 7. I will be as the due unto Israel: he
shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his root as Lebanon. His branches shall
spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive Tree, and his smell as Lebanon.
They that dwell under his shadow shall return, they shall revive as the corn,
and grow as the vine: the scent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon. The
growth, the fruitfulness, and the flourishing estate of the Saints in grace and
holiness, is set forth by a sevenfold Metaphor in these words; the Similes are
all plain and easy, and you may easily dilate upon them in your own thoughts;
and therefore I shall pass them. I shall conclude with that precious promise,
John 4.14. But whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall
never thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of
water springing up into everlasting life. The Spirit in its gracious operations
shall be a constant spring in believers hearts, and it shall every day rise
higher and higher, like the water in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 47.1. -- 7.
till grace be swallowed up in glory. And thus you see by these choice
promises, that it is possible for you to attain to a greater measure of
holiness. But,

Secondly, The prayers that have been put up upon this very account, do clearly
evidence the same. Certainly the people Phil. 1.9, 10, 11. And this I pray,
(...) brevis penetrat Coelum.
that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all
judgment. That ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be
sincere and without offense till the day of Christ: Being filled with the
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise
of God. Col. 1.9. For this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not
cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge
of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. Chap. 4.12. Epaphras,
who is one of you, a servant of Christ saluteth you, always laboring fervently
for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of
God. The Greek word ((...)) is a Metaphor from a Ship, whose Sails are filled
with wind; Epaphras was an humble petitioner that the souls of the Colossians
might be filled with the highest degrees of grace and holiness, as the Sails of
a Ship are filled with wind, 1 These. 3.12. And the Lord make you to increase
and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do
toward you: The Apostle by doubling his word increase and abound, discovers
himself to be an importunate suitor, that a double portion of grace and
holiness might be given out to the Thessalonians. So in that Heb. 13.20, 21.
Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen. The Apostle cannot beg any thing for these believing Hebrews
below perfection. And the Apostle Peter puts up the same requests for those
blessed converts that were scattered throughou^ Pontius, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithynia, In that 1 Pet. 5.10. But the God of all grace, who has
called us into his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a
while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. God is called the
God of all grace, because he is the giver of all kinds of grace, and of all
degrees of grace: Now nothing will satisfy this great Apostle when he comes to
plead for these Saints below perfection; though they had as much grace as would
bring them to heaven, yet he begs such a perfection of grace as might raise
them high in heaven. And thus it appears by the prayers of these holy men,
that Saints may still be rising in grace and holiness. But,

Thirdly, The experience of other Saints does clearly evidence Psalm. 37.37.
Phil. 3.11. -- 16. Can. 4.7. Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Rev. 14.4, 5. Prove. 2.21. and Chap.
11.5. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
Genesis 6.9. Noah was a just man and perfect in his generation, and Noah walked
with God: Noah was not only perfect with a perfection of parts, nor only
perfect in respect of desires, endeavors and aims, nor only perfect ^n respect
of his justification before God by imputed righteousness, nor only perfect in
respect of Gods approbation, acceptance and delight, nor only perfect in
respect of Gods design and intentions to make him so in another world, nor
only perfect in respect of those gifts and graces with which he was adorned
and furnished for the discharge of his place, office, and work to which the
Lord had called him, nor only comparatively perfect in regard of that
profane, ungodly, and debauched generation, among whom he lived; but also he
is said to be perfect in respect of an eminent progress that he had made in
grace and holiness, he had attained to considerable degrees and measures of
grace and holiness; and though his proficiency in the exercise of grace and
practice of piety fell short of complete perfection, yet it rise to such a
height, that God could not but crown him and and Chronicle him for a perfect
man. 1 Pet. 2.2. 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. Heb. 5.12, 13, 14
In all Ages of the world there has been four several Ages of Christians, viz.
Babes, children, young men, and old men. Noah was not a babe, nor a child, nor
a young man, but an old man in grace and holiness; and therefore he is said to
be perfect. There are several forms in Christ's School, some higher, some lower;
now he that is in the highest form may be said to be perfect in regard of those
that are in a lower or in the lowest form: now Noah was in the highest form of
grace and godliness; therefore he is said to be perfect; and in this sense, I
suppose, Job is said to be a perfect man, Job. 1.1.8. There was a man in the
Land of Vz, whose name was Job, and that man was perfect and upright, and one
that feared God and eschewed evil. And the Lord said unto Satan, have thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect
and upright man, one that fears God and escheweth evil? Job was a very
considerable person, he was a man of a choice spirit, he was caller in
goodness, and higher by the head and shoulders in grace and godliness, then any
of the Saints in that Age and corner of the world where he lived: Job was a man
of the greatest weight and worth for holiness that was in all the world: Job
was a none such, no Christians could come near him; as he was the greatest, so
he was the best of the best of all the Saints that were in the East for
heighths of grace and holiness, he was a Giant, and all the Christians round
about him were but as so many Dwarfs; he was the Paragon of his time; for piety
and sanctity none could parallel him, none could match him: And in this sense
we are to understand the Apostle, both in that 1 Cor. 2.6. We speak wisdom
among them that are perfect; and in that Phil. 3.15. Let as many as be perfect
be thus minded. He speaks here not of an absolute perfection, (...), I
persecute, I follow with as hot and as eager a spirit after perfection as
persecutors do follow after those they persecute.
for such a perfection himself disclaimeth in verse. 12. Not as though I had
already attained, either were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I
may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. By the
force of the Original word that is here rendered follow, the Apostle declares
that he had perfection in chase (as it were) and that his spirit was with much
heat and eargerness carried out in pursuing after it, and resolved not to rest
till he had attained to it. An absolutely perfection is very desirable on
earth, but shall never be obtained till we come to heaven. Absolute perfection
is not the privilege of Saints militant, but of Saints triumphant; and
therefore the perfection that the believing Corinthians and holy Philippians
had attained to, was not an absolute, but a comparative perfection, they were
perfect incompa^ison of those that were but Babes and Shrubs and Dwarfs in
Christ. And it is a very high and honorable report that the Apostle gives of the
Corinthians, in that 2 Cor. 8.7. Therefore as ye abound in every thing, in
faith, in utterance, and knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love to
us, see that ye abound in this grace also. And it is a very large testimony that
the same Apostle gives of the Romans, in that Romans 15.14. And I my self also am
persuaded of you my brethren, that ye are also full of goodness filled with all
knowledge, able also to admonish one another. Now the fullness the Apostle
speaks of, is not a fullness of parts, for the weakest believer as well as the
strongest, is at first conversion renewed and sanctified in every part, though
it be but in part and imperfect; and this is a fullness of parts, but of this
fullness the Apostle does not speak: but then there is a fullness of degrees;
now this fullness is either an absolute fullness, or a comparative fullness;
the Apostle is to be understood of a comparative fullness; the Romans were full
of all goodness and knowledge, in comparison of those in whom Christ was but
newly formed, and in whom the work of grace was but newly erected, and they
were full of all goodness and knowledge now, in comparison of what they were at
their first acquaintance with Christ, and first acceptance of Christ, and first
resignation of themselves to Christ, and at their first marriage-union, and
communion with Christ. And thus you see by the experiences of other Saints,
that it is possible for you to attain to higher degrees of grace and holiness,
then any those are that yet you have attained to. But,

Fourthly, It Is possible for you to attain to higher degrees Cor. 1.4, 5, 7. I
thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is given you by
Jesus Christ, That in every thing ye are enriched by him, in all utterance and
in all knowledge, Though injuries should be writ in the dust, yet spiritual
mercies should be writ on Marble, that our hearts may be the better provoked to
thankfulness for them.
so that ye come behind in no good gift; and that in Ephesians. 1.3, 7, 8. Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: who according to the riches
of his grace, has abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence: Here the
Apostle trumpets out the high praises of God, for that he had blessed them and
enrich't them, though not with corn, or oil, or wine, or with gold or silver
(which is but red and white clay) that yet he had blessed them with all spiritual
blessings, which are the choicest, the chiefest, and the sweetest of blessings;
for spiritual blessings are right-handed blessings, they are peculiar
blessings, they are blessings sweetning blessings, for they sweeten all the
blessings man enjoys; and they are blessings begetting blessings, for they
beget and bring forth many other blessings to the enriching and adorning of a
Christians soul; and they are blessings, sanctifying blessings, they are
blessings that sanctify all other blessings; and they are blessings preserving
blessings, they are blessings that will preserve all our other blessings;
spiritual blessings are peculiar blessings, they are costly blessings, they are
blessings that reach to the very spirit and soul of a Christian, they are
blessings that raises the spirit of a Christian, and that enobles the spirit of
a Christian, and that cheers up the spirit of a Christian, and that a thousand
ways betters the spirit of a Christian; and therefore it is no wonder that the
Apostles heart was so affected with spiritual blessings, and that his mouth was
so filled with spiritual praises, as indeed it was. And so in that 1 Timothy 1.12,
14. (...) was overful, redundant, or has abounded to flowing over, as the sea
does overflow the banks many times, and drown the lower grounds that are
nearest to it.
And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, because the grace of our Lord was exceeding
abundant, with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. And thus you see by
others thanksgivings, that it is possible for you to attain to far higher
degrees of holiness, then what for the present you are raised to. The Stork is
said to leave one of her young ones where she hatcheth them; and the Elephant
to turn up the first sprig toward heaven when he comes to feed, and both out
of some instinct of gratitude; and shall not a divine instinct enable
Christians to do much more in a way of gratitude, both upon the account of
their own graces, and upon the account of those eminent measures of grace that
other Saints are blessed and crowned withal? though Seiarus did dare to sacrifice
to himself, yet a Christian must not dare to sacrifice to himself, nor to his
duties, nor to his graces, etc. the sacrifice of praise in regard of grace
received, is a crown of glory that is due to none but the God of grace. All the
Rivers return to the Sea from whence they had their beginning. God will give
you his Covenant, and he will give you his Ordinances, and he will give you his
heaven, and he will give you his Son, yea he will give you himself, Isa. 42.8.
but his glory, his glory he will not give unto another. Whatever he parts with
he is resolved that neither Angels nor men shall share with him in the glory of
his grace. I have read of a Stork that cast a Pearl into the bosom of a Maid,
which had healed her of a wound. O! Sirs, when God comes to heal you of your
spiritual wounds and diseases, and not only so, but shall also richly
bespangle and adorn your souls and others with his precious graces, what can
you do less then cast that Pearl of praise into the bosom of God? as David did
in that Psalm. 103.1. -- 6. The best means to get more grace, is to be thankful
for that grace you have, for God loves to sow much where he reaps much; if
your returns are answerable to your receipts, you will still be on the
receiving hand; thankfulness is Gods impost for all his blessings, and they
that truly and duly pays this impost, shall be sure to abound in the best of
blessings; thankfulness for one blessing always draws on another blessing, as
Saints by experience daily find. And thus you see by these Arguments, that it is
possible for you to attain higher degrees of holiness, then any yet you have
reached unto. But,

Fifthly and lastly, It Is possible for you to attain to higher degrees etc.
witness those choice, those rare and singular gifts that Christ has bestowed
upon many of his servants, for this very purpose, viz. that they may help on a
growth and an increase of holiness in your hearts, Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12, 13.
Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and
gave gifts unto men. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; For the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: Till we
all come into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
One main end of Christ's giving such eminent gifts to his Church Officers, is,
that his people may be made eminent in holiness; it is not only to bring them
in, but also to build them up; it is not only to convert them, but also to
edify them; it is not only to begin a work of holiness, but also to perfect
and carry on a work of holiness; and therefore the Word is not only compared to
seed, that begets holiness in men's hearts, but also to wine and milk, and
strong meat that helps forward the growth and increase of holiness in men's
hearts: It Is only the holy soul that can truly say Credo vitam aeternam, (...)
edo vitam aeternam, Cyprian, lib. 4. Ep. 6.
And so the great end of the Lords Supper is not to work spiritual life where
it is not, but to increase it where it it is; it is not to change the heart, but
more and more to sanctify the heatt; it is not to work holiness, but to perfect
holiness in the fear of the Lord; it is not to sow the seed of grace in the
soul, but it is to cause that seed to grow and flourish in the soul. The Martyrs
in the Primitive Church, when they were to appear before the cruel Tyrants,
they were wont, as Cyprian shows, to receive the Lords Supper, and thereby they
were fired with zeal and fervor, and filled with faith and fortitude, etc.
Chrysostom says, that by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we are so armed
against Satan's temptations, that he flees from us, as if we were so many Lions
that spit fire. The Lords Supper is a Cabinet of spiritual Jewels: And O then
how unmanly and unseemly a thing is it to hang this Cabinet of Jewels (which is
more worth then the Gold of Opher) in a Swines snout? And how that mother can
be guiltless of the death of her child, that gives him poison in a Golden cup,
with this caution, that she tells him it is poison, I know not; no more do I
know how that Minister can be guiltless of the body and blood of our Lord, who
dispences the bread of Life to those who are known to be without spiritual
life, yea that are known to be dead in sins and trespasses. The end of the 43.
Sermon.
And thus you see by these five arguments, that it is possible for you to attain
to greater measures of holiness then any yet you have reached unto; and so much
for the second Motive.

Psalm. 16.3, 4.
consider, that the more holy you are, the more you will be the delight of God,
and the more dear you will be to God, and the more beloved you will be of God.
For the right understanding of this argument, you must carefully distinguish
between Gods love of good Will, and his love of complacency; now Gods love of
good Will is equal to all his Saints, whether they are rich or poor, high or
low, bond or free, or whether they have a sea of grace, or but a drop of grace;
Gods love of good Will runs as much out to the weakest Christian, as it does to
the strongest, to a Babe in grace, as to a Giant in grace. All Saints are
equally elected; God never chose one man a vessel of glory more then another;
Romans 11.17.
the weakest Saint is as much elected as the strongest. And as all Saints are
equally elected, so all Saints are equally redeemed by Jesus Christ; Isa. 53.3.
-- 12.
Christ bled as much for one Saint as another, and he sweat as much for one
Saint as another, and he sighed and groaned as much for one Saint as another,
and he trod the wine press of his Fathers wrath, as much for one Saint as
another; 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
Christ paid as great a price for his Lambs as for his Sheep, for Lazarus in
his Rags, as for David in his Royal Robes. And as all Saints are equally
redeemed, so all Saints are equally called, 1 Pet. 2.9.
one Saint is as much called out of the kingdom of darkness as another, and
one Saint is as much called to Jesus Christ as another; in vocation God looks
with as favorable an eye upon one, as he does upon another. And as all Saints
are equally called, so all Saints are equally justified; 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. 1
Cor. 1.30.
though one Saint may be more sanctified then another, yet no Saint is more
justified then another; the weakest believer is as much justified and pardoned
before the throne of God as the strongest is; that pure, perfect, matchless,
and spotless righteousness of Christ, is as much imputed to one Saint, as it is
to another. And as all Saints are equally justified, so all Saints are equally
adopted, Gal. 4.4, 5, 6.
the weakest believer is as much an adopted son, as the strongest believer in
the world is; God is no more a father to one, then he is to another; the Babe
in the arms is as much a son, as he that is of riper years. Thus you see that
Gods love of good will is equal in all his Saints, and therefore you are to
understand this Argument of Gods love of complacency; now this love runs out
more to some Saints then it does to others; for they that have much holiness,
are much beloved, John 14.21, 23,
but they that have most holiness, are most beloved; the greater thou art in
holiness, the greater will thou be beloved of God; O Daniel, Dan. 9.23.
thou art greatly beloved. And why does God love more and delight more in
Christ, then he does in all the Angels and Saints in heaven, and in all the
upright ones that are on earth? but because Christ is more eminent and glorious
in holiness then all created beings are; Heb. 1.3.
he is more the express Image of his Fathers person, and the brightness of his
Fathers glory then others, and therefore he is more beloved then others. 'Twas
an excellent observation of one of the Fathers, August. Tract. in John. 1.14.
viz. that God loved the humanity of Christ more then any man, because he was
fuller of grace and truth then any man. Now for the further Heb. 11.5.
the more that person pleases the Lord; fruitfulness in holiness fills heaven
with joy. The Husbandman is not so much pleased with the fruitfulness of his
fields, nor the wife with the fruitfulness of her womb, nor the father with the
thriving of his child, as God is pleased with the fruitfulness and thriving of
his children in grace and holiness; now certainly the more God is pleased with
any person, the more he loves that person, and the more pleasure and delight he
takes in such a person; if God be most pleased with holiness, he cannot but
John 13.23. Chapter 18.16. Chapter 19.26. Verse. 27.
That he lay nearest to Christ's Bosom at the Table. 2. That he followed Christ
closest to the high Priests Palace. 3. That he stood close to Christ when he
was on the Cross, though others had basely deserted him, and turned their backs
upon him. 4. That Christ commended the care of his virgin mother to him: Now
why did Christ's desire, love, and delight, run out with a stronger and a fuller
Tide toward John, then to the rest of the Disciples, doubtless 'twas because
John did more resemble Christ then the rest, 'twas because John was a more
exact picture, and lively representation of Christ then the others were. But,
fourthly, the more holy any man is, the more communion and Moses, Moses was a
nonesuch for meekness and holiness. Number. 12.3. Now the man Moses was very
meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth. There was no
man so slighted, wronged, provoked, teazed, perplexed, and troubled by that
wicked, unthankful, unbelieving, and murmuring Generation, as Moses was, and
yet he did neither rail at them, nor revile them, he did neither storm nor
rage, he did neither fret nor fling, and though he had a sword of Justice in
his hand, and might easily have avenged himself on them, yet he would not, but
exercised all patience, tenderness, goodness and sweetness toward them. O the
lowliness, the meekness, the holiness of this man Moses! And O the freeness,
the friendliness, the openness, and the familiarness of God with Moses! Deuteronomy.
34.10. And there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the
Lord knew face to face. To give you a little light into these words; Some of
the Rabbis observe that Moses surpassed all the other Prophets, not only in
sublimity of Prophesies, but also in excellency and number of miracles; for
Moses within one Age wrought seventy six miracles, when all the rest of the
Prophets from the beginning of the world quite down to the ruin of the first
Temple, wrought only seventy four: And as for those words, whom the Lord knew
face to face, you are not to understand them thus, that God has a face as man
has, nor that Moses had a view of the essence of God, which is invisible; John
1.18. 1 Timothy 6.16.
for in this sense no man has seen God at any time; and indeed the least beam
of Gods essential glory and Majesty would have swallowed up Moses alive. But
these words, whom the Lord knew face to face, are to be understood of Gods
speaking to Moses in a free friendly familiar and plain manner; God did speak
to Moses by a clear articulate voice, even as one man speaks to another when
they speak face to face. And so when Aaron and Miriam were swelled with pride
and envy, and began to bespatter Moses, and to pick a hole in his Coat, and to
cloud, eclipse, and diminish his glory, see at what ahigh and noble rate God
speaks of Moses, see how God magnifies and exalts and lifts up Moses in that 12
Number. 6, 7, 8. And he said, hear now my words; if there be a Prophet among you,
I the Lord will make my self known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto
him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all my house;
with him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark
speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: Wherefore then were
ye not-afraid to speak against my servant Moses? Now here you see how God owns
Moses, and stands up for Moses, and pleads for Moses, and tells Aaron and
Miriam to their faces, that Moses was the greatest favorite, and that he had
far greater respects for Moses then he had for them, and that there was not a
man in all the world that was so inward with him as Moses, and that had so much
of his ear and heart as Moses had. God did appear to other Prophets in
Dreams and visions, which were transient, but with Moses God will speak mouth
to mouth, God will speak to him without an interpreter, he will speak to Moses
more familiarly and frequently then he did to others by visions, and more
clearly, plainly, and assuredly, then he did to others by dreams: God here
engages himself to hold a more close, familiar, friendly, and constant
conference and correspondence with Moses, then with any others in the world.
Moses was blessed with as clear, and with as full, and with as apparent sight of
God, and communion with God, as he was able to bare and comprehend. Some of the
learned are of opinion, that Christ did converse with Moses in a humane shape,
as he had done with Abraham before, Genesis 18. and Chapter 32.30. etc.
they conjecture that the Lord Jesus did very friendly and familiarly show
himself to Moses with that very same face and form of humane nature, which he
afterward assumed; but this I dare not press upon you as an Article of your
faith: And whether Moses had one hundred and seventy three familiar conferences
with God, which none of the Prophets had, lies upon those Rabbis to prove that
do assert it; but this is granted on all hands, that he was a special
favorite, and a man in high communion with God, and one that had very clear
and eminent discoveries and manifestations of God. And so Abraham was a man of
great holiness, and a man eminent in his communion with God, God owned him as a
friend, Isa. 41.8.
as an honorable friend, as an eminent friend, as a bosom friend, as a
peculiar friend, and as a faithful friend, and therefore he made him one of his
Privy Council, and opened his heart and his secrets to him: And the Lord said,
shall I hide from Abraham the thing which I do? Genesis 18.17.
Abraham is styled the friend of God by a specialty, though God had many
friends, yet 'twas Abraham that was his singular friend, his darling friend,
his rare friend, etc. and accordingly, God was most free, and full, and rich in
the communications of his favors, and secrets to Abraham; 'twas not enough for
Abraham to be of Gods Court, but he must be also of his Cabinet Council. 'Twas
always a principle in morality, that sweet and intimate friendship cannot be
extended to many; Friends usually go by paires. And thus you see that the more
holy any man is, the more communion that man shall have with God, and the more
communion any man has with God, the more beloved shall that man be of God; the
highest communion is always attended with the highest love. But,

Fifthly, and lastly, the more holy any man is, the more actually Job 5.26.
so he comes more and more every day to be prepared, polished, squared and
fitted for a full and glorious fruition of God in heaven; though the least
degree of grace and holiness, puts a man into an habitual preparedness and
fittedness for heaven, yet it is only an eminency in grace and holiness that
puts a man into an actual preparedness and fittedness for heaven; the richer
in grace, the riper for glory; the higher you are in holiness, the fitter you
are to enter into the joy of your Lord: Math. 25.19. to ver. 24.
though the least drop or dram of holiness, is enough to keep a man from
dropping into hell, yet it is only grown holiness that actually prepares and
fits a man to go to heaven. Now doubtless, the more actually ripe and ready
any man is for heaven, the more pleasure and delight God takes in him; the more
the vessels of grace are fitted for glory, the more complacency God takes in
them. When God set himself upon the creation of the world, in the close of
every days work, (except the second, for which the opinions of the learned are
various) God set to his Seal, that it was good; but when he had perfected and
completed the whole Creation, and cast an eye upon all together, then he
concludes, Genesis 1. ult.
that it was very good; And God saw all that he had made, and behold it was
very good, or extreme good, so some, or very pleasant and delightful, so
others: The work of Creation was so curiously and gloriously framed, and so
full of admirable rarities and varieties, that it raised delight and
complacency in God himself: Aug. in Genesis 1.31.
Whereupon Augustine observes, that even to every grace, yea of the least
degree of grace, he says it is good; but when he beholds the graces of his
Saints fresh and flourishing, your faith acted and strengthened, your
repentance daily renewed, your humility increased, etc. then he concludes, that
all is very good. O Sirs, if the Lord Jesus Christ be so ravished with one of
his Spouses eyes, Cant. 4.9.
and with one chain of her neck, with the least drops or sips of grace, or
with the least grains and drams of grace and holiness, O how much more will
great measures of grace and holiness take him, and ravish him! Well, for a
close of this Argument, remember this, that as the Sun shines hotter on some
Climates, then it does upon others, and as the dew falls more upon one place
then another, and as the water over-flowes some pastures more then others; so
Gods love of complacency and delight, shines hotter and brighter upon some
Christians, then it does upon others; and these I have showed you to be such
who are most eminent and excellent in grace and holiness. And thus much for
this third motive.

Math. 5.16.
Fruitfulness in holiness sets the weightiest crown of glory upon the head of
God. John 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bare much fruit. The
more eminent any person is in holiness, the more clearly and convincingly he
proclaims God before all the world, to be a rich God, a full God, a bountiful
God, an overflowing good; there is nothing that works men to admire God so
much, and to exalt God so high, as a Christians fruitfulness in holiness. O how
good must that God be, whose servants are so good, said the Heathen! O how
glorious in holiness must that God be, whose people are so holy! Look as the
thriving child is a credit to the Nurse, and the rich servant an honor to his
Master, and a plentiful Crop the praise of the husbandman; so that Christian
that thrives in grace, that grows rich in holiness, is the greatest credit, and
the highest honor, and the sweetest praise to God in the world. The Tree in
Alcinous Garden had always blossoms, buds, and ripe fruits one under another.
O! Sirs, those Trees of righteousness, Isa. 61.3.
that have not only the blossoms and buds of holiness upon them, but also the
ripe fruits of holiness one under another, they are the greatest honor and
glory to God in the world. What will men say, when they shall behold your
eminency in sanctity? will they not say, certainly God is no hard Master, Math.
25.24.
he never looks to reap where he does not sow, nor to gather where he does
not straw; Certainly, he keeps a noble house, his Tables are richly spread, his
Cups overflow, he feeds, yea he feasts his servants with the choicest rarities
and varieties that heaven affords, witness their thriving and flourishing
estate in grace and holiness. And thus you see that the more your holiness is
increased, the more highly the God of heaven will be exalted and magnified. But,

Fifthly, To provoke you to endeavor after higher degrees Heb. 6.7.
and the Lord will not fail to make new and fresh additions of more grace and
holiness to that thou have. Psalm. 84.11. The Lord will give grace and glory,
and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Mark those
words, viz. that the Lord will give grace and glory, that is, grace unto glory,
he will still be adding more grace to that thou have, till the bud of grace be
turned into the flower of glory, till thy grace on earth commenceth glory in
heaven; the more holiness any man has, the more still God will give him. Math.
13.12. For whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance: He that has principles of grace and holiness laid into his soul, he
shall find a plentiful increase of those sanctifying and saving principles;
he shall have more abundance; his spark of holiness shall grow into a flame,
his drops of holiness shall be turned into a sea, and his mite of holiness
shall be multiplied into millions. Math. 25.29.
The greater harvest of holiness a Christian brings forth, the greater increase
of holiness shall he experience; every exercise of grace and holiness is
always attended with new increase of grace and holiness. Look as that arm is
greatest and strongest that is most used and exercised; so that particular
grace that is most exercised and used, is most strengthened and greatned. Look
as earthly Parents when they see their children to husband and improve a little
Stock to great advantage, then they add to their Stock, they increase their
Stock, they double their Stock; so when the father of spirits sees his children
to husband and improve a little Stock of grace and holiness to the great
advantage of their souls, then he will increase their spiritual Stock, he will
be still a adding to their Stock, yea he will double their Stock. John 15.2.
Every branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more
fruit. Such as are fruitful, shall be made more fruitful: Christ will take most
pains to make them better, who are already very good; of all Christians in the
world, there are none that have so much grace as humble Christians have, and
yet God delights to pour in grace into their souls, as men pour liquor into
empty vessels; humility is both a grace, James 4.6.
and a vessel to receive more grace. And thus much for this fifth Argument. But,

Psalm. 16. ult.
the more he shall enjoy him, in whose presence is fullness of joy; and the more
any man enjoyes the presence of God with his Spirit, the greater will be his
heaven of joy in this world. Look as a little Star yields but a little light,
so a little holiness yields but a little comfort; and look as the greatest
Stars yields the greatest light, so the greatest measures of holiness always
yields the greatest comforts: Divine joy ebbs and flows as holiness ebbs and
slowes; soul comforts rises and falls as holiness rises and falls. Great
measures of holiness carries with them the greatest evidence of the reality of
holiness; now the more clearly and evidently the reality and sincerity of a
man's holiness appears, the higher will the springs of joy and comfort arise in
his soul: Great measures of holiness carry with them the greatest evidence of a
man's union and communion with God; and the more evident a man's union and
communion is with God, the more will that man's soul be filled with that joy
that is unspeakable and full of glory: 1 Pet. 1.8. Acts 9.31.
In great measures of holiness, a man may see and read most of the love of
God, the face of God, the favor of God, and the heart of God; and the more a
man is blessed with such a sight as this is, the more will that Babe of grace,
divine joy, spring in his soul: The greater measures of holiness and
sanctification any man attaines to, the clearer and brighter will the evidences
of his Justification be; Romans 5.1, 2, 3. And Chapter 8.30, 33, 34, 35,
Now the clearer evidences any man has of his Justification, the stronger will
be his consolation; and indeed the strongest waters of consolation, do always
flow from a clear sight and a true sense of a man's justification; no man lives
so comfortably, no man bares the cross so sweetly, no man resists the devil
and the world so stoutly, nor no man will die so cheerfully, as he that lives
and dies in a clear sight of his Justification: The more holiness any man
attaines to, the more his fears will be scattered, his doubts resolved, and
all those impediments removed that commonly bar out joy and comfort? and what
will be the happy issue of these things, but the bringing in of a sea of joy
and comfort into the soul? It Is not riches, nor honors, nor applause, nor
learning, nor friends, nor a great name in the world, but an eminency in
holiness that can highly raise the springs of divine joy in a Christians soul.
Though the windows of the Temple were broad without but narrow within, yet the
joy and comfort of a Christian (that is eminent in holiness) is broad and full
within, though it be narrow and contracted without. O Sirs, as ever you would
have your joy full, labor for a heart filled with holiness; your comforts will
be always few and low, if your holiness be low. Why have the Angels always
Harpes in their hands, and Hallelujah's in their mouths, but because they have
attained to a fullness of holiness. But,

Joh. 14.21, 23. Hosea 6.3.
Ezekiel was a man of eminent holiness, and a man that had glorious visions,
and deep mysteries, and rare discoveries of God, and of the great things that
should be brought about in the latter days, See 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
Chapters of Daniel.
discovered to him. And Daniel was a man of very great holiness; and O what
secrets and mysteries did God reveal to him! many of those great and glorious
things which concerns the destruction of the four last Monarchies, and the
growth, increase, exaltation, flourishing, durable, invincible, and
unconquerable estate of his own kingdom, was discovered to him. 2 Cor. 12.2, 4.
Among all the Apostles, Paul was a man of the greatest holiness, and of all
the Apostles Paul had the most glorious revelations and discoveries of God
manifested to him; witness those glorious Revelations that he had, when he was
caught up into the third heaven, into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words,
(...).
or wordless words, such as words were too weak to utter, such as was not
possible for man to utter, and that either because they transcended man's
capacity in this life, or else because the Apostle was forbidden to utter them,
they being revealed to him, not for the public use of the Church, but only for
his particular encouragement, that so he might be the better able to encounter
with all the hardships, difficulties, dangers and deaths, that should attend
him in the conscientious discharge of his ministerial work. Some of the
Ancients are of opinion, that he saw Gods essence; for, say they, other things
in heaven might have been uttered, but the essence of God is so great, and so
glorious a thing, that no man or Angel can utter it, or declare it; but here I
must crave leave to enter my dissent, for the Scripture is express in this,
John 1.18. 1 Timothy 6.16. 1 Ioh. 4.12.
that no man has thus ever seen the Lord at any time; and that no man can thus
see the Lord and live: And as great a favorite of heaven as Moses was, yet he
could only see the back parts of God, he could only behold some lower
representations of God. Others say, that he heard the heavenly singing of
Angels and blessed Spirits, which was so sweet, so excellent and glorious, that
no mortal man was able to utter it, and this of the two is most probable, but
no man is bound to make this opinion an Article of his faith; this I think we
may safely conclude, that in this rapture, besides the contemplation of
Celestial Mysteries, he felt such unspeakable delight and pleasure, that was
either like to that or exceeding that which Adam took in the terrestrial
Paradise; doubtless, the Apostle did see and hear such excellent and glorious
things, as was impossible for the tongue of any mortal man to express or utter.
And so John was a man of most rare holiness, and Christ reveals to him the
General estate of his Church, and all that should befall his people, and that
from John's time unto his second coming: Christ gives John a true representation
of all the troubles, trials, changes, mercies and glories, that in all times,
and in all Ages and places, should attend his Church, until he came in all his
glory. About sixty years after Christ's ascension, It Is the General opinion of
the learned that this book of the Revelation was penned about the latter end of
the Reign of Domitian the Emperor, which was about sixty years after Christ's
Ascension.
Christ comes to John and opens his heart, and unbosomes his soul, and makes
known to him, all that care, that love, that tenderness, that kindness, and
that sweetness, that he would exercise toward his Church, from that very time
to the end of the world: Christ tells John, that though he had been absent and
seemingly silent for about threescore years, that yet he was not so taken up
with the delights, contents, and glory of heaven, as that he did not care what
became of his Church on earth; O! no: And therefore he opens his choicest
secrets, and makes known the most hidden and glorious mysteries to John, that
ever was made known to any man. As there was none that had so much of the
heart of Christ as John, so there was none that had so much of the ear of
Christ as John; Christ singles out his servant John from all the men in the
world, and makes known to him all the happy providence, and all the sad
occurrences that were to come upon the followers of the Lamb, that so they
might know what to pray for, and what to fit for, and what to wait for; also
he declares to John, all that wrath and vengeance, all that desolation and
destruction that should come upon the false Prophet, and the Beast, and upon
all that wondered after them, and that were worshippers of them, and that had
received their marks, either in their foreheads, or in their hands. We read of
holy Polycarpus, that as he lay in his bed he saw in a vision the bed set on
fire under his head; A vision.
and thus God did forewarne him, and manifest to him what manner of death he
should die, and accordingly it fell out, for he was burnt for the cause of
Christ, and rejoycingly sealed to the truth with his blood. Mr. John Hus was a
man eminent in holiness (he was borne in Prague in Bohemia, A Prophecy.
and was Pastor of the Church of Bethleem) his name Hus in the Bohemian
language s^gnifies a Goose; at his Martyrdom he told them, that if they roasted
him in the fire, out of the ashes of the Goose, an hundred years after, God
would raise up a Swan in Germany that should carry the Cause on for which he
suffered, and whose singings would affright all those Vulters, which was
exactly fulfilled in Luther (whose name in the Bohemian language signifies a
Swan) for God raised him up as a famous instrument in his hand, who carried on
that glorious Cause with mighty success; and upon his death the Bohemians under
Ziska rose in Arms, and had most admirable success against the Emperor and
the Papists. A Prophecy.
Luther was a man of great holiness, and being one time more then ordinarily
earnest with God in prayer, he came down to his Friends, and told them with a
very great confidence, that it should go well with Germany all his days; he
knew what was done in heaven by that which God had done in his own heart, and
accordingly it fell out. The Martyr that was burnt last in Smithfield, A
Prophecy.
told the people that they should be of good comfort, for he was fully
persuaded that he was the last that should suffer under Queen Mary, and so he
was. Thus you see that men of greatest holiness, have had the clearest and
choicest manifestations and discoveries of God, and of his mind made known to
them; Suitable to that choice promise that you have in that 33 Jer. 3. Call
unto me, and I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty (or hidden)
things, (...) Hidden as bunches of Grapes are hidden under the leaves of the
Vines.
which thou know not. God will make known to his holy ones the most hidden
and abstruse things, and the more holy they are, the more they shall know of
the most secret and mysterious things of God. John 7.17. If any man will do
his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I
speak of my self. Christ will be most open to them that are most obedient to
him; they shall know most of the doctrine of Christ, who are most complying
with the will of Christ. David was a man of great holiness, as is evident by
that glorious testimony that God has given of him, in that 13 Acts 22. And when
he had removed him (that is, Saul, v. 21.) he raised up unto them David to be
their King, to whom also he gave testimony, and said, I have found David the
son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall fulfill all my will,
((...)) All my wills; to note the eminency, transc^ndency, universality and
sincerity of his obedience. Now if you will but look into that 2 Samuel 7.27.
there you shall see how the Lord declares and makes known himself and his
intentions toward him; For thou, O Lord of Hosts, God of Israel, have revealed
to thy servant, saying, I will build thee an house: But the Hebrew is more full
and excellent, in the Original, (...)
it runs thus, Lord thou have revealed this to the ear of thy servant; Now the
emphasis lies in those words, to the ear of thy servant. When God makes known
himself and his intentions to such as are eminent in holiness, he does it in
their ear: God tells David in his ear, that he will build him an house, that
is, that he would continue his kingdom to him, and to his posterity after him;
this was blessed news, and this God tells in his ear. Such as are our special
friends and favorites, we often whisper them in the ear; when we would
acquaint them with our most secret and weighty purposes, intentions and
resolutions, we give them a whisper in the ear; such persons that are eminent
in holiness, are the great favorites of heaven, and God tells them in the ear
of many a rare secret, which all others are kept ignorant of. Well Sirs, for a
close remember this, that there are no persons on earth that are so prepared
and fitted for the clearest, fullest, and highest manifestations of God, as
those that are eminent in holiness; nor none that set so high a price upon the
discoveries of God, as men that are eminent in holiness; nor none that are so
able to bare the Revelations of his will, as men that are eminent in holiness,
nor none that will make such an humble, faithful, constant and through
improvement of all that God shall make known to them, as men that are famous
for holiness; and therefore as ever you would have God in an eminent way to
manifest and discover himself and his mind unto you, O labor after a greater
measure of holiness. But,

Generally 'twas the custom of the Eastern countries to wash before worship.

The very heathen gods would be served in white, the very emblem of purity.


holiness puts a divine savor upon all a man's services; there are no duties so
sweet as those that have most holiness in them. Mal. 3.3, 4. And he shall sit
as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and
purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in
righteousness. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto
the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years. After the Lord Jesus
Christ has been to his people as a refiners fire, and as Fullers soap, that
is, after he has refined, scoured, and purged his people from their
drossiness, filthiness, earthliness, selfishness, and sensualness, etc. then
their offerings shall be pleasant to the Lord. Look as light makes all things
pleasant and delightful to man, so holiness makes all a man's duties and
services pleasant and delightful to the Lord. Zach. 13.9. And I will bring the
third part through the fire, and will refine them, as silver is refined, and
will try them as gold is tried: they shall call on my name, and I will hear
them: I will say it is my people; and they shall say, the Lord is my God. When
God has refined his people as silver is refined, then he will bow his ear, and
open his hand, and grant them the desires of their hearts. O the pleasure and
delight that God takes in the prayers, tears, hearings, readings, meltings,
mournings and repentings of such who are eminently purged and sanctified; the
more holiness any man has, the less of the flesh, polution, and corruption
there is in all his duties and services; and the less there is of the old man
in all our holy offerings, the more they are the delight of God; the more
holiness any man has, the less there will be of man, and the more there will be
of Christ and the Spirit in all his duties and services, and doubtless, the
less there is of man, and the more there is of Christ in duties, the more
pleasant and delightful they will be unto the Lord. The more holy any man is,
the more there will be of his heart in his duties, and the more a man's heart is
in his duties, the more pleasant and delightful they will be to God; God is a
spirit, Joh. 4.23, 24.
and he is only taken with those duties wherein the Spirit of a man is; the
heart is (Camera omnipotentis Regis) the presence chamber of the king of
heaven, it is his bed of spices, it is his royal Throne, on which he delights to
sit and rule; a sanctified heart in duties shall carry it with God for crowns,
when a silver tongue shall not carry it with God for crumbs. The more holy any
man is, the more delight and pleasure he will take in religious duties and
services; the more a man's natural strength is, the more easily he walks, and
the more delightfully he works; the fuller the wings are of feathers, with the
more ease and pleasure the Bird flies; so the fuller the soul is of holiness,
Psalm. 40.8. Psalm. 119.32. Math. 11.29. 1 John 5.3.
the more easily, the more pleasantly, and the more delightfully will it walk,
yea run, yea fly in all the ways of Gods commands; every yoke of Christ is
easy, and every command of Christ is joyous to a man that is eminent in
holiness; now the more any man delights and takes pleasure in religious duties
and services, the more God delights and takes pleasure in his religious duties
and services; the more a Christians heart is affected and taken with the duties
of Religion, the more the heart of God will be affected and taken with those
duties. Look as there is no duty that affects the heart of God, that does not
first affect our own, or that takes the heart of God, that does not first take
our own; so all those duties and services that are divinely pleasing and
delightful to our noble part, they are also pleasing and delightful to God
himself. The very heathen (as several Authors report) had their store pots of
water set at the doors of their Temples, where they used to wash before they
went to sacrifice, having this notion and opinion amongst them, that their gods
did best accept and most delight in those sacrifices that were offered by those
who had washed themselves pure and clean; sure I am that the great God, who is
the God of gods, is most pleased and delighted with those sacrifices of prayers
and praises that are offered up with the purest hands, and with the cleanest
heart; and therefore as ever you would have God to take singular, pleasure and
delight in all your duties and services, labor after an eminency in holiness.
But,

Paul had some kinsmen that were in Christ before him (as you may see in that
16 Romans 5, 7. Likewise greet the Church that is in their house, salute my well
beloved Epenetus, who is the first fruits of Achaia unto Christ; Salute
Andronieus and Junia my kinsmen, 2 Cor. 1.12. Chapter 11.22. -- 30. 1 These. 2.2. --
13.
and my fellow prisoners, who are of note among the Apostles, who also were in
Christ before me) and yet in grace and holiness he excelled them all. You know
many men in riding a Journey do often set out after their neighbors, and yet
they do not only overtake them, but also get into their Innes many hours
before them: And among Seamen, is there any thing more common then for those
who set sail some days after others, yet to get into their Ports before them;
so there are many Christians, who have set out heaven-wards, and holinesswards,
after others, and yet they have not only overtaken them, but also in grace and
holiness gone far before them. Luke 2.46.47 48.
As Christ in his nonage, put all the Doctors in the Temple down; so many
Christians even in their nonage (as I may say) do put down other Christians,
Hierom writes of Paulinus, that in the first part of his life he excellled
others, and in his latter part he excelled himself.
who in respect of their years and opportunities might have been Doctors in
Christianity. In this great City you have very many, who have set up many years
after others, and yet they are grown far greater and richer then those of their
callings, who have set up many years before them; and doubtless there are very
many in this City who have set upon the Trade of Christianity, the Trade of
godliness, long after others, who yet are grown greater and richer in grace and
holiness then those, who have for very many years driven that Trade: And, O how
should this Alarm all such to double their diligence, and to strive and labor
as for life to be eminent in holiness, yea to perfect holiness in the fear of
the Lord. But,

Tenthly, To provoke you to labor after higher degrees of holiness. Consider,
that there are no persons under heaven that are so strongly obliged and engaged
to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord, as you are, for you are the only
persons on earth that are made partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Dan.
6.3. 1 Cor. 2.12.
and that have a more excellent spirit in you then the men of this world have,
and that have more excellent principles in you, as knowledge, wisdom, faith,
love, self-denial, humility, etc. to help on the advance and increase of
holiness, then others have whose souls are strangers, yea enemies to those
noble and divine principles: And you are the only persons on earth, upon whom
all exhortations and commands to grow in holiness, to increase in holiness, and
to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord, does most immediately, most
directly, most eminently, most roundly, and most fully fall, as you may easily
see by comparing the Scriptures in the Margent together. O sirs, 2 Pet. 3.18.
how gloriously should that house be adorned with holiness, that is of Gods own
building? 2 Corin. 7.1. Chapter 13.11. Colos. 2.7. Heb. 6.1. 1 Corin. 15.58. Jude
10.
and how fruitful should those vineyards and gardens be, that are of Gods own
planting; and how full should those Wells be that are of Gods own digging? and
how sweet should those flowers be, that are of Gods own setting? and how ripe
should those fruits be that are of Gods own Grafting? O sirs, shall the Eagle
fly higher and higher? shall the Sun shine brighter and brighter? and shall
the Giant refreshed with wine, run swifter and swifter? and shall the woman man
that is with child, grow fuller and fuller, and greater and greater? and shall
not you who are the people of Gods holiness, fly higher and higher in
holiness, and shine brighter and brighter in holiness, Charles the Fifth had
this for his Motto, Vlterius, go on further. Math. 13.23. Mar. 4.28. Ezekiel.
47.3.4.
and run swifter and swifter in the ways of holiness, and grow fuller and
fuller, and greater and greater in the births of holiness? O sirs, holiness in
a Christian is not like a Star in the Sky, nor a Stone in the Center, nor a
Bullet in a Gun which is always equal; but holiness is like to the seed, which
being sown in the furrows of the earth, first springs up into a blade, and then
into an ear, and then into ripe corn. Holiness is like to the waters in
Ezekiels Sanctuary that rise by degrees; First it rise to the Ancles, then to
the knees, then to the Loins, and then to a mighty river that could not be
passed over. 2 Samuel 3.1.
Holiness is like to the house of David that grew stronger and stronger, and
like to the Cedars of Lebanon that grew greater and greater. Hosea. 14.6 7.
O Christians there are none that are so strongly obliged to go on from faith
to faith, Romans 1.17.
and from streng^h to strength, and from holiness to holiness as you are: O! 1
Col. 13.
you must labor to be filled up to the brim with holiness: O! you must strive
to equalize the first three of David's worthies: O! 2 Chapter 7.
you must endeavor to be like the brethren of Gideon, every one resembling the
children of a King: 1 Chronicles 11.21.
O that you could all say as Elihu once did, Judge. 8.18. Job. 32.18, 19.
I am full of matter, my belly is as wine, which has no vent; it is ready to
burst like new bottles. O my brethren, to be as full of holiness as new bottles
are full of wine, or as the Moon is full of light, or as the black clouds are
full of Rain, or as Nurses breasts are full of milk, is the greatest happiness
in this world. O sirs! there are no persons on earth that a^e engaged to love
the Lord with such a vehement love as you, nor to t^ust in the Lord with such
an inflamed faith as you, nor to hope in the Lord with such a raised hope as
you, nor to delight in the Lord with such ravishing delights as you, nor to
long after the Lord with such earnest longings as you, nor to fear before the
Lord, with so great a trembling as you, nor to be so zealous for God with such
a burning zeal as you, nor to mourn before the Lord with so great a mourning as
you, nor to hate all things that are contrary to the nature of God, the being
of God, the command of God, and the glory of God, with such a deadly hatred as
you. Well, remember this, viz. it is no little sin for any Christian to set down
satisfied under a little measure of holiness, considering the many and the
great obligations that lies upon him to perfect holiness in the fear of the
Lord. But,

Eleventhly, To provoke you to labor after higher degrees of holiness,
consider, that the more holiness any man attains to, 2 Corin. 1.8, 9, 10, 11,
12.
the more bold, courageous, resolute, Masculine and Heroic that man will be
for God and godliness: holiness enobles the heart, it raises the heart; and the
higher the springs of holiness rises in the heart, the higher it raises the
heart, and the more it steels the heart for God and godliness; the more
holiness any man has the more resolutely he will set himself against sin, and
the more divinely he will scorn the world, and the more courageously he will
trample upon temptations, and the more Heroic he will be under all his
afflictions; men of greatest holiness have been men of greatest boldness,
witness Nehemiah, the three children, Daniel, Nehe. 6.11.
and all the holy Prophets and Apostles; Prove. 28.1. The wicked flee when no
man pursues, but the righteous are as bold as a Lion; yea as a young Lion,
(...)
(as the Hebrew has it) that is in his hot blood, and fears no colors, and
that is more bold then any others holiness; made Daniel not only as bold as a
Lion, but also to daunt the Lions with his boldness. Luther was a man of great
holiness, and a man of great boldness, witness his standing out against all the
world; and when the Emperor sent for him to Worms, and his friends dissuaded
him from going, as sometimes Paul's did him, Go, Acts and Mon. 776.
(said he) I will surely go (since I am sent for) in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, yea, though I knew that there were as many Devils in Worms to
resist me, as there be Tiles to cover the houses, yet I would go: And when the
same Author and his Associates were threatened with many dangers from opposers
on all hands, he lets fall this heroic and magnanimous speech, Come let us
sing the six and forty Psalm, and then let them do their worst Latimer was a
man of much holiness (counting the darkness and profaneness of those times
wherein he lived) and a man of much courage and boldness, Acts and Mon. 1594.
witness his presenting to king Henry the eight for a new years gift, a new
Testament wrapped up in a Napkin, with this posie or motto about it, Whoremongers
and Adulterers God will Judge. Dr. Tailor the Martyr was a very holy man, and
being persuaded by some of his friends not to appear before Stephen Gardner
Bishop of Winchester, Acts and Mon. 1380.
but to fly: fly you, (said he) and do according to your consciences, but as
for my self I am fully determined, by Gods grace, to go to the Bishop, and to
tell him to his Beard, that he does naught. Colonus the Dutch Martyr, called to
the Judge that had sentenced him to death, and desired him to lay his hand upon
his heart, and then asked him whose heart did most beat, his or the Judges;
here was a man of an heroic spirit indeed. Basil was a man of great holiness,
and a man of a most masculine and courageous spirit; when the Emperor sent to
him to subscribe to the Aarian heresy, and to engage him, Hist: Tripart. lib.
7. cap 36.
promised him great preferment; to which he replied, Alas these speeches are
fit to catch little children withal that look after such things, but we that
are nourished and taught by the holy Scriptures, are readier to suffer a
thousand deaths, then to suffer one syllable or tittle of the Scripture to be
altered: And when the Emperor threatened him with imprisonment, banishment,
death; he answered, Let him threaten boys with such Fraybugs, as for my part I
am resolved that neither menaces nor flatteries shall silence me, or draw me to
betray a good Cause, or a good Conscience. Charles the ninth, king of France,
The History of France in the year 1572.
who had a deep hand in that barbarous and bloody Massacre of many thousands of
the Saints in France; soon after that horrid tragical and perfidious slaughter
was over, he called the Prince of Conde, and proposed to him these three
things, Either to go to Mass, or to die presently, or to suffer perpetual
imprisonment; To which he returned this noble, bold, and heroic answer, viz.
That by Gods help he would never choose the first, and for either of the other
two, he left to the kings pleasure and Gods providence. John Duke of Saxony was
eminent in Christianity, and he did heroically assert and maintain the cause
of God, against all opposition in three Imperial Assemblies; And when it was
told him, that he should lose the favor of the Pope, and the Emperor, and all
the world besides, if he stuck so fast to the Lutheran cause; to which he gave
this noble answer; Here are two ways, said he, I must serve God, or the world;
and which of these do you think is the better? and so put them off with this
pleasant indignation; and when the States of the Empire forbid all Lutheran
Sermons, he presently prepared to be gone, and professed boldly, that he would
not stay there where he might not have liberty to serve God. And thus you see
by all these famous instances, that the more eminent any persons are in
holiness, the more bold, resolute, courageous and heroical they will be for
God, and for the things of God; and therefore as ever you would be men of high
courage and resolution for God, labor to be high in holiness. Such men who in
all Ages have been eminent in holiness, have been like Shammah, one of David's
Worthies, who stood and defended the field, when all the rest fled. But,

Twelfthly, To provoke you to labor after higher degrees of David was a man
eminent in holiness, and as eminently serviceable in his Generation. Acts
13.36. For David after he had served his own Generation by the will of God,
fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption. Men that have
but a little Stock of holiness, will be but a little serviceable in their
Generation, but men that have a great Stock of holiness, will be greatly
serviceable in their Generation; men that have but little Farms and little
Stocks, are but a little serviceable to their Country, but men that have great
Farms, and large Stocks, and rich revenues, are greatly serviceable to their
Country. What a world of good sometimes does one Rich man do in a Town, a
City, a Country? So one Saint that is rich in grace and holiness, O what a
world of good does he do to all that are round about him! Merchants that have
great Stocks, trade to the East and West Indies, and so enrich their Country,
when as those that have but weak estates can only Barter with their neighbors
at home, and so are instruments but of little public good. A Candle inlightens
the Room, but the Sun inlightens the whole world; the more holiness any man
has, the more meet for public use that man will be: As there was none so holy
as Christ, 2 Timothy 2.21. Acts 10.38.
so there was none of so public a spirit as Christ, he went up and down doing
good, he laid out himself, and he laid down himself for public good; he
healed others, but was hurt himself; he filled others, but was hungry himself.
A man that is eminent in holiness, will be of his mind, who was rather willing
to beautify Italy, then his own house. Number. 14.11, 12, 13, 14, 19, 20.
Moses was a man of great holiness, and of famous use in his Generation; ah how
often did he turn away the fierce anger and indignation of God from sinful
Israel? Deuteronomy. 9.14. Psalm. 106.23.
and O the famous deliverances and glorious salvations that God brought about
by his hand. Nehemiah Nehe. 5.14, ult.
was a very holy man, and he laid out himself and his great estate for public
service. Mordecai was a very pious man, Esth. 4. vide.
and a man famously serviceable in his Generation. Esth. 10.3. For Mordecai the
Jew was next unto king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the
multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace
to all his seed. King Jehosaphat, and Joshuah, were men of eminent holiness,
and of singular use and service in their Generation; men that have no holiness,
and others that have but a little holiness, will be still a carrying on a
private interest of honor, or profit, or friends, or Relations, and this we
have seen evident amongst us in these latter days; and therefore as ever you
would be eminently serviceable in your Generation, labor after an eminency in
holiness. But,

2 Cor. 3.18.
Grace is called glory, and the greatest measures of Grace are commonly crowned
with the greatest degrees of glory: Ephesians. 5.27.
Abraham was a man eminent in Grace and holiness, and he was highly in honor
among the people, Genesis 23.6. Hear us, my Lord, thou art a mighty Prince amongst
us; Or as the Hebrew has it, thou art a Prince of God amongst us, that is, thou
art a notable Prince, thou art an excellent Prince, for so the Hebrews speak of
all things that are notable and excellent. Job Job 1.1, 2.
was a man that had attained to a very high degree of holiness, and he was
highly honored among the people, Job 29.25. I chose out their way, and sat
chief, and dwelt as a king in the Army: in all weighty matters Job was the
only man, he was chosen by all, and advanced by all above all in all
Assemblies and places of Judicature, etc. whoever was of the Committee, yet Job
was still Chairman; who ever was of the counsel, yet Job was still President;
and whoever was of the Court, yet Job was still King, yea he dwelt as a King in
the Army; Job was guarded as a King in the Army, and honored as a King in the
Army, and beloved and admired as a King in the Army, and obeyed and served as a
King in the Army, and feared and reverenced as a King in the Army. I might give
you further instances of this in Joseph, Moses, Nehemiah, Mordecai, the three
Children, and Daniel, but I shall forbear. Faith is but a piece, a part, a
branch of holiness; and yet O what an honorable mention does Paul make of the
Romans faith, in that Romans 1.8. First, This is a figurative expression,
according to the style and manner of speaking then.
I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is spoken of
throughout the world. The Romans had attained to an eminency in faith, and the
report thereof sounded thoroughout the Roman Empire, yea throughout the world,
for there being a great resort to Rome from all parts of the world, and by
every ones discoursing and admiring of the Romans faith, their faith came to be
spread abroad among all the Churches all the world over. Look as Christ's
fullness of grace was his highest glory in this world, Psalm. 45.1, 2.
so a Christians fullness of holiness is his highest honor in this world. O
sirs, there is no such way to be high in honor and renown, both in the
consciences of sinners and Saints, as to be high in holiness. Jewel was a man
eminent in holiness, and his holiness set him high in the very judgments and
consciences of the Papists: The Dean of the College, though a Papist, yet
speaks thus of him, In thy faith I hold thee an Heretic, but surely in thy
life thou art an Angel; thou art very good and honest, but a Lutheran. Among
the very Heathens, those were most highly honored, that were most excellent and
eminent in moral virtues. Aristides was so famous among the Athenians for his
Justice, Plutarch.
that he was called Aristides the Just, etc. O Christians, it is your highest
honor and glory in this world, to be so eminent and famous for holiness, that
men may point at you, and say, there goes such a one the wise, and there goes
such a one the humble, and there goes such a one the heavenly, and there goes
such a one the meek, and there goes such a one the patient, and there goes such
a one the contented, and there goes such a one the Just, and there goes such a
one the merciful, and there goes such a one the zealous, and there goes such a
one the courageous, and there goes such a one the sincere, and there goes such
a one the faithful, etc. well for a close, remember this, that though great
places, great offices, great revenues, and great honors, etc. may exalt you
and set you high in the uppermost seats and rooms among men, yet it is only an
eminency in holiness, that will exalt you and set you high in the consciences
of sinners and Saints. But,

Jer. 51.5.
Ah how is this Land filled with sin, yea with the worst of sins against the
holy One of Israel! Hell seems to be broken loose, and men strive to exceed and
excel one another in all kinds of wickedness; O the scarlet sins that are now
to be found under many scarlet Robes! O the black transgressions that are now
to be found under many black Cassocks! O the newfound oaths, the hellish
blasphemies, the horrid filthinesses, and the abominable debaucheries that are
committed daily in the face of the Sun! ah how shameless, how senseless are
sinners grown in these days! Jer. 3.3.
sin every where now appears with a whores forehead; ah what open opposition
does Christ meet with in his Gospel offices, Math. 24.12.
members, ways, worship and works! ah how does all iniquity abound, and how
bold and resolute are multitudes now in dishonoring of God, in profaning his
Sabbaths, in poluting his ordinances, in destroying their own souls, and in
treasuring up of wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5.
etc. Now the worser the times are, the better every Christian must labor to
be; the more profane the Age is wherein we live, the more holy we must
endeavor to be: O Sirs, how else will you recompense the great God (if I may
so speak) for all the dishonors that are cast upon him by the matchless
looseness and wickedness of the present times? Phil. 2.15.
how else will you shine as lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse
Nation? how else will you convince the consciences, 1 Pet. 2.15.
and stop (or button up) the mouths of wicked and unreasonable men? how else
will you be the Lords witnesses against this sinful and adulterous Generation?
Isa. 43.10, 12. And chapter 44.8.
how else will you manifest your great love to Christ, and your exceeding
tenderness of the honor and glory of Christ? how else will you give an
undeniable testimony of the glorious operations of the Spirit in you? how else
will you satisfy your own consciences, Psalm. 18.20. -- 25. Heb. 11.7.
that your hearts are upright with God? and how else will you with Noah
condemn a wicked world? well Christians, remember this, it is more then time
for you to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord, when so many thousands
labor day and night to perfect wickedness in despite of the Lord; it is time
for you to be Angels in holiness, when multitudes strive to exceed the very
devil in wickedness: since Christ was on earth, there has been no times that
have called louder for the perfecting of holiness, then the present times
wherein we live. But,

Fifteenthly, To provoke you to l^bour after higher degrees of Isa. 5.8.
to make a hundred a thousand, and a thousand ten, etc? Many men rise early and
go to bed late, yea they cross their light, Psalm 127.1, 2.
and wound their consciences, and decline their principles, and endanger their
immortal souls, and all to add to their worldly stores. This Age is full of
such Ahabs, 1 Kings 21.
that are even sick for their neighbors Vineyards, yea that rather then they
will go without them, will wade through Naboths blood to them. And how many
rich fools be there amongst us, who instead of minding their souls, and
providing for eternity, mind nothing, Luke 12.16. -- 21.
nor talk of nothing, but pullin^ down their Barns, and building of greater.
What struggling is there for places of honor? what desperate ventures for rich
commodities? and what high attempts are there for large possessions? O the
time, the strength, the spirits, Psalm. 4.6.
that many spend in an eager pursuit after earthly things! O how sad is it to
consider, that Satan shall have more service of a worldling for an ounce of
gold, then God shall have for the kingdom of heaven! though the world in all
its bravey, is no better then the Cities which Solomon gave to Hiram, which he
called Cabul, that is, 1 Kings 9.13.
displeasing or dirty; yet O how mad are men upon it? though all the great, the
gay, and the glorious things of the world, Genesis 3.
may fitly be resembled to the fruit that undid us all, which was fair to the
sight, smooth in handling, sweet in taste, but deadly in operation; yet O how
fond are men of these things? Multi amando res noxias sunt miseri, habendo
miseriores. August. in Psalm. 16.
and how do most long to be touching and tasting of them, though a touch, a
taste, may exclude them out of Paradise for ever? O Sirs, what fools in Folio
are they, who dare hazard the loss of a Paradise for a wilderness, of a crown
for a crum, of a kingdom for a Cottage, and of Pearls for trifles; and yet
such fools are all those who spend themselves in multiplying and increasing of
their earthly enjoyments. In that 13 Genesis 2. It Is said, that Abraham was very
rich in Cattle, in silver and in gold; but according to the Hebrew (...) it
runs thus, Abraham was very heavy in Cattle, in silver and in gold, to show
that riches, that gold and silver (which is the great god of the world) are but
heavy burdens, and rather a hinderance then a help to heaven and happiness.
Gold and silver which are but the white and yellow guts and garbage of the
earth, is fitly called by the Prophet, Hab. 2.6.
thick clay, which will sooner break a man's back, then satisfy his heart; and
O what folly and madness is it for a man to be still a loading of himself with
the clay of this world! though the Sumpter horse be laden with rich treasure
all the day long, yet when night comes he is turned into the dark stinking
Stable, with an empty belly, and with his back full of gauls, sores and
bruises; so though vain men may be loaded with the treasures of this world
during the day of their life, yet when the night of death comes, then they
shall be turned into a dark stinking hell, with consciences full of guilt and
gauls, and with souls full of sores and bruises, and then what good will all
their treasures do them? Luke 16.
Though the rich man in the Gospel lived like a Gentleman, a Gallant, yet when
he died he went to hell. Though Mammon as Aretius and many others observe, is a
Syriack word, and signifies wealth, riches; yet Irenaeus derives Mammon of Mum,
that signifies a spot, and Hon that signifies riches, to show that riches have
their spots; and yet O how unwearied are men in their adding of spots to spots?
men in their pursuit after the things of this world, seem to act by an untired
power, they are never weary of heaping up bags upon bags, nor of enlarging
their Tents, nor of increasing their revenues, etc. Now O how should this
provoke every gracious soul to be adding of grace to grace, and holiness to
holiness? O let not the men of the world out-doe you, let them not out-act you;
O let not nature excel grace; O let the muck-wormes of this world know, that
divine principles are too high and noble to be matched, or to be out-acted by
any thing that they can do. O Sirs, shall children grow in your families, and
oxen grow in your stalls, and fish grow in your ponds, and grass grow in your
fields, and flowers grow in your gardens, etc. and shall not holiness grow in
your hearts? well friends, remember this, it is infinitely better to be poor
men and rich Christians, then to be rich men and poor Christians. But,

Sixteenthly, To provoke you to labor after higher degrees of 2 Epist. of John
4.
so the springs of joy rises higher and higher in your Ministers souls. O
Christians, it is neither your seraphical notions, nor your pompous profession,
it is neither your good words, nor your sweet looks, it is neither your
civilities, nor your courtesies, that raises joy in your Ministers hearts, or
that will add to your Ministers crown, Romans 15.14.
but an increase of holiness will do both. The Thessalonians were rare
Christians, they were very eminent and high in holiness, as you may see in that
1 These. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. And they were the Apostles joy and crown of rejoicing,
as you may see in Chapter 2.19, 20. For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of
rejoicing? are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming? For ye are our glory and joy. The Apostle tells these raised, these
renowned Thessalonians, that as they were now his hope, his glory, and joy, so
at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, they should be his joy, and crown of
rejoicing. Look as Christ has his thousand Shekels of silver, Shekels of silver
were their common money, and a name both for weight and coin, being in value
answerable to our English half-crowns.
so his faithful laborious Ministers have their two hundred Shekels of silver,
and that indeed is a great reward. Cant. 8.12. My vineyard which is mine, is
before me: thou (O Solomon) must have a thousand, and those that keep the fruit
thereof, two hundred. O what an honor is it for faithful Ministers to have a
fifth part of that Reward that Christ has himself; in this 12 v. Christ opposes
his vineyard (his Church) to that of Solomon's which is mentioned in v. 11. and
though doubtless Solomon's vineyard was one of the rarest, choicest, and
fruitfullest vineyards in all Judaea, yet it was wonderful inferior to Christ's
vineyard; and that partly because Christ's vineyard cost him a dearer and a
greater price (even the price of his blood) then ever Solomon's cost him and; 1
Pet. 1.18, 19,
partly because his vineyard serves to more spiritual, high, honorable and
noble ends, 1 Timothy 3.15.
then ever Solomon's did, viz. the glory and exaltation of God, the propagating
of truth, the bringing forth of the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22, 23.
viz. love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance, the bringing in of sinners, and the building up of Saints; and
partly because his eye is still upon it, and his protection is still over it,
Psalm. 121.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
and his presence is still with it. Isa. 27.2, 3. In that day sing ye unto her,
a vineyard of red wine. I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment;
lest any hurt it. I will keep it night and day. But Solomon's eye was not
always upon his vineyard, neither was his hand of protection always over it,
neither was his kingly presence always with it; and partly because all his
treasure is laid up in his vineyard (his Church) his treasures of grace, Ephesians.
3.10.17, 18, 19, 20.
his treasure of mercy, his treasures of comfort, his treasures of goodness,
etc. is all laid up in his Church; but Solomon as rich and as glorious a King
as he was, yet he had no such treasures laid up in his vineyard; Solomon never
made his vineyard his treasury; and partly because his vineyard was given to
him for ever, Psalm. 2.7. John 6.39. Chapter 17.6, 8, 12.
as an everlasting inheritance; but Solomon's was but temporary and mutable. Now
all those that are painful and faithful laborers in Christ's vineyard, shall
receive a noble a liberal compensation and recompense for their labors; no
man shall shut a door nor open a door in Christ's vineyard for naught; no man
shall labor an hour there without a reward; all faithful Ministers are
Fellow Laborers with Christ in the spiritual husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.8, 9.
they dig with Christ, and they plant with Christ, and they prune with Christ,
and they water with Christ, and they watch with Christ, and therefore Christ
will allow them a fifth part of the glory and reward with himself; as he has
his thousand pieces of silver, so he will look to it that they shall have their
two hundred pieces of silver; a thousand is the number of perfection, and here
it may note that fullness of glory that Christ should have, and the two hundred
may note that very great proportion of heavenly glory that all the faithful
laborers in Christ's vineyard shall have, Math. 19.27, 28, 29.
who have helped forward the flourishing estate of that vineyard. Look as the
thriving of the child adds to the comfort and the credit of the Nurse, and the
fruitfulness of the field adds to the pleasure and delight of the Husbandman,
and the health and increase of the Flock adds to the joy and reward of the
Shepherd; so the increase of holiness, the thriving, the fruitfulness of souls
in holiness, adds to the credit and comfort, to the pleasure and delight, to
the joy and reward of faithful painful Ministers, who are Nurses, Husbandmen,
and Shepherds, in the language of the holy Scriptures. Though it be true, that
faithful Ministers are a sweet savor to God, both in them that are saved, 2
Cor. 2.15.
and in them that perish, though their labor whether it hit or miss is
accepted, and shall be rewarded of the Lord, Isa. 49.45.
(as the Physician has his Fee, though the patient dies, and the Nurse has her
wages, though the child don't thrive, and the Vine-dresser has his hire, though
the Vines don't bare fruit) yet the more they win men to heaven, and the more
by their means the work of holiness is carried on in the hearts and lives of
men, the weightier will be their crown of glory, and the greater will be their
joy and rejoicing in the great day of our Lord. O Sirs, did you but see your
faithful Ministers tears, did you but hear their heavy sighs and groans,
were you but acquainted with their fervent and frequent prayers on your
behalfes, did you but believe how they bear their brains, and how willing they
are not only to spend themselves, but even to spit out their very lungs in the
service of your souls, how would you call upon your own souls to add holiness
to holiness! yea charge your own souls to perfect holiness in the fear of the
Lord. Well friends, as ever you would add to your faithful Ministers comfort
here, and to their joy and crown at the coming of our Lord, labor after
higher degrees of holiness. But,

Lastly, To provoke you to labor after higher degrees of holiness, consider,
that the more holiness you have here, the more viz. that some Saints shall
partake of more glory in heaven then others shall, give me leave to promise
these few things to prevent mistakes.

First, That the object of their happiness, which is God blessed for ever, will
be one and the same to all Saints, all glorified Saints etc.

Secondly, That the beatifical vision shall be seen by all the happy and
blessed fruition and possession of God; all the vessels of glory shall be
filled to the brim with a clear sight of God, and with a full enjoyment of
God; and yet doubtless, for all this, some Saints shall apprehend more of God
then others, and comprehend more of God then others, and enjoy more of God then
others; though all shall be filled with those everlasting springs of pleasure
and delight that be at Gods right hand, Psalm. 16. ult.
yet some shall be able to take in more of those pleasures of Paradise then
others shall. 2 Kings 4.3. -- 8.
Though all the widows vessels were filled to the brim with oil, yet,
doubtless, some being greater and larger then others, they accordingly
contained more oil then others; and so 'twill be with the Saints when they
come to heaven; There shall be no lack of glory to any of the Saints in glory;
all the Saints shall be filled with glory according to their capacity. If you
bring a thousand vessels of different sizes to the Sea, the Sea fills them all,
though their sizes differ, and some are bigger, and others lesser, yet all are
filled, every little vessel has its fill as well as the greater; so every
Saint shall have his fill of glory when he comes to glory; the felicity of
every Saint shall be perfect: God will be all in all to all Saints. Psalm. 17.15.


Ezekiel. 28.24.
or a grieving thorn; there all sorrow shall be removed from all their hearts,
and all tears shall be wipt from all their eyes, Rev. 7.17.

Deus nihil coronat nisi dona sua. Aug. When God crowns us, he does but
crown his own gifts in us, etc.
there he will of his own free mercy bestow the greatest measure of glory. Well
friends, remember this, you must always carefully distinguish between the
essence and substance of glory, and between degrees and measures of glory. Now
the essence and substance of glory (which consists in the Saints full communion
with God, and in their perfect conformity to God, and in their universal
subjection to God, and in their everlasting fruition of God) be common to all
the Saints, so that no one Saint shall have more of the essence and substance
of glory then another has, yet the degrees and measures of glory shall be
distributed to some more, to some less. Now that there shall be different
degrees of glory in heaven, answerable to the different degrees of grace and
holiness that the Saints reach to here on earth, and that God will at last
proportion his Rewards according to the different degrees of labor, se^^ice,
and sufferings of his people in this world, may be made evident. 1. By clear
Scriptures. 2. By Arguments. Now there are several Scriptures that speaks out
this truth: take these for a taste.

First, that 1 Cor. 3.8. Now he that planteth, and he that waters The Apostle
having compared his own and Apollo's work together, adds, That both should
receive their reward according to their work, that is, as their work differed,
so should their reward differ; though they both preached one and the same
doctrine, and had both one and the same design and purpose, viz. to bring in
souls to Christ, and to build up souls to Christ, yet according to their
different degrees of labor, so should be their different degrees of reward.
Though no man should work in Gods vineyard for naught, yet he that was most
faithful, diligent, and laborious in planting or in watering Gods Husbandry,
should have the greatest reward. Paul and Apollo shall at last receive their
different reward according to their different labor; or nearer the Original,
they shall each of them receive (...), their proper reward, according to their
proper work.

A second Scripture is that 1 Cor. ^5.41, 42. There is one glory of the Sun,
Mark here is the full stop, and these words are not to be referred to those
following words, viz. That the body is sown in corruption, and rises again in
incorruption. For the Apostle speaks not here of the difference between
glorious and inglorious, corruptible and incorruptible things; but he speaks
here of the difference that is between heavenly and glorious things; for, faith
he, one Star differs from another in glory. It Is very observable, that the
comparison runs between the glorified condition of some Saints that shall rise,
and other some, that shall rise in the great day. So that look as one Star
differs from another Star in glory, so one Saint shall differ from another
Saint in glory at the resurrection of the dead. Though every Star is bright,
shining, and glorious, yet some Stars are more bright, shining and gl^rious
then others are, so though every Saint still shine gloriously in heaven, yet
some Saints shall have a greater luster, glory, and shine upon them then others
shall. Look as some heavenly bodies are more glorious then others; so in the
morning of the resurrection some Saints shall be more glorious then others, etc.

Cor. 9.6. But this I say, He which sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly: and
he which sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. A sparing liberality shall
be attended with a sparing reward, and a bounteous liberality shall be attended
with a bounteous reward. Look as the harvest answers the measure of seed that
is sown, so that he that sows but little reaps but little, and he that sows
much reaps much; so Saints reaping at last will be answerable to their sowing
here. All men's charities shall at last be rewarded proportionable to the
several degrees of it; he that gives a pound shall have a greater reward then
he that gives a penny; he that sows thousands, shall reap more then he that
sows hundreds; he shall have the most plentiful crop in heaven, who has sowed
most seed here on earth, etc. They shall have interest upon interest in heaven,
who sow much on this side heaven.

Luk 19.12. -- 20. Now in this Parable you have a great Lord going into a far
Country; Mina here translated a pound, is twelve ounces and a half, which
pound according to five shillings an ounce, is three pound two shillings and
six pence starling money. Math. 2.2. Rev. 17.14. and chapter 1.5.
but before he goes he gives ten pounds to ten of his servants to trade with
till his return. Now upon his return, he that had increased his pound to ten
pounds, was made ruler over ten Cities, v. 17. And he that made five of one,
was made ruler over five Cities, v. 19. Here he that gained most received the
greatest reward. The Nobleman in this Parable is our Lord Jesus Christ, who is
truly and highly noble, he being coeternall and coequall with his Father in
respect of his Deity; he was borne a king, and is now King of kings, and Lord
of lords, and Prince of the Kings of the earth. The far Country that he is
gone to is heaven, for thither he went at his ascension; now when he shall
return from heaven to judge the quick and the dead, he will then bring men to
an account, to a reckoning about their improvement of all the gifts and graces
that he has entrusted them with, and according to the different improvement
that men shall make of their Talents, so shall be their reward; he that makes
the greatest improvement of his pound, he shall have the greatest reward, he
shall be Ruler over ten Cities, that is, he shall be very highly honored and
exalted, and he that makes a lesser improvement, he shall have a lesser reward,
he shall be Ruler over five Cities; he that makes a great improvement of a
little, he shall, if I may so speak, sit at Christ's right hand, but he that
makes a lesser improvement, he must be contented to sit at Christ's left hand.
God will proportion out men's reward at last answerable to their improvement of
that treasure that he has put into their hands; and yet this does not infer
merit of works, but a gracious disposition in God to encourage his servants in
a way of well-doing, etc.

The fifth Scripture, is that, Dan. 12.3. From this very Text, your English
Annotators conclude that there are degrees of glory in Heaven, etc.
And they that be wise shall shine, as the brightness of the firmament, and
they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. The glory
of Heaven, is here laid out in shining terms, for look how gloriously the
shining of stars, does excel the shining of the Firmament; so some Saints shall
as far outshine others in glory, as the Stars do now outshine the Firmament;
look as the Stars are a more beautiful, and glorious part of the Orb, than the
Firmament is; so some Saints shall have a great deal more beauty and glory upon
them, than others shall: And look as there are different degrees of glory,
between the glory of the Firmament, and the glory of the Stars now, so there
shall be different degrees of glory, between one glorious Saint and another at
last. All the Saints shall at last shine as the firmament; but those that by
their Doctrine, Instruction, and Conversation, turn many to righteousness,
these shall shine as the Stars, for ever and ever: Some of the highest seats in
glory, shall be for such, Act. 26.18.
who turn sinners from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to Jesus
Christ. It Is very observable, that as the Apostles were very eminent in this
work, so Christ has given it under his own hand, Matthew. 19 28. Luke 22.28.29.
that they shall sit upon twelve Thrones, as so many Kings, judging the twelve
tribes of Israel; they had done and suffered more for Christ than others, and
therefore Christ will put a greater glory upon them than upon others; though
many learned men differ about the interpretation of those words, ye also shall
sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel; and therefore I
dare not peremptorily conclude this or that to be the sense of them, yet this
is most plain and evident in the Text, that the Apostles are under a promise,
of some peculiar and more eminent degree of honor, glory, and dignity, than
others are under? look as their Service to Christ was a peculiar and eminent
service, so Christ promises them a peculiar and eminent Reward; every man of
them shall have his particular Throne, and every one of them shall have the
honor, and dignity of judging, that is of governing, and ruling the twelve
tribes of Israel. Look as Ambassadors, and chief Counselors, and Presidents
have the highest and chiefest seats in the Kingly Assembly; Heb. 12.22, 23
so the Apostles shall have the highest, and the chiefest seats in the general
Assembly, and Church of the first born in Heaven, they shall sit as it were on
the Throne, or on the Bench with Christ, so highly and greatly shall they be
exalted. If we cannot hit upon the meanings of the Reward here promised, yet
we may safely and easily gather from the description of it, that there shall
be different degrees of glory, in Christ's Kingdom of glory. The Apostles
followed Christ through great tribulations and afflictions, and they continued
with him in all his temptations, they forsook all to wait on him, and after
they had faithfully, laboriously, successfully, and very eminently served him,
they made themselves an offering for him (as I have formerly showed you) and
therefore Christ will at last in a more eminent way exalt them, and glorify
them, than he will others that have never seen that of Christ, nor received
that from Christ, nor done that for Christ, nor suffered that for Christ as
they have done* degrees of glory shall at last be proportioned out answerable
to those degrees of service, which in this life men have been drawn out to.
Such a thing as this the Apostle Paul does more than hint (if I mistake not) in
that, 1 These. 2.19, 20. For what is our hope, or joy, or Crown of rejoicing?
are not even yet, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming? For
ye are our glory and joy: the crown that Paul speaks of here, is not that
common crown of righteousness, nor that common crown of life and immortality, 2 Timothy 4.8. Jam. 1.12. Rev. 2.10 1 Pet. 5.4.
nor that common crown of glory, that all the Saints shall be crowned with at
last; but he speaks here of an Apostolical crown, of a special, peculiar
crown, that should accrue to him upon the account of his serviceableness to
their Souls, and of this crown he speaks again in that, Phil. 4.1. Therefore,
my brethren, my dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast
in the Lord my dearly beloved: he calls the Philipians, his crown, and that
partly because their spiritual growth, constancy, and perseverance, was now his
glory among other Churches, but mainly because they should be his particular
crown of rejoicing, in the great day of our Lord Jesus; he knew that the
Philipians profit would be his crown, and his advantage another day. The
Apostle alludes here to the custom of the Romans, who as they had their common
crown^ of Bays, Ivy, and Laurel etc. (and these were such, that their horses
which won the race were often crowned with, which occasioned Theocritus to say,
see what poor things the world glories in; for as their Conquerours are
crowned, so are their Horses) so they had their peculiar, their special crowns
that were the rewards of their Conquerors, that had done special service for
their country. So there are common crowns, that belong to all the Saints, as
Saints, as the crown of righteousness; the crown of life, and the crown of
glory; and as there are these common crowns, so there are special and peculiar
crowns, that they shall be crowned with, that are exercised in more high and
excellent services, than others have been employed in; and this is the crown
that here the Apostle speaks of; he knew very well that his reward should be
answerable to his work, for though God never did, nor never will reward men for
their works (as if they were, the meritorious cause of the reward) yet he will
for degrees, reward them according to their works, there are peculiar crowns,
special crowns, for those that have done peculiar, and special services for
Christ on Earth.

A sixth Scripture is that, Matthew. 5.11, 12. Blessed are ye, when men shall
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you,
falsely, for my sake: Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward
in Heaven: Suffering Saints, persecuted Saints, shall be sure of great
rewards? God will reward upon his people, not only their innocence, integrity,
patience, and courage under their sufferings, but the more their sufferings,
revilings, and persecutions are multiplied in this world, the more shall their
recompense and reward, be multiplied in another world. It Is true Christ has
many lovers of his Crown, but few bearers of his Cross, all would rejoice with
him, but few care to suffer for him, but yet it is as true on the one hand viz.
that they who bear most of his Cross, shall be greatest sharers in his Crown;
they that suffer most for him on Earth shall be most blessed and rewarded by
him, when they come to Heaven. 2 Cor. 1.4, 5.
Look as the consolation of the Saints, rises higher and higher in this world,
even as their sufferings, rise higher and higher; so the glory of the Saints,
shall rise higher and higher in the other world, as their sufferings has rise
higher and higher in this world. The persecuted Christians in Tertullian cries
out, Crudelitas vestra gloria nostra, your cruelty is our glory, and the harder
we are put to it, the greater shall be our reward in Heaven. One speaking of
the Martyrs, said, look how many sufferings they have; so many crowns they
shall have; for every suffering, God shall set a crown on their heads: By how
much men's sufferings have been greater (says Chrysostom) by so much the more
their crown shall be bright and splendent. The greater conflicts and
buffetings, any Saint has endured, the greater shall be his reward, and the
more ample shall be his glory says Austin: As Christ has many crowns upon
his head, suitable to the multitude of his sufferings and victories, so
Christians at last shall have crowns suitable to the multitude of their
sufferings, Rev. 19.7.
and suitable to those famous victories they have gained over a tempting Devil,
and a persecuting world; certainly it will be but Justice, that they should
receive the weightiest Crown, 1 John 5.4. and chap. 2.13, 14.
who have bore the heaviest Cross.

The seventh and last Scripture that I shall produce, is that, Matthew. 10.41.
He that receives a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a
Prophets reward; that is say some, they shall be partakers of the same reward,
that is laid up for the Prophets. Without all dispute these two things lies
fair in the Text,

First, that there is some special and eminent degrees of reward due unto a
Prophet above other men. And,

Secondly, that he that shall entertain a Prophet, and perform any offices of
love and favor to him, under that name and notion, he shall be partaker of
that reward; he that receives a Prophet, as he is Gods messenger, and
employed in his service, and sent about his arrant, and not upon any carnal or
worldly respects, he shall receive a Prophets reward, that is, he shall
receive either such a reward as the Prophet himself shall receive at last, or
he shall receive such a large ample and noble recompense as is meet for one to
receive, that received a Prophet, as coming from the Lord, and as acted by the
Lord: Look as suc^ who give an honorable reception, to the Ambassadors of
Kings, or Princes, do highly raise themselves in the favor and esteem, of
those Kings or Princes, that had sent them; so those that receive the faithful
Prophets of the Lord, as the Ambassadors of God, they shall be highly
interested in the favor of God, and as nobly be rewarded by God. I might
produce several other Scriptures, As that Mat. 6.20. Joh. 14.2. Mat. 20.20. to
the 24.
that sound to the same purpose, as these Seven do; but enough is as good as a
feast.

I shall therefore in the Second place come to the Reasons that may further
evidence and confirm this great truth, viz. That there shall be different
degrees of glory in Heaven; among many other reasons that might be given, I
shall only give you these five.

First, there are diversities of degrees of Angels in Heaven; Col. 1.16. here
you have an enumeration of, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, and Powers, and
so in that Ephesians. 1.21. Far above all Principalities, and Powers, and Might, and
Dominion. These principalities and powers, are the blessed Angels that Minister
before the Lord, and that are subordinate unto one another; and here they are
reckoned up by assending, power is above principality, and might above power,
and dominion above might. To define those orders and degrees of Angels, with
which God is environed, is a work too high and hard for me; and though the
Papists, and several Schoolmen are so bold as to define their particular
offices and orders, Dionysius. Areopagita, Thomas Aquinas, Anselm, etc.
yet I dare not be wise above what is written; where the Scripture is silent, I
love to be silent, and where the Scripture has no tongue, there I desire to
have no ears. There is an order in Hell, an order among the Devils, and
therefore you read in Mat. 9.34. and chap. 12.34. Mark 3.22. The very
supposition of order supposes inequality, and disproportion.
three Scriptures of the Prince of Devils; and so much also that expression
imports, that you have in that Mat. 25.41. The Devil and his Angels, which
intimates a Prince among those unclean and damned spirits. Now shall there be
order in Hell, and confusion in Heaven: Shall there be order among the evil
Angels, and shall there not much more be order among the good Angels? Certainly
that God that is the God of order, and that has made all things in order, and
that to this day keeps all things in order here below, will never suffer the
least disorder and confusion, to be among those Princes of glory, that stand
continually before him. He that denies order in Heaven, denies Heaven to be
Heaven; and he that grants order in Heaven, grants degrees of glory in Heaven.
Though there is no difference between the Angels in natura Angelica, the
Angelical nature being alike in all, yet in officio, in office there is a great
deal of difference in the glory of the Angels; for God imploys some of the
Heavenly Host in more high, noble, and excellent services than others, and
answerable thereunto shall their reward be. Though all Angels shall share
alike in the essential, and substantial glory of Heaven, yet there is an
additional glory, an accidental glory, an overplus of glory, that shall be
conferred upon the Angels, answerable to the several and various services that
they have managed and engaged in. Now the Scripture tells us plainly, Matthew.
22.30
that in Heaven we shall be like to the Angels; and therefore if there be
degrees of Angels, and if the Angels in Heaven shall have a different glory and
reward, according to the work in which they have been employed, then the glory
of the Saints in respect of degrees shall be different also. But

Secondly, There are degrees of Torments in Hell, and therefore by the Rule of
Contraries, there shall be degrees of Glory in Heaven. Now that there are
degrees of torments in Hell, is most evident from several plain Scriptures, as
from that 10th. of Matthew. v. 14, 15. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor
hear your words, when ye depart out of that house, or City, shake off the dust
of your feet. Verily I say unto you, Contempt of Christ and his Gospel, is
worse than Sodomy.
it shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of
judgment, than for that City. Sodom and Gomorrah shall have an easier and
cooler Hell, than such Cities shall have, that have contemned the tenders of
Grace, and the offers of Mercy. It Is very observable, that the punishments that
God in this life has inflicted upon the Jews for their contempt of Christ, and
his everlasting Gospel, have been more terrible, than his raining Hell out of
Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah, for on a sudden, and in a moment God consumed
them, and burnt them up; but God has for above this sixteen hundred years,
been a raining Hell out of Heaven upon the Jews; he has for a long time vexed
them with all manner of adversity, and to this very day he has made them all
the world over, a spectacle of his dreadful severity; but all those plagues and
punishments that the Jews have been, and still are under, are but flea-bitings,
and scratches on the hand, to those dreadful and amazing judgments, that God
in the great day of account, will inflict upon all Christ's refusers, and
Gospel-despisers. And so chap. 11.20, 21, 22, 23. Then began he to upbraid the
Cities, wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not.
Woe unto thee Chorazin, we unto thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which
were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented
long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, it shall be more
tolerable for Tire and Sidon, at the day of Judgment, than for you. And thou
Capernaum, which art exalted up to Heaven, shall be brought down to Hell; for
if the mighty works which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it
would have remained until this day. The more mercy has been upon the bare knee
entreating sinners to repent; the more earnest the Lord Jesus has been in
wooing sinners to believe on him, and to resign up themselves wholly and only
to him, the more clearly and sweetly the everlasting Gospel has sounded in
sinners ears, and the more near, and the more often Heaven has been brought to
sinners doors, and yet they have bid defiance to all, and hardened themselves
in their sins, with the greater violence, and with the more dreadful vengeance,
shall such be plunged into the lowest Hell. And so in that, Mat. 23.14. Woe
unto you Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites, for ye devour Widows houses, and
for a pretense make long prayer; therefore ye shall receive the greater
damnation. Hypocrites shall be double-damned, the hottest and the darkest
place in Hell is reserved for them. Give him his portion with hypocrites; for
number and weight there are no torments in Hell to the torments of hypocrites.
Counterfeit sanctity is double iniquity, and therefore it is but justice that
the hypocrite should have double torment. And so in that, Luke 12.47, 48. That
servant that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes, and he that knew it not, and did commit things worthy of stripes,
shall be beaten with few stripes. Sins against light and knowledge, are sins
against the noblest remedy; they waste and wound the conscience most; they most
open sinners mouths to blaspheme God, and they most harden sinners hearts in
sinning against God; and every way they dare God most, and provoke God most to
strike with an Iron-Rod, and to whip the knowing transgressor, not with Rods,
but with Scorpions. It Is very observable, that the more light and knowledge men
sin against in this world, Romans 1.21, 22, 23.
the greater judgments God gives them up to, even in this life; take a
remarkable instance in the most refined and civil Heathens (who are presumed to
have most light and knowledge) who were given up to the most beastly errors
about the nature of God, as the Romans and Grecians, who worshipped Fevers,
and humane passions, yea every paltry thing, etc. whereas the Scythians, and
more barbarous Nations worshipped the Sun, and the Thunder, etc. things
terrible in themselves. Oh how much more then will God in the great day give
them up to the greatest judgments, who have given themselves up to the
greatest sins! Certainly the Professors of this age, yea of this City, whether
they go to Heaven or Hell, will be the greatest debtors that shall be in either
place; the one to the Free Grace of God, and the other to his Justice; that
they that have most of Hell in their mouths, and most of Hell in their hearts,
and most of Hell in their lives, should have most of Hell in their souls at
last, is but justice. I shall conclude this second Argument with a saying of
one of the Ancients; Augustine.
Look (says he) as in Heaven one is more glorious than another, so in Hell
one shall be more miserable than another. Now if there be degrees of torments
in Hell (which I suppose the Scriptures but now cited does undeniably prove)
then doubtless there will be degrees of glory in Heaven.

Thirdly, God in this life dispenses the gifts and graces of his Spirit
unequally among his Saints; to some he gives two Talents, to others five, and
to others ten. Hence it is you read both of a weak Faith, and of a strong Faith.
Matthew. 25. and chapter 8.10, 26. and chapter 15.28.
Why are ye afraid, O ye of little Faith? And, O woman great is thy Faith.
And, Verily I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel. And hence it is
that you read both of weak Christians, and of strong Christians. He that is
weak in the Faith, receive. Romans 14.1, 2. 1 Cor. 9.22. 2 Cor. 12.10. Heb. 5.13,
14 1 Pet. 2.2. v. 1.
Another who is weak eats herbs. And to the weak, I became as weak, that I
might win the weak. We then that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of
the weak, and not to please our selves. When I am weak, then am I strong. And
hence it is that you read of Babes, and of Children, and of young Men, and of
old Men, in the Scripture. Saints are of different growths. Some are but babes
in gifts and grace, others are children, others young men, and others old men.
That God that distributes the good things of this world unequally among the
Sons of men, as to some more, to others less; to some great things, to others
little things; to some high things, to others low things; that God unequally
distributes spiritual blessings among his dearest children; to some he gives
more light, to others less; to some a greater measure of love, to others a
less; to some a greater degree of joy, to others a less, etc. Some Saints shine
in grace and holiness as the Firmament, and others shine in grace and holiness
as the Stars; some shine in grace and holiness as the Moon, and others shine in
grace and holiness as the Sun, and all this springs from those different
measures of grace and holiness, that God bestows upon his people. Now doubtless
men may as well plead for equal degrees of grace, as they may for equal degrees
of glory; they may as well plead for an equal share in the good things of this
world, as they may plead for an equal share in the happiness and blessedness of
that other world. Doubtless as God dispenses his gifts and graces unequally in
this life, so he will dispense his Rewards unequally in the other life. As
men's gifts and graces are different here on earth, so their glory shall be
different when they come to Heaven; without all peradventure they shall have
the whitest and the largest Robes of Honor, and the heaviest and the brightest
Crowns of Glory; whose souls are most richly adorned with grace, and whose
lives are most eminently bespangled with holiness. The more grace and holiness
any Saint has here, the more he is prepared and fitted for glory, and the
more any Saint is fitted for glory, the more that Saint shall at last be filled
with glory. The greatest measures of grace and holiness do most enlarge the
soul, and widen the soul, and capacitate the soul, to take in the greatest
measures of glory; and therefore the more grace, the more glory; the more
holiness the more happiness a Saint shall have at last. Certainly God will
crown his own gracious works in his children, proportionable to what they are,
but they are different and unequally in all his children (in respect of
measures and degrees) and therefore God will set different Crowns of glory upon
the heads of his children at last. But

Fourthly, They that have more grace and holiness than others, they are more
like to God than others. They bear his glorious Image in a greater print, they
have a brighter character of God upon them, and they are the most lively
picture of God in all the world.

Now we know, though Parents love their children well, and wish all their
children well, and do for all their Children well, yet commonly they love them
most, and provide for them best that resemble them most. Parents cannot but
love those children most, and lay up for them most, who have most of themselves
in them; and I cannot see how God can do otherwise than love them most, and
provide for them best, who most resembled him to the life; the nature of God is
a holy nature, and so there lies a holy necessity on his nature, to love them
most who have most grace and holiness in them; look as it is natural to God to
hate wickedness, Psalm. 45.7.
so it is natural to God to love holiness; and as the higher men rise in
wickedness, the more a holy God hates them; so the higher men rise in holiness,
the more a holy God loves them; now the more any are like to God, and the more
they are beloved of God, the higher doubtless in glory shall they be advanced
by God. The best and the largest Portion is laid up for that Child that is
most like his Father; the more any man in holiness resembles God on Ear^h, the
greater and the larger Portion of glory, that man shall have when he comes to
Heaven. But,

Fifthly, and lastly; to deny degrees of glory in Heaven, and to say that God
will not suit men's wages to their works, nor their rewards to their services, nor
crown the highest improvements of grace with the highest degrees of glory, is
to render useless, many glorious exhortations, that are scattered up and down
in the Scripture; as that in the 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore my beloved Brethren,
be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for
as much as you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. If this were
not a truth, that I have been all this while asserting, why then, when men meet
with this exhortation, they may say, why, it is no great matter whether we are
steadfast, unmovable, and always abounding in the work of the Lord or no, for
if we are, we shall never advance our reward in Heaven, we shall never add
Pearls to our glorious Crown, we shall never add one mite to our happiness and
blessedness: and if we are not, we shall be as high in Heaven, and our
reward as great, and our crown as weighty, as theirs shall be who are
steadfast, unmovable, and always abounding in the work of the Lord. And so the
denial of degrees of glory in Heaven, will take off also the edge of all those
other exhortations of perfecting holiness, of sowing liberally, 2 Cor. 7 1.
cap. 9.6. 2 Pet. 3. ult. Joh. 15.8. 2 Pet 1.5, 6, 7.
of growing in grace, of bringing forth much fruit, and of adding virtue to
virtue, etc. yea, this will cut the throat of all divine endeavors, for who
will labor to be rich in grace, and to be much in service, and to abound in
all the fruits of righteousness and holiness, when none of all this will turn
to a man's advantage in another world? If he that sows little, shall have as
great a Harvest, as he that sows much, if he that is dull and negligent in
the work of the Lord, shall have as great a reward, as he that is active and
abundant in the work of the Lord. If those trees of righteousness which bring
forth much fruit, shall have no greater a recompense, than those trees of
righteousness which bring forth many leaves (of profession) but little fruit,
etc. who would sow much, and who would be active, and abundant in the work of
the Lord? and who would bring forth much fruit, verily but few, if any. But now
the opinion or rather the truth, that I have been laboring to make good, viz.
that there shall be different degrees of glory in Heaven, and that God will
proportion men's reward to their work, and that he will measure out happiness
and blessedness to them at last, according to the different measures of grace
bestowed upon his people, and according to the work, service, and faithfulness
of his people, in this world. This truth I say held forth in its luster and
glory, is a mavelous encouragement, and a mighty provocation to all sincere
Christians, to labor after the highest pitches in Christianity, and to be
very eminent in grace and holiness; for what man is there that will not reason
thus, the more grace the more glory, the more holiness the more happiness, the
more work the more wages, and the greater my service shall be here, the
greater shall be my reward hereafter; and therefore, O my Soul! grow in grace,
perfect holiness, and abound in the work and service of the Lord, knowing that
thy labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: And thus I have given you the
reasons, that prove that there shall be degrees of glory in Heaven.

Now I have nothing further to do upon this point, but to give a few brief
Answers, to such Objections, as are commonly raised against this truth, that I
have asserted and proved.

Obj. First, Some object and say, that one Christ bought us all, and that all
our portions are bought by the precious blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
that therefore all believers shall share alike in the inheritance of the Saints
in light; now to this Objection I shall Answer.

First, That all Saints shall be equal sharers, in the substantial, and
essential glory of Heaven, etc. but of this I have spoken before: and therefore,

Secondly, Though a Father buys a rich inheritance for all his Children, yet
this lays no necessity nor obligation at all upon him, to alot to every one of
his Children an equal portion? so though our Lord Jesus Christ, has by his
blood purchased a rich inheritance for his Children, yet this lays no
necessity nor obligation at all upon Jesus Christ, to divide this rich
inheritance, by equal portions among his Children; it is true, that Christ has
purchased all with his blood, and it is as true, that he may divide his purchase
among his people as he pleases; if every man may do with his own as he
pleases why may not Christ, must he needs be bound when others are free?

Thirdly, and lastly, I answer, that as it is true that the merits and
satisfaction of Christ, is the ground and foundation of our reward, and that
alone which makes our works capable of a reward; so it is as true, that our works
are the subject of reward, and this is most agreeable to the compact that was
made between Christ and his Father; that everlasting happiness and blessedness,
that eternal glory and felicity should be measured out to the Saints,
according to their different measures of grace, and different degrees of
service that they have been engaged in, in this world; and all this upon the
credit of Christ's blood; certainly there is nothing under heaven below the
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ that can make differing works, capable of a
different reward: the Papists are most sadly out, for they are so blind and
bold as to affirm that the more grace any man has, the more glory he merits
by his grace, these men make degrees of grace and not the blood of Jesus
Christ, to be the meritorious cause of degrees of glory, and therefore of all
men I think they are furthest from glory: certainly this is the believers
glory, and his crown of rejoicing that all recompenses and rewards shall flow
in upon him, not upon the account of his merits, but upon the account of
Christ's blood, and thus much shall suffice, to have spoken by way of Answer to
this Objection.

Obj. 2. But now in the Second place, I shall come to answer their grand and
main objection, and that is taken from that Parable in the 20 Matthew. where the
Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a vineyard; now in this Parable there is
mention made of a Husbandman that called several laborers into his vineyard,
at several hours in the day, some he called at the first hour, and some he
called at the third, and some at the ninth, and some at the eleventh, now when
they came all to receive their wages, the story tells us that he gave every
man a penny, he gave every man an equal reward, they that labored from the
first hour, and they that labored from the third hour, and they that labored
from the sixth hour of the day, had no greater a recompense than he that came
in at the eleventh hour, and so had labored but one hour in the vineyard, and
bore but little, if any, of the heat of the day, from whence the Objectors
conclude that there are no degrees of glory in Heaven; but that all shall have
glory alike, happiness and blessedness alike, every man shall have his penny,
every man shall have an equal reward, and no man's penny in Heaven shall be
brighter or bigger than another.

Now by way of answer, to this objection, give me leave to premise these three
things?

First, That this Parable of the householder, in giving to every man a penny,
has no reference at all to Heaven, nor to the reward, nor to the glory that
shall be conferred upon the Elect, and this I shall clearly and fully prove, by
these four following Arguments.

First, This illative particle, for, in verse. 1. shows that this Parable is
inserted to expound the former conclusion, viz. that the first shall be last,
and the last shall be first, and therefore the end of the Parable is
concluded, with the repetition of the same sentence, verse. 16. the last shall
be first, and the first shall be last. Christ by this Parable would teach his
hearers, that there is no reason under Heaven why they which are first called
in respect of time should boast or triumph over others, because he can easily
call the uncalled at pleasure, and either make them equal with them, or else
prefer them before them which are first. The scope of Christ in this Parable is
not to set forth the equality of celestial glory, it is not to prove that the
happiness and blessedness of the Saints shall be equal in Heaven, but the very
drift of the Parable is to show, that they which are first called and
converted, have no cause at all to despise the uncalled, and unconverted, or to
trample upon them with the foot of pride, considering that they who are yet in
their sins, and in their blood, and in an unconverted, and unsanctified estate,
may yet be called, and either made equal to them, or preferred before them. But

Secondly, Interpreters do generally agree in this, that by the Husbandman we
are to understand God himself, and by the Laborers men upon earth, and by the
Vineyard the Church of God; and several of them say, Chrysostom, Origin, Jerome,
Gregory, Austin.
that by the five hours in the Parable, we are to understand the five ages of
man.

First, By those who were called in the morning, See my Apples of Gold.
and sent into the Vineyard, we are to understand those who in their childhood
are called and converted, they are such who begin to seek the Lord, and to
serve the Lord, even as soon as they are capable of the use of reason; As
Samuel did, and as Josiah did, and as Timothy did.

Secondly, By those who are called at the third hour, we are to understand
those who are converted, and turned to the Lord in their youth, in the prime,
the spring and morning of their days.

Thirdly, By those who were called at the sixth hour, we are to understand
those who are turned to the Lord in their strength, and in their full and
perfect age.

Fourthly, By those who were called at the ninth hour, we are to understand
those who are converted and turned to the Lord in their declining age.

And fifthly, By those who were called at the eleventh hour, we are to
understand those who are converted and turned to the Lord in their decrepit old
age, when they have one foot in the grave, and there is but a short step
between them and eternity; when with the Thief upon the cross they are even
ready to be turned off of the Ladder of life. Now the Vineyard being the
Church, all that this parable proves is no more but this, that whether men are
called into the Vineyard of the Church either sooner or later; either at the
first hour, or at the ninth, or eleventh hour. Yet this shall neither greaten
nor lessen their reward, for if they are called at the first hour, their
recompense shall be never the greater upon that account, or if they are called
at the eleventh hour, their reward shall be never the lesser upon that account;
the reward shall not be different according to the different times of men's
being called and converted, and that this Parable proves; but the reward shall
be different according to the diversity of our works, and that my former
arguments prove. But,

Thirdly, If the Penny The Roman penny is the eight part of an ounce, which
after five shillings the ounce, is seven pence half penny.
that every one had in the Parable be meant of glory, then it will roundly
follow, that murmurers shall be saved, and glorified as well as others, for the
murmurers had their Penny as well as the rest, verse. 10, 11, 12. But when the
first came, they supposed that they should have received more, and they
likewise received every man a Penny. And when they had received it, they
murmured against the good man of the house, saying, These last have wrought but
one hour, and thou have made them equal unto us, which have born the burden,
and heat of the day. The Greek word (...), that is here rendered murmured,
signifies to grunt as Swine grunt; they grumbled and grunted, and they grunted
and grumbled, and pray tell me what should such Swine as murmurers are do
grunting and grumb^ing in Heaven? doubtless the Crown of Glory is too bright,
too noble, too glorious, and too weighty a Crown, to be set upon murmurers
heads. Heaven would be no Heaven, if there were but one gruntler or murmure^
there; in Heaven all the vessels of Glory shall be full, and there shall not be
the least shadow of envy, or repining there. In the streets of that new
Jerusalem above, none shall ever complain that others have too much, or that
themselves have too little; every glorified Saint shall sit down fully
satisfied and contented with his portion there. Now should we by the Penny
understand a glorified estate and condition, then this would unavoidably
follow, that many shall be brought to a state of glory, which are not elected,
nor sanctified nor prepared for glory; but this can never, nor must never be
granted; and therefore without all peradventure this Parable does no way hold
out that state of glory and felicity which all the called and chosen of God,
shall have at Christ's coming to judge the quick and the dead. But

Fourthly, The Penny that is here mentioned in this Parable, cannot, nor may
not be interpreted, so as to signify an equality of glory, or an equality of
happiness and blessedness, that the Saints shall have in Heaven, because such
an interpretation, such an exposition is cross and contrary to the common and
received Rules of interpreting and expounding of Scripture. Now among other
Rules that are to be observed in the interpreting and expounding of Scripture,
there are these two.

First. You must so interpret and expound one Text of Scripture, that you do
not set it at strife and variance with another Text of Scripture; for though
there is a seeming contradiction between Scripture and Scripture, yet there is
a blessed harmony, and a glorious correspondency between all the parts of
Scripture, It Is a very dangerous thing so to interpret Scripture, as to raise
contests and opposition between Scriptures and Scriptures; it is an evil thing
to raise up Scripture against Scripture, and so to interpret one as to make it
affront another. Woe to him that by his interpretations of Scripture proclaims
the Scriptures to be at open war amongst themselves. Now to interpret the Penny
in the Parable, so as to make it signify an equality of glory and happiness
among the Saints in Heaven, is to set this Scripture at variance, and strife,
withal those Scriptures that I have produced to prove an inequality in the
glory and happiness of the Saints in Heaven, and therefore such an
interpretation is rather to be abhorred, than to be received. But

Secondly, Another Rule that is to be observed in the interpreting of
Scripture, is this, we must always interpret those Scrptures that are more
dark and mysterious by those Scriptures that are more plain and clear, and not
interpret those Scriptures that are plain and clear, by those that are dark and
mysterious, Job 38.2.
for this were to darken counsel by words without knowledge. Now they that
interpret the Penny in the Parable to signify an equality of glory among the
Saints in Heaven; they transgress this second Rule; for they must then
interpret all those clear and plain Scriptures that I have brought to prove
degrees of glory in Heaven by this dark and mysterious Parable, whereas they
should interpret this dark and mysterious Parable (if I may so say) by those
plain and clear Scriptures that I have already cited; and therefore their
interpretation must be rejected. It Is true, of some Parables we may say as
Gregory does, viz. That they rather require a Practicer, than an Interpreter.
And it is as true, Psalm. 49.4. and Psalm. 78.2. John 16.29.
that other Parables are so dark, obscure, and mysterious, that we shall never
understand them, without the sweat of our brows, and the beating of our brains;
and such a Parable this seems to be, and therefore we must interpret the parts
of it rather by other clear Scriptures, than to make clear and plain Scriptures
bow to this that seems to have a vail upon it. And thus you see by these
Arguments that the Penny in the Parable has no reference at all to Heaven, nor
to any equality of glory that shall be among the Saints there.

Secondly, Chrysostom's Vide Chrisostom in hunc locum.
counsel on the Text should be eyed and followed, says he, We should not
strain every particular of a Parable, but only consider the scope of Christ in
the propounding of it, and accordingly apply it. We look not on every
particular color in a well drawn picture, but on the whole piece: so when we
come to view a Parable, it is enough that we cast our eye principally upon the
general intention and scope of it; he that is very exact and curious to view
and observe every particular circumstance about Parables, may easily draw blood
instead of milk out of the breasts of Parables. Ezekiel. 2.10. Hier. in cap. 2.
Ezekiel.
Parables are like to the Role which Ezekiel saw in a Vision spread before him,
which was written within and without; without the History was written, and
within the mystery was written. Now though the outside, the history of a
Parable be like the Golden Pot, yet the inside, the mystery of a Parable, is
like the Manna that was hid therein, and it is the Manna, the Manna, that we
must seek after. Look, as it is their wisdom, who deal in curious rich stuffs
that are wrought on both sides, to cast a special eye upon the flowers that are
on the inside of those stuffs: So it is our wisdom to cast a special eye upon
the inside of Parables, upon the mystical reference that Parables have, than to
lie poring upon the outside of Parables. Now the scope of this Parable is not
to prove that there is an equality of glory in Heaven, but to reprove the Jews,
who being called into the Lords Vineyard betimes in the morning, repined and
murmured that the Gentiles, who were called in at the latter end of the day,
who were called in some thousand years after them, that they should through the
riches of grace have an equal share with them in the reward; and stand upon as
good and as noble terms with God as themselves, who had so long bore the heat
of the day. God, to show that his gifts, his grace, and his rewards are free,
will give his pennies as well to those who have labored but a little, as to
those who have labored much; and this is no prejudice at all to his truth and
justice, that his grace is free. But

Thirdly and lastly; That by the Penny we cannot, nor we may not understand
everlasting happiness and blessedness; but some other reward that Hypocrites
may attain to as well as sincere-hearted-Christians, and the reason is obvious;
for he that was sent away for his envious grumbling and grunting, was sent
away also with his Penny; Some by the Penny do understand, worldly honor, and
the estimation and approbation of men.
take thy Penny, and be packing. By the Penny some pious Interpreters do
understand some competent gift or other (whatever it were) which might be well
managed and improved to advantage. The Vineyard is the Church, and every one
that is called to labor in the Vineyard, is called to labor in the use and
improvement of Ordinances. Now every one that is laborious in the use of
Ordinances, shall be sure to get something; no man shall kindle a fire on Gods
Altar for naught. And yet it many times comes to pass, that those who have been
called and converted long before others, do yet make no greater, nor no better
yearnings on it, than those do that have been called and converted long after
them; he that is called at the first hour sometimes gets no more than he that
is called at the eleventh hour. It Is in the Trade of Christianity, as it is in
other Trades. Now you know that many men who have been set up in this or that
Trade, ten, nay twenty years before others, yet they many times make no more
yearnings, no more advantage of their Trade, than they that have set up but the
other day, as we say. Why so many that have been called long to the Trade of
Christianity before others, yet they make no more yearnings, no more advantage
of that Trade, than those that have been called to it but yesterday, as I may
speak; his gifts, his gain, his yearnings that is called in at the eleventh
hour of the day, is many times equal to his that was called in at the first
hour of the day. Yea I have formerly proved, that sometimes many that are
called later than others, do yet in gifts and grace excel those that were
called long before them. Now these Objections being answered, that Truth stands
firm, like Mount Zion, viz. That the more holiness you have here, the more
happiness you shall have hereafter; the more grace you have here on Earth, the
more glory you shall have when you come to Heaven.

And so I come to the second thing proposed, namely, To acquaint you with some
means, helps, and directions, that may enable you to make a progress in
holiness, and to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord. And

First, If ever you would perfect holiness, if ever you would attain to higher
degrees of holiness than any yet you have attained to, then labor to be more
and more sensible of your spiritual wants and deficiencies of grace and
holiness. Ah Christians! you must be often in casting up your accounts, and in
looking over the defects of your holiness; he that has most holiness, yet
wants much more than what he has attained to, witness the prevalency of his
corruptions, witness his easy falling before temptation, witness his aptness
to faint in the day of affliction, witness his staggering in the day of
opposition, witness his shifts in the day of persecution, and witness his
actual unpreparedness and unfitness, for the day of his dissolution. The more
any Christian sees himself defective in holiness, the more he will labor
after holiness, Psa. 119.59, 60. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto
thy testimonies: I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. The
Hebrew word (...) that is here used for thinking, signifies to think on a man's
ways accurately, advisedly, seriously, studiously, curiously; this holy man of
God, thought exactly and curiously, on all his purposes and practices, on all
his doings and sayings, on all his words and works, and finding too many of
them to be short of the rule, yea, to be against the rule, he turns his feet
to Gods testimonies, having found out his errors, upon a diligent search, a
strict scrutiny, he turns over a new leaf, and frames his course more exactly
by rule: O Christians! you must look as well to your spiritual wants, as to
your spiritual enjoyments, you must look as well to your layings out, as to
your layings up, you must look as well forward to what you should be, as
backward to what you are; certainly that Christian will never be eminent in
holiness, that has many eyes to behold a little holiness, and never an eye to
see his further want of holiness; he that is more affected with that holiness
he has, than he is afflicted about those great measures of holiness that he
needs, will never be but a Puny, a Dwarf in holiness; the more sensible we
are of our own weakness and emptiness, the more pleasure God will take to fill
us with his own fullness, and to perfect in us the work of holiness. But,

Secondly, If ever you would perfect holiness, if ever you would attain to
higher degrees of holiness, Psalm. 41.12. 1 Samuel 2.1.3.
then set the Lord always before your eyes, set your selves always as in his
presence: David was a man that was very high and eminent in holiness; but how
came he to so great a height? why he tells you how in that 16. Psalm. 8.
Athenodorus a Heathen could say that all men ought to be careful in the
actions of their lives, because God was every where, and beheld all that was
done. 1 King. 20.39. Psalm. 39.1. Jer. 20.10. Job 10.12.
I have set the Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand, I
shall not be moved. David did not by fits and starts set the Lord before him,
but he always set the Lord before him in his course, he had his eye upon the
Lord; and so much the Hebrew word (...) imports; I have equally set the Lord
before me, that is, the force of the original word, that is, I have set the
Lord before me, at one time as well as another, without any irregular
affections, or passions, etc. in every place, in every condition, in every
company, in every employment, and in every enjoyment, I have set the Lord
equally before me; and this raised him, and this will raise any Christian by
degrees, to a very great height of holiness; Psa 119.168. I have kept thy
precepts, and thy testimonies: for all my ways are before thee. The Hebrew
word ((...) shamar) that is here rendered kept, signifies to keep carefully,
diligently, studiously, exactly; it signifies to keep as men keep prisoners,
and to keep as a watchman keeps the City, or the Garrison, yea, to keep as a man
would keep his very life; but now mark what was the reason that David kept the
Precepts and the testimonies of the Lord, so carefully, so sincerely, so
diligently, so studiously, and so exactly? why the reason you have in the
latter part of the verse, for all my ways are before thee. O Sirs! it is as
necessary for him that would be eminent in holiness, to set the Lord always
before him, as it is necessary for him to breathe; in that 31. of Job you have a
very large narrative of that height and perfection of holiness, that Job had
attained to, and the great reason that he gives you for this, is in the 4.
verse, Does not he see my ways, and count all my steps? the eye of God had so
strong an influence upon his heart and life, that it wrought him up to a very
high pitch of holiness. The Scholar writes most exactly, whilst his Masters
eye is upon him, and the Child walks most exactly whilst his Fathers eye is
upon him, and the Servant works most exactly whilst his Masters eye is upon
him: and so certainly all the Sons, and Servants of the most high God, do hear
most exactly, and pray most exactly, and walk most exactly, when they set
themselves most as in the presence of the great God, who is all sight, who is
Totus oculus, all eye. Ah friends! as ever you would be high in holiness,
possess your hearts with a serious apprehension of Gods presence, set your
selves daily as in his sight, as under his eye; and remember, though a man may
easily baffle his conscience, and put out his light, and deceive the world,
like that counterfeit Alexander in Josephus his story, yet he shall never be
able to baffle or deceive the eye of Gods omnisciency; you shall as soon get
out of the reach of his hand, as you shall get from under the view of his eye:
God has his windows in all our breasts, and curiously and narrowly observes all
that is done within us, and all that is done by us; and if the serious
consideration of his all seeing eye, will not influence us to labor after the
highest degrees of holiness, I know not what will. It was Seneca's advice to
his friend Jucilius, that whatsoever he was doing he should imagine that Cato
did behold him; and Plutarch advised his friends to demean themselves so
circumspectly as if their enemies did always behold them: But my advice to you
shall be this, upon every occasion, in every condition, and in every action,
set the Lord always before you; if the sharp and severe eye of a holy man, or
of a holy friend, or of a holy relation will so overawe you, and so
exceedingly influence you to the best of actions; then certainly the sharp
peircing and all-seeing eye of God will do much more, and therefore let the
Lord be always in your sight. But,

Thirdly, If ever you would attain to higher degrees of holiness, then fix and
settle your selves under a holy Ministry; resign and give up your selves to
his Ministry who makes it his great business and work, to preach holiness, to
promote holiness, to countenance holiness, to encourage holiness, to exalt
holiness, and to remove all obstructions that may any ways hinder the progress
of holiness. Some there be that spend their time rather to please, Isa. 30.10.
than to profit, and to tickle their hearers ears than to touch their hearts;
from these turn aside, and some there be who make it their work rather to
destroy Churches, than to build them up in faith and holiness, and from these
turn aside; Gal. 1.23.
some there are who make it their business to delude and deceive the simple,
Phil. 4.14. Jer. 14.14.
by venting, and setting to sale the devices of their own heads, and the
deceits and visions of their own hearts. How many are there in these days,
whose glorious visions are but golden delusions, and whose Seraphical phrases
are but brainsick fantasies, and whose new notions are but new nothings; from
these turn aside.

And others there be that build the things that they have destroyed, Gal. 2.18.
2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
and are returned (after they had been seemingly washed) with the Dog to his
vomit, and with the Sow to her wallowing in the mire. They say that if tame
Foxes break loose and turn wild, they do more mischief than any. Julian was
once a Professor, but turning back to Heathenism, he drew more from the Faith
by his fraud, than his predecessors did by force; therefore from these turn
aside.

Mat. 15 1. -- 7. Mark 7.1. -- 14.
Some there be that cry up the commandments of men above the Commandments of
God, and that set up the ordinances of men, above the Ordinances of God, and
that prefer humane institutions before divine institutions; from these turn
aside.

1 King. 20. -- 26. 2 Cor. 10.10.
And others there be, that have a vein of scorning and reproaching, of
disdaining and triumphing over the persons, names, and credits of those
faithful Ministers of Christ, who upon all accounts, excel them, and whom upon
a dying-bed, and before a Judgment Seat, they will wish that they had
imitated, and not envied. These labor to darken and obscure others, that their
own Sun may shine the brighter; these labor to lessen others reputation,
hoping thereby to greaten their own, these admire themselves, and contemn
others; these look upon themselves as the greatest Doctors, and upon all others
as the worst of Dunces; from these turn aside.

Some there be that spend their time and their strength in studying and
preaching of dry and sapless controversies, which are so far from bettering of
men's hearts, and from reforming of men's lives, that they leave men as much, and
many times more under the power of sin, and dominion of Satan, than they were
before; from these turn aside.

And others there be that stand most upon easy things, and little things, upon
things of least worth, and weight, and in these they will be very nice and
curious, 1 Timothy 1.5, 6, 7. Mat. 23.25. and chapter 6.3, 4, 5.
and yet readily pass over the great and the weighty things both of the Law and
of the Gospel; they stand more upon circumstantials, than upon substantials,
upon a Saints-day, than upon a Sabbath Day, upon an Easter-offering, than upon
offering up of themselves to the Lord; upon a Pipe, a Vesture, a Gesture, than
upon saving of immortal souls, from these turn aside.

Some there be that speak two words for Christ, Ezekiel. 13. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3, 4
Rev. 18.11, 12, 13.
and ten for themselves, that are very zealous to fleece their flocks, but are
neither headed, nor hearted to feed their flocks; that mind men's goods more
than their good, and the serving of themselves, than the saving of souls. So
they may be clad sprucely and fate deliciously, and live lazily, they care not
though millions of souls go to Hell yearly; to pick your purses, they will
indulge your consciences; and so it may go well with them in this world, they
care not what becomes of you in the other world; from these turn aside.

And others there be that take more pains to make Proselites, than to make men
holy; they make it their great business to win over men to their opinions, Mat.
23.15.
when they should be a winning of men over to Jesus Christ; they make it more
their work to convert men to their way, than they make it; their work to better
men's hearts, or mend their lives, or save their souls; they will compass Sea
and Land to make men one with themselves, and yet think all that time and pains
lost, that is spent in endeavoring to make men one with Christ; these are
Factors for Hell, and resemble the Prince of darkness to the life, for as he,
so they will spare no pains to gain Proselytes; from these turn aside. And give
up your selves to their labors, who make it the top of their glory to preach
holiness, to advance holiness, to magnify holiness, and to practice holiness;
and this will be an excellent means to raise you up to higher degrees of
holiness. But

Fourthly, Be most in with them that are most eminent and excellent in
holiness; let the delight and joy of your hearts run most out to them, who are
still adding to their stock of holiness. Thus it was with that Princely Prophet
in that Psalm* 16.2, 3. My goodness extends not to thee; But to the Saints
that are in the Earth, and to the Excellent, in whom is all my delight. The
Disciples by discoursing with Christ had a holy flame raised up in them, Luke
24.32. And they said one to another, did not our hearts burn within us, while
he talked with us by the way, Act. 18.5.
and opened to us the Scriptures? And when Paul met Silas and Timotheus, he
burned in spirit; these two men were eminent in holiness, and by their company
and communion, the zeal and courage of the Apostle Paul was very much heated
and raised. Look as one flaming Bavin may kindle a thousand, so one precious
Saint, in whom grace is strong, and holiness is high, may by a divine and
secret operation, convey heat and life, power and vigor into all that touch
him, or come near unto him; even as the Lodestone by a secret operation
conveyeth power and vigor into Iron. The prayers, the conferences, the
counsels, and all the carriages of a man eminent in holiness, will mightily
help on the work of holiness in their hearts, where the streams of holiness
runs but low. Look as rich and costly Banquets do refresh, and raise, and
strengthen their spirits, that are weak and faint. So men that are rich in
grace and holiness, will raise and strengthen their spirits, who are weak in
grace, and who for want of greater measures of holiness, are apt to faint. Look
as young plants will not thrive under dropping-trees: so such as are weak in
holiness, will never thrive so long as they only associate themselves with
those that are weak. Look, as many times one rich man makes many poor men rich:
so many times one man rich in holiness makes many rich in holiness; and
therefore as over you would abound in holiness, look not so much at gifts, as
at grace; look not so much at Saints outsides, as at their in sides; look not
so much at their external Garb, as at their internal worth, and always make
them your choicest, and your chiefest companions, who do most excel in grace
and holiness; their tongues, their lips, their lives, will still be a droping
divine marrow and farness, and therefore be sure to keep most in with them. But

Fifthly, If ever you would attain to higher degrees of holiness, then be much
in the exercise and actings of that holiness you have; all the honor and glory
that God has from us in this world, is from the exercise of holiness. Look, as
the frequent actings of sin is the strengthening of sin, so the frequent
actings of holiness is the strengthening of holiness. Look, as the non-exercise
of holiness brings upon the soul a decay of holiness; so the exercise of
holiness breeds in the sold an increase of holiness. Holiness is always made
more and more perfect by acting. Look as Wells are the sweeter for drawing, and
Fountains the better for overflowing; so holiness is sweerest and best when it
is drawn into action. Look as the running-water is the best and sweetest water;
so the active Christian is the best and sweetest Christian. That musical
Instrument always makes the sweetest melody, that is most frequently used, and
so does that Christian that is most frequent in the exercise of grace and
holiness. We get nothing by dead and useless habits, talents hid in a Napkin,
gather rust, and the noblest faculties are imbased, when not improved in
exercise; and therefore the Apostle exhorts Timothy to stir up the gift of God
that was in him, in that 2 Timothy 1.6. (...), It signifies to rekindle, or
revive, when the world, the flesh, and the Devil, go about to put out that
Divine Fire that should be always ^^^ning in our hearts, we must do all we
can to foster it, and keep it burning.
The words are an allusion to the fire in the Temple, which was always to be
kept burning, Paul would have Timothy to be always a blowing his spark into a
flame. Look as fire is preserved and maintained by blowing and stirring of it
up; so holiness is preserved and maintained in the soul by being stirred and
blown up in the soul. The habits of grace and holiness are like dull
coal-fires, which if they are not now and then blown and stirred up, will
certainly dye and go out.

O Sirs! it is not the having, but the husbanding of holiness that brings glory
to God; for a man to have the habit of holiness, and not to put it in practice,
is all one as for a man to have a Talent, and to wrap it up in a Napkin. 'Twas
a notable observation of Pliny upon Phydeus, the famous Painter, that had the
habit of that Art above all of his time; says he, That great Art and skill
that Phydeus had, had been to no purpose, had he not exercised and practiced
it, upon some Table, so it is with the habits of grace and holiness in the
Saints, if they are not brought forth into exercise, into action, it is all one
as if they had no such habits at all; Holiness out of action, is like a candle
under a Bushel, that yields no comfort to a man's self, nor no light to others.
Though Gold be Gold in the mine, and though it be the most precious and
desirable mettle in the world, yet so long as it is only in the mine, what profit
or advantage have we by it; but now when it is dig'd out of the mine, and becomes
a Treasure in men's hands, and is fitted for use and service, then it brings
profit and advantage to men, and then the luster and glory of it appears: So
though grace and holiness in the habit (in the mine) be grace and holiness;
yet what profit or advantage is there in those habits, till they are brought
forth into action, into exercise, and till then all the luster and glory of
grace and holiness, lies hid and obscure; the more the habits of holiness are
brought into action, the more holiness will be augmented and increased; and
therefore above all, look to the frequent exercises and actings of that
holiness you have: and this will be a ready way to turn your drop of holiness
into a sea, and your spark of holiness into a flame, and your two mites of
holiness into a vast treasure. But

Sixthly, If ever you would attain to higher degrees of holiness, Mat. 6.5, 9.
if ever you would perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord, then be much
insecret prayer, be much in closet duties; Christ takes a great deal of
pleasure to hear and to see his people pour out their souls before him in a
corner; Cant. 2.14. O my Dove! that art in the clefts of the rock, in the
secret places of the stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy
voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. Look as secret
meals are very fatning, so secret duties are very soul-inriching; secret
Prayers are the Pillars of smoke, whereby the soul ascends to God, out of the
Wilderness of this world; secret Prayers are the wings of the Soul, whereby it
flies to God in a more still and silent way; for the Increase and Augmentation
of Holiness, the tender dew, that falls in the silent night, will abundantly
more cause sweet herbs to flourish and grow, than great showers of rain that
falls in the stirring day; so secret prayer will abundantly more cause the
sweet herbs of grace and holiness to grow and flourish, than all those more
open and visible duties of Religion, which too too often are mingled, and mixed,
with the Sun and Wind of Pride and Hypocrisy. O Sirs! secret prayer is Jacobs
Ladder, where you have God in his fullness and holiness, descending down into
the Soul; and it is that Ladder whereby the soul ascends to the highest pitch of
communion with God; witness Ambrose, who was wont to say, I am never less
alone, then when I am all alone, for then I can enjoy the presence of my God,
most freely, fully, and sweetly, without interruption. And witness that
Heaven-born-Lady, who spent most of her time in secret duties, in closet
communion with God; and when persons of great quality came to visit her, she
would so entertain them, as she would be sure not to omit her set times for
secret prayer; she would rather rudely take her leave of them (as some called
it) than omit her close^ communion with God; And Constantine that great
Emperor, made it his constant practice (as Eusebius reports) to shut up
himself daily in a secret place in his Palace where he went to private Prayer.
Cant. 1.11.12,
she had found such rare advantages by closet duties, that she would not upon
any terms neglect them, or in the least turn her back upon them. And 'twas a
most sweet and divine saying of Bernard, O Saint! know thou not (says he)
that thy husband Christ is bashful, and will not be familiar in company,
retire thy self therefore by meditation into thy closet, or the fields, and
there thou shall have Christ's embraces. O Sirs! it is an experienced truth, that
there is no such way under Heaven to be rich in grace; and to be high in
holiness, as by driving and maintaining a secret trade with God. When had Peter
that glorious vision, and manifestation of grace but when he was alone and on
the house top a praying? Act. 10.11, 12.
And when was that soul ravishing, that soul cheering, Dan. 9.20, 21, 22, 23.
and that Soul strengthening message dispatched by the Angel to Daniel, viz.
that he was greatly beloved of God, but when he was alone a praying? and
doubtless many thousand Saints have had their hearts melted, their corruptions
weakened, their fears scattered, their doubts resolved, their holiness raised,
and their assurance sealed, whilst they have been in closet-duties? Look as men
many times gives their best, their choicest, and their richest gifts in secret,
so does God many times give the choicest discoveries of his love, and the
sweetest dainties and delicates of glory, and the richest measures of grace and
holiness to his people in secret. Look as there was none so holy as Christ,
Compare these Scriptures together, Mat. 14.23. Mar. 6.46. Luke 5.16. and cap.
6.12. Mat. 26.36, 39, 42, 44. Luke 22.32, 44, 45. John. 17.17.
so there was none so much in secret prayer as Christ; look as many men in this
famous City, by driving a secret trade, a private trade, gain very great
estates, beyond what many do, who drive more public trades; so many Christians
that drive a secret trade, a private trade with God in their closets, they grow
abundantly more rich in grace, in holiness, in communion with God, and in all
gracious experiences, than many other Christians who make a great deal of
bussel in the world, and who are much in the Public trade of Christianity;
viz. hearing the word, conferences, family duties, etc. but very rarely shall
you find them in their closets, as ever you would be eminent and excellent in
holiness, keep up your private trade with God, maintain your closet communion
with the holy one of Israel. But,

Seventhly, If ever you would attain to higher degrees of holiness, then fall
with all your might upon subduing and crucifying your most raging corruptions,
and your most darling-lusts; O do not defer! O do not delay the work of
spiritual mortification! O do not think that you can both fight and overcome,
fight and triumph in one day! O do not think that your golden and your silver
Idols will lay down their Arms, Isa. 2.20.
and yield the field, and lie at your feet, and let you trample them to death
without striking a blow. O remember that bosome-sins will do all they can to
keep their ground, and therefore you must arise with all your strength against
them, and bray them in a mortar, and stamp them to powder, and burn them to
ashes! O deal with them, as they dealt with the Leviets Concubine, force them
to death, and cut them to pieces! Judge. 19. 2 King. 9.
O leave not the Palm, the skull of this cursed Jezabel undevoured undestroyed!
O deal by your most enraged lusts, as the Philistims did deal by Sampson, pluck
out their eyes, and make them to grind in the Mill of Mortification, till
their strength be utterly consumed and wasted. Whilst Saul lived and kept the
Throne, and was in his strength, little David was kept exceeding weak and low;
but when Saul was dethroned and slain, little David quickly grew stronger and
stronger: 2 Samuel 3.1.
so all the while a darling sin lives, and keeps the Throne in the hear^^ grace
and holiness will be kept exceeding weak and low, but when your darling, Romans
8.10, 13.
sin is dethroned and slain by the power and the sword of the Spirit, grace and
holiness will quickly grow stronger and stronger, and rise higher and higher.
When men would have a rough field fitted for the plow, and fitted to bring
forth fruit, will they not first fall with all their strength, and with all
their might, upon grubbing up by the roots the strongest Trees, and the
sturdiest Oaks, knowing that when these are grubbed up, weaker trees will
easily fall? So, as ever you would have your hearts and lives full of the
fruits of righteousness and holiness, fall with all your strength, and with all
your might upon grubbing up by the very roots your beloved sins, your strongest
lusts, and then the rest of your corruptions will easily fall. When Galiah was
slain, the Philistims fled, and were easily brought under; when a General in an
Army is cut off, the common soldiers are quickly routed; down but with your
darling-sins, and then the conquest of other sins will be easy.

When a man has eat poison, nothing will make him thrive, till he has
vomited up the poison that he has eaten; it is not the most wholesome food the
choicest dainties, nor the richest cordials under Heaven, that will increase
blood, and spirits, and strength, in such a person, he will throw up all, and
nothing will stay with him to do him good, till his poison be cast up, and cast
out. Beloved-sins, they are the poison of the soul, and till these are vomited
up, and cast out by sound repentance, and the exercise of Faith in the Blood of
Christ, the soul will never thrive in grace and holiness; all the wholesome
food of the Gospel, and all the dainties and cordials of Heaven, will never
beger good blood, nor noble spirits, nor divine strength in their souls, that
upon no terms will part with their darling sins; and therefore as ever you
would be strong in the grace of the Lord, draw up all the strength that ever
you are able to make, and fall on with the greatest courage upon your
bosome-sins, and never cease till in the strength of Christ you have got a
complete victory and conquest over them. In the Law 'twas the blood of the
Sacrifice, and the Oil that cleansed the Leper, and that by them was meant the
blood of Christ, and the Spirit of Grace is agreed by all. Ah friends! as ever
you would be cleansed from your darling-sins, which do so exceedingly hinder
the increase of holiness, be often in looking upon a crucified Christ, and in
the application of his blood to your own souls.

I have read of five men, that being asked what was the best means to mortify
sin, gave these Answers; says the first, The best means to mortify sin, is,
to meditate of death. Says the second, The best means is, to meditate of the
judgement-day. Says the third, The best means is, to meditate on the Joys of
Heaven. Says the fourth, The best means is, to meditate on the torments of
Hell. But says the fifth, The best means is, to meditate on the blood and
sufferings of Christ^ and doubtless the last hit it to a hair; If any thing
under Heaven, will subdue and bring under darling-sins; it will be the daily
sight of a bleeding, groaning, dying Savior. Philosophy (says Lactantius) may
cover vices, but it never cuts off vices; it may hide a lust, but it can never
quench a lust. As black-patches instead of plasters may cover some deformities
in nature, but they can never cure them. Ah Sirs! if you do not kill your
darling-sins, they will kill your precious souls. Isa. 37.
When Senacheribs Army was destroyed by an Angel, and he returned home with a
hook in his nose, and a bridle in his lips, he enquired of one about him, what
he thought the reason might be why God so favored the Jews; to which he
replied, That there was one Abraham their Father, that was willing to sacrifice
his beloved Son to death at the command of God, and that ever since that time
God favored that people: well said Senacherib, if that be it, I have two
beloved Sons, and I will sacrifize them both to death, if that will procure
their God to favor me; which when his two Sons heard, they (as the story
goes) slew their Father, being more willing to kill, Isa. 37.38.
than be killed. Oh friends! you must kill, or be killed; if you are not the
death of your beloved sins, your beloved sins will prove the death and ruin of
your immortal souls; and therefore never leave looking up to a crucified
Christ, till virtue flow from him to the crucifying of those special sins that
do most obstruct and hinder the growth and increase of holiness. But

Eighthly and lastly, If ever you would attain to higher degrees of holiness,
then dwell much upon the holiness of God. O be still a musing, be still a
pondering upon the holiness of God. Certainly, if there be any means under
Heaven, to raise you up to higher degrees of holiness, it is this, and therefore
keep always a fixed eye upon the infinite and most glorious holiness of God.
Now that this direction may the better work, premise with me these eight
things concerning the holiness of God.

First, Premise this with me, that God is essentially holy, Mat. 19.17. There
is none good but God, that is, there is none essentially good but God, etc.
and in this sense none is holy but himself. Now essential holiness is all one
with God himself; Gods essential holiness is Gods conformity to himself;
holiness in God is not a quality, but his essence, Quicquid est in Deo, est
ipse Deus, whatsoever is in God, is God; holiness in Angels and Saints is but a
quality, but in God it is his essence. The fallen Angels keep their natures,
though they have lost their holiness; for that holiness in them was a quality,
and not their essence. Look as created holiness is the conformity of the
reasonable creature to the Rule; so the increated holiness of God, is Gods
conformity unto himself. Gods holiness, and his nature are not two things, they
are but one; Gods holiness is his nature, and Gods nature is his holiness. God
is a pure Act, and therefore whatsoever is in God, is God; it is Gods
prerogative royal, to be essentially holy; the most glorious creatures in
Heaven, and the choicest souls on Earth, are only holy by participation, 1 Samuel
2.2. There is none holy as the Lord, Gods holiness is so essential, and
co-natural to him, that he can as soon cease to be, as cease to be holy.
Holiness in God is a substance, but in Angels and men it is only an accident, or
a quality, the essence of the creature may remain, when the holiness of the
creature is lost. As you may see in Adam, and the fallen Angels; but Gods
essence and his holiness are always the same; his very nature is holy, Exodus
3.14.
and therefore it is that he is called Jehovah, and I Am, because what he is
really, that he is essentially. Though men (for our information) do
distinguish between the Attributes of God, and the Nature of God, yet in him
they are the same. Look as the Wisdom of God, is the wise God, and the Truth
of God, the true God, and the Power of God, the powerful God, and the Justice
of God, the just God, and the Mercy of God, the merciful God, and the
Mightiness of God the mighty God, and the Righteousness of God the righteous
God, and the graciousness of God the gracious God; so the Holiness of God is
the holy God. Gods Nature, and his Name are one and the same. God is
essentially holy, and that is the top of all his glory. But

Secondly, As God is essentially holy, so God is unmixedly holy, the Holiness
of God is a pure Holiness, it is an unmixed Holiness, 1 John 1.5. God is light,
and in him is no darkness at all. There are no mixtures in God; God is a most
clear, bright-shining light; yea he is all light, and in him is no darkness
at all. The Moon indeed when it shines brightest, Plato calls God the horn of
plenty, and the Ocean of beauty, without the least spot of injustice, etc.
has her dark spots, and specks, but God is a light that shines gloriously,
without the least spot or speck. Now look as that darkness which has not the
least light attending it, is the grossest, the thickest Egyptian darkness that
can be; so that light that has not the least cloud of darkness attending it,
must be the most clear, splendid light that possible can be, and such a light
is the holy one of Israel. It Is very observable, the Apostle to illustrate the
perfect purity and sanctity of God, adds a Negative to his Affirmative; In him
is no darkness at all, that is, God is so pure, that not the least spot, the
smallest speck can cleave to him; he is so holy, that no iniquity can be found
in him; there is no defect not default in the Nature of God; he is a God of
Truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he. As Moses spoke in that
Deuteronomy. 32.4. God is a pure, a most pure Act, without the least potentiality,
defectability, or mutability; and therefore in the highest sense he is light,
and in him is no darkness at all. Surely there is no unrighteousness in God,
no evil can dwell with him, or come near unto him. God stands at such a
distance from iniquity, yea he so abhors it, that he never did, nor never
will bestow a good look upon it, Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes than to
behold evil, and can not look on iniquity. There are four things that God
cannot do. 1. He cannot lie. 2. He cannot dye. 3. He cannot deny himself; nor
4. He cannot look with a favorable eye upon iniquity. God does indeed look
upon iniquity with a hateful eye, with an angry eye, with a revengeful eye, and
with a vindictive eye, but he never did, nor will look upon iniquity with an
eye of delectation, or with an eye of approbation, witness his hurling the
fallen Angels out of Heaven, and his banishing of sinning Adam out of Paradise.
By all this you see that the Holiness of God is a pure Holiness, it is a
Holiness without mixture; but now all the holiness that is in the best and
choicest Saints in the world, is but a dreggy holiness, a mixed holiness, a
weak and imperfect holiness; their unholinesse is always more than their
holiness. Ah what a deal of pride is mixed with a little humility, and what a
deal of unbeleef is mixed with a little faith, and what a deal of passion is
mixed with a little meekness, and what a deal of earthlinesse is mixed with a
little heavenlinesse, and what a deal of carnalnesse is mixed with a little
spiritualnesse, and what a deal of hardness is mixed with a little tenderness.
O but now the Holiness of God is a pure Holiness, it is a Holiness without
mixture, there is not the least drop, nor the least dregge of unholinesse in
God; it is true, the Gods of the Heathen were such as had been impure, beastly,
filthy men, Arnobius, Austin, Tertullian, etc.
and therefore several writers have taken a great deal of pains to convince
Heathens of their impiety and folly, in worshipping such for gods upon whom
they fastened many horrid, ridiculous, lascivious, and impious actions, and
therefore they conclude against them, that they are no gods; it is most certain,
that the true God, that He that is the high and the holy one cannot be
charged with any iniquity, no nor with the least show or shadow of vanity.

In God there is wisdom without folly, truth without falsehood, light without
darkness, and holiness without sinfulness. But,

Thirdly, As God is unmixedly holy, so God is Universally holy, he is holy in
all his ways, and holy in all his works, his precepts are holy precepts, and
his promises are holy promises, and his threatenings are holy threatenings, his
love is a holy love, and his anger is a holy anger, and his hatred is a holy
hatred, etc. His nature is holy, his attributes are holy, and all his actions
are holy, he is holy in punishing, and holy in sparing, he is holy in
justifying of some, and he is holy condemning of others, he is holy in
bringing some to Heaven, and holy in throwing others to Hell; God is holy in
all his sayings, and God is holy in all his doings, God is holy in what ever
he puts his hand to, and he is holy in what ever he sets his heart to, his
frowns are holy, and his smiles are holy, his liftings up are holy, and his
castings down are holy, when he gives, his givings are holy givings, and when
he takes away, his takings are holy takings, etc. But

Fourthly, As God is universally holy, so God is eminently holy, he is
transcendently holy, he is superlatively holy, Exo. 15.11.
and therefore he is said to be glorious in holiness, there is no fathoming,
there is no measuring, there is no comprehending, there is no searching, of
that infinite Sea of holiness, that is in God; as neither Men nor Angels, can
set banks or bounds to Gods holiness, so neither Men nor Angels can sound to
the bottom of Gods holiness; all that holiness that is in Angels and Men, is
but a spark to Gods flame; it is but a drop to his sea; it is but a beam to his
sun; it is but a mite to his millions, etc. O Sirs! you shall as soon, stop the
Sun in his course, and change the day into night, and raise the dead, and make
a world, and tell the stars of heaven, and empty the sea with a Cockle-shell,
as you shall be able, either to conceive or express, that transcendent
holiness that is in God. This glorious Name, or Title, the holy one of Israel;
is ascribed to God about thirty times in the Old Testament, and all to show
that he is most excellent and transcendent in holiness, and the Seraphims
which stood before the Throne, cried out three times a row, Holy, Holy, Holy,
is the Lord of hosts, Isa 6.3.
to show that God is most eminently, and superlatively holy; for so thrice holy
in some languages is most holy; for holiness God is a nonesuch, there are none
to be compared with him, neither are there any among Angels or among Men, yea,
or among the Gods that are like unto him; who is like to thee among the Gods,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders: Gods holiness is
infinite, it is so super-eminent, and so super-excellent, that it can neither be
limited, nor lessened, nor augmented, if men should blaspheme, or reproach the
Lord, he would be never the worse, he would be never the less holier then
he is; and if men should bless him and worship him he would be never the
better, never the holier; unto perfection there can be no addition, a drop
taken out of the sea, can no ways add unto the sea. He is exalted above all
blessing and praise? Nehe. 9.5.
All the Angels in Heaven, and all the men on earth, cannot add one Ray, one
Beam of glory to the essence of God, to the holiness of God; as God is goodness
in the very Abstract, and justice in the very abstract, and mercy in the very
abstract, and righteousness in the very abstract, and lovingkindness in the
very abstract; so he is holiness in the very Abstract; so that no man can
flatter him, or add unto him; and hence it is that God glories in the Attribute
of his Holiness, more than in any other Attribute: For, Isa. 57.15.
thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is
holy; when God would lift up himself in all his Glory, he does it by declaring
that his name is holy; and so when God would swear by himself, he swears by
his holiness Psalm. 89.25. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie
unto David: and so in that, Amos 4.2. The Lord God has sworn by his holiness,
that lo the days shall come upon you, that he will take you with hooks, and
your posterity with fishhooks: Look as the great men of the World are wont to
swear upon their honor (when they would give us the greatest assurance of what
they will do) because such Oath; are looked upon as most sacred and inviolable,
so the great God swears by his holiness, because his holiness is his greatest
Honor, and because he has no greater, nor no better, nor no choicer, nor no
sweeter, nor no preciouser things to swear by; let me, says God, be never
owned as a God, nor honored as a God, nor trusted as a God, nor feared as a
God, nor valued as a God, if I do not Inviolably keep my promises, and make
good my threatings, having sworn thereunto by my Holiness. Now you know the
Scripture says, when God could swear by no greater, he swear by himself; Heb.
6.13.
so I may say, when God could swear by no greater Attribute, by no greater
Excellency, he swears by his Holiness; that being the top and the glory of
all. Look as all the wisdom of the creatures compared with the wisdom of God,
is but folly; and as all the goodness of the creatures compared with the
goodness of God is but naughtiness; and as all the fullness of the creature
compared with the fullness of God is but emptiness; and as all the power of the
creature, compared with the power of God is but weakness; and as all the
righteousness of the creature, compared with the righteousness of God, is but
unrighteousness: So all the holiness of the creature, compared with the
holiness of God, is but unholinesse; man's highest purity, is but impurity,
when it is compared to the purity of God, yea, the very holiness of Angels,
compared with the holiness of God, is chargeable with folly; Job. 4.18. That
fullness of holiness that is in Angels or Saints, is only the fullness of the
Vessel, but that fullness of holiness that is in God, is the fullness of the
Fountain; that fullness of holiness that is in Angels or Saints, is but the
fullness of the Branches, but that fullness of holiness that is in God, is the
fullness of the Root; that fullness of holiness that is in Angels or Saints,
is but the fullness of Sufficiency, but that fullness of holiness that is in
God, is the fullness of redundancy. But,

Fifthly, As God is infinitely holy, transcendently holy, superlatively holy;
so God is originally, radically, and fundamentally holy; the Divine Nature is
the root, original, and spring of all holiness and purity; all that holiness
that is in Angels and men flows from God, as the streams from the Fountain, as
the beams from the Sun, as the branches from the Root, and as the effect from
the Cause. There is no holiness to be had, but from the Holy One, he is the
Author and Original of all the holiness that ever was, or that is this day in
the world, all the seeds of holiness, and all the roots of holiness that are to
be found in Angels or men, Phil. 1.11.
are of the Lords sowing and planting. All that holiness that the Angels had in
Heaven, and all that holiness that Adam had in Paradise, and all that holiness
that Christ had in his humane nature, and all that holiness that ever any
Saints have had was from God, and all that holiness that any Saints now have is
from God. The Divine Nature is the first root and original fountain of all
sanctity and purity, James 1.17. Ministers may pray that their people may be
holy, and Parents may pray that their children may be holy, and Masters may
pray that their servants may be holy, and husbands may pray that their wives
may be holy, and Wives may pray that their husbands may be holy; but none of
these can give holiness, none of these can communicate holiness to their
nearest and dearest relations; it is only God that is the giver and the Author of
all holiness. If holy persons could convey holiness into others souls, they
would never suffer them to go to Hell for want of holiness; to hand out
holiness to others, is a work too high for Angels, and too hard for all
mortals; it is only the Holy One that can cause holiness to flow into sinners
hearts; it is only he that can form, and frame, and infuse holiness into the
souls of men.

A man shall sooner make a man, yea make a world, and unmake himself, than he
shall make another holy; it is only a holy God that can enlighten the mind, and
bow the will and melt the heart, and raise the affections, and purge the
conscience, and reform the life, and put the whole man into a holy gracious
frame and temper. But

Sixthly, As God is originally, radically, and fundamentally holy; Isa. 44.24.
Rev. 1.18.
so God is independently holy; the Holiness of God depends upon nothing below
God. God is the Alpha, the fountain from ^^ence all holiness springs, and he
is the Omega, the Sea to which all glory runs. As all our holiness is from God,
so all our holiness must terminate in the honor and glory of God. It Is God
alone that is independently holy. All that holiness that is in Angels and men,
is a dependent holiness, it depends upon the Holiness of God, as the streams
depend upon the Fountain, the beams upon the Sun, the branches upon the Root,
and the members upon the Head. God is (Unum principium ex quo cuncta dependent)
one beginning, upon whom all things depend. God has his Being only of himself,
and it is he alone that gives Being unto all other things. God is the first
cause, and without all causes himself; the very Beings that Angels and men
have, they have by participation from God. And it is the first cause that gives
unto all causes their proper operations, Isa. 44.6. I am the first, and I am
the last, and besides me there is no God. God never had a cause of his Being,
as all other creatures have; He is a glorious being, a holy being, without all
causes, either efficient, or formal, or material, or final; and therefore he
must needs be independently holy. Look as the power of God is an independent
power, and the wisdom of God an independent wisdom, and the goodness of God
an independent goodness, and the righteousness of God an independent
righteousness; so the holiness of God is an independent holiness. And as it is
the glory of his power, that his power is an independent power, and the glory
of his goodness, that his goodness is an independent goodness; so it is the
glory of his holiness, that his holiness is an independent holiness. And
look as all that power that Angels and men have depends upon the power of God,
and as all that wisdom that Angels and men have, depends upon the wisdom of
God, and as all that goodness that Angels and men have depends upon the
goodness of God; so all that holiness that Angels and men have, depends upon
the holiness of God, etc. Philo could say, that God is such a fountain, that
he breaks forth with the streams of his goodness upon all things, but
receives nothing back again from any to better himself therewith. There are
none in Heaven, nor none on Earth that are absolutely independent but God alone.

Seventhly, As God is independently holy; so God is constantly holy, he is
unchangeably holy, he was holy yesterday, and he is holy to day, and he will
be holy for ever; What is natural is constant, and lasting: Now Gods holiness
is natural, to him; it is as natural for God to be holy, as it is for us to
breathe, yea as it is for us to be unholy. God can as well and as soon cease to
be, as he can cease to be holy; Holiness is his nature, as well as his name;
and therefore his holiness cannot decay; though ours may, whatever we may
lose of our holiness, yet it is certain that God can never lose one grain of
that holiness that is in him. Here our holiness ebbs and flows, but the
Holiness of God never ebbs, but is always a flowing, and overflowing, there
is still a full tide of Holiness in God. Though the Saints cannot fall from
that seed of holiness that is sown in their hearts, 1 John 3.9.
yet they may fall from some degrees of holiness, that they have formerly
attained to, they that have been old men in holiness, may fall from being old
men, to be but young men in holiness, and they that have been young men in
holiness, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.
may fall from being young men to be but children in holiness, and they that
have been children in holiness, may fall from being children, to be but babes
in holiness; but now that holiness that is in God, is never subject to any
decayings, abatings, or languishing; that spring, that Sea of holiness that is
in God, is no ways capable of diminution, nor of Augmentation.

Plato could say that God is one and the same, Pierius.
and always like himself. And it was a custom among the Turks to cry out
every morning from a high Tower, God always was, and always will be, and so
salute their Mahomet; O Sirs! God has been always holy, and God will be
always holy; whatever men may lose, yet God is resolved that he will never
lose his honor, nor his holiness. But

Eighthly and lastly, As God is continually holy, so God is exemplarily holy.
Levit. 20.26. Remember this, you and I must answer for examples, as well as
precepts
He is the Rule, Pattern, and Example of holiness, 1 Pet. 1.15. Be ye holy,
as I am holy. Gods Holiness is the great example and pattern of all that
holiness which is in the creatures. Gods holiness is the Copy that we must
always have in our eye, and endeavor most exactly to write after. Carnal
friends, and this blind world, and Antichrist, and such as love to Lord it
over the conscience, will be still a presenting to you other examples and
patterns, but it is your wisdom, and your work, to cast them all behind your
backs, and to trample them under your feet, and to follow that form and pattern
that the Lord has set before you. And that is, to be holy as he is holy. All
our holiness is to be brought to the Holiness of God, as the standard and
measure of it; and therefore, oh what cause have we to be still a perfecting
holiness in the fear of the Lord. And thus I have done with the second thing,
viz. Means to increase holiness, and to raise you up to the highest pitches and
degrees of holiness.

And so I come to the third thing proposed, and that was, to lay down some
signs or evidences whereby persons may know whether they have attained to any
high pitch, or eminent degrees of holiness or no. Now Sirs, if you desire in
good earnest to know whether you have attained to any perfection of holiness,
or no, then seriously weigh these following particulars, and try your selves by
them.

First, The more a man can warm his heart at the Promises, and cleave to the
Promises, and rest upon the Promises, and suck marrow, and fatness, and
sweetness out of the breasts of the Promises; when Divine Providence (seem to)
run cross to Divine Promises. The greater measure of holiness that man has
attained to, where there are but little measures of holiness, there every
seeming contrariety to the Promise troubles a man, and every little cloud that
hangs over the Promise, will mightily perplex a man, etc. But where holiness is
raised to any considerable height, there that man will suck honey out of the
flint, he will suck sweetness out of the Promise, even then when providence
looks sowrely upon the Promise; yea when Providence seems to bid defiance to
the Promise; witness Jacob, in that Genesis 32.6, 7, 8. compared with v. 9, 11,
12. And the Messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy Brother Esau,
and also he comes to meet thee, and four hundred men with him. Then Ja^ob was
greatly afraid, and distressed: and he divided the people that were with him,
and the Flocks, and Herds, and the Camels into two bands; And said, if Esau
come to the one company and smite it, then the other company which is left
shall escape. And Jacob said, O God of my Father Abraham, and God of my Father
Isaac, the Lord which said unto me, return unto thy Country, and to thy
Kindred, and I will deal well with thee: Deliver me, I pray thee, from the
hand of my Brother, from the hand of Esau: For I fear him, lest he will come
and smite me, and the Mother with the children. And thou said, I will surely
do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the Sea, which cannot be
numbered for multitude. Now here you see holy Jacob in the midst of all his
fears, and frights, in the midst of all his perils and dangers, in the midst of
all his damps and dreads, and in the midst of all cross amazing, and amusing
providence, he turns himself to the breasts of the Promise, and sucks marrow
and sweetness out of those breasts. Jacob puts the Promise into suit, he sues
God upon his own bond, and so bears up sweetly under dark and dismal
providence. And so did Moses, in that Numb. 10.29. And Moses said unto Hobab,
the Son of Raguel, the Medianite, Moses Father-in law, we are journying unto
the place of which the Lord said, I will give it you: come thou with us, and
we will do thee good; for the Lord has spoken good concerning Israel. Moses
had been almost now forty years in the wilderness, and many thousands were
fallen on his right hand, and on his left; yet says he to Hobab, in the face
of all those dismal providence, come go along with us, and be as eyes unto us,
and we will certainly do thee good; Verse. 31.
but Hobab might have objected, Alas! what good can I expect in a wilderness
condition, where so many are weak, and so many are sick, and so many thousands
are fallen asleep; and where all the people are every day surrounded with a
thousand, dangers, difficulties, and deaths; well, says he, though all this be
true, yet go along with us, and be serviceable and useful to us, and we will
do thee good; for the Lord has spoken good concerning Israel. Here this holy
man Moses turns himself to the Promise, and in the face of all sad providence
he draws comfort and encouragement from the P^omise: And so did Jehosaphat, in
that 2 Chronicles. 20. When the children of Ammon, and Moab, and Mount Seir came
against him to battle, v. 1.10. he turns himself to the Promise, v. 7, 8, 9.
and gathers life and spirit from thence. And so did David, in that Psalm. 60. in
the 1, 2, 3. v. you have a Narrative of many cross and dreadful Providence,
and yet in the face of them all, holy David sucks strong consolation out of the
breasts of the Promise, verse. 6. God has spoken in h^s holiness, I will
rejoice: I will divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth. God has
promised in his Holiness, that David should be King over all Israel, and
therefore notwithstanding all strange providence, David triumphs in the
Promise, and looks upon himself as Master of all those strongholds that are
mentioned in v. 7, 8, 9. And so Abraham, he wanted a Son, and God promised him
an Isaac. Now in the face of all his own deadness, and natural in^bi^ities (as
to generation) and Sarah's deadness and barrenness, Romans 4.17, 18, 19, 20, 1.
he turns about to the Promise, and his Faith and Holiness being high, he
draws sweetness and satisfaction from thence. Notwithstanding present
providence, the n^ke^ Promise was a well of Life and Salvation to him.

O Sirs! it is an Argument of a very great measure of holiness, when troubles
and difficulties vanish upon the sight of a Promise; when all things work quire
cross and contrary to sense and feeling. Now for a man to embrace a Promise, to
hug a Promise, to kiss a Promise, and to draw content and satisfaction from a
Promise, argues a great degree of holiness. It Is a very hard and difficult
thing for a man exactly to take the picture of Divine Providence at any time;
for many a^e the voices and the faces of providence, and there are as great
deeps in Providence, as there are in Prophecies; and many Texts of Providence
are as hard, as dark, and as difficult to be understood, as many Texts of
Scripture are; it is as hard to reconcile the Works of God, Psalm. 36.6. Romans
11.33.
as it is to reconcile the Word of God; for as in the Word of God there are many
seeming contradictions; so in the Works of God there are many seeming
contradictions; for here one providence smiles, and there another frowns; here
providence lifts up, and there providence casts down; here providence strokes,
and there providence stri^es; I have read that Marica, a Roman Princess being
great with child, had the Babe in her killed with lightning, when she her
self escaped.
here Providence leads toward Canaan, there providence leads toward a
wilderness; here Providence leads toward Zion, and there Providence leads
toward Babylon; here Providence speaks us very fair, and there Providence does
severely threaten; here Providence is bright and lovely, and there Providence
is dark and dreadful. Now under all such Providence, for a man to run to a
Promise, and to draw out life, and strength, and sweetness from a Promise, is a
clear evidence of a very high pitch of holiness that such a person has
attained to. I have read of an Emperor that put on a new-suit every day; O
Sirs! when the great God shall every day apparel himself in strange changeable
Providence. Now for a-man to hang upon the breasts of a Promise, and to suck
milk out of a Promise argues a very great increase of holiness. But

Secondly, The mo^e a man can overcome evil with good upon holy and gracious
accounts, as upon the account of Gods Command, Gods Honor, the Credit of the
Gospel, and the Conviction, Conversion, and Salvation of Souls; the greater
measure of holiness such a person has attained to, to return reproach for
reproach, reviling for reviling, and cursing for cursing, and scorning for
scorning, and defaming for defaming, is exceeding natural to us; Austin says,
that Christ made a Pulpit of the Cross, and the great Lesson he taught
Christians, was to love their enemies.
but to love them that hate us, to bless them that curse us, to do good to them
that abhor us, and to pray for them that persecute us, and that despitefully
use us, according to Christ's express command, in that Matthew. 5.44. are things
exceeding contrary to nature, and exceedingly above nature; the power of grace
and holiness appears in nothing more than in bringing the heart to a sweet and
ready subjection to such commands as are most cross* and contrary to flesh and
blood. As those are in that Romans 12.17.19, 20, 21. Recompense no man evil for
evil. Dearly Beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath:
for it is written, vengeance is mine, and I will repay it, says the Lord.
Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him* if he thirst, give him drink: Be
not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. And so that in 1 These. 5.15.
See that none render evil for evil unto any man; but ever follow that which is
good, both among your selves, and to all men. To return good for evil, and
kindnesses for injuries, to behave our selves courteously, humbly, meekly,
tenderly and sweetly toward those who behave themselves discourteously,
proudly, passionately, harshly and sowrely toward us, argues a very great
degree of holiness. David was a man eminent in holiness, and he was good at
this good work, as you may see in that 2 Samuel 1.24. Ye Daughters of Israel,
weep over Saul, who clothed you in Scarlet, with other delights, who put on
Ornaments of Gold upon your Apparel. He does not envy against Saul, nor insult
or rejoice over Saul, as many carnal and unsanctified hearts would have done,
nor he does not provoke, or stir up the Daughters of Israel to rejoice in the
death and destruction of such a Tyrant, that had hunted him up and down as a
Patridge, and that had often designed his ruin, and that had always returned
him evil for good, and that had bathed his sword in the blood of Abimelech the
High Priest, and in the blood of fourscore more of the Priests of the Lord, and
that had forsaken the Lord, and gone to a Witch, yea to the Devil for help in
his need: O no! he conceals what was bad, and remembers what was good; he
passes over those things that were condemnable, and he instances only in those
things that might make his memory most acceptable, commendable, and delightful
among the weaker Sex, viz. his making of bravery and gallantry fashionable
amongst them. And so Joseph was a man eminent in holiness, and he was good at
this hard work, as you may see in that Genesis 50.16, -- 23. And Moses was a man
of great holiness, and he was good at his difficult work; as you may see in
that 106 Psalm. 16.23.33. compared together. And Stephen was a man full of the
Holy Ghost, and he was good at praying for them that made a prey of him, Act.
7. ult. And Paul was a man of the same mind and mettle, as you may see by
comparing the 2 Cor. 11, 24. with th^^ Romans 1.2.3. And Eusebius affirms that
when Paul was (...) ^eaded, under Dioclesian the Emperor, he prayed both for
Jews and Gentiles, for the Multitude assembled, and also for the Judge and
Executioner, that his death might not one day, be laid unto their charge,
Calvin was a man of great holiness, and therefore though Luther (who was a man
of a most violent bitter passionate spirit) had woefully wronged him, and
reviled him, yet says he let Luther hate me, and in his wrath call me a
thousand times Devil, yet I will love him and honor him and acknowledge him, a
choice and precious servant of God. Mr. Fox that writ the Book of Martyrs, was
so famous in the practice of this hard piece of Christianity, that it became a
Proverb; If any man would have Mr. Fox do him a good turn, let him do him an
injury, and he will be sure to do him a good turn for it: Send me to my
Toads again [in the Dungeon] where I may pray for your Lordships conversion;
Said Mr. Sanders the Martyr to the Bishop of Winchester, thus you see that the
more eminent any persons are in holiness, the more they overcome evil with
good, the more good they will do them that do evil to them; and thus to do, is
but to conform to Christ your head, for he shed tears for them, that were to
shed his blood, and he gave them his blood to drink, who gave him gall to
drink and vinegar to drink; Act. 2. That man is almost got up to the very top
of Holiness, whose Soul is habituated to overcome evil with good, upon holy
and precious accounts: Julius Caesar, and Augustus Caesar (in whose time Christ
was born) and Titus vespasian, Camillus, Darius, Licurgus, Plato, Pericles, and
Herod that is mentioned in Act. 12.23. with many other Heathens have done
something this way, but what they did they did by fits and starts, and from
poor low principles and to vain glorious ends, and therefore all that they did
this way is not worth a reciting; well Christians the more you can overcome
evil with good, the more certainly your hearts are filled with good, that man's
heart is full of the fruits of righteousness and holiness, that upon divine
considerations is accusto^^d, not to be overcome of evil, but to overcome evil
with good. But,

Thirdly, When men in the main, I say in the main are as holy out of religious
duties, as they are in religious duties, when in the main, of their lives they
are as spiritual, as heavenly, as humble, as gracious, as serious, as watchful,
as circumspect, etc. as they are in their most religious performances and
duties; this argues not only the truth of holiness, Exo. 34.29, 30.^3.35.
but a very high degree of holiness; Moses Face did shine as gloriously when he
came off from the mount, as ever it did shine when he was upon the mount. O
Sirs! if when you come off from the mount of duties, there remains some rays,
and shinings of God upon you, it is an argument that the waters of Sanctity are
risen to a considerable height in your Souls. Ezekiel. 47.2. -- 6.
Ah how lively, how warm, how enlarged; how holy, how humble, how heavenly, how
spiritual, how serious, how zealous, how religious, how gracious, are many in
duties, in ordinances: but ah! how dead, how cold, how straightened, how unholy,
how proud, how worldly, how carnal, how slight, and how irreligious are the^
out of duties, out of ordinances, now certainly these have either no holiness
at all, or else they have attained to but a very little measure of holiness:
But now when a man in the main, when a man in his course is the same out of
duties, out of ordinances, that he is in duties, in ordinances, it is a very
great, and glorious Argument, that such a person has in a very great measure,
perfected holiness in the fear of the Lord. But,

Fourthly, The more a man can Divinely joy and rejoice under tribulations, and
afflictions, the greater measure of holiness he has attained to; it is a mercy
not to grumble, not to mutter, not to murmur, nor to fret, not to faint, not to
dispond, nor not to despair, it is much to be silent under afflictions, and to
be quiet and patient under tribulations; oh but divinely to joy and rejoice
under afflictions, under tribulations, argues a very great height of holiness
Romans 5.3 4. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that
tribulation works patience: And patience, (...).
experience, and experience hop: That glorying and rejoyceing, are both one in
the New Testament, is sufficiently known; they differ only in degrees, glorying
being a step above rejoicing: It Is much to rejoice in tribulations, but it is
more to glory in tribulations; yea, to glory in them as an Old Soldier glories
in all those marks and scars of honor that he has met with, in the service
of his King and Country: and yet to this height, the believing Romans were
raised, which argues a very great measure of holiness in them. And so in that 2
Cor. 7.4. Great is my boldness of speech toward you, great is my glorying of
you, I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation, or
as the Greek runs I do over-abound exceedingly with joy; (...).
I have a superabundance of joy in all our tribulation; and so in chap.
12.9.10. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the
power of Christ might rest upon me: Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities,
in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake:
for when I am weak, then am I strong. Paul rejoices, and glories more in his
heavy afflictions, and in his various tribulations, than he did in his
glorious and Mysterious Revelations; the more he was afflicted and distressed;
the more he had of the visible presence of Christ, and the more he had of the
glorious assistance of Christ, and the more he had of sweet communion and
fellowship with Christ, and the more he had of the choice supports and
singular comforts of Christ, and therefore he takes pleasure in all the
pressures that were upon him; and so in that Jam. 1.2. My brethren count it all
joy, when you fall into diverse temptations: that is, into diverse afflictions; O
Sirs! to be divinely merry in misery, to rejoice in the Cross, as men rejoice
in a Crown, to rejoice in adversity, as others rejoice in prosperity; to
rejoice in a stinking prison, as others rejoice in their stately palaces; to
rejoice in restraint, as others rejoice in liberty; to rejoice in wants, as
others rejoice in abundance; to rejoice in reproaches, as others rejoice in
their honors, etc. is very much, but to be joyful in such cases, not with a
little joy, but with exceeding great joy is more. All joy is an Hebraism, and
it signifies great joy, full Joy, exceeding joy, perfect joy; O! thus to
rejoice and that not only when you fall into some afflictions, but when you
fall into diverse afflictions, argues a very great measure of holiness; but ah!
how rare is it to find such souls in these days, that can not only bear the
Cross, but also rejoice in the Cross, that can not only bear reproaches, but
also wear reproaches, as their Crown and Glory. But,

Fifthly, The more extensive a man's obedience is to divine commands, Number. 14.24.
(...) Vajemalle, the Hebrew word, is a Metaphor, taken from a Ship under fail
which is strongly carried with the wind, as if it feared neither rocks nor
sands.
the greater measure of holiness that man has attained to; Caleb had a very
great measure of the spirit of holiness upon him, and he is said to have
followed the Lord fully, or as the Hebrew has it, he fulfilled after me,
that is, his obedience was full, universal, resolute, and constant to the end;
the contrary is affirmed of Solomon in that, 1 King. 11.6. And Solomon did evil
in the sight of the Lord, and went not fully after the Lord, as did David his
Father; or as the Hebrew has it, he fulfilled not after the Lord, that is,
his obedience was not so full, so universal, so sincere, so resolute, and so
constant, as David's his Fathers was. Zacharias and Elizabeth were persons of
great holiness, and their obedience was very extensive, for they walked not
only in some, but in all the commandments, and not only in all the
Commandments, but also in all the Ordinances of the Lord blameless. Luke 1.5,
6. their obedience was of such an universal extent and latitude, that it
comprehended and took in all the duties both of their general, and particular
callings, they had an eye to the duties of the second Table, as well as they
had an eye to the duties of the first; and they subjected themselves to the
duties of their particular calling, Mat. 23.23.
as well as to the duties of their general calling. As they had an eye to mint,
annisse, and cumming, that is, to the lesser, and lower duties of Religion, so
they had an eye, to the greater, and weightier duties of Religion; viz.
Judgment, Mercy and Faith, etc. But now Christians at their first conversion,
and whilst they remain weak in grace and holiness, their obedience is more
strait and narrow, for commonly they spend much, if not most of their time in
praying, fasting, hearing, reading, Christian-conference, etc. and neglect a
hundred other duties that are incumbent upon them; they are very forward and
warm in the duties of their general Calling, but very cold and remiss in the
duties of their particular Calling, they are very frequent and fervent in some
duties, and very rare in other duties; but now the more they grow in grace and
holiness, the more extensive will their obedience be, and the more their
hearts will be dilated and extended to all the duties both of the first and
second Table. But

Sixthly, The more a man conflicts with heart-sins, with spiritual-sins, with
invisible-sins, with sins that lie most hid, and obscure from the eyes of the
world, and the more spiritual victories and conquests a man obtains over them,
the greater measure of holiness that person has certainly attained to. When
the heart rises with all its strength and might against secret Pride, secret
Self-love, 2 Chronicles. 32.26. Psalm. 119.80. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. Psalm. 30.6, 7. Romans
7.23, 24. 2 Cor. 7..1
secret bublings of Lusts, secret Carnal-confidence, secret Murmuring, secret
Hypocrisy, secret Envy, secret Self-applause, secret Malice, secret Hatred,
secret Snares, secret Temptations, etc. It is an Argument that Holiness is
grown up to some considerable height there. A little Grace, a little Holiness,
will work a man to conflict with gross sins, with outward sins, with bodily
sins, with such sins that every one may set their eyes on, and lay their hands
on; yea where there is no Grace, no Holiness at all, the light of Nature, the
common convictions of the Spirit, the Laws of Men, the eyes of Men, the threats
of Men, the examples of Men, a smarting Rod, and good Education, may work men
to conflict with such sins; O but when all the strength and might of the soul
is engaged against those very sins that lie not within the sight or reach of
the most sharp and piercing men in the world, but in the heart, and about the
heart, and are only obvious to an Omniscient eye, this argues a great degree of
Holiness; And therefore Augustine hit the mark when he said, that it is a
harder thing for a man to fight with his lusts (understand it especially of
heart-lusts, of spiritual-wickednesse) than it is to fight with the Cross. Aug.
Sermon. 4. de verbis Domini. Jam. 3.7. Hiraclius motto was, a Deo victoria, it is
God that gives victory.
And Austin has long since complained, that we do not tame the beasts in our
own bosoms. O! it is an easier thing to tame all the beasts in the world, than
it is to tame one beast in the bosom; all the beasts in the world may be tamed,
and brought under by a humane power, but no power below that power that raised
Christ from the Grave, can tame the beasts that be in our bosoms. Now look as
conflicts with heart-sins, with spiritual-sins, etc. argues some eminency in
Holiness: so victory over heart-sins, over-spiritual sins, over those sins
that lie most remote from the eyes of others, argues a very great degree of
Holiness; when a Christian does not only resist heart-sins, but vanquishes
heart-sins, when he does not only combat with heart-sins, but conquers
heart-sins; when he does not only fight with heart-sins, but also overcomes
heart-sins, when he does not only wrestle with heart-sins, but also overthrows
heart-sins; this speaks out holiness in its growth. 'Twas a good saying of
Cyprian, there is no such pleasure (says he) as to have overcome an offered
pleasure, neither is there any greater conquest, than that that is gotten over
a man's corruptions. And 'twas an excellent saying of Eusebius Emesenus, our
Fathers overcame the torments of the flames, let us overcome the fiery darts of
vices; and indeed it is an easier thing to overcome the flames, than it is to
overcome those flaming lusts and corruptions that be in our own hearts.
Philosophy may teach us to endure hardships, as it did Calanus in Curtius, who
willingly offered his body to the fire, to the flames, but it is only grace,
it is only holiness that can enable us to overcome our lusts, our heart-lusts;
we read of many that out of greatness of Spirit could offer violence to
Nature, but were at a loss when they came to deal with their corruptions.

I remember a notable saying of Ambrose, Ambros. Ap^l. Dav^d. Post. c. 3.
speaking of Sampson, vincula solvit hostium, etc. Says he, he brake the
bonds of his enemies; but he could not break the bonds of his own lusts: he
choked the Lion, but he could not choke his own wanton love: he set on fire
the harvest of strangers, and himself being set on fire with the spark of one
strange woman lost the harvest of his virtue. And this saying of Ambrose puts
me in mind of a great Roman Captain, who as he was riding in his triumphant
Chariot through Rome, had his eyes never off a Courtizan that walked along the
street, which made one say, Behold how this goodly Captain that conquered such
potent Armies, is himself conquered by one silly woman. O it is not Philosophy,
nor Morality, nor Civility, etc. but holiness, but sanctity that will make the
soul victorious over iniquity; and the more victories and conquests a man makes
upon heart sins, upon spiritual-sins, upon secret-sins, the greater measures of
holiness that person has certainly attained to. But

Seventhly, The more a man is exercised and busied in the most internal and
spiritual duties of Religion, the greater measures of holiness that man has
attained to. You know there are external duties of Religion, and there are
internal duties of Religion: There are external duties of Religion, as public
Preaching, hearing the Word, reading the Word, Mar. 6. and chapter 23.
fasting, singing of Psalms, Christian conference, Communion of Saints, and
receiving the Lords Supper. Now such Christians as have but small measures of
grace and holiness, Isa. 1.11. -- 19, Isa. 58.1, 2, 3.4, 5. Zach. 7.4, 5, 6, 7
and Hypocrites and Formalists that have not the least measure of true grace
and holiness; these are most commonly exercised and busied about the external
duties and services of Religion; but very seldom, very rare shall you find
them in the more inward and spiritual duties of Religion; but then as there are
external duties; so there are internal and spiritual duties, as
Self-examination, Self-resignation to God, Self-loathing, Self-judging,
Divine-meditation, praying in the Spirit, Watchfulness over the Heart, and
making application of the blood of Christ, the death of Christ, the grace of
Christ, the love of Christ, and the word of Christ to a man's own soul. Now the
more any Christian is exercised and employed, in these internal spiritual and
Evangelical duties and services, the greater heights and degrees of holiness
that Christian is grown to, Phil. 3.3. For we are the c^rcumcision, which
worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the flesh. These Philippians were eminent in grace and holiness, as you may
see in chap. 1. And they place no confidence in circumcision, nor in any such
outward performances, or services, but they were much in the exercise of grace,
and in worshipping of God in the Spirit, and in rejoicing in the Person of
Christ, the Natures of Christ, the Offices of Christ, the Discoveries of
Christ, the Communications of Christ, the glorious Operations of Christ, the
precious Promises of Christ, and in the heart-warming and heart-chearing Blood
of Christ.

Now to be much exercised in the most internal, spiritual, and Evangelical
duties of Religion, argues a very great height of holiness. But

8thly. The more spiritual, internal, and intrinsecal Principles, Motives, and
Considerations, carries a person on in Religious duties and services, the more
holy that person is; when a man is carried on in the duties of Religion, from a
sense of Divine Love, Psa. 119.1, 2, 3. 1 John 1.1, 2, 3, 4. Isa. 38.16, 17,
19, 20. Psa. 63.1, 2, 3.
or from a sense of the special presence of Christ with his Spirit, or from a
sense of the excellency and sweetness of communion and fellowship with God, or
from a sense of the graciousnesse and goodness of God toward him, or from a
sense of singular influences and incomes from God, or from a sense of the
choice and precious discoveries of God, or from a sense of the beauty and glory
of God, etc. This argues a very great measure of holiness, that such a person
has attained to; The more the sweet looks of Christ, the secret visits of
Christ, the private whispers of Christ; the divine joggings of Christ, the
blessed Love Tokens of Christ, and the holy kisses, and glorious embraces of
Christ does incite and provoke a person to Religious duties; the greater
degrees of holiness that person has reached to; but now it is an Argument that
the streams of holiness runs but low, when external Motives and Considerations
have the greatest hand in carrying a person on in Religious duties. The more
bare custom, the eye of the creature, the favor of the creature, the example
of the creature, the applause of the creature, the rewards of the creature, or
the keeping up of a man's parts, or the keeping up of a man's name, esteem and
repute in the world, does influence a Christians heart to Religious duties, the
less holiness that Christian has. Yea it is considerable, that outward
Motives, and natural Principles have carried many Heathens to do many great and
glorious things in the world. Did not Sisera do as great things as Gideon? the
difference did only lie here, that the great things that Gideon did, he did
from more spiritual Principles, and raised Considerations, than any Sisera was
acted by; And did not Diogenes trample under his feet the great and glorious
things of this world as well as Moses? Heb. 11.
the difference did only lie in this, that Moses trampled under his feet the
gay and gallant things of this world, from inward, holy Principles, and from
high and glorious Considerations, and Motives, whereas Diogenes did only
trample upon them from poor, low Principles, and from carnal and external
Considerations.

I have read of one Cosmus Medices, a rich Citizen of ^lorence, that he
confessed to a near friend of his, that he built so many Magnificent
Structures, and spent so much on Scholars, and Libraries, not for any love to
Learning, but to raise up to himself the Trophies of fame and renown. And many
of the Romans have done very great and glorious things for their Country, but
all from natural Principles, and from carnal and external Motives and
Considerations; as for a great name, a puff of honor, a little applause, etc.
and therefore their most glorious actions have been but shining sins. God
always writes a nothing upon all those services, Jer. ^2.23.
wherein men's Principles and their Ends are naught and low. 'Twas a notable
saying of Luther, one work of a Christian (says he) is more precious then
Heaven and Earth, and if I might have my desire, I would rather choose the
meanest work of a Country Christian, or poor Maid, than all the Victories and
Triumphs of Alexander the Great, and of Julius Caesar, because whatsoever a
Saint does, though it be never so small and mean, yet it is great and glorious,
because he does all in Faith, and by the Word. And says the same Author
further, let our works be never so small, servile, womanish, yet let but this
title be added, the Word of the Lord; and then they will be all glorious, yea
such as shall remain to all eternity. O Sirs! all our works and services must
be wrought from God, for God, in God, and according to God, or else they will
be but splendida peccata, glistering sins; well the more spiritual and
internal, the principles, motives, and considerations are, that carries a
Christian on in religious duties, the greater measure of holiness has that
Christian arrived to. But,

Ninthly, The more solid, precise, exact, and accurate a Christian is in
religious duties and services, the greater measure of holiness that Christian
has attained to, and the more any Christian grows in holiness, the more
spiritual, the more savory, the more exact, and accurate he will grow in all
his religious services and performances: The more a Christians heart is
endeared to religious duties, and the more his heart is affected with the
heavenly nature of religious duties, and the more easily, the more holily, the
more freely, and the more spiritually, he performs religious duties, the more
he is thriven and grown in holiness. A young Carpenter gives more blows, and
makes more noise and chips, than an old experienced workman does, but the old
experienced workman does his work more solidly, more exactly, and more
accurately, than the young Carpenter does; So many young Christians that are
but newly entered into the trade of Christianity, and that are raised up, but to
a very small degree of sanctity, these may multiply duties upon duties, these
may abound in religious performances, these may be much in adding of service
to service; but yet the aged and experienced Christian in grace and holiness,
does duties more solidly, more spiritually, more exactly, and more accurately,
than the young Christian does: We must never judge of an eminency in
holiness, by the number or multitude of our duties, but by the seriousness,
the graciousnesse, the solidnesse, the spiritualnesse, the holiness, the
heavenlinesse, and the accuratenesse of our hearts in duties. A young Musician
may play longer, and more quick and nimble upon an Instrument, than an old
Musician can, but yet the old Musician plays with more art, accuratenesse,
skill, judgment, and understanding, than a young Musician does; so young
Christians in grace and holiness may hold out longer and be quicker and
nimbler in religious duties, than others that are more aged in grace and
holiness; but yet they that are aged in grace and holiness, do perform
religious duties with more spiritual art, and accuratenesse, and with more
divine skill, judgment, and understanding than they do in whom the spring of
holiness runs low. A young Scholar may run over more paper, and write more
paper, and make more letters, than his Master does, but yet his Master writes
more understandingly, exactly, and accurately, than he does.

So many young converts may run over more duties than others, and yet others
may perform duties more understandingly, and more exactly, and more accurately
than they do; let the duty be never so short, yet if there be much
spiritualnesse, holiness, brokennesse, seriousness, and accuratenesse in it,
it will carry all before it, 'twill win the blessing, and obtain the crown,
when the longest duties (wherein there is no such frame nor temper of spirit)
shall not prevail with God at all. Zach. 7.4, 5, 6. Isa. 58.1. -- 6. It argues
a very great measure of holiness, when the soul is habitually carried on in
religious duties, with much solidnesse, seriousness, spiritualnesse,
exactness, and accuratenesse. But,

Tenthly, The more any man makes it his great business and work, in all his
duties, ways, and walkings, to approve himself to God, and to be accepted of
God, Jer. 12.3. Psa. 17.3. The Hebrew word, (...) Chakreni, signifies, a very
strict careful, diligent search, and inquisition, etc.
the greater height of holiness that man has attained to; David was a man of
great holiness, and how studious and industrious he was to approve his heart
to the Lord, you may see in that 139. Psalm. 23, 24. Search me, O God! and
know my heart, try me and know my thoughts; and see if there be any wicked
way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. The Psalmist knew that God had
an eye upon him, both at home and abroad, both at bed and at board, both in
public, and in private, both in his family, and in his closet, he knew that
God had an eye in every corner of his house, and in every corner of his heart,
and therefore he appeals to God, and he approves his heart to God, and nobly
ventures upon the trial of God; Search me O God, and know my heart, etc. this
frequent repetition and doubling of words, Search me O God, and know my heart,
try me, and know my thoughts, etc. does not only note the earnestness, and
seriousness of David's spirit in prayer, but also the soundness, the
uprightness, the plainness and the unfeignednesse of David's heart, in that
he was very willing and ready to submit himself to the search, trial,
examination, and approbation of God. And so Peter that great Apostle of the
Gentiles, makes it his great business to approve himself to Christ thrice
together, Joh. 21.15, 16, 17.
Lord, thou know that I love thee, Lord thou know that I love thee, Lord
thou that know all things, thou know that I love thee, Christ best knew
the reality and sincerity of Peter's love, and therefore Peter appeals to him,
as to a judge, that would be sure to judge righteous judgment; Thou know
that I love thee. And so the Apostle Paul speaking in the Name of his fellow
Apostles, says, wherefore we labor, that whether present, 2 Cor. 5.9. (...).
or absent, we may be accepted of him: The Greek word that is here rendered
labor, is a very Emphatical word, it signifies to labor and endeavor with
all earnestness and might, to endeavor with a high and holy ambition, to be
approved of by God, and to be accepted of God, judgeing it to be the greatest
honor, and the most desirable happiness in all the world, to be graciously
owned, approved, and accepted of the Lord; as ambitious, industrious, and
laborious, as Haman was to be highly accepted with King Ahasuerus, yet he was
not more ambitious to be accepted with the King, than the Apostles were
ambitious to be accepted of the King of Kings. O Sirs! when in every Sermon you
hear, and in every prayer you make, and in every fast you keep, and in every
action you do, and in every way that you walk, and in every mercy that you
enjoy, and in every cross that you bear, etc. you make it your great business
and work, to approve your selves to the Lord, and that though the world should
discountenance you, and friends hate you, and near and dear Relations reject
you, that yet you may find blessed acceptance with God; this argues holiness to
be upon the Throne, when in all your dealings and tradings with God, you make
it your Heaven to approve your selves to God; and when in all your transactions
with men, you make it your happiness to approve your selves to God; it is an
Argument that the springs of holiness are risen high in your souls. But

Eleventhly, The more a man lives by the Rule of Expediency, as well as by the
Rule of Lawfulness, the greater measure of holiness that person has attained
to. Joh. 16.7. 2 Cor. 8.10.
Weak holiness has only an eye upon the Rule of Lawfulness, but raised
holiness has one eye upon the Rule of Lawfulness, and the other upon the
Rule of Expediency. Weak holiness says, O this is lawful, and that is lawful!
O but says raised holiness, is it expedient? is it expedient as well as
lawful! That Angelical Apostle Paul had still his eye upon the Law of
Expediency, 1 Cor. 6.12. All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not
expedient; all things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the
power of any. And so chapter 10.23. All things are lawful for me, but all things
are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not.
And so in that 2 Cor. 12.1. It Is not expedient for me doubtless to glory. Many
things may be lawful, that yet may be very inexpedient for our place, state,
calling, and condition in the world. 'Twas lawful for the Apostle to eat meat,
Romans 14.
but 'twas not expedient for him to eat meat; when his eating of meat would
make his weak Brother to offend, or grieve, or stumble, or fall; And therefore
he resolves, that rather than he will eat meat to offend, 1 Cor. 8.13.
he will never eat meat whilst the world stands. The more unchangeably
resolved any person is to eye the Rule of Expediency, and to live by the Rule
of Expediency, the greater measure of holiness that person has certainly
attained to, the streams of holiness runs low in that Christians heart that
has two eyes to behold the Rule of Lawfulness, but never an eye to see the
Rule of Expediency, it argues a very great height of holiness for a man to
make as much conscience of living by the Rule of Expediency, as he does of
living by the Rule of Lawfulness. For a man to be often a looking over his
Natural actions, his Moral actions, and his Religious actions, and to be still
a putting this question to himself; O my soul! do thou eye what is expedient?
do thou eye as well what is expedient, as what is lawful? such a frame and
temper of spirit speaks out much of Christ and Holiness within. O the sins! O
the sorrows! O the shame! O the reproach! O the troubles! O the travels! O the
trials, etc. that might have been prevented, had the Law, had the Rule of
Expediency been more minded and followed by Christians in these days, etc! But

Twelfthly and lastly, The more a man can deny himself, when he has an
opportunity, power and authority to raise himself, to greaten himself, to seek
himself, and to lift up himself, the greater measure of Holiness that man has
attained to. Providence often puts many a rare and fair opportunity into Moses
his hand, Exodus 32.9. -- 15. Deuteronomy. 9.13, 14, 18, 19, 20. Heb. 12.24, 25. Nehem.
5.14. -- ult.
whereby he might have raised himself, and have greatned himself in the world,
and yet then, even then he denies himself. And Nehemiah was a man of the same
mind and metal; he stood upon the advantage ground, to have greatned himself,
and to have lifted up himself, as others had done before him; but instead of
this he lessens himself, he denies himself, he degrades himself, and being
of a very noble, generous public spirit. he turns his back upon his own
worldly interest, and keeps a very free and bountiful Table, upon the account
of his own particular Revenue, and not upon the account of a public purse. And
so Daniel was one in Spirit with the former; when God had brought him into high
favor with the Prince of the Eunuchs, Dan. 1.8, 9, 10, 11.
and given him a great deal of heart-room there, yet upon no terms would he
defile himself with the Kings meat, or comply with the requests of the Prince
of the Eunuchs, it argues a great deal of holiness; for a man to deny his
temporal self, Rev. 4.10, 11.
to dethrone his temporal self, when he stands upon the advantage ground to
advance his temporal self, and to throne his temporal self in the world.

I have read of Trojane the Emperor, how he sent Eustochius, one of his
chiefest Captains against the Barbarians, who having vanquished them, returned
home: The Emperor being very joyful at this good news, goes to meet him, and
brings him gloriously into the City: Now Eustochius being high in the Emperors
favor, 'twas but ask and have, speak and speed, but on this very day of Pomp,
Triumph, and Glory; he chose rather to suffer the Martyrdom of himself, his
wife and children, than with the Emperor to offer sacrifice to Apollo; and so
denies himself, and all his present Pomp and Glory, when he might greatly have
enriched himself, and advanced himself. Nothing speaks out greater measures of
holiness, than for a man to deny himself when he may seek himself, and exalt
himself if he pleases.

I have read of a godly man, who being sorely tempted by Satan, was much in
duty; to whom Satan said, why take thou this pains? thou do watch, and
fast, and pray, and abstainest from the sins of the times. But, O man! what
do thou more than I do? art thou no Drunkard? no more am I; art thou no
Adulterer? no more am I; do thou watch? why let me tell thee, I never slept;
do thou fast? why I never ate nor drank; what do thou more than I do? why I
will tell thee Satan, said the holy man, I pray, I serve the Lord, nay more
than all this, I deny my self: nay, then says Satan, thou go beyond me,
for I am proud, and I exalt my self, and so vanished. O the excellency of
self-denial! and O the holiness and the happiness of that man that can deny
himself, that can debase himself, that can even trample upon himself, when he
has power and authority in his own hand to greaten himself, and to exalt
himself. Power and authority will try what metal men are made of. Ah how many
have there been among us of late years, who when they have had no power nor
authority in their hands to help themselves, have seemed to be great deniers of
themselves; but no sooner had they power and authority in their hands, but ah
what self-love, what self-interest, what self-seeking, and what self-exalting
was to be found amongst them! O how have many among them, instead of loving God
to the contempt of themselves, loved themselves to the contempt of God? and who
instead of debasing themselves that they might exalt God, have debased God,
that they might exalt themselves, and who instead of losing themselves that
they might find God, have lost God, that they might find themselves.

These put me in mind of the Abbot in Melancthon, who lived strictly, and
looked demurely, and walked humbly, so long as he was but a Monk, but when by
his seeming sanctity and humility, he had got to be Abbot, he grew most
intolerable proud, and insolent, etc. and being asked the reason of it, he
confessed that his former lowly looks was but to see if he could find the
keys of the Abbey; how many such Abbots we have had amongst us, you all know.
Ah how rare is it to find a man to deny himself, when he is advantaged to
seek himself, such a man is worth gold, but this Ironage affords few such
golden-men. Where this frame of spirit is, there the streams of holiness runs
deep. And thus much for this Use of Trial and Examination.

And so I come now to the last Use of this Doctrine, and that is for Comfort
and Consolation to all those that have this real holiness, without which there
is no happiness. O Sirs! open, wide the everlasting doors of your souls, that
not a River, but a Sea of joy and comfort may flow in upon you. For

First, Know for your comfort, That real holiness is the seal of your eternal
Election. Some are elected to glorious offices in this world, others are
elected to eternal glory in the other world. Joh. 6.70.
Judas was chosen to be an Apostle on Earth, but not to be a Saint in Heaven;
but the Thessalonians were elected to eternal glory in Heaven, 1 These. 1.4.
though they were not chosen to any glorious offices here on Earth. It may be
thou art a poor creature, that never wast, nor never art like to be elected to
any noble or honorable employments, either in Church or State; O but if thou
art a holy person, then know for thy everlasting comfort, that thy real
holiness is a real seal of thine Eternal, Election; it is the counterpane, as it
were, of all that gracious love, good will, and eternal favor that God bears
unto thee, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy. God did not choose us either because we were
holy, or because he did foresee that in time we would be holy, but he chose
us to that very end that we should be holy. Look as Esther Esther 1.
was first chosen out among the Virgins and then purified and decked with Rich
and Royal Ornaments and Garments, before she was brought into the presence of
the King: So God first chooses poor sinners, and then he purifies them, Psalm.
45.13.
and adorns them with the rich and glorious Garments of Grace and Holiness,
that so they may be meet and fit to enter into his Royal Presence, 1 These. 1.4.
Knowing, Brethren, Beloved, your Election of God. Verse. 5. For our Gospel came
not unto you in word only; but also in Power, and in the Holy Ghost. Verse. 9.
And how ye turned, to God, from Idols to serve the Living and True God. When
the Gospel comes in Power, and in the Holy Ghost, and turns persons from Idols,
to serve the Living God; it is a clear and evident sign of their Election, real
Sanctification, is a sure evidence, a fair copy of a man's Election. Look as the
Pattern is known by the Picture and the Cause by the Effect; so Election is
known by real Sanctification.

A Christian need never put himself to the charge of making a Ladder to climb
up to Heaven, to search the Records of Glory, to see whether his Name is
written in the Book of Life, in the Book of Election or no, but rather make a
strict and diligent enquiry whether he be really and thoroughly sanctified, or
no; for where there is real sanctification, there the glorious Image of Gods
Election is in Golden Characters stamped upon the soul. A man may have his Name
set down in the Chronicles, yet lost; wrought in durable Marble, yet perish,
set upon a Monument equal to a Colossus, yet be ignominius, inscribed on the
Hospital gates, yet go to Hell, written in the front of his own house, yet
another come to possess it. All these are but writings in the dust, or upon the
waters, where the Characters perish so soon as they are made, they no more
prove a man happy, than the fool could prove Pontius Pilate happy, because his
Name was written in the Creed, but in real Sanctification a man may see his
Name so written in the Book of Gods Election, as that it shall remain legible
to all Eternity. But

Secondly, If thou are a holy person, if thou have that real holiness, without
which there is no happiness, then know for thy comfort, that the Lord takes
singular pleasure, delight and complacency, both in thy holiness, and in thy
person, Psa. 149.4, 5. For the Lord takes pleasure in his people; he will
beautify the meek with salvation. Let the Saints be joyful in glory; let them
sing aloud upon their beds. The Hebrew word Rotseh, that is here rendered
pleasure, is from Ratsah, that signifies pleasure, delight, complacency,
content, etc. O, God takes singular pleasure, singular delight, singular
complacency, and singular content in all his Saints, in all his sanctified
ones. Holiness is the express Image of God, and therefore he cannot but take
pleasure in it, and in all those that bear it, Zeph. 3.13. The Remnant of
Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies: neither shall a deceitful tongue
be found in their mouth. Well, here are glorious Characters of their holiness,
but what pleasure, what delight, etc. does God take in these holy ones? why
certainly very much, as you may see in ver. 17. The Lord thy God in the midst
of thee is mighty: he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will
rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing. Look as a Bridegroom
rejoices over his Bride; Isa. 62.4, 5.
so will the Lord rejoice over his holy ones; and look what delight,
complacency and content the Bridegroom takes in his Bride, the same, yea
greater God takes in all his sanctified ones. Yea look as a fond Father joys
over his dear child that he carries in his arms, or dandles upon his knee,
with singing: so God will joy over all his holy ones (which are his fondlings)
with singing; such is the singular delight, satisfaction and content that he
takes in them. Look as the Husbandman delights much in that ground that was
once barren, but is now fruitful; and as the Captain takes a great deal of
pleasure in that soldier that once run from his colors, but is now returned,
and fights valiantly and resolutely against all opposers and adversaries; and
as the Father takes a great deal of joy, content, and satisfaction in the
return, reformation, and amendment of his Prodigal Son; Luke 15.
even so a holy God is wonderfully delighted, pleased, enamoured, and even
overjoyed, Heb. 6.7, ^.
when such as brought forth nothing but the thorns and briers of wickedness,
Heb. 2.10.
do now bring forth the pleasant fruits of righteousness and holiness; and
when such as have run from Christ the Captain of their salvation, and run from
their profession, and run from their principles, and run (almost) from every
thing that is good, shall now return to the Captain of their Salvation, and
fight it out most valiantly, and resolutely against the world, the flesh, and
the devil; and when such as have proved Prodigals, and spent all that portion,
all that stock, and all that treasure that they have been entrusted with, shall
now break off their sins, and humble themselves, and reform their lives, and
mend their ways: God is so infinitely pleased and delighted in these, that he
Records their Names in Heaven, Luke 10.20. Rejoice not in this, that the
spirits are subject unto you, but rather rejoice because your names are written
in Heaven; it is matter of the greatest joy in the world, for a man to have his
name inrol'd in Heaven; look as it is the sinners hell, that his name is
engrossed in the book of perdition, so it is the believers heaven that his name
is engrossed in the book of election.

I have read of a Senator, Tacitus.
who relating to his Son the great honors that were assigned to some
Soldiers, whose names were written in a certain book, whereupon the Son was
very importunate to see that book, his Father shows him the outside, and it
seemed so glorious, that he earnestly desired him to open it; no says the
Father by no means, for it is sealed by the counsel; then says the Son, pray
tell me if my name be written there, his Father replies no, because all the
names of those Soldiers, were kept secret in the breasts of the Senators: The
Son studying how he might get some satisfaction, desired his Father to
acquaint him with the merits of those Soldiers, whose names were written in
that book, the Father relates to him their noble achievements, and worthy acts
of valor, wherewith they had eternized their names, such are written said he,
and none but such must be written in this book; whereupon the Son consulting
with his own heart, that he had no such. Trophies to show, but had spent his
time in courting of Ladies, rather than in encountering of Knights, and that he
was better for a dance than for a march, and that he knew no Drum but the
Tabret, nor no courage, but to be Drunk and Rant; hereupon he presently
retired himself, repented, entered into a combat with his own lusts, and
affections, and subdued them, and became temperate, continent, valiant and
virtuous: Now when the Soldiers came to receive their Wreaths, their Crowns,
their Honors, etc. He steps in and challenges a Wreath, a Crown for himself,
but being asked upon what title his challenge was grounded, he answered, if
honors be given to Conquerours, then they must be given to me too, for I
have gotten the noblest conquest of all, and it being demanded, wherein he
answered, these have subdued strange Foes, and conquered their outward enemies,
but I have subdued my self, I have conquered the enemies that were in my own
bosom. O Sirs! there are no men's names written in the book of life but theirs
who by grace and holiness have subdued and brought under their sinful selves,
and who have conquered the corruptions that be in their own bosoms, that is in
respect of love, and dominion; many there be who are exceeding inquisitive to
know whether their names are written in Heaven or no; I would say to such,
there is no such way to know this, Phil. 4.3. Heb. 11.38. Seneca, though a
Heathen, saw so much excellency, that morality put upon a man, that he cries
out (Ipse aspectus boni viri delectat) the very looks of a good man delights
one. Sapiens dei comes est, says Philo.
as by your holiness; have thou broke off thy sins by sound repentance, has
the Gospel changed thy inside and thy outside, has it made thee a new
creature, and turned thee from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
to Jesus Christ? etc. then without all peradventure thy name is written in
Heaven, and thou art the person that have the greatest cause in the world to
joy and rejoice.

Again the Holy Christian is the best Christian in the world, nay he is such a
one of whom this world is not worthy, and therefore God cannot but take
singular pleasure and delight in him; many there are which are accounted deep
Scholars, great Linguists, profound Philosophers, good Grammarians, excellent
Mathematicians, sharp Logitians, cunning Politicians, fine Rhetoritians, sweet
Musicians, etc. but the truth is, he is the best Grammarian, that has learned
to speak the truth from his heart, and he is the best Astronomer, that has
his conversation in Heaven, and he is the best Musician, that has learned
practically, to sing out the praises of God, and he is the best Arithmetitian,
that knows how to number his days, and he is the best read in Ethics, that
every day grows holier and holier, and he is the best skild in Oeconomicks,
that trains up his Family in the fear of the Lord, and he is the best
Politician, that is as good at taking good counsel, as he is at giving good
counsel, and he is the best Linguist, that speaks the language of Canaan, and
therefore God cannot but take the greatest content and satisfaction in such.

Again the Holy Christian, is the only man for whom God has wrought the
greatest miracles, he can tell you that he was blind, but now God has given
him eyes to see sin to be the greatest evil, and Christ to be the choicest
Good, he can tell you that once he was so deaf, that though God called very
often and very loud upon him, by his word, and by his works, by his rods at
home, and by his judgments abroad, and by his spirit and conscience that were
still a preaching in his bosom, sometimes Life, sometimes Death, sometimes
Heaven, and sometimes Hell, yet he could not hear; but now God has given him
an hearing ear, so that now he can with delight hear the sweet Music of the
promises, on the one hand; and with a holy trembling lissen to the voice of
divine threatenings on the other hand; Psalm. 45.1. Jude 3. The very Heathen
could say quando sapiens loquitur aulea animi aperit. When a wiseman speaks,
he opens the rich treasure and wardrob of his mind.
he can tell you that once he was so dumb, that if he might have had the
whole world, he could not have spoke a good word for God, nor for his ways,
nor for his people, nor for his ordinances, nor for any of his concernments in
the world; O but now! his tongue is as the pen of a ready writer, and he is
never better, than when he is a speaking either of God, or for God, and his
concernments, now he can contend for the faith, and speak for Saints, and
plead for Ordinances, and though in some cases he may want power to act for
God, yet he never wants a tongue to speak for God. The Spouses lips drop honey
combs, in that 4 Cant. 11. And the tongue of the just is as choice silver; in
that 10. Prove. 20. yea, his tongue is a tree of life, whose leaves are
medicinable, in that 12. Prove. 18. He can tell you that once he was so lame,
that he was not able to move one foot Heaven-wards, or Christ-wards, or
Holiness-wards, etc. but now his feet delights, not only to go, but to run in
all the ways of Gods commands; Psalm. 119.32. Yea, he can tell you that once
he was dead, as to all his soul concernments, but now he is alive, and the
life that he leads in the flesh, is by the faith of the Son of God, that has
loved him and given himself for him. Gal. 2.20. It was by a miracle that the
River Jordan was driven back, and it is no less a miracle to see a sinner that
was accustomed to do evil, habituated now to do good. That the tide of sin,
which before did run so strong, should be so easily turned, that the sinner
which a little before was sailing Hell-ward, and wanted neither wind nor tide
to carry him thither, should now on a sudden alter his course, and tack about
for Heaven; what a miracle is this? To see the earthly man become heavenly; a
carnal man become spiritual, a loose man become precise, a proud man become
humble, a covetous man become liberal, and a froward man become meek, etc. is
to behold no less than miracles. To see a sinner move cross and contrary to
himself in the ways of Christ and holiness, should be as wonderful in our
eyes, as to see the Sun go backward, or the Earth to fly upward, or the Dead to
raise themselves, or the Bowl to run contrary to its own bias: Now how can God
but take infinite delight and pleasure in his holy ones, considering the many
miracles, that he has wrought both in them, and for them?

Psa. 4.6, 7.
Again there are no persons under Heaven, that take any real pleasure, delight,
content, and satisfaction in God, but those that are holy; the worldling takes
pleasure and delight in his baggs, and the ambitious man in his honors, and
the voluptuous man in his pleasures, and the malicious man in his revenge, and
the envious man in the harms that befalls others, and the drunkard in his cups,
and the adulterer in his harlots, and the gamster in his shifts and tricks, and
the player in his fopperies, fooleries, and mockeries; it is only the holy man
that takes pleasure and delight in God, Job. 22.25, 26. Cant. 2.3. cap. 7.6.
Psalm 33.21. Psalm. 48.11. Isa. 41.16. Joel. 2.23. Hab. 3.18. Zech. 10.7.
as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the margent together; to delight
and take pleasure in God, is a work too high, too hard, too spiritual, and too
noble for any but holy persons; there are none headed, nor hearted, nor
spirited, nor anointed, nor principled, for taking Pleasure in God, but holy
ones. Abraham did not take more pleasure in his Isaac, nor Jacob did not take
more delight in his Joseph, nor David did not take more satisfaction in his
Absalom, nor Jonah did not take more content in his Gourd, than a holy man
(when he is himself) takes pleasure, delight, satisfaction, and content in
God; and therefore how can God but take pleasure and delight in him: Shall the
Child take delight in the Father, and shall not the Father delight again in
the Child? and shall the Wife take pleasure and satisfaction in the Husband,
and shall not the Husband take pleasure and satisfaction again in her? Look as
God hates them that hate him, so he takes pleasure in them that take pleasure
in him; now what a singular cordial and comfort is this to all Gods holy ones,
that God takes singular pleasure, delight, satisfaction, and content in them?
what though the world hate you, and scorn you, and despise you, and prefer
every Barabas and Judas before you, yet cheer up your spirits with this
cordial, and warm your hearts at this fire, that God takes singular pleasure
and delight in you; what cares the Child though others flight him, so long as
his Father at home delights in him; and what cares the Wife though others
despise her, as long as her Husband at home honors her, and takes pleasure in
her; and what cares the Innocent person though the Malefactor at the Bar rails
upon him, as long as the Judge upon the Bench acquits him; and what should a
Christian care though all the world should abhor him, as long as the Lord takes
singular pleasure and delight in him. But

Thirdly, If thou art a holy person, if thou have that real holiness, without
which there is no happiness, then know for thy comfort, that thy real holiness
is a substantial evidence of thy real union with Christ; all true holiness is
the immediate fruit of our real union with Christ; Joh. 17.20, 21. chapter 15.5.
Ephesians. 4.16. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 5.25. to the end.
upon our union with Christ, Christ is made, not only Wisdom, Righteousness
and Redemption, but he is also made Sanctification to us, 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ
and a holy person are one, as Father and Son are one, and they are one, as the
Vine and the Branches are one, and they are one as Head and Members are one;
and they are one, as the Foundation and the Building are one; and they are one
as Husband and Wife are one, and that which speaks out their oneness, their
union, is their holiness. He that is in Christ is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17.
He that is ingrafted into Christ, he that is initiated into Christ, he that
is united unto Christ, he is a new creature, he has a new head, a new heart,
a new lip, a new life, a new spirit, new principles, and new ends; he can
truly say with that convert, Ego non sum ego, I am not the man that I was; of a
Lion, holiness has made me a Lamb; of a Wolf, holiness has made me a Sheep;
of a Raven, holiness has made me a Dove, etc. And what does all this speak
out but a man's being in Christ, but a man's union with Christ; renovation speaks
out union, and union speaks out renovation; renewing by Christ speaks out the
souls in-being in Christ, and the souls in-being in Christ, speaks out the
souls renewing by Christ. Look as there could be no depravation but from our
union with the first Adam, so there can be no renovation but through our union
with the second Adam. Col. 3.10. But

Fourthly, If thou art a holy person, if thou have that real holiness, without
which there is no happiness, then know sort by comfort, Psa. 34.12, 13, 14.
that God will certainly bless all thy blessings to thee, and he will bless
every estate and condition to thee most men have many blessings, but it is only
the holy man that has his blessings blessed unto him, Genesis 22.17. In blessing I
will bless thee, says God to holy Abraham, i. e. I will bless thy blessings to
thee. The holy person is in Covenant with a holy God, and therefore all the
blessings of the Covenant are his, Psa. 50.5. Psa. 105.42. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26.
Zach. 3.3, 4. Psalm. 84.11. Pro. 12.21, etc.
all they that partake of the Holiness of the Covenant, they shall certainly
partake of the blessings of the Covenant; Now this is one of the blessings of
the Covenant, that all our blessings shall be blessed unto us. O Christian! all
thy right hand blessings shall be blessed unto thee, and all thy left hand
blessings shall be blessed unto thee, all the blessings of the upper springs
shall be blessed unto thee, A little blessed is better than a world enjoyed. If
thou art a holy man, the God of all mercies, and all the mercies of God, the
God of all comforts, and all the comforts of God are thine, and what would
thou have more?
and all the blessings of the lower springs shall be blessed unto thee; and all
the blessings of the Throne shall be blessed unto thee, and all the blessings of
the footstool shall be blessed unto thee. And as all thy blessings shall be
blessed unto thee, so every estate, and every condition shall be blessed unto thee;
thou shall be blessed in health, and blessed in sickness; blessed in strength, and
blessed in weakness; blessed in wealth, and blessed in want; blessed in honor, and
blessed in dishonor; blessed in life, and blessed in death; thou shall be blessed at
home, and blessed abroad; blessed at board, and blessed at bed; blessed lying down, and
blessed rising up; blessed in liberty, and blessed in bonds. Look as all the
blessings of a wicked man are cursed unto him; and as all the relations of a
wicked man are cursed unto him, Prove. 3.33. Mal. 2.1, 2, 3. Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
and as all estates and conditions that are incident to a wicked man are cursed
unto him; so all the blessings of a holy man are blessed unto him, and all the
relations of a holy man are blessed unto him, and all estates and conditions that
are incident to a holy man are blessed unto him. Isaac tills the ground, Genesis
26.12. chapter 4.12.
and sows his seed, and God blesses him with an hundredfold; And Cain tills
the ground, and sows his seed, but the earth is cursed to him, and commanded
not to yield to him her strength. But

Fifthly, If thou art a holy person, if thou art one that have that real
holiness, without which there is no happiness, then know for thy comfort, that
thy holiness is a glorious witness and evidence of thy Effectual Vocation, 1
Pet. 1.15. As he who has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation. Many are externally called, that are not internally called, and
many are ineffectually called, that are not effectually called. But now real
holiness that speaks out an internal call, an Effectual Call, 1 Pet. 2.9.
a call out of darkness into marvelous light; it speaks out such a call as
makes sinners Saints, slaves Sons, enemies Friends, and strangers Favorites.
Genesis 41.
As Joseph a stranger was called out of a prison, a dungeon, and made a very
great Favorite in Pharaohs Court: so real holiness is a glorious witness and
evidence that you are effectually called out of the prison of sin, and the
dungeon of wrath, and made a Favorite to the King of Glory. 2 Timothy 1.9. 1 Pet.
5.10. Gal. 4.6.
The Author of this Call is a holy God; our holy Calling depends upon the
purpose of God, the power of God, and the grace and good pleasure of God; the
means of our holy Calling are the Spirit of God, and the Word of God; and the
ends of our Calling are Holiness, and the Glory of God. O Sirs! you are not
called upon the account of your Parents Faith or Nobility, nor upon the account
of any intrinsecal virtues in you, nor upon the account of any extrinsecal
services done by you, but upon the account of Gods peculiar Election, and
particular Vocation; and therefore by Holiness make good the honor of your
High-Calling. And if any should object against you the meanness of your birth,
and outward calling, put them in mind of your High and holy Calling, and ask
them what they think of Lazarus, that is now asleep in Abraham's bosom; And if
others should object against you your former wickedness, and cast your sins as
dirt and dung in your faces; let them know, that St. Paul can tell them from
Heaven, that though once he was a wretched blasphemer, and a bloody
persecuter, that yet now he is a glorious Saint in Heaven. But

Sixthly, If thou art a holy person, if thou art one that have this real
holiness, without which there is no happiness, then know for thy comfort, that
thy holiness is a blessed evidence of thy Adoption and Sonship. John 1.12. Romans
8.17.
If thou art a holy person, then of a child of wrath, thou art become a child
of God, a child of love, and of an heir of Hell, thou art become an heir of
Heaven; and of a slave, thou art become a Son, Gal. 4.4, 5, 7. But when the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under
the Law, To redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the
Adoption of Sons, wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a Son, Romans 8.14.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. The leadings
of the Spirit are all holy leadings, and there are none that are the Sons of
God, but such as are under the holy leadings of the Spirit of God, Phil. 2.15.
That ye may be blameless, and harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke, in
the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as lights in
the world. There are none worthy of this title of Honor, viz. the Sons of God,
but such who in the main of their lives and conversations are blameless, and
harmless, without rebuke, and that are as shining lights in the world.

There are two ways whereby we may know fire to be real fire, and that
differences real fire from painted fire, or from imaginary fire; the first is
by the heat of it, and the other is by the flame of it: Now though sometimes it
so falls out, that the fire do not flame, yet at that very time you may know it
to be real fire by the heat it gives: So there are two ways of knowing our
Adoption; Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.16.
the first is by the Spirit of Adoption, crying Abba Father in our hearts; And
the other is by our Sanctification and Holiness; now, though sometimes it may
so fall out, that the flame, the witness of the Spirit of Adoption may be
wanting, yet the heat of Sanctification and Holiness remains, and we may have
recourse to this fire, and warm our hearts at it, and sit down satisfied, and
assured of our Adoption; for as fire may be known to be fire by its hear,
though it want a flame; so though the Spirit of Adoption do not witness our
Adoption to us, yet we may know our Adoption by our real Sanctification and
Holiness. Every holy person is a highborn person, John 3.5.8. chapter 1.12, 13.
for as his Divine Birth, so his Divine Adoption is high, very high, exceeding
high, yea even as high as Heaven it self. It Is a very high honor to be the Son
of a King, 1 Samuel 18.23, 24.
yea to be the Son-in-Law of a King, for so David reckoned it. Seems it
(says he to Saul's servant) a light thing to you, to be a Kings Son-in-Law,
seeing that I am vile and lightly esteemed. Oh then what an honor it is to be
the Son of God, Rev. 1.6.
to be the Son of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lord! It Is a very high honor
to be Gods servant, and so David accounted it, as you may see in that 2 Samuel
7.5, 8. (And so did Theodosius the Emperor, and Constantine the Great, and
many others account it) O then what an honor must it be to be Gods Son! The
blessed Apostle cannot speak of this high privilege; but with great
admiration; as you may see in that 1 Job. 3.1. Behold what manner of love the
Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God. It Is
an infinite condescension in God, to honor us with the title of Sons, and
therefore we should never think of it, nor never speak of it, but with much
Admiration. O Sirs! what matter of Admiration is this, that the great and
glorious God, who has many millions of glorious Angels waiting on him, that
he should look upon all holy persons as his Sons, and that he should love them
as Sons, and delight in them as Sons, and cloathe them as Sons, and feed them
as Sons, and protect them as Sons, and stand by them as Sons, and lay up for
them as Sons, and lay out himself for them as Sons, that they that have not
deserved a smile from God, a good word from God, a bit of bread from God, or a
good look from God, should be made the Sons of God? What manner of love is
this, that they that have so highly provoked God, that they that have walked so
cross and contrary to God, that they that were so exceeding unlike to God, that
they that have preferred every lust, and every toy and vanity before God, that
they that have fought many years under Satan's Banner against God, that they
that have refused all the offers of mercy that has been made by God, that they
that have deserved to be reprobated by God, to be damned by God, and to be
thrown to Hell by God, that these should be made the Sons of God? O stand and
wonder! O stand and admire at the freeness of Grace, and at the riches of
Grace! But

Seventhly, If thou art a holy person, if thou art one that have that real
holiness, without which there is no happiness, then know for thy comfort, that
thou art an undoubted heir of everlasting Glory, Romans 8.16, 17, 18. James 2.5.
2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
Romans 8.29, 30. For whom he did foreknow he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the Image of his Son (that is in holiness) that he might be the
first born among many Brethren. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he
also called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. Holiness is a most sure earnest, and pawn
of glory, 2 These. 2.13. God has chosen you to Salvation through Sanctification
of the Spirit, Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
1 John 3.2, 3. When he shall appear, we shall be like him (that is, in glory)
for we shall see him as he is. And every man that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. He that has a real hope, a lively
hope, of being like to Christ in Glory, and of reigning with Christ in Heaven,
will set roundly upon the work of self-purifying; there is no hope to that hope
that runs out into holiness, and that leads the soul on to the highest degrees
of purification, and that inables a man to set up Christ's purity as the most
perfect Pattern, and exact Copy for his Imitation, Titus 3.4, 5, 6, 7. But
after that the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by
works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which
he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior; That being
justified by his Grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal Life. Holiness is an infallible forerunner of glory; it is the
first fruits of that eternal happiness and blessedness that God has laid up
for his children in the highest Heavens. And O what cause of joy and gladness
should this be to every holy heart! what though thou should never have a
good day more on Earth; what though all the springs of comfort should be dried
upon thy right hand and on thy left hand; what though God should never smile on
thee more in this world; what though the remaining part of thy life should be
filled up with crosses, losses, troubles and trials; what though God should let
Satan loose to tempt thee, and wicked men grow strong to oppress thee, and
friends turn enemies to grieve thee. Yea what if thou should go to thy grave
with tears in thy eyes, and with sorrow in thy heart; yet as long as thou art
sure that thou art an heir of Glory, and that all the happiness of Heaven is
thine, and that thy Crown is safe, Psalm. 16. ult.
and that thou shall be for ever filled and satisfied with those everlasting
pleasures and delights that be at Gods right hand; thou have cause to joy and
rejoice in the midst of all thy sorrows and sufferings, Heb. 12.28. 1 Pet. 1.3,
4. See my String of Pearls on that very Text.
yea to glory and triumph in the hopes and expectations of a Kingdom that
shakes not, of a Crown that withers not, of Riches that corrupt not, and of an
Inheritance that fades not away. O Sirs! it is not all the Silks of Persia, nor
all the Spices of Egypt, nor all the Gold of Ophir, nor all the Treasures of
both Indies, nor all the Crowns and Scepters in the world, no nor yet the worth
of ten thousand worlds, that are to be compared with that Glory that is
treasured up for all Gods holy ones; they have an Inheritance reserved in
Heaven for them that cannot be moth-eaten, nor spoiled by hostile invasion, nor
wrung from them by power, nor won from them by Law, nor mortgaged for debt, nor
impaired by public calamity, nor plundered by Thieves and Robbers, nor changed
by Kings or Parliaments, no nor violated by death it self; and therefore what
infinite cause of joy and rejoicing have all such that are interested in such
an Inheritance, and in such a perfect happiness, and complete blessedness, that
is reserved in Heaven for all Gods holy ones? O what a singular comfort must
this be to a Christian in the midst of all his miseries and distresses, Psalm.
73.24.
when he is able to look upon God, and say, This God is my God for ever and
ever, and he shall be my Guide to Glory, and when he is able to look up to
Heaven, and say, This is my Inheritance; yea when he is able to look upon all
the Glory and Happiness of another world, and to say, All this Glory and
Happiness is mine, for I have that Holiness that is the earnest of it, Qui
spirituali exultationis oleo uncti sunt, etc. Macar. Hom. 17.
the pawn of it, and the first fruits of it in my own soul. 'Twas an observable
saying of Macarius, They that are anointed with the spiritual Oil of gladness,
(says he) have received a sign of that incorruptible Kingdom, to wit, Gods
Spirit for an earnest, they are the Secretaries of the Heavenly King, and
relying confidently upon the Almighty, they enter into his Palace (where the
Angels, and the Spirits of holy men are) although they be yet in this world;
for although they be not yet come to the entire Inheritance, which is prepared
for them in that world, yet they are most sure of it by that pledge, which they
have newly received, as sure as if they were already crowned, and had the key
of the Kingdom in their own possession.

'Twas a very sweet and comfortable speech which the Emperor used to Galba, in
his childehood and minority, when he took him by the chin, and said, Tu Galba,
etc. Thou Galba shall one day sit upon a Throne; so it is very sweet and
comfortable for the Saints to consider, that how mean and contemptible soever
they may be in the eyes of the world, that yet there is a day a coming when
they shall sit upon a Throne and be crowned with Glory, and reign with Christ
to all Eternity. But

Eighthly, If thou art a holy person, if thou have that real holiness, without
which there is no happiness, then know for thy comfort, that all things shall
be sanctified unto thee, Tit. 1.15. Unto the pure, all things are pure, but
unto them that are defiled, and unbeleeving, is nothing pure; but even their
mind and conscience is defiled. When a man's heart is once sanctified, then all
things are sanctified to him; when a man's Spirit and way is clean and pure,
then all things are clean and pure to him. O Sirs! this is so great, and so
glorious a privilege, to have all things sanctified to us, that it is more
worth than a world, yea than many worlds. Next to a man's interest in Christ,
he cannot beg a greater mercy than this, that all things may be sanctified
to him; that is, that all things may so work, as to make him more and more
holy, that every cross may make him more holy, and that every comfort may make
him more holy; that every mercy may make him more holy, and that every misery
may make him more holy, that every Ordinance may make him more holy, and that
every Providence may make him more holy, that every Affliction at home may make
him more holy, and that every Judgment abroad may make him more holy; every
condition is sweet when it is sanctified to us; sickness is as sweet as health,
when it is sanctified to us; and weakness is as sweet as strength, when it is
sanctified to us, and poverty is as sweet as liberty, when it is sanctified to
us, and disgrace is as sweet as honor, when it is sanctified to us; and bonds
are as sweet as liberty, when they are sanctified to us; and death is as sweet
as life when it is sanctified to us. Look as no condition can be a happy
condition, that is, not a sanctified condition, so no condition, can be a
miserable condition, that is a sanctified condition; now this is only the holy
man; privilege, the holy man's mercy, to have every estate, and every condition
sanctified unto him; and this indeed is the Cream and Crown of all our mercies,
to have them sanctified unto us, I and every bitter will be sweet, yea, very
sweet, when it is sanctified unto us; what though thy mercies, O Christian! are
fewer than others, and lesser than others, and leaner than others, and shorter
than others, yet thou have no reason to complain, as long as thy mercies are
sanctified mercies; and what though thy trials are greater than others, and thy
burden is heavier than others, and thy sorrows are deeper than others, and thy
crosses comes thicker than others, yet thou have no cause to complain, as long
as they are sanctified. Art thou a Holy person, O then remember for thy
comfort, that every bit of bread thou eatest is sanctified, and every draught
of beer thou drinkeh is sanctified, and every suit of clothes thou wearest is
sanctified, the beds thou lie on are sanctified, and the stools thou sitest
on are sanctified, the very air thou breathest in is sanctified, and the very
ground thou treadest on is sanctified, every penny in thy purse is sanctified,
and every pound in thy shop is sanctified, whatsoever thou have at home is
sanctified, and whatever thou have abroad is sanctified: And O! how should the
sense of these things, sweeten all thy bitters, and turn thy Hell into Heaven
and wipe all tears from thy eyes, and turn thy sighing into singing, and thy
mourning into rejoicing? etc. But

As those Heathens that have no hope. 1 These. 4.13.
Ninthly, If thou art a Holy Person, if thou have that real holiness, without
which there is no happiness; then know for thy comfort, that thou art a person
very high in favor with God, thou art one of his peculiar ones. Dan. 14.1. Ye
are the Children of the Lord your God, ye shall not cut your selves, nor make
any baldness between your eyes for the dead. For thou art an holy people unto
the Lord thy God, and (...) the Lord has chosen thee to be a peculiar people
to himself, above all the Nations that are upon the Earth. All Gods holy ones,
are his peculiar ones; God has a peculiar respect for their persons. Dan.
9.23. O Daniel! thou art greatly beloved, or as the Hebrew word Chamudoth,
signifies thou art a man of desires; Now Daniel is called a man of desires,
because the desires of God run out strongly after him, as one that was
singularly beloved of him, and as one that was highly in favor with him; and
as God has a peculiar respect for their persons, so he has a peculiar
respect for their duties and services, Prove. 15.8. The sacrifice of the wicked
is an abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the upright is his delight.
God takes more delight to hear the prayers of the upright, and to grant the
prayers of the upright, than the upright takes delight to pray; how burdensome,
and troublesome soever their prayers may be to others, yet they are still
delightful to God, but more of this in the next Particular. And as God has a
peculiar respect for their services, so he has a peculiar respect for their
tears, for he puts them into his Bottle. Psalm. 56.8. and as he has a
peculiar respect for their tears, so he has a peculiar respect for their
names, for he writes them in his Book. Luke 10.20. And as he has a peculiar
respect for their names, so he has a peculiar respect for their blood, Psa.
116.15. and this Cain found by woeful experience, from the cry of his Brothers
Blood. O Sirs! God by making of you holy, has made you like himself, like his
Son, like his Spirit, and like his most glorious Angels, which excel in
strength; and what does this speak out but Gods peculiar favor, God makes many
rich, and many great, and many honorable, and many mighty, and many wise, and
many noble, and many beautiful, and many successful, whom he will never make
holy; Ephesians. 1.3.
in making of you holy, God has made you spiritually great, rich, honorable,
wise, and beautiful, etc. and this speaks you out to be highly in the favor
of God: Holiness is a singular fruit of Gods special favor and love; God has
a common favor and love for all men, yea, for the worst of men, Ephesians. 2.4, 5.
witness that common preservation, and common protection, and common
provision, that he vouchsafes to them, and God has a special love and
favor, and this runs out only to his holy ones? holiness is a divine beam, a
heavenly drop a choice pledge of Gods special favor and love; O Sirs! though
the world may slight you, and enemies revile you, and friends dis-favour you,
yet let this support you, let this rejoice you, that you are high in the favor
of God. But

Tenthly, If thou art a holy person, if thou art one that have that real
holiness, without which there is no happiness, then know for thy comfort, that
all thy duties and services are very pleasing, Act. 10.4. Mal. 3.3. 2 Timothy 2.21.
delightful, and acceptable to the Lord, and this roundly follows upon the
former, for when ever a man's person comes to be accepted of God, and to be
high in favor with God, then all his services and sacrifices comes to be
acceptable to God; Genesis 4.4. And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of
his flock, and of the fat thereof, and the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to
his offering. God had first a respect to his person in Christ, and then to his
offering; and so his sacrifice was accepted for the man; and not the man for
the sacrifice. Heb. 11.4. By Faith Abel offered unto God, a more excellent
sacrifice than Kain, by which he obtained witness, that he was righteous; God
testifying of his gifts, and by it, he being dead yet speaks: God will
always welcome the holy man into his presence, and he shall always have his
ear at command; God will still be a warming his heart, Isa. 45.11.
and a cheering up his spirit, and a satisfying of his soul, in meeting of him
in all holy means, and in giving gracious answers to all his requests. Isa.
64.5. Thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness: those that
remember thee in thy ways: Prove. 21.8. The way of man (that is of unholy man)
is froward and strange: but as for the pure, his work is right. When God has
cleansed ^ man's heart, and sanctified his nature, then his work, his religious
work is right; it is then right in the eye of God and in the account of God, and
in estimation of God; and therefore his Petitions are as soon granted, Isa.
65.24.
as they are offered, and his requests performed, Sealh here is a special note
of observation, to work us to a serious marking of the things that are
mentioned, as things that are of special weight, and of highest concernment to
us.
as soon as they are mentioned: Psalm. 32.5. I said I will confess my
transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Selah.
Holy David had an inward purpose and resolution, to confess his sin, but before
he could do it, God throws him his pardon; thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin; God loves to be beforehand with his people in acts of grace and favor.
Gods eye and his ear was in David's heart, before David's confession could be in
his tongue. O! the delight of God; O! the pleasedness of God, with the duties
and services of his holy ones: Psalm. 4.3. But know that the Lord has set apart
him that is godly for himself: the Lord will hear, when I call upon him; that
is, the Lord will approve of my prayer, he will accept of my prayer, he will
delight in my prayer, and he will answer my prayer when I call unto him; and
what can the Godly man desire more? Psalm. 61.1. Hear my cry O God, attend unto
my prayer. Aquinas says, that some read the words thus (Intend ad cantica
mea) attend unto my songs (and so the words may be safely read from the Hebrew
word (...) Ranah, which signifies to shout or shrill out for joy) to note that
the prayers of the Saints, are like pleasant songs, and delightful dirties, in
the ears of God; no mirth, no music can be so pleasing to us, as the prayers
of the Saints are pleasing to God: Cant. 2.14.
Psalm. 141.2. Let my prayer come before thee as incense, and the lifting up of
my hands, as the evening sacrifize: What Is more sweet, what is more pleasing,
and what is more perfuming then incense? why the prayers of the Saints, Rev.
5.8. chapter 8.3, 4
as they are in the hands of a Mediator, are as sweet and pleasing to God, as
incense that is made up of the choicest and sweetest spices, are sweet and
pleasing unto us; 1 Pet. 3.12. For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous,
and his ears are open unto their prayers; or rather as the Greek has it, his
ears are ((...)) to their prayers, that is, when their prayers are so faint and
weak, that they cannot reach to God, that they cannot travel as far as Heaven,
then God will come down to them, and lay his ears, as it were, unto their
prayers? O what matter of joy and comfort, is this to all the holy seed, that
God will graciously bow his ears to their prayers, when he turns his back with
the greatest disdain and indignation upon the most costly sacrifices of the
wicked. O you precious Sons of Zion! that are daily lamenting, and mourning,
over the weaknesses that cleaves to your best services, know for your comfort
and joy, that though with Moses you can but stammer out a prayer; God once
accepted of a handful of Meal for a sacrifice, and of a gripe of Goats hair
for an oblation. Artaxerxes, the Persian monarch accepted with a cheerful
countenance a little water, as a present from the hand of a poor labourer, etc.
or with Hannah weep out a prayer, or with Hezekiah chatter out a prayer, or
with Paul sigh and groan out a prayer, yet the Lord will own your prayers, and
accept your prayers, and delight in your prayers: O what a rare comfort is this
for a Christian to consider, that when he is under outward wants and inward
distresses, that when he has sickness upon his body, and reproach upon his
name, and death knocking at his door, that in all these cases, and in all other
cases he may run to God as to a Father, and tell God how it is with him, and
when he has done that, he may sit down satisfied and assured of Audience and
Acceptance in Heaven? O Sirs! this is a privilege more worth than a thousand
worlds, and had unsanctified persons as many Kingdoms to give, as they have
hairs on their heads, they would give them all for an interest in this
privilege, when guilt and wrath is upon their consciences, and when the arrows
of the Almighty stick fast in them, and when the terrors of death are round
about them, and when the dreadful day of their account is every moment
remembered by them. O! if it be so great a favor to have the ears of an
earthly King at pleasure, what a transcendent savor must it be to have his
ear at pleasure, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords? and yet this favor
has all his Saints. But

Eleventhly, If thou art a Holy Person, if thou art one that have that real
holiness, without which there is no happiness, then know for thy comfort, that
Jesus Christ will certainly preserve thy holiness. Next to Christ, holiness is
a Christians choicest Jewel, and this Christ will be sure to preserve;
self-preservation is natural to all creatures, holiness is Christ's Creature,
Christ's Image, and therefore he will certainly preserve it, and maintain it;
Christ cannot neglect himself, he cannot be wanting to himself, Phil. 1.6.
Heb. 12.2. 1 These. 5.23. and cha. 3.12, 13. Ephe. 5.25, 26, 27. 1 John. 3.9.
now holiness is himself; and therefore if there be but a spark of holiness in
a dunghill of corruption, Christ will certainly own it, cherish it, and
preserve it; he that is once really holy, shall be for ever holy. Let the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, do what they can, the holy seed shall still
remain in all Gods sanctified ones; though a holy man may fall strangely,
sadly, frequently, foully, yet he shall never fall totally, he shall never
fall finally, because that that holiness that is in him, is a lasting, yea, an
ever-lasting and abiding principle, that can never be destroyed, or
extirpated. A wicked person may be turned into a holy man, but a holy man can
never be turned into a profane person again. A holy change is an unchangeable
change, the state of holiness is an unchangeable state: It Is true the fallen
Angels quickly lost that stock of holiness, that God had put into their hands;
and Adam lost all his holiness upon the turn of a hand, he broke, and proved a
Bankrupt almost as soon as God had set him up in Paradise, but the state and
condition of all the Saints, is a better and a safer state and condition, than
either the Angels, or than Adams was; and that partly because their state was
mutable though perfect, but the state of the Saints is an unchangeable state,
though it be (for the present) an imperfect state; and partly because God put
that stock of holiness, that they had into their own hands, but now the Saints
holiness is not a stock in their own hands, but in Christ's hands; for not only
their persons, but their holiness is kept by the power of God, 1 Pet. 1.5.
through faith unto salvation. As Christ is to manage our salvation for us, so
he is to manage our grace and holiness for us; and therefore as he will most
certainly make sure the one, so he will as certainly preserve the other; once
a Son, John. 8.35.
and for ever a Son; though the servant may be turned out of doors, yet the
Son abides in the house for ever, as Christ speaks, he that is once
sanctified, shall be for ever blessed.

Holiness is an abiding seed, an immortal seed; it is a royal gift, which being
once given, shall never be taken away from him that has it. I readily grant,
that the strength of Holiness, and the luster and shine of Holiness, Romans 11.29.
and the sense and feeling of Holiness, and the comfort and sweet of Holiness,
and the lively stirrings and operations of Holiness, may be somewhat abated
and lessened in the soul; but the seed of Holiness, the substance of Holiness
always remains in a changed soul. There is always a divine fire, though
sometimes it may be raked up under the Ashes; there is always life and sap in
the root, though there be neither leaves nor blossoms on the tree; it is true,
the best of Saints may have their spiritual Autumn; and it is as true, that
after their Autumn, there will certainly follow a Spring of Holiness. It Is most
certain, that the truth and state of Holiness remains under all a Christians
infirmities, darknesses, weaknesses, ecclipses, clouds, failings, waverings and
wanderings; and the reasons are clear, because that great and glorious principle
of Holiness flows from Gods unchangeable love, and is a fruit of the
everlasting Covenant, and the price of Christ's Blood, and depends and hangs
upon a perpetual union and communion with Christ, Deuteronomy. 33.26, 27. Genesis 49.22,
23, 24.
and is a sure pledge and earnest of a man's eternal enjoyment of Christ, and is
always maintained and uphel^ by the everlasting Arms of Christ; to say that
the Saints may fall totally and finally from all that Grace and Holiness they
have, is to say. 1. That the Surety of the New Covenant is grown very poor and
weak, which is very little less than blasphemy, and quite contrary to that Heb.
7.21, 22. 2. It is to say that the Promises are yea and nay, quite contrary to
what the Apostle affirms, in that 2 Cor. 1.20. 3. It is to say that the Power
of God is grown exceeding weak and contemptible, 1 Pet. 1.5. Joh. 10.27. -- 31.
yea it is to make sin and Satan stronger than God, which is quite contrary to
the current of Scripture. 4. It is to say that the Decree of God is mutable,
which is cross and contrary to the Apostle, in that 2 Timothy 2.10. 5. It is to
say that Gods free, eternal and everlasting love is become changeable and
unconstant, which is expressly cross to that Jer. 31.3. Mal. 3.6. Joh. 13.1.
with many other Scriptures; and therefore that Arminian Principle is to be for
ever detested and abhorred. But

Twelfthly and lastly, If thou art a holy person, if thou art one that have
that real Holiness, without which there is no happiness, then know for thy
comfort, that all things shall work together for thy good, Romans 8.28. And we
know that all things work together for good, to them that love God, to them who
are called according to his purpose. All the afflictions, Rev. 2.10.
and all the temptations, and all the desertions, and all the oppressions, and
all the oppositions, and all the persecutions that befalls a godly man, shall
work for his good: Every cross, every loss, and every disease that befalls the
holy man, shall work for his good; every device, every snare, every method,
every depth, every stratagem, and every enterprise of Satan against the holy
man, 2 Cor. 12.9.10.
shall work for his good; they shall all help to make him more humble, more
holy, more heavenly, more spiritual, more faithful, Isa. 38. Hos. 2.5, 6, 7.
more fruitful, and more watchful; every day of prosperity, and every night of
adversity, shall work for the holy man's good; every storm, and every calm;
every bitter, and every sweet; every cross, and every comfort, shall work for
his good that is holy; when God gives a mercy, that shall work for his good;
and when God takes away a mercy, that shall work for his good; when God gives
him large commons, that shall work for his good; and when God cuts his commons
short, that shall work for his good; yea and all the falls, and all the sins of
the Saints shall work for their good. As I get hurt by my graces, so I get good
by my sins, said famous Mr. Fox. 2 Cor. 7.8, -- 13.
O the rare, the fear, the watchfulness, the tenderness, the zeal, the revenge,
that God raises in the souls of his Saints by their very falls. O the hatred,
the indignation, and the detestation that God raises in the hearts of his
children against sin, by their very falling into sin! O what love to Christ,
what thankfulness for Christ, what admiration of Christ, what cleaving to
Christ, what exalting of Christ, and what drawing from Christ, are Saints led
to by their very falls! O what exercise of grace, what increase of grace, what
magnifying of grace, what liftings up of Divine Power, and what a high price
are holy men led to set upon the precious Blood of Christ, and all by their
falls! It Is the glory of Gods Holiness, that he can turn spiritual diseases
into holy remedies, and soul-poisons into heavenly cordials, that he can
prevent sin by sin, and cure falling by falling; one calls that 8th. of the
Romans and the 28. The blind man's Promise, and I may call it the lame man's
Promise, that is holy, and the deaf man's Promise, that is holy, and the dumb
man's Promise, that is holy, and the needy man's Promise, that is holy, and the
sick man's Promise, that is holy, and the languishing man's Promise, that is
holy, and the dying man's Promise, that is holy. O the comfort! O the sweet! O
the content! O the satisfaction that this Promise has afforded to many a
precious Saint, when other Promises have not been at hand! O Christian! what
though friends and relations frown upon thee, what though enemies are plotting
and conspiring against thee, what though wants like an armed man are ready to
break in upon thee; what though men rage, and Devils roar; what though sickness
be in thy family, and death stands every day at thy elbow, yet there is no
reason for thee to fear or faint, because all these things shall work for thy
good. Yea there is wonderful cause of joy and rejoicing in all the afflictions
and tribulations that comes upon thee, considering that they shall all work for
thy good. O Christians! I am afraid, I am afraid, that you do not run so often
as you should to the breasts of this Promise, nor draw that sweetness and
comfort from it that it would yield, and that your several cases may require;
and thus I have done with this use of comfort and consolation to all Gods holy
ones. You see what comfort, what consolation, yea what strong consolation waits
upon all Gods sanctified ones. I have been the longer upon this use, because
the times require it, and the condition of Gods people calls for the strongest
cordials, and the choicest and the sweetest comforts.

And now I have nothing to do, but to lay down some Positions concerning
Holiness, which may be of singular use, for the preventing of some Objections
and mistakes, and for the giving of satisfaction, especially to such in whom
the streams of Holiness runs low, and who are still a lamenting and mourning
under the imperfections of their Holiness, etc.

And the first Position is this, Where ever real Holiness is, it will appear,
it will discover it self, it will show it self; Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
it is the very nature of Grace and Holiness, to manifest it self; and
therefore it is set forth in Scripture by the names of light, which shines
abroad, and of ointment and perfume, Mat. 5.16. Prove. 27.9. Cant. 3.6.
which cannot be hid; of Leaven and Salt, which deriveth its own nature and
relish upon a whole lump: And it is very observable, that when the Holy Ghost
was given, Act. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
he was given in tongues, fiery tongues, and with a rushing of a mighty wind,
all which have a quality of self-manifestation, and notifying of themselves to
others.

Take a River that is damm'd and stopped up, yet if the course of it be natural,
and if it commonly runs downward, it will at length bear down all, and ride and
run triumphantly over all that is in its way: So though real Holiness in a day
of temptation, desertion, and affliction, etc. may seem to be damm'd and stopped
up, yet at length it will make its way through all, and over all, and show its
self in its native colors. Though fire for a time may lie hid under the Ashes,
yet at last it will flame forth, and show it self to be fire; Holiness is a
divine fire, and though in some cases it may for a time seem to be hid, it
will at length break forth and show it self to be Holiness. I have not Faith
enough to believe that that man was ever really holy, whose Holiness is still
un^er a bushel, or in a dark Lanthorn. Look as natural life cannot be so hid,
but that it will discover it self a hundred hundred ways: So Holiness, which
is a Christians spiritual life, cannot be so hid, but it will discover it a
hundred, hundred ways.

The second Position is this, That Holiness rises by degrees, it rises
gradually in the souls of the Saints. Though the first Adam was made a man a
holy man, Job. 17.9. Psalm. 92.12. Mal. 4.2. Hos. 14.5, 6, 7.
yea man perfectly holy, and all at once; yet the Holiness of all that is
interested in the second Adam, rises by degrees. It Is true in the Creation of
the world, all the creatures were made in their full and perfect growth and
strength at once; but in the new Creation, Holiness, which is Gods own
creature, is carried on by degrees. Luke 2.52.
Look as Christ increased in wisdom and in stature, and in favor with God and
man, by degrees. So that Babe of Grace, Holiness, increases in the soul by
degrees. Look as the seed which is sown in the furrows of the earth, Mat.
13.23. Mark 4.28.
first springs into a blade, and then into an ear, and then into ripe Corn: So
that immortal seed, Holiness, which is sown in the furrows of a Christians
soul, springs and grows by degrees. Look as the waters in the Sanctuary rise
first to the ancles, then to the knees, then to the loins, then to the chin,
Ezekiel. 47.3, 4, 5.
and then to a River that was not passable: So Holiness rises higher and
higher in the soul by degrees. Look as the morning light shines more and more
unto the perfect day: Prove. 4.18.
So the light of Holiness shines more and more clear, and more and more
bright, until all darkness and imperfection be swallowed up in perfection.
Look as the body of a man grows and increases by degrees in stature and
strength till it comes to its full growth and perfection: Ephesians. 4.16.
So Grace and Holiness will grow and increase by degrees, till Grace be
turned into Glory, till Holiness be turned into Happiness. Though the Ocean be
full, yet the bottle cannot be filled but by degrees. We are poor
narrow-mouthed Bottles, and therefore what we take in of Holiness; must be
by degrees; our incapacity is so great, that at present we are no ways able
to take in a fullness of Holiness; and therefore God drops in now a drop, and
then a drop; now a little, and then a little, as we are able to take it in.
And indeed to difference the state of Grace from the state of Glory, the state
of Holiness from the state of Happiness; it is necessary that Holiness should
be communicated to us by degrees, an absolute fullness of holiness will make an
absolute fullness of happiness; when our holiness is perfect, our happiness
shall be perfect; and if this were attainable on earth, there would be but
little reason for men to long to be in Heaven.

The third Position is this, that there is a great deal of preciousnesse in the
least degree of holiness. For

1. It Is the special work of the holy Spirit; and this I have showed you
already at large; and therefore it must needs be precious.

2. It Is a part of the Divine Nature, it is a beam of God, a spark of Glory; and
therefore it must needs be precious. 2 Pet. 1.4. Mat. 12.20. Isa. 40 10, 11.
chapter 60.22. Isa. 35.3, 4. Joel 3.10. Mat. 5.3, 4, 5, 6. Romans 14.1. chapter 15.7.


3. There are many choice and special Promises that are made over to the least
degrees of Holiness, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the Margint
together; and therefore the least degree of holiness is very precious.

4. It gives a man a right to precious Privileges, and to all the precious
Ordinances of Christ's house. Ergo.

5. It Is a fruit of the special love and favor of God; a man may read more of
the heart of God, and of the special love of God toward him in the least spark
of holiness, than he can in his highest worldly enjoyments. A man may read
that special grace in the least degree of holiness, which he can never read
in the honors, profits, pleasures, delights, and contents of this world. Ergo.

6. The least degrees of holiness gives a man as great a right, The little
hand of a child may hold a Pearl as well as the hand of the greatest Giant in
the world.
and as good a title to everlasting happiness and blessedness, as the
greatest degrees of holiness does, and the reason is clear, because the
promise of happiness and blessedness is not made over to degrees of
holiness, but to the truth of holiness; and therefore he that has but the
least spark of true holiness, may plead the Promise, and apply the Promise,
and suck marrow and sweetness out of the Promise, as well as he that has the
greatest measures of holiness in the world. The Promises of Salvation are not
made over to the strength of Faith, but to the truth of Faith, Joh. 6.35. It Is
no where said, that only he that believes with the Faith of an Abraham, shall
be saved; but it is often said, He that believes shall be saved; that is, he
that believes truly, though he does not believe strongly, shall be saved.
Ergo.

7. When unholy persons are under terrors of conscience, A little holiness is
like a Diamond very little in bulk but of a very high price and value, etc.
and upon their dying-beds, and when they shall stand before a judgment seat,
had they as many worlds to give, as there be stars in Heaven, and as there are
men on Eart^, they would give them all for the least spark of true holiness;
and therefore without all peradventure, the least degree of holiness must be
very precious, considering what a price the worst of men would give for it,
were it in their power to purchase.

8. The least degree of holiness shall at last be blessed with a happy triumph
over the strongest corruptions, the least degree of holiness will lead the
soul to Christ, it will bring the soul into communion with Christ, it will work
the soul to lean upon Christ, and by degrees to draw that life, that virtue,
and that vigor from Christ, that will enable a Christian not only to combat,
but to conquer even Goliath himself; and therefore the least degree of holiness
is doubtless very precious.

Genesis 18. The least finger is of use to the whole body.
9. The least degree of holiness will render a Christian in some measure
serviceable and useful to the turnings away of the wrath and judgments of God
from a People or Nation, and for the bringing down of favors and blessing upon
a Land; When all the Power, Authority, Greatness, Grandeur and Glory that
wicked men have in their hands, can do just nothing either to the diverting of
wrath, or the obtaining of mercy; and therefore the least degree of holiness
is precious. But

Tenthly and lastly, The least degree of holiness is a sure pledge and pawn,
of greater degrees of holiness, that in time thou shall attain to. The tallest
Oak was once an Acorn; the deepest Doctor was once in his Horn-book, and the
greatest Giant was once a child. Thy spark in time shall be blowed up into a
flame; thy drop in time shall be turned into a Sea, and thy penny in time
shall be multiplied into pounds, and thy pounds into hundreds, and thy
hundreds into thousands, and thy thousands into millions; and now tell me
Christians, whether these ten things do not sufficiently prove that there is a
great deal of preciousnesse in the least degrees of holiness; and O that you
that have but a little holiness, would be often a warming of your hearts at
this heavenly fire! and O that you that have a great deal of holiness would
not despise those that have but a little holiness! O that you that bring forth
a hundredfold, would not despise those that bring forth but thirty-fold! and O
that you that have ten Talents; would not despise those that have but two
Talents, considering that there is a great deal of preciousnesse in the least
degree of holiness.

The fourth Position is this, All Saints are not alike holy; some are more
holy, and others are less holy; in some Saints the springs of Holiness runs
low, in others the springs of Holiness rise very high. Holiness thrives not
alike in all Saints; Mat. 13.8.23. Mat. 25.14, 15. Luke 19.12. -- 21.
in the Parable; some brought forth thirty, some sixty, and others a
hundredfold, and yet all was good ground too: And in that other Parable, every
one had not ten Talents; some had but five, others two, others but one. God
never does distribute holiness alike to all; to some he gives more, to others
less, according to the good pleasure of his Grace. God never intended that all
should thrive alike in holiness. Neh. 7.2.
Though there were diverse that feared God in Nehemiah's time, yet he tells you
that his Brother Hanani feared God above many. Job 1.8.
And though Jobs three friends that came to visit him in the days of his
sorrows, viz. Eliphaz, Zophar, and Bildad, were doubtless all holy men, yet
they fell very much short of Job in Grace and Holiness, as is evident not only
by that high testimony that God himself gives concerning Job, That there was
none like him upon the earth, a perfect and upright man, one that feared God,
and eschewed evil. But also throughout that whole Book of Job. It Is true, all
Saints are equally justified, and equally pardoned, and equally reconciled, and
equally accepted, but all Saints are not equally sanctified. All Saints are not
of equal standing in the house of God. All Saints have not been partakers of
equal means, all Saints have not had equal gales of the Spirit, all Saints have
not alike acted that holiness they have; and therefore no wonder if all Saints
are not alike holy. David's worthies were not all of equal strength, nor all the
stones in the building are not of equal proportion, nor all the members in the
natural body are not of equal magnitude; and so it is also in the mystical body
of Christ. In Gods house there are vessels of Gold, and vessels of Silver, that
is, 1 Cor. 12. 2 Timothy 2.20.
there are some that are more eminently sanctified, and purified, than others
are. You read in Scripture of Babes, as well as of strong Men; of Lambs, as
well as of Sheep; of Plants, as well as of Trees. Besides, you read of a little
Faith, and of smoking Flax, and of a bruised Reed, and of a grain of
Mustard Seed; and what does all this evidence, but that God gives different
measures and degrees of grace and holiness to his people. Christ has not work
alike for all Saints to do, nor burdens alike for all Saints to bear, nor
mercies alike for all Saints to improve, nor temptations alike for all Saints
to resist, nor difficulties alike for all Saints to grapple withal, nor
dangers alike for all Saints to encounter withal, etc. and therefore he gives
not a like measure of holiness to all, but to some more, to others less,
according as their condition requires, Some Saints stand in need of a great
deal more grace and holiness than others do. Their place, calling, condition,
and employments in the world calls for a greater stock, than others need. One
man may better keep house with a hundred a year, than another who has a great
family, and great resort to his house, can do with a thousand a year; and so
it is here. A little may serve a little Farm; but it must be a great stock that
must serve a great Farm. A little stock of Holiness will serve some
Christians, but it must be a great stock of Holiness that must serve to supply
the necessities, and the wants of other Christians; and therefore God gives
different measures and degrees of holiness among his people as their needs
require. Look as one sinner excels another in wickedness, so one Saint excels
another in holiness, and therefore let not those that have much holiness
despise those that have but little; nor let not those that have but a little
holiness censure or judge those that have more holiness than themselves. Read
the 77. and the 88. Psalms. And indeed most of the Psalms of David, are a full
proof of this Position, as all may see that will but read them with a spiritual
eye, and with, and understanding heart.
All that holiness that any man has, whether it be little, or whether it be
much, is all of Grace, it is all of free grace; and therefore let every man
improve it, be thankful for it, and walk humbly under it.

The fifth Position is this; A Christian may be more eminently Holy at one
time, than at another, he may thrive and increase more in holiness at one
season, than at another; two men do not more differ one from another, than [the
self same Christian at several times differs from himself. Now the Springtide
of Holiness is risen high, very high at another time the streams of Holiness
runs exceeding low; now he is full fraughted with high thoughts of God, with
honorable thoughts of Christ, with precious thoughts of the Saints, with pious
thoughts of the Scripture, with delightful thoughts of Ordinances, with serious
thoughts of Providence, and with ravishing thoughts of Eternity; Besides the
examples of Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Job, and Peter, with the experiences of all
other Saints in all ages, speaks out this truth.
and at another time you shall have him filled with such hard thoughts of God,
with such dishonorable thoughts of Christ, with such low thoughts of the
Saints, with such slight thoughts of the Scripture, with such undelightful
thoughts of Ordinances, and with such confused thoughts of Providence, and
with such muddy dark and unpleasing thoughts of Eternity, as if he were really
another man; now he is very lively and quick, very cheerful and thankful, very
fruitful and faithful; now he is very fearful of offending God, and very
careful of pleasing God, and very circumspect and watchful in his walking with
God, as if he were a man fully resolved instantly to start from holiness to
happiness; but now if you please to look on this man at another time, when he
is either deserted of God, or tempted by Satan, or worsted by the World, or
enthraled by his Lusts; and Ah! how unlike himself will you then find him, for
now he is flat and dull, and dry (though not quite dead) now he is much
straightened and shut up, now he can neither joy in God, nor delight in Christ,
nor find sweetness in Ordinances, nor any taste or relish in any of his
mercies. Now his Apprehensions are dark, his Thoughts are dismal, his
Meditations are confused, his Words are unadvised, and his ways are crooked;
now he says the Lord is my Portion, and anon he says, will the Lord cast
off for ever, and will he be favorable no more? now he believes, anon he
doubts, this hour he hopes, the next he fears, to day he is upon the mount,
joying and triumphing, to morrow you shall have him in the valleys, mourning
and sighing; many clouds, many eclipses, many varieties, and many changes,
passes upon Gods holy ones in this life. A Child, a Tree, a Plant, shoots up
sometimes more in a month, than they do in many months; and so does many a
Child of God, many a Tree of righteousness, and many a Plant of renown, shoots
up more in holiness in a month sometimes, than they do in many months at
another time; they thrive and flourish in holiness more in a year sometimes,
than they do in many years, at another time. Look as many a man gets more money
in one year, than he does afterward get in seven; so many a Christian gets
more grace and holiness, sometimes in one year, than he gets afterward in
seven. No Saints have at all times a like the same blessed gales of the Spirit;
it is just with a holy soul, as it is with a ship, sometimes the ship has a very
fair and fresh gale of wind, and then she cuts her way through the proud waves
of the Sea, and the Passengers sail very speedily and merrily toward their
desired Port; but anon the wind is slack, and veres about to another point of
the Compass, and then the Passengers are all amote, and they sail but slowly
and heavily toward their desired Harbor? And so it is with a holy heart,
sometimes the gales of the spirit blow very fair and sweet, very strong and
powerful, upon a gracious soul; and then a Christian sails most sweetly, most
speedily, and most successfully on in a way of Holiness, and toward his Port
of Happiness; but anon the spirit is either resisted or grieved, or neglected,
or quenched, or vexed, or disobeyed; and then his gales, his influences, his
breathings are slacked, and then a poor Christian sails but very slow on in a
way of holiness, then he does but even creep toward the Harbor of
everlasting blessedness.

Again no Saints have at all times alike the same external, helps, advantages,
and opportunities of being holy, and of thriving in holiness: It may be they
have not the word so clearly, so powerfully, so sweetly so faithfully, nor so
frequently, preached to them, as formerly they have had; or it may be they have
not other Ordinances so lively, so purely, so spiritually, so evangelically
dispensed to them, as formerly they have had; It may be they have had stones
instead of bread, and bones instead of flesh, and chafe instead of wheat, and
muddy water instead of choice wine, and then no wonder if they do not thrive in
holiness, as they did when God rained Mannah every day about their Tents, and
when they were fed with the best of the best, that their Heavenly Fathers
Table, Wine-seller, and House did afford. When Children have not as good Food,
and as good Physic, and as good lodging, and as good looking to, as they have
formerly had, no wonder if they thrive not, as at other times. And so it is
here; look as no men have always the same helps, the same advantages, the same
opportunities, to grow great, and rich, and high, and honorable in the world,
that sometimes they have had; so no Christian has always the same helps,
advantages, and opportunities to grow rich, and high in holiness, as sometimes
he has had: It may be he has not that communion and fellowship with the
people of God, that once he had, or if he has, yet it may be their
communion is not so pure, so holy, so lively, so heart-warming, so
soul-inriching, as once it has been, or it may be he has not as good
counsel as formerly, nor as good examples as formerly, nor as good
encouragement, as he has formerly had to be holy; or it may be their
calling, employment, and outward condition is so altered and changed from what
once it was; that they have not that time for closet Duties, and to wait on
public Ordinances, that once they had; or it may be bodily infirmities,
weaknesses, diseases, aches, and ailements are so increased and multiplied upon
them, that they cannot make that improvement that once they did, of those very
advantages, and opportunities, that yet by a hand of grace is continued among
them; now these cases being incident to the people of God, there is no reason
to wonder, if at some times, Saints are more holy than they are at others; and
if at some seasons they shoot up more in holiness, than they do at others: The
serious weighing of this Position, may serve to prevent many fears and
scruples, many debates and disputes, that often rise in the hearts of
Christians, upon the often ebbings and flowings of holiness in their souls.

The sixth Position is this; There will come a time when in this world, holiness
shall be more general, and more eminent, than ever it has been since Adam
fell in Paradise; The Scripture speaks clearly, roundly, and fully to this,
Deuteronomy. 30.5, 6, 8. The Lord thy God will bring thee into thine own Land, and the
Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and thou shall
return and obey the voice of the Lord, and do All His Commandments. This
gracious Promise was made to the Jews, above two thousand years ago, and yet to
this very day it has not been fulfilled; and therefore there will certainly
come a time wherein God will make it good, Isa. 11.6. The Wolf shall dwell with
the Lamb, etc. and they shall not hurt, etc. for the Earth shall be Full of
the Knowledge of The Lord, As the Waters Cover The Sea. This glorious Promise
has not been made good to this day, but there is a time a coming wherein it
shall be accomplished, Isa. 35.8. There shall be a highway, and it shall be
called a way of Holiness, THE UNCLEAN SHALL NOT PASS OVER IT, Isa. 59.21. This
is my Covenant, my WORD AND MY SPIRIT SHALL NEVER DEPART from thee for ever,
Isa. 60.21. Thy People shall be ALL RIGHTEOUS, Jer. 32.40, 41. I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them
good. But I will put my fear into their hearts, So Ezekiel. 36.23. to v. 30. Mal.
4.1, 2. 2 Pet. 3.13.
that they shall not depart from me; yea I will rejoice over them to do them
good, and will plant them in this Land assuredly WITH MY WHOLE HEART, AND WHOLE
SOUL.

Now it is very observable, that this great Promise must be fulfilled, when
the Jews shall return, and be settled in their own Land. And so the Prophet
Ezekiel speaking of the glorious state of the Church in the last days, Ezekiel.
44.7, 9.
adds, Thus says the Lord, no stranger uncircumcised in HEART shall enter into
my Sanctuary. Zeph. 3.13. The remnant of Israel SHALL NOT DO INIQUITY, nor
SPEAK LIES; neither shall a DECEITFUL TONGUE be found in their mouths. Now the
context clearly shows that these words relate to the glorious state of the
Church on Earth, and they have never yet received their accomplishment, but
shall in the last days, for he is faithful that has spoken it. Zach. 14.20,
21. Upon ALL SHALL BE HOLINESS TO THE LORD. I have opened this Text pretty
fully to you already in my former discourses on holiness; and therefore shall
pass it by now, Rev. 21. verse the first, See the English Annotations on these
words.
and verse the last. And I saw a New Heaven, and a New Earth, and I saw the
holy City New Jerusalem coming down from God out of HEAVEN. Behold the
Tabernacle of God is WITH MEN, etc. and there shall in no wise enter into it
any thing that DEFILES, etc. but they that are written in the Lambs Book. I
have formerly proved by several Arguments, as diverse of you knows that this
chapter cannot be understood of Heaven, but must necessarily, and beyond all
dispute be understood of the glorious state of the Saints on Earth, which they
shall certainly enjoy in the last days. By all these Scriptures it is most
evident, that there will come a time when holiness shall be more general, and
at a fuller height than ever yet it has been since man fell from his Original
holiness; and therefore pray and wait, and wait and pray, look and long, and
long and look for the breaking forth of this day of glory upon the world.

The seventh and last Proposition, is this, That though the people of God ought
to be holy at all times, yet there are some special times and seasons wherein
God calls aloud for holiness, more than he does at other times, and wherein
he looks, and expects that his people should be eminently holy, as well as
really holy.

Quest. But what are those special times and seasons, wherein God calls loudest
for Holiness, and most for Holiness?

I answer, they are these.

First, After great and sore falls, O now God calls aloud for holiness. Jer. 3.
^sal. 51. Job 3. and chapter 12.4, 5. Isa. 38.14. Mat. 26. ult.
David after his great falls greatly humbles himself before the Lord. And Job
after his bitter cursing, and heavy complaining abhorrs himself in dust and
ashes. And Hezekiah after his great miscarriage, did chatter like a Crane and
mourn as a Dove* And Peter after his hellish cursing hi^ desperate swearing,
and his hideous lying, goes forth and weeps bitterly. So Origin, after he had
denied the Truth, and sacrificed to an Idol, he ^ame to Jerusalem, and being
desired to preach, and having opened his Bible, the first Scripture that his
eye was fixed upon was that Psalm. 50.16, 17. verses. What have thou to do to
take my Word into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed; whereupon he
shut his Book, sat down, and fell into a passion of weeping, and so came out
of the Pulpit, as not being able to speak to the people. After great falls God
expects and looks that his people should be more fearful of sin than ever, and
more careful of pleasing and honoring of him than ever, and more resolute in
resisting of temptations than ever, and more constant and abundant in a way of
duty, than ever, and more thankful and fruitful under mercies, than ever, and
more quiet and silent under afflictions than ever, and more stout and
courageous in the face of all opposition than ever, and more wise and
circumspect in their walkings than ever, and more vigilant and diligent to
prevent and avoid future falls than ever; how else will the honor of God be
repaired, and the glory of Religion be vindicated, and the Credit of the
Gospel be raised, and the grieved Saints be rejoiced, and young beginners in
Religion be afresh encouraged, and secure sinners be awakened, convinced and
converted. But

Secondly, When God shows singular mercy to his people, and when he does great
things for his people, then he expects and looks that his people should be a
holy people, and then he calls loudest for Holiness, Exodus 19.3, 4, 5. And
Moses went up unto God, and the Lord called unto him out of the Mountain,
saying, Thus shall thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of
Israel, Ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I bare you upon
Eagles wings, and brought you unto my self. Now therefore of ye will obey my
voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto
me, above all people; for all the Earth is mine. Here Moses makes use of a
very elegant expression, to show the singular love, Vide Aristotle. l. 9. de
Historia Animalium.
care, kindness, and goodness of God toward his people; He bare you upon
Eagles wings; the Eagle is a very Princely, Noble Bird, she fears no Birds
from above to hurt her young ones, and because she fears the Arrow from
beneath, therefore she carries her young ones upon her wings; so that there is
no hurting, nor harming, nor no killing of them, but by shooting through the
body of the old one; other Birds carry their young ones in their talons, and so
expose them to danger, but the Eagle carries hers upon her wings, that they may
be safe and secure. Moses, to show how choice and chary God was of Israel; and
how much he stood upon their safety and security tells them, that he carried
them upon Eagles wings; that so none of their enemies might ruin or destroy
them, yea that they might not so much as in the least hurt or harm them; he
carried them out of Egypt, and he carried them through the Red Sea sweetly,
swiftly, strongly, and tenderly, as the Eagle carried her young ones when
danger is at hand. Now God having expressed such love, such care, such bowels,
such tenderness, such sweetness, and such kindness to his people; he looks and
expects that they should be a holy people, and therefore he strongly urges
them to obey Gods voice indeed, and to keep his Covenant; now what is it for a
man to obey Gods voice indeed, and to keep his Covenant, out to be really
holy, yea to be eminently holy, So in that 10th. of Deuteronomy. where Moses had made
a large Narrative of the singular favors and mercies of God to Israel, in the
eleven first verses of that chapter; he falls in the 12, and 13. verses upon
pressing of them to be a holy people. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy
God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways,
and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul? To keep the Commandments of the Lord, and his statutes, which I
command thee this day. The word in the 12th. verse. rendered require, is (...)
Shoel from Shaal, which signifies to ask, to request or petition a person. Now
here ^^ses brings in God asking, requesting, and petitioning of Isr^ l that
they would fear him, and walk in his ways, etc. and what is that but that they
would be a holy people to him, that had done such great and glorious things
for them; the word in the 13. verse. rendered keep is (...) Shamar, which
signifies to keep carefully, diligently, Job 7.12. 1 King. 20.39.
faithfully to keep as watchmen keep the City, or as Soldiers keep their
Garrisons, or as Jaylors keep their Prisoners. Now God would have his people
thus to keep his Commandments, and his Statutes, and this God would have them
to do upon the account of those high acts of favor and grace, that he had
showed unto them; and thus to keep his Commandments, and his Statutes; what is
it but to be a holy people, yea to be a very holy people unto the Lord? And so
in that Ezra. 9.13, 14. Seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our
iniquities deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this, should we
again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity with the people of these
abominations? would thou not be angry with us, till thou have consumed us,
so that there should be no remnant, nor escaping? Free and rich mercy calls
hardest and loudest for duty, the more merciful God has been to his people,
the more fearful they should be of offending of him, and the more careful they
should be in pleasing of him, Divine blessings should be the greatest
obligations in the world upon a Christian to keep at a distance from sin, and
to keep close to a holy God; the greater the mercy is, and the more miraculous
the deliverance and the salvation is, that God crowns his people with, the
greater are the engagements that God has put upon them to be a holy people to
him. So in that 116. Psalm. David gives in a bill of particulars in the eight
first verses, he gives you a choice Narrative of the singular favors and
blessings of God both in respect of his inward, and his outward man; God had
been good to his soul, and he had been kind to his body; he tells you of Gods
sparing mercy, and of his preventing mercy, and of his preserving mercy, and of
his delivering mercy, and of his supporting mercy, and of his multiplying
mercy, and of his pardoning mercy; he tells you that God has heard his
prayers, and wiped off his tears, and preserved his feet from falling, and his
soul from death. And then in the following words he tells you what his
resolution is, upon the whole. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the
Living, verse. 9. or rather as the Hebrew has it (Ethhallech Liphne Jehovah) I
will walk before the face of the Lord; The Hebrew word that is here rendered
walk, signifies a continued action, or the reiteration of an action. David
resolves that he will not only take a turn or two with God, or walk a pretty
way with God, as Orpah did with Ruth, Ruth 1.10, -- 15.
and then take his leave of God, as Orpah did of her Mother; but he resolves
whatever comes on it, that he will walk constantly, resolutely, and
perpetually before God, or before the face of the Lord; Now walking before the
face of the Lord, does imply a very exact, circumspect, accurate, and precise
walking before God; and indeed no other walking is either suitable, or pleasing
to the eye of God. But is this all that he will do upon the receipt of such
signal mercies? O no! for he resolves to take the cup of salvation, and to
call upon the Name of the Lord, and ^o offer the sacrifice of thanksgiving, v.
13. and 17. but is this all that he will do? oh no! for he resolves that he
will presently pay his vows unto the Lord in the presence of all his people, v.
14, and 18. but is this all that he will do? O no! for he resolves that he
will love the Lord better than ever, and more than ever, v. 1. He loved God
before with a real love, but having now received such rare mercies from God,
he is resolved to love God with a more raised love, and with a more inflamed
love, and with a more active and stirring love, and with a more growing and
increasing love than ever. And so the Apostle, in that Romans 12.1, 2. I beseech
you therefore, Brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.
And be not conformed to this world* but be ye transformed by the renewing of
your mind, that ye may prove what is the good, and acceptable, and perfect
will of God. When this great Apostle would work up the Romans to a full
resignation of themselves to God, and to his service, and would sense and arm
them against the sinful fashions, customs, examples, dispositions and
practices of a corrupt and wicked world; he sets the mercies of God before
them; the Apostle very well knew that there was no such spur to holiness, nor
no such preservative against wickedness as this was; the Apostle could have set
threatenings before them, and the curse before them, and wrath before them, and
former and latter judgments before them, and hell before them, and yet he
passes over all these things, and presents the mercies of God before them, as
the most effectual means under Heaven to engage them to holiness, and to
fortify them against all sinful conformity, and worldly vanity. O Sirs! you are
all under several signal mercies this day; you are out of Hell, and is not that
a signal mercy? you have many mercies that others want, and is not that a
signal mercy? yet God rains Mannah every day about your Tents, when others
wander several miles, and are too often put off with stones instead of bread,
and is not that a signal mercy? That wicked men's hearts should be so full of
wrath, rage, revenge, envy and malice, and you cast at their feet, and yet not
trod to death, is a signal mercy; that you should stand when others fall, that
you should be faithful, when others are false, that you should persevere, when
others backslide, that you should be for God, when so many are for Baal, and
that you should be followers of the Lamb, when so many thousands are dancing
after Antichrists Pipes, are all very rare and signal mercies, and calls aloud
upon you to be holy, yea to be eminently holy, etc. But

Thirdly, Times of personal afflictions, are times wherein God calls aloud for
holiness, when the Rod of God is upon our backs, See my Mute Christian under
the Smarting Rod, etc.
it highly concerns us to look that our words are full of grace, and that all
our ways and works are full of holiness. Now God looks that his people should
be divinely fearful of offending him, and divinely careful in pleasing of him,
and divinely willing to resign up themselves to him, and divinely patient in
waiting on him, and divinely humble in submitting to him, and divinely wise in
justifying of him, and divinely resolute in serving of him, Heb. 12.10. But he
afflicts us for our profit, that we might be made partakers of his holiness;
why they were before partakers of his holiness, that is true; and these words
declare that the great reach and design of God in all the afflictions that he
brings upon his people, is to make them more and more holy; and therefore for
Christians to be proud under the Rod, and carnal under the Rod, and worldly
under the Rod, and froward under the Rod, and stupid under the Rod, and wanton
under the Rod, and wicked under the Rod, is to cross and frustrate the great
design of God in afflicting of them. In afflictions God looks that his people
should shine brighter and brighter, and grow better and better, and holier and
holier; O there is nothing that pleases God more, that delights God more, that
affects God more, or that wins upon God more, than to see his people a holy
people in the days of their afflictions, Well-waters are hottest in the
winter, etc.
Jer. 2.2, 3. Go, and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus says the
Lord, I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine Espousals,
when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a Land that was not sown.
Israel was holiness unto the Lord, and the first fruits of his increase: all
that devour him shall offend; evil shall come upon them, says the Lord. God
was wonderfully affected and taken with the love of his people, and with the
kindness of his people, and with the holiness of his people, when they were in
their wilderness condition. Look as stars shine brightest in the darkest
nights, and as Torches are the better for beating, and Spices the sweeter for
pounding, and young Trees the faster rooted for shaking, and Vines the more
fruitful for bleeding, and Gold the more glittering for scouring: So God looks
that his childrens graces should shine brightest in the darkest nights of
afflictions, he looks that his children should be the better for his Fatherly
beating, and the sweeter for being pounded in the mortar of affliction, and the
faster rooted in grace and holiness, by all divine shakings, etc.

In times of affliction God looks that his children should be true Salamanders
that live best in the fire. Where afflictions hangs heaviest, he looks that
there corruptions should hang loosest; he looks that that grace and holiness
which lies hid in nature, as sweet water does in Rose leaves, should then be
most fragrant when the fire of affliction is put under to distill it out, etc.
But

Fourthly, When persons that are under a great Profession, or in Church
Communion, shall ^all presumptuously and scandalously, when they shall not only
do weakly, but wickedly, when not only infirmities, but inormities may be
justly and righteously charged upon them. When such persons walk so loosely,
and vainly, as that they occasion the Name of God to be blasphemed, Romans 2.21,
22, 23.
Religion to be scorned, the Gospel to be despised, Profession to be abhorred,
the Saints to be reviled, and young comers on to be discouraged, and the
ungodly in their wickedness to be hardened and confirmed. O this is a time
wherein God calls aloud upon his people to be holy! O now God expects an
extraordinary measure of holiness in his people! O now he looks that his
people should rather walk like Angels, than live like Saints, that so they may
in some measure repair, and make up the sad breaches that have been made upon
his honor, and the credit of Religion, and that they may live Profession into
honor and esteem once more in the world. Such blessed effects as these, the
horrid sin of the incestuous person did occasionally work in the hearts and
lives of the Corinthians, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the
Margint together. 1 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and chapter 7.11.
O Sirs! in these days are there not many that have made a very high
Profession, that have shined as the stars in the Firmament, who are now fallen
from their Profession, from their Principles, and from all things that are
good? How many now do build the things that they have destroyed? what betraying
of Christ, what betraying of Truth, and what betraying of Saints is there this
day among many that have pretended very high to Religion? how many now approve
of those things that before they would never own, and that justify those
things now that they have formerly condemned, and that comply with those things
now that formerly they have abhorred, yea that contend for those things now for
which they have formerly suffered; and therefore certainly these are the very
times wherein God calls aloud upon his people to be holy, yea to be eminently
holy, etc. But

Fifthly, In all our approaches, addresses, and drawings near to God; God calls
aloud for holiness, Levit. 10.^3. Then Moses said to Aaron, This is it that the
Lord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh unto me* and
before all the people I will be glorified; and Aaron held his peace. There is
nothing more evident than this, throughout the Old Testament, that the people
of God were always to sanctify themselves, when they were to draw nigh to
God. Joh. 4.23, 24.
God is a holy God, and there is no drawing nigh to him without holiness; the
worship that God stands most upon, and that is most pleasing and delightful to
him, is Spiritual Worship, and none can offer this but a holy people. Such as
draw nigh to God without holiness, may, if they were not deaf, hear God saying
to them, Psalm. 50.16, 17.
What have you to do to take my Name into your mouths, seeing you hate to be
reformed? And who required these things at your hands? Isa. 1.12. The Renians
taught, that a man might be saved in any Religion. Isa. 29.13, 14. Mat. 15.8, 9.
The Persians every morning worship the rising Sun, and the Turks their
Mahomet; and the Papists their Images, and some of the Indians worship the
first thing that they meet with in the morning, and others of them worship a
red Ragge, and others of them worship the Devil. The Romans used to worship
Jupiter, a hurtful god amongst them, not because they loved him, but because
they would not be hurt or harmed by him. And Praxitelles the Painter made the
silly people worship the Image of his Strumpet under the title and pretense of
Venus. And verily all the worship that thou offerest to God, is little better,
if thou drawest nigh to him with thy body without holiness in thy soul. O Sirs!
remember that in all your public duties God calls aloud for holiness, and in
all your family duties God calls aloud for holiness, and in all your closet
duties God calls aloud for holiness; times of drawing near to God should be
always times of much holiness; you may come to a duty, but you will never come
to God in a duty without holiness; you may come to an Ordinance but you will
never come to God in an Ordinance without holiness; and therefore in all your
drawings nigh to God, remember that God calls for holiness in a special manner
then. But

Sixthly, When God eminently appears in the execution of his judgments upon
wicked and ungodly men; O that is a time that God calls aloud for holiness,
when he is a raining Hell out of Heaven upon unholy persons; God now lo^ks
that his people should be holy, yea eminently holy. So in that Exodus 19.4, 5.
Ye have seen what I did unto the ^gyptians; you have been eyewitnesses of my
dealings with them in Egypt, you have seen how I have followed them with plague
upon plague, because they did so sorely oppress you, and would not let you go
to worship me; Exodus 24. ult.
and serve me according to my own prescriptions. And when they were
judgement-proof, you saw me drown them in the Red Sea before your eyes, and
upon this very ground he urges them to obey his voice, and to keep his
Covenant, verse. 5. And so in that Rev. 15.1, 2, 3, 4. And I saw another sign in
Heaven, great and marvelous, seven Angels having the seven last plagues, from
them is filled up the wrath of God. And I saw as it were a Sea of glass,
mingled with fire, and them that had gotten the victory over the Beast, and
over his Image, and over his Mark, and over the number of his Name, stand on
the Sea of glass, having the harps of God. And they sing the song of Moses the
servant of God, and the Lamb, saying, Great and marvelous are thy works Lord
God Almighty, just and true are thy ways thou King of Saints. Who shall not
fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? for thou only art holy; for all
Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments are made
manifest. In this and the following chapters the utter overthrow of Antichrist
is described. In this chapter you have a new Vision of the Gospels restoring,
and of Antichrists ruin. By the Sea of glass mingled with fire, we are to
understand the fiery trials, and dreadful persecutions by fire and faggot that
Antichrist will inflict upon sincere and faithful Christians. The allusion is
to the Red Sea, and Pharaohs persecuting of Israel, but the addition of fire is
plainly to distinguish the Popes persecution from Pharaohs; for though Pharaoh
did sorely oppress the people of God both in their liberties and consciences,
and though he had plotted and contrived a way to destroy their male children,
yet he was never so cruel, he was never so bloody as to burn the people of
God with fire and faggot, as Antichrist has done in all ages. But now mark,
when the vials of the wrath of God comes to be poured out upon Antichrist, yea
upon what ever smells of Antichrist, or looks like Antichrist, why then the
people of God will in a very eminent way lift up God as the great object of
their fear, and then the generality of the Nations shall be so deeply affected
with the dreadful amazing and astonishing judgments of God upon Antichrist,
that they shall repent, worship him, and give glory to him. O Sirs! when God
strikes slaves, Sons should tremble; great judgments upon sinners speaks out a
great deal of the justice and holiness of God; and the more the justice and
holiness of God appears, the more holy his people should grow. Ah Christians!
had you grown more holy by those severe judgments of God, that has been
inflicted upon others before your eyes, you had not been under those smart
rebukes of God that now you are under this day. But

Seventhly, When men are called forth to war by God, O! that is a special time
and season wherein God calls aloud for holiness. The man of war must have
holiness written upon the bridles of the horses, Zach. 14.20. When men carry
their lives in their hands, they had need of holiness in their hearts; when in
every encounter a man must expect to enter upon a state of eternity; he had
need be very holy, that so if he should fall in the encounter, The Romans
lived more orderly in time of war, than in the times of their greatest peace.
he may be sure to be happy, Deuteronomy. 23.9, 14. When the H^st goes forth against
thine enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing. For the Lord thy God
walks in the midst of thy Camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies
before thee: therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in
thee, and turn away from thee. When the sword devoureth on both hands, when it
eats the flesh of Nobles, and drinks the blood of Nobles; when it feeds upon
the flesh of the poor, and drinks the blood of the needy, then every soldier
had need be a Saint, when an eternity of glory and misery is every moment
before every soldier; every soldier had need walk very accurately, he had
need live very holily. Mark, though the people of God were to keep themselves
from every wicked thing, at all other times, yet when they went out against
their enemies, then in a special manner it highly concerned them to keep
themselves not from some, but from every evil thing, or rather as the Hebrew
has it, from every evil word, (...) Da^ar; he that is in danger of death
every step he takes, and that carries his very soul in his hand, had need
precisely to abstain not only from every evil work, but also from every evil
word, as here God expressly charges Israel to do. When God finds holiness in
Isreal's Camp, then God will quickly give up Isreal's enemies into Isreal's hands;
but when the Camp becomes a Den of iniquity, then God will depart from the
Camp; and when God who is the bulwrk of a Camp, is departed, all the world
cannot preserve that Camp from being destroyed. Rev. 17.14.
The Lamb looks that all those brave hearts that engage with him against
Antichrist, should be called, and chosen, and faithful; there is no armor of
proof to that of holiness; let a man be never so well mounted, clothed; armed,
weaponed, yet if he be unholy, he lies naked and open to all disasters,
calamities and miseries. O Sirs! it is one of the dreadfullest things in the
world to hear such a cursing, swearing, lying, and damning of themselves, and
to see such a giving up themselves to work all manner of wickedness with
greediness, who carry their lives in their hands every hour in the day yea at
whose elbows damnation stands every moment. O Sirs! when God gives the sword a
Commission to eat flesh, and drink blood, to stay both old and young, to spare
none that come before it, and to pity none that come nigh unto it; it highly
concerns all men to be holy; this is a special season wherein God calls aloud
for holiness.

I confess I am for Peace and Truth, for Peace and Righteousness, for Peace and
Holiness against all war in the world, but when ever the Lord shall call forth
his people to fight his battles against Antichrist, 1 Samuel 25.28. Dan. 2.31. --
ult.
and to smite Daniels Image in pieces, it stands them very much upon to be a
holy people, yea to be eminently holy, as they would have the presence of God
with them, and the power of God engaged for them, and the mercy, goodness, and
blessing of God succeeding and prospering of them, though he that goes to war
had need carry his purse with him, yet he must be sure to leave his sins
behind him, or else his sins will do him more mischief than all his enemies,
for they will set God against him; and how can straw and stubble possibly stand
before a consuming fire?

I have read of Xerxes that viewing almost an innumerable Army of men, he fell
a weeping, saying, Where will all these men be within a hundred years; he wept
to think that all that mighty Army would be in their graves within a hundred
years. Ah what cause of weeping is there, when we behold most Armies in the
world, considering that within a few years yea months, for any thing we know,
they may be most in Hell, except there be sound repentance on their sides, and
pardoning mercy on Gods, they are so abominable, debauched and wicked. But

Eighthly, When God has separated and severed his people from the corrupt and
sinful customs and manners of the world, and brought them into fellowship with
himself, and into Gospel-Communion with one another, O then in a special manner
he calls aloud upon them to be holy, Levit. 20.23, 24, 26. And ye shall not
walk in the manners of the Nation, which I cast out before you; for they
committed all these things and therefore I abhorred them. But I have said unto
you, ye shall inherit their Land, and I will give it unto you to possess it, a
Land that flows with milk and honey: I am the Lord your God, which have
separated you from other people. And ye shall be holy unto me: for I the Lord
am holy, and have severed you from other people, that ye should be mine.
Distinguishing mercies should breed and nourish distinguishing qualities. O
Sirs! it is not for you who are separated and severed from the world by God, to
be proud and carnal, and formal, and distrustful, and hypocritical, and
earthly, and froward, etc. as the world is, it is not for you to deny your
principles, to debauch your consciences, to change your notes, to turn your
coats, to defile your souls, to blot your names, and to scandalize your
profession: O Sirs! if God has separated you, and severed you from the world
by a call from Heaven, it highly concerns you not to think as the world thinks,
nor to speak as the world speaks, nor to judge as the world judges, nor to walk
as the world walks, nor to worship as the world worships; but so to think,
speak, judge, walk, and worship as may make most for the honor of God, the
glory of the Gospel, and as best becomes those that have had the honor and the
happiness of being separated and severed by God from the world. But

Ninthly, When the day of the Lord draws near, and when we look for the
accomplishment of great things; O then! God calls aloud upon his people to be
holy; 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. But the day of the Lord will come as a Theif
in the night, in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and
the Element shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also, and the works that
are therein, shall be burnt up. Seeing then that all these things shall be
desolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and
godliness. Looking for, and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein
the Heavens being on fire shall be desolved, and the Element shall melt with
fervent heat. Never-the-less, we, according to his promise, look for a new
Heaven and new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. Wherefore (Beloved)
seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of
him in peace, without spot, and blameless. The nearer the day of Christ is to
us, and the more great and glorious things we expect from God, Isa. 65.17, 18,
19, 20.
the more holy, the more spotless, and the more blameless we must labor to
be. I know there are many that look for new heavens, and a new earth, that is,
for a glorious Church State here on earrh, wherein shall dwell righteousness;
it is certain that the highest Heavens, where God keeps his Royal Court, was
never without righteousness; righteousness has been always the habitation of
his Throne, righteousness has always dwelt in the highest Heavens; and indeed
Heaven would be no Heaven, yea, it would rather he a Hell than a Heaven, if
righteousness did not always dwell there: neither can the highest Heaven ever
wax old, neither were they ever made of Earth, or Brittle mouldering matter;
the Palace of the great King will be always new, fresh, shining, and
gloriousness; but indeed the Earth in all Ages, have been full of injustice
unrighteousness, wickedness, tyranny, cruelty, and oppression; so that
righteousness seems to have been banished out of the world, ever since Adam
fell from his primitive righteousness and holiness: O! but there is a glorious
day a coming, wherein the Earth shall be full of righteousness and holiness,
as I have formerly proved at large, from other Scriptures. Now Christians the
more great and glorious things you expect from God, as the downfall of
Antichrist, the conversion of the Jews, the conquest of the nations to Christ,
the breaking off of all yo^ks, the new Jerusalems coming down from above, the
extraordinary pouring out of the spirit, and a more general union among all
Saints, the more holy, yea, the more eminently holy in all your ways and
actings it becomes you to be; many there be that will talk high, and speak
big words, and tell you stories of great things that they expect, and look for
in these days which are the last of the last times, and yet if you look into
their lives, you shall find them loose and vain, and what not? O! that these
would for ever remember, that the more great and glorious things we expect and
look for from God, the more holiness God expects and looks for from us; and
therefore as we would not have God fail our expectation, let not us frustrate
his, and the higher your expectation rises, the higher always let your
holiness rise, Eccle. 12, 2, 3, 4, 5.
for there is nothing that will hasten that desirable day of glory upon the
world, like this. But

Tenthly, and lastly, When you draw near your end, when there are but a few
steps between you and the Grave, between you and Eternity; when you have but a
little time to live, when death stands at your backs, and treads on your heels,
and knocks at your doors, when the eyes begin to grow dark, when the grinders
begin to cease, when the keepers of the house, the hands, and the arms, begin
to tremble, and when the strong men, the legs and thighs, begin to bow, and
stagger, and totter, as being too weak to bear the bodies burden: O then! what
a holy people should you be? this very consideration, had a very great
influence upon that great Apostles spirit, in that 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 14, 15.
Wherefore I will not be negligent, to put you always in remembrance of these
things, though ye know them and be established in the present truth, Yea, I
think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle (...) To rouse you up The
Greek word signifies, to awaken, rouse, and raise such as are a sleep. There is
a sinful slugishness and drousiness, that often hangs upon the best of men, and
therefore they stand in much need of being awakned and roused up, to look after
their spiritual and eternal concernments.
to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance; knowing that shortly, I must
put off this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ showed me. Moreover I
will endeavor, that you may be able after my decease, to have these things
always in remembrance. The Apostle having the sentence of death in himself; O!
how does he bestir himself, and how does he stir up all that grace and
holiness that was in his heart, yea, and all his Ministerial and Apostolical
gifts, and all to better himself, and to make those that were really holy, to
be eminently holy? Peter being very sensible of the near approaches of death,
did very earnestly desire, and greatly endeavor so to act his part before he
went off the stage of live; that (when his head was in the dust, and his soul
in heaven) those Saints that should survive him, might be very famous in grace
and holiness. That of Eleazer is very remarkable, who would not do any thing
which might seem to be evil, because he would not spot his white head: O Sirs!
when once the Gray hairs of holiness and righteousness are upon you, it highly
concerns you to shun the very shows and appearances of evil, that so you may
not spot nor stain the honor of your white head. I have read of Joshua that
valliant Soldier, that when he was a young man, and in the prime and flower
of his days, when his bones were full of marrow, and his breasts full of milk
(as Job speaks) that then he was least in vigor and valor for God, and how
that sometimes in cases of eminent danger, he would conceal himself, but when
he grew older, and found the strength of nature declining and decaying, then
he bestired himself exceedingly for God: O Sirs! when you have one foot in the
Grave, God calls aloud upon you to bestir your selves exceedingly for his
honor and glory, and for your own internal and eternal welfare. Solon was not
ashamed to say that he learned much in his old age. And Julianius (the Lawyer)
was wont to say, that when he had one foot in the Grave, he would have the
other in the School: O Sirs! shall nature do more than grace, shall morality
excel real piety? 'Twas the glorious commendation of the Church of Thiatira,
that her last works were more than her first; Rev. 2.19. I know thy works, and
charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy work, and the last
to be more than the first: O the happiness! of that man that is best at last,
that brings forth most of the fruits of Righteousness and Holiness in old age.
O the blessedness of that man, whose Faith is more strong at last than at
first, and whose love is more inflamed at last than at first, and whose hopes
are more raised and elevated at last than at first, and whole knowledge is more
clear at last than at first, and whose zeal is warmer at last than at first,
and whose thoughts are more heavenly at last than at first, and whose heart is
more spiritual at last than at first, and whose communion with God is more high
at last than at first, and whose life is more holy at last than at first.

If there be any man in the world that is ripe for Heaven, and that injoyes a
Heaven (in his own soul) on this side Heaven, this is the man whose graces, and
whose gracious works are more at last than at first. Well Christians, for ever
remember this, the nearer death makes her approaches to you, the louder God
calls upon you to be holy. And thus by a hand of grace, that has been in me,
upon me, and with me, I have showed you what those special times and seasons
are wherein God calls loudest for holiness, and so according to my weak
measure, I have given out all that the Lord has graciously given in concerning
that most necessary, that most noble, that most glorious, and that most useful
point of points, viz. Holiness; and therefore I have nothing more to do, but
earnestly to pray, that what has been spoken and written, may be so blessed from
on high, that it may work mightily to the internal and eternal welfare both of
Writer, Reader, and Hearer, that so when their Race is run, and their Work done
here on earth, they may be everlastingly blessed with a happy sight of the
Beatifical Vision of God in Heaven. Amen.

FINIS.
Books sold by Henry Cripps in Popes-Head-Alley.
SIbbs Saints Cordials. Reynors Government of the Tongue. Armetages Sermons.
Roman Antiquities. Burtons Melancholy. Youngs whole duty of a Christian.
Supplication of Saints. Cradocks Works. Huit on Daniel. Sarah Wight. Cotton on
the seven Viols. Hookers Souls-preparation for Christ: Goodwins Child of Light
walking in darkness. Reynolds on Hosea. Tichburns Cluster of Canaans-Grapes.
Baxters Doctrine of Self-poseing. An Abstract of the Assemblies Catechism. J.
Goodwins Saints Interest in God. Dingly of Thunder.
Books sold by Henry Mortlock, at the sign of the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, near the Little North-door.
Folios.
A Commentary upon the whole Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, wherein the text
is learnedly and fruitfully opened, with a Logical Analysis, spiritual, and
holy Observations, Confutation of Armianism and Popery. By Mr. Paul Bain.

A Commentary on the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, and the Major Prophets.
By John Trapp, M. A.

Quartoes.
An Exposition of the Prophecy of Ezekiel. By W. Greenhill.

Some Sermons preached upon several occasions. By P. Sterry.

A Way to Zion, sought out and found for Believers to walk in. By Daniel King
Preacher of the Word near Coventry.

Funebria Florae, The Downfall of May-Games; By Tho. Hall, B.D. and Pastor of
Kings-Norton in Worcestershire.

The loathsomness of long Hair, or, A Treatise wherein you have the Question
stated, many Arguments against it produced, and the most material arguments for
it, refelled, and answered, with an Appendix against Painting, Spots,
naked-breasts, etc. By the same Author.

Samuel in Sackcloth, or a Sermon assaying to restrain our bitter Animosities,
and commending a spirit of moderation and right constitution of soul, and
behavior toward our Brethren, upon 1 Samuel 15.35.

Large Octavoes.
The Hypocrites Ladder, or Looking-Glass, or a Discourse of the dangerous and
destructive nature of Hypocrisy, the reigning and provoking sin of this age;
wherein is showed how far the Hypocrite, or formal Professor may go toward
Heaven, yet utterly perish, by three Ladders of sixty steps of his Ascending.
By John Sheffield, Minister of the Word at Swithins, London.

An Improvement of the Sea, upon the nine Nautical Verses, in the 107. Psalm,
wherein among other things you have a very full and delightful Description of
all those many various and multitudinous Objects, which they behold in their
Travels (through the Lords Creation) both on Sea, in Sea, and on Land, viz. All
sorts and kinds of Fish, Fowl, and Beasts, whether wild, or tame; all sorts of
Trees and Fruit; all sorts of People, Cities, Towns, and Countries. By Daniel
Pell, Preacher of the Word.

A Caveat against Seducers, in a Sermon preached by Rich. Stand-fast, Rector of
Christ-Church in Bristol. Together with the Blind Man's Meditations, by the same
Author.

A Treatise of Divine Meditation, by that faithful Servant of Jesus Christ John
Ball, late Minister of the Gospel at Whitmore in Staffordshire, published by
M. Simeon Ash, Preacher of the Gospel at Austins, London.

Irenicum, A Weapon-Salve for the Churches Wounds. Or the Divine Right of
particular Forms of Church Government, discussed and examined; by Edward
Stillingfleete, Rector of Sutton in Bedford-shire. The second Edition corrected.

An Exposition by way of Supplement on the 4th. 5th. 6th. 7th. 8th. and 9th.
Chapters on the Prophecy of Amos, where you have the Text fully explained,
other Texts occasionally cleared, many Cases Stated, many practical
Observations raised, and many Polemical Points debated; by Tho. Hall, B. D. and
Pastor of Kings-Norton.

A Cluster of Grapes taken out of the Basket of the Woman of Canaan: or,
Counsel and Comfort for Believing Souls; By John Durant, late Preacher of the
Gospel in Canterbury.

A Call to the Unconverted; By Richard Baxter.

A Latin and English Grammar; By Charles Hool, M. A.

Books sold by John Sims, at the Cross-Keyes in St. Paul's Churchyard.
CHrist the Pattern of a Christians Practice; By Mr. Ralph Robinson. Octavo,

Several Pieces of Mr. Ralph Venning collected into one Volume, viz. Orthodox
Paradoxes, Mysteries and Revelations: Canaans Flowings. A Warning to
Backsliders. The Way to True Happiness. Mercies memorial. 8 to.

A Practical Discourse of Prayer, wherein is handled the Nature, the Duty, and
the Qualifications of Prayer; By Tho. Cobbet, Minister of the Gospel. 8 to.

Two Treatises of Mr. Brinseley.

1. A Groan for Israel. 2. The Spiritual Vertigo: with two other Treatises,
viz. Three Sacred Emblems. 2. Tears for Jerusalem; By the same Author. 8 to.

Irenicum, A Weapon-Salve for the Churches Wounds, Or the Divine Right of
particular Forms of Church Government, discussed and examined; By Edward
Stilling fleet, Rector of Sutton in Bedford-shire. The second Edition
corrected. 4 to.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
CHristian Reader, take notice that the Pages are misfigured, for next to page
240. follows page 280. yet do thou but follow the directionss laid down in
the Table; and without any further trouble to thy self, thou will find any
particular that thou have a mind to be satisfied in.

A.
OF Adams holiness in innocence, Page 5, 6, 7. The greatness of Adams sin, in
four particulars. Page 52. Of Adoption. Real holiness is a sure evidence of a
man's Adoption. Page 624, 625, 626. Of Admiration. Holy persons are much taken
up in the Admiration of the holiness of God. Page 102, 103, 104 Of being
Afflicted. Holy persons are much afflicted. etc. with their own unholyness.
Page 123, 124, 125, 126. And much affected and afflicted with the unholiness of
others. Page 139, 140, 141. Afflictions. Of great and heavy afflictions. Page
363, 364, The more a man can divinely rejoice under afflictions, the greater
measures of holiness that man has certainly attained to. Page 600, 601, 602. Of
All Things. All things shall be sanctified to the holy man. Page 629, 630. Of
Approving a man's self to God. The more a man makes it his great business to
approve himself to God, the greater measure of holiness that man has attained
to. Page 609, 610, 611. Of Authors. That unholy persons are to be shut out from
special Communion with the people of God, is made evident by the Judgments of
many Learned and approved Authors. Page 51, 52, 53, 54.
B.
Of Beasts. Unholy persons are Beasts, yea, the worst of Beasts. Page 54, 55,
56. Of Blessings. God will certainly bless all a holy man's blessings to him.
Page 622, 623. Of Boldness. The more holy any man is, the more bold and
courageous that man will be for God and Godliness. Page 507, 508, 509.
C.
Of several Cannots. There is a threefold Cannot. 1. A natural Cannot. 2. A
contracted and habituated cannot. 3. A judicial cannot. Page 21-25. Of
Conformity to Christ. True holiness is conformable to the holiness of Christ.
Page 138, 139. Of Civil men. Mere civil men shall not go to Heaven. Page 77,
78, 79. Of Company. He that will be holy, must keep company with those that are
holy. Page 307, 308. And he that will perfect holiness in the fear of the
Lord, must be most In with them that are most excellent in holiness. Page 577,
578. Of Communion. There is no spiritual communion with God in this world,
without holiness. Page 28, 29, 30. Unholy persons are to be shut out from
sacred and special communion with the people of God in this world: This proved
by an induction of ten particulars. Page 44-54. The more holy any man is, the
more communion that man will have with God. Page 491, 492, 493. Of Comparing
your selves with others. Take heed of comparing your selves with those that are
worse then your selves. Page 284, 285. Of Contrariety. Unholy persons are full
of contrariety to God. Page 27, 28. Of being Condemned. Unholy persons are
adjudged and condemned to hell. Page 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62. Of Conversion. The
persecutions of the Saints may issue in the conversion of sinners. Page 401,
402, 403. Many that have been converted later then others, do yet in holiness
much excel them. Page 504, 505.
D.
Of Death. Take heed of putting the day of death far from you three arguments
to persuade to this. Page 288-296. Of Degrees. A holy person will be still
reaching after higher degrees of holiness. Page 107, 108, 109. Christians must
press after the highest degrees of holiness. Page 468, 469. About degrees of
glory in Heaven, see Heaven. Of Delight. The more holy any man is, the more he
will be the delight of God, etc. Page 488, 489. Tbis is further proved by five
Arguments. Page 490, 491, 492, 493, 494. God takes singular delight, both in a
holy man's person, and in his services to. Page 616, 617, 618, 619. Of
Self-denial. The more a man can deny himself when he has power and
opportunity to raise himself, etc. the greater measure of holiness he has
attained to. Page 612, 613, 614. -- 620, 621. Of Discord. No special communion
to be held with those that cause discord and division among the Saints. Page
46. Of the Doctrine. The Doctrine is this; That real holiness is the only way
to happiness: All men must be holy on earth, or they shall never see the
Beatifical Vision, they shall never reach to a glorious fruition of God in
Heaven. Page 5. The Doctrine proved by ten Arguments. Page 18-62. Of holy
Duties. The holy man's duties are most delightful to God. Page 632, 633, 634.
Real holiness naturaliseth holy duties to the soul. Page 126, 127, 128. The
more holy any man is, the more singular delight and pleasure, God will take in
all his Religious duties and services. Page 502, 503, 504. When men in the
maine are as holy out of Religious duties, as they are in Religious duties, it is
an evidence of a great measure of holiness that they have attained to. Page
600. The more a man is exercised in the most spiritual and internal duties of
Religion, the more holiness he has attained to. Page 605, 606. The more solid
and exact a Christian is in religious duties and services, the more holy he is.
Page 608, 609.
E.
Of Election. Real holiness is a sure evidence of election. Page 614, 615,
616. Of not Enduring. Such as cant endure holiness in others, shall never go
to Heaven. Page 87, 88, 89. Of Ends. A holy man propounds holy ends to himself,
in all his actings and undertakings. Page 157, 158, 159. How persons may know
when they make the glory of God their end, answered five ways. Page 159-168.
Of Errors. We are to have no special communion with such as err in foundation
truths. Page 44, 45, 46. Of Exercise. He that would have more holiness, must be
much in the exercise of that holiness he has. Page 578, 579, 580. Of
Expediency. The more a man lives by the rule of expediency, the more holiness
he has attained to. Page 611, 612. Of the Eye of God. He that would attain to
greater measures of holiness, must always remember that the eye of God is
continually upon him. Page 573, 574, 575.
F.
Of Fellowship. Unholy persons have familiarity and fellowship with Satan. Page
26, 27. Of the Favor of God. Holy persons are highly in Gods favor. Page 630,
631, 632. Of the Fewness of those that shall be saved. The number of those that
shall go to Heaven are but few. Page 67, 68, 69. Of Flatterers. Take heed of
flatterers. Page 285-289. Of Formalists. Formalists shall not go to Heaven.
Page 75, 76, 77. All unholy persons are fools, they have all the
characteristical notes and properties of fools: And this is showed in eight
particulars. Page 30-44, Christians are to have no special communion with
fools. Page 49.
G.
Of our Generation. The more holy any man is, the more serviceable and useful
he will be in his generation. Page 509 510. The mere gifted man shall not go
to Heaven: Where you have seventeen differences between gifts and grace. Page
84, 85, 86, 87. Of Growth. The afflictions and persecutions of the Saints, will
further the growth and increase of their grace. Page 403, 404, 405. Of Guilt.
Of guilt upon the conscience. Page 362, 363.
H.
Of Hatred. Where there is true holiness, there is a hatred of all ungodliness.
Page 109-123. Of Heaven. Ten arguments to prove that unholy persons have no
mind to go to Heaven. Page 64, 65, 66. Of Heaven. The more holy any man is,
the more actually ripe for heaven that man is. Page 493, 494. That there are
degrees of glory in Heaven: That some Saints shall partake of more glory in
Heaven then others shall, is approved by Scripture and Arguments from p. 517.
to p. 565. only observe, that next to p. 520. follows p. 553. all this
misfiguring of the pages will be prevented in the next impression. Objections
against degrees of glory in Heaven, answered from p. 565. to p. 572. Of Hell.
Unholy persons are doomed adjudged and sentenced to Hell. Page 57-62. Of an
Heir. Real holiness is a sure evidence that thou art an Heir of glory. Page
626, 627, 628, 629. Of Holiness. There is a sixfold holiness. Page 5-19.
Holiness is the honor and the glory of the creature. Page 183, 184, 185, 186.
Holiness is very attractive drawing and winning. Page 186, 187. 188. Holiness
is the excellency of all a man's excellencies. Page 188, 189, 190. Holiness is
an honor and an ornament both to the persons that have it, and also to the very
places where they were borne. Page 190, 191, 192, 193. Holiness is the very
ear-mark, the very livery and and badge of Christ's servants and subjects. Page
193, 194. A man of holiness is a common blessing, a public mercy. Page 194,
195, 196, 197. Holiness is of the greatest antiquity. Page 197, 198, 199.
Holiness will render you most beautiful and amiable. Page 199, 200, 201, 202.
Holiness is the most gainefull trade in the world, This is made good by five
Arguments. Page 202-216. Holiness will put the greatest splendour and majesty
upon persons, that can possibly be put upon them. Page 216, 217, 218. The times
wherein we live calls aloud for holiness. Page 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223,
224. Holiness will render you most like. 1. To God. 2. To Christ. 3. To the
blessed Angels. Page 224. 225, 226, 227, 228. Without holiness there is no
seeing, no enjoying of of God. Page 228, 229. Eight arguments proving that most
Christians have but a little holiness. Page 466-479. The more holiness any man
has, the more holiness God will give him. Page 495, 496. The more holiness any
man has, the more God will reveal himself to him. Page 498, 499, 500, 501,
502. None under Heaven are so strongly obliged to perfect holiness in the fear
of the Lord, as holy ones are. Page 505, 506, 507. The times require greater
measures of holiness, Page 512, 513. Christ will certainly preserve thy
holiness. Page 634, 635, 636. Of the Holiness of God. 1. God is essentially
holy. Page 585, 586. 2, God is unmixedly holy, the holiness of God is a pure
holiness. Page 586, 587, 588. 3. God is universally holy. Page 588. 4. God is
eminently holy, he is transcendently holy, he is superlatively holy. Page 588,
589, 590, 591. 5. God is origin^lly, radically and fundamentally holy. Page
591, 592, 6. God is independently holy. Page 592, 993. 7. God is constantly
holy, he is unchangeably holy. Page 593, 594. 8. God is exemplarily holy. Page
594. Of Holiness. Where ever real holiness is, it will discover it self. p.
639. Holiness rises by degrees. p. 639, 640. There is a great deal of
preciousness in the least degrees of holiness; and this is evidenced by an
induction of Ten particulars. 640, 641, 642. All Saints have not a like measure
of holiness. 643, 644. A Christian may have more holiness at one time, then at
another. 644, 645, 646, 647. There will come a time when even in this world
holiness shall be more general and more eminent. Page 647, 648, 649. Of Honor,
and of honoring of God. The more holiness is increased, the more the great God
will be honored. 494, 495. The highest degrees of holiness are commonly
attended with the highest degrees of honor. Page 510, 511, 512. Of Hypocrites.
Hypocrites shall not go to Heaven. Page 82, 83, 84.
I.
Of Idleness. We are to have no special communion with idle persons. Page 43,
44. Of Joy. Of Joy several considerable things. Page 352-369. The more holiness
any man attains to, the greater will be his Heaven of joy in this world. Page
496, 497, 498.
Of the Judgments of God. He that will be holy, must dwell much upon the
memorable Judgments of God, that in this life has fallen upon unholy persons.
Page 339, 340, 341.
K.
Four reasons why the Kingdom of Heaven is called the kingdom of God. Page 19.
L.
Of Labor. A holy heart will labor to make others holy. Page 132, 133, 134,
135. Of Life. Several Arguments proving the life of man to be but short. Page
292-296. Of Little sins. Five Reasons why a holy heart rises against little
sins. Page 113-120. Of a Little holiness. Most Christians have but a little
holiness, this is proved by eight Arguments. Page 469-479.
M.
Of Melancholy. Of Melancholy and the effects of it. Page 367, 368, 369. Of
Manifestations. The more holy any man is, the more God will manifest himself to
that man. Page 498, 499, 500, 501, 502. Of Marriages. Holy persons are not to
marry with those that are unholy. Page 56, 57. Of a scandalous Ministry, and of
a holy ministry. Settle not your selves under a lewd scandalous Ministry. 296,
297-299. See many considerable things in the Epistle concerning profane,
ignorant, scandalous, debauched Ministers. He that would perfect holiness in
the fear of the Lord, must fix and settle himself under a faithful holy
Ministry. Page 575, 576, 577. Of Mockers. Mockers shall not go to Heaven. Page
71, 72, 73, 74, 75, Of Mortifying of sin. He that would be more holy must fall
in good earnest with all his might upon mortifying his most raging corruptions,
and most darling sins. Page 582, 583, 584, 585. Of Mourners and mournings.
Seven reasons why a holy man mournes for other men's sins. 139-145. He that
would be holy must mourn over his own unholiness. 299, 300, 301. Mourn over
the loss of holiness. Page 466, 467, 468. Motives. Seven Motives to move you to
try whether you have any real holiness or no. 89-101. Fifteen Motives to get
holiness. 170-209. Seventeen Motives to perfect holiness in the fear of the
Lord. 469-517. The more spiritual Motives and considerations, carries a man on
in religious duties and services, the greater measures of holiness has that man
attained to. Page 606, 607; 608.
N.
Of Necessity. The necessity of holiness. Page 170, 171, 172, 173, 174. Of
Neuters. Neuters shall not go to Heaven. Page 79, 80, 81, 82. Number. The
Number of Saints not diminished, but increased by persecutions. Page 398, 399,
400, 401.
O.
Of Objections. 1. Ob. We have no power to make our selves holy, answered from
341-347. 2 Ob. But hereafter may be time enough to look after holiness; we may
yet spend a few more years in pursuing after the profits, pleasures, etc. of
the world. Ans. 347-352. 3. Ob. If we should press and pursue after holiness,
then we must take our farewell of all joy and comfort, of all delight and
pleasure, etc. Ans. 352-369. 4. Ob. We see that there are none so afflicted and
persecuted as those who mind holiness, who follow after holiness, etc. Ans.
369-423. 5. Ob. If we should labor after holiness, then we must resolve to be
poor and mean, and low in the world, for we shall never grow rich by
godliness. Ans. 423-433. 6. Ob. Should we pursue after holiness, it would be a
disgrace and dishonor to us, who are honorable, great, rich and high in the
world; we are high borne, we are Gentlemen, and well bred, and holiness seems
to be too poor, and too low a thing for such as we are to look after, Ans.
433-446. 7. Ob. Should we pursue after holiness, we shall be sure to be
reviled, reproached and slandered, and we shall become a scorn and a byword,
etc. to all that are round about us. Ans. Page 446-456. Of Obstinate sinners.
No special communion to be held with obstinate sinners. Page 48, 49. Of
Overcoming. The more a man can overcome evil with good, upon holy and gracious
accounts, the greater measure of holiness that person has attained to. Page
597, 598, 599, 600.
P.
Of Persecution and persecutors. Persecution has been the common lot and
portion of the people of God. 369, 370. Christ and his Apostles has long since
foretold us that afflictions and persecutions will attend us in this world.
370, 371, 372. Persecutions that befalls the Saints for holiness sake, shall
never hurt nor harm the Saints. 372, 373, 374, 375, 376. That the condition of
persecutors of all conditions under Heaven is the most sad and deplorable
condition, is made good by five Arguments. 376-389. That God will bare his
people company in all their afflictions and persecutions. 389, 390, 391, 392.
He shall be sure to suffer from Christ, that refuses to suffer, or that is
afraid to suffer persecution for Christ. 392, 393, 394, 395, 396. Many great
advantages that will redowne to Christians by all the afflictions and
persecutions that does befall them. 396-411. To fuffer afflictions and
persecutions for holiness sake, is the greatest honor that Christians are
capable of in this world. 411, 412, 413. The afflictions and persecutions that
commonly attend Christians in these days, are nothing to the fiery trials
that the Saints and Martyrs of old have been exercised with. 413, 414, 415.
Unholy persons have suffered as great and grievous things for the satisfying of
their lusts, etc. as Christians are like to suffer for their pursuing after
holiness. 415, 416. Though persecutions may attend the people of God, yet he
has very many ways to preserve his people from being ruined and destroyed by
persecuting hands. As 1. By laying a Law of restraint upon persecutors. 2. By
setting persecutors one against another. 3. By passing a sentence of death upon
persecutors. 4. By altering and changing the hearts of persecutors. 5. By
taking of persecutors feet in the same snares that they have laid for others.
6. By providing Cities of refuge and hiding places to shelter them. 416-420.
All the persecutions that the Saints meet with on earth, shall advance their
glory in Heaven. Page 420, 421, 422, 423. Of Perseverance. Christians must
persevere in their pursuit after holiness. Page 460, 461, 462. Of what is
Possible. It Is possible for unholy persons to be made holy; this is proved by
eight arguments. 174-183. It Is possible for those that are holy to attain to
greater measures of holiness then any yet they have attained to; and this is
proved by five Arguments. Page 479-488. Of Profane persons. Profane persons
shall not go to Heaven. Page 70, 71. Of False Prophets. No special communion
to be held with false Prophets. Page 47, 48. Of Prayer. He that will be holy
must be much in Prayer, and be sure (...) Of Vows. He that will be holy must
dwell much upon his solemn vows. Page 309, 310, 311, 312. Of Universal
Obedience. The more universal a man's obedience is, the more holy that man is.
Page 602, 603. Of Unbeleevers. We are to have no sacred, no speical communion
with unbeleevers. Page 42, 43. Of the Unholy. A holy person will be holy among
the unholy. Page 154, 155, 156, 157. Of the Use of earthly things. Holy persons
will be holy in the use of earthly and common things. Page 136, 137, 138. Of
Uprightness. Enduring of persecution, an argument of uprightness. Page 396,
397, 398.
W.
Of Waiting. He that will be holy must wait upon the word faithfully preached,
304-307. He that will be holy when he has done all must wait. Page 337, 338,
339. Of Wants. He that would perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord, should
labor to be more acquainted and affected with his spiritual wants. Page 572,
573. Of the Word. A holy man loves the word for its holiness. 144-147. How a
person may know when he is affected, and taken with the word as it is a holy
word, Answered 5 ways. Page 147-154. Of the World. Take heed of the world, and
why. 239-284. But here remember once for all, that by the Printers mistake,
next to page 240. follows 280. The next Impression will prevent this, and
other mistakes also. The more worldlings strive after the world, the more
Christians should strive to perfect holiness. Page 513, 514, 515. Of Worship.
Christians must stand for purity of worship, and why. Page 462, 463, 464, 465,
466. Of Working. All things shall work for good to the holy man. Page 636, 637,
638.
FINIS.

