depictions of the king and his privy council, the house of lords, the house of
commons, the lord bishops, and the convocation His Man and his Prive council
The House of Lords The house of Commons The Lord Bishops The Convocation

I. Ch: Sculp


Englands Glory, Or, an Exact CATALOGUE OF THE LORDS OF HIS MAJESTY'S Most
Honorable PRIVY COUNCEL. WITH The Knights of the most Noble Order of Saint
George, called the Garter, and the HOUSE of PEERS.

As also A Catalogue of the Lord Bishops, the House of Commons, the Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons and Baronets, etc. made since his
Majesty's happy Restoration, and the times of their several Creations; Likewise
a perfect List of the Knights of the Bath, and the Preparations and Habits that
were made for them at the time of their Installment at the Coronation; Together
with a perfect Catalogue of the Lower House of Convocation now sitting at
Westminster.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, and Hen. Eversden
at the Greyhound in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

A Perfect CATALOGUE OF HIS MAJESTY'S Most Honorable Privy Council.
HIs Royal HIGHNESS Duke of York. Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of
England. Earl of Southampton Lord Treasurer. Lord Roberts, Lord Privy Seal.
Duke of Albemarle. Duke of Ormond. Lord High Chamberlain, Earl of Lindsey. Lord
Chamberlain, Earl of Manchester. Algernon, Earl of Northumberland. Earl of
Leicester. Marquess of Dorchester. Earl of Berkshire. Earl of Norwich. Earl
of Saint Albanes. Viscount Say and Seal. Lord Wentworth. Lord Seymour,
Chancellor of the Dutchey. Lord Hollis. Annesley, Earl of Anglesey. Lord
Cooper. Earl of Carlisle. Earl of Sandwich. Lord Cornwallis. Earl of
Lauderdail. Sir Charles Berkley. Sir George Carteret. Secretary Nicholas.
Secretary Morice.
A Relation of the manner of the Election and Installation of the Noble Order
of St. George, at Windsore, etc.
THE Founder of this Noble Order was Edward the third King of England, a person
of a most accomplished Virtue, this most excellent Prince having exceedingly
prevailed both against the French and Scottish Kings, discomforted their
Armies, and taken one of them in Person, ordained this most Noble Order and
Society of Knights, so to adorn their Valor, manifested in the Wars with
honor the reward of Virtue. Their number 26. no more ut pretium faciat
raritas. The Laws and Statutes of this Noble Order were first Instituted and
devised by this Victorious Prince King Edward, of that name the third; after
revised and ratified by many of the succeeding Kings. And on the Reformation of
Religion much altered by King Edward the sixth.

In their Elections two things there are which they especially observe.

First, that the party nominated, be a Gentleman of Name, and Arms; for three
descents both by the Fathers side, and the Mothers side.

The second thing to be observed is, that the party nominated be without spot
or foul reproach: as viz: not convict of Heresy; nor attaint of Treason; nor by
his Prodigality and Riot decayed in his Estate, by means whereof he is not able
to conserve the Honor of his Order; nor such a one as ever fled in the day of
battle; his Sovereign Lord or his Lieutenant being in the field, In all which
cases a Knight elected and installed may also if it please the Sovereign, be
degraded.

The Party chosen by the Prince, if he be a stranger, is certified thereof soon
after by letters from the Sovereign: and many times the Statutes of that Order
have been sent unto him to consider of them, whether or no he will accept of
this Election. If he accept it (as no question but he will) then does the
Sovereign forthwith send unto him by his Ambassador and the chief Herald
(commonly) the whole Habit of the Order, with the Garter and the Collar
wherewith they do invest him. And on the other side, the Prince or Stranger so
invested, within convenient time, send their sufficient Deputy with a Mantle of
blew Velvet, to be installed in their room at St. GEORGES Church in Winsore.
But if the party chosen be a Subject of the Kingdom, the Garter is delievred to
him presently upon his Election, to signify that he is chose into the Order.
Afterward in the Chapter House, upon the reading of his Commission before the
Sovereign or his Deputy, he is invested with the Robe and with the Hood. Then
follows the Installment performed with many grave and magnificent Ceremonies:
which done, he does receive the Collar of the Order. This at their
Installations have always an Oath administered, that to their power, during the
time they shall be Fellows of the Order, they shall defend the Honor,
Quarrels, Rights and Lordships, of the Sovereign, and that they shall endeavor
to preserve the Honor of the said Order: and all the Statutes of ^t they shall
well observe, without fraud or covin.

Having thus spoken of the statutes of this most Noble Order whereby they are
and have been governed, we will descend in the next place to give you notice of
their Patron, which after the opinions of those times, they chose unto
themselves. Of which this Polydore Virgil. This order is (says he) dedicated
unto St. GEORGE as the chief Saint, and patron of the men of War; whose
Festival they therefore solemnly observe with many noble Ceremonies. But what
need Polidore have been produced unto this purpose, since from the Charter of
the Institution we have a testimony more authentical* For there King Edward
tells us that to the Honor of Almighty God, and of the Blessed Virgin St. Mary,
And of the Glorious Martyr St. GEORGE, Patron of the Right Noble Realm of
England, and to the exaltation of the Holy Catholic Faith, he had ordained,
established, created and founded within his Castle of Windsore, a company of
twenty six Noble Knights to be of the said most Noble Order of St. GEORGE,
named the Garter. It is true indeed what Polidore has well observed, with
great Ceremony and Solemnity the Knights do celebrate this Feast: Attending
both on the Vesper and the day it self at Divine Service, attired in the most
rich and stately Mantles of the Order: and gallantly adorned with their most
rich and sumptuous collars (which we call of SS.) the Image of St. GEORGE,
garnished with pearls and precious stones, appendant to them. In which their
going to the Church, and in their sitting at the Table, they go and set by two
and two, every one with his Fellow which is fore against him in his stall. And
if by chance it happen that his Fellow be not present, he does both go and set
alone, I say if it chance to happen: for all the Fellows are obliged to be
there personally present, without a just and reasonable cause acceptable to the
Sovereign or his Deputy, and signified by special letters of Excuse. Other Pomp
and rich magnificence of this Feast I forbear to mention, as being unable to
express it. The mind is then best satisfied in such things as this, when the
eye has seen them.

Now follows a perfect Catalogue of the Knights of the most Honorable Order
of the Garter, made by our Gracious Sovereign, King Charles the second.

That the Knights of this most honorable Order are called in Latin Equites
Georgiani, St. GEORGES Knights, and sometimes also in English, as in that
passage noted out of Poly Albion.

The other Ornaments and Habits belonging to this Order, besides the Garter;
are a Gown, a Kirtle, a Chapperon, a Cloak, a Girdle and a Collar: all stately
and Magnificent both for stuff and fashion, but worn only upon days of
Extraordinary solemnity for ordinary use, besides the Garter, which is for
every days wearing, and their Cloak with the Sun on the left shoulder of it in
his full Glory, which last was added by his late Majesty of ever Blessed
Memory, they have a blew Ribbon which they wear about their necks; with the
picture, or rather portraicture of the GEORGE appendant to it.

CHARLES the Second, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, and Sovereign
of the most Noble Order of St. George, called the Garter, was pleased to
dignifie therewith these persons following, Viz.
1649.
MAurice Count Palatine of the Rhene, the third surviving Son of the Queen of
Bohemia. James Butler Earl of Ossery, and Marquess of Ormond, made afterward
Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household, Earl of Brecknock, and Duke of Ormond.
Edward Count Palatine of the Rhene, another of the younger Sons of the Queen of
Bohemia. George Villiers Earl, Marquess, and Duke of Buckingham. William
Seymour Earl and Marquess of Hartford, declared to be one of this Order about
this time, but not invested in the same till the Month of May, An. 1660. after
which time he was advanced unto the Title of Duke of Somerset. Thomas
Wriothesly Earl of Southampton, had his Declaratory Letters at the same time
also, but not invested with the George and Garter till the Month of May
aforesaid, and not long after made Lord Treasurer of the Realm of England.
William Hamilton Duke and Marquess of Hamilton, Earl of Cambridge and Arran,
and Lord Secretary of Scotland. William Cavendish, Marquess and Earl of
Newcastle, Viscount Mansfield, etc. James Graham, Marquess and Earl of
Montrose in the Realm of Scotland, the Valiant and Victorious Commander of his
late Majesty's Forces in that Kingdom, Anno 1643. 1644. etc. James Stanley
Earl of Darby.
1653.
George Digby Earl of Bristol, and sometimes one of the principal Secretaries
to his late Sacred Majesty. Henry Duke of Gloucester, the Kings younges^
brother. Charles Prince of Tarante, the eldest Son to the Duke of Tremonille in
the Realm of France. William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, the onl^ Son of
William Prince of Orange, and the Princes^ Mary.
1654.
Frederick William Marquess and Elect^ of Brandenburgh, Duke of Prussia,
Pomeren, Clev^ and Gulick, etc.
1658.
Gasper Count of Marsham, a Commander ^f great note in the Armies of the King
of Spain against ^he French.
1660.
George Monck Lord General of all his Ma^esties forces both in England and
Scotland, created afterward Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torington, Lord Monk of
Poderidge, Lord Tayes and Beauchamp, and Master of his Majesty's Horse. Edward
Mountague Admiral of the Fleet which ^rought his Majesty into England, created
afterward ^arl of Sandwich, Lord Hinchinbrook, and Master ^f his Majesty's
Wardrobe. Aubrey de Vere the 21. Earl of Oxon. of that ^ame and family.
1661.
Charles Steuart Duke of Richmond and ^enox, Earl of March and Litchfield, etc.
Montague Bertue Earl of Lindsey, and Lord High ^hamberlain of England. Edward
Montague Earl of Manchester, Lord ^hamberlain of his Majesty's household.
William Wentworth Earl of Strafford, Viscount Wentworth, Lord Raby New-march;
in number ^e 457. person that has been chosen of the Order ^ce the first
Institution.
The Fellows and Companions of the most Noble Order of St. GEORGE, commonly
called the GARTER, as they now stand this present April, Anno 1661.
1. CHARLES the Second, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc. 2.
James Duke of York, the King's only Brother. 3. Charles Lodowick Prince Elector
Palatine. 4. Frederick William Marquess and Elector of Brandenburgh. 5. Rupert
Count Palatine of the Rhene, and Duke of Cumberland. 6. Edward Count Palatine
of the Rhene. 7. William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange. 8. Barnard Duke of
Espernon. 9. Charles Prince of Tarante. 10. William Cecil Earl of Salisbury.
11. Thomas Howard Earl of Barkshire. 12. Algernon Fercy Earl of Northumberland.
13. James Butler Duke of Ormond. 14. George Villiers Duke of Buckingham. 15.
Thomas Wriothesly Earl of Southampton. 16. William Cavendish Marquess of
Newcastle. 17. Gorge Digby Earl of Bristol. 18. Gasper Count of Marsham. 19.
George Monk Duke of Albemarle. 20. Edward Montague Earl of Sandwich. 21.
Awbrey de Vere Earl of Oxford. 22. Charles Steuart Duke of Richmond and Lenox.
23. Montague Bertue Earl of Lyndsey. 24. Edward Montague Earl of Manchester.
25. William Wentworth Earl of Strafford.
A Perfect CATALOGUE OF THE PEERS Of the Realm of England. VIZ. Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons, now sitting in this present
Parliament, began at Westminster the 8th day of May, in the 13th year of the
Reign of our Gracious Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the Second, etc. 1661.
According to their Dignities, Offices and Degrees, with the Names of the
Judges, and others called thither for their Assistants, and Officers of their
Attendances. Together with The Ancient Statute for placing the Lords in all
Parliaments, and other Assemblies and Conferences of COVNCILS.
Dukes of the Blood Royal.
JAMES Duke of York and Albany, Lord High Admiral of England. Rupert, Duke of
Cumberland.
These take place in respect of their Offices.
Edward Earl of Clarendon Lord Chancellor of England. Thomas Earl of
Southampton Lord Treasurer of England.
DUKES.
GEorge Duke of Buckingham. Charles Duke of Richmond. George Duke of Albemarl,
General of the Armies.
MARQUESSES.
JOhn Marquess of Winchester. Edward Marquess of Worcester. William Marqu. of
Newcastle. Henry Marquess of Dorchester.
EAR^
These also take place in respect of their Offices.
MOuntague Earl of Lindsey, Lord High Chamberlain of England. James Earl of
Brecknock, Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household. Edward Earl of Manchester,
Chamberlain of the Household.
Awbrey Earl of Oxford. Algernon Earl of Northumberland. Francis Earl of Salop.
Charles Earl of Derby. John Earl of Rutland. William Earl of Bedford. Philip
Earl of Pembroke and Mountgomery. Theophilus Earl of Lincoln Charles Earl of
Nottingham James Earl of Suffolk. Richard Earl of Dorset. William Earl of
Sarum. John Earl of Exon. John Earl of Bridgewater. Rob^t Earl of Leicester.
James Earl of Northampton. Charles Earl of Warwick. William Earl of Devon.
Basil Earl of Denbigh. George Earl of Bristol. Lionel Earl of Middlesex. Henry
Earl of Holland. John Earl of Clare. Oliver Earl of Bullingbrook. Mildmay Earl
of Westmerl. Thomas Earl of Berks. Thomas Earl of Cleveland. Edward Earl of
Mulgrave. Henry Earl of Monmouth. James Earl of Marlborough. Thomas Earl of
Rivers. Henry Earl of Dover. Henry Earl of Peterborough. Henry Earl of
Stamford. Henry Earl of Winchelsey. Charles Earl of Carnarvan. Mountjoy Earl of
Newport. Philip Earl of Chesterfield. John Earl of Thanet. Jeremy Earl of
Portland. William Earl of Stafford. Robert Earl of Sunderland. James Earl of
Sussex. George Earl of Norwich. Nicholas Earl of Scarsdale. Henry Earl of St.
Albans. Edward Earl of Sandwich. Edward Earl of Claren^. Arthur Earl of Essex.
Thomas Earl of Cardigan. Arthur Earl of Anglesey. John Earl of Bathe. Charles
Earl of Carlisle.
VISCOUNTS.
LEicester Viscount Hereford. Francis Viscount Mountag. William Viscount Say
and Seal. Edward Viscount Conway. Baptist Viscount Cambden. William Viscount
Stafford. Thomas Viscount Faulconberg. John Viscount Mordant.
BARONS.
John Lord Nevil of Aburgavenny. James Lord Tutchett of Awdley. Charles Lord
West de La Ware. George Lord Berkley of Berkley. Thomas Lord Parker of Morley
and Mountegle. Francis Lord Dares. Conyers Lord Darcy of Darcy. William Lord
Stourton of Stourton. William Lord Sandys De Le Vine. Edward Lord Vaux of
Harrowden. Thomas L^ Windsor. Thomas Lord Wentworth. Wingfield Lord Cromwell.
George Lord Bruce. Philip Lord Wharton of Wharton. Francis Lord Willoughby of
Parham. William Lord Pagit of Beaudesert. Dudley Lord North. William Lord
Shandos of Sudeley. John Lord Carey of Hunsdon. William Lord Peter. Dutton Lord
Gerard of Gerards Bromley. Charles Lord Stanhop of Harrington. Henry Lord
Arundel of Wardour Christopher Lord Roper Tenham. Robert Lord Brook. Edward
Lord Mountague of Boughton. Charles Lord Howard of Charlton. William Lord Gray
of Warke. John Lord Roberts of Truro William Lord Craven of Hampstead. John
Lord Lovelace of Hurley. John Lord Paulet of Hinton Saint George. William Lord
Maynard. Thomas Lord Coventry of Aylesborow. Edward Lord Howard of Escrick.
Warwick Lord Mohun. Percy Lord Herbert of Powis. Edward Lord Herbert of
Cherbury. Francis Lord Seymour of Trowbridge, Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster. Thomas Lord Bruce of Wharleton. Francis Lord Newport of High arcall.
Thomas Lord Leigh. Christopher Lord Hatton. Henry Lord Hastings of
Loughborough. Richard Lord Byron. Richard Lord Vaughan. Charles Lord Smith of
Carrington. William Lord Widdrington. Humble Lord Ward. Thomas Lord Culpeper of
Thoresway. Isaac Lord Astley of Bramford. Richard Lord Boil of Clifford. John
Lord Lucas. John Lord Bellafis. Lodowick Lord Watson of Rockingham. Charles.
Lord Gerard of Brandon. Robert Lord Sutton of Lexington. Charles Lord Kirkhoven
of Wotton. Marmaduke Lord Langdale of Holme. William Lord Crofts. John Lord
Berkley of Stratton. Denzill Lord Hollis of Ifeild. Frederick Lord Cornwallis
of Eye. George Lord De La-Mere of Dunham Massey. Horatio Lord Townsend of Lynn
Regis. Anthony Lord Ashley de Winborn Saint Giles. John Lord Crew de Stene.
The Names of the ASSISTANTS in the House of PEERS.
Sir Robert Foster Knight, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. Sir Harbotle
Grimston Baronet, Master of the Rolls, Orlando Bridgman, Knight and Baronet,
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Matthew Hale, Chief Baron of the Exchequor.
Thomas Mallet Knight, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench. Thomas Twisden
Knight, one other of the Justices of the Kings Bench. Wadham Windham Knight,
one other Justice of the Kings Bench. Robert Hyde Knight, one of the Justices
of the Common Pleas. Thomas Terill Knight, one other Justice of the Common
Pleas. S^el Brown Knight, one other Justice of the Common Pleas. Edward Atkins
Knight Christopher Turner Knight
Barons of the Exchequer. Jeffery Palmer Knight, Attorney General. John Glynne
Knight William Wild Knight
Sergeants at Law. Edward Nicholas Knight, chief Secretary.
Masters of the Chancery attending according to the direction of the Lord
Chancellor.

The Officers attending there.
The Clerk of the Crown. The Clerk of the Parliament. The Usher of the black
Rod. The Yeoman-Usher.
The Placing of the Lords in Parliament, and other Assemblies and Conferences
of Councils, as established by Act of Parliament, 31 H. 8. 10.
1. That no person or persons of what Estate, Degree or Condition soever, he or
they be (except only the Kings Children) shall at any time hereafter attempt or
presume, to sit or have place at any side of the Cloth of Estate in the
Parliament Chamber, neither of one hand of the Kings Majesty, nor of the
other, whether the Kings Majesty be there personally present or absent.

2. Every person which shall have the office of Vicegerent Ecclesiastical of
the grant of the K. Highness, his heirs or successors shall sit and be placed
in this and all Parliaments hereafter, to be holden on the right side of the
Parliament Chamber, and upon the same Form that the Archbishop of Canterbury
sits on, and above the said Archbishop and his successors, and shall have
voice in every Parliament or assent or dissent, as other the Lords of the
Parliament.

3. That next to the Vicegerent shall sit the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
then next to him on the same form and side the Archbishop of York, and next to
him on the same form and side the Bishop of London, and next to him on the
same side and form the Bishop of Duresme, and next to him on the same side and
form the Bishop of Winchester, and then all other Bishops shall sit and be
placed on the same side after their Ancients, as it has been accustomed.

4. That, The Lord Chancellor The Lord Treasurer The Lord President of the
Kings Council. And The Lord Privy Seal.
Being of the Degree of Barons of the Parliament, or above, shall sit and be
placed as well in this, as in all other Parliaments hereafter to be holden on
the left side of the said Parliament-Chamber on the higher part of the form of
the same side, above all Dukes, except only such as shall happen to be the
Kings Son, the Kings Brother, the Kings Uncle, the Kings Nephew, or the Kings
Brothers or Sisters Sons.

5. That the Great Chamberlain shall sit and be placed after the Lord Privy
Seal, in manner and form following, that is to say, every of them shall sit and
be placed above all other Personages, being of the same Estates or Degrees that
they shall happen to be of.

Next, The Constable The Marshall The Lord Admiral The Great Master or Lord
Steward. The Kings Chamberl. etc.


6. That the Kings chief Secretary, being of the Degree of a Baron of the
Parliament, shall sit and be placed before and above all Barons, not having any
of the Offices aforementioned; and if he be a Bishop, that then he shall sit
and be placed above all other Bishops, not having any of the Offices
aforementioned.

7. All Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons, not aforementioned,
not having any of the Offices aforesaid, shall sit and be placed after their
Ancienty, as it has been accustomed.

8. That if any person or persons which at any time hereafter shall happen to
have any of the said Offices of Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord resident
of the Kings Council Lord Privy Seal. Or Chief Secretary.
who is under the Degree of a Baron of the Parliament, by reason whereof they
can have no interest to give any Assent or Dissent in the said House, that then
in every such case, such of them as shall happen to be under the degree of a
Baron, shall sit and be placed at the uppermost part of the Woolsacks, in the
midst of the said Parliament chamber, either there to sit upon one form, or
upon the uppermost woolsack, the one of them above the other in Order, as is
above rehearsed.

9. That in all Trials of Treasons by Peers of this Realm, if any of the Peers
that shall be called hereafter to be Triers of such Treasons, shall happen to
have any of the Offices aforesaid, that then they having such Offices, shall
sit and be placed according to their Offices, above all the other Peers that
shall be called to such Trial, in manner and form as is above mentioned and
rehearsed.

10. That as well in all Parliaments, and in all other Assemblies and
Conferences of Councils. The Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord
Presidents, the Lord Privy Seal, the great Chamberlain, the Constable, the
Marshal, the Lord Admiral, the Grand Master, or Lord Steward, the Kings
Chamberlain, and the Kings chief Secretary shall sit and be placed in such
order and fashion as is above rehearsed, and not in any other place.

A Perfect CATALOGUE of all the Archbishops and Bishops in England and Wales,
established by his Majesty King CHARLES the Second, Ranked in their Order,
whereof the Five first take place by Act of Parliament, the rest according to
their Consecration.
(*) Notes the Ancient Bishops, Y. the Diocesses in the Province of York, all
the rest in the Province of Canterbury.

Counties under their Iurisdict. Parish. in each Dio. (*) Doctor William Juxon
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England. (
Consecrated Anno 1633.)

Has Canterbury and Rochester
have all Kent 257 98
(*) Doctor Accepted Frewen Lord Archbishop of York, and Metropolitan of
England. (Y) ( Consecr. 1634.)

Yorkshire Nottinghamshire.
581 Doctor Gilbert Shelden Lord Bi^hop of London. Consecrat. Oct. 28. 1660.

Essex Middlesex Hartfordsh. part.
623 Doctor John Cossens Lord Bishop ^f Durham, Y. Consecrat. Dec. 2. 1660.

Durham Northumb. Man Isle.
135 (*) Doctor Brian Duppa Lord ^ishop of Winchester. Prelate of the Garter.
Consecrat. 1638.

Hamshire Surrey Wight Isle Guersney Isle Jersey Isle.
362 (*) Doctor William Peirs Lord ^ishop of Bath and Wells. Consecrat. 1632.

Somersetsh.
388 (*) Doctor Robert Skinner Lord ^ishop of Oxford. Consecrat. 1636.

Oxfordshire.
195 (*) Doctor William Roberts ^rd Bishop of Bangor. Consecrat. 1637.

Carnarvonsh Anglesey Isle Merioneth Denbysh. part
107 (*) Doctor John Warner Lord ^ishop of Rochester. Consecrat. 1637.

Kent part.
98 (*) Doctor Matthew Wren Lord Bishop of Ely. Consecrat. 1638.

Cambridgsh. Ely Isle.
141 (*) Doctor Henry King Lord Bishop of Chichester. Consecrat. 1641.

Sussex Hartfordsh. part.
557 Doctor Humphrey Hinchman Lord Bishop of Salisbury. Consecrat. Oct. 28.
1660.

Wiltshire Berkshire.
248 Doctor George Morley Lord Bishop of Worcester. Consecrat. Oct. 28. 1660.

Worcestersh. Warwicksh. part.
241 Doctor Robert Sanderson Lord Bishop of Lincoln. Consecrat. Oct. 28. 1660.

Lincolnsh. Leicestersh. Huntingdons. Bedfordsh. Buckinghams. Hartfordsh. p.
12^ Doctor George Griffith Lord Bishop of Saint Asaph. Consecrat. Oct. 28.
1660.

Denbysh. part. Flintsh. part.
121 Doctor William Lucey Lord Bishop of Saint David's. Consecrat. Dec. 2. 1660.

Pembroksh. Carmarthenshire.
308 Doctor Benjamin Lancy Lord Bishop of Peterborough. Consecrat. Dec. 2. 1660.

Northamptonshire Rutlandsh.
29^ Doctor Hugh Lloyd Lord Bishop of Landaff. Consecrat. Dec. 2. 1660.

^lamorgansh Monmouthsh Brecknocksh. Radnorsh. pt.
177 Doctor Richard Stern Lord Bishop of Carlisle, Y. Consecrat. Dec. 2. 1660.

Cumberland part. Westmerland.
93 Doctor Brian Walton Lord Bishop of Chester, Y. Consecrat. Dec. 2. 1660.

Cheshire Richmondsh. Flintsh. part. Cumberl. pt. Lancashire.
256 Doctor John Gawden Lord Bishop of Exeter. Consecrat. Dec. 2. 1660.

Devonshire. Exeter City. Cornwall.
623 Doctor Gilbert Ironside Lord Bishop of Bristol. Consecrat. Jan. 13. 1660.

Bristol City. Dorsetshire.
236 Doctor Edward Reynolds Lord Bishop of Norwich. Consecrat. Jan. 13. 1660.

Norfolk Suffolk
1121 Doctor William Nicholson Lord Bishop of Gloucester. ( Consecr. Ja. 13.
1660.)

Glocestersh.
267 Doctor Nicholas Monck Lord Bishop of Hereford. [ Consecr. Ja. 13. 1660.]

Herefordsh. Shropsh. part. Worcestersh. part. Radnorsh. par.
313 (...) Lord Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, formerly Prebend of Durham.
Warw^cksh. p. Staffordsh. Derbysh. Shropsh. part.
241

THE NAMES OF THE Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinque Ports
of ENGLAND and WALES, For the PARLIAMENT Begun at WESTMINSTER The eighth of
May, 1661. as they are returned in to the Crown-Office.
SIR Edw. Turner Speaker.

Bedford.
Robert Lord Bruce. Sir Humphrey Winch, Baronet.
Town of Bedford.
John Keeling Sergeant at Law. Richard Tailor, Esquire; Sir Samuel Luke Knight.
Richard Tailor, Esquire;
Berks.
John Lovelace, Esquire; Richard Powle, Esquire;
Borough of New Windsor.
Sir Richard Braham Knight. Thomas Higgens Esquire;
Borough of Reading.
Sir Tho: Dolman Knight. Richard Aldworth Esquire;
Borough of Wallingford.
George F^ne Esquire; Robert Pa^ker Esquire;
Borough of Abingdon.
Sir Geo. Stonehouse Baronet.
Bucks.
Sir William Bowyer Knight. and Bar Col. William Tyrringham, Esquire;
Borough and Parish of Buckingham.
Sir Richard Temple Bar. William Smith Esquire;
Borough of Cheping-wicomb.
Sir Edmond Pie, Knight and Bar. Sir John Burlacy Baronet.
Borough of Alisbury.
Sir Richard Ingoldsby, Sir Tho. Leigh Baronet.
Borough of Admonsham.
Sir William D^ak Knight and Bar. Thomas Proby, Esquire;
Borough of Wendover.
Richard Hambden Esquire; Robert Crook Esquire;
Borough of great Marlow.
Peregrine Hobby Esquire; Will. Burlace Esquire;
Cambridge.
Thomas Chichely Esquire; Thomas Wendey Esquire;
University of Cambridge.
Sir Richard Fanshaw Baronet. Tho. Croutch Mr. of Arts.
Town of Cambridge.
Sir William Compion Knight. Roger Pepys, Esquire;
Cheshire.
William Lord Brereton. Peter Venables Esquire;
City of Chester.
Sir Thomas Smith, Knight. John Ratcliff, Esquire;
Cornwall.
Jonathan Treslawny Esquire; John Coryton Esquire;
Borough of Dunhivid, alias Lanceston.
Sir Charles Harbord Knight. Richard Edgecomb, Esquire;
Borough of Leskard.
John Harris Esquire; Peter Prideaux Esquire;
Borough of Loswithall.
Sir Chichester Wrey Knight. and Bar. James Bultele, Esquire;
Borough of Truro.
Nich. Arundell Esquire; Edward Boscowe Esquire; William Brewerton Esquire; Arthur Trevor
Esquire;
Borough of Bodmyn.
Sir John Carew, Baronet. Hander Roberts, Esquire; Sir James Smith, Knight. Sir
John Carew, Baronet. Bernard Greenvile, Esquire;
Borough of Helston.
Sir Peter Killegr^w, Knight. Thomas Robinson, Esquire;
Borough of Saltash.
Francis Buller, Jun. Esquire; John Buller Esquire;
Borough of Comelford.
Thomas Coventry Esquire; Charles Rascarrock Esquire; Bernard Greenvile Esquire;
Borough of Port-Pigham alias Westlowe.
John Nicholas Esquire; John Trelawny Esquire;
Borough of Grawpound.
Charles Trevanion Esquire; John Tanner Esquire;
Borough of Eastlowe.
Henry Seymor Esquire; Robert Atkins Esquire;
Borough of Pemyn.
William Pendavis Esquire; John Birch Esquire;
Borough of Tregony.
Hugh Bolcowen Esquire; Tho. Herle Esquire;
Borough of Bossiney.
Robert Roberts Esquire; eldest Son to the Lord Roberts. Richard Rouse Esquire; Anthony
Buller Esquire;
Borough of St. Ives.
John Basset Esquire; James Prade Esquire; Edward Nosworth Esquire;
Borough of Fowey.
Jonathan Rashleigh Esquire; John Rashleigh Esquire;
Borough of St. Iermines.
John Ellyot Esquire; Edward Ellyot Esquire;
Borough of Michaell.
Sir Edward Mosely, Baronet. Matthew Wien Esquire; Humphrey Burlace Esquire; Matthew
Wren Esquire;
Borough of Newport.
John Speckot, Esquire; Sir Francis Drake, Baronet,
Borough of Mawes.
Sir Will. Tredenham, Knight. Arthur Sprey Esquire; Sir Rich. Vivian, Knight and
Bar.
Borough of Kellington.
Sir Cyrill Which, Knight. Anthony Buller, Esquire;
Cumberland.
Sir Patrick Corwin, Bar. Sir George Fletcher, Bar.
City of Carlisle.
Sir Phillip Howard, Knight. Christopher Musgrave, Esquire;
Borough of Cockermouth.
Sir Wilfred Lawson, Knight. Hugh Potter, Esquire;
Derbie.
William Lord Cavendish. John Fretchvile, Esquire;
Borough of Derby.
Roger Alestre. John Daltons, Esquire;
Devon.
Sir Hugh Pollard, Knight and Bar. Sir John Roll, Knight.
City of Exeter.
Sir James Smith, Knight. Robert Walker Esquire;
Borough of Totnes.
Sir Edward Seymor, Bar. Thomas Clifford, Esquire;
Borough of Plymouth.
Sir William Morris Knight, principal Secretary of State. Samuel Trelawny,
Esquire;
Town and Borough of Okehampton.
Edward Wise, Esquire; Sir Thomas Hele Bar.
Borough of Barnstable.
Sir John Chichester, Bar. Nicholas Dennis Esquire;
Borough of Plymton.
Sir William Strode, Knight. Thomas Hele, Esquire;
Borough of Honiton.
Sir Courtney Pole, Bar. Peter Prideaux, Esquire;
Borough of Tavistock.
George Howard Esquire; William Russell Esquire; Sir John Davy, Bar.
Borough of Ashberton.
Sir George Sonds of Kent, Knight. of the Bath. John Fowell, Esquire;
Borough of Clifton.
William Harbord Esquire; Thomas Southcote Esquire;
Borough of Berealston.
Sir John Maynard Knight. Ellis Crimes, Esquire; Sir John Maynard, Knight. George
Howard. Esquire;
Borough of Tiverton.
Sir. Tho. Stukely, Knight. Thomas Carew, Esquire;
Dorcet.
Gyles Strangewayes, Esquire; John Stroud Esquire;
Town of Poole.
John Morton Esquire; Will. Constantine Esquire; John Morton Esquire; Sir John Fitzjames,
Knight.
Borough of Dorchester.
Denzill Hollis Esquire; James Gould Esquire;
Borough of Lyme Regis.
Sir John Shaw, Knight. Henry Henly, Esquire;
Borough of Weymouth.
Sir John Strangewayes Knight. Winston Churchill, Esquire;
Melcome Regis.
Coll. Bu^en Reimes. Esquire; Sir William Pen Knight.
Borough of Brideport.
Humphrey Bishop Esquire; John Strangewayes Esquire;
Borough of Shaston.
Henry Whicaker Esquire; John Low Esquire;
Borough of Wareham.
George Pe^t Esquire; Robert Culliford Esquire; Robert Laurence Esquire; George Pit Esquire;
Borough of Corfe-castle.
Sir Ralph Banks, Knight. John Tregonnel, Esquire;
Essex.
Sir Benjamine Ay^offe, Bar. Sir John Bramston Knight of the Bath.
Borough of Coulchester.
Sir Harbottle Grimston Knight, Master of the Rolls. John Shaw Esquire; Recorder.
Borough of Maldon.
Sir John Ty^rel Knight. Sir Richard Wiseman, Knight.
Borough of Harwich.
Sir Henry Wright, Knight. and Bar. Thomas King, Esquire;
Gloucester:
John Grubham How, Esquire; Sir Baynham Throgmorton, Knight.
City of Gloucester.
Sir Edward Masley, Knight. Evan S^ys, Sergeant at Law.
Borough of Cirencester.
James Earl of Newbrough. John George, Esquire;
Borough of Tewksbury.
Henry Capel, Esquire; Rich. Dowdeswel, Esquire;
Hereford.
James Scudamore, Esquire; Anthony Price, Esquire;
City of Hereford.
Sir Henry Lyngen, Knight. Sir Edward Hopton, Knight.
Borough of Lempster.
Rich. Grahme Esquire; Humph. Cornwall Esquire;
Borough of Weobly.
Thomas Tomkins Esquire; John Barnaby, Esquire;
Hertford.
Sir Rich. Franckline Knight. and Bar. Sir Tho. Fanshaw Knight. of the Bath.
Borough of St. Albans.
Richard Jennings, Esquire; Tho. Arris Doctor of Physic.
Borough of Hertford.
Sir Edw. Turner, Knight. Tho. Fanshaw Jun. Knight. of the Bath.
County of Huntingdon.
Robert Mandevile Viscount. Henry Williams, Esquire;
Huntingdon Town.
John Cotton Esquire; Lionel Walden, Esquire;
Kent.
Sir Thomas Payton, Baronet. Sir John Tufton Knight. and Bar.
City of Canterbury.
Fran. Lovelace Esquire; Recorder. Sir Edward Masters, Knight.
City of Rochester.
Sir Francis Clark, Knight. Sir William Barten, Knight.
Borough of Maidstone.
Sir Edmund Pierce, Knight. Robert Barnham Esquire;
Borough of Queenborough.
James Herbert Esquire; Sir Edward Hales Baron.
Lancaster.
Edward Stanley Esquire; Sir Roger Bradshaw, Knight.
Borough or Town of Lancaster.
Sir John Harrison, Knight. Richard Kirkby Esquire;
Borough or Town of Preston in Amonderness.
Edward Rigby Esquire; Ieoffry Rishton Esquire;
Borough of Newton.
Richard Leigh, Esquire; John Vaughan, Esquire;
Borough of Wigan.
Charles Earl of Ancram. Jeoffry Shackerly, Esquire;
Borough of Clitherow.
Sir Ralph Ashton, Bar. John Heath, Esquire;
Borough of Liverpool.
William Stanley, Esquire; Sir Gilbert Ireland, Knight.
Leicester.
John Lord Roos. Sir George Fawnt.
Borough of Leicester.
John Gray of Land. Esquire; Sir William Hartopp of Ro^herby Knight. Sir William
Hartopp. Sir John Prettyman, Knight. and Bar.
Lincoln.
George Viscount Sanderson. Charles Huffey Esquire;
City of Lincoln
Sir Robert Bowls Baronet. Sir Thomas Meers Knight.
Borough of Boston.
Robert Lord Willoughby of Eresby. Sir Anthony Irby Knight. Robert Lord Willoughby
of Eresby. Thomas Thory, Esquire;
Town of great Grimsby.
Iervas Hollis, Esquire; Adrian Scroope, Esquire;
Town of Stamford.
William Montague Esquire; William Stafford Esquire;
Borough of Grantham.
John Newton, Esquire; Sir Will. Thorold Knight. and Bar.
Middlesex.
Sir Lancelot Lake, Knight. Sir Tho. Allen, Knight.
City of Westminster.
Sir Philip Warwick, Knight. Sir Richard Everard, Knight.
London.
John Fowke, Esquire; Sir William Thompson, Knight. Will. Love, Esquire; Alderman. John
Jones, Esquire;
Monmouth.
Henry L. Herbert of Ragland. William Morgan, Esquire;
Borough of Monmouth.
Sir George Robert Knight.
Norfolk.
Thom. Lord Richardson Bar. of Cramond. Sir Ralph Hare, Baronet.
City of Norwich.
Francis Cory Esquire; Christopher Jay Esquire;
Town of Kingslynn.
Edward Walpoole, Esquire; Sir William Hovell, Knight.
Town of great Yarmouth.
William Coventry Esquire; Sir William Dowley, Knight.
Borough of Thetford.
Sir Allen Appesly, Knight. Will. Gaudy Esquire;
Borough of Castlerising.
Sir Robert Paston, Knight. Robert Steward Esquire;
Northampton.
Sia Justinian Isham, Baronet. George Clarke, Esquire;
City of Peterborough.
Charles Lord de Le Spencer.
Town of Northampton.
Sir John Norwich Knight. and Bar. Sir James Langham Knight.
Town of Brackley.
Robert Spencer, Esquire; Sir William Farmer, Baronet.
Borough of Higham Feries.
Lewis Palmer, Esquire; Son to Sir Ieoffry Palmer his Majesty's Attorney General.
Northumberland.
Henry Lord Cavendish Viscount Mansfield. Sir William Fenwick. Bar.
Town of Newcastle upon Tyne.
Sir Francis Anderson, Knight. Sir John Marley, Knight.
Borough of Morpeth.
Sir George Downing, Knight. Henry Widdrington Esquire;
Town of Barwick upon Tweede.
Sir Thomas Widdrington. Knight. Edward Gray Esquire;
Nottingham.
Sir Gervase Clifton Knight. and Bar. Anthony Eyres, Esquire;
Town of Nottingham.
Arthur Stanhope, Esquire; Rob. Pierpoint, Esquire;
Borough of Estretford.
Sir William Hickman, Baronet. Clifford Clifton Esquire;
Oxford.
Henry Lord Viscount Faulkland. Sir Anthony Cope, Baronet.
University of Oxford.
Lawrence Hide, Esquire; son to the Lord Chancellor. Sir Hencage Finch Knight. and Bar.
City of Oxford.
Richard Croke Esquire; Recorder. Brom Wharwood Es.
Borough of New Woodstock.
Sir Thomas Spencer Baronet. Sir William Fleetwood.
Borough of Banbury.
Sir John Holman, Baronet.
Rutland.
Edward Noell Esquire; Philip Sherrard Esquire; brother to the Lord Sherrard.
Salop.
Sir Francis Lawly Baronet. Sir Richard Oatly, Bar.
Town of Salop.
Andrew Newport Esquire; Thomas Jones Esquire;
Borough of Bruges alias Bridgnorth.
Sir William Whitmore Baronet. John Bennet Esquire;
Borough of Ludlow.
Job Carleton Serj. at Law. Tim. Littleton Esquire; Serj. at Law.
Borough of great Wenlock.
* Sir Thomas Littleton Baronet. George Weld Esquire;
Town of Bishops Castle.
Edmund Waring, Esquire; Will. Okely, Esquire;
Somerset.
Sir John Stowel Knight. Bath. Edward Phillips Esquire;
City of Bristoll.
Thomas Earl or Ostory. John Knight Esquire; Sir Humphrey Hook. John Knight, Esquire;
City of Bath.
Alexander Poph^m Esquire; William Prynne Esquire; Sir Charles Be^kley. Sir Tho.
Bridges.
City of Wells.
Richard Lord Butler, second son to the Duke of Ormond. Sir Maurice Berckley
Knight. and Bar.
Borough of Taunton.
Sir William Portman Bar. Sir William Windham.
Borough of Bridgewater.
Edmund Windham Esquire; John Tint Esquire;
Borough of Minehead.
Sir Hugh Windham. Francis Lutterell Esquire;
Borough of Ilchester.
Edward Phillips Recorder, Esquire; Henry Dunstar Esquire;
Borough of Milborne Port.
Francis Windham Esquire; Michael Mallett Esquire; Henry Milborne Esquire; Mich. Mallet,
Esquire; of Poyntington.
Southampton.
Charles Lord St John's. of Basing. Sir John Norton.
City of Winchester.
Lawrence Hide, Esquire; Rich. Goddard, Esquire;
Town of Southampton.
Will Leg, Esquire; Sir. Rich. Ford.
Town of Portsmouth.
Rich. Norton, Esquire; Sir Geo. Carteret Knight. and Bar.
Borough of Yarmouth.
Rich. Lucv, Esquire; Edw. S^h. Esquire;
Borough of Petersfield.
Sir Humph. Bennet. Arthur Bold, Esquire;
Borough of Newport.
Will. Glascock, Esquire; Will. Oglander, Esquire;
Borough of Stockbridge.
Henry Whitehead, Esquire; Sir Robert Howard. Sir Robert Howard. Robert Phillips,
Esquire;
Borough of New Town.
Sir John Barrington, Knight. and Bar. Sir Henry W^rsley, Bar.
Borough of Christ-Church.
Humph. Wield, Esquire; Henry Tulse, Esquire;
Borough of Whit-church.
Hen Wallop of Farley Wallop Esquire; Giles Hungerford, Esquire;
Borough of Lymington.
Sir W^lliam ^ewis, Baronet. John Bulckley, Esquire;
Town of Andover.
Sir John Tr^tt Baronet, John Collins, Esquire;
Stafford.
Sir Thomas Leigh. Randolph Edgerton, Esquire;
City of Lichfield.
Col. John Lane, Esquire; Sir Theophilus Biddulph.
Borough of Stafford.
Robert Milward Esquire; Recorder. William Cherwind Esquire;
Newcastle under line.
Sir Caesar Colchlow. Edward Manwaring.
Borough of Tamworth.
Amos Waltond, Esquire; John Swinfen, Esquire;
Suffolk.
Sir Henry Felton Baronet. Sir Henry North Baronet.
Borough of Ipswich.
John Syclemore Esquire; William Bloyse Esquire;
Borough of Dunwich.
Sir John Rouse Baronet. Richard Coke Esquire;
Borough of Orford.
Sir Allen Broderick. Walter Deveraux Esquire;
Borough of Alborough.
Sir Robert Brook, Sir John Ballard. Baronet.
Borough of Sudbury.
Isaac Appleton, Esquire; Thomas Walgrave, Esquire; Robert Cordel, Knight. and Baron. Sir
Thomas Bernardiston.
Borough of Eye.
Charles Cornwallis Esquire; Sir George Reeve.
Borough of St. Edmundsbury.
Sir Edward Pooly. Sir John Duncomb.
Surrey.
Adam Brown, Esquire; Sir Edw. Bowyer.
Borough of Southwarck.
Sir Thomas Bloodworth. George Moore Esquire;
Borough of Blechingley.
Sir William Haward. Edward Bish Esquire;
Borough of Ryegate.
Edward Thurland Esquire; Roger James Esquire;
Borough of Guilford.
Sir Richard Onslow. Arthur Onslow Esquire;
Borough of Gatton.
Thomas Sturges Esquire; William Ofeild Esquire;
Borough of Haslemore.
George Evelyn, Esquire; Thomas Morris, Esquire; James Gresham, Esquire; Chaloner Chure,
Esquire;
Sussex.
Sir John Pelham, Bar. John Ashbournham Esquire;
City of Chichester.
Henry Pickham Esquire; Will Gar^way, Esquire;
Borough of Horsham.
Sir John Covert, Knight. and Bar. Henry Chown, Esquire;
Borough of Midhurst.
John L^kenor Esquire; Adam Brown, Esquire;
Borough of Jews.
Sir John Stapely. Sir Thomas Woodcock.
Borough of New Shoreham.
Sir Herbert Springer, Knight. and Bar. Edward Blaket Esquire;
Borough of Bramber.
John Byne Esquire; P^ercy Goring Esquire; John Byne Esquire; John Persons, Esquire;
Borough of Steyning.
Henry Goring Esquire; John Fagg Esquire;
Borough of East-Grinstead.
Charles Lord B^ckhust. George Courthoppe Esquire;
Borough of Arundel.
Roger Earl of Orrery, Lord Broghal. Francis Lord Angier.
Warwick.
Sir Robert Holt, Baronet. Sir Henry Puckering, alias Newton, Baronet.
City of Coventry.
Sir Clement Fisher, Knight. and Bar. Thomas Flint Esquire;
Borough of Warwick.
Sir Clement Throck norton. Hen Puckring, alis Newton, Esquire;
Westmerland.
Sir Philip Musgrave, Baronet. Sir Thomas Strickland.
Borough of Appleby.
John Lowther Esquire; John Dalston Esquire;
Wilts.
Henry Hide, Son to the Earl of Clarendon. Charles Seymour, Son to tho Lord
Seymour.
City of New Sarum.
Edw. Tooker, Esquire; Francis Swanton Esquire;
Borough of Wilton.
John Nicholas Esquire; Thomas Mompesson, Esquire;
Borough of Downton.
Gilbert Raleigh. Walter Bookland. Gyles Air, Junior. John Elliot, Esquire;
Borough of Hindon.
Sir George Grubham-How Bar. Edward Seymor Esquire; Sir Charles Herbert.
Borough of Heytsbury.
Sir Charles Barkley. Henry Coker Esquire; Sir Joseph Ash of Twitenham. John
Iolliffe of London, Esquire;
Borough of Westbury.
Richard Lewis. Tho. Francklin Esquire;
Borough of Calne.
George Lo^, Esquire; Will. Duck^, Esquire;
Borough of Devizes
William York, Esquire; John K^nt, Esquire;
Borough of Chipenham.
Edward Hungerford Esquire; Henry Baynton Esquire; Sir Hugh Speek Baronet.
Borough of Malmsbury.
Sir Francis Henry Lee, Baronet. Lawrence Washington Esquire;
Borough of Cricklade
Sir Geo. Hungerford, Knight and Baronet. John E^ly, Esquire;
Borough of great Bodwyn.
Duke Stonehouse Esquire; Henry Clark Esquire; Duke Stonehouse Esquire; Thomas Gape Esquire;
Borough of Lugers^ll.
Sir Jeoffry Palmer, son to Sir Ieoffery Palmer, his Majesty's Attorney Genesis
William ^shburnham Esquire;
Borough of Old Sarum.
Sir John Denham, Knight of the Bath, his Majesty's Surveyor Gene^al. Edward
Nicholas, Esquire;
Borough of Wooton Basset.
Sir Walter St. John's Baronet. John Pleydal Esquire;
Borough of Marlborough.
John Lord Seymour. Jeoffry Daniel Esquire;
Worcester.
Sir John Packington Bar. Samuel Sands, Esquire;
City of Worcester.
Sir Rowland Barkly. Thomas Street, Esquire;
Borough of Droitwich.
Henry Coventry Esquire; Samuel Sandys Iun. Esquire;
Borough of Evesham.
William Sandys Esquire; Abr. Culme Esquire;
Borough of Bewdly.
Sir Henry Herbert.
York.
Conyers Darcy, Esquire; Sir John Gotherick, Knight. and Bar.
City of York.
The Sherriffe being dead, no return.
Town of Kingston upon Hull.
Anthony Gilby, Esquire; Andrew Marvel, Esquire;
Borough of Knaresborough.
John Talbott. William Stockdale.
Borough of Scarborough.
Sir Jordan Crosland. Will. Thompson, Esquire;
Borough of Rippon.
John Nicholas, Esquire; Thomas Burwel Dr. of Law.
Borough of Richmond.
Sir John York. Joseph Cradock Dr. of Law.
Borough of Hidon.
Sir Matthew Apleyard. Sir Hugh Bethel.
Borough of Burrowbridg.
Sir Richard Maleverer, Knight. and Baronet. Robert Long, Esquire;
Borough of Malton.
Thomas Danby, Esquire; Sir Tho Hablethwait. Sir Tho. Hablethwait. Sir Thomas
Gower, Knight. and Bar.
Borough of Thirske.
Sir Tho. Ingram Walter Strickland, Esquire;
Borough of Alborough.
Sir Solomon Swale, Baronet. F^ancis Goodrick, Esquire;
Borough of Beverley.
Michael Wharton, Esquire; Sir John Hotham.
Borough of Allerton.
Sir Gilbert Gerrard. Roger Talbot, Esquire;
Borough of Pomfret.
Sir John Dawny. William Lowther, Esquire;
Barons of the Cinque Ports.
Port of Hasting.
EDmund Waller Esquire; Francis Goodrick, Esquire;
Town of Winchelsey.
Sir Nicholas Crispe. Francis Finch, Esquire;
Town of Rye.
Richard Spencer, Esquire; Herbert Morley, Esquire;
Port of new Rumney.
Sir Norton Knatchbull, Bar. Sir Charles Berklay Jun.
Port of Heyth.
John Harvey Esquire; Phineas Andrews Esquire;
Port of Dover.
Sir Francis Vincent, Knight. and Bar. George Mountague, Esquire;
Port of Sandwich.
Edward Mountague, Esquire; James Thurban Esquire;
Port of Seaford.
Sir Will. Thomas, Knight. and Bar. Sir Thomas Dykes.
WALES.
Anglesey.
Nicholas Bagenall, Esquire;
Town of Bewmoris.
Sir Heneage Finch, Knight. and Bar.
Brecon.
Sir Henry Williams Baronet.
Town of Brecon.
Kingswell Lucy, Esquire; Sir Herbert Price, Bar.
Cardigan.
John Vaughan Esquire;
Cardiganshir.
John Vaughan Esquire;
Town of Cardigan.
James Phillips Esquire;
Carmarthen.
Francis Lord Vaughan.
Town of Carmarthen.
John Vaughan, Esquire; son to the Earl of Carbery.
Carnerven.
Richard Win, Baronet.
Town of Carnerven.
William Griffith Esquire;
Denbeigh.
Sir Thomas Middleton, Baronet
Town of Denbeigh.
Sir John Salisbury Baronet,
Flint.
Sir Henry Conway, Baronet.
Town of Flint.
Roger Whitley, Esquire;
^lamorgan.
William Lord Herbert of Cardiffe
Town of Cardiffe.
Sir Richard Lloyd.
Merioneth.
* Henry Win, Esquire;
Pembrooksh.
Arthur Owen, Esquire;
Town of Pembrook.
Rowland Laughern, Esquire;
Town of Haverfordwest.
(...)
Montgomery.
Edward Vaughan, Esquire;
Town of Montgomery.
John Blancy, Esquire;
Radnorshire.
Sir Richard Lloyd.
Town of Radnor.
Coll. Sir Edward Harley Knight. of the Bath.
William Goldsborough Secretary to the House of Commons. John Sharp Assistant.
A CATALOGUE OF Nobility. Viz. The Names and Titles of all such Dukes, Earls,
Viscounts, Barons, and Baronets, as have been made since his MAJESTY'S Most
Happy Restoration. Together with The Times of their several CREATIONS.
DUKES.
THe Right Noble T homas Howard, Earl of Arundel, Surrey and Norfolk, was
restored to the Dignity and Title of Duke of Norfolk, by an Act of the
Parliament begun at Westminster the 25. of April, in the twelfth year of the
Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, and in the
Year of our Lord 1660, etc. The Right Noble William Seymour, Marquess of
Hertford, was restored to the Dukedom of Somerset, by an Act of the Parliament
begun at Westminster the 25. of April, in the twelfth year of the Reign of our
most Gracious Sovereign Lord, King Charles the second, 1660. The Right Noble
George Monck, Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington, Baron Monck of
Potheridge, Beu^hampe and Teys. He was created to those Honors by Letters
Pattents, bearing date at Westminster, the seventh day of July, in the twelfth
year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second;
granting the said honors to him and the heirs males of his body for ever,
with the Fee of 20 l. per annum, payable but of the Exchequer, and 40 l. per
annum for the said Dukedom out of the Customs of London. He had the Honor
also in the same year to be constituted Captain General of all his Majesty's
Landforces, Garrisons, Forts, and Castles within any of his Majesty's
Kingdoms or Dominions, or any of them; Lord Deputy of Ireland, Master of the
Horse, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, etc. 1660.
EARLS.
The Right honorable Heneage Finch, Earl of VVinchelsey, was created Baron
Fitzherbert of Eastwell in the County of Kent, by Letters Patents, bearing date
at Westminster the 26 of July, in the twelfth year of the Reign of our most
Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, in the year of the Lord 1660.
which Honor is entailed on him and the heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten, with all Rights, Privileges and Preheminences thereunto belonging.
The Right Honorable Edward Montague, was created Baron Montague of St. Neots,
Viscount Montague of Hinchinbrook and Earl of Sandwich, by Letters Patents,
bearing date at Westminster the twelfth day of July, in the twelfth year of
the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, which
Honors are granted to him and the heirs males of his body, with the Fee of 20
l. per annum, together with all Privileges thereunto belonging: in the same
year also he was made Master of the Wardrobe, Knight of the most Noble Order of
the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc 1660.
The Right Honorable Elizabeth Viscountesse of Kynelmeky, was created Countess
of Guilford during her life by Letters Patents, bearing date at Westminster
the fourteenth day of July, in the twelfth year of the reign of our most
Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, with all Privileges thereunto
belonging, and Fee of 20 l. per annum out of the Exchequer, etc. The Right
Honorable James Butler Duke and Marquess of Ormond, in the Kingdom of
Ireland, was created Baron Butler of Lanthony in the County of Gloucester, and
Earl of Brecknock in Wales, by Letters Patents, bearing date at Westminster
the 20 day of July, in the twelfth year of the reign of our most Gracious
Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, which said Honors are granted to him,
and the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, with the Fee of 20. l. per
annum, together with all privileges, etc. he was in the same year also made
Lord Steward of his Majesty's household, Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council. The Right
Honorable Sir Edward Hyde Knight (Lord Chancellor of England, was created
Baron Hyde of Hyndon, in the County of Wilts, by Letters Patents, bearing date
at Westminster the 3 day of November, in the twelfth year of the reign of our
most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, entailing the same upon
the heirs males of his body. He was also created Viscount Cornbury in the
County of Oxford, and Earl of Clarendon in the County of Wilts, by creation
with the usual formalities the 20 day of April, and by Letters Patents also
bearing date the same day, in the thirteenth year of the reign of our most
Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second; which said honors are granted
to him and the heirs males of his body for ever, with the Fee of 20 l. per
annum out of the Customs of London, together with all other privileges unto
the said honors belonging, etc. Hiis Testibus datum per manum Domini Regis
apud Pallacium suum VVestminst. the twentieth Aprilis ann. praedict. The Right
Honorable Arthur Lord Capel, was created Viscount Maldom in the County of Ess
x, and Earl of the said County, by Creation at Westminster, ut supra; and by
Letters Patents also bearing date ut supra; granting the same to him and the
heirs males of his body for ever, and for want of such issue, the same honors
were granted in remainder to Henry Capel Esquire; his Brother, and the heirs males
of his Body; and for want of such issue to Edward Capel Esquire; another brother,
and to the heirs males of his body for ever, with the Fee of 20 l. per annum,
etc Datum per manum Domini Regis apud Pallacium suum VVestminst. the 20 Aprilis
praedict. The Right Honorable Thomas Lord Brudnel Baron of Stoughton in the
county of Northampt. was created Earl of Cardigan, by creation at VVestminst.
ut supra, the 20 of April in the thirteenth year of the reign of King Charles
the second, and by Letters Patents also bearing date the same day and year,
granting the same to him and the heirs males of his body for ever, with the Fee
of 20 l. per annum, with all privileges, etc. Datum per manum Domini Regis,
apud Pallacium suum VVestminst. the 20 Aprilis praedict. The Right Honorable
Arthur Annesly Baron Mount Norreys and Viscount Valentia in Ireland, was
created Baron Ann sly of Newport Panel in the County of Buckingham, and Earl
of Anglesey in Wales, by creation at VVestminst. the 20 day of April, ut
supra, by Letters Patents bearing date at VVestminst. ut supra; granting the
same to him and the heirs males of his body for ever, with the Fee of 20 l.
yearly, and all other privileges etc. Datum per manum Domini Regis 20 Aprilis
praedict. The Right Honorable Sir John Greenville Knight, Gentleman of his
Majesty's Bedchamber, and Groom of the Stool, was created Baron Greenville of
Killhampton and Beddiford in the Counties of Devon and Cornwall, and Viscount
Greenville of Lansdown, and Earl of Bath. by creation at VVestminst ut supra,
and by Letters Patents bearing date at VVestminst. ut supra, which said Honors
are granted to him, and the heirs males of his body for ever, with the Fee of
20 l. per annum, and all other Privileges, etc. Datum per manum Domini Regis
apud Pallacium suum VVestminst. 20 Aprilis praedict. The Right Honorable
Charles Howard Esquire; was created Baron Dacres of Gilsland, Viscount Howard of
Morpeth, in the County of Northumberland, and Earl of Carslile, by creation at
VVestminst. the 20 day of April in the thirteenth year of the reign of our most
Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, and by Letters Patents bearing
date at VVestminst ut supra; which said honors granted to him and the heirs
males of his body, for ever, with the Fee of 20 l. per annum, and all other
privileges, etc. Hiis Testibus. Datum per manum Domini Regis apud Pallacium
suum VVestminst. 20. Aprilis praedict.
VISCOUNTS.
The Right Honorable John Viscount Mordant, was created to that honor in the
twelfth year of the reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the
second.
BARONS.
The Right honorable Thomas VVinsore de Windsor, alias Hickman, was restored
and confirmed to the Barony, Title, and Dignity, of Baron Windsor, by Letters
Patents, bearing date at Westminst. the 16 day of June, in the twelfth year of
the reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, which
said honor is granted to him and his heirs for ever, with the same precedence
and place in Parliament and elsewhere in England, as Henry and Thomas Winsore,
Baron Windsor, whilst they lived successively enjoyed, and all other dignities
and preheminencies to a Baron of Parliament belonging, etc. 1661. The Right
honorable Denzill Hollis Esquire; was created Baron Hollis of Ifield in the County
of Sussex, by creation at Westminst. the 20 of April, and by Letters Patents
bearing date the 20 day of April, in the thirteenth year of the reign of our
most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second; which said honor is
granted to him, and the heirs males of his body for ever, with all privileges
and preheminences thereunto belonging, 1661. Hiis Testibus. Datum per manum
Domini Regis apud Pallacium suum Westminster. 20 Aprilis praedict. The right
honorable Sir Frederick Cornwallis Knight and Baronet, Treasurer of his
Majesty's household, was created Baron Cornwallis of Eye in the County of
Suffolk, by creation at Westmin. the 20 day of April, and by Letters Patents
bearing the same date ^t Westminst. in the thirteenth year of the reign of our
most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, granting the same to him
and the heirs males of his body for ever, with all privileges and
preheminencies thereunto belonging, etc. 1661. Datum per manum Domini Regis ut
supra. The right honorable Sir George Booth Baronet, was created Baron De
lamer of Dunham Massey in the County of Chester, by creation at Westmin. the
20. day of April, and by Letters Patents bearing the same date at Westmin. ut
supra, which said honor is granted to him, and the heirs males of his body for
ever, with all privileges and preheminencies, etc. Datum per manum Domini
Regis apud Pallacium suum Westminster. 20 April. praedict. The right honorable Sir
Horatio Townsend Baronet, was created Baron Townsend of Lyn Regis in the County
of Norfolk by creation at Westminst. the 20 day of April, and by Letters
Patents bearing the same date at Westminster. ut supra; granting the same to him and
the heirs males of his body for ever, with all privileges and preheminencies,
etc, 1661. Datum per manum Domini Regis apud Pallacium suum Westminster. 20 Aprilis
praedict. The right honorable Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper Baronet, was created
Baron Ashley of Wynborne St. Giles in the County of Wilts, by creation at
Westminst. the 20. day of April, and by Letters Patents bearing the same date
at Westminst. ut supra; granting the same to him and the heirs males of his
body for ever, with all privileges and preheminencies, etc. Datum per manum
Domini Regis apud Pallacium suum Westminst. 20 Aprilis praedict. The right
honorable John Crewe Esquire; was created Baron Crew of Steane in the County of
Northampton, by creation at Westminst. the 20 day of April, in the thirteenth
year of King Charles the second, and by Letters Patents, bearing date at
Westminst. ut supra; granting the same to him, and the heirs males of his body
for ever, with all privileges and preheminencies, etc. Datum per manum Domini
Regis apud Pallacium suum Westminst. 20 Aprilis praedict.
Ireland.
DUKES.
The right Noble James Marquess of Ormond was created Duke of Ormond in the
Kingdom of Ireland by Letters Patents, bearing date at Westminst. the 30 of
March, in the thirteenth year of the reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord
King Charles the second, entailing the same to him and the heirs males of his
body, with all privileges and preheminencies thereunto belonging, with the Fee
of 40 l. per annum, payable in the Exchequer of Ireland, for the better support
of the said honor.
EARLS.
The right honorable Roger Lord Broghill was created Earl of Orrery in the
County of Cork, within the Province of Munster in the Kingdom of Ireland, by
Letters Patents, bearing date at Westminst. the fifth day September, in the
twelfth year of the reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the
second, entailing the same honor to him and the heirs males of his body
lawfully begotten, with all rights, privileges, etc. belonging, with the Fee
of 20 l. per annum, out of the Exchequer in Ireland. The right honorable Sir
Charles Coot was created Baron Coot of Castle Cuffe, Viscount Coot of Castle
Coot, and Earl of Mountrath in the Kingdom of Ireland; the said honors, etc.
to him and the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, with all privileges,
etc. with the Fee of 20 l. per annum, payable out of the Exchequer in Ireland,
by Letters Patents, bearing the date at Westminst. the sixth day of September,
in the twelfth year of the reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King
Charles the second. The right honorable Oliver Lord Viscount Fitz-Williams of
Merwin in the Kingdom of Ireland, was created Earl of Tirconnell in the said
Kingdom by Letters Patents, bearing date at Westminst. the 20 day of April, in
the thirteenth year of the reign of our most Gracious Sovereign King Charles
the second; granting the same to him and the heirs males of his body for ever,
with all privileges and preheminencies thereunto belonging, and also 20 l. per
annum out of his Majesty's Exchequer in Ireland, for the better support
thereof.
VISCOUNTS.
The right honorable Sir John Clotworthy of Antrim, in the County of Antrim,
in the Kingdom of Ireland, Knight. was created Baron of Lough Neagh, and Viscount
Maszereen in the said County by Letters Patents, bearing date at Westminst. the
21 of November, in the twelfth year of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord, etc.
with the said honors, and also to him and the heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten; and for want of such issue to John Skiffington Baronet, and the heirs
males of his body, on the body of Mary the Daughter and heir apparent of the
said Sir John Clotworthy lawfully begotten, together with all rights,
privileges and preheminencies to a Baron and Viscount but belonging. The right
honorable Robert Cholmondeley Esquire; was created Viscount Kellis in the County
of Meth in the Kingdom of Ireland, by Letters Patents, bearing date at
Westminst. the 29 of March, in the thirteenth year of the reign of our most
Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, granting the same to him and
the heirs males of his body, with the remainder to Hugh Cholmondeley Esquire; his
Brother, and the heirs males of his body, with all privileges and
preheminencies to a Viscount of Ireland belonging.
BARONS.
The right honorable Sir John King of the Abbey of Boil in the County of
Roscommon in the Kingdom of Ireland, Knight, was created Baron Kingston of
Kingston in the County of Dublin, to hold to him and the heirs males of his
body lawfully begotten with all privileges, etc. by Letters Patents, bearing
date at Westminst. the fourth day of September. in the twelfth year of the reign
of our most gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second. The right
honorable Colonel Richard Coot was created Baron Coot of Colreine in the
County of Shyoe in the Kingdom of Ireland, the same entailed to him and the
heirs males of his body, lawfully begotten, with all privileges, etc. by
Letters Patents, bearing date at Westmin. the sixth of September. in the twelfth
year of the reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the second,
in the year of our Lord, 1661.
THE NAMES OF THE BARONETS Made since his MAJESTY'S Most Happy RESTORATION.
With the times of their several Creations.
Anno Duodecimo Caroli Regis Secundi.
SIR Orlando Bridgeman Knight, Chief Baron of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer,
and now Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, was created to the Dignity and
Degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents, bearing Date at Westminst. the seventh
day of June, in the twelfth year of the reign of our most Gracious Sovereign
Lord King Charles the second, in the year of our Lord, 1660. entailing the same
upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir Jeffery Palmer Knight, his
Majesty's Attorney General, was created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet
by Letters Patents, bearing date at Westmin. the seventh day of June, Anno
praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir
Heneage Finch of Raveaston, alias Rauston, in the County of Bucks Knight, his
Majesty's Solicitor General, was created to the dignity and degree of a
Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date at Westmin. June the seventh Ann.
praed. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir John
Langham of Cottesbrook in the County of Northampton, Knight, created to the
dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents, bearing date at Westmin.
the seventh day of June, in the twelfth year of the reign of King Charles the
second, 1660, etc. ut supra. Sir Rob. Abdy of Albins in the County of Essex
Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by a Patent bearing date
at Westmin the ninth of June, in the twelfth year of King Charles the second
1660. Thomas Draper of Suminghill Park in the County of Berks Esquire; was created
to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents, bearing date at
Westminster. the ninth of June, An. praed. Humphrey Winch of Hamnes in the County of
Bedford, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet, by Letters
Patents, bearing date the ninth of June, An. praed. entailing the same upon the
heirs males of his body for ever. Jonathan Rease Esquire; created to the dignity
and degree of a Baronet, by Letters Patents, bearing date the ninth of June,
An. praed. the same entailed upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Henry
Wright of Dagenham in the County of Essex, Esquire; created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the ninth of June, Ann.
praedict. entayling the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Hugh
Speak of Haselbury in the County of Wilts, Esquire; created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents, bearing date at Westminster. the twelfth of
June, Ann. praed. Nichoeas Gould of the City of London Esquire; created to the
dignity and degree of a Baronet by a Patent bearing date at Westminster the
thirteenth day of June, Anno praedict. Sir Thomas Adams of the City of London
Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet b^ a Patent bearing date
at Westminster. the thirteenth day of June, Anno praed. Richard Atkins of Clapham in
the County of Surrey, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet, b^ a
Patent bearing date at Westminster. the thirteenth day of June, Anno praedict. Thomas
Allen of the City of London Esquire; created to ^he dignity and degree of a Baronet
by Letters patents, ^earing date the fourteenth of June, Anno prae^ict. Henry
North of Mildnall in the County of Suffolk, Esquire; ^as created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by ^etters patents bearing date at Westminster. the fifteenth day
of ^une, Ann. praed. Sir William Wiseman of Rivenhall in the County of Essex
Knight, was created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents,
bearing date at Westminster. the fifteenth of June, Anno praedict. Thomas Cullum of
Hasteam in the County of Suffolk, Esquire; was created to the dignity and degree of
a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster. the eighteenth of June,
Ann. praedict. Thomas Davye of St. Cleeres Hall in St. Oseth in the County of
Essex, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents
bearing date the twentieth of Iun. Ann. praed. entailing the same upon the
heirs males of his body for ever. George Grubham How of Cole-Barwick in the
County of Wilts, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents, bearing date at Westminster. the twentieth of June, An. praed. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. John Cuts of Childerley in the
County of Cambridge, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet,
bearing date at Westminster. the one and twentieth of June, Anno praed. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. William Humble of the City of
London, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents
bearing date at Westminster. the one and twentieth of June, praed. entailing the same
upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Solomon Swale of Swale-Hall in the
County of York, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents bearing date at Westminster. the one and twentieth of June, An. praed.
entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Gervase Elwes of
Stoake Juxta Clares in the County of Suffolk, Esquire; created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents, bearing date at Westminster. the two and
twentieth of June, Anno praed. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his
body for ever. Robert Cordel of Melsord hall in the County of Suffolk Esquire;
created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents, bearing date
at Westminster. the two and twentieth of June, Anno praed. entailing the same upon
the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir John Robinson of the City of London,
Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents
bearing date at Westminster. the two and twentieth of June, Anno praed. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. John Abey of Moors in the
County of Essex, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents, bearing date the two and twentieth of June, Anno praed. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Henry Stapleton of Mitton in
the County of York, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster. the three and twentieth of June, Anno
praed. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Jacob
Ashley of Hill-Morton in the County of Warwick, Esquire; created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster. the five and
twentieth of June, Anno praed. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his
body for ever. Sir Robert Hillyard of Patrington in the County of York, Knight,
created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet, by Letters Patents, bearing
date at Westminst the five and twentieth of June, Anno praedict. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Si William Bowyer of Denham in
the County of Bucks, Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster. the five and twentieth of June Anno
praed. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. John
Shuckourgh in the County of Warwick, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of
a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster. the six and twentieth of
June, Anno praed. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever.
William Wray of Ashly in the County of Lincoln, Esquire; created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster the seven and
twentieth of June, Anno praed. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his
body for ever. Francis Hollis of Winterborne in the County of Dorset, Esquire;
created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by L^tters Patents bearing date
the seven and twentieth day of June, Anno praed entailing the same upon the
heirs males of his body for ever. Nicholas Steward of Hartl^y Mandit in the
County of Southampton, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster. the seven and twentieth of June, Anno
praed. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. George
Warberton of Harley in the County Palatine of Chester, Esquire; created to the
dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the seven and
twentieth of June, Anno praed. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his
body for ever. Oliver St. John of Woodford in the County of Northampton, Esquire;
created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date
the 28th of June, Anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his
body for ever. Sir Ralph Delaval of Seaton in the County of Northumberland,
Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet, by Letters Patents
bearing date at Westminster the 29th. of June, Anno praedict. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Andrew Henley of Henley in the
County of Somerset Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet, by
Letters Pattents bearing date the 30th of June, Anno praedict. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Tho. Else of Wyham in the
County of Lincoln, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents bearing date the 30th. of June, Anno praedict. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir J^hn Cov^rt of Slungham in
the County of Sussex, Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet,
by Letters Patents, bearing date the 2d. of July, Anno predict. entasling the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Maurice Berkly of Brewton in
the County of Somerset, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet
by Letters Patents bearing date the 2d. of July Anno praedict. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Peter Harr of the City of
London, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet, by Letters Patents
bearing date the 2d. of July, Ann. predict. entailing thc same upon the heirs
males of his body for ever. Henry Hudson of Melton-Mowbray in the County of
Leicester Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents, bearing date the 3d. of July, Anno predict. entailing the same upon
the heirs males of his body for ever. Thomas Herbert of Trintern in the County
of Monmouth Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents bearing date the 3d. of July, Anno pred. entailing the same upon the
heirs males of his body for ever. Thomas Middleton of Chirke in the County of
Denbigh, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents,
bearing date the 4th. of July, Anno predict. entailing the same upon the heirs
males of his body for ever. Verney Noel of Kerkby in the County of Leicester,
Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Pattents,
bearing date the 6th. of July, Anno pred. entailing the same upon the heirs
males of his body for ever. George Ruswel of Clipston in the County of
Northampt. Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents bearing date the 7th. of July, Anno pred. entailing the same upon the
heirs males of his body for ever. Robert Austen of Bexley in the County of
Kent, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Pattents, bearing date the 10th. of July, Ann. Pred. entailing the same upon
the heirs males of his body for ever. Robert Hales of Beaksborne in the County
of Kent, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet, by Letters
Pattents, bearing date the 12th. of July, Ann. pred. entailing the same upon
the heirs males of his body for ever. John Clarke of North-weston in the
County of Oxford, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents bearing date the 13th. of July, Anno pred. entailing the same
upon the heirs males of his body for ever. William Thomas of Fowington, in the
County of Essex, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet, by
Letters Patents, bearing date the 13th. of July, Ann. pred. entailing the same
upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir William Boothby of Broad-ashe in
the County of Derby, Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents, bearing date the 13th. of July, Anno pred. entailing the same
upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Wolstan Dixey of Market-Bosworth in
the County of Leicester, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a
Baronet bearing date the 14th. of July, Ann. pred. entailing the same upon the
heirs males of his body for ever. John Bright of Badsworth in the County of
York Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents, bearing date the 16th. of July, Anno pred. entailing the same upon the
heirs males of his bod for ever. John Warner of Parham of Badsworth in the
County of York Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents, bearing date the 16th. of July, Ann. pred. entailing the same
upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir John Harbey of Aldenham in the
County of Hertford Knight, created Baronet by Letters Pattents, bearing date
July 17. Ann. pred. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for
ever. Sir Samuel Morland, alias Morley de Sulthamstead Baunester in the County
of Berks Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents, bearing date the 18. of July, Ann. pred. entailing the same upon the
heirs males of his body for ever. Sir Thomas Hewet of ^ishoberry in the County
of Hertford Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents, bearing date the 19th. of July, Ann. pred. entailing the same upon the
heirs males of his body for ever. Edward Honywood of Evington in the County of
Kent Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet, by Letters Patents,
bearing date the 19th. of July Ann. pred. entailing the same upon the heirs
males of his body for ev r. Bazil Dixwell of Broomhouse in the County of Kent
Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents,
bearing date the 19th. of July, Ann. pred. entailing the same upon the heirs
males of his body for ever. Sir Richard Brown of the City of London Knight,
created Baronet by Letters Patents, bearing date the 21. of July Ann. pred.
entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Marmaduke Gresham
of Symp^field in the County of Surrey Esquire, created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 21. of July, Ann. pred.
entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Henry Kernor of
Hodnet in the County of Salop, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a
Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 23. of July, Anno predict.
entayling the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir John Aubrey
of Lantrethed in the County of Glamorgan, Knight, created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 23 of July, Anno
praedict. entayling the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Tho.
Sclater of Cambridge in the County of Cambridge Esquire; created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 25. of July, Anno
praedict. entayling the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Henry
Conway of Bot^ytham in the County of Flint Esquire; created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 25. of July, Anno
praedict. entayling the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Edward
Green of Soupford in the County of Essex Esquire; created to the dignity and degree
of a Baronet by Letters Pattents, bearing date the 26th. of July Ann. praed.
entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. John Stapeley de
P^tcham in the County of Sussex Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a
Baronet, by Letters Pattents bearing date the 28th. of July 1660. Ann. praed.
entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Metcalfe Robinson
of Newly in the County of York, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a
Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 30. of July 1660. Anno predict.
entayling the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Will. Dudley of
Clapton in the County of Northampton Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of
a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the first of Aug. 1660. Anno predict.
entayling the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Hugh Smithson of
Stannick alias Stanwick in the County of York, Esquire; created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 2. of Aug. 1660. Anno
praedict. entaylinge same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir Roger
Mostyn of Mostyn in the County of Flint Knight. created to the dignity and degree
of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 3. of Aug. 1660 Anno predict.
entayling the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir Will.
Willoughby of Willoughby in the County of Nottingham Knight. created to the
dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 4. of Aug.
1660. Anno predict. entayling the same upon the heirs males of his body for
ever. Anthony Oldfield of Spalding in the County of Lincoln Esquire; created to
the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 6. of
Aug. 1660. Anno praedict. entaying the same upon the heirs males of his body
for ever Peter Leicester of Tablye, in the County Palatine of Ghester, Esquire;
created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Pattents bearing date
the 10. of Aug. 1660. Anno praedict. entayling the same upon the heirs males of
his body for ever. Sir William Wheeler of the City of Westminster Knight
created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date
at Westminster the 11. of Aug. in the 1^th year of the Reign of King Charles
the II. entayling the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. And for
default of such Issue males, to descend to Charles Wheeler Cousin of the said
Sir William, and the heirs males of his body for ever. Tho. Lee of Hartwell in
the County of Bucks, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents bearing date the 16. of Aug. 1660. entayling the same upon the
heirs males of his body for ever. John Newton of Barscourt in the County of
Gloucester, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet for his life,
and after his decease to John Newton of Hader in the County of Lincoln Esquire,
to the heirs males of his body by Letters Patents bearing date the 16. of
August, 1660. Tho. Smith of Hatherton in the County of Chester Esquire; was created
Baronet bearing date at Westminster ut supra; and to the heirs males of his
body for ever, and for want of such issue, to Laurence Smith Esquire; his brother
and the heirs males of his body; and for default of such issue, to Francis
Smith Esquire; their Brother and the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten,
etc. Sir Ralph Asheton of Middleton in the County of Lancaster, Knight, created
to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 17.
of Aug. anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for
ever. John Rous of Henham in the County of Suffolk Esquire, created to the
dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents, bearing date the 17th of
August, anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs Males of his body for
ever. Henry Messingbeard of Bratosthall in the County of Lincoln, Esquire; created
to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 22.
of Aug. anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for
ever. John Hales of Coventry in the County of Warwick Esquire; created to the
dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 28th. of
August, Ann. pred. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for
ever. Ralph Bovey of Hillfield in the County of Warwick Esquire, created to the
dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents, bearing date the 30th. of
Aug Anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for
ever. John Knightley of Off-Church in the County of Warwick Esquire, created to
the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 30th.
of August, Anno pred. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for
ever. Sir John Drake of Ash in the County of Devon Knight, created to the
dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Pattents, bearing date the 31. of
August, Ann. pred. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for
ever. Sir Oliver St. Geo. of Carrickdromrick in the County of Leaterem in the
Kingdom of Ireland, Knight. created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents, bearing date the 5th. of Sept. Ann. pred. entailing the same
upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir John Bowyer of King^erisley in
the County of Stafford, Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet
by Letters Patents, bearing date the 11th. of Sept. Ann. pred. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir William VVilde Knight,
Recorder of the City of London, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet
by Letters Patents, bearing date the 13th. of Sept. Anno pred. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Joseph Ash of Tittenham in the
County of Middlesex Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents, bearing dare the 19th of Sept. Ann. pred. entailing the same
upon the heirs males of his body for ever. John How of Compton in the County
of Gloucester, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents bearing date the 22d, of Sept. Anno praedict. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. John Swinburn of Chupleton in
the County of Northumberland, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a
Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 26th of Sept. An. praedict.
entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. John Trot of
Laverstock in the County of Southampton, Esquire, created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 11th of October Ann.
praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever.
Humphrey Miller of Oxen-heath in the county of Kent, Esquire; created to the
dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 13th of
October, Anno praed. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for
ever. Sir John Lewis of Leeston in the county of York Knight, created to the
dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents, bearing date the 15th of
October, 1660. Anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his
body for ever. John Beale of Maidstone in the county of Kent, Esquire, created
to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents, bearing date the
16th of October. Anno praedict entailing the same upon the heirs males of his
body for ever. Sir Richard Francklin of Moor-Park in the county of Hertford
Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents
bearing date the 26th of October. Anno praedict. entailing the same upon the
heirs males of his body for ever. William Russel of Laughorn in the county of
Carmarthen, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents bearing date the 8th of Novem. Anno praedict. entailing the same upon
the heirs males of his body for ever. Will. Barkhouse Esquire; Grandchild of
Rowland Barkhouse, late Alderman of London, created to the dignity and degree
of a Baronet by Letters patents bearing date the 8th of November anno praedict.
entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Thomas Boothby of
Fridayhill in the parish of Chinkford in the county of Essox, Esquire, created
to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters patents bearing date the 9th
of November. anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body
for ever. Sir John Cutler of the City of London, Knight, created to the dignity
and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 11th of November,
anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever.
Giles Mottel of Liege Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet
by Letters Patents bearing date ^ov. 16. anno praedict. entailing the same upon
the heirs ^les of his body for ever. Henry Gifford of Burstall in the county of
Leicester Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents bearing date the 21. of November. anno praedict. entailing the same upon
the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir Thom. Foot of the City of London
Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents
bearing date the 21. of November, anno praedict. entailing the same upon the
heirs males of his body for ever. Tho. Manwaring of Over-Perver in the
county-Palatine of Chester Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet
by Letters Patents bearing date the 21. of November. anno praedict. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Tho. Bennet of Baberham in the
county of Cambridge Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents bearing date the 22d. of November, Anno praedict. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. John Wroth of Blenden hall in
the County of Kent Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents, bearing date the 29th of November, anno praedict entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. George VVinn of Nosthall in the
County of York Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents bearing date December 3. anno praedict. entailing the same upon
the heirs males of his body for ever. Humphrey Mononx of VVootton in the County
of Bedford Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
patents bearing date December 4. Anno praedict. entailing the same upon the
heirs males of his body for ever. William Gardener of the City of London, Esquire;
created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by a Patent bearing date at
VVestminst. December. 4. Anno praedict. entayling the same upon the heirs males
of his body for ever. Heneage Fetherston of Blakewar in the County of Hertford,
Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing
date December. 5. Anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his
body for ever. John Peyton of Deddington in the Isle of Ely in the County of
Cambridge, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents bearing date Dec. 10. Anno praedict. entayling the same upon the heirs
males of his body for ever. John Fagge of VViston in the County of Sussex, Esquire;
created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date
the December. 11. Anno praedict. entayling the same upon the heirs males of his
body for ever. Edmund Anderson of Broughton in the County of Lincoln, Esquire;
created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date
December. 12. Anno praedict. entayling the same upon the heirs males of his body
for ever. Matthew Herbert of Bromfield in the County of Salop, Esquire; created to
the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date December. 18.
Anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever.
Edward Ward of Bixley in the County of Norfolk, Esquire; created to the dignity
and degree of a Baronet by Letters Pattents bearing date December. 18. Anno
praedict. entayling the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. George
Marwood of little Busby in the County of York, Esquire; created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by a patent bearing date December 21. anno praedict.
entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Ralph Ashton of
Middleton in the County of Northampton Esquire, created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters patents bearing date December. 19. anno praedict.
entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Will. Killigrew
of Arwininck in the county of Cornwall Esquire, created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet entailed upon the heirs males of his body for ever, and for
default of such Issue, to Peter Killigrew of Arwininck aforesaid, son of Sir
Peter Killigrew Knight, and the heirs males of his body for ever, by Letters
patents bearing date at Westminster, December. 22. anno praedict. John Keyt of
Ekrimpton in the county of Gloucester Esquire, created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters patents, bearing date December. 22. anno praedict.
entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. John Buck of
Hanby-Graunge in the county of Lincoln Esquire, created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters patents bearing date December. 22. anno praedict.
entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever, William
Franckland of Thirkleby in the county of York Esquire; created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters patents bearing date December. 24. anno praedict.
entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Richard Stydalph
of Norbury in the county of Surry Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a
Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date December 24. anno praedict. entailing
the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. William Juxon of Alb^mue in
the County of Sussex, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet, by
Letters Patents, bearing date December. 28. Anno praedict. entailing the same to
the heirs males of his body for ever. John Leggard of Ganton in the County of
York Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents
bearing date December 29. Anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males
of his body for ever. John Jackson of Hickle^on in the County of York Esquire,
created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date
December. 31. anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body
for ever. Sir Henry Pickering of W^addon in the County of Cambridge, Knight,
created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by a Patent bearing date Jan.
2d. anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for
ever. Henry Bedingfield of Oxborough in the County of Norfolk Esquire; created to
the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents, bearing date Ian. 2.
anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever.
Walter Plomer of the Inner Temple London Esquire; created to the dignity and degree
of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date Ian. 4. anno praedict. entailing
the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Herbert Springe^ of the
Broyle in the County of Sussex, Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of a
Baronet by a Patent bearing date Ian. 23. anno praedict. entailing the same
upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Will. Powel, alias Hinson of
Pengetbley in the county of Hereford Esquire; created to the dignity and degree of
a Baronet by a Patent bearing date Ian. 23. anno praedict. entailing the same
upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Robert Newton of the City of London
Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by a Patent bearing
date Ian. 23. anno praed. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body
for ever. Nich. Staughton of Staughton in the County of Surrey Esquire, created
to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by a Patent bearing date Ian. 29. anno
praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Will.
Rokeby of Scyars in the County of York, Esquire, created to the dignity and
degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date Ian. 29. anno praedict.
entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever.
Baronets made in the 13th year of the Reign of our most gracious Sovereign
Lord King CHARLES the Second.
Walter Earnly of New Sarum in the County of Wilts, Esquire, created Baronet
the 2d. of Febr. 13, Carol. 2. 1660. entailed upon the heirs males of his body
for ever. John Husbands of Ipsley in the County of Warwick, Esquire, created
Baronet Febr. 2. Anno praedict. etc. ut supra. Thomas Morgan of Wangatock in
the County of Monmouth, Esquire, created Baronet Feb. 7. Anno praedict. etc. ut
supra. John Lane of Talske in the County of Roscommon in the Kingdom of
Ireland, created Baronet the 9th of Febr. Anno praedict. etc. ut supra. George
Wakfron of Beckford in the County of Gloucester, Esquire, created Baronet Febr.
13th. Anno praedict. etc. ut supra. Benjamin Wright of Cranham-Hall in the
County of Essex Esquire, created Baronet Febr. 15. Anno praedict. etc. ut
supra. John Colleton of the City of London, Esquire, created Baronet the 18th
of Febr. Anno praedict. etc. ut supra. Sir James Modiford of the City of London
Knight, created Baronet the 18th of Febr. Anno praedict. etc. ut supra. Thomas
Beaumont of Staughton Grange in the County of Leicester, created Baronet Febr.
21. Anno praedict. etc. ut supra. Edw. Smith of Eshe in the County of Durham,
Esquire, created Baronet the 23d. of Febr. Anno praedict. etc. ut supra. John
Napeir, alias Naper, alias Sands Esquire, was created to the d^gnity and degree
of a Baronet, the said dignity entailed on the heirs males of his body: and for
default of such Issue to Alex. Napeir, alias Sands, and the heirs males of his
body: and for default of such Issue, to the heirs males of the body of Sir
Robert Napeir, alias Naper, alias Sands, Knight and Baronet deceased,
Grandfather (...) the sa^d John and Alexander lawfully begotten successively
with precedence before all Baronets made since the 24th of September, 10
Iacobi, when the said Sir Robert, Napeir, alias Naper, alias Sands, was created
a Baronet, which Letters patents were lately surrendered by Sir Robert Napeir
lately deceased, ^ather of the said John and Alexander, to the intent the said
Degree should be restored to himself and the said John and Alexander, by
Letters patents bearing date at VVestminst^ the 4th of March, in the 13th year
of the Reign of King Charles the Second. Thomas Gifford of Castle-Jordan; in
the County of Mead in the Province of Lemster in the Kingdom of Ireland
Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters patents
bearing date the 4th of March, anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs
males of his body for ever. Tho. Clifton of Clifton in the County of Lancaster,
Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters patents
bearing date the 4th of March, anno praedict. entailing the same upon the,
heirs males of his body for ever. William Wilson of Eastborne in the County
of Sussex, Esquire, created Baronet the 4th of March, anno praedict. etc. ut
supra. Compton Reed of Barton in the County of Berks Esquire, created Baronet
March the 4th. anno praedict. etc. ut supra. Sir Brian Broughton of Broughton
in the County of Stafford, Knight, created Baronet March 10. anno praedict.
etc. ut supra. Robert Slingeseby of Newsells in the county of Hertford,
Esquire, created Baronet March 16. anno praedict. etc. ut supra. Sir Ralph
Verney of Milde-Claydon in the County of Bucks Knight, created Baronet, Mar.
16. Anno praedict. etc. ut supra, John Crofts of Stowe in the County of
Suffolk. Esquire; created Baronet the 16th of March, Anno praedict. etc. ut supra.
Robert Dicer of Vphall in the County of Hereford Esquire ire, created Baronet March
18. Anno praedict. etc. ut supra. Sir John Bromefield of Suffolk-place in
Southwark in the County of Surrey, Knight. created Baronet the 20th of Mar. Anno
praedict. etc. ut supra. Thomas Rich of Sunning in the County of Berks Esquire;
created Baronet the 20th of March. Anno praedict. etc. ut supra. Edw. Smith of
Edmondthorpe in the County of Leicester, Esquire, created Baronet March 26.
Anno praedict. etc. ut supra Walter Long of VVhaddon in the county of Wilts,
Esquire, created Baronet Mar. 26. Anno praed. etc. ut supra. John Fettiplace of
Chilbrey in the county of Berk Esquire, created Baronet Apr. 8. Anno praedict.
etc. ut supra. Walter Hendly of Coutchfield, in the County of Sussex, Esquire,
created Baronet Apr. 8. Anno praed. etc. ut supra. Will. Parsons of Langley in
the County of Bucks, Esquire, created Baronet Apr. 9 Anno praed. etc. ut supra.
John Cambel of Woodford in the County of Essex, Esquire created Baronet Apr. 9.
Anno praedict. etc. ut supra. Sir Charles Gaudy of ^owshell in the County of
Suffolk, Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents bearing date the 20th of April Anno praedict. entailing the same upon
the heirs males of his body for ever. William Morice of Werrington in the
County of Devon, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters patents bearing date the 20th of April Anno praedict. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir William Cayly of Brampton
in the County of York, Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet
by Letters Patents bearing date the 20th of Apr. Anno praedict. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir Charles Doyly of the City
of London, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents
bearing date the 26th of Apr. Anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs
males of his body for ever. William Godolphin of Godolphin in the county of
Cornwall Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet, by Letters
Patents bearing date the 29th of April, Anno praedict. entailing the same upon
the heirs males of his body for ever, Thomas Cursen of Walter Perry in the
county of Oxford, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents bearing date the 30th of April ann. praedict. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Edmund Fowell of Fowells-Combe
in the county of Devon, Knight, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet
by Letters Patents bearing date the first of May, anno praedict. entailing the
same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. John Cropley of Clarkenwell in
the county of Middlesex, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a
Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 7th of May anno praedict. entailing
the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Will. Smith of Radcliffe in
the county of Bucks, Esquire, created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by
Letters Patents bearing date the 10th of May anno praedict. entailing the same
upon the heirs males of his body for ever. George Cook of Wheatley in the
County of York, E q created to the dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters
Patents bearing date at Westminster. May 10th. anno praedict. entailing the same upon
the heirs males of his body for ever; and in default of such Issue to Hen. Cook
Brother of the said George Cook, and the heirs males of his body for ever.
Charles Lloid of Garth in the County of Mountgomery, Esquire, created to the
dignity and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 10th of May
an praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever.
Nathan Powel of Enhurst in the County of Sussex, Esquire; created to the dignity
and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 14th of May an.
praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever: Denny
Ashburnham of Broonham in the County of Sussex, Esquire; created to the dignity
and degree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 15th of May anno
praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for ever. Sir
Hugh Smi h of Long Asheton in the County of Somerset Knight, created to the
dignity and de^ree of a Baronet by Letters Patents bearing date the 16th of
May, Anno praedict. entailing the same upon the heirs males of his body for
ever.
A Perfect LIST OF THE Knights OF THE Bath.
Sir -- Fiennes Lord Clinton. Sir -- Egerten Lord Brackley. Sir Philip Herbert.
Sir William Egerton. Sir Vere Fane. Sir Charles Berkley. Sir Henry Bellasis.
Sir Henry Hyde, Vicount Cornberry. Sir Rowland Bellasis. Sir Henry Capel. Sir
John Vaughan. Sir Charles Stanley. Sir Francis Fane. Sir Henry Fane. Sir
William Portman. Sir Richard Temple. Sir William Ducy. Sir Thomas Trevor. Sir
John Soudamore. Sir William Gardner. Sir Charles Cornwallis. Sir John Nicholas.
Sir John Monson. Sir Bourchier Wray Sir John Coventry. Sir Edward Hungerford.
Sir John Kn^vet. Sir Philip Boteler. Sir Adrian Scroop. Sir Richard Knightley.
Sir Henry Heron. Sir John Lewknor. Sir George Brown. Sir William Tyrringham.
Sir France Godolphin. Sir Edward Baynton. Sir Grevil Verney. Sir Edward Harley.
Sir Edward Walpoole. Sir Francis Popham. Sir Edward Wise. Sir Christopher
Calthorp. Sir Richard Edgcombe. Sir William Bromley. Sir Thomas Bridges. Sir
Thomas Fanshaw. Sir John Denham. Sir Nicholas Bacon. Sir James Altham. Sir
Thomas VVendy. Sir John Bramston. Sir George Freeman. Sir Nicholas Slanning.
Sir John Roll. Sir Richard Ingoldsby. Sir Edward Heath. Sir William Morley.
Sir John Bennet. Sir Hugh Smith. Sir Simon Leech. Sir Henry Chester. Sir Robert
Atkins. Sir Robert Gaire. Sir Richard Powle. Sir Hugh Ducy. Sir Stephen Hales.
Sir Ralph Bashe. Sir Tho. VVhitmore.
Preparations for each KNIGHT of the BATH at their Installment. 1661.
INprimis, A Pallet with a Matteresse or Featherbed, as also Bolster, Pillow,
Blankets, Sheets, Coverlets, and Covering of red Rug or Say, with a Denis
Tester to the same of red Say without Curtains. The Bathing-Tub and stool with
three legs are to be provided at the charge of the Kings Barber.
Item, his Bath to be prepared with a cross Hoop over it, and a three-legg'd
stool in the one end thereof, and covered with fourteen yards of red Say, and a
Carpet with 18 or 20 else of Linen cloth, to line the same both without and
within.
His First HABIT.
Item, Cloth of Friars Russet to make a long Gown with wide Sleeves and Hood
thereto, in form of an Hermits wed, tied close about the middle with a Cardon
of Ash-colored and Russet Silk (made round of Finger-work, and knit full of
knots before, reaching down almost to the knees,) and a white Napkin or
Handkerchief hanging thereat. Item, A pair of Stockins of black Kerscy, called
Chause Semello, sealed with black leather, sowed to them; they using with them
no other Shoes, but sometimes wearing a pair of black slippers, to keep them
from taking cold.
His Second HABIT.
Item, A Mantle and Surcoat of red Taffatie, lined and edged with white
Taffatie or Sarcenet, and thereto fastened two long strings of white Silk, with
Buttons and Tassels of red Silk and Gold; and a pair of white Gloves tied to
them; Also a Coif of white Lawn for his head, with a white Hat, and a white
Feather. Item, a Sword, the Pornel whereof, and the Cross Hilt to be gilt, the
Scabberd of white, Leather, Girdle and Belt of the same, with Buckes of Iron,
or other Metal: Item, white Boots, and a pair of Gilt Spurs, with white
Leathers. Item, Four horses sadled, ( viz, For himself, his two Esquires, and
one Page, That for himself, having a black Leather Saddle, bordered with white
Leather, the Arson white, no Crooper, but a Pectoral, having a cross Patee gilt
thereon, and on the Forehead another, also black Stirrup-Leathers with gilt
Stirrups. Item, a black Bridle of Leather, having a broad Rain, and a small
long Rain.
Note, that the Horse for the Page, and Horse for the two Esquires, are to be
furnished as the Knight himself pleases.

His Third HABIT.
Item, to have a ^ong Gown of purple Satin, the Sleeves turned up at the hands
half a yard deep with white Taffatie, (after the manner of a Doctor, or
Bachelor of Laws Gown) edged with white Taffati^, and sometimes lined
throughout with a Hood to the same, purfled with like Taffatie; about half an
Inch deep, on his left Shoulder a small Lace of white Silk. These three
Escutcheons to be provided at the charge of the Heralds.
Item, three Escutcheons of his Arms with Crest, and if he be a Nobleman, to
be with Supporters. Item, A Table and his Mess of Mea^.
Also every Knight is to provide an Angel in Gold for his offering in the
Chapel.

The Proportions of Cloth and Silk for the Robes before specified.
The Cordo^, the pair of white gloves, the Coif of white ^avvn, the Lace of
white Silk, these to be provided at the change of the Se^geant of the Chandry.
Inprimis, three yards and an half of gray Cloth for his Gown and Cap. Item,
Thirteen else of Crimson Taffatie for the Robe and Surcoat. Item, Sixteen yards
of purple Satin for the Robe and Hood. Item, Three else of white Taffatie, to
edge and face the Silk Robe. Item, Cardels or strings with great Tassels of
Crimson Silk and Gold for the Crimson Robe, and a small one of Purple and Gold
for the purple Robe.
Note, that the Esquires and Page are to be richly habited, and that every
Knight to have two Footmen.

A CATALOGUE OF THE PRELATES and CLERGY Of the Province of CANTERBVRY. In the
lower House of CONVOCATION Now sitting at WESTMINSTER.
Doctor HENRY FEARNE Prolocutor.
Dioc. Cant.
THomas Turner Doctor of Divinity, Dean. Peter Gunning Doctor of Divinity,
Proctor for the Chapter. George Hall Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon. Pet.
Hardress, D. of Divinity John Gough Dr. of Divinity
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc Land.
Matthew Nicholas Doctor of Laws, Dean. Christopher Shute Doctor of Divinity,
Proctor for the Chapter. Thomas Pask Doct. of Divinity, Archdeacon of London.
Edward Layfield Doct. of Divinity, Archdeacon of Essex. Robert Porey Doct. of
Divinity, Archdeacon of Middlesex. John Hansley Master of Arts, Archdeacon of
Colchester. Mark Franck Doct. of Divinity, Archdeacon of St. Albans. William
Heywood, Doct. of Divinity Robert Thorndike Master of Arts
Proctors of the Clergy.
Col. Westminster.
John Earls Doctor of Divinity, Dean. John Sudbury Doct. of Divinity, Proctor
for the Chapter. The same Doctor Sudbury Archdeacon.
Dioc. Winton.
Alexander Hyde, Doctor of Divinity, Dean. Nicholas Preston Doctor of Divinity,
Proctor for the Chapter. (...) Gorge Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of Winton.
John Peirson Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of Surrey. William Booth Master of
Arts Joseph Gulst^n Doctor of Divinity
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Elien.
Henry Fern Doctor of Divinity, Dean. Richard Ball Doctor of Divinity, Proctor
for the Chapter. Bernard Hale, Doctor of Divinity Archdeacon. Edward Martin
Doctor of Divinity William Rawley Doctor of Divinity
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Bathon and Wellen.
Robert Creighton Doctor of Divinity, Dean. Richard Busby Doct. of Divinity,
Proctor of the Chapter. Grindal Sheafe Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of Wells.
William Davies Clerk, Archdeacon of Bath. William Pierce Master of Arts,
Archdeacon of Taunton. Walter Foster Bachelor in Divinity William Fane
Master of Arts
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Bangor.
The Bishop of Ossory in Ireland, Dean Commendatorie. Michael Evans B. of
Divinity, Proctor for the Chapter. William Moslyn Bachelor of Divinity,
Archdeacon of Bangor. The Bishop of Bangor, Archdeacon of Anglisea,
Commendatorie. Robert Morgan Bachelor of Divinity, Archdeacon of Merioneth.
John Gething Edward Win
Masters of Arts, Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Oxon
John Fell Doct. of Divinity, Dean. John Dolben Doct. of Divinity, Proctor for
the Chapter, Ba^tem Holiday Doct. of Divinity, Archdeacon. Ralph Bredcoak Tho.
Lamplugh
Doct. of Divinity, Proctors for the Clergy.
Dioc. Roffen.
Nathaniel Hardy Doct. of Divinity, Dean. Ralph Cock, Doct. of Divinity, Proct.
for the Chapter. John Lee Doct. of Divinity, Archdeacon. Thomas Pierce Doct. of
Divinity Rich. Chase Bachelor of Divinity
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Cicestren.
Joseph Henshaw Doct. of Divinity, Dean. Walter Jones Doct. of Divinity,
Proctor for the Chapter. Jasper Main Doct. of Divinity, Archdeacon of
Chichester. Philip King Doct. of Divinity, Archdeacon of Jews. James Wilcox
Oliver Whitby
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Wigorn.
John Oliver Doct. of Divinity, Dean. William Dowdeswel Doct. of Laws, Proctor
for the Chapter. William Hodges Bachelor of Divinity, Archdeacon. Joseph
Crouther Doct. of Divinity Henry Sutton Master of Arts
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Sarum.
Richard Barley Doct. of Divinity, Dean. John Priaulx Doctor of Divinity,
Proctor for the Chapter. John Rives Bachelor of Law, Archdeacon of Berk.
Anthony Hawles Doct. of Divinity, Archdeacon of Sarum. William Creed Doct. of
Divinity, Archdeacon of Wilts. Samuel Leech Doct. of Laws. Richard Cleyton,
Batch. of Divinity.
Proctors of the ^gy.
Dioc. Lincoln.
Michael Honywood Doctor of Divinity, Dean. John Pullen B. of Divinity, Proctor
for the Chapter. Raphael Throckmorton D. of Divinity, Archdeacon of Lincoln.
Giles Thorn B. of Divinity, Archdeacon of Bucks. Peter Mews Doctor of Laws,
Archdeacon of Huntingdon. Stephen Luddington Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon
of Stow. John Hacket Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of Bedford. Henry Fern
Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of Leicester. Giles Alleyn Doctor of Divinity
Basil Beridge Clerk.
Proctors of the clergy.
Dioc. Assaph.
David Lloyd Doctor of Laws, Dean. William Fowke Mr. of Arts, Proctor for the
Chapter. The Bishop of Asaph -- Archdeacon Commendatorie. Robert Powel Mr. of
Arts Humphrey Lloyd Clerk.
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Meneven.
William Thomas Doctor of Divinity, Precentor. William Owen Doctor of Divinity,
Proctor for the Chapter. William Nichelson Archdeacon, commendatory of Brecon.
William Jones Mr. of Arts, Archdeacon of Carnarthen. The Bishop of Landaff,
Archdeacon commendatory of St. David's. Edward Vaughan Mr. of Arts, Archdeacon
of Cardigan. Griffin Aatley Mr. of Arts Timothy Halton Mr. of Arts
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Landaven.
The Bishop of Landaff Commendatory of the Archdeacon and Chapter. Francis
Davi^ D. D. Archdeacon of Landaff. John Cleg Mr. of Arts, Proctor for the
Chapter. William Braband Doctor of Divinity George St^dling Mr. of Arts
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Exon.
John Peterson Doctor of Divinity, Dean. Seth Ward Doctor of Divinity, Proctor
for the Chapter. Edward Young Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of Exon. Edward
Cotton Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of Cornwall. Francis Fullwood Doctor of
Divinity, Archdeacon of T^tnes. James Smith Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of
Barnstaple. Richard Mervin Doctor of Divinity Joseph Maynard B. of Divinity.
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Petriburg.
Edward Rainbow Doctor of Divinity, Dean. John Howorth Doctor of Divinity,
Proctor for the Chapter. John Quarles Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of
Northampton. Peter Gunning Tho. Pierce
Doctors of Divinity, Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Norwic.
John Crofts Doctor of Divinity, Dean. Joseph Loveland Clerk, Proctor for the
Chapter. William Ieery Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of Norwich. Edward
Reynolds Mr. of Arts, Archdeacon of Norfolk. Anthony Sparrow Doctor of
Divinity, Archdeacon of Sudbury. Laurence Womock Doctor of Divinity,
Archdeacon of Suffolk William Herbert Doctor of Divinity (...)
Proctor of the Clergy
Dioc. Bristol.
Henry Glemham Dr. of Divinity, Dean. Richard Towgood B. of Divinity, Proctor
for the Chapter. (...) Meredith Clerk, Archdeacon of Dorset. Ralph Ironside
Mr. of Arts William South Mr. of Arts
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Hereford.
Herbert Crofts Dr. of Divinity, Dean. William Brabourn Doctor of Divinity,
Proctor for the Chapter. George Benson Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of
Hereford. Thomas Cock B. of Divinity, Archdeacon of Salop. William Watts Mr.
of Arts John Tailor B. of Divinity
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Glouc.
William Brough Dr. of Divinity, Dean. Walter Blandford Dr. of Divinity,
Proctor for the Chapter. John Middleton Mr. of Arts, Archdeacon. Richard
Harwood Doctor of Divinity James Hitchman B. of Law.
Proctors of the Clergy.
Dioc. Coven and Lich.
Will. Paul Doctor of Divinity, Dean. James Fleetwood Dr. of Divinity, Proctor
for the Chapter. John Ryland Mr. of Arts, Archdeacon of Coventry. William
Higgins Mr. of Arts, Archdeacon of Derby. Francis Cole Mr. of Arts,
Archdeacon of Stafford. Robert Powel Mr. of Arts, Archdeacon of Shrewsbury.
Nicholas Barnard Samuel Gardenor
Doctors of Divinity, Proctors of the Clergy.
FRAN. MVNDY, Batch. of Laws Actuarie.
FINIS:

