TWO LETTERS FROM TWO CHIEF OFFICERS under the Command of the EARL of ORMOND.

Particularly relating their good and happy Success in their late Expedition.



LONDON: Printed for H. Blunden. 1642.

DVBLIN 21. April 1642. Dear Brother,
I Hope my former Letters are come safe to your hands, I have been these 16.
days from Dublin. Three thousand Forces, horse and foot, went forty miles
into the Country toward Kilkenny, to relieve some Towns and strong Castles,
kept by the English; (God be praised we had good success, In all our
undertakings;) we effected all things according to our desires: we burned the
Rebels Towns, and put all to the sword all the way We marched, and gave them a
greater defeat then has been known these many years, since Kingsale Camp,
there has not been known the like multitude of Rebels in Arms, near a Town
called Athye (where our Army lay) the Rebels kept their Randevous, we saw their
strength the day before, and counted their Colors, which was between fifty
and threescore, as We plainly saw; we could not judge them to be less then
8000. men; the next morning we began our March homewards, with a full
resolution to fight with them if they came near us; we had not marched a mile
but we perceived them on the right hand of us a mile and half distant, coming
very fast toward us, which made our Soldiers taken with much joy, hoping to
encounter them, and do execution on them, (I never saw better resolution in men
in all my life) we marched five miles before we could come at them, for there
was a great Bog between us, they marched on our right Flank up even with us all
the time: when we made a stand, then they likewise did so too; and in the place
where we charged them, they also drew themselves into a full Body on the top
of a Hill, we being in the bottom, (a great disadvantage to us) howsoever we
powered valleys of shot among them with our ordnance, and small shot likewise:
they stood us till we came almost within Carbines shot, and then they face
about, and fell into disorder, running away as fast as they could; but we
pursued them, and our Horse did great execution on them, but were too nimble
for the foot, we followed a mile to a great Bogge, where they got for their
defense. The number that we slew of them, was at least six hundred: Amongst
which was four of their chief Commanders, whose heads we brought along with
us, and placed them on the gates of Dublin: Six of their Colors likewise we
took, and very much of their Carriages; we understand that they were the
absolute strength of seven Counties in this part of the Kingdom, and did as
confidently assure themselves of cutting us all off, as of meeting with us; in
so much (they being so many more then us as they divided our bagage long before
we fought with them, and were resolved to show no mercy to us; But it pleased
God to bless and strengthen us with such hearts and courage, that we made them
fly before us, like dust before the wind. I pray God to continue our hopeful
proceedings; shortly we expect to go to Kelkenny, where the Rebels are
exceeding strong; so with my true love unto you remembered, I rest,

Your very loving Brother, D. B.

Dublin, April 21. SIR,
I Do acknowledge my self engaged to you for your care of my business which I
understand by your letter, and will study whereby to requite it: We have great
store of provision for the present, but I doubt a famine will suddenly follow,
by the reason of the spoil that is made of Corn and Cattle: for where ere we
come, we kill and burn all before us, because we would not have it relieve our
enemies, and they do the like by us. We have received no pay since we came into
this Kingdom, but the more is behind; We will trust the Parliament. We were
three thousand foot, and four hundred horse, and five field Pieces, commanded
into the County of Wicklow, and Kildare, the second of April to relieve some
English that were besieged by the Rebels, and very little resistance was made:
for they ran away still before us. And thus we marched three weeks about the
Country, and relieved what places we were sent to relieve. We were coming back
to Dublin, but my Lord Montgarret, one of the chief of the Rebels, thought to
out us all off before we came to Dublin. On Friday in the morning last past,
they showed themselves, and marched by us twelve thousand till two of the
clock. In the afternoon before the battle began, they had divided our Wagons,
and our clothes, and appointed whose prisoner every man of any quality should
be, and the rest should be killed, and hanged: they brought a cartfull of
Halters for that purpose, so confident they were of victory After we had been
at prayers, Sir Charles Coote ordered our small Army, and toward them we
marched, and all the way our Ordnance played upon them, and then the Musketeers
came up within shot, and gave so good fire, and came on so fast upon them, that
those Irish Commanders durst not stay till we came to push of pike, but away
they ran; then had we the killing of them till 5. a clock at night: And instead
of their dividing our Wagons, we now divide theirs. We killed near a thousand
men, besides the prisoners we took they were hanged. My Lord Montgarrets son
was killed in the battle, and his head brought to Dublin. There was not a man
killed of ours, and not above eight hurt. I received a small hurt, but it is
almost well already. I desire you send this Letter to my father when you have
read it.

Tho. Wyld.

FINIS.

