THE Debauchee: OR, THE Credulous Cuckold, A COMEDY.

ACTED at His Highness The Duke of York's THEATER. Licensed, Feb. 23. 1676/7.
ROGER L'STRANGE.

LONDON Printed for John Amery, at the Peacock, against St. Dunstan's-Church in
Fleet Street. 1677.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by a WOMAN.
WHo can enough the Stages Fate deplore?
From men of sense, (our Patrons heretofore,)
By whom, (because all was well understood,
In our worst Plays, something was still thought good,)
To you the tastless judging Tribe we fly,
Who treat our best with that severity,
You never know, where it is the Wit does ly;
Poets do justly your dull Censures scorn,
Men of your parts, for us alone were born,
Your Natural parts, which never would fail to Charm,
Did not your Damned acquired ones do you harm;
To please our Sex, you question all that is writ,
You Sham, Clinch, Quibble, Cant, and Counterfit,
And something fain you would show, might pass for wit,
While folly can alone our wishes hit.
Half Fools it is true, like half Wits, awkward prove,
But a good thorough Fool, all Women love.
Mark but the use of Fools, which is it you want?
A quiet Husband? or a free Gallant?
You have him, but a Wit is such a Tool!
Fit to make nothing, till he is made a Fool,
And that is about the Bush, which to prevent,
We'll kindly take you such as God has sent;
Then be advised. --
And this dull strife for wittiness give ore,
Ground your small merit on a juster score,
Less of ill Wit, and of good Breeding more,
From France you bring us Noise, instead of Sense.
Instead of Courage, saucy Confidence;
With antique Dresses, and Impertinence.
One eminent Grace does in that Land abound,
Manners, which you sweet Sparks have never found.
Manners, in these refined, though ill-bred Times,
Like Christian Charity amongst Divines,
Would make Atonement for a world of Crimes.
You Would be so welcome here, would you but sit
Like Ciphers, as you are, and grace the Pit,
Well dressed, well bred, we'd never look for Wit.
But you come bawling in with broken French,
Roaring out Oaths aloud, from Bench to Bench,
And bellowing Bawdy to the Orange-wench;
Quarrel with Masks, and to be brisk, and free,
You sell 'em Bargains for a Repartee,
And then cry Damn 'em Whores, who ere they be.
For shame from these Barbarities remove;
If you will be rude, in War your roughness prove,
Or at some hours 'twill be allowed in Love;
But you with all wrong qualities endu'd,
Are too too civil, when you should be rude.
Written by a Person of Quality.
Actors Names.
Lord Loveless, Gallant to Mrs. Saleware. Sir Oliver Thrivewel. George
Careless, His Nephew. Mr. Saveall, Friend to Sir Oliver. Tom. Saleware, A
Citizen. Watt, Man to Mr. Careless. Sim, An old Butler to Sir Oliver. The Lady
Thrivewell, Wife to Sir Oliver. Clara, her Sister in Love with Lord
Loveless,disguised like his Page, and called Bellamy. Mrs. Crostill, a rich
young Widow, in love with Careless. Mrs. Phebe Gimcrack, Miss to Careless.
Betty, Maid to the Widow. Closett, Housekeeper to Sir Oliver. Alitia, Wife to
Saleware. A Servant Maid. A Prentice. Two Chair-men. A Footman.
Scene, London. THE Debauchee, OR, The Credulous Cuckold.
Act First. Scene First.
Enter Careless and Watt. Carel. WAtt, have you delivered the Letter, as I
ordered you?


Watt. Yes, Sir, I have to your Uncles Friend Mr Save-all, but he says, he has
made your peace so often and to so little purpose, that he now absolutely
despairs of a Reconciliation between you.


Carel. But then thou should have told him, I would not take that for an
answer.


Watt. Then he would have answered me, Let your precious Master take his
course, for he is like to have no better answer.


Carel. Could thou not tell him again, that I have taken all the Courses, a
young Gentleman can, to maintain himself like one; but they are all run out,
and I have not one trick to manage, and may perish unless that damned Uncle of
mine, set me again, nor know I how to arrive to that but through his
intercession.


Watt. Puh, Sir, then I know what he would have told me again, and mustered up
all your Vices: then that this same Uncle (so despised a thing) before he
discarded you, had releast you out of Prison, within the space of Thirteen
months, a Dozen times.


Carel. Well, Coxcomb, that was not once a Month then. Why should he upbraid me
with it? I am sure 'twas I that suffered for it, and so you might have told him.


Watt. Yes, and then he would have answered me, that your extravagant courses
have cost your Uncle at least Fifteen hundred Pounds, and upon your last
debauch (when he resolved never to concern himself for you again, about a year
ago) he cast another Five hundred Pound after you, with this Proviso that you
should never trouble him any more; and at last finding you incorrigible, he
Married on purpose to disinherit you.


Carel. Ay, that damned Marriage has ruined me -- but, damn it, let it go, and
let my Uncle go to the Devil, and let Save-all go, and be damned for a Cynical
Ass as he is. -- I confess he has by his formal Solicitation, made up breaches
between my Uncle and me, at least a Score of times, what a Devil had it been
for him to have tried his Interest for me once more?


Watt. I wish you would consider what is to be done, for your own sake, besides
you ought to take some care of me your Creature, that have stuck to you through
all Fortunes, to maintain and keep up your Gallantry, and think in time before
these Cloths are worn out, for you will find it somewhat difficult to Equip your
self again.


Carel. I care not, I will not give my self one Minutes trouble about it, I ll
rather dye here in New Alsatia, or sell my self a Slave to the Galleys.
Consider quoth a? -- what should I consider?


Watt. Consider your poor Whore Sir, for she (as you have managed her) is in a
worse Case than your self; her Cloths grow somewhat shabby.


Carel. Ay there is it, I would willingly do somewhat for her, but how the Devil
knows. -- Have I not already done all that possibly can be done by a distressed
hopeless heir?


Watt. Has the Die quite failed you, and all the Cheats that thereupon depend?
Your Marrabone bowling Booties forsaken you? your Tennis Court Betting? your
Cockpit Cozenages too? and all your Arts of borrowing?


Carel. All, all Arts are quite confounded.


Watt. I wonder your Father should leave you nothing to live upon but Wit, and
that not for life.


Carel. Hold thy peace; -- I am contriving a way how (tho it cost me my life,)
to disgrace my Uncle.


Watt. There Is a Plot! I beseech you think of your poor Whore, Sir -- what do
you think will become of her, if you should cast away your self?


Carel. Thou know I must leave her once.


Watt. If you could leave her handsomely -- and betake your self to other Women.


Carel. To other Women? what to do? to empty my Bones? I have had enough of
variety.


Watt. Ay but, Sir, you are handsome and young; I have known such in this Town,
who have brought in as good a Living, as any Miss of 'em all; kept their
Coaches too, with only being a little Snout Fair.


Carel. Damn it, I Will never fall so low to do the drugery of any Old Lady.


Watt. Very good! many a younger Brother would leap at such preferment.


Carel, No I Will pursue my first Resolves, and will commit some death-deserving
Crime, though these Cloths go to the Hangman for it, in spite to him that was my
Uncle, and that ridiculous, grave, formal Nonsensical speaking Friend of his
Saveall, that calls People Pe-o-p-le. [ Enter Saveall.


Mr Saveall! -- Could I expect this honor? how am I obliged to you for this
Visit?

-- Sir, being informed my Uncle was come to Town and you with him, I did
presume to write to you.


Save. Send away your Servant.


Care. Go, wait without. [ Ex. Watt.


Save. One Servant is not sit to be employed in all Offices. -- It was a bold
thing indeed, to write to me, considering how often I have interceded for you,
and reconciled you to your overgrateful Uncle, therein was your good thoughts
of your self.


Carel. The wretchedst Creature breathing! in having wearied out my best of
Friends, on whom my chiefest happiness depended.


Save. No, I am not wearied, but have the same good wishes still to serve you,
but cannot strive against impetuous Torrents.


Carel. My Uncle's then resolved that I shall perish. But did you speak on my
behalf this time?


Save. O Sir! I have tried him even unto his displeasure.


Carel. But did you mention that good deed of mine; which he once swore should
ever be remembered?


Save. All, Sir, all; but 'twas in vain to urge your merits to him, though to say
truth, it was a worthy Action to save him, from the inhuman Violence of Thieves
and Murderers -- but --


Carel. Watt, and I, made Four of the stoutest Rogues fly for it, that ever
cried Stand upon the Kings high way. -- After they had dismounted him, and set
their Pistols to his Bosom; he crying and roaring out for Assistance, I
happened by mere Accident to pass by, which was a miraculous chance, nay it
was, when I was out of his Favor too, and had been so for six Months; and yet
Nature prevailed and I saved him -- nay more --


Save. Fare you well, Sir, I could have said all this as well as you -- but --
[Offers to go.


Carel. Good Mr Saveall, do not leave me.


Save. Good Mr Careless, give me leave to be heard as well as to hear.


Carel. I cry you mercy, Sir, pray proceed.


Save. I was saying what you did then for your Uncle was a worthy Action, and
you expressed your self a perfectly kind Nephew; the Action too drew blessings on
your head, notwithstanding you were then cast off to Reprobation, he then
received you into his Bosom again, Adopted you his Son, tho but his Sisters
Son, allowed you Three hundred Pounds a year, and gave Walter Fifty Pounds for
the good Service he then did.


Carel. And he deserved it, I Will say that, he received a flash over the
Coxcomb, he never bore his drink well since.


Save. God be with you the second time.


Carel. Nay sweet Mr. Saveall --


Save. I came not altogether to hear you speak, but to speak unto you my self.


Carel. Sir, I will attend with all due submission.


Save. As I was saying -- Sir Oliver being thus gracious unto you, you presumed
upon your Merit still, and flew to new extravagancies, till for one good
service you did him, he repaid you a hundred, by paying of Surgions Bills for
Claps, Wounds, etc. Redeeming you out of Prison, till wearyed with your
Extravagancies he turned you off for ever, nay even at that time --


Carel. Even at that time I could have lived, and might do so still, only by
being imagined his Heir, had he not been Married: a Curse upon that Marriage,
it turned the hearts of all well minded Citizens from me.


Save. A Third time I will take my leave.


Carel. Sir, You shall see the last of me first and that immediately, that you
may let my Uncle know, I Will be no more a Vexation to him, unless in Charity he
will see me buried; it is all I ask. [ Draws his Sword. Saveall gets it from him.


Save. I hope you will not kill your self and thereby damn your Soul.


Carel. O Sir, you need not disarm me, I can die without that help -- I feel my
heart ready to break; alas Sir, my Uncle has abandoned me, and so have you, and
then it is high time to dye -- Watt -- [ Enter Watt.


Watt. Your pleasure, Sir.


Save. I have delayed too long to tell him the good News I bring him. [Aside.


Carel. Put me to Bed, Watt. [Watt holds him he stands as fainting.


Watt. Mrs. Phebe is come indeed, but I hope you will not go to Bed with her
before him. [ Aside to Care.


Carel. Put me to Bed, I say -- come undress me quickly.


Watt. Lord, Lord, Sir, how his heart pants! pangs of death I fear.


Save. Alas! I hope not so, good Mr. Walter. I will now be brief -- Mr.
Careless, pray look up.


Carel. No, no, Sir, I am well prepared to die, I thank my Stars.


Save. Why Sir Oliver is Friends with you!


Carel. Alas, alas Sir, --


Save. Why I thought you a Man of more resolution.


Carel. Ay, Ay Sir, I have made a resolution.


Save. Come Sir, I profess, all that I have done was only to search your temper.


Watt. Ay, Ay, Sir, but I am a fraid you have searched too deep.


Carel. Ay, Ay, --


Save. Come Sir, look up, Sir Oliver intends to take you into Grace again, and
make a farther Trial of you -- you may be yet his Heir, for your New young Aunt
is now out of hopes of a Child, having been Married at least 20 Months, and no
signs of Issue.


Carel. Ah Sir, -- can this be possible?


Save. Most possible. Come Sir, you must along with me to your Uncle; and all
things shall be well again.


Carel. Your Generosity has revived me, Sir, -- Watt, my Sword. -- tell Phebe I
am now in haste, going to see my Uncle, and cannot stay to speak with her. [
Gives him his Sword, Carel. speaks to him aside.


Save. Good Gentleman, how feebly he stands! but his Uncles kind Aspect will
recover him.


Carel. Sir, what if I should first (to show the Reformation of my mind) leave
off my unbecoming Perriwig, and put off these gay Cloths, and Equip my self in
a Students Gown? I can be furnished at the Brokers, Sir.


Save. The Reformation of your mind's sufficient; and these Cloths become your
Quality. [ Ex. Save. and Carel.


Enter Phebe to Watt. Phe. What? he is departed, it seems.


Watt. Called by his happy Fortune.


Phe. Refuse to see me? but I Will fetch him back. [Offers to go.


Watt. Hold, hold, sweet Phebe, you will not ruin him; he is gone to be Friends
with his Uncle, and I dare promise you within a day or two, a New Gown and
Petticoat.


Phe. You know how to dissemble too -- pray let him make me amends for the
wrongs he has done me, for I neither can nor will any longer bear with him.


Watt. Nor bear him neither? You had best have a care what you say.


Phe. Nor with him neither, Sawcebox, unless he Marry me, as he promised, and
save my honor.


Watt. Your honor, with a Pox!


Phe. Yes, Sirrah, my honor, which was unspotted before he seduced me, which
e're long I Will make him know -- nay and thou shall assist me in it.


Watt. Why look you, Mrs. Phebe, be not so passionate, and I Will do all I can to
serve you.


Phe. It Is your safest way, or I Will be the death of you.


Watt. Bless me, how desperate Poverty makes a Whore? -- but what Course do you
intend to take with him?


Phe. Why I intend to send my wealthy Kinsman that lives in the City to demand
satisfaction of him, which if he refuses, I don't doubt but he will hamper him.


Watt. What I Will warrant you, you mean Saleware, he that has the slanting Wife?


Phe. Why how now Impudence! do you mock my misery? -- I Will make him know what
it is to abuse simple Innocence. He had no way to accomplish his wicked design,
but by promising to Marry me, and at the same time made me refuse the offers of
a good match in the Country, by which I incurred the displeasure of all my
Friends; and does he think to leave me now at last, without making some
provision for me? but he shall find that my Kinsman has money, and will stretch
his purse to right me by Law. -- for I have already given him an Account of his
ill usage to me.


Watt. But I hope you have not told him how often he has enjoyed you, and the
Where Is, and the Whens.


Phe. Sirrah, I shall teach you and your Master too, to use me with more
Civility ere it be long.


Watt. Why truly, Mrs. Phebe, for all my Fooling I have a perfect sense of the
injuries he has done you, and have not been wanting in my persuasions to make
him less cruel; -- but I Will warrant you will refuse me a kiss now for all the
good Offices I have done you. [She strikes him.


Phe. Away you impudent Raseal.


Watt. Come prithee tempt me no farther, for if you do, by Heaven I shall be
most desperately in Love with you.


Phe. You in Love with me, you pitiful Creature!


Watt. Yes, faith Madam, I am your Creature as well as my Masters, and can
satisfy my appetite very well upon a dish after he has done with it, and you
know the Servingman is always allowed to break his Fast upon his Masters
leavings -- Oh, how Devilish hungry that frown makes me.


Phe. You are no Impudent Rascal you?


Watt. Come, come, you know a good stomach needs no sauce, and you may save
your self the charge and trouble of going to Law, nor shall you need the
assistance of any other Friend, to make my Master do you reason, but your
Friend and Servant honest Watt.


Phe. In good time.


Watt. Come take my Counsel, and if I do not handle matters so (if you will but
join with me) as shall content you, then say I Am a Man of no Abilities.


Phe. How join with you?


Watt. In the next Room I Will show you; there I Will dictate a Letter, which you
shall write too him, which shall sting him to the quick.


Phe. Nay I intended to write to him before I departed the house -- Oh Cousin,
are you come? [ Enter Tom. Saleware, as they are going off.


Watt. The Devil take this sniveling Cuckold for spoiling our sport. -- hark
ye, Mrs. Phebe, is this your Worshipful Knisman you told me of.


Tom. I am the Gentleman, Sir, if you have any thing to say to me -- my
Kinswoman has told me all, and so pray tell your Master, and that he is a
dishonest Gentleman if he does not Marry her according to his promise; it is
that I came to demand in her right, or to denounce the Law against him.


Watt. 'Twas well, Sir, that you came too late to tell him so, for he would
have so swinged you else --


Tom. Oh, oh, Sir, these great Speeches cannot fright me, I neither fear, nor
care for swinging, I Will not be dashed, nor basht, nor cross him out of my Book
for such payments; for, Sir, take notice he is in my Books for Sixscore pounds,
as you can witness, tho you have lost the remembrance of me; -- but Sapientia
mea mihi; Stultitia tua tibi.


Watt. Oh your Servant, sweet Mr. Saleware, I had indeed forgot you -- how does
Mrs. Saleware, your most beautiful Wife? the Flower de Luce of Pater Noster Row.


Tom. No matter to you, Sir, how my Wife does; it is, my Kinswoman that I talk
of, whom your Master has deflowered, and deluded, and led into a Fools Paradise,
as the saying is, by swearing he would make her his Wife, and here he has held
her off, and held her on, till she is with Child by him, and I Will have you to
know, Sirrah, my Cousin is a Gentlewoman.


Watt. Pray, Sir, how many Children have you, by your most exquisite Wife?


Tom. Why what is that to you? again Sirrah -- still meddling with my Wife?


Watt. I only spoke it, because you were talking of Children, Sir, -- but how
shall I know this is my Masters Child, if she has conceived?


Tom. I shall make him know it is his. Come, come, there is Law to be had for
money, money to be had for Friends, Friends to be had in the Spiritual Court;
and so, if you please, you may tell your Master. Come, Cousin, come.


Watt. But pray, Sir, give me leave to ask you one question: From whom does
your Cousin derive her Gentility? Is it from you or your Wife?


Tom. Sirrah, you are a sawey Jackanapes, to offer to meddle with your betters;
for I Will have you to know, I am a Common Council Man, and as for my Wife, let
me advise you not to mention her but with respect, or I shall bring you, where
you shall be taught to mend your manners.


Watt. I cry you mercy, Sir, I know she is for great Persons.


Tom. Are you at it again? Well, Sirrah, remember this. -- Come away, Cousin.
[Exeunt,


SCENE II.
Enter Sir Oliver Thrivewell and Lady. Sir Ol. Why should you harbor so ill an
opinion of me?


La. Your late unkindness is too visible; did you not take me in your Arms last
night, with exstasie? And when you discovered that 'twas I, you coldly turned
away, as if you had dreamt the while.


Sir Ol. Methinks you dream now, or else you could not talk so idly.


La. This will not do, for I Am resolved, I ll never let you rest, till I know
what it is has caused this Melancholy. -- I am sure, be it what it will, it has
been but very lately entertained. -- Come be free with me, have you entered
into Bonds for Friends, and are forced to satisfy 'em?


Sir Ol. No, no, prithee give over.


La. Or has any sad distaster befallen some dear Friend of yours?


Sir Ol. Fie, fie.


La. Or is it your extravagant Nephews wicked Courses that afflcts you? -- I
was in hopes you had been Friends with him, you made your Friend Mr. Saveall
and I believe so. You said you would send for him; have you not? or do you
repent the promise which you made us?


Sir Ol. Neither, upon my life; when e're he comes, he shall be welcome to me,
prithee leave to be Inquisitive.


Sad. Indeed I shall not, Sir, till I know:


Sir Ol. Nay good wife --


La. No persuasion shall prevail, I will know it tho it be a sin against my
self: and I Will forgive it too.


Sir Ol. Now shall I play the Fool, and tell her. [Aside.


La. You will not tell me then?


Sir Ol. Yes, I will, if you will be so good as to forgive it, tho you are most
concerned to punish it:


La. Sir, it is my duty to forgive any thing, and here again, I swear I will
forgive it.


Sir Ol. Let me confirm your mercy -- and on this Altar which I have
transgrest, offer new vows, of Love and Faith for ever. [Kisses her.


La. Again, Sir, I forgive what ere it be.


Sir Ol. I Will sin no more so, yet I scarce know a man that is not guilty this
way --


La. Dear Husband, to the business. You Have loved a pretty Woman, Is It not so? I
mean -- unlawfu^ly? --


Sir Ol. Your guess is right; and I expect my sentence.


La. Ha, ha, ha, what a Coil was here, about a thing of nothing? Where shall
you find from the Carman to the Statesman, one free from such a fault? --


Sir Ol. And can you pardon it then?


La. Never fear it: tho I Have been jealous ever since your last being in Town.

-- But pray, how many Women -- have you thus loved? --


Sir Ol. Upon my life but one.


La. Tell me her name; tho I fancy I suspect who it is already.


Sir Ol. Saleware my Silkmans Wife.


La. It Is she I meant. Pray what price? for she is a handsome woman;


Sir Ol. Faith after a tedious Courtship which she withstood, with much put-on
Coyness and feigned scorn, crying I had mistook my woman, she was not of that
lewd sort -- and so forth, at last I offered her a Hundred Guinies, which
softened her into a yielding; and then I once enjoyed her.


La. I guess the time too. 'T was last Term when you stayed out all night, and
said you would been amongst the Wits.


Sir Ol. Still you guess right, -- but that for which I hate this jilting
Queen, is, having purchased her at such a price, I thought to have loved on
still on the old stock. But she turned tail -- and cried, Another Hundred
Guinies; and you're welcome; this answer I received but yesterday.


La. O unmerciful! how rich would the City be, were every kindness that their
Wives granted, so returned and paid! Why, twould beggar the Court and Country.
But here comes Mr. Saveall and Mr. Careless, I believe. Faith it is a handsome
Gentleman -- [Aside.


Enter Saveall and Careless. Save. Sir, I have according to your desire brought
home your Nephew Careless; a Penitent he is, and so I recommend him.


Sir Ol. George, thou art welcome, nor will I perplex thee with any upbraiding
of thy past offenses.


Carel. I humbly thank you, Sir,


Sir Ol. Nay, not so grave, good George: I Will have thee live with all thy wonted
Spirit. Leave but thy wonted lewdness and it is enough.


Care. Sir, they only served to teach me how I ought to be, by seeing my own
defermity in them, and I hope, have wrought that Effect in me which you desire
--


Sir Ol. It Is well said, and, George, thank Mr. Saveall and your Aunt too, for
they were your Advocates,


Carel. Hah! my Aunt! how beautiful she is! [Aside gazing on her.


Sir Ol. Salute her, George --


Carel. I dare not, Sir, approach her.


Sir Ol. I like that Modesty. [ To Save. aside.


Save. Nay, nay, Sir, he is transformed from what he was.


Carel. Madam, the goodness you have shown me, cannot be paid but with that
reverence and respect we pay to Heaven; for when I would approach you as a Lady
to whom I owe obedience as an Aunt, your bounty and your Beauty gives me Laws,
and thus commands my distance.


La. This distance is too much. You Will be more welcome, if you approach more
near.


Carel. I Would rather offend in my respect, than in my obedience, and since you
command it -- thus take the humble boldness -- Ah, she is a Heavenly creature --
[aside. [Kisses her.


Sir Ol. George, -- come hither -- take notice; George, my house here is yours,
my table yours: and all my Servants to be commanded by you: -- but you have
Watt still?


Care. Yes, Sir, a very harmless honest true hearted Fellow it is: as I have
instructed him, he has left off swearing now, and can say Grace.


Sir Ol. It Is well. Send for him to wait on you: to morrow I Will pay your debts
if you owe any thing.


Carel. Some few, Sir, hardly worth taking notice of: they shall not be your
trouble --


Save. You speak well, Sir.


Sir Ol. Well, George, what ere they be, they shall be paid. Come lead you
Aunt in to Dinner -- [Exeunt.


The End of the First Act.
Act Second. Scene First. Salewares Shop.
Discovers Alitia Saleware: a Prentice, the Lady Thrivewel, and a Footman. Ali.
I Assure your Ladyship, there cannot be better ware in London, and your
Ladyship will find it such in the wearing.


La. Have you made a Bill Mrs. Saleware? for I am satisfied in the goodness of
your Commodity; -- a Note of the particulars I pray: and at as low a Rate as
you can afford for ready money; for I am never in the City Books, like Heirs
under age and Courtiers:


Ali. Your Ladyships pay was ever good, and I have made the Prices according.
Here it is, Madam --


La. Let me see -- Boy, take you the Box, it is all put up.


Ali. Yes, Madam.


La. Give me my Purse, Boy, and go you home with the Lace. I have only Gold,
Mrs. Saleware, which you will weigh before you take, I suppose. [Ex. Boy.


Ali. That Is no great pains, Madam.


La. How ever I Will not give you the trouble now, -- pray send your man for a
Glass of beer --


Ali. Some beer for my Lady -- [Ex. Boy.


La. That I may take the opportunity to tell you, what possibly you would be
loath he should hear: -- for it is more the business of the Foreman of the Shop
to keep his Mistresses secrets.


Ali. Your Ladyship is merry.


La. Not very merry, because I find by your Bill here that I have laid out more
money than my Husband allowed me: here is a Hundred and Eight Pounds and Two
shillings, and I am allowed but the Hundred.


Ali. The rest is no great matter, Madam,


La. Oh, very great in a Norfolk Ladys Pocket: and would supply her Credit at
Picket, and Lantraloo a whole Christmas in the Country: tho you great Gamesters
of the City here, can lose and win your Hundreds, whilst it is so easily
commanded out of the Pockets of those Country-Ladys Husbands --


Ali. I understand not your Ladyship.


La. I Will tell you then: Sir Oliver, when he was last in Town, lent you, or left
with you, a Hundred Guinies, which he has given to me: now here is in the Bill
one Hundred and Eight Pounds and Two Shillings, so here is Twelve shillings for
you, and all is paid.


Ali. What mean you, Madam?


La. Why, have you forgot the Money my Husband lent you? it is strange, when
'twas to do you such a service.


Ali. A service, Madam!


La. Yes, a service; have a care you don't make me suspect that you deserved it
from him some dishonest way.


Ali. Please you to drink, Madam?

[Enter Boy with a Glass of Beer. [Ali. Drinks.
La. After you Mrs. Saleware. -- This Notes right cast up, Boy?


Boy. To a Farthing, Madam. [La. Drinks.


Ali. I hope your Ladyship will find your self so well used, that you will
always be pleased to Honor me with your Ladyships Custom.


La. On these Terms always, Mrs. Saleware, and so, Your Servant.


Ali. Your Ladyship obedient. -- Open the Coach for my Lady.


La. My Footman's there, he need not.


Ali. Would your Coachman would carry your Ladyship to the Devil. [Enter Bell.
as the Lady goes out, she gazes on him. La. returns still gazing upon Bell.


La. Hark you, Mrs. Saleware. -- sure it is the same. [Aside.


Ali. Your command's an honor, Madam.


La. Do you know that Gentleman?


Ali. Yes, Madam, he is Gentleman to the Lord Loveless, and called Bellamy.


La. It Is a hansom youth, I thought I had seen his Face before. I commend you
for placing your Love here now: but an old Country Knight is a dangerous man;
have a care of such, for likely, they have handsome Ladys of their own; adieu
sweet Mrs. Saleware -- [ Ex. La.


Ali. The Devil take her, how she shot Darts at Bellamy: she Loves the
Beardless Boy, this chaste Lady.


Bell. Now, Madam, may I be heard?


Ali. Yes, if you please to speak.


Bell. But you are frowning, Madam, why do those Eyes put on such Marks of
anger, threatening a death to him, whom they have made their slave?


Ali. Fie upon it, what stuff's this, I am out of Humor, and this will increase
it.


Bell. Who durst offend you?


Ali. An unlucky accident that has happened to me, I have cozened my self in
the Sale of a parcel of Goods, which if my Husband should know, here would be
such a life --


Bell. Hang him Mercenary fool, why should he set you here to forward such mean
Trade?


Ali. Ay, this talk pleases me.


Bell. Ranking his Wife but with his Prentices,


Ali. It Is very true, Mr. Bellamy: it is a mean thing as you say, but I have
revenged it to day, in the mistake I have made.


Bell. I hope it was not much?


Ali. Not much; but so much as has spoiled a Shop-Trader of me: your Lord told
me, I should not be at this Servile pass long: that he would take me from it,
and carry me to the other End of the Town, and take me a House in the Pellmell
--


Bell. He still designs it; -- If I prevent him not. [Aside.


Ali. He said I should have new Cloths, too, and sent the Mercer to me with
Patterns of Brocados de or: but I have heard nothing on it since.


Bell. Perhaps this Letter will satisfy you.

[Gives her a Letter: she reads. -- What a cursed office is this, to play the
Pander for the man I love, I am well born, and but for his slattery, had still
remained with Honor and in Virtue: but his bewitching tongue wrought on my
easine's, and robbed me of my Fame: -- 'twas well in this disguise I was
concealed, my sister else had knowri me, and then I Would been undone: it is this --
that keeps me too, concealed, from the false Loveless, who takes me for a Boy,
and makes me do what even in this bold shape I am ashamed to Act, to Pimp for
him: -- Oh heavens! that word -- but I Will prevent his longer doting here; to
wast his fortune and his love on one, common, ungrateful, and insensible.


Ale. O what a sweet Letter's here, and yet I have a kind of a mind to this
Bellamy too -- at Shatliens at six, good -- -- Sir, I find my Lord is all
honor. [Aside.


Bell. But, Madam will you think on me that languish for you.


Ale. Because I am kind to your Lord, you imagine I must be so to you? but I
would have you to know I am none of those: I am not fallen from his favor yet, or
if I were, I should not fall to Pages -- there be more Lords.


Bell. Madam, you have silenced me. [Offers to go.


Ale. Nay, not so hasty, come back Mr. Bellamy.


Pren. Can you take his money forsooth? -- do you hear, Sir.


Ale. Stay you behind the Counter, Sirrah; cannot I handle the Gentleman
without you? -- What, fly for my first denial? -- Come, let a smile encourage
you again --


Bell. Oh how you bless me! --


Ale. -- Come, come, leave off to talk like a Player, and if you have a passion
for me, let me know it -- Are you ashamed? that blush would seem to say so --
come then, whisper it in my ear -- [He whispers --

Oh strange, is that the highest price you dare venture? I cannot, Sir, afford
it so: yet this -- before you go -- I Am sure you cannot match it. [Kisses him.


Bell. I shall forget my duty to my Lord --


Ale. Prithee do so, and so will I, and tell me what you would have me to do
with you.


Bell. I would entreat you --


Ale. Forward, Sir, without a blush.


Bell. That you would vouchsafe --


Ale. To do what, I pray?


Bell. To wear this Watch by your side -- and every minute think of me.


Ale. I could have done that without all this entreaty -- is this all?


Bell. No, there is something more, but when I think how fair you are, and what
a blessing my Lord injoys in you --


Ale. Prithee no more of him: but ask me something.


Bell. I dare not hope you can grant me any thing.


Ale. Why so?


Bell. Because you love my Lord so well.


Ale. Perhaps not when he is present -- but tell me what is it?


Bell. That you would be pleased --


Ale. I am pleased.


Bell. To grace this Ring with your fair hand.


Ale. And what hurt will that be to your Lord? -- come, come, I must divine
your meaning now, and what returns I must make you for all these presents --
but --


Bell. But -- you will be cruel and betray me to my Lord.


Ale. But I will not, though I have you at my mercy; for it is evident you would
lie with me -- deny it if you can.


Bell. Did I name such a word now? I swear you make me blush.


Ale. Then you're a fool; come, take courage, and be more a man, for you shall
--


Bell. What shall I?


Ale. Why you shall -- you understand me, do what I said you wished to do.


Bell. Oh how happy you will make me!


Ale. But it is on this condition.


Bell. Let it be what it will I Will do it.


Ale. Why you saw here e'n now, a young Lady.


Bell. What of her?


Ale. It Is my Lady Thrivewell.


Bell. Wife to Sir Oliver Thrivewell?


Ale. Yes; it seems you know her then.


Bell. I have seen her, I think, when she was a Maid.


Ali. Well, she is passionately in love with you -- you saw her speak to me, and
how unwilling she was to go, and lose the pleasure of looking on you.


Bell. What does all this tend to?


Ali. Nay, I speak against my self, to oblige that sweet person, which few
women do; but I have particular reason for it, and you must make love to her.
You know what I mean.


Bell. Alas, how should I get access?


Ali. O, my Lord's to borrow money of her husband, and you're to be employed, I
know upon the Message, then you will have opportunity, and she being willing, the
business may soon be done: -- and it is the only way to win my love.


Bell. This is to try my constancy.


Ali. I vow I do not, but will be yours entirely, when this is done; -- but see
my husband: -- We must sup to night at Shaltines.


Enter Tom Saleware. Tom. How does my dear Ali.? -- Mr. Bellamy, your servant,
I hope my Honored Lord's well. Why what, you are not brisk and gay! I hope my
wife has not cozened you in any Wares; or are you and she upon some bargain,
that you cannot agree about? You must comply with Mr. Bellamy, my sweet Aly. he
is my Noble Lord's Favorite, and must be used well, and shall, whether I am
within or without doors.


Bell. Sir you mistake, and I must take my leave. [ Ex. Bell.


Tom. What an Asenego's this? he might a returned my Complement, though I care
not a fart for him. I hope thou have cozened him indeed, Ale.


Ali. Thomas, you are mistaken, Thomas, -- in setting me to cousen any body; I
am weary of this sneaking Trade, Thomas, and of this taudrum City dress,
Thomas, as I have often told you, Thomas; but you think a wife should obey her
husband.


Tom. Never the sooner for a hasty word, sweet heart; but for these Tawdrums,
as you call them, I say, they are the City-fashion: yet you may follow your own
humor, and my Lord's fancy, as I promised before I had you.


Ali. Why, that is well said, Friend.


Tom. Nay, now I am sure she is pleased, she calls me Friend, she ever did so
when she was in good humor.

-- But, Friend, I have found a chapman for the Lace my Lord Lack-Land bespoke,
and wanted money to pay for: a chapman that will buy it all.


Ali. I have sold it, Friend, already.


Tom. How, Friend, and is it paid for?


Ali. Yes, it is paid for.


Tom. Well, it comes as pat to stop a Gap.


Ali. It has stopped a gap already. I have bought me things I wanted, fine
Clothes, and Tours, and Points and Knots, and --


Tom. And -- never the sooner for a hasty word.


Ali. It Is so, Friend, what City-Wife can draw in Customers to her Shop, that
is not Lady-like? and therefore I have done it.


Tom. Say you so, say you so? --


Ali. What are you angry at it?


Tom. I were a beast if I should -- no, no, Friend, I am not angry: let it go
-- and sapientia mea mihi, is my Motto.


Ali. Well Thomas, look to your Shop, for I must go abroad.


Tom. Pray whither?


Ali. How, dare you ask that question?


Tom. I am Corrected. Sam, wash your Face, and get your Cloak and Gloves and
wait on your Mistress.


Ali. I Will have no Sam, to tell you all he fees: In good time, is that
friendly? --


Tom. I am again Corrected, but you will return by supper time?


Ali. Again are you at it?


Tom. I Have don, I Have don.


Ali. I Will neither come to supper, nor to bed, perhaps.


Tom. Never the sooner for a hasty word, I hope.


Ali. Nor when I do come home, you shall not ask me, Where I have been, what I
have done, or what Company I had?


Tom. No, no; sapientia mea mihi, I say still. [Exeunt, severally.


SCENE III.
Careless his Chamber.
Enter Careless: Watt with a Candle. Care. Are not we in another world, Watt?
And have not I improved my time well, already, look you here, firrah? [Shews
Gold.


Watt. -- It Is a comfortable sight, Sir, may it long continue so.


Care. I Will score no more Reckonings in Taverns now, nor hide my self in
Privileged places, to prevent the Alarms of damnable Duns, that besiege a
Chamber Door as soon as day. I owe nothing now, Boy, and here is delicious Gold,
besides, substantial Metal -- hark, how it rings. --


Watt. Yes, 'twill ring the Changes shortly.


Care. So let it, Watt, for necessaries -- and chime all out too, for I can
manage my Uncle now, and drain new showrs when this is gone.


Watt. And do you call Claret, Whores, Hectors, and Fiddlers, Necessaries?


Care. Why yes, or the devil's in it.


Watt. What, Sir, shall go for Pious Uses, for you will have little left?


Care. Pious Uses! Art mad?


Watt. No, Sir, but I call it a pious thing, to have regard in some degree to
your poor whore Phebe; she will come railing home else, and spoil all.


Care. She cannot injure me, the World's my own. Does not all the House adore
me? the Servants and the Tenants call me young Master. Does not my Uncle let
Leases, take Mortgages, and let Money in my Name? And has he not taken care I
shall have a thing, called a Wife, worth ten thousand pound? And can I fear the
Clamor of a little whore, think thou? -- No.


Watt. It Is very well, Sir, and I admire your luck, but most, to see the fine
young Lady, your Aunt, so kind to you; Why she outdoes your Uncle that way.


Care. She shall be no loser by that, I have resolved she shall not go
un-rewarded by me.


Wat. But still, Sir, Mrs. Phebe is forgotten.


Care. You are, methinks, damnable careful of Mrs. Phebe, but I have answered
here her impudent Letter she sent me, wherein she desired me to marry her, a
Pox upon her: -- Here, carry it her, with these ten Guineys, but do not give
them her, till she promise to write, nor come no more, till I think fit to send
to her.


Watt. That may be long enough, for ought I know.


Care. Why, faith it may be so: for I must leave off this lewd whoring life,
for reasons I have.


Wall. I Sir, I should like it well, if you would do so, and make it your
business to court the Widow in an honorable way; you were about her once, and
I think not ill received; Faith, Sir, try her gain. --


Care. Well, well, Sir, go you about your business. --


Watt. I Am gone, Sir. -- Ex. Watt.


Enter Saveall. Care. Mr. Saveall, I see you are a man of Honor, and mean to
keep your word in carrying a Letter to the Widow for me -- here it is -- ready.
-- Careless is Sealing the other Letter.


Save. It is discreetly done, Mr. Careless. [Takes the Letter.


Care. Faith I have been hard employed, writing News into the Country, to
several persons of Quality, of how Affairs stand in Court and City: of News of
State, and News of Gallantry, all, all that has come within my knowledge.


Save. A handsome and commendable Employment, and will improve your knowledge,
and in time you may become a Parliament Man, and assist in the great Affair of
the Rule of the Nation.


Care. When I am married, Sir, I shall take up.


Save. I shall be over joy'd to see such good effects of my negotiation of this
business.


Care. Faith, Sir, I am unused to write to Ladys, and a little awkard in such
matters, but I shall mend with practice. In the mean time I beseech you, Sir,
to beg my pardon for the roughness of the Language.


Save. To the most Incomparable, and most Virtuous [Reads. of her Sex, Mrs.
Crosstil, present. -- The outside is handsome, and promises the inside to be
courtly and civil.


Care. Pray Heaven she have the same opinion of it: which with your kind
interpretation may do much.


Save. I shall not be wanting to say all things to your advantage, and doubt
not but I shall prevail in your behalf.


Care. Oh, Sir, how you continue your goodness!


Save. Well, Sir, expect me and your Fortune modestly early in the morning.


Care. Your Servant, Sir. Now the Devil takeme if can wish him good luck, only
ten thousand pound is a most delicious sum: -- But who comes here? my Aunts
Governant? how very like a Bawd she would look in any other place? but being an
Attendant on my Aunt -- I may be mistaken.


Enter Closett with a Candle. Clos. Not to interrupt your Cogitations, Sir, I
have here from my Lady brought you. --


Care. What dear Closett, any thing from her is precious --


Clos. A Caudle, Sir, the same her Ladyship eats to strengthen her. O, it is a
most profitable Cordial Restorative; I made it, Sir, my self. [He takes the
Pot, and eats as he talks.


Care. How am I obliged to her Generosity, which so far exceeds my merits!

How she graces me in all companies, and conversation, with her particular
Favors: recommending me, and commending me to all the Ladys that pay her
visits: Then what a care she takes of my Lodging, my Chamber, Furniture, my
Table dressed up, my fine Twilights, my Persumes, and my Plate: and what not? --
Why here are rich things in this Caudle too. --


Clos. Have you perceived that? I Will assure you, theirs Amber Greece. --


Care. Ah! Closett, what pity 'twas this fair young Aunt of mine was not
married to a young man?


Clos. Alas, Sir! Aye, great pity.


Care. She is the Charmingst Lady!


Clos. Indeed she is so, Sir, I have known her, and served her from a Child,
and then she was a Charming Child: And as she grew toward Woman she was a
Charming Maid. And now she is a charming Lady, as you say, Sir: And could I
live to see a Child of hers, I should think I had lived long enough, unless I
might live to see that have Children too: which I could wish withal my heart.


Care. I had rather see you at the Devil, and your Charming Lady too; but I
hope my Uncles Impotence; or her honesty, will preserve her from my curse.


Clos. -- But, alas Sir, I shall never see her have one --


Care. That Is excellent.


Clos. Say you so, Sir, -- because 'twill hinder your being Heir? But, I
thought you had valued your Aunt above all that.


Care. So I do, Closett, I spoke of the bottom of the Caudle: that that was
Excellent;

[Sups it up: She takes the Pot. -- But, do think there are no ways, Closett,
to get my Aunt with Child?


Clos. Ways? Yes, yes, Sir, there are ways enough, did not her too nice Virtue
spoil all.


Care. Can not thou persuade her to her good?


Clos. How, Sir?


Care. Nay, do not mistake me, Closett, -- By this good Guiney, I meant no
harm, --


Clos. No, in my Conscience, Sir, yon spoke in pure Love to your Aunt.


Care. -- Nay, -- nay, -- Nay, you shall take it; Nor do I care if thou tell
my Aunt, how dearly I love her, and how well I wish her: Nay, Gad and she were
not my Aunt, tell her, I had rather get her a Son and Heir, than inherit all my
Uncles Estate my self.


Clos. Good heart! how passionately, and honestly he speaks! Well, it is a good
thing to be grateful: [ Lady calls within: Closett, Closett. --


Clos. Alas! that is my Lady calls.


Care. Kiss her dear hands from me, -- and tell her -- oh, tell her, that -- I
know not what, I love her so, I cannot express it.


Clos. I had forgot her message to you, I have the dullest brain of my own --


Care. What was it?


Clos. My Lady entreats you would --


Care. That I would? -- with all my Soul, I would --


Clos. My Lady, desires you --


Care. Thy Lady desires me? By Heaven, and she shall have me.


Clos. Lord, Sir, she desires you, --


Care. The Devil take me, if I do not desire her too, for all she is wife to my
Uncle.


Clos. Will you not hear me out, Sir? she desires you to go abroad with her.


Care, Oh, any whither, to Chelsey, -- Knights-Bridge, -- Branford, --
Geernwich, I know all the convenient houses at every place; and will be as
secret --


Clos. I do not understand you, Sir.


Care. The Pox take this tongue of mine, it will be talking in the wrong place.
-- [Aside.


Clos. Well, Sir, you will go with my Lady, I Will tell her.


Care. I will: Tell her, she shall command my life.


Enter Lady. La. Closett, you make good have.


Clos. Madam, I was just coming. But, Mr. Careless, was talking so
affectionately of your ladyship, and so tenderly, that methoughts, I could have
stayed a whole day to have heard him.


La. I am obliged to him. But, Nephew, you must go abroad with me, to the Park,
and to the Exchange; if you can leave your Study so long.


Care. All the world to wait on you. My dear Aunt, I have no Business, that can
or shall hinder me, from sacrificing the whole time I have to live, to your
Service.


La. Dear George, use less Complement to me.


Care. Give it a kinder name, I do beseech you. --


La. Come, the Coachman waits, and we shall have no time between this and
Supper. You must not talk now, good Nephew.


Care. I Am all obedience Madam, -- but a Pox on it, I must meet my Gang at the
Rose to night. -- [ Ex. Car. and La.


Clos. O that Heaven had sent my Lady such a Husband.


The End of the Second Act.
Act Third. Scene First. A Hall.
Discovers old Sim the Butler asleep in a Chair, a Candle burning almost out.
After a great Noise of calling Sons of Whores, etc. and bouncing at the Door,
Enter Careless drunk, all loose; and without his Perriwig. Care. MOney, ye Sons
of Whores? ask me for money? As if, George Careless ever paid Coach, or Chair
Men -- unmerciful Villains -- money -- no, no! This is not an Age of Payment.

SINGS.
A Pox of the cautious Fool,
That limits his time, and his Glass:
Who drinks, and who Wenches by rule,
Is Damned for a Cynical Ass.
But give me the Boy that is gay,
Whose time is his slave, and will drink
Beyond the dull limits of day,
And never from his Company shrink.
-- Who Is yonder? -- Old Sim -- my Uncles Butler? -- a -- very honest --
Fellow, -- now is he diligently sleeping for my coming home, and most carefully
-- and kindly left the Door open for me: -- So, ho, ho, -- Old Simon, -- so,
ho, ho, -- up, up, dull Mortal.

[Hollows in his Ear: he rowses. I have use for thee. -- Lord,! Lord! -- what
Sots and Beasts, some Men make of themselves, to sleep away half that short
life Heaven has given them! -- What will this wicked World come too? -- Why
Sim, ye drowsy Slave, up I say, -- [He rises and yawns.


Sim. Au, Au. --


Care. Why, Sim, ye Son of a Whore, is this a time to sleep in? Open thine
Eyes, -- behold me, and guess what Business I have for thee.


Sim. Au, au, -- anon, Sir.


Care. Nay now, good Sim, now. --


Sim. Shall I never sleep more?


Care. Unconscionable Simon, no reason in thy Sleep? -- Come hither, Sim, -- I
have honest -- lawful business for thee, -- prithee -- fetch me a Whore. --


Sim. It Is my young Master George's voice, Au, -- au, -- deliver me well out of
this lewd Town again, that I may have my fill of Sleep, and Pudding. Au, au, --
mercy on me, who is here? Aye, it is he, my young Master George, at this late
hour.


Care. You lie, Sim, you lie, -- it is early --


Sim. So it should be, by my blinking Candle. -- But how, Sir, came you in this
lamentable pickle?


Care. How do you mean, Sir? --


Sim. Why, Sir, where is your Sword, and Periwincle? -- sure you have been
Fighting, Sir.


Care. Only kicked a Couple of Chair-men -- that, had the impupudence (would
thou think it, Sim,) to ask me money.


Sim. Alas, Sir, that they should offer it --


Care. I, to me. Sim! -- me that always bilk the Slaves. -- Enter Chair-men,
with Sword and Perriwig.


Sim. The Constable and Watch! well, a my Conscience he never came home in's
life but 'twas thus attended.


Care. These, -- these, -- are the Sons of Whores, that had the Impudence to
ask me money.

I. Cha Your Worship was mistaken, we scorn to ask your Worship money, we know
you better then ^o, as they say, ^^. But, -- if your Worship would be pleased
to give us something o drink your Worships health, after our cold sitting up
all Night, we should be bound to your Worship.


Care. Alas, poor Devils! Sim, give 'em a Guiney to drink. But no paying, good
Sim, it is an ill Precedent. --


2. Cha. Good Mr. Simon, consider us, for we have waited all night at the Rose
Door; and he fearing only that we would ask him money, fell on us, and beat us,
we disarmed him, and then to Cuffs we went: I protest, Sir, no Fault of ours.


Sim. Well, get you gone: and come again anon, and you shall be paid.


Both. God bless your Worship. [Ex. Cha.


Sim. Come, Sir, will you not please to go to Bed? -- it is broad day light, and
you will wake your Uncle, and you know that may be fatal to you.


Care. My Uncle! Damn my Uncle. -- Sim, I tell thee in private, my Uncle's an
old Cuckold; do hear? a Cuckold, Simon. --


Sim. God forbid, Sir, my Lady's a Virtuous Lady, tho I say it.


Care. Why so she is too, Sim, -- but I speak of my Uncle -- I say, -- and I
say, again -- he is a Cuc-Cuckold, -- or shall be a Cuckold before I have done,
Sim, -- my conscience urges me to it. -- 'twill be a work of great Humility, and
Charity, and this is a wicked world, Sim, -- a very wicked world; and it is time
some should mend for Example, -- and now we talk of mending, Sim, -- fetch me a
Whore. --


Sim. A Whore, Sir? --


Care. I, Sim, a Whore. --


Sim. Bless me, Sir! Why we have nonei'th' house, nor can fetch any out of
Doors.


Care. Sim, you lie, -- Sim, -- do not give your mind to lying, 'twill spoil
thee, -- no Whores in the house, -- why where is Mrs. Figit, my Ladies woman?
Doll the Chambermaid? Starcht Susan, of the Landry? or greasy Bess, that is
under the Cook? Or my Ladies Nurse, old Winter? -- Or where is my Lady her self?
she will serve now. -- No Whores in the house!


Sim. Deliver me! What do you mean, Sir?


Care. What all sober discreet persons should mean, to know all the she-things
in the house, -- therefore, Sirrah, fetch me a Whore; or I shall untile, -- I
shall. -- [Reels about with a noise.


Sim. O hold, Sir, I would not for the world you should be heard.


Enter Bess the Scullery-maid passing by. Care. Hold! hold! there is a Female,
-- come hither, Wench, -- come hither, -- I say. -- Why you drunken Baggage,
cannot you stand still?


Sim. Pox on you, he could no sooner ask for a Whore, but you must bolt out. --


Bess. I was going to clean up my Kitchen. --


Care. Hang thy Kitchen, thou must along with me, I have need of thee. --


Bess. Any service that I can do that is honest, Sir. --


Care. Honest, I, I, we'll be very honest, -- thou shall only go to Bed with me
a little; dear Bess, let me kiss thee. [Kisses. Well, it is a rare Wench! she
would victual a whole Camp; a kiss a day to each man, were a plentiful meal,
she smells so of Beef and Mutton: and I have a raw stomach, and could digest
her now finely. Come honest Bess, let us up. --


Bess. I hope you do not take me for a Whore, Mr. George?


Care. A Whore, -- why what would you be taken for, a Cherubin? -- Can I take
thee for a Nobler Creature?


Bess. Ah, fie upon you, Mr. George, I did not think you had the Face to seduce
a young thing as I am. -- Well, my Lady shall know it.


Care. Come away, I say, -- come, -- you do not know what I design you, when my
Nuncle dies. --


Bess. I, when will that be, trow?


Care. Can not thou put a little ingredient into his Potage? -- That will do
his business, and send him to Heaven without the help of a Doctor, -- and then
--


Bess. And what then?


Care. Then, I Will marry thee, by this hand, marry thee. -- Come away, and do not
stand in thy own light.


Sim. Tell him you will come, you Slut.


Bess. Well, Sir, you have overcome me; go you to bed, and I ll but pull off my
Shoes, and steal up to you presently.


Care. Sim, will she keep her word?


Sim. I, I warrant you, Sir; we have all found her a kind soul, and honest in
that point, tho I say it. Pray go to bed.


Care. Give me some wine first. --


Sim. Wine, Sir? you have had Wine enough of all conscience, a vast quantity of
Wine, a vast quantity.


Care. What thou take me to be drunk now, I Will warrant, do thou? No, Sim, I
have that rare quality, -- the more I drink the soberer I am, it is a Miracle to
me now that, -- therefore give me some Wine, to set me right, that I may look
thus -- gravely on my Uncle.


Sim. Nay, pray, Sir, go to Bed, --


Care. Dam me, Sim, I Will have your Leathern Ears, if I have no wine. So, ho,
some Wine you Rascal -- some Wine. [Baw'ls.


Sim. Ah, good. Sir, speak softly.


Care. Softly, you Bitch? -- why who do I fear? Softly! -- there is softly for
you, -- and there is hola. -- [Kicks him.


Sim. I, I, Sir, you shall not hear me cry out, for all your Kicking -- for
your sake. --


Care. Softly, quoth a, I Will softly ye. -- [Goes to run after Sim, throws over
the Table and Chairs.]


Sim. So here is fine doings! you will be turned out for this anon, and I after you
for my kindness in setting up for you all night. [Cries.


Care. Now am I compassionate, -- dear Sim, come kiss me, -- kiss me, I say. --
Why you scurvy coy Rascal, why don't you kiss me? -- So dry your Eyes, and hear
me sing a Song that will make thee weep afresh, -- Listen with reverence.

SINGS.
There was two Cats sat on a Well,
And one Cat there fell in;
But the Cat that sat by,
Wept bitterly;
Because that Cat was the other Cats Cousin Germin.
But the Cat, etc.
[Ex. singing.
SCENE,
The Widows House.
Enter Mrs. Crostill, Saveall and Betty. Mrs. Cr. Ha, ha, ha, I suppose you
know the inside of this, Mr. Saveall?


Save. No, Madam, but I believe it passionate and Courtly, as he that sent it:
only indeed he commanded me to excuse the roughness of the Style, he being
unused to write Epistles of this Nature.


Mrs. Cr. Ha, ha, ha. Pray Sir, read it: you must be acquainted with his
excellent Style.


Save. I am overjoyed to see her so well pleased; would I had brought it last
night. [Takes the Letter.


Mrs. Cr. Read aloud, Sir, for I can never be weary of hearing it.


Save. Reads. Thou damnable impudent Woman, -- hah, -- how dare thou, tho but
in thy Dreams, imagine I am, or can be so great a Coxcomb as to marry thee; a
sin which thou art Damned for but believing. --

-- O Heavens! the Devil himself was sure his Secretary.


Mrs. Cr. O Sir, proceed I pray.


Save. Reads. Do thou not hear I am again established in my Uncles favor, and
do thou think I can want 5 or 10 Guinies to give a Wench, or that there are
not Wenches to be found for such Sums; that I must be destined to marry you
with a Pox. --


Save. I, I, 'twas the Devil that Dictated to him.


Mrs. Cr. Pray on, Sir.


Save. Reads. No, therefore let me advise you, since you are so mad for a
Husband, (tho I believe you love me, and only me,) marry a Blockhead, either in
the City, or Country, that thinks there is Joys in Marriage, and I may chance to
be so kind to be your Friend, by the by; and so you may have Children, like
Yours, (that way,) G. Careless.


Mrs. Cr. You have not read many such Love Letters.


Save. This injury to you, Madam, is irreparable; but the affront done to me
I Will fight him for.


Mrs. Cr. Oh, Sir, he has obliged me beyond expression, and I beseech you tell
him so: nay I Am in earnest. -- For what concerns your self, do what you please.


Save. I do unsay all I said in his behalf, and beg your pardon. --


Mrs. Cr. It Is all one, Sir, I love him still the better; and tell him, this
Letter has made such impressions here, as nothing can remove: and if you will
oblige me indeed, you must bring him to me, and let me alone to speak to him,
and tell him of his Letter.


Save. Sure you're not in earnest, Lady?


Mrs. Cr. By my life, I am, and I beseech you credit me, and bring him to me to
day; bring him in good humor too, and then I Will say you are my friend indeed. --


Save. I will not fail you, Lady. Ex. Saveall.


Mrs. Cro. Was there ever so extravagant a creature as this Careless?


Betty. Madam, will you not be revenged on him?


Mrs. Cro. Yes, Betty, the most severe way that ever woman took. -- I Will love
him! love him to that degree, he shall confess no hate was ever so perplexing.


Betty. I confess, Madam, you were ever of a contradictive humor, and possibly
you will love him the better, because he has affronted you.


Mrs. Cro. I do so, and am all impatience till I see him. Prithee give me the
Song he made to me the last time he was in the Country. --

SONG.
Prithee, Widow, give over, I cannot comply,
What shall I lie mewed, and kept tame till I die?
A Pox of the noose, and the fools it has made,
I never can submit to keep up the dull trade.
In Wine and in Love, I will spend all my life,
Give me the kind Damsel, and damn the Fop-wife.
In Wine and in Love, etc.
[Exit, singing.
SCENE,
The Hall again.
Enter Sim alone. Sim. It Is a mere folly to go to bed now, it is time to rise.
-- Well, Simon, well, thou art bound to give God thanks, thou were not born a
Gentleman, -- some comfort that. -- Mercy upon us, what lives they lead! never
rise till three of the clock after noon, (or very rarely) and then they are
damnable dry, and crop-sick, -- but not at all hungry, so they lose both
breakfast and dinner, (two great blessings;) instead of Prayers, the first
words they speak, as soon as awake, are -- Damn me, how cursed drunk was I last
night! Hay, Jack -- some small Beer, you Vermin, -- (very fine) -- well -- at
last he gets himself dressed, calls for his Coach (and not a word of dinner)
rouls to Playhouse, to that that has the bawdiest Play (for that settles his
stomach,) tells as many as he meets (that he knows) how he was clawed away last
night, but forswears drinking again, for at least a day or two; then spys me a
Vizard, over the benches he stalks, and there thunders a deal of lewd bawdy,
till he has won her heart quite; away they go, sup and get drunk in spite of
vows of sobriety, and then to some convenient Mansion of pleasure, where they
spew and snore away the remaining part of the night, and then comes repentance,
and never till then have they any grace before their eyes.


Enter Mr. Saveall, angry. Save. Mr. Simon, where is your precious young Master?


Sim. So, my precious young Master; he has heard of his mornings revel-rout. --
Sir, I know you are dissatisfied, as you have reason, but as you have ever
been, be so good to pardon this fault too.


Save. Pardon him! I Would sooner pardon the man should cuckold me. No, Sir, where
is he?


Sim. Alas, Sir, you know he has not been abed above an hour or two, it is pity
to disturb him.


Save. So, the old trade too still; I say, he must be disturbed, and that
quickly too, or I shall make a soul house, -- and so tell him.


Sim. Why, Lord, Mr. Saveall! --


Save. Lord me no Lords, Mr. Simon, I say I will speak to him, go tell him, or
I Will go to him, on such a message as shall not please him very well.


Sim. Well, Sir, I Will go, though it grieves my heart to wake him. [ Ex. Sim.


Save. This affront has raised an unusual storm in my breast, had not the Lady
been of my acquaintance, and the Match of my proposing, it had never grieved
me: My comfort is, she is so humorous, that this Letter will rather bring her
on, than put him off: but what she will think of me the while -- it is for that I
will be revenged, that I may let her see I had no hand in it.


Enter Careless yawning, in his Nightgown, and Sim. Care. Oh, Mr. Saveall --


Save. Make your self ready. [Walking fast and angry to and fro.


Care. Faith, I sat up a little late last night. --


Save. Dress you, I say.


Care. Dress me, for what? it is too early.


Save. The better, Sir. --


Care. Why does the Widow intend to marry me instantly?


Save. No, Sir, but I intend to fight with you.


Care. How, Sir?


Sim. Bless my soul, here is fine doings!


Save. What injury have I done you, that you should ruin my Reputation?


Care. How, Sir?


Save. You have put me on a base employment, to carry a Letter to a Noble Lady,
stuffed with such Language, as your Lust, the Devil and all your Cabal of Hectors
could never have invented such another.

Enter Watt. Could not your Pimp there -- serve for the base Office?


Care. I do not understand you.


Save. You had better have eaten fire, or sent it with your ears, than have
provoked me thus by being the Messenger. [Draws.


Care. Forbear, and hear me, Sir, before you take a resolution to abandon me:
If I must lose the Widow, by Heaven it is by the most unlucky mistake in the
world. -- Watt, come hither, -- Did you carry the Letter I sent to Phebe?


Watt. Yes, Sir, and the poor soul's overjoyed at the good News you sent her.


Care. The Devil take her for a lucky whore. That Letter, Sir, was it I writ to
the Widow, and that which you carried was meant for this Damsel: I know it is so.


Save. How could it be possible you should so mistake?


Care. Sealing them before I had superscrib'd them, a Pox upon me: and to be
charged with rudeness to the Widow, -- when I was so religiously bent to lead a
virtuous Matrimonial life. -- The Letter, Sir, (for I Will confess to you) was
written to a poor retaining whore of mine, whom I have turned off.


Save. It was not so directed.


Care. No, no, Sir, there was the mistake; and Fortune's always kind to whores,
those of her own trade. -- Well, hang me, if 'twere not the sweetest well-pen'd
thing, -- Sirrah, go and fetch it back.


Watt. Lord, Sir, she will n'ere part with it.


Care. Then take it by force, you Rogue you.


Watt. What force, Sir?


Care. Thus, you dog, -- thus. --

[Kicks him. This was a Plot of yours, sirrah, I believe you lie with her, you
are so ready to cheat me to serve her -- but I Will be revenged on you both.
[Kicks him.


Watt. I, I, now we may go hang, now you are in favor with Sir Oliver -- but
if I do not fit you for it -- [[Aside.


Care. I am in your debt for being absent last night too, and letting Sim sit
up for me, whom Iabus'd. -- A rogue -- [Kicks him.


Watt. It Is all upon account, Sir. --


Care. No more, Mr. Careless, it is sufficient and since 'twas a mischance, I am
pacified, and will set you right with the Widow again.


Care. But then she I know of this Mistress I have had, -- but the truth is,
it is now grown so common a thing amongst the married men too, as well as the
Gallants, that she cannot but forgive it, I think. -- But who is here? my Aunt
with a young handsome fellow; she is undrest too, Death! now am I jealous, -- but
for my Uncles sake, -- I must needs beat him.


Save. By no means, Sir, I would not have you commit such an outrage in your
Aunts presence, and your Uncles house, for all the world.


Care. You do not know him, Sir?


Save. Yes, Sir, I do, he is both friend and servant to a person of Honor,
whom I value, the Lord Loveless.


La. Mr. Saveall, I must speak with you. [They talk aside.


Care. In the name of pleasure, what is this stripling employ d for to my Aunt?
I perceive they have been in private too together, not so much as Bawd Closset
to overlook 'em: it is a pretty youth, and I must beat it, when I see time
convenient.


La. Mr. Saveall, pray speak to Sir Oliver, for my Lord is going to marry a
rich Fortune, and will redeem his mortgaged Land that is forfeit to Sir Oliver.


Save. Six hundred pound, you say, Madam? -- I will get it done for his
Lordship.


Care. Here Is a pretty come-off! as if he were chamber'd up with her all this
while to borrow money: Ah woman, woman, what Politics you have!


La. Your servant, Mr. Bellamy.


Save. I go your way, Sir, and will wait on you. [ Ex. Bellamy and Saveall.


Care. I would wait on him too. --


La. George, come back -- whither go you?


Care. To bring the young Gentleman to the gate.


La. Oh, you are too ceremonious, George, -- it is below you.


Care. So; I am instructed, Madam. --


La. You know not whose servant he is.


Care. So, she loves him, I know it by her slighting him. -- [Aside.

Oh, Madam, there are Lords servants that may deserve the favor of Knights
Ladies.


La. Not so, good George.


Care. As the Lady may like 'em, Madam.


La. Sure you're not sober yet, George, or melancholy. -- I hope nothing
troubles you?


Care. Not much, Madam.


La. Come, come, I know your grief, you think I am angry with you for the
pickle you came home in last night, or rather this morning: but I excused your
absence to your Uncle, pretending I had sent you to my Brother's, five mile out
of Town, to do a little business for me: and you may see I am not much
displeased by that, though you were with your blades, George.


Care. Did you do me this good office to my Uncle?


La. Yes indeed, and he believed me.


Care. Could you be so good? -- Indeed I was amongst 'em, but will be better
tempered for the future.


La. I shall be glad to see it, for your own sake.


Care. I will obey your will in every thing.


La. Oh, had you beheld your self, and how you were hung together.


Care. A drunkard is a beast, but I Will be so no more. --


La. That Is well promised; and I Will reward it thus, George, there is a small
stock of Gold. -- [She gives him Gold.


Care. Dear Aunt, let me kiss the hand from whence such bounty flows.


La. Not to afflict you with all you said and did: I will only chide you for
calling for whores, George.


Care. Oh Lord! why did I? did I? what a wicked dog was I!


La. You frighted poor old Sim, with Fetch me a whore: -- the poor wretch blessed
himself, and cried, -- There was none in the house! then you roared out, How! no
whores in the house? where is Figet? where starcht Susan? where is Doll, greasy
Bess, or old Winter? meaning Closet, or my Lady her self? -- No whores! -- But
why me, George, up in your Catalogue?


Care. God forgive me, was I so profane a Rogue? such an unhallowed Rascal?


La. Yes, consider it well, George, and lay it to your heart, so fine, so
handsome a young Gentleman to spoil himself with such lewd courses, it is great
shame and pity.


Care. A Pox on this damned Wine, it is that debauches me to all the other sins.


La. It Is true, had you not been drunk, you would never have meddled with so sad
a dirty creature, as Bess the scullion. --


Care. I, that is it she is most offended at, she is not displeased I called for
her Ladyship last night; she presents me too with Gold: I will apprehend her
meaning: -- she would have me leave off debauching, and give her a proof of my
passion and my manhood. -- [Aside.


La. Come, come, be not melancholy, though, George, for I would have you still
gay and pleasant, though not lewd.


Care. Madam, you have reformed my soul, and now I beseech you take the fruits
of your good advice: I am all yours.


La. How mean you?


Care. As I say, the most passionate Lover, the most secret Servant, that ever
was blessed with a Lady's favor.


La. Sure, Sir, you are not well?


Care. Not well? Gad I defy all the Surgeons in London, that can say the
contrary -- I am found, as a Bell. --


La. Not well in your senses, Sir.


Care. Do you doubt my secrecy? I Will never be drunk more to endanger my
blabbing in that humor. My Uncle shall never know it.


La. Can you name your Uncle, and yet pursue me this shameful way?


Care. Who the Devil can do you this kindness more naturally and less sinfully
than my self? am I not his own flesh and blood?


La. Surely you do but rally?


Care. By Heaven I am in earnest: try. In earnest? yes. -- Come let me lead you
to my chamber, -- and give you the first clear proof of my entire passion. --
[Offers to pull her.


La. I know you can but jest.


Care. I Will convince you above. -- Dear, Madam, come.


La. And would you wrong your Uncle?


Care. Why do you name him? he is not so just to you, you may Cuckold him with
less sin, than lie with him; for then you are in danger, for he is a spark
abroad, I can assure you.


La. How can you tell?


Care. Oh, I have heard it every where. -- But what needs all this Ceremony? --
come let us up. --


La. Unhand me. If you provoke me, I Will undo you. --


Care. She Is angry, -- what a Pox, have I mistaken her? [Aside.


La. Is this the best construction you can make of all my kindness to you?


Car. Pox on it, I am not mistaken in her neither, but [Aside. applied my self
to her, too soon after her young Monsieur had left her. -- E'gad I Will tell her
so too. --


La. Well, I see a penitence in your face, George, for what you have done; and if
it is true, I can easily forgive you; -- but here comes my woman. --


Enter Closet. Care. The Devil take her.


Clos. Madam. --


La. Look that you never tempt me so again. [Aside to him.


Care. Then I must dye, unless you will yield without it.


La. Look handsomely, and do not betray your self, and for once you are safe.


Care. So, she will come about again. [Aside.


La. Well, go Cousin, and do that Affair for me I spoke of.


Care. I go, Madam, I have my instructions all?


La. Yes, George, if you can remember. --


Care. Oh, witty Devil, how she has turned the discourse! by which I find she
puts no faith in old Maulkeena there: I love her invention. [ Ex. Careless.


La. Now what is the news with you?


Clos. A Citizen waits to speak with you, Madam.


La. Who is it?


Clos. Mr. Saleware, Madam.


La. Sure his Aly has impudently told him what I have done.


Clos. There Is a Gentlewoman too, Madam.


La. Bring 'em in. [ Ex. Closet.

Reenters with Tom Saleware and Phebe.
Tom. Madam, I humbly desire a word or two with your Ladyship, concerning my
Cozen Phebe here: She Is abused by a Gentleman that lies here, as I understand;
Mr. Careless, Madam, who has damaged her much.


La. Indeed!


Tom. Read this, Madam, 'twill inform you of the truth of what I say, -- hold
up your head, Phebe, we'll not be dashed in a good Cause. --


La. Reads. Madam,

My Uncle's favor has encouraged me to make my humble adresses to you in the
way of holy Marriage, I shall not be altogether unworthy the Honor of being
your Husband, since I may justly enough hope my Estate may be suitable to your
desires: It Is long that I have had a passion for you, and impatient till I find
whether 'twill be received well by you. If you vouchsafe to do so, I shall not
only declare my self a good and grateful Husband, but live the happyest of all
men,

Ever yours, G. Careless.

This is so far from injury, that me thinks it is very kind.


Tom. O but Madam, he is gone from his word, and denies this his Act and deed,
like a disloyal man; and having born her in hand thus long, would now cast her
off: Sent his man to ravish the Letter from her, but never the sooner for a
hasty word. Cousin, we'll not be dashed nor basht, I Will warrant thee.


La. Reads. To the fair hands of Mrs. Phebe Gimcrack. -- Is that your name?


Phe. I am the wretched thing that owns it, Madam.


Tom. Never the sooner for a hasty word.


La. I will endeavor to serve you, Mr. Saleware, -- if I knew how.


Tom. O Lord, Madam, you are discreet, and if your Ladyship takes this matter
in hand, I doubt not but to see my Cousin happy, and a good end of the business;
but if it cannot be, I shall find Friends, nor shall her Cause be starved for
want of moneys, as they say: For we will not be dashed, nor basht; Sapientia mea
mihi, is my word, and so dear Madam, I have discharged my mind.


La. Well, Mr. Saleware, I Will take care of your Kinswoman, and do my best for
her.


Tom. I humbly thank you, Madam. Phebe, do you mind me? Bear your self to this
Noble Lady handsomely, and high, as becomes the Family you came off; She may
chance do you more good than all my high talking: I pray carry it high; -- or,
-- Sapientia mea mihi, Stultitia tua tibi; that is my Motto.


Phe. O doubt not me, Sir; nor my Carriage. --


La. Closett, take this young Woman up to your Chamber, and treat her well; I
will do something for her: doubt not, Mr. Saleware. [ Ex. Closett, and!Phebe.


Tom. How I shall be bound to your Ladyship. Ex. Lady. -- So, now will I home,
and see if my Wife be come yet, or not, she has been out all day, and night
too; but this I must bear, as we are Friends: for Sapientia, is my Motto. -- [
Ex. Tom.


SCENE,
A Shop.
Discovers Alitia in it fine, with Bellamy. Bell. I see you design to kill me,
you would not else let me be a witness to those Joys, which my Lord only reaps,
and must look on and languish for, to conduct you to him; after that undress
you, and lay you, -- O, I dare not name where, but, would I might never live to
see him embrace you more.


Ali. Come, come, you shall not soften me so, you dissembling thing you?


Bell. By all that is good, I am not, I speak truth. -- O how you lay this
morning wrapped in his dear embraces. --


Ali. Well, and did not you come from being wrapped in dear embraces too, those
of my Lady Thrivewell? -- once more, let me hear the pleasing story,


Bell. O if you loved me, as you say, you could not take a pleasure in hearing
what Joys I took with another?


Ali. Joys which you give, I can. Come let me hear how kind she was, and how
well she liked you.


Bell. So well she liked me, that she swore and I believed her, she never liked
her Husband half so well.


Ali. Some other man perhaps she did.


Bell. She vowed, and I again believed; she never knew a man besides her
Husband. --


Ali. And your self, -- but then she was kind?


Bell. Very kind.


Ali. And could you, -- when you pretended to me, could you? Ah you're a
cozening thing.


Bell. Inspired with thoughts of you; I was grateful to her Ladyship, and she
in requital to your kindness, for sending me, has sent you a hundred Guinies.


Ali. I, was she so obliging? Where be they?


Bell. At my Chamber.


Ali. O the Subtilty of these men! for fear I should not keep my assignation,
yon think to oblige me that way, to come to you; but you may believe, my dear
Bellamy, I am all yours, and will be so when e're you name the time.


Enter Tom. Saleware. Tom. On my Conscience, my wife's not come home yet: Well,
thus it must be, in spite of chance, and high heel Shoes which will go a wry
sometimes. How a Lady there, -- and my Wife not with her? -- hah, -- my Wife?
Stay, are my Eyes mine own? -- it is she -- my friend Wife, in that the other end
of the Town habit she has so long wished for: but, Mr. Bellamy, and she are
whispering, I must not yet advance.


Bell. This night let it be. --


Ali. You have had enough of your Lady, sure for one day?


Bell. Doubt me not, dearest, Madam?


Tom. So, Madam, is it come to that? would they had done, that I might approach
without interruption.


Ali. And with all faith and secrecy, I am undone else: for you know my vows
to my Lord.


Bell. You undo me with these suspicions.


Ali. See my Husband. -- Pray, Sir, present my service, and humble thanks, to
my Lord, and my Husbands too. --


Tom. Yes, I beseech you, Sir. --


Bell. I will obey you, Madam. -- [ Ex. Bell.


Tom. -- Still, I say, this is an Assenego, he will never stand a Complement
with me: But, Sapientia mea mihi; -- but, what new Graces has his Lordship done
us, that you have made me send him thanks for? For you say, you bought these
rich Cloths your self.


Ali. It Is enough, I am sensible, and you may leave your silly impertinent
inquisitions.


Tom. I stand corrected, Friend.


Ali. And stand still corrected, or I shall break the Peace with you.


Tom. Never the sooner for a hasty word.


Ali. Before I married you, did not my Lord make you Indent with me, to ask me
no Questions, to deny me nothing I had a mind too, either for wearing, or
eating, or going abroad where and with whom I pleased; and did you not agree to
all this?


Tom. I did, and will still hold to my Indentures with my Noble Lord: whose
favor I would not loose, for Forty Indentures.


Ali. O would you not so.


Tom. And what the dickins care I for my spightful Neighbors, who because they
cannot maintain their Wives so fine as thou art, asperse thee, -- and cry
there is Tom. Salewares fine Wife: but Sapientia mea mihi, is my Motto; Let the
Assenegoes tattle their hearts out, for I am resolved to show my self a dutiful
Husband, in spite of Fortune and foul weather.


Ali. To prevent their talking, I Will remove out of their sight, and leave your
pitiful Shop keeping.


Tom. Never the sooner for a hasty word.


Ali. Nay, I Will do it. I have been about it: have all under one done other
Business too.


Tom. I could tell her under who, if I durst too. [Aside.


Ali. What Is that you mumble there, to your self?


Tom. I was only Divining what that business should be, which you did all under
one; I Will warrant, you have taken fine Lodgings in the Mall, as you intended.


Ali. No, but I have taken a house there, by my Lords directions.


Tom. How, how, what must I then break up Shop?


Ali. No indeed, look to your Shop, and keep your City house too, for your self
to lie in.


Tom. Must I not then lie in the same house?


Ali. No, Friend, not unless you mean to break with me for ever.


Tom. Well, -- I will not disoblige thee, nor my Noble Lord, for any
Consideration, for you know my Motto; Sapientia mea mihi; Stultitia tua tibi.
-- And so let us in to Dinner. [Exeunt.


The End of the Third Act.
Act Fourth. Scene First.
Enter Mrs. Crostill, Lord Loveless and Bellamy. Ld. Lo. MAdam, I Am but a
bashful Lover, unskilled to court a Widow, to swear I love you, -- must and
will have you; -- And want the moving confidence to stir your blood by putting
you to it, before the Priest declare it lawful; -- But, I have Love and
tenderness, which you will find in all the Actions of my life.


Bell. This modest Courtship will do no good on the Widow, he has mistook her
humor. Blessed mistake! [Aside.


Mrs. Cr. My Lord, I am not worthy your regard, my Birth, and Education, are
not suitable to your great Fame. Fortune, it is true, was kind and gave me
wealth, which sets me up a Mark for every Man, that aims at riches: Whilst all
my little Beauties lie dead upon my hands, none court for that in a Wife; It Is
enough, his Mistress shall be fair.


Ld Lo. Madam, you seem to upbraid me with a sin, I vow, I never knew, -- I am
so Innocent. --


Mrs. Cr. That 'twere pity Marriage should de bauc h yor Lordship.


Ld Lo. It cannot, Madam, I Will be so true to you, -- so faithful, and so just
--


Mrs. Cr. Impossible! I would not have you so degenerate from the true
gallantry of your Sex, and Age, to be a constant Husband. O how vile a sound it
has! a young Lord, and constant to his Wife! Not for the World, would I be that
Woman, that should be guilty of making you so strange a Monster.


Ld Lo. Madam, by my Honor, I never loved till now, and you may rally as you
please; but, I again protest it is not your wealth, but Virtue I admire: and you
I must possess, or be for ever wretched.


Enter Saveall and Careless. Save. -- Stay, -- let us retire again, here is the
Lord Loveless.


Care. Let there be the Devil, I Will not retire an Inch, -- -- Save you, Widow.
-- [Goes up to her: putting the Lord by roughly.


Mrs. Cr. What rudeness is this?


Care. Widow, I am in have, and have not leisure for long whining Courtship.


Ld Lo. Mr. Saveall, what Fellow's this, you have brought to affront me?


Save. Your Pardon, good my Lord, we knew not of your Lordships being here;
it is Mr. Careless, Nephew to Sir Oliver Thrivewell, -- of whom I have procured
the Five hundred pound, your Lordship desired by Mr. Bellamy.


Ld Lo. For that I thank you; but for him, I must have an account of his
rudeness.


Save. Pray have respect to the presence of the Widow, my good Lord. --


Ld Lo. I shall do as becomes me, Sir. [ Talks to Save.


Mrs. Cr. Then it seems, you do not deny the Letter, to be your own hand?


Care. No, faith, Widow.


Mrs. Cro. Have you the impudence to confess it?


Care. Yes, and will not ask your Pardon for it; why what the Devil was there,
that was not kind? I offered, if you Married, to do your Drudgery, 'Egad I
think you're beholden to me.


Ld Lo. Madam, I made my first Addresses to you, and desire the favor of being
first heard.


Care. Sir, she shall hear me first, whoere came first I care not, she has
heard you first already; or you have lost time.


Ld Lo. Sir, I have been heard, and I will be heard again, and what is all this
to you?


Care. But you shall not, Sir; let me see you dare speak a Syllable to this
Widow; or but tell her you love her with your Eyes, and it shall be your last;
by Heaven it shall.


Ld Lo. Unhand me, Saveall. --


Mrs. Cro. How dare you, Sir, use this insolence in my house? On what
encouragement, or by what Authority is it?


Care. Good pert thing, hold thy prating, for let me tell thee, I neither love
thee, my self, as you perhaps vainly imagine, nor will I suffer any other to do
so.


Mrs. Cr. I beseech your Lordship, to Pardon him, he is certainly mad.


Care. The fitter for you, Widow.


Ld Lo. Madam, the respect I bear you ties my hands, or you should see I would
not be affronted. -- Mr. Careless, you know me I suppose, and pray expect me to
morrow morning.


Care. I shall, Sir, I shall. You have your answer, Sir, and may be gone.


Ld Lo. Death, shall my fears of angring her, make me endure all this?


Mrs. Cr. Sir, what is your business here? what have you to say to me? If any
thing, say it quickly, and leave me free.


Care. Softly, good Widow, you are so impatient, till you hear me say, I love
you, -- well, know then I do love you most abominably, and am resolved to Marry
you, and then to use you as I list.


Mrs. Cro. Pray, Sir, how old are you?


Care. O parlous Wit! what, I warrant you expect to be Courted in fine
Language; -- Ah, cruel Woman, how can you treat a Gentleman that loves you
dearer than his Eyes, so rigorously? One that cannot, -- nay, will not, (whilst
there are ways to dye,) live out of your favor. [In a whining Tone.


Mrs. Cro. Who is it, you speak of, Sir? --


Care. I am the wretched Man. --


Mrs. Cro. All this, and more, Sir, my heart directs to an unknown youth, who
loves not me. [In a whining Tone too.


Care. Death, but you shall not, I Will have you love none but me.


Mrs. Cr. I cannot choose, you're such a civil Person, and write such passionate
stuff in your Letter. --


Care. O does that Letter trouble you? In good time, I Will write more, and worse
to you hereafter, and in earnest too. -- Did I not tell you the mistake,
unreasonable Creature?


Mrs. Cro. Sir, I have nothing to say to you; and beg your Pardon, if I tell
you, I desire you no more to visit me.


Care. Why, then fare you well. I Will have as good a Widow, on every Alehouse
Chimney. [Sings. O she is a dainty Widow.


Mrs. Cro. O how his humor pleases me, yet now I Will be revenged on it. -- Sir,
your Servant, will your Lordship please to walk in? This rude Fellow has
disordered you?


Ld Lo. Madam, you honor your servant, and fully make amens, for all I Have
suffered, in the Allowance of this favor.

[Offers to lead her in.
Care. But, Sir, I am not pleased she should allow it you. [He pushes him away.


Ld Lo. Death, Sir, But she shall. -- [Offers to draw, the rest part 'em.


Mrs. Cro. Shall you control me, in my own house? -- Pray learn to know your
self. -- Mr. Saveall, pray carry him away; or I Will have it done more
indescently. [ Ex. Lord and Widow.


Care. I will endure it for once; because I know 'twas done only in revenge to
me. -- But who is here? My fine young dandy-prat, -- and at the Widows too! --
Sir, I have seen you but twice, and 'twas at places where I cannot allow of
your coming, first at my Aunts, and now, here at my Widows. [ Sees Bellamy.


Bell. Your Widow, good Sir? I thought she had been the Widow of one deceased?


Care. Thou art a pretty witty child; but, Sirrah, let me find you here no
more, nor at my Aunts, I charge you: if I do, I shall have you whip't.


Bell. I hear your Charge, Sir; but you must leave it to my discretion, whether
I will obey you, or not.


Care. Well, Sir, remember I have given you fair warning.


Save. Sir, will it please you to walk homeward?


Care. You must excuse me, Sir, at present.


Save. It will not be convenient, Sir, to visit the Widow again to day.


Care. O fear it not, Sir, I do not like her so well now.


Save. Do your pleasure, Sir, -- Farewell. [ Ex.Save.


Care. This damned Widow sticks in my Stomach, I am resolved she shall not have
me now, unless she court me to it, to which end, I will go drink her out of my
head, for to my heart she is not yet arrived; and then I Will home, and do that
which only my Aunt and I must be acquainted with: this is her Night of grace,
she has promised me to be kind; if she keep touch with me, -- O how I shall
love. --

[Goes.
Bell. So, they are gone. -- And now must I prepare to meet Mrs. Saleware, I
have a mind to try her honesty, which I believe is as little, as her faith to
my Lord: I have appointed her to meet me at a certain convenient house, where I
have got a Bed ready; but how to supply her with a bedfellow suitable to her
humor, I cannot tell: I have therefore writ this, in an unknown name, to her
Husband, who shall come and prevent the Plot, and save my credit; -- but if he
fail? -- would that were my greatest grief; but here I leave the man my soul
adores, courting another, may she be deaf to all his Love, as I was to my
reason, when it pleaded against his false addresses. --

[Goes out.
SCENE,
The Lady Thrivewell's Chamber.
Enter Lady Phebe, and Closet. La. In troth, I pity you, but you were to blame
too, Phebe, I must needs say, to yield.


Phe. 'Twas the effects of Love, Madam, and his solicitations.


La. Well, well, I Will see what I can do for you, though it be but for the pleasure
of revenge for attempting me: -- Closet, you know my mind, -- and how to order
our design?


Clos. Doubt me not, Madam.


La. I hope he will get himself fudled to night, to further it.


Clos. Then he may forget your Ladyships promise.


Phe. No, no, then he will be the more earnest.


La. You know his humor best that way, it seems, -- but away, here comes Sir
Oliver. -- [ Ex. Clos. and Phe.


Enter Sir Oliver, and Watt. Sir Oliv. Make love to my wife? a fine young
Rogue! -- Well, Watt, for this discovery, I Will reward thee bountifully. --
Sweetheart, I have a suit to you.


Lad. Pray what is it? you may command me.


Sir Oliv. It Is for my absence from thee, to accompany a friend to Dover, who
is going for Holland.


La. I hope this is no excuse to go again to your Citizen's wife.


Sir Oliv. Think no more of that, Sweetheart, but expect me to morrow at
dinner; if I be not here before, and catch you napping, my free Lady. [Aside.


La. His absence falls out luckily, [ Ex. Sir Oliv. and Watt. lest there should
happen any noise in the house by his unruly Nephew, in case he should discover
the cheat I put upon him, his own wench instead of my self. I thought I had
sufficiently chid him for his rash attempting me: and he to pursue it, and urge
me to a promise! -- which I made to be rid of him, is what I must be revenged
on him for.


Enter Closet. Clos. Your Nephew is come, Madam, and very much uppish (as they
say) but not so far gone as to forget your Ladyships Promise, and he is gone to
bed, in expectation of your coming.


La. And have you dressed his Mistress up, as I directed?


Clos. Oh, most famously, Madam.


La. But have you charged her to steal from him, before it is light?


Clos. Yes, I have, Madam. [ Ex. La. Closet.


Enter Bellamy, and Tom Saleware, as in a Bawdy House. Tom. Why Lord, Mr.
Bellamy, you are the strangest man in the World, to think I am jealous, because
I ask for my Aly. I am an Asenego, if I be. --.But yet I know she is here.


Bell. Why look you now, is not this jealousy, not to believe me?


Tom. Oh, you equivocate, Mr. Bellamy, I protest you do; she is not indeed here
at the door, but I Will warrant you she is above, but what is that to me? -- Alas,
Sir, it cannot make me jealous. -- I hope I shall see her safe at home, some
time or other, at her own leisure. -- But it is a hard case tho.


Bell. Now are you relapsing into your jealousy again?


Tom. What an Asenego's this? there is no man in the City more confident of his
wife, than I am of my Aly: nor will I be dashed or basht at any scandalous
reports that go of her, therefore tell me, whether she is here or no, for I
don't come to disturb her.


Bell. There, you are jealous again. -- But to end all disputes, Sir, your wife
is here, and I believe going to bed by this time.


Tom. Why what a notable merry Scab are you, Mr. Bellamy? -- Away, away, I
faith you're a Wag now.


Bell. What, you will not believe me now?


Tom. Believe you? why no, by my troth, not I.


Bell. What made you fancy she was here?


Tom. I fancy, Sir, I have as few fancies as any man breathing, -- but I
received a Note from one Mr. Spywell, hinting that my Aly was to lie with a
certain Friend here all night. -- A very pleasant business; as if I believed
it: -- not I, Sir, I protest, for she has no friend but my Lord, and as if he
would bring her to such a place as this, he having such Lodgings of his own,
and she a House -- is a ridiculous business. --


Bell. Why did you come then?


Tom. To see the meaning of this Spywell's Letter, who bid me come and inquire
for you.


Bell. Well, and here I am.


Tom. Well, and what of that? he is an Asenego that inquires further: and so
farewell to you.


Bell. Stay, Sir, I was that Spywell that writ to you, for I knowing you had
not lain with your wife this three months, out of pure kindness, laid this
Plot, that you might come and lie with her here.


Tom. Why, and is she here indeed?


Bell. Come along with me, and be convinced.


Tom. This is a Plot laid by my wife to oblige me: I am sure it is so. Ah little
Rogue, how I will pay thy kindness! [ Ex. after Bellamy.


SCENE,
A Bed chamber
Ali. sitting in her Nightgown at a Table, undressing her. To her Bell. and
Tom at the door. Bell. If you say I sent for you, you will spoil all, but you must
say you came by inspiration, or that you were informed in a dream, or a vision,
or so forth.


Tom. I warrant you, Mr. Bellamy, for Acting my part well. My wife has laid
this Plot to give me a sure proof of her honesty. --


Bell. Credulous fool! -- well stand you behind this door, and I Will go in and
speak to her.


Tom. Ay, ay, Sir, I Will warrant you, I Will stand close.


Ali. Ah, Mr. Bellamy, are you come? you are a fine man, to make me languish
thus long without you, are you not? -- Come, have to undress you, and let us to
bed.


Tom. So, very good, ha, ha, ha. -- [Aside.


Ali. What does your Passion that was to day so high, decay already?


Tom. That Is pleasant again, as if I were such a fool, to think such an Asenego
as he had ever had a Passion for her, -- ha, ha, ha. -- [Aside.


Ali. Did you only court me to a consent to despise me for it afterward?


Tom. As if she had ever consented to lie with my Lord's man; a pretty
business, that. [Aside still.


Ali. Or you perhaps, malicious as you are, courted me only to try me, and then
betray me. -- Will you not answer me?


Bell. Oh Madam, I am so surprised with an accident that you little dream of,
that I am not able to utter a word.


Tom. Was there ever such witty waggish Rogues seen as these two? what a pretty
Plot have they laid to make me jealous?


Ali. Speak again, what is it has happened?


Bell. Death, I could find in my heart to kill the cuckoldly Idiot, the horned
beast, for preventing my dear expectations thus. --


Tom. As I am a Christian, this is very pretty sport, ha, ha, ha.


Ali. What Is the matter? what Cuckold, my husband? --


Bell. Ay, ay, I know not by what damned Witchcraft, but he knows we are here;
the Devil assisted him sure to find us.


Ali. Oh, I am ruined then: he will tell all to my Lord.


Tom. Never the sooner for a hasty word. -- I should ruin my self then too: no,
no, sapientia mea mihi, is my Motto; be not dashed or basht for that, good
Friend. [Tom comes out to her.


Ali. Has, my husband's here indeed.


Tom. As sure as you are there, sweet Ali. What, you thought to make me jealous
now? but I thank my reason, I have more grace than so: no, I know what is what,
as my Friend Hudibras has it. Make me jealous! honest Tom? -- no, Mr. Bellamy,
I am beholden to you. -- But how I came hither, you shall never know, nor, do
you hear me talk of any Letter or Porter that came to give me intelligence, no,
nor name, Mr. Spywell, not I, sapientia, is my Motto.


Bell. Death! the fool will out with all. [Aside.


Ali. What means all this?


Tom. I mean? I know what you mean; come, come, never blush for the matter, you
might have told me you had a mind to. --


Ali. To what, Coxcomb?


Tom. Ha, ha, ha, I, I, never put on this feigned anger, the Plot is discovered,
and I am not jealous.


Ali. What Plot?


Tom. That you had a mind to do me the honor of letting me lie with you to
night, and now it is out. -- Mr. Bellamy, I hope we shall have your company, tho
not in the same bed, and E'faith, we will have a Sack-Posset before we go to bed,
sweet Ali.


Ali. What a defeat is here! --

[Aside. Mr. Bellamy, hark ye. -- Thomas, be at a distance.


Tom. Face about, Tom. [Turns.


Ali. You have betrayed me every way: I see it plain, and will be revenged on
you, if I live.


Bell. Who, I by all. --


Ali. No swearing, you are a young Hypocrite: where is the hundred Guineys you
had for me, -- you said?


Bell. And have; -- but shall I give them you before your husband?


Ali. Come, come, I see I am abused and fooled; who was it sent for him, has?
-- not you, I Will warrant.


Bell. Not I, I vow by your fair dear self, and am so mad, that he has defeated
me, that if you will give me leave, I Will kill him, to enjoy thee. --


Ali. No, hold; if this be true, I Am reconciled again, and pray let us meet
again to morrow.


Bell. May all that is man about me forsake me, if I lose any opportunity: and
so I Will take my leave. -- [Offers to go.


Tom. Nay, E'faith we will have a Sack-Posset, as I said, before we go to bed. --


Ali. Well, tho I seem to believe him, I am resolved he has done me this injury.

And when a willing woman is so crossed,
All thoughts, but of revenge, are lost.

Tom. Tell me, Ali. indeed, how you came hither.


Ali. You will not be angry then?


Tom. I am an Asenego, if I be.


Ali. It was indeed to make thee jealous.


Tom. Now hang me, if I did not imagine so: nay, nay, I can prophecy right
sometimes.


Ali. And how do you think you were brought hither?


Tom. Nay, I can prophecy that too: Mr. Spywell's Letter -- but I Will say no
more.


Ali. Ha, ha, ha, let us see the Letter.


Tom. Hah, -- where is it? -- hum, -- have I lost it? -- and sacks so I have. --

[Searching for the Letter.
Ali. Well, well, 'twas I that sent it, Simpleton. --


Tom. Why did thou indeed, and indeed? -- Well, let us to bed, for I am now so
in love with thy pretty Project, that I fancy strange things: Come, let us to
bed, we will get a Sibyl or a small Prophet this night. Exeunt.


SCENE,
Sir Oliver's House.
Enter Phebe, passing over the Stage in a Nightgown, Careless after her,
groping as in the dark, in a Nightgown. Care. Oh stay, my dear Aunt, stay,
it is not near day yet, we have many minutes of joy to come ere that approach.
-- She Is gone, -- I heard her Chamber door open, -- would I could find it, --
my Uncle's not at home, and I Will go to her there. -- Who Is this? one with lights?


Enter Lady with a light, and in a Night Gown. La. Is the Devil in you, that
you make such a noise at this hour.


Care. Would it not make a man distracted to be so soon left by so sweet, so
dear a Creature? -- Come let us retire again. --


La. Sure you are mad to desire it, 'twill ruin us both.


Care. I Will warrant you: my charming obliging Aunt! --


Enter Closet. Clos. Oh Madam, don't you hear some body knock at the door? on
my conscience it is Sir Oliver, by the authority of clamor he makes there.


La. I hope not.


Care. E'gad and so do I, I hope it is that Rogue Watt, having forgot I have
turned him away, and is drunk. Come, -- let us retire again, can we be sensible
of any thing but joy?


La. Hark ye, Closet, -- go. -- [Whispers.


Clos. It shall be so. [ Ex. Closet.


Care. That was kind, and well thought on, to give her instructions what to do.


La. You cannot guess at what I said.


Care. Why, to tell my Uncle, that -- you are not well, -- and desire him to
lie by himself to night, or --


La. Thou art so lewd a fellow, thou can not think one sober thought of me,
which makes me now repent the favors I have done thee: be gone, and see my face
no more. --


Care. How unreasonable is a woman when her own turn's served! -- Hark ye, dear
Aunt. --


La. Approach me not; if thou do, I Will raise the house.


Care. Unmerciful creature! do not provoke my love, which is so high, it is
arrived almost to rage, do not; you know not what 'twill make me do, for now
you are in my power, have a care, -- I say, have a care. --


Enter Sir Oliver at the door, with Watt and Saveall. La. Dare you do so base a
thing, as to proclaim my shameful kindness? perjured man!


Care. Why do you provoke me then, do you think to kindle a fire in my heart,
and let it burn out alone? No, I am resolved it shall be laid. -- Come, come,
by all that is good, dear Aunt, I love you; and love you ten times more since
you were kind, then before, and I think the Devil's in you if you desire a man
should do more.


La. I am undone.


Care. Alas, that ever you were kind. -- How prettily this penitence becomes
you. Come, now a tear or two, and then -- thou will be fit to be undone again.


Enter Sir Oliver, and the rest. Sir Oliv. Oh Monster, Villain, Rascal, what
do thou merit for this baseness, but death immediately from my hand? -- And
thou false woman, that have thus betrayed me. --


Care. What Devil sent him hither?


La. Pray hear me, Sir.


Sir Oliv. Can I hear more to convince me thou art false, or I unhappy, -- then
what I Have heard already?


La. I was not so unreasonable when Mrs. Saleware and you were kind.


Sir Oliv. And did you, perfidious woman, pardon me that, to be revenged on me
this way.


La. Mistake me not, nor wrong me: I have only showed you what some would have
done. -- Sir, 'twas my design, to let you see this extravagance of your Nephew.


Care. O witty, dear Devil, how I love thee for thy rare quality -- of
dissembling.


Sir Oliv. Oh, she is the falsest woman. -- [ To Saveall.


La. Mr. Saveall, you have ever been most obliging, pray persuade Sir Oliver to
retire into my Chamber, and hear with patience what I have to say to him, he
shall find there the cause of this mistake.


Save. I Will do my best to serve you, Madam.


Sir Oliv. And do thou think ever to reconcile me? --


Save. 'Twill not be the part of a judicious man to condemn before the cause be
heard, good Sir Oliver, as I take it, let me entreat that justice from you.


Sir Oliv. Well, Madam, I will hear you, tho no false tale thou can devise,
shall persuade me against my senses. But, Sirrah, for your part -- get you out
of my doors, I Will see thee starve and beg, for an ungrateful reprobate, as thou
art. --


La. Indeed you must not put him out of doors.


Sir Oliv. How! dare you take his part?


La. Yes, I dare and will justify it, nor shall you give him a word or look,
that declares anger, you shall not, Sir, 'till you have heard me, and then take
your course.


Care. Kind soul! I could kiss her all over for this. [Aside.


Sir Oliv. You're very confident, but I Will forbear, till I Have heard you, tho
thou can say nothing to make me think you are innocent.


La. Go, -- go to bed again, George, and sleep, without fear of any thing, all
shall be well again. [ Ex. Sir Oliv. and all but Care.


Care. Sweet dear charming gilt, how I love thee! now will she manage my Uncle
so, that it is ten to one but I shall be rewarded for my nights work to morrow:
but Lord, how she thought to terrify me, with chiding me, and repenting her
kindness to me. Now -- go to bed, George, ha, ha, ha. --

Well go thy ways; I know thy Plots will hit:
There Is nothing like a woman's sudden wit.
[Ex.
The End of the Fourth Act.
Act Fifth. Scene, The Lord's Lodgings.
Enter Lord and Page. Lor. TO speak with me?


Page. Yes, my Lord.


Lor. Bring em in. [ Ex. Page, returns with Tom. Saleware and Alice.


Ali. Pray, Thomas, attend at a distance.


Tom. Face about, Tom. Saleware, -- and March forwards; that I learnt at
Finsbury Muster. [Ali. weeps.


Lor. How now, in tears, why is that lovely face where all my souls delight
dwells, thus strangly dressed in sorrow?


Ali. Alas, my dear Lord. --


Lor. Who is t dares injure thee? I know thy Husband is better manner'd, than
to offend thee; and any other cannot escape with life. -- Come name the cause.


Ali. There is a man has Injured me; but one below you, my dear Lord, to take
notice of, your servant Bellamy may do it. Do you believe him honest, my dear
Lord?


Lor. Most perfectly so, if I have any judgment.


Ali. I know, my dear Lord, you ever esteemed him so: but, -- if your Lordship
had a Jewel, or any other thing, you valued and would reserve for your own
wearing, would you let him enjoy it too?


Lor. I know not any thing I should refuse him the use of: except, thy dear
self, where I can brook no Rivals.


Ali. Yet he, my Lord, has wickedly attempted me, and in that has wronged your
Honor, and your trust.


Lor. You surp^ize me!


Ali. My Lord, 'is truth.


Lor. It cannot be. I know he durst not do it.


Ali. Must I not then find credit?


Lor. Give me some circumstances, but to prove it.


Ali. Tho if I had said it only, 'twere sufficient: yet you shall have
circumstances. Thomas, -- come hither Thomas. Pray tell his Lordship, what you
heard and saw, last night between Mr. Bellamy, and I.


Tom. Why may't please your Lordship, my Ali. was abroad all the afternoon
yesterday, as she often is, may't please your Lordship, and may as often be
again, an't please your Lordship.


Lor. It Is well, -- forward.


Tom. Well, out she was, an't please your Lordship, it grew late, and no Ali.
came, it grew later and no Ali. came yet, so that Ie'en concluded she would
stay all night, an't please your Lordship, as she has done many a night, an't
please your Lordship.


Lor. Prithee proceed.


Tom. I shall, an't please your Lordship. It being late, an't like your
Lordship, as I said before, an't please your Lordship, I had word brought me,
an't please your Lordship, that my Ali. was to lie with a Friend, an't please
your Lordship, at a certain house in Drury Lane, an't please your Lordship;
well, I went, and because I hate to be tedious, or hold your Lordship in a long
tale, I will only say, an't please your Lordship, I went thither, as I said,
and found my Ali. just undrest for Bed, Mr. Bellamy, ready to go into Bed to
her.


Lor. It cannot be!


Tom. Be? why I Will justify it, an't please your Lordship.


Lor. Then your Wife's guilty too; how came she thither?


Ali. I hope you will not think so ill of me, my dear Lord, alas, I was
betrayed, the cunning Villain told me your Lordship was to be there, and
desired my company; when I came and found you not, he bid me undress me, and
get me to bed, and you, my dear Lord, would come to me. At last I finding 'twas
but a Cheat, and not knowing how to get away, writ a Note to my Husband, to
come and relieve me.


Lor. Is It possible a man that weeps, and blushes, should be such an one?


Tom. I vow to Gad, an't please your Lordship, I fancied all the while they had
but played the wag, to make me jealous; and Ali. (ah, the little cunning
Gypsy) knowing I was peeping at the door. Cried come to bed, Mr. Bellamy, make
have and undress you, Mr. Bellamy.


Ali. Peace, Fool, -- he will spoil all. -- [Aside.


Tom. Mum. --


Lor. I do not like this. Where Is the Letter?


Tom. Here, an't please your Lordship. -- [Gives him the Letter.


Ali. The Devil take you for giving him the Letter. You said you had lost it.


Tom. I thought so Friend; but I found it since.


Ali. Thou Would better have swallowed it full of Opium.


Tom. I would I had so too, for me, rather than have offended thee.


Lor. Reads. Mr. Saleware, If you would not be a worse Cuckold than you are,
come away to the Joyners in Drury Lane, it being a convenient Bawdy House, and
you will find your Wife there, ready to add to your Horns.

Yours, Spywell.

-- What means this? it is Bellamy's own hand.


Ali. How shall I come off now? -- Why does not your Lordship see how excellent
I am at counterfeiting hands? I feigned Mr. Bellamy's Character, a purpose: It Is
not well.


Lor. This Woman's, false, I see it. -- Who waits?

Enter Page. -- Where Is Bellamy.


Page. He has not been at home to night, my Lord.


Ali. I hope your Lordship will believe me now; but I was told he paid his
visit to my Lady Thrivewell, this morning.


Lor. He is to receive money there for me, pray Heaven he be true, I scarce
dare trust him. Tho I cannot believe what this false Woman says. Get my Coach
ready, I Will go to Sir Olivers, my self.


Ali. I can tell you another circumstance of his dishonesty too.


Lor. What is it?


Ali. He loves, and is beloved, (I mean dishonestly) by my Lady Thrivewell; and
this he told me himself boastingly, that I might yield the sooner.


Lor. Dare you justify this?


Ali. Yes indeed, dare I to their faces.


Lor. And so you shall. -- Mr. Saveall, your servant. [ Enter Save.


Save. Mr. Bellamy, my Lord, is telling out the hundred pound at Sir Olivers,
for you; but my Lord, there is a little difference in Sir Olivers Family, that
my Lady desires your Lordship to compose, if possible.


Lo. With all my heart. My Coach: -- You must along, Mrs. Saleware. Exit Lord,
leading Mrs. Saleware, Tom. and Saveall, follow.


SCENE Changes
To sir Olivers House.
Enter Sir Oliver, Lady Thrivewell, Careless, Phebe, Closett, and Wat. Sir Ol.
No, Villain, I Will have no more to do with thee. I Will leave thee to thy own shame
and poverty.


Care. It may be so.


Sir Ol. All that is thine, I Will turn out after thee; your Phebe, too, your
virtuous Mistress, take her, and be gone.


Care. I thank you for nothing, this was a moveable that belonged to me, before
your virtuous Wife laid us together. -- Who the Devil would have imagined, she
should have Gilted me so? a young hansome proper fellow as I am to?


Sir Ol. Sirrah, sirrah, have a care what you say of my Wife for I shall lay
you fast enough else.


Care. Is this -- your witness, Sir; this precious villain? [ Points to Watt.


Watt. No villain neither, Sir, since I have not betrayed my Master, for you
turned me off basely.


Care. Here Is another of your Engines, this old Deceptio visus, that put me to
Bed to the wrong Woman.


Clo. Alas, good Gentleman, -- ha, ha, ha.


Care. But if, Mr. Bellamy, had been the Man, I suppose, Madam, you would have
kept your word; and old Mother Damnable, would have brought the right party.


Sir Ol. What means he?


La. Fie, George, you will be ashamed of this anon?


Care. Faith, I shall not, and since you have betrayed me, I Will ruin you;
therefore hear me, Oh thou credulous Knight, what I Have to say unto thee. --


La. What can thou say, good George, to my prejudice? Hold yet, whilst thy
credit may be saved.


Care. Not I, it shall out, unless you bribe me.


La. Not a farthing, -- and see who will have the worst on it.


Sir Oliv. What would the Villian say to thy dishonor?


Care. That, which if you are no contented Cuckold, will make you mad, Sir, it
will: -- you think I have done so lewd a thing in courting her, -- but there is
that smooth-faced young fellow, Bellamy, has courted her, and all the rest -- I
can assure you.


Sir Oliv. Mr. Bellamy! it cannot be.


Care. But it can, Sir; there is her procurer, old dark Lanthorn can tell you
more.


Clos. Who I? oh Lord!


Care. Oh, she was chamber'd up with him at least two hours, fair time, --
under pretense of borrowing money; but you may guess his farther business, if
you have any sense.


Sir Oliv. I Will not believe this, Sir; it is malice.


Care. It Is fit you should see it done, indeed, and great pity you did not.


Sir Oliv. Oh, Mr. Saveall, if this be true, where is all my Reputation? --


Care. And for that Rascal, Watt, there, I Will give you an account of him, which
yet you never had: have you forgot, how we rescued you on Hounslow-heath, when
you believed your self set on by Thieves?


Sir Oliv. No, I have not forgot it; would I had lost my Money nay a Limb,
rather than have been by thee preserved. --


Care. That project, Sir, was his, to get me into your favor gain; the
Robbers, as you thought 'em, were his acquaintance, Rogues of his managing, but
to say truth, we meant no hurt, only I was forced, to color the business, to
give him a cut over the Pate, would 't had killed him.


Sir Oliv. Was It his Plot? I am glad to find him a fellow of that ingenuity: I
love him for it.


Care. Do you? then pray take notice, 'twas my own Plot, mine, Sir, to get my
self into your favor.


Watt. Truly, Sir, my Master's in the right, 'twas his Plot.


Sir OIiv. 'Twas witty whose soever 'twas, and I like it well, would all the
rest of the Actions of your life were as well.


Care. Well, Sir, now you know my mind, and I Will take my leave; farewell, Nuncle.
Come away, Phebe, I have been an unkind Dog to thee, that is truth: but come,
I Will even make thee amends, and marry thee, and having no better way to live,
even fell Coffee with thee. -- Come away. -- [Offers to go.


La. Pray call him back; to let him go in this condition will undo him, and I
desire to be cleared too, before he goes of, the aspersion he has laid on me.


Sir Oliv. Yes, Sir, you shall stay, and answer it before Authority.


Care. Why, Sir, if you have a mind to have your house thought a Bawdy house, I
can stay, and prove it.


Enter Closet. Clos. Mrs. Crostil is come to wait on your Ladyship.


Enter Mrs. Crostil, and a little after Clare. dressed. La. This is a great
favor, Madam. Sir Oliver, pray entertain Mrs. Crostil a little. -- [La. goes
to Mrs. Clare aside.


Mrs. Cr. Methinks you all look disordered, I hope, Sir Oliver, you and your
Nephew have a good understanding.


Sir Oliv. No, Madam, nor do I desire to have any with such a Villain.


Mrs. Cr. How, Sir? nay, if you rail at him 'twill make me love him.


Sir Oliv. Then you are wretched.


Mrs. Cr. Nay, then I Am resolved to love him -- Pray what is she he makes such
love to?


Sir Oliv. A common wench, that is with child by him; she pleads a Contract with
him, and he will marry her.


Mrs. Cr. Still you raise my flame to a greater height. -- Mr. Careless, pray
let me speak with you.


Care. Who mean you, Madam, -- me? I Am not at leisure now?


Mrs. Cr. What the Duce was I made of, that his contempt of me increases my
fire. Sir, I must needs speak with you.


Care. What have you to say? Widow, you are come too late, Widow.


Mrs. Cr. Pray walk a little this way. -- I must speak to you alone. [They go
aside.


La. Pray keep your self concealed, my Lord will be [ To Clara. here presently,
and shall do you reason; he has mortgaged a great part of his Estate to Sir
Oliver, and the Forfeiture's out, and he shall be just to you, or we will undo
him. -- Sir Oliver, pray whatever reason you have to be displeased with your
Nephew your self, do not ruin his fortune with the widow. -- [ Aside to Sir
Oliv.


Care. Tempt me not, widow, to your own ruin, if I should be so unlucky as to
marry you, you are certainly undone, for I am one you cannot live with above a
fortnight, you are fine limbed and delicate, and I shall spoil you. -- Here Is
one that knows my strength, and will hold me tack. --


Mrs. Cr. I know not what you mean.


Care. Nor prithee never try, -- I advise you in time, widow, this wench here
is only fit for me.


Care. Is my profer'd passion scorned? --


Care. Faith no, widow, but I shall never merit you: -- besides, I am engaged,
widow.


Mrs. Cr. To that woman? --


Care. Yes, to that woman; what exceptions have you to her?


Mrs. Cr. Why she is a wench, a common prostitute.


Care. Hark ye, have a care what you say (I advise you) before witness, do not
abuse a woman I design to make a wife of, lest I hamper your Estate, widow.


Mrs. Cr. She shall not be your wife, no woman but I shall marry you.


Care. Have a care what you say before witness again, widow.


Mrs. Cr. Call all to hear me, Sir Oliver, and the rest be witness I give my
self to this Gentleman. --


Care. Here Is one forbids the Banes, widow. [ To Phebc.


Mrs. Cr. You shall compound with her.


Care. But what said King Harry? Conscience, -- conscience, widow.


Mrs. Cr. No matter, Sir, give me your hand, beer witness all, I plight my
Faith to this Gentleman.


Sir Oliv. Then you are ruined.


Mrs Cr. Sir, it is too late to advise, I am resolved.


Care. Have I caught you, widow, -- hah, ha. -- Farewell, Nuncle. -- And yet --
Conscience pulls me back. -- Besides, widow, the woman is not satisfied.


Mrs. Cr. I Will give her three hundred pound.


Phe. The woman is not such a fool to take it.


Watt. But the woman shall be so wise to take it, for what ever you all think,
I do not love my Master so ill, to spoil his Fortune. And, Sir, truth is, I
have received -- some favors, -- as they say, from Mrs. Phebe, as well as you,
that is, she has been kind, Sir.


Care. I thought so.


Watt. And I Am content to marry and make her honest, if she can get any
addition to this Lady's bounty, to make her any fortune.


La. That was well said, Watt, and I Will promise the other hundred, in lieu of
that I had in Wares of her Kinswoman, with your permission, Sir Oliver.


Sir Oliv. With all my heart.


La. Watt, go for the Parson then, we will have 'em married presently. [ Ex. Watt.


Enter Lord, Tom Saleware, and Ali. Lor. Madam, in obedience to your commands,
I am come to wait on you.


La. You have honored me, my Lord, tho our difference is almost at an end, yet
I have something to deliver to your Lordship in private.


Lor. Madam, I have also a question to ask you in private too.


La. I shall be glad of any occasion to serve your Lordship.


Lor. Madam, will you withdraw a little? only this Gentlewoman may be witness
of what I have to ask you.


La. I fancy what it is already, and must entreat your Lordship to speak it out,
what e're it be.


Lor. 'T would not be for your Honor, Madam.


La. I am not of your opinion, my Lord, and that I may let you see I am not,
I Will speak it for you: You come to ask me, and this woman to accuse me with
dishonorable Love to a servant of yours, Bellamy I mean, is it not so?


Lor. Madam, it is.


La. This pleases me, indeed she has revenged her self handsomely; I have a
Kinsman here of that opinion.


Care. But, Madam, I recant, 'twas in the days of my debauch and brutality, I
am reformed now by your virtues only, -- and humbly beg your pardon.


Lor. Madam, is not Bellamy, here?


La. He will be presently, my Lord, but now your Lordship, has questioned me, I
hope I may have the same freedom with you?


Lor. Madam, you may command me any thing.


La. Pray where is my Sister Clara?


Lor. Is that a question for me to answer, Madam?


La. Yes, and which in Honor you are bound to answer: Did you not betray her
to shame and infamy, and robbed her of her Virgin purity?


Lor. I did not ravish her, Madam.


La. I do not say you did. But you had Flattery which did much more than force;
I ask not her Honor back, but her life, and self, for we have never heard of
her since that fatal Treachery of yours, and it is of you that I demand her.


Lor. You, cannot sure comple me to return her, if I could?


Care. But she shall, Sir, and I will be her Champion.


Lor. Her loss, Madam, is a greater Grief to me, than it is to you; -- but for
you, Sir, I shall find a time to try your prowess.


Clar. But you shall not, Sir, I Will end the controversy.


Lor. I am amazed, -- Clara, -- and my Bellamy's the same.


Cla. Yes, your Bellamy, is the wronged Clara. -- Do you not blush to see me?
-- I Am come to claim your vows, so often sworn, and so long broken. --


Care. So, I was like to have made fine work.


Ali. Bless me! Bellamy, a Woman?


Tom. Never the sooner for a hasty word, I hope.


Enter Watt. Watt. Sir, the Parson's come.


Care. Come, Widow, dare you sign, seal, and deliver?


Mrs. Cr. With all my heart, Sir. [ Ex. Careless, Widow, Watt, and Phebe.


Clare. Being by you undone, and made unfit to look abroad with Honor, and
more unfit to live, but in the presence of you whom I adored; I did assume that
Masculine habit, to let you see that I had rather live but by your sight alone,
than be my self in any other part of the world; and by your sight alone, could
better contain my self, than she, the Mistress whom you so admired could, with
the dear possession of you.


Lor. You melt my soul. -- Pray let me make new vows to you, or well confirm
the old. -- [Go aside.


Ali. Well, I am absolutely lost and undon in my Lords favor.


Tom. Never the sooner for a hasty word. Come, come, I do suspect this is all
but a plot to make me jealous.


La. Would you not be laughed at now, sweet Mrs. Saleware?


Tom. No, indeed, Madam; nor shall she be by the proudest she that wears a
head; or if she be, it will not make me jealous: Sapientia mea mihi, is my
Motto still.


La. Yet I confess, this young Bellamy, and I have been bed-fellows some years
since. Come be not out of countenance, I will not tell what my Husband did with
you last term.


Tom. Nor shall you make me jealous, Madam, what'ere they did. Efacks not I,
sweet Ali.


Lor. Can you forgive what is past, and take a penitent man to your mercy?


La. My Lord, if you will repair my Sisters honor, Sir Oliver, shall give you in
your Mortgage?


Lor. It Is all I wish on Earth to do so, Madam.


Sir Ol. Then, Sir, I Will restore your writings, and by it make her as good a
Fortune as the Widow, and there is within a Parson shall end the difference.


Lor. It shall be done, Sir Oliver. -- For you, Mrs. Saleware, go home, look to
your Shop, and please your Husband; for from this day, I Will never see you more.


Ali. I see all things are transitory, -- and will turn Honest, and Thomas, you
shall have no more fears of jealousy.


Tom. A Pox of jealousy, I wish that were the worst grievance in the Nation,
the jealousy that troubles my Noddle. No, no; Sapientia, etc. is my Motto.


Enter Careless, Crostill, Watt, and Phebe. La. See, they are already Married.


Tom. What, my Cousin Phebe Gimcrack, too, -- and 'efack, I Will take a frisk for
joy. Watt get some Music.


Mrs. Cr. You shall not need, Sir, I have 'em at hand.


Care. Well, Uncle, I hope we shall now be Friends, and according as I behave
my self, let me have your favor, -- you must all Dine with me to day; and at
night, Widow -- I Will say no more. --


Sir Ol. Well, Sir, as I shall see how you behave your self, I shall prove my
self a loving Uncle.


Care. I will be your Heir yet, in spite of ill Luck, and all my damned
Debaucheries, which now farewell to. --


Lor. See, the Musick's here indeed, we'll lead the Bride a Dance, and then
they shall do as much for us, Clara.


They Dance all. Lor. Now, Clare, that you and I may happy prove,
The Priest within shall consummate our Love.

[Exeunt. FINIS.
EPILOGUE:
Spoken by TOM. SALEWARE.
TOM. face about, with harmeless Rallery,
Instruct the Salewares of the middle Gallery.
Dear Friends, go home and look unto your Wives,
Bid 'em keep in and mend their gadding lives;
They all have got a trick to see a Lord,
-- Yet never the sooner for a hasty word.
I mean no harm, for there are Wives that do
Keep open Shop, and trade as well as you;
Deal by retail, and are to Husbands aiding,
And oftentimes, have much the better Trading.
When time and place are fit, I Will name you some
Who keep a journy-man, or two at home.
I Will say no more; truth sometimes hatred draws:
-- Yet
I Will not be dashed, nor basht, in a good Cause.
I am a Glass in which you all may view,
What strange good Natured things are most of you.
Tho you will believe no Man i the way of Trade,
Yet what believing Fools, by Wives you're made?
Three years you're married, and have never a Son,
Your Wives make visits, and the job is don,
She smiles to see you Rock and Sing, by, by,
And think it is Yours; ah, -- Stultitia tua tibi.
And of your Wives a Pattern see in Aly,
When Trading's dead, they all will strike a Tally;
Yet my dear Friends, be not at this dejected,
Carry't as I do, fair, and stand Corrected:
Act not a Henrick, or a jealous Diego,
It Is safer much, to be an Assenego.
Then let my Wife go visit Knight, or Lord;
Or they come to her, I do not care one -- hum, --
Sapientia mea mihi, is my word.
Written by Mr. E. R.

