THE CUNNING LOVERS.

A COMEDY.

As it was Acted, with great Applause, by their Majesty's Servants at the
private House in Drury Lane.

Written by ALEXANDER BROM, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Will: Sheares, at the Bible in S. Paul's Churchyard, near
the little North door, 1654.

The Names of the Actors.
VErona, the Duke of Verona. Prospero, the Prince his Son. Montecelso, a Peer
of Verona. Ambassadors from the Mantuan Duke. Cosmo, a Lord of Verona. Mantua,
the Duke of Mantua. Clown. Florence, the Duke of Florence. Ferrara, a
Marqueste. Julio, a Mantuan Lord. Valentia, Daughter to the Mantuan Duke.
Duchess. A Smith. A Mason. A Bricklayer. A Carpenter. Pilgrim. A Negromancer.
A Spanish Lady. Bishop. Duke of Verona's Army.
THE Cunning Lovers.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Verona, Prospero, Montescelso, Cosmo. Ver. MAturity and age have now at
length
Im posed on me a careful providence
Both for my Dukedoms safety, and the good
Of our most hopeful Son Prince Prospero.

Pros. My Lord.

Ver. You grow to ripeness, and my thoughts are fixed
To have you troth-plight to some noble wife,
That in my aged years I may have comfort
In your fair issue, I would have you marry.

Pros. Marry my Lord!

Ver. I, marry Prospero.
I have labored with a neighbor Prince, possessed
Of a fair Daughter, to confirm a match
'Twixt thee and her, and it is concluded firmly;
Her name Valentia, she his only child,
By which a settled League grows 'twixt our Dukedomes,
And thou by this art the true hopeful Heir
Of both out rich and wealthy Provinces:
Your answer.

Pros. I am free, my Lord, as the uncurb'd air,
That comes not within limit, as the light
That nothing can imprison. Shall I truly
Speak my own thoughts, and not dissemble with you?
I that am free amongst men, and uncaptiv'd
To any, save the duty bound to you,
Am loath to make my self a woman's slave,
Briefly, my Lord, I have no mind to marry.

Ver. Not marry boy? Oh, knew'st thou what a sweetness
And harmonie's in loves blessed fellowship
Thou would embrace it gladly; this blessed union,
This true-loves knot the Gods themselves do tie,
And none but death dissolves. And what is Virginity?
A something-nothing, singularity
Unsociable, so slightly reckoned of
That either Sex, but to thy number grown,
Has a desire to leave it; be persuaded boy;
Thou have beheld the Picture, and it promises
A perfect Lady; had thou seen the substance
Thou would condemn the workman for so scanting
Her rare comparelesse beauty. Marriage,
Why it is an honor, Emperors, Kings, and Princes,
From the Palace to the Cottage held it facred
And in a high religious reverence.

Pros. Well, my Lord, I will be steered by you;
Even through the turbulent Ocean of this life,
Where many dreadful tempests threaten us,
I shall be swai'd by you, and entertain
This sweet captivity,

Ver. Then art thou wise -- the news. Flourish.

Mon. Ambassadors from Mantua crave admittance
Touching affairs of state.

Ver. Admit 'em -- Enter Ambassadors.
Lords, your arrival is in happy season;
The marriage so long treated 'tween the Fathers
Shall by the Children be confirmed at length,
It Is now on foot.

Em. Your grace mistakes the tenor,
And the strange purpose our Embasie;
The Prince our Master lets know by us
That your alliance highly he disdaines,
Contemnes your love and near affinity,
And for just reasons, to himself best known,
Desires your opposition; for the marriage
Treated between you, esteems his Daughter
Much undervalued, and not rated truly
To her best worth.

Ver. Pause Lord Ambassador,
So high has thy words incer s'd our spleen,
And set so just an edge upon our wrath
That we want patience to bestow an care
Unto thy harsh conclusion: Tell thy Lord,
We did not so much over-prize his love
As here his hate held in the basest scorn;
Nor can he so much undervalue us
As we his Contracts and Confederacy;
And for thy self-presumptuous Mantuan Lord,
We favor thee to let thee undisgrac'd
Depart our Court, be gone without reply,
Not Matuans, but Mantua we defy.

Emb. Let me conclude my Message.

Ver. Convey him hence;
Disdain our fellowship! Mantua shall know
His state shall lessen whilst our glories grow.

Pros. I, but, my Lord, I hope the match is not broke off
Between me and the fair Valentia.

Ver. Oh boy, did thou but know what marriage were,
How full of troubles and contentions,
Thou would forgo it gladly; who that is free
Would be confined to base Effeminacy?

Pro. But that which has made in me the deepest impression
Is the rare Picture of the Lady Valentia.

Ver. The Painter flattered her, in having her
Thou have a painted Mistress, of her self
The Lady is misshapen and deformed.

Pros. Nay, take me with you, my Lord,
I have beheld her Picture, and it promises
A perfect Lady; had I seen the substance
I should condemn the workman for so scanting
Her rare comparelesse beauty; these were your own words,
My Lord, or I much misunderstood them.

Mon. They were indeed, my Lord, I am witness to them.

Pro. Well since your Grace has no purpose to have me marry,
Shall I have your best furtherance to travel?

Ver. Yes, any thing to wear out the remembrance
Of Mantuas Daughter.

Mont. Another boon, my Lord.

Ver. What Is that Coz?

Mont. That I may be his Partner in his travel, his associate
To bear him company, nothing else my Lord.

Ver. Have your desires.

Pros. I embrace your fellowship,
I Will travel, but whither? to have a sight of the fair Valentia,
There shall be the period of my Voyage;
What though her Father and mine be opposites, she and I
May happily agree well enough when we meet together.

Mont. My Lord, what limit shall we have to play the wandering Knights in? Or
how long shall it be ere we set forward on our Journey? We were best go well
provided, for we must see Spain, France, and England ere we return.


Ver. Some ten days hence you shall set forward,
Your stay has a years limit.

Pros. Then come, fair Coz, we must provide our selves;
Her Picture's lovely, and it much contents,
And I must see the face that it presents. Exeunt.

Ver. Your youths cannot outstrip my gravity,
I have you boys, and aim at your intents;
This cunning suit for travel is a color
To some close practice to deceive my age,
But I shall wind them both, Cosmo.

Cos. My Lord.

Ver. The manage of our State we leave to thee,
Whom we know wise and gravely provident;
Our purpose is to chase these travelers,
Whose voyage we mistrust.

Coz. It Is dangerous
Unto your noble person, full of hazard
And doubtful peril.

Ver. I am confident,
Dissuade me not, for my intent is fixed;
In some suspectlesse shape I Will after them,
And sound the inmost of their thoughts, yet pass unknown;
Cosmo regard your charge whilst I provide. Flourish.
To find that craft they with such cunning hide. Exeunt.

Enter Mantua, Ambassadors, and Clown. Man. You have breathed defiance then.

Emb. I have my Lord.

Man. And how did he receive it?

Emb. With such scorn
And proud contempt, that with far greater spleen
He threatened us than we could menace him.

Man. No matter, this late difference pleases us,
You have demeaned your self even to our wish,
Now leave us to our private meditations. Exeunt. Em.
Come hither Sir, I repose in thee
Much trust and much assured confidence,
I have brought thee up of a youth boy, I have.

Clo. You have if it shall please your Grace.

Man. Thy Father was a good old servitour,
I loved him well, I did, indeed I did,
Believe it, for I did so.

Clo. I believe your Lordship without swearing.

Man. Thou know my Daughter should have been affied
Unto Verona's Son Prince Prospero,
I know thou know it.

Clow. I have had, if it please your Grace, such an inckling,

Man. But a difference since
Has fallen betwixt us, nay, in such a manner
That by our Leagers we have threatened war,
And war is like to ensue to come to thee.

Clo. If it shall please your honor, I Will save you that labor and come to you.


Man. Conceive me, I will come to that concerns thee,
Thou know how deerly I affect my Daughter,
I, and how dearly I affect my Gold,
Speak, did I ever yet part with one piece
To guerdon thee, a sign I loved it well.

Clo. No, never, if it shall please your honor, I Will do you right in that, you
everlov'd me too well to give me any thing, I have ever heard you reported for
as covetous and niggardly a noble Gentleman as ever bore sway here, you are one
of the most closse-fifted Carpenters that ever bare rule in Mantua.


Man. To keep my Daughter that she marry not,
By which I like wise may reserve her dower,
I have devised this opposition
'T ween Valentia and Prince Prospero;
More Suitors are now resident in Court,
But to prevent them I Will devise a Tower
In which to shut my Daughter so impregnable
And full of doors, of which I Will keep the keys,
That she in vain shall strive to issue out,
Or they to enter in; this strong foundation
Is laid already, workmen are employed,
And all things promise prosperous success;
In this employment thou shall have a charge,
An overseers place, because I know thee
Simple but sure of faith: we i trust thy reach,
As far from craft as cunning, truly honest
Because not over wise.

Clo. I must entreat your Lordship I may have a pair of Chopeens, or some
high Cork'd shoes, or else I shall never play the overseer well; or if your
Lordship will allow me but a Ladder, I warrant you I will oversee your workmen.


Man. No more, there shall be order from our Treasury
To furnish this rich building --

Enter Florence, Ferrara, Julio, Valentia, and Duchess. Welcome Lords.

Fer. Our welcome would show better,
If we could hear it from the Ladies.

Flo. They come well that speed well, if we could find our selves well sped,
then we should not doubt to presume we were well-come.


Man. Lord Julio, are the toils prepared and set for our appointed game.?


Iul. They are my Lord.

Man. Then Princes we devote this day to pastime
And chasing of the Stag, these beauteous Ladies,
That must this day take leave of liberty,
Shall in our sport associate us; Valentia,
And you most beauteous, and my dearest Love,
I here protest my self your Guardian,
Hoping to see you, ere two months expire,
The Mantuan Duchess.

Dutch. I hope no such matter; but my Lord,
Am I your Dear, as you proclaim me?

Man. My dearest Dear.

Dutch. Then being in the chase I shall fear in the hunting:
To come near you.

Man. Your reason Sweet.

Dutch. Left being your Dear you should strike me.

Man. Still is this Lady cross to my designs,
But time may work her; Daughter, mount your Steed,
And Lords to horse* the morning grows upon us,
And steals toward midst of day.

Val. We but attend
Your Highness company.

Flo. Lady, this day I will not start from your side.

Val. You Will be worse to me than a stitch then.

Fer. Nor will I leave you Lady,

Dutch. And yet you shall have free leave to leave me when you please.


Man. We trifle hours, found out your bugles sh
And the thick air with pleasing echoes fill. Exeunt.

Iul. To ring thy knell, for this day thou art doomed
To perish by the hand of Iulio -- Horns.
The Mantuan Prince
Is now upon the Chase, I hear the cry,
But ere the stagg fall the proud Duke must dye. Exit.

Enter Prospero, and Montecelso. Pros. Hark what a shrill applause does
welcome us
Unto the Mantuan Confines.

Mon. It seems the Duke or some of his train
Are in the Forest chacing some game;
Nay, it must needs be so of necessity, they would not else make
This noise unless they were all horne-mad.

Pros. If I should come a wooing, noble Coz,
I should presage the Music of these horns
Might, to my future match, prove ominous;
But now let us mix our selves amidst the Train,
And see what fair adventure may befall us.

Mon. Sever our selves, it may be that sweet face
Your Father praised may meet us in the Chase.

Pros. I like well this division, come let us part,
And let us be henceforth strangers, thus conditioned,
The first that can prefer himself, or service
Unto the Duke, or gain his sovereign grace
Shall for his friend provide some eminent place.

Mon. I am pleased my Lord, then come let us mount away,
The morning's old, and we shall lose much day. Exeunt. (Horns.

Enter Iulio with a Disguize. Iul. With these Italian tricks villains often mask
Their grim bloodthirsty fronts, and when they purpose
To act some horrid murder, if prevented,
Thus pass unknown, these bought I of a Jew,
A fellow that professes villain;
I Will dog the Duke, whom if I can but single,
Or light on from his Train, but thus, it is done,
The Dukedom seized, and fair Valentia won;
Auspicious hell I thank: thee, thou art still
True to black deeds, and friend to such as kill --

Enter Mantua. Man. My horse hathfail'd me, and I forced on foot
To lag behind, my Train have left me all,
Led by the music of so fair a Cry,

Ju. To find a place where thou may fitly dye.

Man. Who named death to me?

Iul. One whose powerful hand*
Shall guide thy Dukedom, Daughter, and thy Land,
And at one blow gain all --

Enter Prospero. Pro. And we so nigh,
The slave that threatened death himself shall dye.

Iul. Prevented. Exit.

Pro. Courage, my Lord, the traitorous groom is fled,
And you ingirt with safety.

Man. Noble stranger,
The life thou have given me shall be ever thine,
And thank the stars that brought thee to my rescue,
They owed thee a great fortune, thou have saved
The Mantuan Duke from death.

Pro. Are you my Lord,
The noble Mantuan Prince? what Traitors hand
Durst threat your life?

Man. I know not, gentle sir,
But for your self thus much presume from me,
You shall be ever ours, to none more dear,
By whom I am freed from treason, death and fear.

Enter Iulie, Florende, Ferrara, Valentia, Duchess, and Montecelso. Iul. This
way, my Lords, I saw the Duke in perils
An ugly slave, his face much Vizard-like.
Assailed the Duke, and with his weapon drawn
Fled through the Forest, I pursued the Traitor
Whilst I had breath, but fears and guilt of conscience
Gave his speed wings; but see my Lord's in safety,
Whose welfare I salute thus on my knee,
Glad in my soul that he from death is free.

Val. My Father threatened I blessed be that fair hand
That wrought his safety.

Man. Thank this Gentleman,
This noble youth, it is he by whom I live,
Never so near my death, never so near it,
So mortal men are still when least they fear it.

Val. Oh do but tell me, thrice renowned sir,
How I may show me thankful to your love,
Whose noble hand preserved my fathers life.

Pro. Madam, your grace, your favor and good thoughts
Are gifts above my merit.

Flo. Stranger, thou haft won the opinion and suffrage of the whole Court,
and bound the Prince of Florence to be thy grateful debtor.


Fer. We made have
To the Dukes rescue, but it was thy fate
Our valors to prevent, we came too late.

Dutch. Yet did Lord Iulio, with what speed he might, haste us to this great
danger.


Iul. 'Twas my duty
And service to my Lord, whom thus to see
Secured from death glads, almost frantiques me;
Legs for my life I thank, and thou my brain
For making up this broken flaw again.

Man. We thank you Iulio, chiefly you fair stranger,
Whom for your service we will raise in Court,
And breast next our most dear Valentia;
But she is for the Tower barred with twelve doors,
And this the last day of her liberty,
That Is our next business; once more welcome sir,
Attend on us to Court, our happy fate
Has given me safety, and advanced thy state. Exeunt.

Pro. Oh fair Valentia!

Mon. My Lord, if you had been born less than a Prince, yet you have wrought
your self into grace.


Pro. Here set a period to our travels, make a full point here.

Mon. And that, my Lord, is the full end of a sentence; but shall we give over
travel till we have seen something worth seeing.


Pro. Worth seeing sai'st thou? what is Valentia?
Travel from Pole to Pole, stand at the Center
And progress round about the spacious signs,
Or, were it possible, sit with the Sun
In his high noon* tide glory, and from thence
Survey the Kingdoms of this lower world,
Thou can not find her match, Apollo's hair
Is dull to hers, her fingers, hand, eye, front.

Mon. Take me with you my Lord: This mavelous thing you call her beauty, is
it ought but ordinary flesh and blood? Are those gold wiry hairs with which
Apollo might go string his Harp, are they ought but the plain hairs of her
head? Her Ivory palm, that does in touching melt, embroidered with blew
artires, is it ought but a Ladies hand and fingers? And this strange thing,
this wonder of the world, whose peer cannot be found between the Poles, are
not all these nine wonders in one, she that was here even now, the Dukes
Daughter Valentia?


Pro. Oh my dear Montecelso, this I know,
But such an admiration has surpised
The freedom of my senses, that it robs me
Of my true judgment.

Mon. Be advised by me* you love this Lady, but so strict is like to be her
imprisonment, that you may as easily pass by the gates that Cerberus keeps, as
through the doors of this Castle; you are already in favor with the Duke, do
but prefer me to be overseer of the work, if I do not* work it so that I
will bring you to oversee her, turn me out of my office as one not worthy the
name of an Architecture.


Pro. I shall commend thee for a man well skilled a such great structures, it
may be the Duke May trust me on my word.


Mon. And if I do not make him dote as much on you for your valor, as you make
him enamored on me for my skill in building, may this Tower turn to the Tower
of Babel, and make a second confusion between us, there remains for you
nothing but this, to win the favor of the Lady; and for your access to her,
if I do not teach you to counterfeit all the Dukes keys, turn by all the
wards of his locks and lay open all the Jurie of his twelve doors that he has
pannell'd against your entrance, report me to be no man of my trade* Away my
Lord* leave this melancholy, walk by her window* and cast sheeps eyes that
way toward her Chamber, let me alone to stand Centinell and watch if the Duke
come* Exeunt.


Enter Clown, a Smith, a Mason* a Bricklayer, a Carpenter. Clo. Come on my
masters, the Duke has appointed me to be Overseer of his works, the building
of this Tower is put to my indiscretion; therefore come every one of you, and
from me take your directions; what are you?


Ma. I am a free Mason, and expert in squaring stone.

Clo. A good proper square fellow, if your trade be in stone,
I make no question but you will work hard.

Ma. I warrant you sir I Will do my endeavor; will you give us directions?


Clo. First you must make a fair large post at the entry.

Ma. I warrant you I Will make a large porch that any Lady shall go in and out at
pleasure.


Clo. To see how you mistake; you must make it that no body can go in and out
at pleasure but only my Lady, it must be too wide for any that is less than
she, and too strait for any that's greater than she, you conceive me.

Oh sir, it is not possible.

Clo. Tell not me of possible, such directions I had, and such an one I must
have made* Then must I have fair bay windows that must always stand open and
give no light, that they that stand without and look in may see no body
within, and she that stands within and looks out may see no body without* the
reason is, my Lord means to keep his daughter in that Tower, where she must
neither see nor be seen.


Ma. Then none must offer to look out from the inside, nor in from the
outside, else it is not within the compass of workmanship.


Clo. Tell not me of workmanship, such windows I must have made: Now Carpenter
for you, you must make the doors of that fashion that women may go in but men
may not, and they must be of such wood as will not let a Lover come near it,
for my Lord will have no Lovers come near his Castle.


Car. Then you must have some body to keep them out; here are wise directions!


Clo. For you goodman Padlock, you must hammer out your Locks and Keys with
such Art, that if the Duke, or any from him, offer to open, the Key may turn
at pleasure, but if any Lover or suspicious person come to enter, Nonsum, non
possum, non Licet esse Domi.


Smi. That Is as much as to say, they must have no entrance there.


Clo. Smith, you have hit the nail on the head; What Is your place?


Brick. I have the charge of the brick-worke, and must build the Chimnies if
you would give me directions.


Clo. Marry will I sir, you must have a special regard in your Chimneys that
they cast heat, though there be no fire in them, and the Kitchen Chimney
especially must every meal yield roast meat without sending to market, and so
to work for a spurt, and after merrily to dinner.


Omues. A good motion. Exeunt.

ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Mantua, Florence, Ferrara, Iulio, and Prospero. Man. HAve you given
charge, Lord Iulio, that my Duchess
Be nobly served as her whom Mantua loves?

Iul. I have my Lord.

Man. And that Valentia be enclosed and shut
From all her suitors eyes.

Iul. I gave such order.

Man. Enough now my Lords.

Flo. You give us fair words; but keep us from the sight of the fair Ladies.


Man. Soft and fair, soft and fair.

Fer. We know they are both soft and fair, and that is the reason we desire so
much both to see and feel them.


Iul. I would beneath the ground sels of this Castle,
By Miners craft, were placed some strong Petars,
To which I would give fire and blow this structure
Up into air that prisons thus my Love;
But Iulio peace, and some advantage wait
To show to her thy love, to him thy hate.

Flo. My Lord, I can compare you to none so rightly as to the King Aerifius,
that shut up his Daughter Danae in a brazen Tower, but you know the end of it,
there was a Jupiter that with a golden pick-lock broke through those brazen
gates, and made the maid a mother. Now if

I were to choose a godhead, of all the gods that are
Would I, for her sake, wish to be a Jupiter.

Man. For men to be made gods it were a wonder,
You Jove, and neither have his power nor thunder?

Fer. Shall I bail her my Lord? I Will put you in good security.

Ma. But not in better security than I have put her in already,
Yet better would do well; oh for a man
Skillful in Architecture, and composing
Strong frames and forms of building.

Fro. Now Is my question;
My Lord, there is a stranger in your Court
Whose outside though it promise not much Art,
Yet is he so ingenious, and so apt,
Of such opinion and direction too,
That could you win him to be so employed,
As we shall hardly, for men excellent
Are curious of their skill, you cannot find
A man to match his skill in Italy.

Man. Thou were I see, fair Knight, marked in thy Cradle
To do me all good offices, bring that man
To my employment, I will guerdon him
With more than he can ask.

Pro. I, but my Lord,
He is a man always so absolute,
And stands so much upon his excellence
In fine contriving and rare edifices
We shall have much ado to win him to it -- Ent. Mont.
Here comes the man.

Man. Sir, your due praise has, like a harbinger,
Gone all the way before you to provide you
A place in my regard, you are most welcome,
You have not seen my Castle?

Mon. Yes my Lord, I have perused it.

Man. What think you of the work?

Mon. It Is pretty, pretty;
It Is well for modern builders, homebred workmen,
'Twill serve: Yet let me tell you, worthy Lord,
They never looked on high Mauselus Tomb,
Never beheld a Grecian Pyramid,
Rich Crassus house at Rome, Diana's Temple
At Ephesus, nor the grand City Caire,
It Is well for them that are no travelers;
Saw you me draw a form, or a fine model,
The Fabric greatly would enamour you,
But yet it is well enough, pretty, not famous*

Man. Shall I entreat you to direct my workmen,
And I will weigh your pains down with reward.

Mon. Your Tower as it is, my Lord, will serve the turn,
Is finely seated, and to keep your Daughter
Close from the eyes of strangers, well contrived,
Yet could I by a plot, but why should I
Engage me in such work? it is well already,
Well, very well.

Man. You can contrive it better, noble stranger;
Make trial of my bounty, by mine honor
It shall not fail your hopes.

Pro. Did not I tell you at the first, my Lord,
He would be wondrous dainty of his cunning?

Man. So most men are in things they best excel;
Shall I prevail fair sir?

Mon. Well, I am won
To end that frame your workmen have begun;
I have perused the situation,
Find it secure and full of able trust,
Yet one defect I find: Could you pick out
Some noble Knight, whose valor did exceed,
To build for him a Lodging near that Tower
Where fair Valentia is to live enclosed,
He, as a Guardian, or a Centinell,
Might keep continual watch, defend the passage,
And keep the place strong and impregnable?

Man. Where should I find a man worthy that place,
Whose valor might supply this my employment?

Iul. Let me engage my person to that business.

Flo. Accept of me my Lord, I Will be her Guardian.

Fer. Let the Ferrara Marquess be employed
In this adventure.

Mon. List to me my Lord:
Amongst other quests, once as I traveled Greece,
There, at the sack of a most famous town,
I saw a Knight, now resident in Court,
Do such high deeds of Arms, that living Hector,
Had he survived to see his Chivalry,
Would from the Worthies nine have raised his name,
To have eternized him with golden fame.

Man. In our Court resident?

Mon. Yes, that strange Knight,
What wonders have I seen him do in fight!
Would he attempt it, all the plot were sure,
Your Self, your Daughter, and your Tower secure;
But you shall hardly win him to attempt.

Man. That he is valiant I must needs confess
To my lives safeguard I have proved no less;
Oh every way my friend; renowned Soldier,
Pardon me that I have not done you honors
Worthy your high deserts.

Pro. Alas my Lord.

Man. My cares are deaf unto excuse, and shut
Against all denial.

Pro. I am exceeding loath.

Man. I shall deserve it, noble Gentleman,
I must not be denied, this skillful stranger
Shall cause my workmen build you a fair Lodging
Next to the Castle, and adjoining close
Unto my Daughters Chamber: this is all;
Can you deny me this?

Pro. Your former honors
Bestowed so largely on my mean deserts
Have been with me prevailing Orators
Upon your part, and I at length agree
This skillful Artist shall dispose of me.

Iul. Again prevented.

Man. On all sides happy, fortunate, and blessed,
Now my disturbed thoughts attain true rest,
Only one bar unto my best desires
Is the entire affection and true zeal
I bear the beauteous Duchess.

Pro. Oh my Lord,
You have entertained the most affecting wooer
In Europe, or the world, therein he is better
Than in his Architecture, he is but young,
Yet Tully never had such a fluent tongue.

Man. Hemmed in with all felicities about,
Having these helps what need I now misdoubt?
You shall sir bear from me most kind commends.

Mon. Who, I my Lord? Alas.

Man. Come sir, you shall
Unto the beauteous Duchess whom I love.

Mon. You do not know my weakness.

Man. You are strong
In your acute words, and praised for your sweet tongue,
A token I will send by you, that give her,
And in your own sweet words my love deliver.

Mon. If need's I Will do it my Lord: upon my life
The provident Duke has found me out a wife.

Man. Follow us Lords, I am full of jocund mirth,
My fears are dead, my joys receive new birth. Exit.

Mon. Now Prince, was not this wrought out of Adamant?

Pros. But what is the mark that all the several arrows shoot at?

Mon. This is the mark* mark it, I am made chief overseer of the work, and
your Lodging is directly against the Chamber of the Lady: Now will I appoint a
private door to be made through the wall, by and through which you may have
access, ingresse and regresse at your pleasure.


Pro. Thou have builded in my heart a Tower already
Of steady and firm hope.

Man. Take my word I am excellent at Architecture.

Pros. But touching thy employment with the Duchess,
Art thou so mad to woo her for the Duke?

Mon. Yes, I will set him out in his lively colors, deal you as soundly with
the maid as I will work with the widow, and I doubt not but we shall both
live to be in the belief there are no Cuekolds but Batchelours, our stay is
suspicious, be it your charge to hire --

A workman to make the private door through the wall,
And leave it to my wit to cover all.

Pro. That be my care*
Thou wooest a widow, but I court a maid,
The way thou tread'st is easy, broad, and free,
But mine is strait, and danger ushers me. Exeunt.

Enter Verona like a Pilgrim. Ver. No marvel though Jove often went disguised,
And in his rural habit traced the earth
To hear and see the affairs of mortal men.
I being a Prince have in these lowly weeds
Seen more than being refident in Court;
But I am now in Mantua, and thus far
I have pursued my Son by common tract;
The Duke and I are dangerously opposed,
And therefore this disguise must shelter me;
The Mantuan Court I Will now search ere I go
For Montecelso and my princely Son --

Enter Clown with a rule and line. Clo. Let me see, let me see, make a door so
broad, I, so broad, and thus wide; now unless I had the Lady here to take
measure of her it is impossible that ever I should make the door fit* if a man
take a thing in hand, it is for his credit to do it workman like; now if I
should make the door too straight to pinch her body, or too wide to sit upon
her like a sack, what credit should I have by my workmanship?


Ver. Heaven save you sir.

Clo. Et tu quoque my friend; let me see, let me see, now have I forgotten
whether the door must be made for her to come thus, with her arms broad
ways, Pilcher-fashion, and a kembo; or thus side-waies, like a shotten herring.


Ver. Sir, without interruption to your business, shall I entreat a few words
with you.


Clo. Hold here, hold here a little, thus high, I, thus high, just thus high;
but now my friend, if I should make it just thus high according to my measure,
and then the party being yet but young should grow higher, there were all the
labor cast away* come, come, I must have a new measure.


Ver. Sir, what means this? I understand it not*
Pray let me ask you but one question.

Clo. Hold again, hold again, say my friend I make it of this breadth
according to my measure, just to a hair; very good my friend, but now the
party being yet but lean that it should be made for, say the party hereafter
grow fat, or as the Fox that when his belly was empty crept through a small
hole into a henroost, and there filled his belly so full, that when he should
come out again, there was no room; Colon was grown so great, and so poor
Reynald was taken in the manner, no, my friend, this must not be.


Ver. I pray sir to what end take you this measure?

Clo. Why, my friend, because I would do nothing out of measure, I hope you
have not played the old caves dropper.


Ver. No sir, but if your chief affairs be ended,
Let me discourse with you.

Clo. My friend, as you have lent a hand to my Line, so will I lend an care to
your tale.


Ver. What Is the best news in Court?

Clo. Troth sir nothing but this, that the Prince is magnanimous, the Courtiers
egregious, the Ladies beauteous, the place conspicuous, and the building in
hand most sumptuous.


Ver. What strangers so journe there, what men of note?

Clo. Troth sir there are only two, one is most brave at models and buildings,
and has undertaken a most brave piece of work.


Ver. That Is not my Son, he never studied that,
No, not his friend.

Clo. But there is another, the finest sweet-fac'd Gentleman, that saved the
Dukes life in the Forest, if you know not that you know nothing, if you know
not him you know no body.


Ver. What manner of man is he?

Clo. A most dainty man, much of my size, he has a most leering lip and
tempting eye, there is only this difference between us, for you would take us
to be brothers, but that he has more hair than I, and I more wit than he;
Father, you are not worthy to be held a good Subject, if you love not him that
had like to have killed him that would have killed the Duke, he has set me
about this piece of work here, let me see, this blockhead of mine will never
bring it to any purpose -- Ent. Prosp. Oh here comes the Gentleman.


Ver. He interpose himself and save the Duke*
That look, that face, that gesture is my Sons.

Pro. Oh well incounter'd, tell me honest fellow,
Have thou dispatched the close and secret door?

Clo. Not yet my Lord.

Pro. What do thou with that Line?

Clo. I am staying here, that if she should come down this way,
I may take measure of her to make the door fit for her body.

Pro. Away you ass, thou will betray my purpose;
But sirrah on your life use seeresie,
And with all speed dispatch it; but what is he?

Clo. A Fellow that wonders so young a Gentleman as your self should take the
Dukes quarrel in hand, and save him from the sword of a Traitor.


Ver. It Is Prospero my Son, shape, gate, and voice,
To hear his valor praised how I rejoice,

Pro. This fellow at a blush looks like my Father,
Such settled gravity lives in his eye;
Nor is there wanting ought save power and state,
Attended with the royal name of Duke
To make him the same man; but I digress;
Come to your private task, sirrah be secret,
Or thy life paies for it.

Clo. I warrant you sir, I would be as loath to hazard my neck as you the
Dukes favor, his favor once lost may be got again, but my neck once broke,
I Will not trust all the bone-setters in Mantua to have it new set; fear not me.


Fro. This aged man is still tossed in my thoughts,
And ever as I cast a look on him,
His face grows more familiar with my eye;
But to our task in hand, why do we stay?
His cloth of state cannot be turned to gray. Exit.

Ver. Is this your travel Son? Oh heaven to see
The follies and the vain delights of youth,
How headstrong, and how full of violence!
Why should he take this way? why sojourne here
Within my enemies Court? If to revenge
My Injuries, why did he rescue him?
Oh mine own Boy!
I must commend thee yet that could'it win love
Even of thy enemies, and honored fame
Amongst those, that if they knew thee, hate thy name;
I Will listen further till some fate bewray
The full intent of his enforced stay. Exit.

Enter Mantua. Man. My Daughter is securely closed and shut
In my new Turret, and the noble Knight,
As her bold guardian, has his place assigned,
Those fears have end; now to my suit in hand,
The stranger whom so late I entertained
Is my solicitor, and is directed
To meet and court the Duchess in the garden,
Where from this place I may behold their gestures,
The manner of his courtship and conceit:
How is my heart disturbed 'tween hope and fear --
Enter Montecelso and Duchess. Comfort cold spirit, they now methinks appear.

Mon. The greatest instance of my love is, that I have given into your hands my
liberty and life; my name is Montecelso, and that noble Gentleman that rescued
the Duke Prince Prospero, Son to the Duke of Verona, it lies in you either to
save me alone, or to destroy us both; give me no denial, sweet Lady, rather
kill me than disclose me to the Duke, so shall you lessen the supposition of
your cruelty.


Dutch. In that you are a stranger, I can no less in courtesy, nor more in
modesty than to say you are welcome, though I have been trusted by many, I
never betrayed any; I could call you rash to trust so rich a Jewel as your life
unto the breast of a woman, but though you be so over-bold to presume upon me, I
will not prove so over cruel to tyrannize over you.


Man. She talked a great long tale, and loud she spoke,

To her again, do not that answer take.

Mon. Madam, by all the honors of a Gentleman, my love is as pure to you, and
as free from blemish as is the element of fire, or the white robe of Innocence.


Man. I know it is, I know it is.

Dutch. All the comfort I can give you is this, the life you have committed to
me shall be kept for you, the love you have proffered to me I will ponder on, I
will never marry till you are bestowed, nor ever assume the name of wife till
you meet with a Lady to call you husband.


Mon. Give me your hand of that.

Dutch. I may well trust you with my hand that have trusted me with your heart.


Man. A match I hope, for see, they now join hands,
My heart for joy upon the tiptoe stands;
Follow it now, strike whilst the Iron's hot,
I never was pleased till now with a fine plot.

Dutch. But you forget in all this to speak for the Duke.

Mon. Madam, it is true, I did forget my self, I must entreat you to think of
him, but I do not entreat you to think well of him, as ill as you can
possible; I beseech you love to be out of his sight in any case, and to love
him best when he is farthest off: I would have you in all humility to honor
him, but I would not for a world have you to marry him; have I yet spoke for
him sufficiently?


Man. Good, good, well spoken, and well acted too,
He is not half so good to plot as woo.

Dutch. My Lord, the love we now celebrate betwixt our selves should once have
been solemnized between our parents, before these odds grew between the two
Dukes.


Mon. Though the Dukes be at odds, let us make even,
Contracts are made on earth, but sealed in heaven;
Madam, let the Dukes love be the color to our meeting: I must go tell him the
manner, for with much longing he expects my return.
Once more let these our hands our hearts make sure,
So thrive I as my love is chaste and pure. Exit.

Man. Again, again, fair fortune be thy speed,
Once more join hands, and then it is done indeed;
I knew the good Knight would not choose a man
That should not fit my purpose, heaven I pray.
His place may take effect the other way,
And his intents as prosperously proceed;
But I must hence to meet him with all speed. Exit.

Enter Valentia and Prospero above. Val. You wrong mine honor, and I shall
complain,
I charge you get you back the way you came.

Pro. Banish ^he heaven if you exile me hence;
My deed, though it seem rash, yet is begot
In as pure birth as truth, and as upright
As is the scale of Justice; I am free
From all mis-thoughts, then do not banish me.

Val. What are you sir? whence are you? what is your name?

Pro. I am your friend, should you desire to know
What my name is, alas my name's your foe.

Val. Being my friend, and court me in this kind
You should have come and left your name behind.

Pro. I should indeed, my name is Prospero.

Val. Prince Prospero, and the Duke Verona's Son, Our professed Foe?


Pro. Give me some other name,
Call me your friend and I am not the same.

Val. You Are not the same, you are the adventurous Knight
That from the forrest-treason saved my Father.

Pro. I was Prince Prospero when I resen'd him,
And so continued till I saw your face;
But as my heart within your eye was tossed,
At once my hatred and my name I lost.

Val. It was a kind foes part to save a foe.

Pro. That kind foes part performed Prince Prospero

Val. Such a fair foe that no more hurt intends
I should prefer before a many friends.

Pro. Lady, we should have been elpous'd together,
But that our Fathers differed in the Dower;
Shall Gold divorce them whom the soul of love
Links in an endless knot? I for your love
First hazarded my life to come disguised
Only to view your face, next I contrived
This private passage, known to none but us;
If this deserve no love, no friendly grace,
Confine my life if banish me this place.

Val. If nothing but the rescue of my Father
Should plead in your behalf; it deserved favor;
But when your travel, and your servent love,
Attended with year feature and rare parts,
Your studious means to compass my consent
And hazard of your fortunes many ways,
When all these plead together forciblie
They draw me in a treble folded chain
Your zealous love to pay with love again.

Pro. I left my name behind me at Verona,
And now no more Prince Prospero but your Love;
Wear this for me, and use in these affairs
My art, fear not, I will devise a means
To win your Fathers grant unto this match.

Va. So we, my Lord, shall doubly be made friends,
I take it as an earnest of your love,
And hope of my release from this strict bondage;
Accept of me in interchange this Ring,
My Father gave it me, keep't from his eye,
Or he will end our loves by jealousy --

Pro. As I have been, I will be firm and sure,
Long may the date of our chaste love endure --

Enter Inlio, Florence, Ferrara. Flo. I prithee, sweet Marquess, since my
success is so bad with the Duchess let us walk by the Dukes new edifice, and
see if we can take a view of the young enclosed Lady.


Fer. Content my Lord, the Dukes strictness adds but spurs to my desire; for
commonly what we are most forbid that still we most covet.


Iul. Then should you with some engine raze these walls
That interdicts your passage to that Tower;
Had I such power I should enjoy such thoughts,
But Iulio is a Subject.

Flo. Now you put me in mind of such generous and noble thoughts, let us take a
view of the Castle, and spy where it is weakest, that there, if hereafter we
should invade, we may give the best and safest assault.


Fer. Now you speak like a politics Lover, come lets take a view of the
building: But see, see, do you know him that is talking with the Princess
Valentia?


Flo. Is It possible, I Will in and tell the Duke.

Fer. Nay, leave me not behind, I Will second you.

Iul. Intreth Lad art good at that? you are a notable rascal, can you come to it
So closely? is this your courage my courageous Knight?
I Will see how Mantua applauda this fight. Exit.

Val. We are descried my Lord, then post away,
Get through the private door.

Pro. Fear not sweet Lady, I Will so blind their eyes,
That we will still live free from their surprise. Exit.

Val. Ten thousand times adien, I am full of fear;
Where love inhabits danger still draws near. Ex.

ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Mantua, and Montecelso. Man. ALL is too good to be true, but tell me,
And answer every word upon thy oath.

Mon. Upon my oath I will.

Man. Then tell me, tell me,
Did thou with all thy best prevailing words,
With all thy art, with all thy eloquence
Urge her to love? speak that upon thy oath.

Mon. Upon my oath I did entreat her love:
With all my art, with all my eloquence.

Man. And did she grant thy suit?

Mon. She did my Lord.

Man. Thou honest man, thrice happy be the houte
That I first met thee; now upon thy life
Tell me how speed'st thou?

Mon. Well upon my life.

Man. And will she love?

Mon. She will.

Man. Thou have her promise

Mon. I have my Lord.

Man. But have thou, as thou art a Gentleman

Mon. As I am a Gentleman I have my Lord,
I should be sorry else.

Man. Did thy word prosper, took thy suit effect*
Will she be won to marry at thy motion?
And did she give her hand unto the bargain.

Mon. My suit and words were both effectual,
She Is won to marry, and I have her hand
As witness to the bargain.

Man. Friend, swear that.

Mon. Upon my life, my Lord, it is most true.

Man. It Is well, I thank my stars.

Mon. I thank my stars too.

Man. I thank thee too, but for thy industry
This thing had never chanced.

Mon. Nay, that is most certain,
Had I not took my time and plied it thoroughly,
I had never won her heart.

Man. But thou have won it.

Mon. I, I thank heaven my Lord.

Man. And I thank heaven my Lord.

Mon. She has past her word and her firm promise to me.

Man. It glads me at the heart, the very heart.

Mon. Nor have I reason to be sorry for it.

Man. Once more I thank thee friend.

Mon. It Is not so much worth my Lord.

Man. That be my peril, I Will 'bide the venture.

Mon. You are like to do that howsoever.

Man. There Is gold, gramerey friend, I am thy debtor;
This is but the earnest of those rich rewards
Thou shall receive from me.

Mon. I thank your grace,
And I protest I would not for a million
My labors had been fruitless, trust upon it,
The greatest aim of all my suit is won,
Her heart, her hand, her free consent is won
To match with me.

Man. I thank my fate it is so;
But now about my other business friend,
To look unto my works; blessed be the hour
I met thee first, but all is in heavens power. Exit Mon.
An honest and a faithful Gentleman
Upon my warrant, and I dare rely
Upon his trust and certain honesty --

Enter, Florence, Ferrara, Iulio. Flo. My Lord, you are wronged.

Fer. Disparaged.

Iul. And disgraced.

Flo. I bring thee news, thy Castle is surpised,

Fer. Thy Fort is taken.

Iul. And your Daughter seized.

Man. How may that be Lords? it is not possible.

Flo. I speak no more, my Lord, than what I saw.

Fer. What I beheld.

Iul. And what these eyes have seen.

Flo. That stranger Knight, in whom thom most aff^^st.
I saw in a bay window court thy daughter.

Iul. Emrbace her in his arms, and elaspe her waste.

Fer. She darting smiles at him, and the other.

Iul. Nor did they blush, change face, or cease their Courtship, but stood as
at the gaze.

Man. Iulie, and Lords,
You make me smile; have you so late perused
The situation, and observed the passages,
And can you judge wit or the art of man
Can force access there and not use my keys?
Tush, you deceive your selves -- Enter Prospero.
Ha ha, ha, come hither Knight and laugh with me
At their three follies, they would needs persuade me
They saw thee court my Daughter in her Chamber,
Where thou did publicly discourse thy fill,
And yet these keys here at my girdle still.

Pro. They did me the more wrong; I scale your Tower*
It lies not in the reach of humane power.

Man. I know it well, tush, while these (...) here
Were she fair Danae I not Jove would fear.

Pro. You Tower is stronger the Aerifius hold.
Besides, I am not Jove to rain down gold.

Flo. Is It possible my eyes should deceive me!

Fer. Sure 'twas he, or the devil in's likeness.

Iul. There Is in this some witchcraft.

Pro. You might as well say that you see this hand
Reaching as high as unto yonder clouds.

Man. I should have seen that Ring upon that hand
Once in my Daughters Chamber; oh my heart
Why do thou make such traffic with pale fear?

Pro. He has spied the gift, and knows the Ring I wear.

Man. The same, the same, I will in and see
The issue of my fears, twelve locks, twelve keys,
And every door too double-barr'd with Iron,
She in the inmost rome walled round about,
It cannot be, and yet the Ring I saw
Urges my fears, and forces me withdraw. Exit.

Pro. I know your, (...) and must your speed prevent,
But I delay; it is high time I were gone,
Twelve doors the Duke must pass, and I but one. Exit.

Flo. Shall I not trust my eyes?

Iul. Though mine should fail me I would witness yours.

Fer. It makes me past my thoughts.

Iul. There Is some strange juggling could we find it out;
In all his acts your stranger let us trace,
And if we can, work him some deep disgrace. Exeunt.

Enter Valentia above. Val. What have thou done Valentia, given thy heart
Unto a stranger, and thy Fathers foe?
I wrong the Prince, who with a heart entire
Pursues my spousall love with chaste desire;
This match successefully begun may move
Our Fathers hard hearts to a League of love -- Enter. Pro.

Pro. Wonder not Madam at my serious haste,
Your Father on my finger spied the Ring,
And knowing it, is gone by the known way,
Mark you may hear the doors.

Val. Oh my sweet friend,
Haste through the hidden way, leave it to me
To excuse it, and retort his jealousy.

Pro. Adieu sweet Lady,
Hark, hark the last door.

Val. Deceit has eyes behind, seems blind before --

Enter Mantua. Man. What so sad Daughter?

Val. Not sad but solitary.

Man. I see no private passage, and my doors
Rank in their wonted order; prithee Daughter
Show me the Diamond I gave thee last.

Val. The Ring my Lord?

Man. I the Ring.

Val. Why, would your highness use it?

Man. She moves a doubt,
I fear there is guile, and I must find it out.

Val. This is the Ring you mean:

Man. I, it is the same;
Oh my own Girl, sie my suspicious thoughts
That you should lead me to these jealous fears,
But Rings may be alike; my Dear, farewell,
Thou shall not long in this close prison d well.
Exit.
Val. So Prospero has promised, and I Will rather
Trust him than you, although you be my Father.
Exit.
Enter Iulio and Verona. Ver. I have observed sir in your troubled looks
Much coffeehouse, you seem in your appearance
To be some man of high and eminent place
With the great Mantuan Duke.

Iu. What Is that to thee?

Ver. Not much sir, yet out of a genetous spirit
In Pilgrims bred, such as I am professed,
I would some cordial counsels willingly
Bestow upon you, did I know your griefs.

Iul. I have in me a natural melancholy;
I have long aimed at greatness, but between me
And that high point two strangers stand opposed;
Can play the skillful Surgeon?

Ver. Sir I can.
Travel has taught me much, and though now poor,
Yet in my better days I have conversed
In Courts of Princes; would you grace me then
But to prefer my service to the Duke,
I would not doubt but to remove those objects
That so offend your eyes; what are those strangers?

In. The one a young Knight that professes Arms:
The other Architecture, both are frequent
In the Dukes ear, and I, that in times past
Had all his bosom and his private thoughts,
Scarce now remember how his Chambers hang,
So seldome's my admittance.

Ver. Had you so much interest
In his past favors as to make my tongue
Free to his ear I would remove those flatterers,
And plant you in your first deserved grace;
But might I see these Gallants --

Enter Prospero and Montecelso. Iul. Here they come;
The one I take to be a Conjurer,
The other his Familiar that he works with,
I Will show thee reasons for it.

Ver. Observe them sir.

Mon. It Is true my Lord, this night the Duchess lies in the Castle with the
Lady Valentia, it is by the Dukes appointment, because she may be a comfortable
kind Companion to his Daughter; now this night I have cast it so, that we will
be merry with them till past midnight.

Pro. But are the Ladies pleased it shall be so?

Mon. The bargain's made and sealed firm with a kiss,
I set it fast upon the Duchess lips;
But come let us part till the appointed hour,
We must not be seen too familiar together.

Pro. Thou art my better Genius, I agree:
I have no good but what I reap from thee.
Mo. Farewell my Lord, only take heed of eare-droppers. Ex.

Ver. Did you hear that my Lord?

Iul. Yes, and it strikes cold unto my heart;
Must they this night meet in Valentia's Tower)
The Devil has made them picklocks.

Ver. Patience sir.

Iul. Bid me be frantique, rather rail and curse; at midnight must they meet?
Enough, at that fixed hour I Will rouse the Duke,
And put the Court in uproare, with his Guard
'Siege round the Tower, and take these Incubus
'Midst their lascivious pastimes.

Ver. Hear me sir.

Iul. I am deaf to counsel, patience, grace and all,
Till in their midnight rapes these strangers fall.
Exit.
Ver. Oh were I now girt with a potent host
Of mine own people, and my self in Arms
Engaged unto his rescue, I could then
Assure me of my noble Son again;
But I now fear his fall and ominous end,
Whose help bove men to heaven I must commend;
Yet I Will not hence, but note what shall ensue,
Heaven hear my prayers, thou art to just men true.
Exit.
Enter Valentinand Duchess above. Dutch. Madam, this night devote your self
to mirth, whilst your Father sleeps secure in his Palace, Montecelso has
promised to keep his widow waking; I assure you Prince Prospero will be here
too instantly.


Val. He cannot come unlooked for, nor unwish'd,
So long as their intents are honorable,
So long their welcome is unquestionable.

Dutch. Troth Madam we have exceedingly forgot our selves, we should have had a
banquet to have entertained them.


Val. Methinkes it is better as it is without, for the time, that should have
been spent in sweetmeats to taste the Pallat, shall be now spent in sweet
discourse to relish the care.


Dutch. Fie, how long they stay, this hour is as long as three hours: I have
observed one thing in Lovers hours, the time of their absence seems hugely
too long, and the time when they are present is three to one too short.


Val. And three to one is ods, but you are an old woman.

Dutch. That makes me long so much for a husband to make me even; what not yet
come, nor yet? if they stay a little longer, I shall go near to swoon thrice
before they be ready to enter.


Val. No entrance if you love me.

Dutch. Yes at the private door --

Enter Prospero and Montecelso. Pro. Madam.

Mon. Lady.

Dutch. Imagine this night to be Saint Valentines day, when every bird chooses
her mate, for that is the season when they couple; I am here.


Pro. And I here.

Val. And I am glad, my Lord, that you are here; yet I would be loath, my Lord,
have my Father know that you are so.


Pro. That I am so seated, and you upon my knee.

Val. Upon my knees I beg that it may never come to his care.

Mon. Come, what shall's do?

Dutch. Say what you will my Lord, but do nothing I entreat you.

Mon. If we should do nothing, of that must necessary come ill, I Will prove it
too; of doing nothing comes Idleness, of idleness comes no goodness, of no
goodness necessary comes ill: therefore if we do nothing, of necessity we must
do ill.


Dutch. How well, my Lord, you can infer ill; but, my Lord, if you should
insist much in this argument, it were more to express your oratory than
honesty; but my Lord, I know your virtues, and the opinion of them has
prepared you a most kind and loving welcome; we have nothing to entertain you
but words, and we can feast you with nothing but kisses; now you see your fare,
fall to and welcome.


Mon. Madam, I could everlastingly feed here, and yet presume never to surfeit,
I can but thank you, and now I have given thanks, I Will even make bold to fall
to.


Val. You say you could find in your heart to offend my father.

Pro. I madam, so for my offense he would everlastingly confine me to this
prison; why smile you Lady?


Val. To think if my father should steal upon you, and find you here, what a
cunning picklock he would take you for, he would questionless think you
carried a false key about you.


Pro. Tush, he has made a Jury of twelve doors already to pass upon my cause,
and they have all given my case up not guilty --


Enter Florence Ferrara, Iulio. Iul. Where Is the Dukes Guard?

Flo. Begirt the Castle round.

Iul. Her windows shine with lights like blazing stars.

Fer. They Are in her Chamber sure.

Exit. Pro. Heard you that Madam?

Val. We are betrayed.

Mon. The Castle round beset.

Dutch. And hark, above I hear the Dukes keys, down the private way, and
leave the excuse to us.


Val. Nay, when my Lords?

Mon. This way my Lord, good night.

Dutch. Nay, stand not now on trivial Complements,
The Duke's at hand.

Pro. Farewell, Ladies adieu.
Exeunt.
Val. Nay, if you love us leave us; Madam, how shall we answer this to the Duke?


Dutch. Now my apron strings if I had one on, Madam take your Chair and
counterfeit your self fast asleep, so will I, not a word now if you love me.


Val. Thy very words are better to me than a Physical potion, for they have
cast me into a sound sleep already; see I am fast --


Enter Mantua and Lords. Man. Soft, make no noise, the Chamber's whist and
still,
There Is not so much air stirring as would make
The trembling Aspen shake; ha, fast asleep?
Search round the Chamber.

Flo. I find no man here.

Fer. Here Is naught but walls and Arras, and two Ladies
In depth of sleep.

Iul. Let Us wake them my Lord and question them.

Man. Not for thy head that have deluded us,
And to this shame and mockery raised the Court,
Would I disturb them of a minutes rest;
Thy envy unto such as we have raised
For their desert in Court has stretched it self
Even to our high disturbance.

Iul. Hell and the furies,
Am I again deluded?

Flo. Fie Lord Iulio,
To call us in a mockery from our beds!

Fer. Here to hunt shadows, sure the fellow dreamt.

Flo. Pray my Lord wake them, and resolve them how Lord Iulio has possessed you.


Man. Pardon me,
They both are charmed in silence, and their senses
Confused in innocent dreams; I often have heard
That what a man or woman waking thinks,
If they be questioned in their depth of rest
Their Genius or their soul will answer for them,
As their affections or their hearts inclined;
Of this I Will make a true and prosperous use,
And sound them how their humors are disposed,
And to my Daughter first, Lords stand apart,
How sweetly does my Girl become her rest!
How sound are her suspites! Valentia.

Val. My Lord.

Man. She answers me, now art thou happy Mantua,
For thou shall sound the utmost of her thoughts;
Whom does my Daughter most affect on earth?

Val. I love none but my Father.

Man. Oh mine own girl, and would thou not have a husband?

Val. I Will live and dye a maid.

Man. There Is no deceit in this, there is no dissembling,
She cannot study for evasive shifts,
I thank heaven I am resolved: now Duchess
Your turn is next, I Will try how she likes me,
What thinks the Duchess of the Mantuan Duke?

Dutch. As of a fine grave noble Gentleman.

Man. Now she speaks her heart, this is plain dealing;
And could thou be content to marry him?

Dutch. That Is my desire.

Man. And live his noble Duchess.

Dutch. I wish no better.

Man. Mine own;
Most sweetly may you sleep, and nightly dream
Of these positions, not for half my Dukedom
Would I disturb their quiet; come let us leave them,
Nay pardon me, I Will see the Chamber cleared.

Iul. Could I be possibly thus mocked?

Man. Nay Gentlemen,
I Will be the Porter, see I keep the keys
Of these two Jewels that I most esteem;
Iulio, beware hereafter you incur not
Our wrath by these suggestions of untruths;
Come Lords to bed, I counsel you the best,
Goodnight my girls, and sweetly may you rest.
Ex.
Dutch. Are they gone wench?

Val. I, and so gone that till they have slept soundly, it is not possible to
fetch them again.


Dutch. Now Endymions fortune upon them, that being once asleep they may not
wake again this forty years.


Val. Was it not well apprehended of me to say I loved none but my Father?


Dutch. And was it not as well seconded of me to say in my sleep I loved none
but the Duke? Sure it must be in my sleep if ever I loved him, for yet I could
never endure him waking; but what shall's do?


Val. By my counsel let us even go to bed like loving bedfellows, and see if
we can dream of them that in time may become our loving bedfellows.


Dutch. With all my heart, now the Duke is confident of our affections, we may
be the freer in the entertaining of those whom we best affect; come, come,
let us leave talking of this counterfeit sleep, and see if we can take a nap in
sadness.


Val. content, and let all men learn thus much from us, that sleeping or
waking it is hard to o're-reach a woman. Exeunt.


Enter Montecelso. Mon. Yet all things go current; if the Ladies were as nimble
in their excuse as we were quick in our passage through the private door, I
hope neither the Duke nor any of his Court can any way trace us in our
proceedings; some Lovers would think me a most happy creature to enjoy the love
of so beautiful a Lady, and for ought I know I may be so; but I have made a Vow
never to marry a wife, but first to make some perfect and sound trial of her
affection toward me; but because there is no woman that loves a man living,
but she will infinitely lament him dead, it shall be thought that I have
drowned my self, of which I will give the Court some assured instance, and
afterward living hereabouts in some odd disguise, I shall truly understand how
she takes my death; if in any extremity of grief, I will revive her with as
great a surplusage of joy; but if she take it coldly, as a business that little
concerns her, I Will leave her to the mercy of him that bids fairest for her; and
to my plot, I stay but for some company that may see me throw my self
desperately into the River, hear my passion and report it --


Enter Clown. Clo. My work and every thing belonging to the Dukes building
being brought to some good pass, I will study how to pass the time, and for the
better recreation of my duller spirits take a turn or two here by the Rivers
side to contemplate of the beauty of my Mistress; for indeed I am lately fallen
in love.


Mon. No fitter man in the world to be the reporter of my death than this
Coxcombe.


Clo. Upon a morning when I rose to breakfast like a glutton,
I don'd my doublet and my hose, and eat two legs of Mutton;
Her bonny looks forget I not, nor teeth as white as amber,
Her face did shine like pewter-pot belonging to the Chamber;
My lovely Mistress I espied as she a milking went a,
But oh me thought at every stride her smock that she had rent a;
Full pale she looked, for on her head a milk-paile was well placed,
Her lips were white, her brows were red, her body was straitelaced;
But shall I now describe her legs, for I durst look no higher,
She went as if she trod on eggs most softly through the mire.

Mon. Now to my passion.

Clo. But oh a place besides all these above both knees and thighs a,
Which spring, as she looked for fleas, did make my stomach rise a.

Mon. Let Jove threat thunder, or bright Juno scold,
Mars threaten Arms, armed in Cyclopian steel,
He to my heels clap Boreas brazen wings,
Or mounted on the back of Mercury
With greater terror scale the Olimpick heaven,
Then when the Giants mustered here on earth,
And darted mountain tops at Jupiter.

Clo. What mad fellow's this? he has driven me quite out of my meditations,
pray heaven I fall not into his fegaries.


Mon. But oh my beauteous Duchess, cause of this
My frenzy, lunacy, rage, and despair,
I love thee dearly; yet because my fervor
Shall no way cross the noble Mantuan Duke,
I am resolved to dye.

Clo. Of all the trades that are I love not this dying, poor Gentleman, would
the Duke knew as much; but if love put a man into these perplexities, I Will take
heed how I meddle with it, I Will e'ne shake hands with it, and part with it as it
came.


Mon. Whom do I see, the Duke of Mantua's Joy,
She whose bright beauty enamours Jove himself,
And makes him from his crystal throne descend
To 'bide with this fair mortal, thou art she.

Clo. Not I I assure you, I am a man and no woman, if you will not believe me,
I have a warrant about me to show.


Mon. Come, thou art she, will thou dissemble love?

Clo. I am not she, look here I have a beard.

Mon. It Is but the perriwig fallen from thy temples,
And stays upon thy Chin, thou art my Duchess;
But stay, I Will place this border right again,
And set it on thy front where it should stand.

Clo. Oh sir, I Will bring the Dukes own barber that shall take his oath upon a
corporal book, that this is a beard and no perriwig; I am he that was overseer
of the Dukes work, and not the fair Duchess that you take me for, put on
your spectacles, and you will see I am nothing like her.


Mon. Then she is lost, and I undone withal,
Therefore I Will strip me to the Ivory skin,
And as Leander did lively leap in,
My head beneath yon River I will run,
Neptune spread wide thy arms, for now I come. Exit running.

Clo. Oh save the man, save the man, now he flounces, now he flounders, yet he
swims above water like a walnut shell, yet he sprawles like a naked frog, yet
he strives for life, oh save the man, save the man; but now, now, now he sinkes
by degrees, now he is swallowed, now he is choked, this is my comfort, he
cannot choose but go with a clean soul to heaven, it will be so washed in the
water before he come thither. Again, again, again; now he lies still upon
his back and floates along with the tide, and now his soul is in the skies, he
does not offer so much as to strive against the stream, but swims as gently
down with the tide as may be; but what a fool was he, that knowing he should
go so long a journey by water, and the weather so could too, would leave his
clothes behind him? Well, I Will e'ne take up his scattered Apparel, carry them
to the Court, and there report what I have heard and seen, the poor Gentleman
is well onward of his journey by this time, they had need provide him good
store of faggots, for he will be monstrously wet when he comes to his Inn.

Exit.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Mantua, Florence, Ferrara, Iulio, Prospero, and Duchess. Man. LAdy, I
understand and good tidings from you.

Dutch. From me my Lord?

Man. It Is all one Madam, you at length are won
Unto a second marriage.

Dutch. Has Montecelso then told to the Duke
Of my free grant and yielding to his love?

Man. Sir, I must have you freely reconciled
To the Lord Iulio that has put upon you
Such slanderous imputations.

Pro. You my Lord
Can much with me, but were it for the reverence
I owe your Grace my sword had charactered
My wrong upon his body.

Man. Come, all friends.

Iul. My Lord, I yield my self, and here confess
In what high measure I have injured you.

Dutch. That Is too much to receive injury and make satisfaction too.

Flo. He slandered you most vilely.

Fer. Told the Duke
You were safe lodged within Valentia's Tower.

Flo. Made us to girt the place with the Dukes Guard.

Fer. And at the highest of night search all her Lodgings
For you and the Architector.

Pro. But who found you?

Flo. None but two sleeping Ladies* and they fast
Surpised in innocent dreams.

Pro. Was this wrong
To be endured?

Man. Where the guilt's confessed
There pardon is soon purchased.

Iul. I Will not believe
But there is in this some juggling, some strange feat --

Enter Clown. Clo. Room for a bringer of ill news, for one that brings a tale
will offend all your noses, and a discourse that will distaste all your ears;
who knows this Hat? who knows this Doublet? who knows this Cloak?


Dutch. These were Lord Montecelso's; why my heart Art thou struck cold with
fear?


Pro. These were my friends.

Man. If I mistake not these belonged to him
Whom I prefert'd to over-see my works,
What news of him?

Clo. You that loved him, out with your eyes, and wipe your handkerchers, and
as you look upon this Cloak provide for a shower of rain.


Flo. Speak, what of him?

Clo. He is dead, he is fled, he is not wounded, but he is drowned, he is gone
for ever, for he is leapt into the River.


Dutch. Dead!

Pro. Drowned!

Man. How came he drowned? speak.

Clo. Marry with water, belike it got into his mouth and choked him.


Iul. There Is one gone yet.

Man. I mean discourse the cause that urged him to it.

Clo. As I was walking by the Rivers side, musing and meditating on some
passions incident to men of my complexion, I spied this Gentleman stark
staring mad, exclaiming on the beauty of this fair Duchess, saying, that he
run mad for her love; but because he would not be false to the Duke his Master,
that put him in trust, he would rather show himself to be no better than a
drowned Rat than deceive him, and so very courteously casts away his Hat, very
dolefully lays by his Cloak, very dissolutely hurles off his Doublet, very
desperately leaps into the River, and very dangerously gives up the Ghost.


Pro. It drives me to amazement,
And I am wrapped in wonder.

Dutch. Oh my Fate!
I am of all the most unfortunate;
I Will not outlive him.

Man. Wherefore does my Duchess
Show in her looks such sad distemperature?

Dutch. I am lost, there steals a coldness through my blood,
The Icy hand of death plays on my breasts,
And where it touches turns all to earth,
And I am doomed --

Iul. Look to the Lady, see she faints.

Flo. How cheer you Lady?

Dutch. Ha, am I called again?
Then like a soul disturbed in her departure,
And kept from rest and downie quietness,
Let me proclaim my anguish.

Fer. Patience Lady.

Dutch. I Will not be patient, give me leave to drown
My soul in brine, and in a flood of tears
Swim to my Love.

Man. The Duchess is distracted.

Dutch. I am so, I am desperate, frantic, mad,
Go call yon Architector from the deeps,
And he shall build a Castle in the air,
Where we will live together 'midst the Clouds
And laugh at these poor mortals here on earth.

Iul. The Lady's mad.

Dutch. You are deceived, not I;
Cannot a Lady weep, mourn, or lament,
Or spend a few tears over a funeral hearse
But you will judge her frantique, pray give leave,
Which of you here can hinder me to weep?
I am a woman

Clo. I am a man.

Dutch. Women command tears,
Then pray let me bestow some on a friend;
If you will dye go hang or drown your selves,
I Will do the like for you.

Iul. Yes, not for me.

Dutch. Why should I weep for thee if thou did so,
Or thee, or thee, or any dotard here,
Yet if you please you may go try for me,
He clap at that well-acted Tragedy.
Exit.
Clo. Oh save the woman, save the woman.

Man. Follow her Iulio, see her well attended;
Sure she is Planet-struck, or some ill star
Has in her bosom wrought this mutinous war,

Iul. I Will see well to her safety.

Man. Oh my Duchess!

Pro. These are but women's passions,
And like a tempest, the more violent it is
'Twill be the sooner blown o'r.

Man. So I hope.

Pro. Fear not my Lord, perhaps she counterfeits
To know how you affect her, if in this
You will compassionate with her, and partake
In this supposed frenzy.

Man. It Is like so,
For if a man may trust a sleeping woman,
She loves me 'bove the world.

Pro. My Lord I know it.

Man. Nay, I know it too, I Will never else trust dreams.

Pro. But leaving this, I have a suit unto your Grace.

Man. Speak and prevail dear friend.

Pro. There is a Spanish Lady my first Love,
Who heating of my residence with you,
Is traveled thence to meet me in your Court,
I have notice that she shortly will arive;
My purpose is to feast her in my Lodging
So lately built, next to your Daughters Tower,
Where if it please you with these Lords to grace (...),
And taste a homely banquet, I shall say
To you I am engaged every way.

Man. I will not fail thee, nor shall these our friends,
We Will grace the Spanish Lady with our presence.

Clo. I have a suit to your Grace.

Man. Thy business Groom?

Clo. That for the good news I have brought you I may have some guerdon, some
remuneration, as they say.


Man. This thy reward be, since by thy occasion
My Duchess of her best wits is deprived,
Wander for ever like a banished Caine,
Till of her sense she be possessed again
Dare not so near our Court. Come Lords, let us in
To cheer her sorrows, and her fate lament,
But to the man that can her fren^ie cure
We here proclaim what e're he can demand*
If in the compass of our populous Land.
Ex.
Clo. Banish, what is that? can any man tell me what it means? let me see;
Banished sure is some strange language, and for any thing I know the meaning of
it may be, give him a hundred Crowns, or give him two hundred Crowns; and
banished the Court may be come to the Court and there you shall receive them;
the Duke was not wont to give me such hard words; if he had called me Rogue or
Rascal, I had understood him, I had had him to a hair, but the word banished
does a little stick in my stomach; Banished! I will go feek out some wise man
or other to tell me what the the word means, and what sum of money, I may
demand of the Dukes Treasurer; Banished --


Enter Montecelso. Mon. Save you sir.

Clo. And you my friend, what are you?

Mon. Sir I profess my self to be a wise man.

Clo. Then you are the man that I desire to meet, for I was seeking a wise man
to tell me the meaning of a strange word.


Mon. Unfold thy mind; I shall resolve thee truly*
Lie it within the power of humane skill.

Clo. Thus Stands the case: The Duke entertained a fellow to look to his
buildings, and this fellow drowned himself, it was my fate to bring the news
to the Court, which when the young Duchess heard, she grew presently as mad as
a march Hare; now demanding reward for my news, the Duke out of his bounty
said, be would banish me the Court; now I would feign know what sum of money
the word banished signifies.


Mon. It signifies, that if thou dare presume
To come within the Court gate, thou incur'st
The Dukes displeasure, it is present death.

Clo. You will not buy my reward sir, will you?

Mon. Not I.

Clo. Then I see thou art a wise man.

Mon. But is the Duchess frantique?

Clo. I Will assure you she is a mad wench.

Mon. And how did the Duke take it?

Clo. Oh very discontentedly: and he has proclaimed to him that can cure her
of her frenzy to have the next thing he shall ask without exception.


Mon But art thou sure it is true?

Clo. I assure you my friend as true as I am banished.

Mon. That cure I Will undertake, and so prevail,
That I presume my cunning shall not fail.

Clo. Now sir I have resolved you of all these doubts, can you tell me how I
shall bestow my self now I am banished?


Mon. I can, I am a stranger in this City,
And I profess dark arts, Physic, and Negromancy,
And for a need can conjure; but direct me
Where I may lodge and freely use my Art,
I Will entertain thee and supply thy wants
With all things needful.

Clo. As bountiful as wise; I am for you sir so you will teach me wit; I have
seen the Duke and his Court, but never to my knowledge saw a wiseman before,
you are the first of the name that ever I looked on; but if it be nothing but a
Lodging you want, trust to me, I can furnish you with that at an hours warning.


Mon. Direct me to the place.

Clo. That I will sir as well as I can,
Be you the wise Master, I Will be the wise man.

Mon. Attend me then, her choice love I have found,
I made the hurt, and I can cure the wound. Exeunt.

Enter Mantua, Florence, Ferrara, and Iulio. Man. Her fits increase then daily.

Iul. They still grow,
Sometimes her eyes with salt tears overflow;
She fills the house with Music, and then wrings
Her Ivory hands, she dolefully laments,
At once expressing thousand discontents.

Man. Proclaim to him that can her frenzy cure
The next thing he can ask.

Iul. I shall my Lord.

Flo. My Lord leave these discontents to some further leisure, we are now at
the strange Knights Lodging to give entertainment to the Spanish Lady.


Fer. True, we are his invited guests, and it is not fit that our grievances
should any way appear to a stranger.


Man. You counsel well, behold this is his Lodging --

And here is the Knight himself. Enter Prospero.

Pro. Welcome my Lord to a poor strangers Lodging,
My beauteous Lady and my Love's arrived,
Whose grace I first won in a Turnament,
Bearing the prize from many Knights of Spain;
Please you to grace me at a solemn feast
Which I prepared this day to welcome her,
You shall do much honor.

Man. Knight I will,
And for thy sake respect her to her worth;
How do thou like thy Lodging built so near
This Castle where Valentia lies enclosed?

Pro. My Lord, it is well for prospect and for air,
Will It please you enter Lords, where be my servants. Ex. (Hoboys A Banquet.

Enter Mantua, Florence, Ferrara, Iulio, Prospero. Man. Is this the place?

Pro. It is my Lord; but I must crave your pardon,
We want that order, and that entertainment,
That observation and decorum now
That longs to your estate and sovereignty,
Yet our good thoughts above our power are large
And full of zeal.

Man. Come, thou art at too much charge.

Pro. May it please your Highness to possess your seat,
Homely your Viands, but your welcome's great.

Flo. But where is the Lady?
She should be Mistress of the feast to day --

Enter Valentia like a Spanish Lady. Fer. She is not far, see yonder where she
comes.

Man. My Daughter.

Flo. It Is Valentia.

Iul. Sure it is Valentia in this strange disguise*
Or can you once again deceive my eyes?

Man. My Daughter on my life, her eye, her brow,
Her every part; ha, are my eyes my own?
Here hang my keys* the doors fast barred and locked;
Nor is she subtle spirit, composed air,
To creep though key-holes, or to crawle through chinkes;
Tush, tush, one Lady may be like another,
And my suspect is causeless.

Pro. Let me entreat you
To take your seat, My Lady's but a stranger,
And unacquainted with the Italian guise.

Iul. Observe her well my Lords.

Flo. She has her blush.

Fer. Her lip, her front.

Iu. The right trick of her eye.

Man. But is it she, is it possible the Knight
Would be so bold, she so audacious?
It cannot be; come, now I take my place.

Pro. In this your Highness does your servant grace.

Val. E^ha nos de bener dies benediga toda la Compania seias and bien venido.


Man. What says the Lady?

Pro. She calls for wine and bids you welcome all.

Man. The very touch and accent of her tongue.

Val. Signeur yo b^^^ an de buen corac^n.

Man. Her meaning.

Pro. She drinks to you with a good heart.

Man. Tell her I pledge gladly.

Iul. Doubtless it is she, can it be otherwise?

Flo. Why spend we time in cups and banquets here,
When fair Valentia must be needs transformed
Unto this stranger-Lady.

Fer. Still the more
That I observe her I am more confirmed.

Iul. It Is she, some devil or witch else.

Man. When face, and tongue, and each thing proves her mine,
Why should I doubt to challenge her? I Will suddenly
Call on her name, and if she answer to it
Dobtlesse it is she, Valentia -- no.

Pro. What means your Lordship?

Man. Nothing, nay nothing; see the very Ring
Upon her finger, I can sit no longer;
My Lords, I must entreat your patience,
I have dropped a Jewel as I came along,
And must find it or it will go wrong.

Iul. A Jewel lost.

Flo. Let Us help his Grace to seek it.

Pro. Pray do my Lords.

Fer. Some Torches there.

Pro. Lights for the Lords, 'twas dropped sure by the way,
Help him to seek it.

Iul. Look well there in the Rushes. Exeunt.

Pro. Haste through the private door, off with that habit;
If this pass current we are past all fear,
Your Father's gone in post, why do you stay?

Val. I have the odds, for mine is the nearer way;
Farewell sweet Prospero. Exit.

Pro. Seek till your eyes be blind,
You shall lose her though you the Jewel find;
How Fortune smiles upon our cunning shifts,
They are busy all at work, the Duke himself
Is like a Jailer gingling of his keys,
Which serves her as a watchword to uncase;
If now our plot prove, there depends on this
All our succeeding hopes, and future bliss -- Ent. Val, above.
Valentia, Valentia.

Val. Here my Lord.

Pro. What, at your book already?

Val. Yes sir, to pray
After these tempests for a calmer day.

Pro. The Duke's at hand, and seeking how to cross
Our loves has all his Lords left at a loss -- Enter Man.

Man. Body of me she is here; fool that I am
Her loyalty to mistrust, or his good thoughts,
She being chaste, he honest; how now Lady,
What at your book so close?

Val. Books are Companions
To them who are compelled to single lives.

Man. Thou art rank amongst Virgins.

Val. Virgins would be wives -- Why come you sir?

Man. Only my girl to see
How well thou farest, thou one day shall be free;
Fare well, in this my jealousy appears,
And this one fear begets a thousand fears. Exit.

Val. Not without cause, good Father, knew you all;
But I must down the next way through the wall. Exit.

Enter Prospero. Pro. By this she is coming, be thou first fair love,
Or else our stratagem is quite o'rthrown,
But if it take place, Valentia is mine own;
How will the Duke look when he finds her here*
And in his heart condemn his needlesle fear!
He has not wit to trace us in our drifts,
True love is cunning and has thousand shifts -- Enter Val.
Valentia.

Val. Prince Prospero.

Pro. And in your habit too, all succeeds happily.

Val. Hark, hark, my Father is at hand my Lord,
I Will keep my place as if I had not moved,
Who ever ventured fairer where they loved -- Enter Mantua

Pro. How now my Lord, what is the Jewel found*

Man. 'T was never lost, I left it in my Closset,
Where it was safe, 'twas but my jealous fear
And blind mistake, but now those doubts are past,
For where I found it I have locked it fast.

Pro. May it please your Grace to sit --

Enter Florence, Ferrara, Iulio. Flo. I have looked my eyes almost blind,
And yet I can no Jewel find.

Fer. Sure if it had been a Diamond, or any stone that had had either luster or
quickness, I should have seen it sparkle.


Pro. Lords, you may spare your pains,
The Jewel's found.

Man. Lords, seat your selves, and grace this strangers banquet,
And speak what news is in the City rifest,
For you frequent i^ most.

Iul. They say, my Lord, there is a Negromancer,
One of rare art and cunning, that can truly
Tell of things lost, one that has Ephemerides
At his fingers ends; no frenzy, fever, sickness,
But he has Cordials for, so his large bills,
Pasted on every post, speak in his praise.

Man. And where resides he?

Iul. Here in the City Mantua.

Flo. Some Mountebanke fellow.

Iul. It should not seem so,
For he has much resort, and every mouth
Proclaims his skill.

Pro. I will make trial of him,
To know if my love-sute shall well succeed.

Fer. I Will try his cunning.

Flo. I Will be his Client.

Iul. So will I,
And in my deep affairs his best skill try.

Man. I Will prove him in the beauteous Duchess cure,
In which if he prevail his pains shall be
Paid from the best of all his Treasury;
We sit too long, stranger, we praise thy bounty,
And if in any suit thou will use our love,
Suppose it, craved, granted.

Pro. I shall find time my Lord.

Man. I cannot he at rest
Till I have once more searched her private Chamber to assure and
Of these doubts; strange: farewell,
Only my keys can these sad doubts expel. Exit.

Pro. Haste, haste to meet your Father in the Tower.
Shortly will come the long expected hour. Exit.

ACT V. SCENE I.
A Table with a Book and Papers set out. Enter Montecelso and Clonne. Clo. YOu
see I have purchased you a Lodging at the house of mine own flesh and blood,
otherwise called my Father; now sir, if you do not show your self a Master of
your Art, or your Crafts-Master, you shall but disgrace your self, and call
the reputation of my Fathers house in question.


Mon. Tush, fear not me, what cannot I perform,
A mask of naked wenches I could bring
To dance strange Antiques here, and none but we
To be spectatours.

Clo. Oh brave man, when shall we see this sport?

Mon. Do thou love sweet meats? I have changed e're now,
Against a Christning day, a shower of hail
To perfect Comfets that have served a feast,
And I can do it again, but tush it is nothing.

Clo. Oh sweet man, here is one that by his Art is able to undo all the
Comfet-makers in Christendom,


Mon. What meat do thou love best?

Clo. I love many meats well, and indeed scarce any comes amiss, if it be come
in his right likeness, when I have a stomach I can eat Capon and Rabit, but
above all meats, not to dissemble, I love a good piece of roasted beef.


Mon. I Will tell thee what once I did in Germany.
There was a hill lay just against the Sun,
I by my art changed it to perfect beef*
Which the violent heat of the Sun roasted as
Perfectly as any sea coal fire, and still as it
Was enough the Country people came with their
Sharp knives and cut it off in slices.

Clo. Oh that my journey had lain over that hill.

Mon. Now sir a brook ran by of clear water,
And that I turned to perfect vinegar
For sauce to that rost-beefe, and the small sand
Was changed to perfect pepper; now sir, it
Was but bringing ^^ead along with them and flicing away
A piece of the hill, and sitting down by the Rivers side,
And there was as good roast beef, vinegar, and pepper
As any man in Mantua could desire to eat.

Clo. This cunning man has a trade would set any man's teeth a wat'ring that
has but a stomach -- Enter Prospero.
But soft, here come strangers.

Pro. If the wise man be as cunning as rumor reports him,
I Will know what shall betide me in my love-affaires;
This, I this, by my directions should be the house.

Mon. My Cousin the Prince, excellent, I Will put him
Into a pitiful perplexity e're we part.

Pro. Now will I try whether this fellow have any cunning or no, thou learned
man of Mantua heaven save thee.


Mon. Thou worthy Gentleman of Verona, I thank thee,
Nay, I have given 't you, pick out the meaning of that.

Pro. He knows me to be of Verona.

Mon. I, and an enemy to the Duke of Mantua,

Pro. You wrong me sir, I love the Duke.

Mon. I, and his Daughter too, pray do you no^?

Pro. A rare admirable fellow, he knows all, I must collogue with him, or he will
reveal all my secrets to the Duke.


Clo. Nay, herein, most learned, I must needs say you err; and though I will
not say your devil is a Liar, because I am altogether unacquainted with him,
yet in this I must needs tell you he is in the wrong, for this Gentleman is a
true Trojan, a Knight Errant, and one that has fought at the Tomb of
adventures.


Pro. Indeed I am a Stranger.

Mon. Indeed you are a dissembler.

Pro. My name's Antonio.

Mon. Otherwise called Prince Prospero.

Pro. The rarest fellow in Christendom; upon my life he knows my very
thoughts, my meditations.

Mon. Come hither you, you that can gull the Duke,
Make private doors into his Daughters Tower*
And whilst your Noble Father, good old man,
Thinks you abroad in travel to see fashions,
You loyter here about a Ladies love.

Pro. Oh wonderful, I never heard the like*

Mon. Now where is the Ring the Duke spied on your finger?
When was the merry meeting with your friend
And the two Ladies when they talked asleep,
And by that sudden shift deceived the Duke?
Where Is the strange Spanish Lady? where is the banquet
To which you did invite him?

Pro. He knows all, all by this light,
There Is nothing left unknown.

Clo. Here Is no roguery, here is no knavery, here is no villainy, and all confessed
too, I Will even, like a good Subject, make all this acquainted to the Duke.


Pro. Sweet Conjurer, good Mephast ophilus,
I Will give thee here a hundred Ducats straight
But keep my counsel.

Clo. But if the wiseman will, the fool will not; nay, and there be such
knaveries in hand, you had better never have let them come to my ear, the Duke
shall know all, all by this hand, nay, that is most certain -- trust to it.


Mon. Stay sirrah, or I Will bring you back with a whirlewind.

Clo. Not I most learned, you shall pardon me, I Will be no Traitor for no man's
pleasure.


Mon. Prithee come back.

Clo. No such matter, have you such fagaries, I Will tell the Duke.

Mon. You doore-maker.

Clo. How most wise?

Mon. The Duke shall know of making of that door
By which the Prince had free way to the Lady,
You were his Overseer.

Clo. No more, sweet Doctor Faustus, no more.

Mon. Sirrah, you had better been a door keeper than a doore-maker.


Clo. Then I had better be a thief than a knave, silence noble Scholar, and I
am at thy service.


Mon. Well sirrah, keep his Counsel and I Will keep yours, and whilst I speak a
few words with this stranger, do thou watch there, and look steadfastly at the
kitchen window, for about dinner time there will fly in Capons, Pigeons, Pigs,
Geese, Larks, Chickens all ready roasted, with every one a knife at his girdle
to cut himself up, do but thou watch and bring me word when they come flying
in and call me; we will to dinner.


Clo. Oh rare, ready roasted! I would I were a wise man too, as I shall never
be whilst I live; it is nothing but spreading a cloth, laying trenchers,
setting a salt, providing of bread, and making platters and sauce ready, and
your roast-meat will come as duly every one flying to his own dish and sauce as
Crows in the evening fly to their own nests; I Will get him to tile our house with
Biskets, to pave the Kitchen with Custards, to make our Lo^e-walls of
Ginger-bread, and turn our Cheese-trenchers into Wafer-cakes; I Will watch, but
if I bring him word till I have filled my belly, may my girdle break.


Pro. Montecelso turned a wise man!

Mon. I know that is more than ever thou did look for at my hands.


Pro. Beshrew thee Coz, thou have put me into two pitiful plunges, first thy
death, next for this needless fear.


Clo. Not yet!

Pro. I thought as surely thou had been in heaven
As I know this is earth: in troth mad Coz,
And have thou gone beyond me?

Clo. Now I hope: no, that was a Crow that flew over our house.


Mon. Be confident for I have cast a plot.
How thou shall steal away thy Love to Church,
And make her Father with his own free hand
Give her to thee in marriage; more than this,
Put strange disgraces on thy opposites
And such as are thy rivals; would thou think
Me a perfect wise man to contrive this well?

Pro. More wise than I first knew thee.

Mon. For this time part, early to morrow morning
Convey Valentia through the private door
Suited as at the Banquet; next invite
The Mantuan Duke to grace your Nuptials
In Saint Lauretta's Chapel; what remains
Shall all be mine.

Pro. My dearest friend adieu,
No cunning head had e're a heart so true. Exit. -- Knock.

Mon. Hark, some one knocks.

Clo. Most prudent.

Mon. Leave staring to the kitch. till anon,
And let me in these Gallants.

Clo. Beshrew their hearts for me, belike they heard what good cheer was
flying toward our house, and now like bold guests they are come to bid
themselves to dinner; I will let them in, though I could wish them choked for
their pains --


Enter Verona, Florence, Iulio, Ferrara. Ver. Who takes his turn first?

Flo. That will I so please you.

Mon. I know them all, their business, their affairs,
And I shall fit them finely; grave old man,
My choicest welcome I bestow on you,
And welcome Lords to all, but first you:
I know my Lord of Florence you affect
The amorous Lady fair Valentia.

Flo. Oh marvelous!

Mon. But you the frantique Duchess.

Fer. Possible.

Mon. Come, come, I know the inmost of your thoughts,
Then to be brief and cut off circumstance,
Hark you my Lord of Florence, do but this,
And I Will assure you fair Valentia's love,
Tomorrow morning must the stranger Knight
In Saint Lauretta's Chapel wed his Love,
The Spanish Lady, given him by the Duke,
Whilst they are busied watch the new-built Tower,
In which by Art I will contrive a door,
Which you shall find wide open.

Flo. Oh rare man!

Man. Through which pass freely; now to blind suspicion,
Because you may not be descried or known,
Wear some disguise, this paper shall direct you.

Flo. Thou most ingenious Artist, take this Gold,
The happy earnest of my future love. Exit.

Mon. Enough my Lord, now wait upon my skill;
And now to you, I know you love the Duchess,
But she is changed by sickness; yet my Lord
If you will marry fair Valentia,
Who for your love disdaines the Florentine,
I Will set you down a course to compass it.

Fer. Either will serve my turn, I Am not so curious
To thy my fancy to one woman's face.

Mon. Know, through my spirits help, I have dug a door
Quite through the Turrets door, which wall leads straight
Unto the Ladies Chamber, take this note,
This Paper shall direct you.

Fer. There Is Gold for Paper.

Mon. Adieu.

Iul. My turn is next;
I am a stranger to thee, learned Friend,
Nor do thou know my business.

Mon. No Lord Julio.

Iul. Iulio I Am called indeed.

Mon. And love that Lady
Whom these two Princes tenderly affect.

Iul. Thou Art something near me.

Mon. I Will come nearer yet,
To the two strangers I could tell your hate,
The One drowned, the other Guardian of the Tower,
But my Art's no accuser.

Iul. Noble Scholar,
Let this Gold bribe thy art to secrecy,
And teach me how I may prevent their plots,
Gain the Dukes Grace, and fair Valentia's love.

Mon. This Paper shall do all, peruse it then,
And let it be your Tutor, so now leave me.

Iul. with all my art I Will prove thy magic skill,
And to the utmost what thou plot'st fulfill, Exit.

Mon. Adieu; you sirrah.

Clo. Most judicious.

Mon. Follow them with speed,
Watch them, and when thou see them near the Tower,
Run to the Duke and call his armed Guard
To apprehend these Miners that have dug
Unlawful passage through his high-built Tower,
See them well beaten, and after come to me,
And I will teach thee this rare Negromancy.

Clo. Fear not, Master Doctor, first I Will play my part,
And after come to you to learn your Art. Exit.

Mon. Now sir to you.

Ver. And what to me sir? think not with your tricks
To draw me in opinion you are wise.

Mon. Were not your Grace a man I reverence.

Ver. My Grace, what Grace? you would gull me would you not?

Mon. Nor can you gull me most excellent Lord,
You are Verona's Duke; nay, never start,
For to your care my tongue's close as your heart;
I know that Mantua loves you not, yet know
Your Son serves Mantua as a friendly Foe.

Ver. Pardon me sir, I now approve your cunning,
Conceal my being, and expect reward --
But see the Duke.

Enter Mantua, Duchess and Servant. Man. What liberal reprover, I perceive
You find some matter in this man of note.

Ver. Matter indeed my Lord, this is a man
Exceeding many other private men,
That are indeed but shaddows, counterfeits,
This man has natural gifts joined with his Art.

Man. We like your praise, and will our self applaud
His excellence, if by his grounded skill
He can give case to this fair Duchess grief.

Mon. What Mortals can attempt I Will undertake;
This is the Lady, and I know her grief
Arises from a sullen melancholy;
She has lost some friend, the sorrow of whose death
Has turned her sanguine streams of blood to black.

Dutch. Black, lost, gone, sunk, fled, adieu, farewell,
The waves have quite undone poor Lucibell.

Mon. Tush, I can cure this madness presently.

Man How learned Friend? restore her to her senses,
And the next thing that thou demand'st is thine.

Mon. I know the perfect temper of her grief,
Which that you may perceive I Will cure with Art;
I will raise up the Ghost of him she loved,
So like in all things you your selves shall swear
It is the man.

Man. Shall he appear to us?

Mon. Here to you all, but stir not, move no foot,
Take heed you do not question him too far,
But only hear and see, and stand aloof.

Man. But will he not afright us?

Mon. Not a jot;
Look to the Lady, I Will about my Art,
And send the Architector presently, Exit.

Dutch. Well, if I see him I will chide him so,
That he shall never drown himself again.

Man. Is It possible this can be done by Art?
Or means he to delude us?

Dutch. So it seems, for I shall never more see my Love again.

Man. Sweet Lady be content.

Dutch. You see I am.
The sound may give whole counsel to the sick,
Away, your counsel does increase my pain,
And I shall never more see my Love again --

Enter Montecelso as a Ghost. Ver. He Is come already.

Man. Lord how like he is!
Would you not swear it were the very man;
An admirable Artist I see he wafts the Lady.

Dutch. Oh thou dear soul of my sweet Love deceased,
I Will follow thee.

Man. Stir not, it is the Devil.

Dutch. Spirit or fiend, his amorous shape so charms,
Did he graspe hell I Would fly into his arms. Exeunt.

Man. The Devil has born her hence, follow and rescue her.

Ver. Not I my Lord, your Grace shall pardon me.

Man. Oh what black trespass has she done against heaven
That she should thus be hurried quick to hell;
Now is she hopeless, past recovery;
I Will hang that Conjurer.

Ver. Condemn him not before you see the event.

Man. What can the event be but her utter loss?
Oh my fair Duchess, if thou perish thus,
I Will make that base Inchanter curse this day,
For thy lost blood his traitcrous head shall pay --

Enter Montecelso. Mon. How cheeres my Lord, did you behold the Ghost?

Man. We saw the Devil, but speak, where is the Duchess?

Mon. Safe in my Chamber, where before to morrow,
Your Grace shall see her perfectly recovered,
Doubt not my Art; but there remains, my Lord,
For you a further business, the strange Knight
Expects the Spanish Lady from your hand
In Saint Lauretta's Chapel, whither I promise
To bring your Lady perfectly recovered.

Man. See this done,
And the next thing that thou demand'st is thine.

Mon. I shall make bold, my Lord, to claim your promise.

Man. Claim it and take it.

Mon. You Will trust her in my Chamber for this night,
For I must physic her.

Man. Do what thou please, it highly shall content me;
Come, let us return to Court, and there attend
Of our precedent fears a fortunate end. Exeunt.

Mon. Thou have no part in that fair fortunate end,
It 'longs to me, and to my noble friend: Madam --

Enter Duchess. Dutch. Oh my dear Love how could you so delude
A Lady that with such entire affection
And zealous love admired and honored you!

Mon. Of that no more; the Duke for this great cure
Has promised me what I shall next demand,
I have a boon to ask, I have set on foot
Many strange plots which must their full effect
Receive this night, the Prince is to espouse
The fair Valentia by the Dukes free gift,
Florence, Ferrara, and Lord Iulio,
His Rivals, are about their several tasks;
Something there remains for me, amongst the rest,
And you to act out of these confusions,
We must devise our fortunes to secure,
And save that love that is so chaste and pure. Exeunt. Hoboys.

A dumb show. Enter at one Door a Bishop, Mantua, and Verona, fetch Profpero
and Valentia, Mantua makes some strange pauses, viewing the Lady exactly, at
length (recalling his hand once or twice) troath-plights them, and so march
over to the Church. Enter Iulio like a Smith. Iul. In this disguise who can
know Iulio now.
Or guess the purpose that I have in hand?
This Paper tells me I shall find a door
Left open to Valentia's amerous bed: here I Will wait
The happy end of my auspicious Fate --

Enter Florence as a Mason. Flo. So I am fitted so un willingly
That I scarce know my self; yet as this Paper
Gives me directions may I find the Door
Left open to me, I desire no more --

Enter Ferrara as a Carpenter. Fer. A Carpenter I should be, would this Apron
And Rule bring me to rule in Mantua
By marriage of the fair Valentia,
I should applaud my fortunes, and commend
The wise man's Art; this can imperious love, Ent. Clo. and Guard.
Whose power has often transhap'd the gods above.

Clo. You shall be transhap'd I Will warrant you, we will teach you to take upon you
other men's trades before you be free of their Companies; if your Rule at your
back will not rule you, we will; stand close Gentlemen, and though we find them
broad awake, let us see if we can take them napping.


Iul. The door, according to to the wise-mans words,
I find wide open, I Will enter.

Fer. Why pause I being so near?

Flo. I Will enter instantly, but soft, I am prevented.

Iul. Company, now must I counterfeit to work.

Fer. To shun discovery,
I Will see how I can play the Carpenter.

Flo. Now to my Masonry.

Iul. Would I were ten Leagues off.

Clo. Upon them Gentlemen, upon them, these be the underminers I told you of,
up with your Poleaxes and down with them, see they have broken open a door
already, they shall be arraigned of Burglary.


Iul. Hold, hold, and hear us.

Clo. Bumbaste them Gentlemen, currifeige them bravely, hear them after; palt
the Mason with stones, hammer the Smith, and overruled the Carpenter, come,
away with em. Exeunt.


Enter Verona. Ver. My Son is married to the Mantuan Princess,
A Lady of that presence and opinion,
That it offends me not; but to prevent
Any offense that may be done to him,
Or injury to me, I have at hand
A Royal Army under Cosmos charge,
Our trusty and approved Counselor,
To offer War or Peace -- the Duke's at hand. Exit. Flourish.

Enter Mantua, Prospero, and Valentia. Man. How naked is our Train, that of
our Courtiers,
So few attend this high solemnity?
Where Is Florence? where is Ferrara? where is Lord Iulio?
That have not seen us given away this
Daughter I fear, for so my eye persuades;
Had I not in these keys such confidence,
And in the strength of my large edifice,
I should not doubt to swear, but these I Will trust,
When servants fail, keys and stone-walls prove just.

Pro. Thrice worthy sir, you have given me such a gift,
Should you impart you Dukedomes large revenew
It could not equal't; now your hand is past,
Which both your word and Church-rights have made fast.

Man. 'Twere best that I return to see all safe*
And next enquire how my fair Duchess fares.

Pro. Fear not my Lord, you have committed her
To his protection that undoubtedly
Will see to her recovery.

Man. So we hope.

Pro. Restore her to her senses and true feeling.

Man. We doubt it not.

Pro. And apt her thoughts for love.

Man. That Is all we covet.

Pro. I have understood
By those that know him, so much he will make good.

Man. Then are we truly happy --

Enter Clown, Iulia, Florence, Ferrara. Clo. Room for one good Subject that
brings three bad Subjects to answer Burglary before your Grace: see here my
Lord, here are three fellows that have good faces and are ashamed to show 'em,
they seem to be sound men, yet see if they do not strive to look scurvily?


Man. What men are these? or how have they offended?
Why do they turn their heads thus and look downwards?

Clo. As if they had stolen a pudding.

Pro. These faces I should know, my Lord of Florence,
Ferrara's Marquess, and Lord Iulio;
Is this the cost you have so liberally
Bestowed to grace our feast? my Bride and I
Are much bound to you

Man. These the men, perhaps they have some mask,
If so, let us see it.

Flo. Compel me not to answer.

Fer. Give me leave
To blush and be ashamed.

Iul. Hell take the Conjurer.

Man. My Lords, what means this antique* if you have
Some sport to show us* pray my Lords let us have't.

Iul. So, so.

Pro. How well this suit becomes you! troth my Lord,
Might I advise you, I would still go thus;
Acquaint me with your Tailor.

Man. Is this the newest fashion?

Iul. Would I were in the Indies
Rather than here.

Man. But tell me sirrah, what means this show?

Clo. Call you these Lords! no, they are Loones, they look more like Prentices
than Princes; these are they that have beleaguered your new Tower, and dug a
hole through the wall, that an Ox or an Ass, 'blesse us, as big as your self
may creep through; there is a door made into your Daughters Tower where she
was kept, and the door being left open she is flowne away: Valantia is gone,
she is gone, and these are they that had their hands in the business.


Man. Valentia gone, and by their practice lost!

Clo. By theirs; when they were boring at the hole we took them at it with
their tools out, we took them in the manner before they could put up, and
here we have brought them to answer before your Grace, that you may freely
punish their weakness that would offer to go to your walls.


Man. These injuries severely we will revenge,
But most on thee false Iulio, for her loss
Thy head shall pay.

Iul. Pox of the Conjurer I say still.

Man. Speak, where is Valentia, can you tell me?

All. No.

Man. Then for her loss your forfeit lives shall go;
Who can advise me best where I may find
Her I most loved, and has proved most unkind.

Clo. Might I advise your Grace, I would have you should do as Archers do, that
when they have lost an Arrow, shoot another after it; so, my Lord, if you have
ever another Lady or Mistress about the Court, shoot her after your Daughter,
that you may either find one, or lose both.


Pro. Good Counsel.

Man. To him that can reduce her to her Tower,
Or put me in possession of her hand,
What grace our Power or Dukedom can command
Shall all be his.

Pro. I take you at your word, see here my Lord.

Man. This, this is the Spanish Lady.

Val. She that spoke
In Spanish once is forced to change her tongue,
Pardon dear Father.

Man. Ha! am I then o're-reach'd? is it possible
For all my Cost, Charge, Care, and diligence
A Wenches wit out-go me? could her subtlety
Make way through that which not an Army could?
What should I say?

Clo. Those Creatures that wear smocks
Will where they love pierce stone-wals, creep through locks;
Why thus you see, as well as we, a great man may be gulled,
Woodcocks are meat, but not to eat until that they be pulled. Ex.

Iul. That private door, my Lord, I now perceive
Was made by him.

Flo. My Lord, remember you
The Ring you spied upon his finger once,
Then think upon the door.

Fer. You made us toss the rushes
And seek the Jewel, did you? Speak, what art thou
That thus have gulled the Duke?

Pro. I am a Prince,
And every way thy equal.

Man. I would to heaven it were no worse.

Val. He is no less my Lord, receive him then to grace.

Man. Of Whence?

Pro. Verona.

Man. Mine enemy.

Pro. Was It not a friendly part
To lodge your only child so near my heart?

Val. My Lord, remember he once saved your life,
And even for that deserves me for his wife.

Pro. Now as a friend a friendly League I crave,
Take not away what you so freely gave.

Man. I will pause upon it, although it be past help,
And see what we may punish, what forgive;
But now my only comfort is stored up
In the fair Duchess, if she gain her health -- Ent. Dutch. and Mont.
And here she comes, I cannot choose but fear
So long as I behold you Ghost so near.

Fer. That Conjurer
Is a rare Artist that can raise a shadow
So like unto the Substance.

Man. Fair Duchess, art thou recovered, speak?

Dutch. Thank heaven I am.

Man. It Is well done to have heaven still in thy thoughts
Being so near a feind, come from that Devil.

Dutch. Fear not my Lord, I am so armed with faith,
And love withal, he has no power to hurt me.

Man. Art thou well?

Dutch. Yes my Lord, I am well.

Man. Come from him, but art thou very well?

Dutch. Very well my Lord I thank you.

Man. Perfectly well?

Dutch. So well you cannot wish me better.

Man. Come hither then.

Dutch. I was of late but ill,
Then give me leave, my Lord, to keep my self
Well while I am well.

Mon. That Is with me my Lord.

Man. Can the Ghost speak too.

Man. Speak, and talk, and walk,
Embrace and kisle.

Man. I love no kissing Ghosts.

Flo. Believe me, that Magician was a man
Of rare experience, and deserves great praise.

Fer. Did he not say before what he should do,
That Ghost does act his part exceedingly.

Man. I say come from him, he is a spirit.

Dutch. I do not love to do any thing but with a spirit.

Man. He came out of hot hell.

Dutch. He Will make the warmer bedfellow.

Mon. Further than you have been, be not deceived my Lord.

Man. That Is far enough already.

Mon. I am the man I seem, no Architector,
But Cousin to that noble Gentleman
Prince Prospero, of the Duke Verona's Court,
That for this Duchess love have thrust my self
Into this imminent danger, as the Prince
Has done the like for his Valentia;
You promised me if I could cure this Lady,
The next thing I demanded, her I crave,
Whom if I truly merit let me have.

Man. I have been gulled on all sides, nor will I
Put up these injurious wrongs, you both shall dye -- Ent. Iul.

Iul. To arms, to arms my Lord, for I descry
A potent Army marching before our walls,
And by their Colors flying they should be of Verona.

Man. Be they from whence they will we will parley them;
Admit their General to an interview Flourish.
To know their cause of Arms -- Enter Verona.
Our Clinick turned a Soldier I

Pro. Noble Father I crave your pardon.

Mon. I the like my Lord.

Ver. Stand on our party then whilst I debate
Our purpose with this Duke; these Arms we levied
With no intent of wrong to Mantua,
But to secure our Son, and this his friend,
We do protest it is no work of ours
That he is married, neither did we wished*
But since by heaven and fate they are united,
We rather wish they may their Loves enjoy,
Than what heaven seems to applaud we should destroy.

Man. To plead in Arms (...) best way to prevail,
Where still the weak'st must yield; since our own blond
Has had an equal share in this our wrong,
Why should we envy strangers, we will strive
From the worlds eye to hide this ominous scarre;
Heaven offers peace, why should we threaten war?
Each where they love join hands.

Pro. Our hearts.

Val. A sweet Conclusion.

Mon. And now Madam I Will make you amends for mocking you.


Dutch. Great men are sometimes gulled, but that is not common,
You have done more, for you have gulled a woman.

Man. Your Son, Verona, and his friend has much
Outstrip'd us by their wit, but the best is
We are not gulled alone,
You see your greatness is no privilege
From those that have quick brains, but now all friends;
Verona we embrace, and thus atone
All our difsentions; Marriage shall conclude
What Arms has menaced; our united Dukedomes
Since by this happy fate they are agreed,
We Will strive which most in bounty shall exceed.

FINIS.

