A HEAVENLY CORDIAL For all those Servants of the Lord that have had the PLAGVE
(and are recovered) or that now have it; also for those that have escaped it,
though their Relations and Friends have been either visited, or swept away by
it. OR, Thirteen DIVINE MAXIMS or CONCLVSIONS in respect of the PESTILENCE,
which may be as so many supports, comforts, and refreshing springs, both to the
visited and preserved people of God in this present day. ALSO Ten Arguments to
prove that in Times of Common Calamity, the people of God do stand upon the
advantage ground, as to their outward preservation and protection above all
other people under Heaven. ALSO Eight Reasons why some of the precious Servants
of the Lord have fallen by the Pestilence in this Day of the Lords Anger. By
THOMAS BROOKS, late Minister of the Gospel in London.

LONDON, Printed for, and are to be sold by John Hancock, at the first shop in
Pope's Head Alley, next to Cornhill. 1666.

A HEAVENLY CORDIAL.
The First Divine Maxim or Conclusion, is this, Viz.
2 Samuel 24. 15.
Deuteronomy. 32 39 Hyppocrates calls it, (...), The Divine Disease, because it comes
more immediately from God, than other diseases do.
SO the Lord sent a Pestilence upon Israel, from the morning even to the time
appointed; and there died of the people from Dan even to Beersheba, seventy
thousand men. Numb. 16. 46. Wrath is gone out from the Lord, the Plague is
begun. Numb. 14. 12. I will smite them with the Pestilence, and disinherit
them. Deuteronomy. 28. 21. The Lord shall make the Pestilence cleave unto thee, until
he has consumed thee from off the Land whither thou go to possess it. Ezekiel.
14. 19. Or if I send a Pestilence into that Land, and pour out my fury upon it
in blood, to cut off from it man and beast. Verse 21. For thus says the Lord
God, how much more, when I send my four sore judgments upon Jerusalem, the
sword, and the famine, and the noisome beast, and the pestilence, to cut off
from it man and beast. Amos 4 10. I have sent among you the pestilence after
the manner of Egypt. Hence it is called, Gods Arrow, Psalm. 91. 5. and when God
shoots these arrows into Kingdoms, Cities, Towns, Families, none can Psalm. 38.
2.
pull them out but God himself. The Plague is more immediately from God, than
any other Sickness or Disease is; for it is the immediate stroke of God. The
Scribe is more properly said to write, than the pen; and he that makes and
keeps the Clock, is more properly said to make it go and strike, than the
wheels and poizes that hang upon it: and every Workman to effect his work,
rather than the tools which he uses as instruments. So the Lord of Hosts, who
is the chief Agent and Mover in all things, and in all actions, may more fitly
and properly be said to effect and bring to pass all Judgments, yea, all
things which are done in the Earth, than any inferior or subordinate causes;
seeing they are but his tools and instruments, which he rules and guides
according to his own Will, Power, and Providence. I know some Physicians
ascribe it to the heat of the Air, and sometimes to the dryness of the Air, and
sometimes to the corruption of the Air, and sometimes to the corruption of men's
blood, and sometimes to Satan, and sometimes to the malignancy of the Planets;
but certainly those are Physicians of no value, that cannot look above second
causes, to the First Cause, that cannot look to the wheel within the wheel. The
Ezekiel. 1.
Plague is a hidden thing, a secret thing; it is a sickness, a disease, that
more immediately comes from God, than any other sickness or disease does.
Behold the hand Exodus 9. 3.
of the Lord is upon thy cattle which is in the field, upon the horses, upon
the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep, there shall be a
very grievous murrain. The word here translated murrain, is in chap. 5. v. 3.
termed pestilence; and it is one and the same disease, though when it is
applied to cattle, it be usually rendered by murrain, yet when it is applied to
men, as in the Scripture last cited, it is commonly called the pestilence.
Behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thy cattle, etc. That is, the
extraordinary immediate power and work of God, without the intervening of any
second cause or humane operation. This open plague, this plague without doors,
that principally fell upon the cattle, was from the immediate hand of God. It Is
God alone that singles out the Nation, the City, the Town, the Parish, the
Family, the Person, that he will strike with the plague; for all second causes
are ordered by the first cause, as every instrument is ruled or overruled by
the will and hand of him that holds it. When a man goes with his Axe to cut
down Trees in the Wood, there is an equal aptness in the Axe to cut down one
Tree as well as another, an Oak as well as an Ash, etc. but it is still ruled
by the will of him that handles it. So it is here, the noisome pestilence, or
the pestilence of griefs (as the Hebrew runs in that Psalm. 91. 3.) has an
equal aptness to cut down one man as well as another, the rich as well as the
poor, the honorable as well as the base, the strong as well as the weak, the
Prince as well as the peasant, the Emperor as well as the Carter; but it is
still overruled by the Lord himself, who gives it a Commission to cut off such
and such in this Kingdom, and that in this City, and that in this Town, and
that in this Family; and that to spare, save, and pass by all the rest. In
Rev. 6. you shall read of four horses when the four seals were opened, 1. A
white horse. 2. A red horse. 3. A black horse. 4. A pale horse. After Christ
had ridden upon the white horse propagating the Gospel, then follows the red
horse, a Type of War; then the black horse, an hieroglyphick of Famine; and
then the pale horse, the emblem of Pestilence. Now all these horses, these
plagues, were of Christ's sending. From those words Judges 3. 20. I have a
message from God unto thee, O King, said Ehud. Lo, his poniard was Gods
message; from whence one well observes, That not only Isa. 26. 8, 9, 10.
the vocal admonitions, but the real judgments of God, are his errands and
instructions to the world. 'Twas a mad principle among the Manichees, who
referred all the judgments, calamities, and miseries that came upon them to the
Devil for their Author; as if there could be any evil in the Amos 3. 6.
City, and the Lord have no hand in it. Now in that it is the Lord alone that
sends the pestilence amongst a people, how should this comfort us, and quiet
us! how should this cool us, and calm us! how should this satisfy us, and
silence us before the Lord, and cause us to lay our hands upon our mouths, as
David did, Psalm. 39. 9. and as Aaron did, Lev. 10. 1, 2, 3. and as Ely did, 1 Samuel 3. 18. and as the Church did, Lament. 3. 26, 27, 28, 29.

Solinus writes of Hypanis a Scythian Cap. 20.
River, that the water thereof is very bitter, as it passes through Exampius,
yet very sweet in the spring. So the cup of trembling which is this day offered
to the children of God, is often very bitter at the second hand, or as it
appears in second causes; and yet it is sweet at the first hand, yea, it is
very sweet, as it is reached to them by a hand from heaven: and therefore they
may well say (as their Head and Husband has done before them) Shall we not
drink of the Cup that our Father has given us to drink of, etc.

The Second Divine Maxim or Viz.
The Pestilence, and all other Judgments of God, are limited as to places.
Hence it comes to pass, that God shoots his arrows of Pestilence into one
City, and not into another; into one Town, and not into another; into one
Family, and not into another; into one Kingdom and Country, and not into
another. Exodus 8. 20, 21, 22, 23. and Exodus 9. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. 2 Samuel 24.
15. Turn to all these Scriptures, and ponder upon them.

The Third Divine Maxim or Viz.
All the Judgments of God are limited not only to places, but also to
persons.
And therefore such and such must fall, when such and such must escape; and
such and such must be infected, when such and such are preserved: Hence it is
that one is taken in the Bed, and the other left; one smitten at the Table, or
in the House, and all the rest preserved in perfect health, etc. God has
numbered so many to the sword, and so many to the famine, and so many to the
pestilence; so many to this disease, and so many to that; 2 Samuel 24. 15, 16.
Ezekiel. 11. 5, 6, 7. Ezekiel. 5. 12. Ezekiel. 6. 11, 12. Exodus 12. 13. Psalm. 91. from
verse. 3. to v. 9. Isa. 65. 12. Jer. 15. 2. Ezekiel. 33. 27. Turn to all these
Scriptures, and ponder upon them. God marks out those persons, that he intends
to shoot the arrow of pestilence amongst. God never shoots at rovers, he never
draws his bow at a venture, but he singles out the persons that he purposes to
hit, and his arrows fly swiftly and suddenly, yet they hit none but those that
God has set up as a mark to shoot at, as Job speaks.

The Fourth Divine Maxim or Viz.
No man knows divine love or hatred, by outward dispensations; Eccl. 9. 1, 2.
Luke 13. 4, 16. Lam. 4. 6. Dan. 9. 12. Psalm. 73. 12, 13, 14, 15, 21, 22.
In time of great judgments God sometimes spares those whom his soul hates and
abhors, Isa. 1. 5. Hos. 4. 14, 17. God sometimes preserves wicked men from
great judgments, that they may fall by greater judgments; as you may see in
Sodom and her sisters, which were preserved from the slaughter of the four
Kings, that God might rain down Hell out of Heaven upon them. And so
Sennacherib escapes the stroke of the destroying Angel, that he might fall by
the sword of his own sons, Isa. 37. 37, 38. And as in times of great
judgments, God sometimes spares those sinners that his soul hates, so in times
of great judgments God takes away those whom his soul dearly loves, 2 Cor. 34.
27, 28. Turn to it. In all the considerable plagues that have been in this
Nation, how many precious Christians have fallen by the sword, and by the hand
of the destroying Angel; when many thousands of Balaks and Balaams, I mean the
worst of men, have escaped the sword, the plague, etc. And is there any thing
more obvious and notorious this day, than this? surely not.

The Fifth Divine Maxim or Viz.
The Lord sometimes takes away his dearest people, by some one judgment, that
so he may by that means deliver them from many judgments; and sometimes he
takes away his people by one great judgment, that so they may escape many
other greater judgments, that he intends to bring upon the Earth.
And thus good Josiah was slain in battle; yet because he lived not to see the
woeful miseries of succeeding times, he is said to go to his grave in peace, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27, 28. Turn to it. Henoch lived long in a little time, and God took
him to heaven before he brought a sweeping Flood upon the world; but he fore
seeing the Flood, named his son Methuselah, that is to say, He dies, and the
dart (or flood comes) and so it fell out; for no sooner was his head laid, but
in came the Flood. And so Augustine was taken out of the world, before Hyppo
was taken by the Vandals. And so Paraus was gotten to his better Country,
before Heidelbergh and the Palatinate was delivered into the power of the
enemies. Ambrose is said to have been the Walls of Italy, and when he died, the
Earl Stilico said, That his death did threaten destruction to that Country.
And when Luther was laid in his grave, then troubles, wars, desolations, and
confusions, came in upon Germany like a flood. The righteous are taken away
Isa. 57. 1.
from the evil to come, and their death is a sad presage of sore and signal
calamities that are hastening upon the world. Of late many precious servants of
Christ are fallen asleep; but who knows what a day of wrath is coming? When a
man cuts down his chiefest timber trees, it is an argument that he intends to
part with his land; and how many tall Cedars in this our Lebanon, has God
lately cut down in the midst of us: Therefore we have eminent cause to be
importunate with God, that he would neither part with this Nation, nor depart
from this Nation. When some fatal judgment hovers like a flying fiery scrole
over a Nation, God many times gathers many of his choice servants unto himself,
that he may preserve them from the evil to come.

The Sixth Divine Maxim or Viz.
None of Gods judgments upon his people, ever make any change or alteration of
Gods affections toward his people.
However his hand may be against them, yet his love, his heart, his favor, his
affections in Jesus, is still one and the same to them, Isa. 54. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Isa. 49. 14, 15, 16. Psalm. 89. 31, 32, 33, 34. Jer. 31. 3^ 35, 36, 37.
compared. Malach. 3. 6. John 13. 3. James 1. 17. Ponder seriously upon all
these Scriptures. So when God sent the plague upon David's people, and that for
David's sin too, yet how sweetly, how lovingly, how tenderly, how
compassionately, how indulgently, does the Lord carry it toward David himself!
2 Samuel 24. 11, 12, 13, 18, 19, 25. compared. And some learned men are of
opinion, that Lazarus died of the Plague, and yet the Text tells us that he was
carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom. Oecolampadius and many other worthies
also died of it. When Munster lay sick, and his friends asked him how he did,
and how he felt himself? he pointed to his sores and ulcers, (whereof he was
full) and said, These are Gods Gems and Jewels, wherewith he docketh his best
friends: and to me they are more precious than all the gold and silver in the
world. Gods dear love to his people, is not founded upon any thing in his
people, nor upon any thing that is done by his people, but only upon his own
free grace and goodness, Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8.

The Ethnicks feign that their Gods and Goddesses loved certain Trees, for some
lovely good that was in them, as Jupiter the Oak for durance, Neptune the Cedar
for stature, Apollo the Laurel for greenness, Venus the Poplar for whiteness,
Pallas the Vine for fruitfulness. But what should move the God of Gods, and the
Lord of Lords to love us, who are poor worthless fruitless Trees, Ezekiel. 16.
twice dead, and plucked up by the roots? This question is best resolved in
three words, Amat quia amat, he loves us because he loves us. The root of his
love to us lies in himself, and by his communicative goodness the fruit is
ours. Gods love to his people is a Jer. 31. 3. 35, 36, 37.
lasting love, yea an everlasting love, it is a love that never decays nor
waxes cold; it is like the stone Albestos, of which Solinus writes, that being
once hot, it can never be cooled again.

The Seventh Divine Maxim or Conclusion, is this, viz.
Many times when the poor people of God cannot carry it with God for the
preservation of a whole Land or Nation, yet they shall then be sure to have the
honor and the happiness to be so potent and so prevalent with God, as to
prevail with him for their own personal preservation and protection, Jer. 15.
1. Ezekiel. 14. 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, compared. So Ezekiel. 9. 4, 6.
.

The Eighth Divine Maxim or Conclusion, is this, viz.
Sword, Famine, and Pestilence, can only reach our outward man, they only reach
our bodies, and our bodily concernments, they cannot reach our souls, nor our
internal, nor our eternal concernments: No outward Judgments can reach the
favor of God, or the light of his countenance, or our communion with him, or
our spiritual enjoyments of him, or the joys of the Spirit, or the teachings
of the Spirit, or the leadings of the Spirit, or the earnest of the Spirit, or
the witness of the Spirit, or the sealings of the Spirit, or the quick enings
of the Spirit, or that peace that passes understanding, or our secret trade
with Heaven.
.

The Ninth Divine Maxim or Conclusion, is this, viz.
There are no people upon the earth that in times of common calamity stand upon
such fair grounds for their preservation and protection as the people of God
do.
And this I shall make evident by an induction of Ten particulars.

First, They are the only people Exodus 15. 26. Job 5. 20, 21. Isa. 4. 5, 6.
Isa. 8. 13, 14. Isa. 26. 20, 21. Isa. 31. 5. Isa. 32. 1, 2. Psalm. 91.
throughout. Turn to these sweet promises, and remember, that there are no men
on earth that can or may lay their hands on these precious promises, and say,
these promises are mine, but only the godly man. These Promises are Gods Bonds,
which the godly man may put in suit, and urge God with, and plead hard in
prayer, which no other men Sirtorious, as Plutarch observes, paid what he
promised with fair words as Courtiers use to do: but so does not God. Men often
eat their words; but God will never eat his; has he spoken, and shall it not
come to pass? Josh. 23. 14. Ezekiel 12. 25. Chapter 24. 14.
may. The Promises of God are a Christians Magna Charta, his chief Evidences
that he has to show for his preservation, for his protection, for his
salvation. Divine Promises are Gods deed of gift, they are the only Assurance
which the Saints have to show for their right and Title to Christ, to Heaven,
and to all the glory and happiness of another world. O how highly do men prize
their Charters and Privileges! and how carefully do they keep and lay up the
Conveyances and Assurances of their Lands! Oh how should Saints then treasure
up those precious Promises, which are to them instead of all Conveyances and
Assurances for their preservation, protection, maintenance, deliverance,
comfort, and everlasting happiness. The Promises are a Mine of rich treasuries,
they are a Garden full of the choycest and sweetest flowers of Paradise; in
them are wrapped up all celestial contentments and enjoyments: and therefore
study them more than ever, and prize them more than ever, and improve them more
than ever.

Secondly, If you consider their etc. By all which it is evident, that they
stand upon the advantage ground, for preservation and protection, above all
others in the world.

Thirdly, If you consider that high value, and esteem, and price, Zech. 2. 8.
He accounts them as his Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. He prizes them as his portion,
Deuteronomy. 32. 9. yea, as his pleasant portion, Jer. 12. 10. He accounts them his
Crown, yea, his Crown of Glory, and his Royal Diadem, Isa. 62. 3. Thou
(speaking of his Church) shall also be a Crown of Glory in the hand of the
Lord, and a Royal Diadem in the hand of thy God. Yea, he prizes one Saint above
all the world, Heb. 11. 38. By all which it is most evident that they stand upon
the advantage ground, as to their preservation and protection, above all other
people in the world; for God accounts all the world besides to be but as dirt,
as dust, as chaff, as thorns and briars, that are only fit to be cast into the
fire to be consumed and destroyed. When Pearls grew common at Rome they began
to be slighted: But Saints are such Pearls of price, that God will never slight.

Fourthly, If you consider that they are the only people in the Psalm. 89. 30,
31, 32, 33, 34. Jer. 32. 38, 39, 40. Ezekiel. 20. 37. Deuteronomy. 29. 12. Jer. 31. 31,
32, 33, 34. Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Some do derive the word Berith
(which signifies the Covenant) from a Root which signifies to purify, to
separate, and to select: And verily, when the Lord makes a Covenant with any,
he does separate them from others, he honors them above all others, and he
looks on them and owns them for his peculiar people, and delights in them as
the chosen and choycest of all others. The whole world lies in wickedness, John
1. 5. 19. By this also it is evident, that the people of God stand upon the
advantage ground for their preservation and protection above all others in the
world.

Fifthly, If you consider the common carriage and deportment of God toward his
people in former times of calamities and great Judgments. Did he not provide an
Ark for righteous Noah, so that Noah was safer in his Ark of three Stories
high, than Nimrod and his crew were in their Tower of Babel, raised to the
height of five thousand Heyl. Cosm. l. 3.
one hundred forty six paces, as is reported. And did he not provide a Zoar
for righteous Lot. Hesiod speaks of thirty thousand Demygods that were keepers
of men. But what are so many thousand gods to that one God that neither Psalm.
121. 3, 4, 5. Isa. 27. 3.
slumbers nor sleeps, but day and night keeps his people as his Jewels, as the
apple of his eye, that keeps them in his pavilion, as a Psalm. 31. 20.
Prince keeps his Favorite. Princes have their retiring rooms and withdrawing
Chambers, which are sacred places; and so has God his, and there he shelters
the Favorites of Heaven. Gods gracious Providence is his golden Cabinet, where
his children are as safe as if they were in Heaven. See Isa. 49. 2. Isa. 26.
20, 21. Jer. 36. 26. Psalm. 83. 3. They have consulted against thy hidden ones,
hidden under the hollow of thy hand, and under the shadow of thy wing, and
therefore safe from dangers in the midst of dangers, Jer. 39. 16, 17, 18. How
wonderfully did he preserve the three children (or rather the three
Non-conformable Champions) from burning in the midst of the flames, Dan. 3. and
Daniel from being devoured in the Lions Den, Dan. 6. And so Gods mourning ones
were his marked ones, and his saved and preserved ones, when the destroying
Angel slew old and young, etc. Ezekiel. 9. 4, 6. And reverend Beza and his Family
was four several times visited with the Plague, and yet as often preserved as
they were visited; and this good man was very much refreshed and comforted
under that and other sore afflictions that befell him, by that Psalm. 91. which
made him the more highly to prize it, and the more dearly to hugg it all his
days, as himself witnesses in his Writings on this Psalm. There is a Dialogue
between an Heathen and a Jew after the Jews return from captivity, (all
Nations round about them being enemies to them) The Heathen asked the Jew, How
he and his Countrymen could hope for any safety, because (says he) every one
of you is a silly sheep, compassed about with fifty wolves? I but, says the
Jew, we are kept by such a Shepherd, as can kill all those wolves when he
pleases. Now by all this also it is evident, that the people of God stand upon
the advantage ground, as to their preservation and protection above all other
people in the world.

Sixthly, If you consider the Genesis 32. 1, 2 Dan. 6. 21, 22. Acts 12. 11, 15.
Acts 27. 23 2 Kings 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. Acts 5. 18.
of the blessed Angels that always attends them, Psalm. 91. 11. For he shall
give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. verse. 12. They
shall bear thee up in their hands, least thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Psalm. 37. 7. The Angels of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him,
and delivers them. Matthew. 18. 10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these
little ones; for I say unto you, that in heaven their Angels do always behold
the face of my Father which is in Heaven. Heb. 1. The Heathens had some blind
notions concerning the Angels and their ministry, as may be seen in the
writings of Plato, Plutarch. Hesiod the Greek Poet could say that there were
thirty thousands of them here on Earth, keepers of mortal men, and observers of
their works.
14. Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who
shall be heirs of salvation. The world may deprive us of many outward comforts,
but they can never deprive us of the ministry of the Angels. When the servants
of God are hated by men, persecuted by men, and forsaken of men, yet they are
then visited and attended by Angels. Princes have their guards, but what poor,
what weak, what contemptible guards are theirs, to those legions of Angels that
daily guard the Saints! When men can clip the wings of Angels, and imprison or
pinion these heavenly soldiers, then and not till then, shall they be able to
have their wills upon the poor people of God. Oh the honor, the dignity, the
safety and security of the Saints, in a life guard so full of state and
strength! Well may we say, Come taste and see how gracious the Lord is, in
affording his children so glorious an attendance. Now by this argument as well
as the rest, it is evident, that the people of God stand upon the advantage
ground as to their outward preservation and protection, above all other people
in the world.

Seventhly, If you consider that Deuteronomy. 4. 6, 7, 8, 9. Joh. 4. 23, 24.
bear up the name and glory of God in the world; they are the only people that
worship God in spirit and in truth, and from such worshippers it is that God
has the incomes of his glory. The holy hearts, the holy lives, the holy
examples, the holy ways, the holy walkings, and the holy worship that is
performed by the Saints, are the springs from whence all divine honor rises to
the Lord in this world. The people of God are Deuteronomy. 26. 17. 18. Psalm. 116. 16.
Psalm. 22. 30
the only people in the world that have chosen him for their God, and that
have given themselves up to his service, and thus they honor his goodness. The
people of God are the only people in the Genesis 24 12 Psalm. 48. 14.
world who in the times of their fears, doubts, darknesses, distresses,
straits, trials, dangers, etc. do consult with God as their great Counselor,
as their only Counselor; and thus they honor his admirable wisdom, and
infinite knowledge. The people of God are the only people in the world, that
do make God their refuge, their strong tower, their Psalm. 46. 1, 7, 11. Prove.
18. 10. Psalm. 32. 7. Psalm. 119. 114. Psalm. 20. 7.
shelter, their hiding place in stormy and tempestuous days; and thus they
honor the Power, Allsufficiency, Sovereignty, and Authority of God. Wicked men
trust in their Chariots and Horses, and Armies, and Navies, and Revenues, and
Carnal Policies, and sinful shifts, devices, and ferches; when the poor people
of God do not dare to trust in their swords, nor in their bows, nor in their
wealth, nor in their wit, nor in their friends, nor in any arm of flesh, or
carnal refuges, but in the Lord alone; for in the Lord Jehovah Isa. 26. 3, 4.
is everlasting strength. The people of God are the only people in the world
that do give God the supremacy in their hearts, that do set up God and Christ
Psalm. 73. 25, 26. Phil. 3. 6, 7 8, 9. Rev. 4. 10, 11.
above themselves, and above all their duties, services, privileges, graces,
comforts, communions, spiritual enjoyments, and worldly contentments; and thus
they honor all the excellencies and perfections of God at once. And do you
think that God will not have a special care of such, that are the only
promoters of his honor and glory in this world? Doubtless he will. Now by this
argument it is further evident, that the people of God do stand upon the
advantage ground, as to their outward preservation and protection, above all
other people in the world.

Eighthly, If you do but seriously viz. The Lord John 1. 18. Heb. 7. 25. 1 John
2. 1, 2.
Jesus, who lies in the bosom of the Father, and who is so near and dear unto
him, and so potent and prevalent with him, that he can do what he pleases with
the Father, and have what he will of the Father. Now look what interest the
wife has in the husband, the child in the father, the members in the head, the
subject in his Prince, the servant in his Lord, the branches in the root, the
building in the foundation, that the believer has in Christ, and much more.
Christ is not like the Bramble, that receives good but yields none; but he is
like the Fig Tree, the Vine, the Olive. All that are interested in him, that
pertain to him, are the better for him; they all receive of his fullness John 1.
16. Col. 1. 19.
grace for grace. Now, doubtless, all that interest that Jesus Christ has in
God the Father, he will improve to the utmost for their good, that have an
interest in him. Now by this argument it is also evident, that the people of God
do stand upon the advantage ground above all others in the world, as to their
outward preservation and protection.

Ninthly, If you consider Gods Psalm. 103. 13, 14. Like as a father pitieth his
children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him; for he knows our frame, he
remembers that we are dust. There is an ocean of love and pity in the fathers
heart toward his children; but it is but a drop to that which is in God. He hit
the mark, that said, Tam pius nemo, tam pater nemo, No father Bernard.
is like our father. God is Pater miserationum, he is all bowels. Let God carry
it how he pleases toward us, yet we must still acknowledge that he is a
propitious father, and say with him, Lord, thou Austin.
art a father both when thou stroakest, and when thou strikest; thou strikest,
that we may not perish, and thou stroakest, that we may not faint. Pity is as
essential to God, as light is to the Sun; or as heat is to the fire: Hence he
is called the Father by an eminency, James 1. ult.
as if they were no father to him, none like him, nor none besides him, as
indeed there is not originally and properly. So Exodus 19. 4. Ye have seen what
I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on Eagles wings, and brought you
unto my self. It Is an elegant expression, to set forth Gods admirable care over
his people. The Eagle fears no bird from above to hurt her young, only the
arrow from beneath; therefore she carries them upon her wings. Deuteronomy. 32. 9, 10,
11. The Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance; he
found him in a desert land, and in the wast-howling wilderness; he led him
about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye. As an Eagle
stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings,
takes them, bears them on her wings. verse. 12. So the Lord alone did lead
him, and there was no strange God with him. The Eagle carries her young ones
upon her wings (not in her tallons, for fear of hurting them) openly, safely,
choicely, charily, speedily; and so did God his Israel, of whom he was
exceeding choice and chary.

The care that God exercises toward his people, is,

1. An Extensive Care, a care that reaches, that extends it self to all the
Saints, whether rich or poor, high or low, bond or free, etc. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.
Zech. 1. 10, 11.

2. It Is an Intentive Care. He cares for all, as if he had but one to care for,
Zech. 1. 14.

3. It Is a Pleasant and Delightful Care, Isa. 31. 5. and not a wearying,
tearing, tormenting care; it is such a pleasant care as an indulgent father
exercises toward a son, Mal. 3. 17.
an only son, a son that serves him.

4. It Is an Effectual Care, a Prosperous Care, a Successful Care, a Flourishing
Care. Men many times rise early and go to bed late, and take a great deal of
care at home and abroad, and all to no purpose; but the care of God is always
successful, Deuteronomy. 11. 12.

5. It Is a Singular Care, a Peculiar Care God cares more for them than he does
for all the world besides. The Fathers care over the Child is a peculiar care,
and the Husbands care over the Wife is a peculiar care, and the Heads care over
the Members is a peculiar care; and so is the Lords Zeph. 3. 6, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Psalm. 36. 6. Isa. 40. 31.
care over his people a peculiar care. Gods general care extends to the whole
Creation, but his special care centers in his Saints.

6. It Is a very Tender Care, Isa. 40. 11. He shall feed his flock like a
shepherd, he shall gather the lambs with his arms, and carry them in his
bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young. Zech. 2. 8. He that
touches you, touches the apple of his Ishon, of ish, is here called Bath the
daughter of the eye, because it is as dear to a man as an only daughter.
eye, or the little man that is in the eye, or the black of the eye, which is
the tenderest piece of the tenderest part; to express the inexpressible
tenderness of Gods care and love toward his people.

7. It Is an Abiding Care, a Lasting Care, and not a transient care, a momentary
care. Psalm. 125. 1, 2. They that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Zion,
which cannot be removed, but abides for ever. As the mountains are round about
Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people, from henceforth, even for
ever. Jerusalem was surrounded with many great high mountains which were a
great safeguard to it against all winds and storms; such a shelter, such a
safeguard, yea, and a better, Zech. 2. 5.
will God be to mystical Mount Sion the Church, against all winds and storms of
affliction or persecution, Psalm. 121. 3, 4. He that keeps thee will not
slumber: behold, he that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep. He
repeats the promise, and sets it forth with a behold, that it may stick the
closer, and warm our hearts the better. The phrase is taken from Watchmen, who
stand on the walls in time of war, to discover the approaching enemies, and
accordingly give warning: Now though they may be careless, treacherous, or
sleepy, yet the Lord will be so far from sleeping, that he will not so much as
slumber, no, he will not so much as fetch one wink of sleep. It has been a
tradition, that Oppianus. Plin. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Lions sleep not; yet to think or say that they sleep not at all, were absurd;
indeed their eyelids being too little to cover their great eyes, they do sleep
with their eyes somewhat open and shining, which has occasioned some to think
that they sleep not at all. But sure I am, that the Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
who is the Keeper of Israel, does neither slumber nor sleep, he never shuts his
eyes, but has them always open upon his people for good; he winks not so much
as to the twinkling of an eye, he always stands Sentinel for his peoples
safety, Isa. 27. 2, 3. In that day sing ye unto her, a Vineyard of red wine; I
the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment, (or as the Hebrew runs, at
moments, or by moments) lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day; that
is, constantly, continually, without intermission. And this constant care of
God over his people, was signified by those two Types, the Pillar Exodus 13. 21,
22.
of Fire, and the Pillar of a Cloud, that left not Israel, till they were in
the possession of the Land of Canaan, which was a Type of Heaven.

8. And lastly, It Is an Active It was a strange speech of Socrates a heathen,
Since God is so careful for you (says he) what need you be careful for any
thing your selves?
Care, a care that puts the Lord upon preserving his people, and protecting of
his people, and making provision for his people, and standing by his people,
and pleading the cause of his people, and clearing the innocence of his people.
God is above his people and beneath them, Deuteronomy. 33. 26, 27. He is under them
and over them, Cant. 2. 6. He is before them and behind them, Exodus 33. 1, 2.
Isa. 52. 12. Isa. 58. 8. God is in the front of his people, and God is in the
rear of his people, he is on the right hand of his people, and he is on the
left hand of his people, Psalm. 16. 8. Psalm. 121. 5. Psalm. 118. 15, 16. Exodus
14. 22 (God made the waters as a wall on their right hand and on their left.)
God is round about his people, Psalm. 34. 7. Psalm. 125. 1, 2. and in the midst
of his people, Zech. 2. 5. Psalm. 46. 5. God is in the midst of her, Isa. 12. 6.
Oh how safe are they that are under such a glorious care! God is above his
people and beneath them, he is under them and over them, he is before them and
behind them, he is in the front and in the rear, he is round about them, and in
the midst of them. Now what does all this speak out, but that the care of God
toward his people is an active Care. If the Philosopher could say, being in
danger of Shipwreck in a light starry night, Surely I shall not perish, there
are so many eyes of providence over me. Oh then what may the Saints say! Now by
this argument it is evident that the people of God stand upon the advantage
ground, as to their outward preservation and protection above all other people
in the world.

Tenthly and lastly, If you do Babylon, and their enemies added to all their
sorrows and sufferings, but will God put this up at their hands? No. Zech. 1.
15. And I am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at case, for I was
but a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction. I am very
sorely displeased, etc. Or as Zeketseph, from Ketseph, which properly signifies
such anger as causes soaming and frothing as the tumultuous water, tossed with
the wind, Eccl. 6. 17. Zech. 1. 7. boiling or soaming anger; the word
signifies, a servour, fierceness, or vehemence of anger.
the Hebrew runs, I am in such a heat as causes fuming and foaming, I am
boiling hot, and even ready to draw upon them, and to cut them off from the
Land of the Living. For the Original word here used, has great affinity with
another word that signifies to cut down and to destroy, 2 Kings 6. 6. and
imports an higher degree of displeasure, a greater height of heat, than
either anger or wrath, as may be seen in that signal gradation, Deuteronomy. 29. 28.
The Lord rooted them out of their land, Beaph in anger, Ubechemah and in wrath,
Ubeketseph and in great indignation. The last of these three is the word in the
Text, and notes a higher degree of anger than the two former. So Mal. 1. 4.
Whereas Edom says, we are impoverished, but we will return and build the
desolate places: Thus says the Lord of hosts, they shall build, but I will
throw down, and they shall call them the border of wickedness, and the people
against whom the Lord has indignation for ever. The Edomites were very great
enemies to the Israelites, they stood looking on, laughing and rejoicing at
Isreal's destruction; God saw this, and it greatly displeased him (he being
highly sensible of the least indignity done to his people) and therefore he is
resolved to pay them home in their own coin, Obed. 8. to 19. verse. The very
name and memory of the Edomites have long since been extinct and blotted out
from under heaven, they were a people of his wrath, Isa. 10. 6. and of his
curse, See Deuteronomy. z5. 17, 18, 19. 1 Samuel 15. 1 Chronicles. 4. 42, 43. and compare
them together.
Isa. 34. 5. So Amalek was a bitter enemy to Gods Israel, but God utterly blots
out his remembrance from under heaven; and laying his hand upon his Throne, he
swears that he would have war with Amalek for ever, Exodus 17. 14, 16. Nahum 1.
2. God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth, and is furious;
the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his
enemies. The people of God ought to rest satisfied and assured, that God sees,
and smiles, and looks and laughs at all the counsels and combinations of wicked
men against his Son and Psalm. 2.
against his Saints; and when they have done their worst, the Counsel Prove. 19.
21.
of the Lord shall stand, and Christ shall reign in the midst of his enemies;
and that the stone cut out of the mountains without hands, shall bring down the
golden Image with a vengeance, and make it Dan. 2. 35.
like the chafe of the Summer floor. Some write of Lions, that as they are
mindful of courtesies received, (witness the Story of Androdus that fugitive
servant of Rome) so they will be sure to revenge injuries done to them; they
will prey on them that would make a prey of them. When Juba King of the Moors
marched through the Desert of Africa, a young man of his Company wounded a
Lion; but the year following, when Juba returned, the Lion again meets the
Army, and from among them all singles out the man that hurt him, and tears him
in pieces, suffering the rest to pass by in peace and safety. And thus the Lord
Jesus, who is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, is always ready to revenge Rev.
5. 5.
the cause of his people, and to take vengeance on all that have wounded his
people, or made a prey of his people; as you may clearly and fully see in
Ezekiel chap. 25. and 35. Now by this argument, as well as by all the rest,
it is evident, that the people of God stand upon the advantage ground, as to
their outward preservation and protection, above all other people in the world.

Quest. But if this be so, How comes it to pass that in this time of great
mortality, many of the precious people of the Lord have been taken away, as
well as others; the raging pestilence having carried many pious souls out of
this world, of whom the world was Heb. 11. 38.
not worthy? The Saint as well as the sinner, has fallen by the hand of the
destroying Angel; in this day we have seen that word made good, viz. That all
things come alike Eccl. 9. 2.
to all: there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to the good,
and to the clean and to the unclean, to him that sacrifices, and to him that
sacrifices not; as is the good, so is the sinner, and he that swears, as he
that fears an oath?

To this Question I shall give these eight short Answers.

First, God has smitten some none might be proud, secure, or censorious, and
that all might take the alarm, and prepare to meet Amos 4. 10, 11, 12.
their God, and that all may keep humble and tremble, because of his righteous
judgments, Psalm. 119. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am
afraid of thy judgments.

Secondly, The number of those

Thirdly, Sometimes Gods own hand. Thus Moses and Aaron sinned Numb. 20.
with others, and therefore their Carkases fell in the Wilderness as well as
others. This may sometimes be the reason why some good men fall in a common
calamity, but I dare not say that it is always the reason why some good men
fall in a common calamity. I believe there are several choice Christians that
have been swept away in this day of the Lords wrath, who have not sinned with
the wicked, though they have fallen with the wicked. Many have fallen by this
dispensation, who yet have kept their garments pure Revel. 3. 4.
and clean, and are now walking with Christ in white. I do not think that those
Saints that have died by the plague, were greater sinners than those that have
escaped the plague; yea, I have several reasons to persuade me, that several of
those precious servants of the Lord that have died of the plague, had more
grace in their hearts, and less sin in their lives, than many other Saints that
have been pitied and spared in this day of the Lords anger, etc.

Fourthly, No godly man dies Job 5. 26. Rev. 11. 6, 7. Acts 13. 25, 36.
glass be run, and his work done, and he prepared and fitted for another world:
Job 14. 5. Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with
thee; thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. God has set every
man both his time and his task. In this Scripture as in a glass you may see
the true reason why some likely to live long, die soon, even whilst their
bones are full of marrow, and their breasts are full of milk, and others that
are more weak and infirm, live long, yea very long; the reason is, because God
has set bounds to every man's life to a very day, I, to a very hour. verse. 14.
All the days of my appointed time (or warfare) will I wait till my change
come, i. e. till my death, Job calls death a change. Death is not an
annihilation or extinction, but a mutation.

1. It Is the last change that we shall meet with till the resurrection.

2. It Is a lasting, yea, an everlasting change; it puts every man into an
eternal condition of happiness or misery.

3. It Is an universal change; and that, 1. In respect of persons, all must meet
with it, it is appointed for all men once to die. 2. In Heb. 9. 27.
respect of the whole man body and soul. Death lodges the body in the grave,
and puts the soul into heaven or hell.

4. It Is a different change, according to the quality of the person changed.
It Is terrible to a sinner: For,

First, It will put a full period to all his outward mercies, comforts,
Saladine Job 1. 21.
a Turkish Emperor, the first of that Nation that conquered Jerusalem, lying
at the point of death, after many glorious victories commanded that a white
sheet should be born before him to his grave, upon the point of a spear, with
this proclamation, These are the rich spoils which Saladine carries away with
him: of all his triumphs and victories, of all the riches and realms that he
had, now nothing at all is left him but this sheet.

Secondly, It will put a full period

Thirdly, It will put a full period etc.

Fourthly, It will put a full period Romans 2. 4, 5.

Fifthly, It will put a full period sighing, no dancing but wringing or hands
and gnashing of teeth for evermore, etc.

Sixthly, It will put a full period

Seventhly, It will put a full Genesis 6. 3. Rev. 3. 20.
never strive with the sinner more, now Christ will never knock at the sinners
door, at the sinners heart more, etc.

Eighthly and lastly, It will put upon one pious example more. All hell will
not afford one good example. In a word, now the sinner shall find by woeful
experience, that death will be an inlet to three dreadful things: 1. To
judgment, Heb. 9. 27. 2. To an irreversible sentence of condemnation, Matthew.
25. 41. 3. To endless, easeless, and remediless sufferings. Not many years
since in the Town of Yarmouth there was a young man, who being very weak, and
nigh to the grave, and under the apprehensions of the wrath of God, and
supposing that he was presently going down to the Pit, to Hell, he cried out, O
that God would spare me but two days, O that God would spare me but two days,
O that God would spare me, but two days. This poor creature trembled at the
very thoughts of wrath to come. O who can dwell with everlasting burning? who
can dwell with a devouring fire? Isa. 33. 14.

And as death is terrible to the sinner, so it is desirable, comfortable and
joyful to a Child of God. Cant. 8. ult. Luke 2. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. 2 Cor.
5. 1, 2, 4, 8. Phil. 1. 23. Rev. 22. 20
I desire death, says Melancthon, that I may enjoy the desirable sight of
Christ. And When will that blessed hour come? when shall I be dissolved? when
shall I be with Christ? said holy Mr. Bolton, when he lay on his dying bed.
Jewel was offended at one that in his sickness prayed for his life. One whom I
knew well, a little before his death, after a sharp conflict, cried out three
times, Victory, Much more to this purpose you may find in my Saints Portion,
and in my String of Pearls.
Victory, Victory; he breathed out his soul and his Doxology together, Thanks
be to God for Jesus Christ, and so conquered Satan in his last encounter. The
dying words of my young Lord Harrington were these, O my God, when shall I be
with thee? Shall I die ever (says Austin) yes, or shall I die at all? yes
(says he) Lord, if ever, why not now? When Modestus the Emperors Lieutenant
threatened to kill Basil, he answered, If that be all, I fear not; yea, your
Master cannot more pleasure me, than in sending of me unto my heavenly Father,
to whom I now live, and to whom I desire to basten. Mr. Deering a little before
his death, being raised up in his bed, and seeing the Sun shine, was desired to
speak his mind, upon which he said, There is but one Sun that gives light to
the whole world, but one righteousness, one communion of saints; as concerning
death, I see such joy of spirit, that if I should have pardon of life on the
one side, and sentence of death on the other, I had rather choose a thousand
times to die than to live. So Mr. John Holland lying at the point of death,
said, What brightness do I see? and being told it was the sunshine, No, says
he, My Savior shines: now farewell world, welcome heaven, the day star from on
high has visited me. Preach at my funeral, God deals comfortably and
familiarly with man; I feel his mercy, I see his majesty, whether in the body,
or out of the body, I cannot tell, God he knows, but I see things that are
unutterable. Mr. Knox found so much comfort from the Scriptures upon his
deathbed, that he would have risen, and have gone into the Pulpit, to tell
others what he had felt in his soul. And by that information that I have had
from some good hands, several precious Christians that have lately died of the
plague, have gone to heaven under as high a spirit of joy, of comfort, of
assurance, and of a holy triumph, as any of the last mentioned worthies, or as
any other that ever I heard of or read of; the remembrance of which has been,
and still is a singular Cordial to all their relations and friends that yet
survive them.

But as I was saying, No godly man falls in any Common Calamity till his glass
be run, and his work done; so I say of all those dear servants of the Lord that
have fallen by the pestilence in the midst of us, their hour was come, and John
7. 30. chap. 8. 19, 20. 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7.
their course was finished. Had God had any further doing work, or suffering
work, or bearing work, or witnessing work for them in this world, 'twas not all
the Angels in heaven, nor all the malignant diseases in the world, that could
ever have cut them off from the land of the living. When Lazarus was dead, his
two sisters John 11. 21, 32.
Martha and Mary came to Christ with tears in their eyes, and sad complaints in
their mouths. Lord if thou had been here, my brother had not died, said
Martha; and Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not died, said Mary:
And is not this the common language of many this day, when such and such
precious Christians have fallen by the pestilence; Oh if such a Physician had
been here, they had not died; or if they had been let blood, they had not died;
or if they had taken such a potion, they had not died; or if they had eat but
of such or such meats, they had not died; or if they had not lived in such a
foggy air, they had not died; or if they had not been shut up in such close
narrow nasty rooms and places, they had not died; or had they been but so wise
and happy as to have applied such or such a remedy, they might have been alive
to this day. Not considering with Job, that the days of man are determined,
and his bounds appointed, which he cannot pass. The time and place, and every
circumstance of his dissolution, is decreed from all eternity. That one man
dies in the field, another in his bed, one at sea, another on the shore; one of
an Apoplexy in the head, another of a Struma in the neck; one of a Squinacy in
the throat, another of a Cough and Consumption of the Lungs; that so many
thousands dies of Obstructions, Inflammations, Dropsies, Gouts, Pestilence, it
is foreordained in heaven. The hand of the Lord is in all, and he it is that
having brought us into the world at his pleasure, will take us hence at his
appointment. The Jews have a saying, That God has four Keys under his own
Girdle: 1. The Key of the Clouds. 2. The Key of the Womb. 3. The Key of the
Heart. And 4. The Key of Death, the Key of the Grave.

Fifthly, God sometimes takes Eccl. 8. 11.
how impudent, are many grown, because they have escaped the present judgment,
when many others that have been a thousand times better than themselves, have
been sent to their graves. The Alcoran says, God created the Angels of light,
and the Devils of the flame. Certainly Gods children are of the light, but
Satan's children are furious, wrathful children, they are children of the flame.
Oh in what a flame now The scales of the Leviathan (as Luther makes the
comparison) stick close together; and so do wicked men in their counsels,
plots, and projects against the people of God.
are many wicked men against the people of God, since the hand of the
destroying Angel has not yet reached them, over what they were in, when the
destroying Angel first drew his sword in the midst of us; as if they were
spared on purpose to oppress, persecute, and scatter the people of God more
than ever. Oh that all such would be but so favorable to their own souls, as
seriously to ponder upon Ezekiel chap. 25. and 35. and Obediah verse. 8. to
verse. 19. and Nahum 1. from verse. 9. to v. 15.

Felix Earl of Wertenbergh, one of the Captains of Charles the Fifth, burning
in rage and anger against the people of God, he swore in the presence of diverse
at supper, That before he died, he would ride up to the spurs in the blood of
the Lutherans; but God soon cooled his courage, for that very night he was
choakt and strangled in his own blood. Paul prays that he might be delivered
from unreasonable and wicked men, the word is (...) absurd men, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.
such as put themselves upon ways of opposition, against all reason and common
sense; yea, such who in their rage and bitterness of spirit make no bones of
breaking all the Laws both of God and men, so they may but have their wills and
lusts satisfied, in afflicting, scattering, and tormenting of the people of
God. Absurd men with Judas kiss Christ and betray him; they kiss the head, and
stab the body; or as one wittily expresses it, they kiss the mouth, and tread
upon the toes. Reader, remember this, when the people of the Jews made use of
Philo to apologize for them unto Caius the Emperor, Caius used him very
ruggedly, but when he was come out of his presence, the Jews came round about
him. Well says he (to encourage them) surely Caius will arm God against
himself for us. Let the Reader apply it as he pleases.

Sixthly, God sometimes takes When good men die, that it is an ill sign to the
world. When the Luminaries of heaven are eclipsed, Deus avertat omen. Paulinus
reports of Ambrose, that he would weep bitterly, when he heard of any godly
ministers death. Whilst Calvin lives, Beza's life is sweet; but when Calvin
dies, death is the more acceptable unto Beza. It Is dark night, when the lights
are put out, and when the curtains are drawn, and the windows close shut. Ah
England, England, if this is not thy present case, I know nothing. The Clouds
gather more and more, and every day they look blacker and blacker, and bloodier
and bloodier; happy are those souls that are now in heaven, and blessed are
those souls that are now waiting for the redemption of Israel.

Seventhly, Notwithstanding any Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8,
9. Rev. 3. 19.
children with what rod he pleases. Notwithstanding all the gracious
engagements that are upon the Lord to his people, yet he reserves a freedom to
himself to make use of the very lives of his people, in such ways as may make
best for the bringing about of his own ends, and as may make most for the
advance of his own glory; and hence it comes to pass that God delights so to
carry it toward his dearest people, as that sinners and saints shall be forced
to say, That his judgments are unsearchable, and that his ways are past
finding out, Romans 11. 33. And that his way is in the sea, and that his paths
are in the great waters, and that his footsteps are not known, Psalm. 77. 19. If
you take a strait stick and put it into the water, it will seem crooked; why?
because we look upon it through two mediums, Air and Water, there lies the
deceptio visus; thence it is that we cannot discern aright. Thus all the
proceedings of God in his righteous judgments, which in themselves are just,
righteous, and strait, without the least obliquity, seem to us strange and
crooked. That the wicked should prosper, and the righteous be afflicted; that
good men should be in bonds, when bad men walk at large; that the Israelites
should make the bricks, and the Egyptians dwell in the houses; that some of the
best of Christians should fall by the pestilence, when many of the worst of
sinners have their lives for a prey; these are some of those mysterious
providence that many times make some of the best of Christians to stagger in
their judgments; and why so, but because they look upon Gods proceedings
through a double medium of flesh and spirit; and hence it comes to pass that
allthings seem to run cross, and that Gods most just and righteous proceedings,
are not so clearly and fully discerned, as otherwise they might be. The wheels
in a Watch or in a Clock, move contrary one to another, some one way, some
another, yet all show the skill and intent of the workman, to show the time, or
to make the Clock to strike: so in this world divine providence seem to run
cross to divine promises; the wicked are spared, and the righteous are taken
away; yet in the conclusion all issues in the will, purpose, and glory of God.

Eighthly, and lastly, God has taken several of his own dear children Ezekiel.
18. 25, 29.
the mouth of blasphemy, has taken away several of his dear servants by the
raging pestilence, when the Psalm. 73. 5. 2 Pet. 2. 9. Job 24. 12. Psalm. 50. 21.
wicked walk on every side, yea, when hell seems to be broke loose, and men
turned into incarnate devils, and all because they have not been plagued as
other men, nor visited as God has visited some of his dearest children.
Sometimes Gods manner is to begin with his own people, 1 Pet. 4. 17. Judgment
must begin at the house of God; and the Lord commands his destroying Angel to
begin at his Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 9. 6. Sometimes when God intends to bring a
common and general destruction upon the enemies, oppressors, haters and
persecuters of his people, he is wont first to scourge his own till the blood
comes. I took the cup at the Lords hands (he means the cup of Gods fury, Jer.
25. 17.) and made all the Nations to drink (that is prophesied, that they
should certainly drink of it) unto whom the Lord had sent me. But who were to
drink first of this cup? Mark he tells us verse 18. Jerusalem and the Cities of
Judah, and the Kings thereof, and the Princes thereof; These were to begin in
this cup to Egypt, and the Philistims, to Edom and Moab, and the Ammonites, as
he shows in the verses following: Now all these were bitter and implacable
enemies to the Israel of God. Ah sinners, sinners, do not insult over the poor
people of God, because here and there the hand of the Lord has touched them,
and God has given the cup into their hands; for if God be God, the cup must go
round, and he will make good that word, Isa. 5. 22, 23. Thus says thy Lord,
the Lord, See verse 17.
and thy God, that pleads the cause of his people; behold, I have taken out
of thy hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou
shall no more drink it again: but I will put it into the hands of them that
afflict thee, which have said to thy soul, bow down, that we may go over; and
thou have laid thy body as the ground, and as the street to them that went
over. And that word, Jer. 49. 12. For thus says the Lord, behold, they
(meaning his own peculiar people) whose judgment was not to drink of the cup
(that is, the cup of my wrath) have assuredly drunken; and art thou he that
shall altogether go unpunished? thou shall not go unpunished, but thou shall
surely drink of it; or drinking drink, as the Hebrew runs. I have not spared my
own dear people (says God) who might have expected this favor at my hands,
before any people under heaven, upon the account of my relation to them, my
affections for them, and my Covenant with them all; and do you think that I
will spare you? No, drinking you shall drink, that is, you shall certainly
drink of this cup of my wrath, and you shall signally and visibly drink of this
cup of my wrath. And that word Isa 49. 25, 26. But thus says the Lord, even
the Captains of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible
shall be delivered; for I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and
I will save thy children; and I will feed them that oppress thee, with their
own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine;
and all flesh shall know that I the Lord is thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the
mighty one of Jacob. Oh that those men would lay these Scriptures to heart, who
rejoice and glory in the sufferings of the poor people of God; and because some
of them have fallen by the hand of the destroying Angel, considering that the
design of God herein, is to stop the mouth of iniquity, and that none may say,
that he is either partial or fond. Such men that have been eyewitnesses of
Gods impartial dealing with his own people in this day of his wrath, should
rather be down in the mouth than up in their spirits; they should rather be
silent than raving against the people of the Lord; they should rather tremble
than rejoice, for if God deal thus with his green-trees, how will he deal Luke
23. 31. The Hebrews call good men green-wood and bad men dry-wood.
with the dry? when God cuts down his best timber, will he not either grub up,
or burn up the old stumps? surely he will. If judgment begin at the house of
God, where shall the sinner and the ungodly appear? 1 Pet. 4. 17, 18. If God
deal thus with his best friends, how will he deal with his enemies? If God deal
thus with his dearest children, servants and slaves have cause to tremble. And
thus much for the reasons why some of Gods dearest children have fallen by the
pestilence, in this day of the Lords anger.

The Tenth Divine Maxim or Viz.
That such saints as do fall by the sword or by the pestilence, they receive no
loss, no wrong, no injury, by these sad dispensations; they gain much, but they
lose nothing; for by these sad providence they are but hastened to heaven, to
their fathers house, to their eternal homes, and to those blessed mansions John
14. 1, 2, 3, 4.
that Christ has prepared for them.
Elijah went to heaven in a fiery 2 Kings 2. 11, 12.
Chariot; and many thousand of the Martyrs went to heaven in fiery Chariots,
and in bloody Chariots; and doubtless, many worthies in this day are gone to
heaven in a pestilen tial Chariot, as in a Chair of State. Heaven is a place of
so much pleasure and delight, that they are happy that can 1 Cor. 9. 25. 2 Timothy
4. 8. James 1. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 4. Rev. 2. 10. Nec Christus, nec Coelum patitur
hyberbolem. Neither Christ, nor Heaven, can be hyperbolized.
get thither any how. There is laid up in heaven an Incorruptible Crown, a
Crown of Life, a Crown of Righteousness, a Crown of Immortality, a Crown of
Glory; and who would not shoot any gulf to come to these Crowns. The goods
things of heaven are so many, that they exceed number; and so great, that they
exceed measure; and so precious, that they are above all estimation. What will
that life be, or rather what will not that life be, since all good either is
not at all, or is in such a life? Here is light which place cannot comprehend,
voices and music which time cannot ravish away, odours which are never
dissipated, a feast which is never consumed, a blessing which eternity
bestows, but eternity shall never see at an end; and who would not wade
through a red Sea, to come to this heavenly Canaan? What are all the silks of
Persia, and all the spices of Egypt, and all the gold of Ophyr, and all the
treasures of both Indies; yea, what is the glory of ten thousand worlds, to
that glory that those saints are now enjoying, who have died by the pestilence
in the midst of us. When Cyneas the Ambassador of Pyrrhus, after his return
from Rome, was asked by his Master, what he thought of the City and State, he
answered, That it seemed to him to be Respublica Regnum, a State of none but
great Statesmen, and a Commonwealth of Kings. Such is Heaven, no other than a
Parliament of Emperors, a Commonwealth of Kings; every saint in that Kingdom
is Coheir with Christ, and has a Robe of Honor, and a Romans 8. 17.
Scepter of Power, and a Throne of Majesty, and a Crown of Glory. Now what does
that Christian lose, who dies of the pestilence, and by that means is brought
to the fruition of all this glory! Death (says M. Brightman) that was before
the Devils Sergeant to dragg us to hell, is now the Lords Gentleman-usher to
conduct us to heaven.

In the Ceremonial Law there was Levit. 25.
an year they accounted the year of Jubilee, and this was with the poor Jews a
very delightful and acceptable year, because that every man that had lost or
sold his lands, upon the blowing of a Trumpet rerurned, and had possession of
his estate again; and so he was recovered out of all those miseries and
extremities in which he lived before. Now our whole life in this world, is made
up of troubles and trials, of calamities and miseries, of crosses and losses,
of reproaches and disgraces, but death is the Christians Jubilee; it wipes away
all tears from his eyes, it turns his miseries into mercies, his crosses into
crowns, and his earthly hell into a glorious heaven. Though death, though the
pestilence, be to the wicked as the Rod in Moses hand, that was turned into a
Serpent; yet to the godly, death, the pestilence, is like to the wand in
Elijahs hand, a means to waft them over into a better life. The Heathen Gods
held death to be man's summum bonum, his chiefest good. Solomon upon his Throne
extolled his Coffin above his Crown. Death is a fall that came in by a fall. For
a saint to die, is for a saint to be no more unhappy. By death the saints come
to a fixed and invariable eternity. Death is but an entrance into life. That is
not death, but life, which joins the dying man to Christ; and that is not life,
but death, which separates the living man from Christ. Death will blow the bud
of grace into the flower of glory. Death is a saints Quietus est.

All fearful disasters (says Gregory) which rob the saints of life, do but
serve as a rough wind, to blow them suddenly into their desired haven; I mean
heaven. It matters not (says Austin) whether a burning fever, or flash of
lightning, or whether a stone in the bladder, or a thunder-stone in thy head,
sends thee out of this miserable world; for God minds not, says he, the
immediate occasion of thy coming to him, but the condition and posture that thy
soul is in, when it comes before him. The great thing that God will look at,
is whether thou art a sheep or a goat, a sinner or a saint, a friend or an
enemy, a son or a slave, a believer or an infidel; whether thou art growing on
the Crab-stock of old Adam, or art engrafted into Christ; whether thou art
clothed with the righteousness of his Son, or whether thou stand before him
in the ragged righteousness of thine own duties.

The Eleventh Divine Maxim or Viz.
Though a godly man should die of the plague, yet he shall be certainly
delivered from the evil of the plague.
The smartest rod that God lays upon his own people, is from a principle Rev.
3. 19. Prove. 3. 11, 12. Heb. 12. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
of love; though he be angry with his peoples sins, yet he loves their persons.
Though the pestilence comes as a judgment upon wicked men, yet it comes only
as a chastisement upon the people of God. When the plague comes upon wicked
men, it comes upon them by virtue of the first Covenant, and as a fruit of the
Curse; but when it comes upon the godly, it comes upon them by virtue of the
second Covenant (I mean the Covenant Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
of Grace) and as a fruit of his love: Hence God is called, the great and
terrible God, that keeps Covenant, Neh. 1. 5. But why is he called the
terrible God that keeps Covenant, but because as he has covenanted to keep
them from the evil of the world, and to purge away their Psalm. 119. 75. John
17. 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18.
sins, and to save their souls, and to preserve them to his heavenly kingdom;
so he stands bound by his Covenant, to make use of any terrible judgments or
terrible dispensations, to effect these great and glorious things. As we
sometimes preserve those things in salt, that we cannot preserve in sugar; so
sometimes God preserves his poor people in the salt of afflictions, in the salt
of terrible dispensations, when they would not, when they could not be
preserved in the sugar of mercies, etc. Though the plague should come into a
godly family, yet God will deliver that family from the evil of the plague.
Psalm. 91. 10. There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come
nigh thy dwelling. Beloved, Though the plague should come into a godly man's
house, yet there shall not be any evil in it to the godly man. When the plague
comes into a wicked man's family, it always comes in the quality of a Levit. 26.
curse; but it never comes into a godly man's family in the quality of a curse,
for Christ was made a curse for Gal. 3. 13.
them. It never enters into a godly man's family as a fruit of Gods revenging
justice or wrath, Romans 8. 8. Jer. 24. 5. Isa. 54. 7, 8, 9, 10. Jer. 31. 3, 33,
34, 35, 36, 37. When the plague comes upon the wicked, it comes upon them as a
fruit of Gods judicial wrath; but when it comes upon the godly, it only comes
upon them as fruit of Gods fatherly anger. When it comes upon the wicked, it
comes upon them as a fruit of Gods everlasting wrath; and therefore where it
proves fatal, it is but an inlet to eternal torments: But when it comes upon a
child of God, it comes upon him but as a fruit of Gods momentary wrath, Isa.
54. 7, 8, 9, 10. Look as David gave charge to his soldiers that they should
not kill Absalom his son, but only restrain his unnatural rebellion, and
reduce him to his former obedience; so when God sends the pestilence amongst
his people, he lays a law of restraint upon it, that it shall not hurt his
people, that it shall not destroy their graces, nor ruin their souls. The full
commission that God gives to the pestilence, is to restrain the sins of his
people, and to destroy the soul-rebellions of his people. I have read of a
Lodestone in Aethiopia, which has two corners, with the one it draws the iron
to it, with the other it put the iron from it: so God has two arms, the one
of mercy, and the other of judgment; two hands, the one of love, the other of
wrath; with the one he draws, with the other he drives; the one stroaketh,
the other strikes: and as he has a right hand of favor, wherewith to lead
the saints, so he wants not a left hand of fury, wherewith to dash the wicked
in pieces.

The Twelfth Divine Maxim or Viz.
That God knows how to distinguish his people, and how to difference his people
from others, when the pestilence rages in the midst of them.
As he did between the Israelites and the Egyptians, Exodus 8. 21, 22, 23. Exodus
9. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Exodus 11. 7. That of the Apostle is a great truth, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The Lord knows them that are his. The Lord knows all his people
by name, he does not only know how many he elected, but he also knows who
they are; he knows the very numerical persons upon whom he has set his
electing love. Though the pestilence does not know a saint from a sinner, yet
the Lord knows a saint from a sinner; though the pestilence does not know the
righteous from the wicked, yet the Lord knows the righteous from the wicked;
though the pestilence does not know him that fears an Oath from him that
swears, yet the Lord knows him that fears an Oath, from him that swears;
though the pestilence does not know the clean from the unclean, yet the Lord
knows the clean from the unclean; though the pestilence does not know him that
sacrifices, from him that sacrifices not, yet the Lord knows him that
sacrifices, from him that sacrifices not; though the pestilence does not know
the oppressed from the oppressor, yet the Lord knows the oppressed from the
oppressor; though the pestilence does not know the persecuted from the
persecutor, yet the Lord knows the persecuted from the persecutor, etc. 2 Pet.
2. 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptatitions, that is
afflictions; though the godly man do not know how to deliver himself out of
temptations, though others do not know how the godly man should be delivered
out of temptations, yet the Lord knows how to deliver the godly man out of
temptations; and his time is always the best. The Physician turns the
hour-glasse, and resolves the physic shall work so long, the impatient Patient
cries out, Oh I am in pain, Oh how I am tormented, Oh what would I not give for
a little ease, Oh me thinks every hour is a year; but the wise Physician
knowing the fittest time, will not suffer him to have any rest or comfort, till
the physic has had its proper operation. Thus many times Gods dear children
when they are under sore trials, they cry out, How long Lord, how long shall
this Rod lie upon our backs, how long shall thy anger smoke, how long shall the
judgment continue; but God will turn a deaf ear, and make them wait his time,
which is always the best time. And therefore though God knows how to deliver
the godly out of temptations, yet he will take his own time to deliver them out
of temptations, etc.

The Thirteenth and last Divine Viz.
That though the godly are not delivered from the plague, yet they are still
delivered by the plague; by it they shall be delivered from all their sins.
Death is not Mors hominis, but Mors peccati; not the death of the man, but the
death of his sin. When Sampson died, the Philistims died together with him; so
when a believer dies (be it by the pestilence or any other disease) his sin
dies with him. As death came in by sin, so sin goes out by death. As the worm
kills the worm that bred it, so death kills sin that bred it. The Persians had
a certain day in the year, wherein they used to kill all serpents and venomous
creatures; such a day as that will the day of death be to every believer. When
the pestilence has put a period to a Christians days, then he shall never be
proud more, nor passionate more, nor unbelieving more, nor worldly more, nor
neglective of duty more, nor grieve the spirit of God more, nor wound
Conscience more, nor break his peace with God more, nor sad the hearts of the
righteous more, nor open the mouth of blasphemy more; the death of the body
shall quite destroy the body of death: so that as sin was the Midwife that
brought death into the world, so death shall be the grave that shall bury sin
in. When the pestilence takes away a godly man, it does not take him away in
his sins, but it takes him way from his sins. And as death, as the pestilence
(where it kills) rids the believer of all his sins, so 'twill rid him of all
his troubles. Death cures all diseases, the aching head, and the unbelieving
heart; Vltimus morborum medicus mors. At Stratford-Bow Acts and Mon. fol. 1733.
were burned in Queen Mary's days, at one stake, a lame man and a blind man;
the lame man after he was chained, casting away his crutch, bad the blind man
be of good comfort, for death would cure them both; 'Twill cure thee (says he)
of thy blindness, and me of my lameness. The way to glory is by misery. In this
world we are all Benonies, the sons of sorrow. The way to heaven is by weeping
cross. Christs-passion week was before his Ascension day. None passes to
Paradise, but by burning Seraphims. We cannot go out of Egypt, but through the
Red Sea. The Children of Israel came to Jerusalem through the Valley of Tears,
and crossed the swift river of Jordan, before they came to the sweet waters of
Siloam. If a godly man die of the pestilence, he shall never be haunted,
tempted, and buffetted by Satan more, he shall never see a cloud, a frown, a
wrinkle in the face of God more; the Chair of pestilence shall be to him but a
Chair of State, by which he shall be brought into the presence of the King of
Kings. If the plague prove mortal to a godly man or woman, it shall do that for
them, which all ordinances could never do, and which all their duties could
never do, and which all their graces could never do, and which all their
experiences could never do for them, and which all the assistances, influences
and incomes of the holy spirit could never do for them, etc. It shall at once
free them from all their sins, snares, sorrows, tears, temptations,
afflictions, oppressions, oppositions, vexations, and persecutions. Death will
cure the believer of all his bodily diseases and distempers at once. And thus I
have done with these Divine Maxims and Conclusions; the Lord make them as so
many heavenly Cordials to the Christian Reader.

READER,
If thou art so ingenious, as to be desirous to know what those special Lessons
are, that thou art to learn by that severe Rod the Pestilence, that has been
so long amongst us; I must refer thee to my first Epistle before my Treatise on
Closet Prayer, where thou will find Twenty Lessons that we are to learn by that
smarting Rod.

FINIS.
In Page 6. line 3, 4, 5. the sense being disordered by misplaced points, let
it be thus read; in this Kingdom and that, in this City and that, in this Town
and that, in this family and that.

Books printed for, and are to be sold by John Hancock, at the first shop in
Pope's Head Alley, next to Cornhill.
NIne Books lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel
at St. Margarets New-Fish-street.

1 Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices: Or, Salve for Believers and
Unbelievers sores.

2 Heaven on Earth: Or, A serious Discourse touching a well-grounded Assurance
of man's everlasting happiness and blessedness.

3 The Unsearchable Riches of Christ: Or, Meat for strong Men, and Milk for
Babes.

4 His Appes of Gold for Young Men and Women; And, A Crown of Glory for Old Men
and Women; Or, the Happiness of being good betimes, and the Honor of being an
Old Disciple.

5 A String of Pearls; Or, The best things reserved till last.

6 The Silent Soul, with Sovereign Antidotes against the most miserable
Exigents; Or, A Christian, with an Olive-leaf in his mouth, when he is under
the greatest afflictions, the sharpest and sorest trials and troubles, the
saddest and darkest providence and changes, etc.

7 An Ark for all Gods Noah's in a stormy day; Wherein is showed the
transcendent excellency of a Believers portion; on Lam. 3. 24.

8 The Crown and Glory of Christianity; Or, Holiness the only way to Happiness,
discovered in 48. Sermons on Heb. 12. 14.

9 The Privy Key of Heaven; Or, A Discourse of Closet Prayer, Twenty Arguments
for it, with the resolution of several considerable Questions, etc.

Eight Treatises, lately published by Mr. Ralph Venning.
1 A Warning to backsliders, with means for the recovery of fallen ones; on
Rev. 2. 5.

2 The way to Happiness, opened; on Mat. 7. 21.

3 Mercies Memorial, or a thankful Remembrance for Gods merciful Deliverance on
the 5. of November, 1605. on Psalm. 136. 23.

4 Canaans Flowing, or Milk and Honey, being a Collation of many Christian
Experiences, Sayings, and Sentences, etc.

5 His 543. Orthodox and Miscellanious Paradoxes concerning God, Christ, etc.

6 The new Command renewed, or love one another.

7 Mysteries and Revelations, or the Explication of several Allusions and
Metaphors in the Scriptures.

8 Things worth thinking on, or Helps to Piety.


