AND MOST MYSTERIOUS HISTORY OF Man's Redemption.

WHEREIN Is set forth the gracious administration of Gods Covenant with
Mankind, at all times, from the beginning of the World unto the End.

Historically digested into three Books. The first sets down the History
from Adam to the blessed Incarnation of Christ: The second continues it to the
end of the fourth year after his Baptism, which was the three and thirtieth
year of his age: The third, from thence till his glorious coming to Judgment.

BY MATTHEW BROOKS D. of Divinity.

Genesis 3.15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed, it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.
St. Joh. 3.16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
St. Joh. 19.30. It is finished. LONDON, Printed by William Wilson, for the
Author, Anno Dom. 1657.

TO HIS MOST HONORED FRIEND, FRANCIS BVRWELL, Esquire;
SIR,
IT is not unusual to those who write books, to make choice of some noble
friends to whom to dedicate them. My ambition is to present you with the
Dedication of this. The great respects which I had from your dear Father to the
last gasp of his breath, continued and augmented by you, have put me forwards
to retribute (to his memory, to your own merits) in such a way as I am able.

Sr. There is great profit in reading of books, if a good choice be made of
them. Historical books will accomplish a gentleman: for an history is not
improperly defined to be (...), a commemoration containing an exposition of
some matter or thing, which has been acted or done upon the stage of the
world. So that by history we do as it were live, and have lived at all times,
and in all places, conversing with all sorts of people, knowing the manners and
several constitutions of all nations, and are present in all the occurrences
of times bypast, as if they were now in action. But a Christian has his unum
necessarium, and that is to know Christ, and the power of his resurrection, and
the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death. No
historical knowledge therefore more pertinent unto him then that whereby,
according to the Scriptures of the Divine canon, he shall know the gracious
administration of Gods covenant with mankind; shall see Christ in the
Original promise, and in all the promises, sacraments, sacrifices, and sacred
ceremonies, visibly set forth and represented in the legal worship, and by
persons ordained to minister in the same, together with sacred places and
functions till his coming in the flesh, to fulfill all that which was promised,
and mystically showed concerning himself. And then shall behold him in the
flesh, as he was by divine dispensation: shall hear his heavenly doctrine, see
his wonderful works and miracles; and how he abolished the old testament,
instituted the great and mysterious sacraments of the new. And how (having done
all those things which were first requisite for him to do) he suffered, was
buried, descended into hell, rose again the third day from the dead; and having
been conversant with his disciples for the space of forty days after his
resurrection, he transferred the keys of the kingdom of heaven from the
Legal to the Evangelicall priesthood, giving ample commission to his Apostles
to go into all the world, and to teach and baptize all nations; and then
ascended into heaven, where he sits on the right hand of God, and makes
intercession for his Church.

A sound faith requires a right understanding: for the things which we do not
rightly understand, we cannot rightly believe. Therefore though to believe and
to apply the great and most mysterious work of man's redemption to our selves
effectually that we may be saved, is the gift of God by the holy Ghost through
faith; yet to inform the understanding, the history opened and cleared
according to the Scriptures, is most necessary. This is that which I have
endeavored to do, in such a method as I conceive most proper for the subject
so transcendently mysterious and divine, carefully observing the periods of the
times, and with what brevity and perspicuity I could: to remember the learned
of those things which they know, and to teach the unlearned some things which
they do not know; avoiding in all things curiosity and ostentation of language.
Upon the principal matters concurring with the history, (the explication
whereof is more requisite) I have insisted more largely. And as for those
things which cannot positively be defined or stated, (because not clearly
evidenced in the Scriptures) Ut potui, explicavi; nec tamen ut Pythius Apollo,
certa ut sint and fixa quae dixi: sed, ut homunculus, probabilia conjectura
sequens. Therefore must I apologize with the author of the Macchabaean history;
for, If I have done well, and as is fitting the story, it is that which I
desired; but if slenderly and meanly, it is that which I could attain unto. 2
Mac. 15.38.

Sir, you have the devotions of Your much obliged and most observant friend,
MATTHEW. BROOKS.

Reader,
IT cannot be but thou shall meet with some faults in this Impression, which I
beseech thee to correct upon thine own observation; principally these
following. fol. 17. Sect. 28. for invisible Church, read visible Church. f. 54.
sect. 78. for vessels r. ves^'s. fol. 54. 79. for Scuttetus, r. Scultetus. f.
73. 10. for had paid it, r. has paid it. f. 135. 75. for verietie r. verity.
f. 223. 24. for ingregrity, integrity. and in the same sect. for St Peter
Lombard, says Peter Lombard. f. 225. 26. for emptitius, emptitias. every where
for Sanhedrim, Sanhedrin f. 240. 43. for degisereris, dejicereris, and for
stanti standi. f. 244. 48. for Number, Nunc. f. 249. 53. Quadripartitae,
Quadripartita. f. 261. 67. for pdrmits, permits. f. 264. 69. (...), r. (...).
and in the same section, for, wherewith he was buried was chre, r. where with
he was buried were left in the Sepulcher. f. 168. and 169. for Not to them as
to St Thomas, Not to say unto them as to St Thomas. f. 271. 74. for (...) r.
(...). Vale.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE SACRED AND MOST MYSTERIOVS HISTORY OF MAN'S REDEMPTION.
GOD made Man in his Image, after his likeness. Image and Similitude of God,
had free will, Man made in the Image of God.
which made him capeable of a special positive law; according to which he
should live in all due obedience to his Creator, preserving himself, and all
his posterity, in that good condition in which he was created; as well thereby
to avoid both sin and death, as also to render himself by his obedience a fit
subject of a more clear and perfect vision, and fruition of God, Aug. Enchir.
cap. 25. Genesis 2.16.
The law which God gave unto him was delivered in terminis; Of every tree of
the Garden, thou may freely eat: But of the Tree of the knowledge of good
and evil thou shall not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof,
thou shall surely die.

This was the primordiall law; The primordiall Law.
and (as Tertullian says) in this Adam we acknowledge to be laid up all those
precepts which afterward, delivered by Moses, sprouted forth young. That is to
say, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all soul:
and thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. And Thou shall not kill, and
Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal, Honor thy father, and
thy mother, and Thou shall not covet that which is another man's. For (says he)
the primordiall law was given to Adam and Eve in Paradise, as the womb of all
the commandments of God. Advers. Judaeos cap. 2. He had no need of further
grace, for the observation of this law; because he might (if he would) have
kept it, by the liberty and freedom of his own will left unto him in the
custody of pure nature. For which cause the breach thereof made him a
transgressor to all the commandments (if, as Saint Augustine says, Adam's sin.
it be divided into its several members,) For pride is there (says he), for
as much as man delighted to be rather in his own power, then in the power of
God. And Sacrilege [or Infidelity], because he did not give credence to God.
And murder, because he killed himself. And Spiritual fornication, because
the virginity of the humane mind was deflowred by the Serpents persuasion. And
theft, because he usurped that food which was prohibited. And covetousness,
because he desired more then ought to have sufficed him. And whatsoever else by
diligent consideration, may be found to be in this one act of his
transgression; Wherefore, by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and death passed upon all men [(...)] for that or in whom, (namely, in
that one man) all have sinned. Thus was the deadly wound given by Adam, The
propagation of Adams sin.
through the abuse of his free will, to himself, and unto all his posterity,
who were then in him tanquam in radice, as in the root of mankind, Aug. Enchir.
cap. 26. whereby both he and they who were to descend of, and from him, by
ordinary generation, were the same day made obnoxious, or subject both to the
Spiritual or supernatural, and to the bodily or natural death, with all the
dreadful precedents, concomitants, and consequents of them both.

For this, (and to the end that he might restore that creature whom he had
made to immortality) God by his infinite wisdom, and of his great mercy,
manifested unto man that expedient which he had foreseen, and determined from
eternity; that he would redeem and save him, Gods Covenant of grace.
by the seed of the woman whom the Serpent had seduced; which seed should
break the Serpents head; that is to say, overthrow the Devil and all his
power. And therefore after Adam had sinned, and in him all his posterity, God
makes his covenant with him, and with them: and requires both of him, and
them, that they should on their parts, perform the conditions of it, by
believing and applying it every one of them particularly to himself; and to
know no other Redeemer, by whom to be redeemed from sin and death, brought
upon them all by Adams transgression, but only that blessed seed. The first
saving grace therefore that man received after his Fall (whereby he might rise
again from sin and death, into which he was fallen) was faith, even faith in
Christ: for the promised seed was Christ. Here therefore siste gradum, for the
order of this our history does require that I should adnote some thing by the
way concerning that first, and most necessary grace.

Romans held and worshipped faith for a goddess; and Numa Pompilius is first
said to have dedicated a Temple to Faith; Concerning Faith.
whether because in all the actions of life, and more specially in contracts,
bargains, and covenants, there is an urgent use, and necessity of faith: Or,
whether because traditions streaming down even from Adam unto those days, had
greatly manifested among the heathen themselves, that faith which is toward
God, as that only thing whereby God is moved to grant all the requests of men;
and by which every man may, and must attain unto true happiness; it is more
then I will take upon me to determine. Probable it is that Numa was not
altogether ignorant of that which was taught in the Church concerning faith:
for the Temples which he built are said to be without Images, and his Books
upon Livies report being found a long time after his death [viz. Anno Urb.
Cond. 573. Genebr. Chron. lib. 2. p. 411.] were burnt, as not holding
correspondence with the heathenish superstition of those Idolatrous times.

There is faith toward Men; and there is faith toward God; Scripture. I will
restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning;
Isa. 1.26.
afterward thou shall be called the city of Righteousness, the faithful city.
Faithful toward God in believing all his promises; faithful toward God in
keeping all his commandments. Faithful toward Men, in all distributive, and
commutative justice. But concerning that faith which is toward men, Faith
toward men.
and is nothing else but a certain veracitie or truth of mind, whereby men
approve themselves constant in their words, in their promises, and in all their
contracts, bargains, and covenants, to perform them, and is political,
active or mercatorious; it pertains not to this our History to discourse at
large.

Faith toward God, Faith toward God.
is that faith whereby a man does believe God, and apprehend and apply the
Covenant of Grace, first made with Adam, and his posterity; and all the
promises of God thereupon depending; to the saving of his soul. So that
howsoever the name or word faith, be copiously, and variously accepted in the
Scriptures; yet as now we are to speak of Faith, S. Mat. 13.20, 21. Heb. 6.4,
5, 6. Jac. 8.13. Act. 2.19. S. Mat. 17.20 1 Cor. 13.2. Tit. 1.1.
we do not intend either the external profession of Christian Religion only.
Or any temporal assent or bare knowledge of the grace of God. Nor yet any
certain persuasion conceived by Revelation, or by particular promise
concerning the working of miracles. But it intends that faith which is properly
and theologically styled Faith; which pertains only to Gods Elect, and to
all of them; which is passive, and is called by Divines, the justifying or
saving faith; because that thereby a man is justified, (...), in the sight of
God, or with God, as the Scripture speaks. Gal. 3.11.
It is a gift of God, or an holy habit wrought by the Holy Ghost, whereby the
believer gives his assent or credence unto Gods holy word, and does apprehend
and apply to himself, in particular; as well the Original promise, as also
all other promises, of the saving good will, and grace of God, in Christ the
promised seed, to his glory, and to the salvation of his own soul.

The efficient cause of which justifying faith primarily is God The efficient
of justifying faith.
who is one divine essence distinguished into three persons, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost: for faith is the gift of God, as St. Paul says;
Unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him,
Phil. 1.29.
but also to suffer for his sake. Yet so as that instrumentally it is either
internal or external. The internal is the Holy Ghost by his special working
(the shining of God in our hearts) whereby faith is begotten in us; 2 Cor. 4.6.
while that he does dispose our understanding to the saving knowledge of
Christ: and moves our will to give assent, and adhere thereunto. The external
is the administration of the Gospel, in the dispensation of the Word and
Sacraments, whereby the Holy Ghost does ordinarily form, and confirm the work
of faith in us: although it must not be denied that for the liberty of the
power of his will, God without the use of this ordinary means, when, and where
he shall so please, does beget, and work, faith in the hearts of men. Romans 1.16.
I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek. 17.
For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith, as it is
written, The just shall live by faith.

matter of faith The matter of Faith.
if considered subjectively, the proper subject thereof is the understanding
and will of man, so far forth as each faculty is regenerate by the
supernatural grace, and power of the Holy Ghost, whereby the understanding
discerns those supernatural benefits of faith, offered in Christ to be true;
and the will applies them assuredly, as good and saving. O fools and slow of
heart, (of understanding, and of will) to believe all that the Prophets have
spoken. Luc. 24.25.
But the matter of faith considered objectively; in respect of the
understanding, is divine verity: and in respect of the Will, the sole singular
grace of God, promised in Jesus Christ; both which are contained and
circumscribed in the written word of God: all which, and only which, faith
respects, and embraces, as its adequate object, and therein Christ
crucified, as its principal, first, and proper object. Let us draw near with
a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience, Heb. 10.22, 23.
and our bodies washed with pure water. Let us hold fast the profession of our
faith without wavering (for he is faithful that promised.)

matter of faith in respect of the parts of it, The matter of faith in respect
of the parts thereof.
are diversely considered, as well in regard of the subject, as of the object.
For in respect of the understanding, and divine will, it is knowledge and
assent: knowledge, whereby a man understands the whole word of God, according
to the principal heads thereof, for the measure of grace revealed. Assent,
whereby a man takes it for granted, and is firmly persuaded in his heart, that
all those things which he knows out of the Law, and the Gospel are so
certainly true, that in them, as in divine truths, is settled rest to be found.
Romans 7.16.
I consent (says the Apostle) unto the Law that it is good. In respect of the
will of man, the principal and primary part of faith, is confidence; which is
a most firm persuasion of the heart, whereby all the faithful do appropriate
the general promise of Grace, to themselves in particular. Which confidence
produces a twofold effect: whereof the first is a sure ground or foundation
upon which a man's faith stands in opposition of all dangers internal and
external. The second is a full trust in God, S. Mat. 7.25.
whereby a man does depend on him, that he may be saved. It is the testimony of
the Spirit, which (as St. Paul says) bears witness with our spirit, that we
are the children of God. Romans 8.16.


The form of faith The form of faith.
consists in Relation, whereby the believer God in particular. So that look
what the Scripture promises, and propounds generally, the believer
appropriateth to himself by a firm persuasion. As for example, God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son: S. Joh. 3.16.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life:
And this is it which the Scripture speaks in general terms: and was first
spoken to Adam after his fall, and is further spoken in all the old and new
Testament, which yet the believer appropriateth to himself. God so loved me,
that he has given his only begotten Son, that I believing in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life.

The final cause of faith, for the first and principal end of it, The final
cause of faith.
is glory of God, the Author of our faith, and the Redeemer of our Souls. But
the next or secundary end is out own salvation, which the scripture therefore
calls the end of our faith, and the reward of it, as the Apostle St. Peter
says, 1 Pet. 1.9.
Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls. Here note
by the way, Observation.
that faith toward God is one, and yet diverse. One, in the species; for though
there are many sorts of Christians, yet there is but one Catholic faith: for
faith is species specialissima. One, in regard of the object; for the thing
believed is one and the same: upon which ground, St. Athanasius in his Creed,
does conclude peremptorily, This is the Catholic faith, which except a man
believe faithfully, he cannot be saved. And the scripture accordingly, One
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; Diverse; both in number, and in degree. Ephesians. 4.5.
In number. Every believer has his own faith, proper and peculiar to himself,
which is his own faith, and is not the faith of any other. In degree; for faith
is in some more, in others less, according to the measure of the divine grace
of God. There is (...), and there is (...). If God so cloth the grass of the
field which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much
more cloth you, O ye of little faith? But the woman of Canaan had a great
faith, S. Mat. 15.28
O woman great is thy faith; be it unto thee even as thou will.

Now this which has been said concerning faith, The Covenant diversely
administered.
brings us directly into the way of our sacred History. For that Covenant
which God made with Adam, and with all his posterity, was diversely administered.
At this time thus, at that time so, at diverse times in diverse manners,
according as God was pleased to speak unto the fathers (...) at sundry times,
Heb. 1.1.
and in diverse manners, says the Apostle. And according as God was pleased to
invest it, as it were with diverse Robes, excellently set forth in the type,
Genesis 37.31.
by Joseph's coat of many colors, dipped in the blood of the Kid which his
brethren had killed. The times are distinguished into two Periods; The times
d^stinguished into two Period^.
the first is of the promised seed to be exhibited when the fullness of time
should come: The second is of that promised seed exhibited, when that fullness
of time was come: for so St. Paul himself distinguishes the Periods of the
times, Gal. 4.4.
saying, When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son.

first period of time, the Covenant was administered Concerning the first Period
of time, how the Covenant was administered. Geneb. Chr. lib. 2. p. 447.
in diverse manners. For the space of two thousand forty and six years or
thereabouts (for I scuffle not with Chronologers concerning the exact
Computation of years, seeing that of Genebrard is very true, that as touching
the number of the years of the world, a man shall find as many opinions as
writers. Neither will I have to do with that vast difference betwixt the
Greek and the Latin writers, occasioned by the corrupted Septuagint, utterly
inconsistent with the Hebrew verity. I follow those Latin writers and
Chronologers, among whom I find but little difference, and they who differ but
a little, seem no tto differ at all) I say, for the space of two thousand forty
and six years, or thereabouts, from Adam to Abraham, and to the ninety ninth
year of Abraham's age, the Covenant came forth naked, and was administered under
the form of that blessed promise, which God made unto man after his
transgression in these words, saying unto the serpent in whom the Devil was, I
will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed, it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. This was the
Original promise, the Covenant of Grace, Genesis 3.15.
the sum and substance of the Gospel: which promise all the righteous
faithful, from Adam to Abraham (though they knew no more of Christ) did
believe, that they might be saved. For, as learned St Augustine says, None of
all the righteous faithful could attain salvation, but only by the faith of
Christ: to them Christ was known, and had he not been known to them (says
he) they could not have prophesied Christ to us, sometimes more darkly, and
obscurely, as did the former; sometimes more plainly, and perspicuously, as did
the latter Prophets. Enchir.

The faith of the ancient righteous Fathers, The faith of the ancient righteous
Fathers.
was the Catholic faith, even the same which we have, though otherwise
dispensed, and revealed to them more obscurely, to us more plainly: They were
Christians as well as we, for they did believe in Christ: and Eusebius proves
by invincible arguments, that the very names of Jesus, and of Christ, were
known from the beginning of the world, and had in honor by all the Prophets of
God, Ec. Hist. Lib. 1. Chap. 1. And in the Revelation of Saint John, Christ is
plainly said to be slain from the foundation of the world. It is, because by
virtue of his death which was to come, Rev. 13.8.
they were saved, even as we. I know not, whether it were more impiously, or
ignorantly averred, by the Servetani, that the Fathers of old time, and before
the coming of Christ, did want both true faith, and spiritual life. Sure I
am, it is against the truth; for those righteous Fathers, who had nothing more
but the original Promise, had thereby the true justifying and saving Faith,
according to all that, which has been laid down before concerning faith; for,
they gave assent or credence unto that promise, and did apprehend and apply it
to themselves in particular, to Gods glory, and to the salvation of their own
souls. The efficient cause The efficient cause.
of it primarily, was God himself, whose gift it was; instrumentally and
internally the Holy Ghost, by his special working, while that he did dispose
their understanding to the saving knowledge of Christ, and did move their wills
to assent and adhere thereunto. Instrumentally and externally, it was the
Gospel it self, administered by Tradition, before they had the Word written,
or any Sacrament for the obsignation of that Promise; whereby the Holy Ghost,
as by the then ordinary means, did form and confirm the work of faith in them.

The matter The matter.
of their faith considered subjectively, was the understanding supernatural
power and grace of the Holy Ghost, whereby the understanding did discern those
supernatural benefits of faith, offered in that promised Seed, to be true; and
the will did apply them assuredly to be good and saving. But the matter of
their faith, considered objectively, in respect of the understanding, was
divine verity; and in respect of the will, it was the sole singular grace of
God, promised in that seed, both which were contained and circumscribed in the
original promise; all which, and only which, their faith respected and
embraced, as its adequate object, and therein that Seed, as its first, next,
and proper object. The matter of their faith, in respect of the understanding
and divine will, it was knowledge and assent; knowledge, whereby they
understood the promise, for the measure of grace revealed: Assent, whereby they
took it for granted, and were firmly persuaded in their hearts, that the
promise was true, and therein found settled rest. In respect of their will, the
principal and primary part of their faith was confidence, whereby they did
appropriate the general promise of grace to themselves in particular, which
also produced a twofold effect, whereof the first was a sure ground or
foundation, upon which their faith stood, in opposition of all dangers,
internal and external. The second was, a sure trust in God, to depend upon
him, that they might be saved; which sure trust in God, was the testimony of
his Spirit, Heb. 11.4.
whereby, as the Scripture says, Abel offered unto God a more excellent
sacrifice then Cain.

form The form.
of their faith likewise did consist in relation, whereby that promise or
covenant of grace, which was made unto Adam, and to all his posterity, every
believer did apply and appropriate unto himself, by a firm persuasion: viz.
that that Seed should come; and for him, and for his redemption, should break
the Serpents head, should overthrow the Devil and all his power; purchasing
for him salvation and everlasting life. Finally, the final cause The final
cause.
of their faith, for the first and principal end of it, was the glory of God,
the Author of their faith, and the Redeemer of their souls. But the next, or
secundary end, was their own salvation, which they, even as we, did work out
with fear and trembling. And in this manner was the Covenant barely
administered, under the form of that blessed promise, from Adam to Abraham, as
has been said before.

Abraham, The Covenant renewed with Abraham, etc. Romans 4.16 Gal. 3.9.
and with his Seed, generally with all the Faithful, (for Abraham is set
forth, to be the Father of us all; that is, of all us that believe: Abraham was
blessed by Faith in Christ: And all they which be of faith, are blessed with
faithful Abraham) for they are the spiritual Seed: Specially with the People
and Nation of the Jews, the carnal Seed. He draws his Covenant into
Articles, indenteth it, Genesis 17.11, 12, 13, 14,
and sets his Sign or Seal unto it, the Sign or Seal of Circumcision: Ye
shall circumcise (says God) the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a
token of the Covenant between me and you. He sets down, what he will do on
his part, and what he expects, that his People should do on their part; and
he seals it with his Seal, Circumcision. And of all this, you may read at
large, Genesis 17.

Circumcision Concerning Circumcision
was a sacred action, wherein the foreskin of the flesh of the Male kind, was
cut off, according to Gods Ordinance, for the obsignation of his divine
Covenant with men. Who it was, that was deputed to that Office, the Scripture
makes no mention; probable, it is the most ancient or honorable of that House
or Family, of which the party to be Circumcised was descended, especially,
before the Law given: for, God commanded Abraham to do it, and Abraham, at Gods
commandment, Genesis 17.23. Exodus 4.25.
circumcised Ishmael his Son, and his whole House. Zipporah, the Wife of Moses,
(although we have but that one precedent) did circumcise her Son. When the
People of Israel were arrived in the Land of Canaan, then did Joshua Josh. 5.3.
circumcise them. It is likely, that under the Law, that Office was to be
performed by the Priests, as being by their Function sacred to God, and
therefore the fittest persons to perform so divine a Ceremony. The Day
appointed for Circumcision was the eighth day; for so did God ordain: He that
is eight days old, Genesis 17.12.
shall be circumcised among you. And it is plain, that our Savior Christ
himself, as being under the Law, and Saint John the Baptist, were circumcised
the eighth day, according to the Law. But, if a man had not been circumcised
upon the eighth day, according as God had appointed, he might then be
circumcised at any other time; for, it is never too late for a man, to submit
himself to the holy Ordinances of God. And therefore the Children of Israel,
who traveled in the Wilderness by the space of forty years, were
(notwithstanding their age) circumcised in the Land of Canaan. Likely it is,
that they did not circumcise with Knives, but with sharp Stones; for Zipporah,
the Wife of Moses, circumcised her Son with a sharp Stone: Then Zipporah took a
sharp stone, Exodus 4.25.
(a sharp knife of stone) and cut off the foreskin of her Son, says the story.
And God commanded Joshua, saying, Make thee sharp knives, Josh. 5.2.
(or knives of flints) and circumcise again the children of Israel the second
time. Circumcision was not without the shedding of some blood, and much pain:
For, when Moses's Wife had cut off the foreskin of her Son, she cast it at his
feet, saying, Exodus 4.26.
Surely a bloody husband art thou to me. She said, a bloody Husband thou art,
because of the Circumcision. And when the Shechemites were Circumcised, it is
said, that the third day, when they were sore, (sore of the wound of
Circumcision) Simeon and Levi took each man his sword, Genesis 34.25
and came upon the City boldly, and slew all the Males. They were sore, sore of
the wound of Circumcision, sore the third day after; and so sore, that they
were not able to make resistance, no, not for their lives.

Circumcision was a great and venerable Sacrament, it was initiation, or
reception into the Covenant; The mystery of Circumcision.
and the mystery of it was great: For first, whereas Circumcision was ordained
to be made in that part or member of the body of Man, which God would to be for
the propagation of Seed; it did fitly intimate man's uncleanness by Nature,
and the propagation of Original sin. Every father stands in the place of Adam,
and conveigheth unto his Child, besides the nature of Man, the very guilt and
corruption of Nature: Ephesians. 2.13.
We are by nature the children of wrath. That natural uncleanness of ours
must be taken away, or we cannot be saved. This is a second birth, as Christ
said to Nichodemus, Marvel not that Isaid to thee, Ye must be born again. S.
Joh. 3.7.
2ly It did fitly give them to understand, that that Seed, in whom they
believed (Christ the Messiah) should come of the circumcised seed of Abraham,
according to the flesh, as God had promised, Genesis 22.18. Lact. Instit. lib. 4.
cap. 17.
saying, In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, 3ly The
making bare of that part or member, did (as Lactantius observes) signify, in
the mystery, the true circumcision which is of the heart; that the breast must
be laid bare, and that the spiritual Seed must be circumcised in heart, to have
their conversation with an open and simple heart. I say nothing of that
similitude which some have observed, betwixt the heart and the prolifick
member. Romans 2.28.
He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision, which is
outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, 29.
and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter, whose
praise is not of men, but of God. 4ly That piece of skin which was cut off, did
signify the uncleanness of Nature, in a state of sin: And like as they cast
the prepuce, or piece of skin, upon the ground, at the feet of him that was
circumcised, Exodus 4.25.
as may be conjectured by what Zipporah did when she circumcised her Son: So,
that all uncleanness of heart and action, must be circumcised and cut off, it
must be cast away, as the prepuce thrown upon the ground, never to be
reassumed. 5ly The circumcision-knife was a type of Christ; for, that knife was
of stone, and did intimate Christ the Rock, the foundation Stone, the Stone of
Sion, elect and precious; the corner stone, who by his Spirit, does circumcise
the hearts of men, according to that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy Seed, to
love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou
may live. 6ly The drops of blood that were shed in circumcision, did give
them to understand the blood of the Messiah, who was to be of the circumcised
Seed, and that his blood it was, which should be shed for the remission of
sins. 7ly The great pains and forenesse of circumcision, did represent as well
the sufferings of Christ for us, as also, that they who will be his servants,
must be nothing curious to suffer all pains and persecutions; and, if need be,
to shed their blood for the name of Christ. 8ly The day of circumcision, which
was the eighth day, did set forth in a mystery the Resurrection of Christ; for,
like as Christ rose again from the dead upon the eighth day, according to the
Jews account, who begin to reckon their week upon the Sunday; even so, that
they who were circumcised, had an eight day to look for, the day of his
Resurrection, by virtue whereof, they should rise again from the dead, being
first risen with him unto newness of life; that is to say, from a death of
sin, to a new and spiritual life. Lastly, that same opprobrium circumcisionis,
that shame and disgrace which the Jew had, by reason of his circumcision, among
the Gentiles, (for which he was mocked, despised, reproached, and scornfully
termed (...) Apella, Verpus, etc.) did set forth the shame and scandal of the
Cross, giving the People of God to understand thereby, that the way to Heaven
is not a way of popularity and honor, but rather of ignominy, reproach, and
worldly contempt. Moses had learned that lesson by his circumcision, Esteeming
(says the Scripture) the reproach of Christ greater riches, Heb. 11.26.
then the treasures in Egypt. So great and excellent was the Mystery.

Most important was the use of this great Sacrament: For, The use of
Circumcision.
first, it was sigillum foederis, the seal of the Covenant, which God had
renewed unto Abraham, and to his Seed, and did therefore serve greatly to
confirm their faith; for, in that God had set to such a seal, they needed not
to doubt the performance thereof on his part. Once God did make his covenant
with Mankind, and with all his creatures, that he would no more destroy them
from off the face of the Earth by the Waters of a flood; for confirmation
whereof, he placed his Rainbow in the cloud, as the seal of that covenant;
concerning which seal, he speaks and promises, saying: It shall come to
pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the Bow shall be seen in the
cloud; Genesis 9.14.15.
and I will remember my covenant which is between me and you, and every living
creature of all flesh, that the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy
all flesh. Such was the use of Circumcision, when God should see the
circumcision in the flesh of the foreskin, then would he remember the covenant
that he had made with Abraham, and with Abraham's seed, to be the God of
Abraham, and of his seed after him. And so was circumcision, signum
confirmationis, Circumcision, signum confirmationis.
a sign or seal of confirmation, as well of the covenant it self on God's
part, as also of their faith in that covenant, on their part.

2ly It served to admonish them of their duties all their lives, to the end,
that as often as they should look down upon them sign or mark of circumcision,
in the flesh of their foreskin, they might remember their covenant with God, to
be an holy and a peculiar people unto him, and to serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of their life. They did wear Gods badge or mark in
their flesh, whereby he had set his stamp or mark upon them, for his own
people, to give them to understand, that they must not defile themselves, or
suffer themselves to be defiled, according to all the abominations of the
wicked Heathen; nor lead an unclean life, according to the fleshly lusts of
their own heart. And for this cause, God was pleased, that they should receive
names in circumcision; so when Abraham was circumcised, Genesis 17.5.
his name was changed from Abram into Ahraham; And Saint John the Baptist, S.
Luc. 1.63. S. Luc. 2.21.
(though sanctified from his Mothers womb) and our blessed Lord himself;
(because he would fulfill all righteousness) had their names in their
circumcision. It was a note of that subjection and perfect obedience, which
they did owe unto the whole Law; and so it was signum admonitionis,
Circumcision Signum admonitionis. Jer. 4.4.
a sign of admonition, giving them always to understand their duty, and that
they must, on their part, perform the conditions of the Covenant to Godward.
Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the fore-skins of your heart.

grace upon them, and to conveigh his grace unto them. For God does not jest,
or toy with men in the outward signs, but like as he does make a sure
performance of all that which he promises in his vocal word, the Scriptures;
even so does he make a sure performance, of all that which he promises, and
sets before the eyes of men in his visible word, the sacred, Romans 4.11.
and mysterious Sacraments. And therefore St. Paul says, That Abraham received
the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith, which he had
yet being uncircumcised, (to what purpose) that he might be the Father of all
them that believe, though they be not circumcised, Circumcision Signum
praebitionis.
that righteousness might be imputed to them also. And thus it was signum
praebitionis, a sign of praebition, wherein he performed that which he had
promised.

Circumcision, was an external sign of the visible Church, and made that
outward distinction, whereby the servants of God were to be known and
distinguished from the idolatrous Heathen; so that they who were not
circumcised, had not the visible character, nor were to be reputed as visible
members of the visible Church. And unto this alludeth St. Paul, when he says,
Phil. 3.2.
Beware of Dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision. The Dogs
were the unbelieving Heathen, the evil workers were the miss-living
Christians, the concision were those Jews, who after the abolition of
circumcision, by some instrument which they had, did draw up the prepuce, as
men ashamed of their circumcision; But the true circumcision is of the
Christian. For (says the Apostle) We are the circumcision, which worship God
in spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.
And thus was it signum distinctionis, 3. Circumcision Signum distinctionis.
a sign of distinction, as being that outward character or mark, whereby the
Church of God was visibly to be known, and distinguished, upon which the Jews
were so elated, that the uncircumcised they utterly disdained, reputing them as
Dogs, Swine, or other unclean beasts. Thy servant slew both the Lion and the
Bear, 1 Samuel 17.36
and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them. And in this manner
the Covenant went forth, and was administered, from the ninety ninth year of
Abraham's age, until Moses time, and to the departure of the people of Israel
out of Egypt, for the space of about four hundred and two years more, till the
people were departed, and the Law was given.

And here the peruser of this our sacred History, has to observe, circumcision
was not, Periods of times to be observed.
and therefore could not be used; so was it from Adam to Abraham, and to the
ninety ninth year of Abraham's age. There was a time when circumcision was; and
therefore must be used. So was it from the ninety ninth year of Abraham, till
the Resurrection of Christ; during all which time it was sub praecepto, under
the law and commandment of God; it was a necessary Sacrament, or seal of Gods
Covenant, and was therefore necessaria and utilis, necessary and profitable:
Necessary to be done for the Law sake, whereby it was ordained, and profitable
by divine Institution, to them that were circumcised. There was a time when it
might indifferently be used, or not used; which was, from the Resurrection of
Christ, to the destruction of the Temple, which was the Wardrobe of
Ceremonies. In which period it was lawful, but it was not profitable, and was
permitted (as Luther says) not as a necessary Sacrament or seal of the
Covenant, Luther com in Galat. cap. 2. v. 3.
but for reverence of the Fathers, and for charity sake, lest the weak should
take offense, until they should be confirmed in the faith. There was a time,
and now is, wherein circumcision is altogether unlawful, and this time is from
the destruction of the Temple by Titus and the Romans, unto the end of the
world. So then, there are four periods. The first from Adam to Abraham,
wherein circumcision was not borne. The second from the ninety ninth year of
Abraham, till the Resurrection of Christ; wherein it lived, but yet had its
infancy, its manly age, and its old age. Its infancy from Abraham, till the
departure of the people out of Egypt, and till the Law given. Its manly age,
from the Law given to the birth of Christ. Its old age, from Christ his birth
to his Resurrection; during which time it is not improper to say, that it lay
sick upon its death bed; and when Christ rose from the dead, then circumcision
expired. The third Period, from the Resurrection of Christ, till the
destruction of the Temple, during all which time though it were dead, yet it
was not buried, but lay, as it were, upon its Hearse, in expectation of an
honorable burial. The fourth and last Period, from the destruction of the
Temple, which was the funeral burning of circumcision, to the end of the
world; wherein it is not only dead, but buried too; and if any man shall now
rake it out of its grave, Christ shall profit him nothing. Behold I Paul say
unto you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. Gal. 5.2.


In or about the year of the world, two thousand four hundred Concerning the
paschall Lamb. Genesis 15.13, 14.
when the time came that God would bring forth the people of Israel out of
Egypt, according to his word, and promise made to Abraham, Genesis 15. He sets
another seal to his Covenant, by instituting another Sacrament, the Sacrament
of the passover or paschall Lamb, (it was the Sacrament of their continuation
in the covenant) which he commanded to be observed. It was a sacred action of
divine Institution, in the killing and eating of a Lamb, to perpetuate the
memorial of Isreal's deliverance out of the land of Egypt, and from the
servitude and bondage of the Egyptians, to testify unto them the grace and
favor of God, to be a type of Christ, to conserve them in the unity of the
Church, and to teach them true gratitude in the thankful acknowledgement of so
great a benefit. To him that made the world, it belongs to make the
Sacrament; therefore this Sacrament was of divine institution: for Moses
delivered to the people that which he received from God. The Time.
1. He changes the beginning of the year: For whereas the Jews ever before,
began the year at the aequinoctiall, in the month of September; God commanded
Moses that it should begin from that month, wherein the people departed out of
Egypt, that was the month Nisan, which correspondeth with the month of March,
wherein is the Vernall aequinoctiall. At this aequinoctiall, this great
Sacrament was to be celebrated; for upon the tenth day of that month, they
made choice of the Lamb; upon the fourteenth day at evening (that is to say
before the Sun went down) they killed it; and in the evening following, which
was the evening of the fifteenth day (for the Jews began their day at evening
when the Sun went down) they did eat it according to the Law. Where I would
request the Reader of this our History to take notice, that it came to pass in
process of time, that the Jews by the tradition or law of their Sanhedrin,
Carol. Sigon. de Rep. Heb. lib. 3. cap. 9.
did forbear to eat the Passover, upon the second, the fourth, or sixth days
of the week; that is, upon our Monday, Wednesday, and Friday: so that if the
fifteenth day of the month fell upon either of those days, the Passover was
deferred to the next day. It is said to fall out so, the year that Christ
suffered; and this was the reason why the Passover was killed for him upon the
Thursday, and eaten at even, that is to say upon the Friday, which began at
Sunset, which day to the Jews, following their tradition, was the parasceue or
day of preparation, on which they killed the Passover, to eat it after Sunset,
which was the evening of the Saturday or Jewish Sabbath. But our Lord, who was
made under the Law, would not eat it, but according to the Law.

place The place.
of the Passover was certain and appointed; for although at first they did eat
it in the land of Egypt, according to their families in several houses: Yet
when they arrived in the land of promise, it was utterly forbidden to be
celebrated, in any other place but only in that which the Lord should choose
to put his name there: Deuteronomy 16.6.
that was first in Shilo, afterward at Jerusalem, whither the tribes went up
at that solemn feast and being dispersed all the City over, did by several
companies, in several houses, eat the Passover: The persons The Persons.
that were to eat it, were all the congregation of Israel, even every one that
was circumcised, of whom such a number was to meet together in one house, as
might suffice to eat a whole Lamb at one meal. No foreyner or hired servant,
nor slave might eat of it; but yet, if they were first circumcised, they might
come unto this Sacrament; neither was any difference at all to be made betwixt
them, Exo. 12.49.
and the native circumcised seed. 3ly The ceremonies The Ceremonies.
were stated; that they must choose a Lamb, it must be taken out from the
Sheep, or from the Goats. This choice must be made upon the tenth day, upon
the fourteenth day in the evening they must kill it: they must take the blood
in a Basin: they must take a bunch of Hysop, and dip it in that blood, and
strike the lintell, and the two side-posts of the door of the house where it
was eaten, neither must they go forth until the morning. The Lamb it self
must not be eaten raw, nor sodden, but roasted; it must be all roasted whole,
with the head, the legs, and purtenance. It must be eaten with bitter herbs,
and with unleavened bread; it must be all eaten, nothing of it must remain
until the morning, and if any part of it should remain until the morning, it
must be burnt with fire. It must be all eaten in one house, none of it must be
carried out, neither must a bone of it be broken. All the while that they did
eat it, they must stand upon their feet, for they must eat it with their loins
girded, their shoes on their feet, and their staff in their hand, and they
must eat it in haste. And all this is luculently prescribed, Exodus 12.

By all this, God would perpetuate the memorial of that great The Meaning.
when he brought them out of the land of Egypt, and from the cruelty and
oppression of Pharaoh, and of the Egyptians. It was not enough that such a
deliverance should be preached, but he will have it to be visibly represented
in his Church, by the anniversarie celebration of a solemn Sacrament; of which
the parents must carefully teach the meaning unto their Children. And it shall
come to pass when your children shall say unto you, what mean you by this
service? That ye shall say, it is the sacrifice of the Lords passover, Exo.
12.26.
who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote
the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. 27.


But by all this a further and greater mystery The Mystery.
was meant and deliverance out of the land of Egypt, was a type of that
deliverance which all the Israel of God has by the redemption of Jesus Christ.
That was a deliverance out of a temporal bondage, this is a deliverance out of
an eternal bondage; that was a deliverance of the body, this is a deliverance
of body and soul; that was a deliverance from Egypt, and from the heavy
burdens of it; this a deliverance from hell it self, and from the eternal
torments of it. By that deliverance, the carnal seed were brought into the
land of Canaan; by this deliverance, the spiritual seed are brought into the
kingdom of heaven. That lamb was Christ; it was Christ in mystery and
signification, for Saint Paul affirms it in plain terms, 1 Cor. 5.7.
Christ our passover is sacrificed (or slain, (...)) for us. That lamb was
without blemish, and a male of the first year, or of a year old: to signify
Christ conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of a pure Virgin, in whom there
was not the least blemish or spot of sin, either original or actual; and to
signify Christ sacrificed, in the full perfection of the human nature. That
lamb was taken out from the sheep or from the goats, to signify Christ
according to the flesh, descended both of righteous and unrighteous parentage,
as is to be seen in his genealogy, St. Mat. 1. and St. Luc. 3. That blood of
the lamb which was shed, and was with a bunch of hysope stricken upon the
lintell, and upon the two side-postes, which God looked upon, to the end, that
he might not suffer the destroyer to destroy them; did signify the blood of
Christ, who, like as the hysope, which is a low and contemptible herb, should
come in a low and contemptible condition; that he would look upon his blood,
and for that blood-sake, spare his whole Church, by delivering it from the
destruction of the wicked world. That lamb is eaten for sustentation of the
body, when Christ crucified is believed for the nutriment of the soul; for, S.
Joh. 6.51.
to eat Christ is a work of faith. That lamb, roasted whole upon the spit, did
signify, whole Christ, made a sacrifice upon the cross. That lamb wholly
eaten, did signify Christ wholly to be believed, the divinity, the humanity,
the hypostaticall union. A bone of that lamb was not to be broken; and that St
John says plainly to be meant of Christ, S. Joh. 19.36.
that not a bone of him should be broken; wherein also is to be observed, that
although this lamb of God did suffer, according to all that wherein it was
possible for him to suffer in the flesh, and was broken; yet his Divinity could
not suffer. That lamb was to be eaten in haste, because it was the Lords
passover; to signify, that all they who eat the true passover, which is
Christ the Lord, by faith, must use no procrastination or delay, but must make
all the haste they can to come to a full fruition of him. That lamb was to be
eaten with unleavened bread, and with bitter herbs, to signify, that they who
eat the true passover, must purge out the old leaven of malice and
wickedness, and keep the feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth, nothing abhorring poverty and all manner of afflictions, which attend
them in this present world for that lamb's sake. That lamb was eaten standing,
with their loins girt, their shoes on their feet, and their staves in their
hands; to signify, that in this world, we are pilgrims and strangers; here we
have no abiding place, we must go forth to seek another and a better Country,
whose builder and founder is God.

Finally, the use The use.
of this Sacrament was, to admonish them of beginning of the year was changed,
to teach them, to live no more after the old year, in their former
conversation, but to become new creatures in Christ: No uncircumcised person
was to eat of it, for this was a Sacrament of the ^^visible Church, and served
to congregate the members of the same into communion, and into one and the same
visible profession of the true Religion; and was therefore a distinctive sign,
whereby the professors of the true Religion might be known and distinguished.
In one house it must be eaten, neither must any part of it be carried out of
the house: to teach them to know, that the Church, which is that house in which
the Lamb is, is but one; they must therefore keep themselves in the unity of
that Church, and not go forth of it, nor think to find the true Lamb of God,
in the fraternities of Heretics, Schismatics, and Sectaries, who depart from
the communion of the Church; for, among such, he will not be found, neither
will he be eaten there.

This great Sacrament being thus instituted and ordained, then God proceeds,
for he disposes, expounds, The Covenant disposed into the form of a
testament. The legal part. Levit. 18.5. Gal. 3.19.
and confirms his covenant into the form of a Testament, having two parts;
the one legal and conditional, requiring perfect obedience, and under that
condition promising eternal life: Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my
judgments; which if a man do, he shall live in them. And that legal part of
the covenant was added, that is to say, further expounded, put into a better
method, and written (as Saint Paul says) because of transgressions. How so?
Why, first, to discover sins and transgressions; for, by the law is the
knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. Romans 7.7.
I had not known sin but by the law; for I had not known lust, except the law
had said, Thou shall not covet. 2ly To punish sins and transgressions, for the
punishment is prescribed by the law; the punishment prescribed by the law, is
the curse of the law: Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this
law, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
to do them. 3ly To smite the conscience, and to make a man to condemn
himself, for the sins and transgressions which he has done; as Saint Paul
says, We know, that what things soever the law says, Romans 3.9.
it says to them that are under the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and
all the world may become guilty before God. In the confession of sins, says
Saint Jerome upon the place. 4ly To show unto the people, by whom sins and
transgressions are to be expiated, viz. not by those Leviticall Ordinances, but
by him who was set forth in the Leviticall Priesthood, and by all the
sacrifices of the Law, that is, Jesus Christ: Ephesians. 1.7
In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace. For the law (says the Apostle) having a
shadow of good things to come, Heb. 10.1.
and not the very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices which
they offered year by year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect.

Testament was Evangelicall, The Evangelicall part.
setting before their eyes the Redemption of Jesus Christ, and giving them to
understand, that man should be reconciled unto God, and delivered out of all
miser^^ by his death. Upon which part of the testament, he puts a most rich
and sumptuous robe, whereunto belonged, 1st that Tabernacle, or portable
Temple, which Moses at Gods commandment made in the Wilderness, the pattern
whereof was showed unto him in the Mount, Exodus 25.40. Act. 7.44. Heb. 8.5.
with all the sacred utensills thereunto belonging; the Arc of the covenant,
the golden table, the shewbread, the golden candlestick, the altar of incense,
the altar of burnt offerings, the brazen laver; all which are to the life set
forth, as God commanded, and as Moses made them, in the book of Exodus, Cap.
25, 26, 27, 30, 36, 37, 38, 40.

Tabernacle, The mystery of the Tabernacle.
as it was the house of divine worship, did represent the Church; for in his
Church, and only in his Church, is the true worship of God. The Pillars were
types of the Apostles, Bishops, and other Ministers of the new Testament, by
whose faith and function, the Church is upheld. Their sockets of brass, the
faith of Christ, in which they stand strongly grounded and rooted, immovable
as pillars in their sockets. The golden boords, with their sockets and bars,
did represent the faithful, far more precious then gold, who, like gold, do
shine and glister in all holy conversation. The curtains of fine twined linen,
and blew, and purple, and scarlet, with cherubims of cunning work, coupled
together with loops and taches of gold, did signify, that the members of the
Church, adorned with the several graces of the Holy Ghost, are knit and joined
together in the unity of one and the same Spirit, by the bond of peace. The
Rams skins died red, and the Badgers skins for the covering aloft, did mean the
Gentiles, made partakers of the same redeeming blood, and their faith and
fortitude in withstanding the violent storms of persecution. The other vailes,
namely, that of the outward court, and that which was betwixt the outward court
and the holy place, did show forth the humility of Christ, wherewith the
Divinity, as with a vail, was shaddowed, and through which the Godhead entered
in to be sacrificed, and to make an atonement for the sins of men. But the
inward vail, which was hung up before the holy of holies, or the holiest of
all, which was inaccessable to all, and a type of heaven, into which only the
high Priest entered, and that but once a year, upon the great day of expiation,
according to our account the tenth day of September, did import, that the way
into the Holiest of all, was not made manifest, while the first Tabernacle was
yet standing. Heb. 9.8.
The High Priest must go in, making the atonement, that so heaven gates may be
opened unto the sons of Adam, who were shut out by sin: When thou had
overcome the sharpness of death, (sings the Church) thou did open the
kingdom of heaven to all believers. But who is sufficient to declare the
mystery of all these things?

The matter and form of the Ark, The Ark.
is luculently set forth in Exodus, Cap. 25. and 37. It was placed in the most
holy place, impervious unto all, save only to the high Priest, called in the
Scripture, the Arc of the covenant of the Lord, Number. 10.33. Josh. 3.6.
because the tables of the covenant were laid up there, together with the
golden pot of Manna, and Aaron's budding Rod. It was a visible testification of
Gods divine presence, from whence he gave Answers, where God did, as it were,
make his habitation, and therefore called also the Ark of the Lord God of
hosts, 1 Samuel 4.4.
that dwells between the Cherubims. It was a type of Christ, for the gold of
the Ark did signify the Divinity of Christ; the wood of the Ark did signify
the humanity of Christ; and the crown environing, did signify the hypostatical
union, whereby was showed what Christ must be in his own person, viz. God and
man, hypostatically united in one person. It was a symbol of Religion; for what
else meant the tables of the ten commandments, which were laid up there, the
pot of Manna, with Aaron's rod? What else meant those two Cherubims, which were
placed face to face, and did face one another; yet so, as both of them did look
down upon the propitiatory, or mercy seat: But the old Testament, and the new,
having mutual respect to Christ, answering to, and interpreting one another?
It was an Emblem of Regality; for there might you see the crown of gold, and
the flourishing rod or scepter, ensigns of regality.

Without the Vail, which was betwixt the Holy place and Holiest of all, in the
holy place, stood the golden table, The golden table.
an ample description whereof is made Exodus 25. To this table belonged dishes,
and spoons, and covers, and bowls, to cover or power out withal. And upon
this table were set forth the cakes of shewbread, in number twelve, made of
fine flower, and set in two rows, having franckincense put upon each row. This
was the bread of memorial, and must be renewed every Sabbath day, that it
might be before the Lord continually. See Levit. 24. The table was Christ, in a
mystery; there might they see his divinity, his humanity, the hypostaticall
union, by the gold, the wood, and the crown environing. From him, as from a
table, do all his people receive the spiritual nutriment. His Ministers supply
the office of dishes, spoones, covers, and bowls, to cover and pour out
withal; for by them, and by their ministry, is the heaven y nutriment given
and dispensed unto men. These must be all of pure gold, sacred by their
functions, and holy in their lives and conversations. The twelve cakes did
signify the Church, the two rows the Church of the new Testament, consisting
both of Jews and Gentiles. The name or title of shewbread, did intimate the
visibility of his Church: the franckincense that was upon those rows of the
shewbread, the prayers, supplications, and praises of his Church. And as that
bread was renewed, and was continually before the Lord for a memorial: Even
so, that he will for ever accept the prayers, supplications, and praises that
are made unto him in his Church, have it always in remembrance, and preserve
it unto the worlds end. And what is this, but that which Christ says unto his
Apostle Saint Peter, S. Mat. 16.18.
Upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. Upon this table have I placed my shewbread, [my Church] I have
placed it in two rows of Jews and Gentiles; I have placed it for a memorial,
and to be continually before me, that I may have it always, in despite of all
opposition, even unto the end of the world.

golden candlestick The golden Candlestick. S. Joh. 1 9. S. Joh. 8.12.
has likewise its description, Exodus 25. It had his shaft, his branches, his
bowls, his knops, and his flowers, all of pure beaten gold. It was Christ,
that true light, which lights every man that comes into the world. I am
(says he) the light of the world: he that follows me, shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of life. His branches, his bowls, and his
knops, are his Apostles, his Bishops, and Priests; and his flowers are all good
christians, that believe in him. The candlestick is made for the light of the
house: Christ came into the world for the light of his Church. The branches,
the bowls, the flowers belong unto the candlestick: The Apostles, the Bishops,
the Priests, and all good christians, belong unto Christ. The light which is
held forth by the branches, is the light of the candlestick: the doctrine of
the Gospel, by which the world is enlightened, is the word of Christ. All the
branches, bowls, knops, and flowers, must be of pure gold: All his Apostles,
Bishops, Priests, and all good christians, must be of like holiness with him.
Because it is written, 1 Pet. 1.16.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. The lamps, snuffers, and snuffe-dishes, must be of
pure gold; and all they who have any place or degree in his Church, must be of
like purity.

Altar of incense The Altar of incense.
was made of Shittim-wood, four square, a cubit long, and a cubit broad, two
cubits high; it had four horns, it was covered over with gold, and had a
crown of gold round about. It was placed in the Holy place, before the vail,
which divided the Holy place from the Holy of Holies. Once every year, upon the
day of Expiation, (according to our account count the tenth day of September,
the high Priest entered into the Sanctum Sanctorum, and then he made an
atonement, upon the horns of the Altar, with the blood of the sin offering
of attonements: that is, he put the blood of the Goat, and of the Calfe,
offered for the sins of the people, upon the horns of that Altar; by which
religious Ceremony the atonement was made, and a reconciliation of God with
the people. Upon this Altar was offered the sacred incense, The sacred incense.
which was a most sweet perfume, composed and confected of four most sweet and
odoriferous simples. Stacte (Myrh dried and beaten to ashes). Onycha (the shell
of a little fish, wonderfully sweet, much like the nail of a man's hand, whence
it is so called; (...) signifies a nail: if not rather, as Papias thinks, a
kind of spice, bearing that name). Galbanum (it was the juice or gum, of a
certain sweet smelling herb, white as milk, whence it has the name; for (...)
signifies milk). And pure Frankincense, that is to say, franckincense not
mixed with rosen. A like quantity of all these Simples were confected into a
sweet perfume, for the service of God, and this was called incense pure and
holy. Now the Altar was Christ, Exodus 30.35
for it figured and set forth Christ to come: the Incense were the prayers of
the Church, The Mystery.
and of all her members: And the Priest who offered incense, did in the type
bear the person of Christ, until his coming in the flesh. The gold (as was
said before concerning the Ark and the golden Table) did signify the Divinity,
the Wood the Humanity; and the Crownen vironing, the Hypostatical union: that
the wood of Shittim not corruptible as other wood, was covered with gold, it
did signify Christ his body, which God would not to see corruption, clothed
upon, with eternal glory. Like as the sacred incense composed of four most
sweet and odoriferous simples, was offered by the Priest, both morning and
evening upon that golden Altar: so that the prayers and supplications of the
faithful, composed and confected of faith, hope, charity, and the sweet
ejaculations of Gods most holy and most blessed Spirit, are by Christ the true
and eternal Priest, offered unto God upon the golden Altar which is himself,
as a sweet perfume, with the good savor whereof he is well pleased, at morning
and at evening, a principio ad finem, from the beginning of the world unto the
end.

The brazen Altar, The brazen Altar.
which was the Altar of burnt-offerings, with Exodus 28. It did signify Christ.
For like as that Altar was but one, and was for all the burnt-offerings of all
the people offered upon all occasions: even so Christ is that sole, singular,
catholic, general, and universal Altar, in and upon whom all the sacrifices
of the Church which are spiritual, are by faith to be offered up unto God the
Father. This Altar was placed in the court without, to signify Christ (as old
Simeon says in his Song) prepared before the face of all people, S. Luke 2.31.
and tendered unto all the world by the ministry of the Gospel. I might here
say, that the Brass did signify the fortitude and patience of Christ, Heb. 12
2.
who endured the cross, despising the shame. And whereas all the Vessels
thereof were to be of Brass, it was to give them to understand, that all his
servants must be of the like fortitude and patience. An appendix to this Altar
was the brazen laver The brazen Laver.
described, Exodus 30. It was for the Priests to wash their hands and their
feet, when they went into the Tabernacle, and when they approached the Altar to
offer sacrifice; they were to wash their hands and their feet lest they should
dye. It was to give them to understand, that all they who will minister to the
Lord in holy things, must cleanse their hands from every evil work, and their
feet from every evil way, they must be holy by the sanctification of his
spirit, for he that is not so washed, is obnoxious or subject unto death
eternal every moment. The Mystery of which ordinance, extends to that holy
priesthood which now in the time of the Gospel, does offer up spiritual
sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2.5.
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And such was the Tabernacle, and the sacred
utensils of the same, all which were to be found in the Temple which Solomon
built, but with greater splendour, meaning thereby that when Christ the true
Solomon should establish the Church, which is now in the New Testament, then
should all the mysteries of Christian Religion appear in far greater beauty and
glory.

Tabernacle and Ark which Moses made, after that God had his fixed Temple built
by Solomon. At first the Tabernacle and Arc, during the peregrination of the
people of Israel in the wilderness, The History of the Tabernacle, and of the
Arc.
were carried from place to place; at length they passed through the River
Jordan, being always born by the Priests, and Levites, whose office was to
take down the Tabernacle, that so it might be born, and to set it up again,
when there should be occasion. When they had passed over Jordan, they were of
them brought to the camp at Gilgal, Josh. 4.19.
which was nigh to Jericho, in the East border; and there they abode together
for a certain space, till the people whom Joshua had circumcised were whole,
Josh. 5.8.10.
and till they had kept the passover: And then the Ark was taken by the
Priests, and carried about Jericho seven days together, but was every night
brought back again into the camp, Josh. 6.11.
where it lodged. The City being taken and destroyed, after the walls thereof
were fallen down, both the Tabernacle and the Ark were brought to Shiloh,
Josh. 18.1.
a town in the tribe of Ephraim, and set up there; of which tribe Joshua was.
Jud. 2.9.
There was the land divided by lot, for an inheritance unto the several
tribes, by Eleazar the Priest, and Joshua the Son of Nun, at the door of the
Tabernacle which was there then. And thus the house of God, Josh. 19.51.
and the seat of Religion (the Tabernacle and the Ark) were placed in Shiloh,
and thither the tribes went up at the three solemn Feasts, Exodus 34.23 Jud.
18.31. 1 Samuel 1.9. 1 Samuel 3.2.
as unto the place which the Lord had chosen to put his name there, according
as it was provided in the Law. In that place the Tabernacle and Ark remained
during all the government of the Judges, until the time and government of Eli
the high Priest, and until a little before his death.

At what time there was War between the Israelites and the Philistines, and the
Israelites were overcome by the Philistines at Eben Ezer: wherefore to find
protection from the Ark they went to Shiloh, and took it out of the Tabernacle,
and brought it into the field; and so were the Tabernacle and the Ark
separated, The Tabernacle, and Ark separated.
the one from the other. But the battle being joined, the Israelites were
defeated, thirty thousand of their footmen slain upon the turfe, the Ark of God
was taken, and Hophni and Phinehas the sons of Eli were both slain. At the
news whereof (and when he heard that the Ark of God was taken) old Eli
fainted, fell off from his seat, and brake his neck. The Philistines (the Ark
of God being thus gotten into their possession) brought it from Eben Ezer where
the battle was fought, 1 Samuel 4.18.
unto Ashdod or Azotus where was the Temple of Dagon their god, and set it up
by Dagon; but it was he that was figured by the Arc, and whose divine presence
was there, that would by his coming into the world, overthrow all the false
gods of the Gentiles, and destroy and abolish their idolatrous worship and
service; and therefore Dagon could not stand before the Ark of the Lord, but
fell flat upon his face to the earth, which when the men of Ashdod saw, they
set him up in his place again. 1 Samuel 5.3, 4.
But Dagon was thrown down again, and his head, and both the palms of his hands
were cut off; thereby showing that the Devil, whose idol Dagon was, and all
his power and wicked works, should be overthrown and cut off, by that true
Arc, who is the power and strength of God. The hand of the Lord also (says
the Text) was heavy upon them of Ashdod, and he destroyed them, and smote them
with Emrods, even Ashdod and the coasts thereof. Therefore they convened all
the Lords of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 5.6.
to consult and determine what should be done with it (for they were not
insensible that the plague which was come upon them, was because of the Ark)
who ordered it to be sent to Gath. But they also being destroyed, 8.
and plagued with Emrods, as the men of Ashdod had been, they sent it away to
Ekron; so loath and unwilling are men to render back unto God his rights,
having once seized on them with sacrilegious hands. 10.
Notwithstanding the Ekronites were grievously plagued also, as those of Ashdod
and Gath had been; their destruction was great and mortal, and the hand of God
was heavy upon them. They therefore being sensible of the cause of it, by
common consent of all the Lords of the Philistines, after seven months
captivity, sent it back again unto the Israelites; and in this manner did they
send it. They sent, for a trespasse-offering, (by the counsel of their
Priests, and Diviners) five golden Emrods, and five golden Mice, thereby
acknowledging the divine power and justice of God, whereby they were justly
plagued, and their Land marred, and put them in a Coffer by the side of the
Arc. Then they put it upon a new cart, whereunto they yoked two milch kine to
draw it, shutting up their calves at home. But the Kine forgetting their
Calves, went directly to Bethshemesh, which was in the borders of the
Israelites; there was it entertained with exceeding great joy, taken down from
the Cart by the Levites, who clave the wood of the Cart, and offered therewith
the Kine for a burnt-offering, placing the Ark upon that great stone which was
in the field of Joshua the Bethshemite, whither the Kine had brought it. That
stone therefore was a type of Christ, the rock and sure foundation whereupon
his Church is builded.

Bethshemites had looked into the Ark, then were they also plagued, and no less
then fifty thousand and threescore and ten men of them perished of the plague.
This gave them occasion to send to the inhabitants of Kiria^hjearim to take the
Arc unto them; who came upon that invitation, and fetched it away, and brought
it into the house of Abinadab in the hill, 1 Samuel 7.1, 2.
and sanctified Eleazar his son to keep it; there it remained for the term of
twenty years, kept by Eliazar, till Samuel made that Oration to all the people
which is intimated, v. 3. and till the people put away their false gods, served
the Lord, assembled in Mizpeh, and obtained that great victory against the
Philistines, in memory whereof Samuel set up that stone between Mizpeh and
Shen, which he called Eben Ezer; that is, the stone of help; v. 12.
a type of Christ the deliverer: How be it the Arc remained there after the
expiration of those twenty years till David's reign (although there be some who
bear us in hand that it peregrinated to diverse other places, as Mizpeh, Gilgal,
Nob, without sufficient warrant) during which time the Tabernacle without the
Ark, was translated to Gibeon, as the Scripture witnesses; and rested there.
But David went to fetch the Ark out of the house of Abinadab in Gibeah, 1 Chr.
16.39 2 Chr. 1.3.
or the hill (so called, because it was situate in a lofty place) and as he
was bringing it upon a new Cart with great joy, Uzzah was smitten by God for
his rashness, and dyed: wherefore David being in a great fear, 2 Samuel 6.7.
brought it not up to Jerusalem, but turned aside out of the way, and disposed
it in the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite, where it continued by the space of
three months, with the blessing of God upon Obed-Edom, and upon all his
household: v. 11.
which when David perceived, he went and brought it to Jerusalem, where it was
entertained with the greatest gratulations and applause that might be; and set
it upon mount Sion, in a new tabernacle; which he had made for the
entertainment of it. And so the old tabernacle which Moses made, remained still
in Gibeon, where we find it in the reign of Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 1.3
neither do we find after that time any further mention of it in the
Scriptures.

But when Solomon had built the temple, and finished the sanctuary, ark, with
the tabernacle of David, and all the sacred vessels which were in that
tabernacle, into the temple which he had built; and placed the ark in the most
holy place, under the wings of the cherubims, in which at that time there was
nothing, 1 King. 8.9.
save the two tables of stone which Moses put there, at Horeb. Howsoever, I
think it fit to admonish the reader, that there be some who think the
tabernacle to have been erected sometime at Gilgal, because it is said, that
the people made Saul King before the Lord in Gilgal. And sometimes at Nob, 1 Samuel 11.15
because David there obtained of Abimelech hallowed bread. And that Solomon
translated the old tabernacle, 1 Samuel 21.6.
and all the sacred vessels thereunto belonging, from Gibeon, to his temple at
Jerusalem; because it is said expressly, that they brought up the ark of the
Lord, and the tabernacle of the congregation, 1 King. 8.4. 2 Chronicles. 5.5
and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle. Which yet I cannot
understand to be spoken of any other tabernacle or vessels, but of that
tabernacle, and those vessels which David made. And so the tabernacle of
Moses, which had stood by the space of about four hundred seventy, and eight
years, ceased. And (the time being come, wherein God would have as it were, a
fixed habitation, by a fixed place of worship) the temple succeeded in place
thereof, in which also the ark of God found rest, and had its habitation there,
till that temple was destroyed by the Chaldeans. In which confusion of things,
the perpetual fire of the burnt offerings was hidden by the priests; and the
tabernacle of David, which was in the temple, together with the ark and the
altar of incense, by the prophet Hieremiah. The matter is reported in a letter,
which the Jews that were at Jerusalem and in Judea, wrote unto the Jews in
Egypt, thus: When our fathers were led into Persia, the priests that were then
devout, took the fire of the altar privily, and hid it in a hollow place of a
pit without water, where they kept it sure, so that the place was unknown to
all men. And this (says the story) was done at the commandment of Hieremiah, 2
Mac. 1.19. 2 Mac. 2.1.
concerning whose hiding of the tabernacle, the ark, and the altar of incense,
it is thus added. It was also contained in the same writing (or records) that
the prophet being warned of God, commanded the tabernacle and the Ark to go
with him, as he went forth into the mountain, where Moses climbed up, and saw
the heritage of God. And when Jeremie came thither, 2 Mac. 2.4,
he found an hollow cave, wherein he laid the Tabernacle, and the Ark, and the
Altar of incense, and so stopped the door. 5,
And some of those that followed him, came to mark the way, but they could not
find it. Which when Jeremie perceived, he blamed them, 6,
saying, As for that place, it shall be unknown, until the time that God
gather his people again together, and receive them unto mercy. 7,
Then shall the Lord show them these things, and the glory of the Lord shall
appear, and the cloud also, as it was showed unto Moses, 8.
and as when Solomon desired, that the place might be honorably sanctified.

Jews returned out of captivity, after threescore and ten years, they built
the second temple; but they found neither the fire, nor the tabernacle, nor the
altar of incense; till many years after the fire was found, by the care and
counsel of Nehemiah. 2 Mac. 1.20,
For thus says the story: Now after many years, when it pleased God, Neemias
being sent from the King of Persia, did send of the posterity of those priests,
that had hid it, to the fire; but when they told us, 21,
they found no fire, but thick water: Then commanded he them to draw it up and
to bring it: and when the sacrifices were laid on, Neemias commanded the priest
to sprinkle the wood, and the things laid thereupon with water. 22.
When this was done, and the time came that the sun shone, which before was hid
in the cloud, there was a great fire kindled, 31, 32.
so that every man marvelled. Now when the sacrifice was consumed, Neemias
commanded the water that was left, to be poured on the great stones. When this
was done, there was kindled a flame: but it was consumed by the light that
shined from the Altar. Thus the fire was found, but the tabernacle, the ark,
and the altar of incense, were never found. Wherefore some do say, that the
Jews did make and dedicate another Ark, like unto the former: But others do
affirm, that they had no ark at all in the second temple, but in stead
thereof, they had in the Sanctuary a stone pitched, of the height of three
fingers, having a censer upon the top of it. But that all other the utensills
of the tabernacle, as occasion served, were made and renewed for the use of the
second temple. But we return to our sacred history.

Evangelicall part of the Testament belonged, 2ly the Leviticall priesthood.
The Leviticall priesthood.
And although all the priests were typical persons, and were anointed and
consecrated with the oil of holy ointment: yet in the person of the High
Priest, The high priest his garments.
they had Christ visibly set forth before their eyes. To him belonged eight
several vests, (some will have nine, some ten; but I follow Saint Hierome,
Epist. 128.) whereof four were common to the other priests, the other four
peculiar to himself; giving them thereby to understand, that in all the
proprieties of his manhood, he would be like unto his brethren, and take part
with them; but that the divine proprieties of his Godhead might not be
communicated. 1st The feminalls, The feminals
or linen breeches, which were straightly tied about their middle, under the
navill, above the hip; it was to conceal their secret parts, in case they
should slip or fall, as they sacrificed, or were otherwise busy in the works
of their ministry; and this descended to the thighs. 2ly The strait linen
coat, The linen coat.
which was of fine linen embroidered, and came down unto the thighs; it was
made to sit close unto the body, and without any foldings or wrinkles, that so
it might be no hinderance to them in their ministry, in manner like a close
shirt or wastecoat. 3ly The girdle of needle work, The girdle.
the materials whereof were purple, and scarlet, and blew, and fine linen; it
is said to be made round, in fashion like a long purse, and to be about the
breadth of four fingers, and it hung down to the knees. With this girdle, the
priests were girded under the pappes; and if at any time it happened to be
troublesome to them in their ministrations, they cast it back upon the left
shoulder. 4ly The cap or mitre, The cap or mitre.
which was of fine linen close to the head, in form like to a semicircle,
and was tied behind with a ribband or fillet, to keep it from falling off; it
came not down far upon the head, but covered the uppermost, and hindermost
part of it, almost (it seems) as low as the ears. And these were the garments
which the High Priest had in common with the other priests: where I think it
fitting to admonish the reader, of the linen Ephod, The linen Ephod.
frequently mentioned in the Scriptures, (although no mention be made of it,
Exodus 28. where the Sacerdotall vestments are set forth and described) which
was the common garment of the priests. It seems to be no other, but a linen
robe, in fashion like unto a serplice, yet so, that it might with convenience
be girt about them, that so it might be no trouble to them in their
ministrations. 1 Samuel 2.18.
For Samuel ministered before the Lord being a child, girded with a linen
Ephod. And David when he brought up the Ark into Zion, 2 Samuel 5.14.
he danced before it, girded with a linen Ephod.

But the peculiar garments of the High priest, were 1st The robe of the Ephod,
The robe of the Ephod.
being all of blew, it had a hole upon the top, for the putting of it on, which
was bound about with woven work, to strengthen it; this robe was large and
long, reaching to the feet, upon the hem whereof were pomgranates, of blew, and
of purple, and of scarlet, and bells of gold interchangeably set (seventy two
of each) round about. It was to the end, that the sound of the high priest
might be heard at his going in, and at his coming out of the holy place. 2ly
The Ephod, The Ephod of the high priest.
or superhumerall, a peculiar garment of the high priest, made of gold, and
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen cunningly or skilfully
wrought, this was put upon him, and fastened with a girdle of the same
materials and like curious workmanship; it is said to extend from the neck
unto the hipps, upon the two shoulders whereof, were two onyx stones, having
on them engraven the names of the children of Israel, six on the one stone, and
six on the other: these were stones of memorial unto the children of Israel,
to the end that the high priest going in to the sanctum sanctorum, might bear
the names of that people upon his shoulders, for whom he made his
supplications. 3ly The breast plate of judgment, The breast plate of judgment.
or Rational, of the same materials and curious workmanship of the Ephod; it
was double, and four square, a span in breadth, and a span in length, it had
twelve precious pearls, in four distinct rows, set in it, having the names
of the children of Israel engraven severally, every one in its particular
stone; this was put in a place of the breast of the Ephod, left for that
purpose, and was made fast with chains and rings in such manner as is
expressed, Exodus 28. It was to the end, that the high priest should bear the
names of the children of Israel in the breast plate of judgment upon his heart,
when he went into the holy place, for a memorial before the Lord continually.
In this breast plate of judgment they put the Urim and Thummim, The Urim and
Thummim.
which what it was, the Scripture mentions not, how be it, the words signify
splendors and perfections; which thing has given occasion to some to think,
that by the urim and thummim nothing else was meant but the forementioned rows
of precious stones in the breast of the High priest, they being the most
splendent bright and perfect of all other. But I rather think the Urim and
Thummim (whatsoever they were) to be inserted within the pectorall, which
therefore (and not to keep it from rending) was duplicate, and that they were
placed in the pectorall, over against the heart of the high priest; for
hitherto make the words of the text, Exodus 28.30.
Thou shall put in the breast plate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim, and
they shall be upon Aarons heart, when he goes in before the Lord. 4ly The
plate of gold, The plate of gold.
vvhereupon was engraven, Holiness to the Lord, (Saint Hierom thinks, that
nomen tetragrammaton, which was ineffable to the Jews, to be graven upon that
plate, Epist. 128.) this was put upon a blew lace, whereby it was made fast
unto the mitre or cap, upon the forefront of the same. So that although the
mitre or cap were common to all the Priests, yet was it the peculiar ornament
of the High priest to be mitred, with that mitre, upon whose front was fastened
by the blevv lace, the golden plate, with that mysterious inscription.

sacerdotall garments were made for glory and for beauty; Exodus 28.2.
namely, to adorn and beautify his priests in glorious, splendent, and
beauteous habit, that so the people might have a more reverent regard of their
persons whom God had honored with so many peculiar vestes so rich, so
precious: and think with themselves in what Veneration they ought to have
those holy things about which their ministry was conversant. But the mystery
was Christ, The Mystery of the garments of the high Priest.
there might they see him habited as his brethren, in the same feminalls,
linen coat, girdle, and cap, and girded about with the same linen Ephod. All
which things did foretell him to be a proper or particular man, and a perfect
or very man. They did preach Christ, and that he should not take unto him the
general form or Idea of man's nature conceived in the mind; nor the common
nature of man, as it is existing in every man: but that he should assume the
whole nature of man, viz. a reasonable soul, and human flesh, subsisting in one
particular subject: that he should be a true and perfect man, in every thing
that concerns man's nature like unto his brethren: that he should have the
substance of a true body, and of a reasonable soul: that he should have all
the proprieties of body and soul. In body length, breadth, thickness,
circumscription, dimensions: in soul the understanding, the will, the
affections: also the faculties of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, feeling:
likewise of moving, growing, eating, digesting, sleeping: all which was meant
and intended by the parability of those garments, whereby the Priest was
nothing at all hindered from doing the duties of his function. That such a
Priest should come, who should offer up the eternal sacrifice; a full perfect
and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the whole
world, That like as the Priests were girded about with the white linen Ephod,
even so that such a priest should be girded about with the general infirmities
of man's nature, yet without the least spot of sin. And this with much more
Mystery was preached by those garments which the High priest had in common
with the other priests.

But his peculiar Ornaments did set forth Christ in a more peculiar Ephod, did
set forth Christ enrobed in the riches of all graces, and of all virtues,
pomegranates and the bells, the sweet sound of his Gospel, and the precious
fruit thereof. The Ephod or superhumerall, girt about him with the curious
girdle, and the two onyx stones upon his shoulders; that it is he who is girt
about with power, that the government is upon his shoulder, that he is able to
save his people to the uttermost, who are elect and precious as the precious
onyxstones; that he would bear them upon his shoulders, and present them to his
Father, by making an eternal, a gracious and efficacious intercession for
them: The rational or breast plate of judgment, that it is he to whom it
belongs to give the righteous judgment: the twelve precious pearls, set in
four distinct rows, that he should be the God of order, who would bear all his
people in his breast, and have the names of them there, to remember every one
of them, to love and to cherish them as his own heart, and to judge, and avenge
them in righteousness: that like as the Urim and Thummim was put into the
duplicate, and thereby hidden, so that it could not be seen; Even so, that the
brightness, and perfection of his Deity, should not be discerned by human eye,
being over-shadowed and obscured by his humanity. And because inquisition was
made at God by the Urim and Thummim, thereby was most excellently set forth his
prophetical office. Finally, the plate of gold, whereupon was graven holiness
to the Lord, did set forth his Kingly office, and that such a one should be
made of God both Lord and Christ; that in his person the kingly and the
priestly offices should be so consistent, as to be bound together with such a
bond of mediatorship betwixt God and Man, as might never be dissolved.

Evangelical part of the Testament, belonged all the Leviticall consecrations,
especially that of the High Priest, Consecration of the high Priest.
who was anointed and consecrated with the holy anointing oil, and thereby
set apart to his office and function. The oil was a most sweet confection of
diverse principal spices, pure Myrrh, sweet Cinnamon, sweet Calamus, Cassia,
and oil Olive, all pure and sweet; it was reserved only for Consecrations, it
was not lavvfull for any man to pour it out after the manner of other oil,
upon his own flesh in his frequent unctions, neither might any one make or
compound the like. With this holy anointing oil, were the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, and the Arc of the Testimony, and the Table and all his Vessels,
and the Candlestick and his Vessels, and the Altar of incense, and the Altar of
burnt-offerings, with all his Vessels, and the Laver and his foot anointed,
and thereby consecrated, to the end that after such an anointing, they might
be wholy set apart to Gods worship, and never return any more to common or
ordinary use. With the same oil were Aarons Sons, the Priests, and Aaron
himself the high priest anointed and consecrated, as is fusely set down, Exodus
29. and 30. Levit. cap. 8. But Aarons consecration (and therefore the
consecrations of all the high priests in their several successions) was in a
more excellent manner; for, having on all the forementioned Vests and
Ornaments, with the mitre and holy crown upon his head, the holy anointing oil
was so powered upon his head, Psalm. 133.2.
that it ran down upon his beard, and descended to the skirts of his garments.

God would have his consecrations to be done by Oil, may be rendered from the
excellent proprieties thereof: The Mystery
all which, in a spiritual, and Evangelicall sense and meaning will relate to
Christ. Oil has an excellent virtue in seasoning of meats, as well for the
preservation of health, as also to give them a sweet and delightsome relish to
the palate. Therefore did they dress their flovvre with Oil: 1 Kin. 17.10
Levit. 2.
and with Oil God would have his offerings to be seasoned. The Oil in the
meat offering did show forth Christ the condiment, without whom nothing is
svveet, nothing is savory. It is he that seasoneth all our sacrifices, and
whatsoever we shall ask the father in his name, he will give it us. Joh. 16.23
Oil has an excellent virtue in healing of wounds, and to assuage the pains of
them: Luc. 10.34.
It is Christ who speaks peace unto the soul by the word of the Gospel, and was
anointed, and sent to heal the broken hearted. Oil does exhilarate and make
glad him that is anointed with it: Luc. 4.18. Psalm. 104.15.
all true joy and gladness is from Christ, through the sweet influence of his
most holy, and most blessed spirit, who is the oil of gladness. Psalm. 45.7.
Oil does pierce into the bones, does diminish the pains of bodily exercises,
does make a man strong, and able to perform his work. Livie tells of
Hannibal, that he being to skirmish immediately with the enemy (but the weather
being extreme cold, and his Soldiers weary and weak) distributed Oil unto
them, to the end that being anointed therewith, they might be refreshed, and
enabled to the battle. It is Christ who by his grace enableth us unto that
whereunto of our selves we have no sufficiency. 2 Cor. 12.9. Ezec. 36.26.
Oil does mollify and soften: It is the peculiar work of Christ by his Spirit
to mollify and soften the hard hearts of men. Oil has a sweet and odoriferous
smell, Cant. 1.3.
and his name (says the Spouse in the Canticles) is as ointment powered forth.
Oil does illuminate and lighten: and He is the true light, which lights every
man that comes into the world. Joh. 1.9.
When the High Priest was anointed, Christ was anointed in the type; He was
the anointed, and he was the annointer, and he himself was the holy anointing
oil. Notwithstanding the oil wherewith he was anointed, was not of the essence
of his Godhead, but the fullness of all graces, and of all virtues, wherewith
the manhood of Christ was as it were filled up to the brim, (created graces
and virtues) infused into the manhood by the divine operation of the Holy
Ghost. Therefore the holy anointing oil, howsoever it was Gods oil, neither
was it lawful for any one to make the like; yet was it confected of no other
simples, but such as are to be found in nature. That holy anointing oil was
powered forth upon the High Priest, having on, together with all the rest of the
sacerdotall ornaments, the Urim and Thummim, together with the golden Plate or
holy Crown, that so they might in the type, and by the spirtuall eyes of faith,
see Christ by his unction, with that oil which was material, anointed and
consecrated to be that true King, that true Priest, that true Prophet, of whose
fullness all Kings, Priests, and Prophets do partake; and yet he has made all
his elect and chosen, Kings and Priests unto God and his father, as St. John
says in his Revelation. Rev. 1.6.
That the High priest was so anointed, that the holy anointing oil powered
upon his head went down unto his beard, and descended to the skirts of his
clothing; it did mysteriously give them to know, that the graces of the Holy
Ghost, whereof the manhood of Christ is the rich treasure house, do descend
down from him the head of his Church, (who received them not by measure) into
all the members of his mystical body, who all receive them from him in such a
measure and proportion as is convenient for every one of them. Lastly, by the
different habit of the High Priest, and his superabundant unction, they were
showed the difference that must be betwixt the type, and the antitype: for
Kings, Priests, and Prophets, were typical persons, and they all were
anointed by men; but that He must be anointed by the Father, through the Holy
Ghost. They were anointed with the holy anointing oil: but he must be
anointed with all spiritual graces, meant and intended by it. They were
anointed in measure; but he must be anointed above measure. They were
anointed as men; but he must be anointed as God and man. They were anointed
to offices temporal; but he must be anointed to offices eternal. They by
their unction were Christi Domini, the Lord's Christ's: But he by his unction,
must be Christus Dominus, the Lord Christ, Act. 2.36.

Evangelicall part of the Testament belonged all the Leviticall offerings. The
Levitical offerings.
The Holocaust or whole burnt-offering The whole burnt offering.
so called, because it was all burnt. It was a sacrifice wherein to the end
that God might be honored and pleased, the whole host which was offered, was
consumed with the holy fire, and as it were sent up from earth to heaven for an
odor of a sweet savor to God. It was of the Herds, of the Flocks, or of the
Fouls: and the whole rite thereof is amply set forth, Levit. cap. 1. The
continual or daily burnt-offering, The continual burnt-offering.
so called because it was offered unto God twice every day at morning and at
evening. It did consist of two Lambs of the first year, whereof the one was
offered in the morning, and the other at even, and the rite thereof is set
down, Exodus cap. 29. The meat offering, The meat offering.
which was either fine flovvre, and oil, seasoned with salt, and
frankincense put upon it, and that either raw baked or fried, or green ears of
corn dried, having in like manner, oil, salt, and frankincense, and the rite
thereof is to be read, Levit. cap. 2. The drink offering The drink offering.
was strong Wine, the fourth part of an Hin for one Lamb, as a proportionable
quantity for such an offering povvred unto the Lord, Exodus 29. Numb. 28. The
sin-offering The sin-offering.
so called, because it was made for the expiation of sin committed, either
ignorantly or vvittingly, whether greater or less, by the priest, the whole
congregation, the Ruler, or any of the people, set forth and prescribed at
large, Levit. cap. 4. and 5, and 6, and 7. The peace-offerring was either of
the herd or of the flock, male or female; The peace offering.
it, was made in thankfulness of some benefit received, or for prevention of
some eminent danger; and the rite thereof is prescribed, Levit. cap. 3. There
were many other offerings which the law had to be made upon all occasions, all
which were either propitiatory, which were to reconcile God, and to satisfy
for sin; or Eucharisticall, for praise and thanksgiving; and were either
ordinary or extraordinary. But our sacred history shall crave pardon of the
reader, not to enlarge it self too far. Only this it has to observe in
general, concerning the Leviticall offerings. General Observations concerning
the Levitical offerings.
1. That they were not offered (except by special dispensation) but only in
one place, that was 1st where the tabernacle was. 2ly where the temple was. 2.
That they were all offered according to a prescript form of liturgy. 3. That
they were to be offered with no other fire, but with the holy fire, the fire
which came out from before the Lord, which he ordained to be kept upon the
Altar continually-burning, so that it might never go out. Levit. 6.4. That no
beast or bird of prey, or any unclean thing, must be brought unto him for
sacrifice. 5. That his offerings must be of the best, and finest of all kinds;
nothing blind, lame, torn, deformed: the sweetest oil, the finest flower, the
strongest wine, the purest franckincense, and of every thing that which was
most choice. Lastly, that honey and leaven were utterly banished from all his
sacrifices.

All the Leviticall offerings did relate to Christ, and did set forth The
mystery.
The holocaust or whole burnt-offering, did signify Christ, our holocaust or
whole burnt offering, who in the fire of his love has offered himself up
wholly unto God the father, and has shed his blood for the remission of sins.
The continual or daily burnt offering, S. Joh. 1.29.
did set forth Christ the lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world.
The offering of that sacrifice in the morning and at even, did set forth the
efficacy of his death, for remission of sins to all them that believe, from the
beginning of the world unto the end. That to all the righteous faithful,
whether in the morning or in the evening of the world, there is no other lamb,
but that lamb which was slain from the foundation of the world. Rev. 13.8.
The meat offering did set forth Christ, that bread of life, the bread which
comes down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die. That the
bread which he would give is his flesh, S. Joh. 5.50, 51.
which he would give for the life of the world. The drink offering did set
forth Christ, that true wine which makes glad the heart of man, without whom,
there is no true joy or gladness to be had; that wine poured out was his blood
shed for the remission of sins. The sacrament of which meat and drink offering
he has instituted to be in the elements of bread and wine. The sin offering
did set forth Christ, an expiatory sacrifice for sin, and did preach unto them
no other doctrine, but that of the blessed Apostle and Evangelist Saint John,
If any man sin, 1 John 2.^1.2.
we have an Advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And he is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the
whole world. The peace offering did preach peace unto the world by Christ who
is our peace, and that it is he that delivers us from the wrath to come. So
that there is now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.1.


offerings were made in that place where first the Tabernacle, afterward the
Temple was; it intended Christ the great sacrifice to be offered up at
Jerusalem. That they were all offered according to a prescript form or
liturgy; it intended the orderly worship of God, which Christ would establish
in his Church in the new Testament. That they were offered with no other fire
but the holy fire; it meant, that all the spiritual sacrifices of his Church,
should be sent up to the Father by the fire of his blessed Spirit; and that his
spirit should remain in his Church perpetually to sanctify and cleanse it. That
no unclean thing must be offered for sacrifice; it did set forth the purity of
Christ his sacrifice, who is clean of himself, and the cleanser of all that
are clean. Who is offered up unto God by all the faithful, who crave remission
of sins for his sake, and offer unto God his sacrifice, as a full satisfaction
for all their transgressions, having nothing of themselves worthily to offer.
That his offerings must be of the best and finest of all kinds, nothing blind,
lame, torn, deformed; the sweetest oil, the finest flower, the strongest wine,
the purest franckincense; It signified, that God would accept him only for that
sacrifice, for the dignity and worthiness of whom, and in whom, as in the
all-sufficient sacrifice, he is well pleased; in whom only should be found the
integrity and perfection of the human nature. And that honey and leaven were
utterly banished from all his sacrifices: It was to show, that in Christ should
be found neither leaven of hypocrisy, nor honey of voluptuousness; and that
they who will sacrifice unto the Father by him, must utterly put away
spiritual pride, which is the leaven of hypocrisy, and all sensual lusts,
which are the honey of voluptuousness. By all which things we may observe, that
all the sacred rites of the sacrifices and oblations, as well those that we
have mentioned, as those also which for brevities sake our sacred history must
omit, were no other, but as it were visible homilies, divinity lectures, and
catechisms, whereby the faithful were showed, taught to know, and to
understand the mystery of the redemption of mankind by Jesus Christ.

Evangelicall part of the Testament belonged those Concerning those days, and
months, and times, and years, which the Jews had.
days, and months, and times, and years, which the Jews had, and were
commanded to observe; these are distinguished into profests and feasts. The
profests were minor holy days, wherein it was permitted unto them to work, the
offering up of the morning and evening sacrifice notwithstanding. But the
feasts, or major holy days were such, as upon which it was not permitted unto
them to work at all. Every day the sacrifice was to be offered morning and
evening, as before is said. But a peculiar sacrifice was ordained to be made,
the first day of every month, as you may read, Numb. 28. The profests therefore
were the new moons, The new moons.
that is to say, the first day of every month, upon which days they were not
forbidden to labor in their ordinary professions, although a peculiar
sacrifice was appointed for those days. It is said, that they were solemnized
in memory of the creation of light, and in acknowledgment of Time, that it
belongs to God. Their feasts or holy days (major holy days) they called
Sabbaths, that is to say, days of rest; and every sabbath they kept by the
space of a whole day, to wit, from sunset, to sunset again, the full space of
twenty four hours, for so measured they their day, and that is Gods measure
of a day. Genesis 1.5.
Of these sabbaths, some were of divine institution, and some by positive human
law; those of divine institution were 1. the Sabbath of the seventh day; 2. the
feast of Easter; 3. the feast of Penticost; 4. the feast of Trumpets; 5. the
day of Atonement; 6. the feast of Tabernacles; 7. the sabbatary seventh year;
8. the Jubilee of the fiftieth year. Observation.
Concerning all which sabbaths our Sacred History must observe, that although
the observation of them were moral, yet the days themselves were not moral
by nature, (for had they so been, the observation of them could never have
ceased in the Church, no more then of those spiritual and evangelicall duties,
which were prefigured in them, and commended and commanded by them) but they
were made moral by divine positive law.

Those that were by positive human law, were 1st The sabbaths of dedication;
for there were four dedications, which were kept dedication of Solomon's
temple, in the month of September. The second was the dedication of the temple
of Zorobabel, in the month of February. The third was the dedication of the
Altar by Judas Machabaeus, in the month of November. The fourth was the
dedication of the temple re-edified by King Herod, not without great solemnity,
as Josephus says. 2ly They had the feast of the lamentation of the daughter of
Jeptha mentioned Judge. cap. 11. 3ly They had the feast called Naphthar or
cleansing, ( Josephus calls it the feast of lights) instituted by Nehemiah,
in memorial of the holy fire found in the pit, with which he purified the
sacrifices; and was celebrated upon the twentieth day of November, 2 Mac. 1.
4ly They had the feast purim or lots, instituted by Mordochaeus, in memory of
their deliverance from the bloody intentions of Haman, which was kept yearly
with great solemnity upon the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the month of
February, Hest. cap. 9. which fourteenth day of February, is remembered to have
been a double holy day; for then also they did commemorate a great victory
obtained against Nicanor, one of the Captains of Demetrius King of Syria. But
our sacred history must supersede all these festivalls, as being of human
institution. Yet from the history it self, Observation.
the reader has to observe, that the clause of the commandment, Six days
shall thou labor, etc. was no warrant to the Jews to rest from labor only
upon the Sabbath of the seventh day; for besides that day, our history has
observed how many sabbaths God himself ordained, and how many were ordained by
their governors, upon many of which, they were not only commanded to rest
from labor; but if any man had presumed to work, it was ordained that he
should be put to death. How then shall that clause now warrant the observation
of the Sunday or Lords day only, if other days and times be set apart by
lawful authority? Truly it will be somewhat too peremptory to tie up the
Almighty God to the bare allowance of a seventh day, for his public external
worship; seeing that the moral equity of the commandment is, that not a
seventh day only, but that a sufficient quantity of time should be set apart,
and dedicated to his service.

Sabbath of the seventh day The sabbath of the seventh day.
was commanded to the people and nation of the Jews to be kept holy in memory
of the creation, that day did forbid all manner of labor: so that it was not
lawful so much as to kindle a fire upon that day. Notwithstanding (as was said
before) it had not its morality by nature, Genesis 2.3. Exodus 35.3.
(for then it had been for ever indispensable) but it was made moral by a
divine positive law, and was temporary, and was commended only to the
circumcision, the Jews and Proselytes, until the time of reformation. And
therefore upon urgent necessity might be omitted, and the Jews themselves
might labor, and war, and fight in battle, and carry burdens, and perform
laborious works upon the sabbath day. Josh. 6.
Joshua besieged Hiericho, and compassed it seven times upon the sabbath day.
They took the city on that day, and slew all that were therein, man, woman,
young, old, ox, sheep, and ass, with the edge of the sword, and burnt the
city with fire, on the sabbath day. The Israelites fought with the Syrians on
that day, 1 King 20.
and slew of them an hundred thousand footmen. S. Joh. 5.10.
And Christ himself commanded a certain man whom he had cured to carry his bed
on the sabbath day, which else by the law ought not to be don, neither might he
have commanded him so to do, if the Sabbath had been moral by nature, and
indispensable.

The feast of Easter, The feast of Easter.
called also the feast of unleavened bread, was March at even, till the one and
twentieth day of the same month at even. During all which time they were to
eat no leavened bread, neither were they to have any leaven found in their
houses: and if any man were found to eat leaven within that space, he was to be
put to death. This feast was kept in memory of the deliverance of the people of
Israel out of Egypt. And at this feast, Exodus 12.15
all the tribes were to appear in the place which the Lord should choose to put
his name there: that was, first in Shiloh, where the Tabernacle of Moses was:
afterward, in Jerusalem where Solomon built his most sumptuous, and most
magnificent Temple.

The feast of Pentecost, The feast of Pentecost.
otherwise called the feast of Weeks, or of first fruits, was celebrated on the
sixth day of May, in memory of the law given upon mount Sinai. Upon the second
day after the eating of the passover, which was the second day of sweet bread,
(which was before harvest began, and upon the sixteenth day of March) the Law
commanded that they should offer a Sheaf of new corn, before the Lord: Levit.
23.10
it was to crave his blessing upon their harvest. But fifty days after, (which
was seven whole weeks): and upon the fiftieth day, (at what time they had
gathered in their harvest) they were all to appear before the Lord again, and
to offer new bread before him, in thankful acknowledgement of the harvest
which they had received by his gift. The feast of Trumpets, The feast of
Trumpets.
was solemnized upon the first day of the seventh month, that is to say, upon
the first day of September: upon which day they were to blow Trumpets. But for
what cause this feast was instituted, (whether in memory of that Trumpet which
sounded upon mount Sinai when the Law was given: or of the deliverance of
Isaac, when Abraham would have offered him up upon the mount Moriah, and he was
exchanged for a Ram, caught by his horns in a thicket; the memory whereof was
renewed by blowing up those Trumpets of Rams horns: or rather, in memory of
those great and memorable Victories which the people of Israel valiantly
achieved before they were settled peaceably in the land of promise) it is more
then we can now determine. It was a solemn feast, and honorable mention is made
of it in the book of Psalms. Blow up the Trumpet in the new moon; in the time
appointed, Psalm. 81.3.
on our solemn feast day.

The day of atonement The day of Atonement.
was upon the tenth day of the same month, so called, because by such solemn
ceremonies, and sacrifices, as are set forth, Levit. cap. 16. and 23, the
Priest did make an atonement for the people, did expiate their sins, and
reconcile them to God. It was kept in memory of that reconciliation which was
made betwixt God and the people, after they had sinned against him in the
matter of the golden Calfe. Jer. 36.6.
It was dies jejunii, the fasting day: For upon that day they were commanded to
fast, and to afflict their souls. And Josephus says, that all the people did
fast upon that day, and that whosoever did not upon that day fast and afflict
his soul, he was to be put to death. And that if any man should work upon that
day, he was to be put to death. Such, and so severe was the Law on that behalf.
For whatsoever soul it be (said the Law) that shall not be afflicted in that
same day, Levit. 23, 29, 30.
he shall be cut off from among his people; And whatsoever soul it be that
does any work in that same day, the same soul will I destroy from among his
people.

Tabernacles, The feast of Tabernacles.
which was to put them in remembrance that they dwelt in Tents, and
Tabernacles, in the wilderness by the space of forty years. At which Feast, all
the tribes were to go up to that place where he should fix his worship; and
upon the first day of this feast they did rest from labor; and did take the
boughs of goodly trees, the branches of Palm trees, and the boughs of thick
trees, and Willows of the brook; and they did go forth, and dwell in
Tabernacles, seven days, with great joy, and rejoicing. They say that at this
feast, they did sing the eighty fourth Psalm, How amiable are thy Tabernacles
O Lord of hosts, etc. Concerning which feast, they that will know more, let
them read Levit. cap. 23. Number. cap. 29. Nehem. cap. 8. and likewise Josephus in
the third book of his Antiquities, cap. 10. On the day following, which was the
eighth day, and the two and twentieth day of the month, there was another
feast or solemn assembly, an holy convocation, on which they might do no work;
and then the tribes being at Jerusalem, they brought in the revenue for repair
of the Temple, to defrey the charge of the sacrifices, and for the maintenance
of the Priests and Levites.

Sabbatary seventh year, The sabbath of the seventh year.
or sabbath of the seventh year, was a Sabbath for the whole year. And that
year they dismissed all their bondmen, and bondwomen, which were Hebrews; and
the earth it self had rest for that year. For they might neither ear nor sow,
nor reap nor mow, nor carry any thing into their barns, for that whole year.
And the fruits which the earth it self brought of its own accord, Exodus 23.
Levit. 25. Deuteronomy. 15.
were common to all those that would make use thereof, as well to those of the
country, as to strangers, without forbidding or reservation. The Jubilee of the
fiftieth year, The Jubilee of the fiftieth year.
was proclaimed by blowing up of Trumpets of Rams horns; and then the earth
must rest for the space of a whole year, even from the tenth day of September,
(upon which day the Trumpet was to proclaim the Jubilee) till the tenth day of
September in the next year. During all which time they might neither ear, nor
sow, nor reap, nor mow, nor gather that which grew of it self. It was a year of
liberty, for in that year all servants went forth perpetually free; and every
one that had sold his possession, did in that year return unto it again, Levit.
25. It was called Jubilee, from the Trumpets of Rams horns, wherewith it was
proclaimed, which the Hebrews call Jobelins,

But of all these things, the Mystery The Mystery.
was most excellent; for the quotidian profeast and daily sacrifice, did (as is
said before) in the Mystery set forth, S. Joh. 1.29
Christ that lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world. For he is the
perpetual sacrifice; he was the sacrifice before the Law, offered up in the
mystery by Abel, Seth, Noah, Sem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and by all the
Fathers, who by their sacrifices, testified that they expected no other
sacrifice but that promised seed who should be sacrificed for the sins of the
whole world. He was the sacrifice under the Law; he is an eternal sacrifice.
Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Heb. 13.8.
The new moons, or monthly Sabbaths, did set forth Christ the light of the
World, who being sent into the World, has enlightened it by his preaching, by
his miracles, and by his most holy, and most blessed spirit. I am (says he)
the light of the world, he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but
shall have the light of life. Before he came in the flesh, the faithful, S.
Joh. 8.12.
by the spiritual eyes of faith, did look on him as on the light to come: for
so the Prophet Isaiah did look upon him, and did foreknow and foretell of him
by the spirit of prophecy. The people (said he) that walked in darkness, have
seen a great light; they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon
them has the light shined. Jsai. 9.2. Luc. 2.29.30, 31, 32.
And when he was come, then did they welcome that light. Lord, (said old Simeon
in his song) now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
word. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before
the face of all people. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy
people Israel.

The sabbath of the seventh day, did signify Jesus Christ who is true
sabbath, who gives true spiritual rest unto the world, and without whom there
is no true rest to be had. Therefore when Christ the sabbath signified was
come, the sabbath of the seventh day, which was the sabbath signifying, must
vanish away. That Sabbath of the seventh day, did therefore teach the people of
God to expect the true sabbath in whom all must cease from the unclean works of
sin, and every one must submit himself to him, and suffer him to have, and
sanctify a sabbath in him, by his most holy and most blessed spirit: so to
cease from their own works, ( not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own
pleasure, Isai. 58.13.
nor speaking thine own words (says the Prophet Isaiah) as to do all the
works of his law by faith. For he that is entered into his rest (which is
Christ the true sabbath) He also has ceased from his own works, Heb. 4.10.11.
as God did from his. Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest, lest any
man fall after the same example of unbelief.

Easter did set forth Christ the true paschall Lamb, who should be killed,
that so he might be made the food of the faithful unto everlasting life; who
so eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, S. Joh. 6.54
has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. And because that
Christ is that feast, and is our passover, that therefore we must purge out
the old leaven: for so S. Paul himself sets forth the Mystery. Purge out
therefore (says he) the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are
unleavened. For even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. 1 Cor, 5.7.
Therefore let us keep the feast, not with the old leaven, neither with the
leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity
and truth. The feast of Pentecost did set forth Christ, conferring the gifts of
the Holy Ghost upon his Church: and was a type of that day wherein the Holy
Ghost was sent, under the outward visible signs of fiery cloven tongues, Act.
2. The feast of Trumpets did signify Christ publishing his Gospel by the
mouths of his Apostles and Disciples, whose sound went into all the earth,
Romans 10.18
and their words unto the ends of the world.

atonement, or yearly feast of the expiations, did set forth the expiation of
sins by Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, Romans 3.25.
for the remission of sins. Upon which day the passion and death of Christ, and
man's Redemption by him was so plainly showed, that nothing could be more lively
acted, or represented. The day it self was a day of a general and universal
expiation of sins by sacrifice; wherein the atonement was made for the holy
Sanctuary, and for the tabernacle of the congregation, and for the Altar, for
the Priests, and for all the people of the congregation. Therefore the great
expiatory sacrifice, (Christ crucified upon the Cross) must be offered up for
all the sins of all mankind, as well for the most holy, who may be compared to
the Sanctuary, to the Tabernacle, to the Altar, to the Priests, all consecrated
unto God by his mysterious Sacraments; as also for all sorts of sinners, to be
understood by all the people of the congregation. For what other thing is the
world, but a congregation of all sorts of people, all sinners; all standing in
need of the general and universal expiation? That general and universal
expiation, must be made by no other person, but by the High Priest; therefore
an High Priest must be expected who must make the great atonement for the sins
of the whole world. The High Priest did make an atonement for himself, and it
was needful for him so to do, because he was a sinner: therefore he was not
the true high priest, but a type of him, who had no need to make an atonement
for himself, because he had no sin. That high priest did make the atonement
every year, and did admit of a successor by reason of death; therefore he was
not the true high priest, but a type of him who should make the atonement once
for all, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Heb. 6.20.
That high priest had none to accompany him when he made the atonement;
therefore this high priest must himself be the propitiation for the sins of
the whole world. That high priest did put on those garments which were common
to the other priests, to wit, the linen coat, the linen breeches, the linen
girdle, and the linen mitre; he did also bring his own sacrifice, a young
bullock, for a sin-offering, and a ram for a burnt offering, and did receive of
the congregation two kids for a sin-offering, and a ram for a burnt-offering:
therefore this high priest should put on the whole human nature, and should
receive that of us, which he would sacrifice for us, as namely, the substance
of our flesh. But as those garments are said to be holy, so must they
understand the humanity of Christ to be without sin. The young bullock which
the high priest brought for a sin offering, and the ram which he brought for a
burnt offering, was his humble acknowledgment that he was not that High priest,
but a type of him that should make the great atonement for all mankind. Heb.
7.26,
Seeing (as the Apostle says) such an high priest became us who is holy,
blamlesse, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens.
Who needs not daily as those high priests, 27.
to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the peoples: for
this he did once, when he offered up himself. Such a one therefore were they
admonished by that his sacrifice to look for. The two goats upon which the high
priest cast lots, did signify Christ in two natures, and that in one of those
natures, namely, the humanity, he should be killed and die; but yet by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, for that was signified by the
lots that were cast; seeing as Solomon says in the book of Proverbs, The lot
is cast into the lap, Prove. 16.33.
but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. The blood of the bullock and
the blood of the goat which the high priest brought successively within the
vail, and did with his finger sprinckle the mercy seat, and before the mercy
seat seven times; did in the mystery instruct them to know, that not by the
blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood, should Christ the true high
priest, enter in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption
for us. Heb. 9.12.
And that sevenfold aspersion made by the finger of the high priest, did
signify the fullness and perfection of the propitiation to be made by Christ.
The incense which was offered by the high priest within the vail in the most
holy place, the cloud whereof did arise and cover the mercy seat; did show
forth the prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, which Christ
made in the days of his flesh, unto him that was able to save him from death,
and the efficacy of the same, Heb. 5.7.
that he was heard in that he feared; or (...), for has piety. That he made an
atonement upon the horns of the altar of incense, which was placed before the
vail, which divided the holy place from the holy of holies, with the blood of
the sin offering of the attonements, Exodus 30.10.
by putting of the blood of the goat and of the bullock upon the horns of that
altar round about; and that he did sprinkle of the blood upon it with his
finger seven times, (which he did, after that he came forth from within the
vail): It was to admonish them in the mystery, that the prayers and
supplications of the Church are no otherwise made clean, so as to be accepted
with the Father, but by the innocent blood of the Redeemer. That when he had
made the atonement for the holy place and for the tabernacle, he then brought
the live-goat, and did lay both his hands upon the head of it, and confess
over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat, and
did send him away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness, that the goat
might bear all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited: It was to teach them
to know, that Christ must be made sin for us, and a curse for us, 2 Cor. 5.21.
Gal. 3.13. Isa. 53.6.
and that the Lord should lay on him the iniquity of us all, as the prophet
Isaiah says; that so we might be made the righteousness of God in him; and
that all nations might be blessed in him: and that his righteousness might be
made ours to justification, that so our sins might not be imputed. For the
scapegoat did but bear all their iniquities to a land not inhabited; showing
them thereby, that Christ should so bear our sin, not that it should not be at
all, but that it should not be imputed. That same fit man, or man of
opportunity, was also a type of Christ: for like as that fit man, or man of
opportunity, was only fit to have away the escape goat into the wilderness, and
did watch and stay his opportunity so to do: even so was there no other fit man
to bear away our sins by his death, nor any other man of opportunity, but he
that stayed the opportunity to bear them away when his hour was come. That
after the escape goat so sent away, the high priest came into the Tabernacle,
and there put off those linen garments which were common to him with the other
priests, and that he left them there; and that he did wash his flesh with water
in the holy place, and having so done, that then he put on the pontifical
ornaments, in which garments he did come forth, and offer his burnt offerings
for himself and for the people, and make the atonement for himself and for
the people, and having burnt the fat of the offering upon the altar, the
bullock and the goat whose blood was brought in, to make the atonement in the
holy place, were carried forth without the camp and wholly burnt there; It did
teach them, that the true high priest, after that he had suffered for our sins,
would then deposite his body to the grave, and that afterward he would put on
robes of glory; and that although enrobed in everlasting glory, he would
evermore make intercession both for priest and people; and that he would
sanctify us with his own blood by suffering without the gate. Heb. 13.12.
For the better understanding of all which things, the reader is to be
admonished judiciously to compare that which he shall read fusely set forth in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, to that which God ordained to be done by the high
priest, Levit. cap. 16. And also to excuse this our prolixity, seeing that it
could not but be most pertinent to this our sacred history, that we should show
how excellently the Gospel was preached by divine and mysterious ceremonies,
which were appointed to be solemnly performed by the high priest upon that day.

The feast of Tabernacles did set forth Christ our Tabernacle, tabernacle which
he has pitched, shall find shelter from all the winds and storms of
temptation, and adversity, and persecution. It did also set forth the brevity
and uncertainty of this present life, giving them to understand, that in this
world the people of God are strangers and pilgrims, who like Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, heirs of the promise, do sojourne here as in tabernacles, looking
for a city which has a foundation, whose builder and maker is God.

Finally, the Sabbath of the seventh year, and the Jubilee of the did signify
that true liberty which Christ the son of God would proclaim unto the world in
the time of the Gospel. That the worship of God should then be more plain,
more general, and more free. More plain, as being no longer to be involved in
those legal obscurities, more general, as being extended all the world over;
more free, as being not tied to any particular place. And that all distinctions
should then be taken away, not in respect of that relation which is betwixt man
and man in the world; but in respect of that relation which is betwixt Christ
and his Church. For like as the redeemer would buy them all with the same
price, and would shed no more nor no other blood for the Jew, then for the
Gentile; for the bond, then for the free; for the male, then for the female;
even so that they should be all saved by the same grace, justified by the same
faith, have the same word, the same sacraments, the same worship, an equal
interest in Christ. So says Saint Paul to the Galatians, Gal. 3.28.
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. Col. 3.11.
And so to the Colossians, There is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor
uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free; but Christ is all, and in
all.

Evangelicall part of the Testament belonged the holy city, Mat. 4.5. Mat.
27.53. History of the holy city Jerusalem.
for so is Jerusalem styled in the scripture. It was anciently a Fort of the
Jebusites upon mount Sion, and was not conquered till David's time; it was then
so impregnable, that when David assailed it, they bragged, that their lame, and
blind, and impotent people should defend it. Yet David took it, and built
thereon the city, which from thence obtained to be called the city of David. 2 Samuel 5.6 7.
Nigh whereunto adjoined the mount Moriah, upon which mountain, Abraham in
obedience to Gods commandment offered up Isaac his son for a burnt offering.
Genesis 22.
In the same place David having purchased the threshing-floor of Araunah the
Jebusite, 2 Samuel 24.
built an Altar, for the pacifying of Gods wrath, when he had slain, in three
days space, from Dan to Beersheba, no less then seventy thousand with the
plague of pestilence. There also King Solomon built his most sumptuous and most
magnificent Temple. This city was first built (as it is most probably affirmed)
by Melchisedec (supposed by diverse of the ancients to have been Sem the son of
Noah) not long after the flood; and was by him called Salem. But afterward the
Jebusites had it in possession, and called it Jebus after their own name; Josh.
18.28. Jud. 19.10.
which name it held a long time, as it may be seen in the books of Joshua and
Judges. But when that King David had gotten it, he expelled the Iebusites from
thence, and called it Jerusalem. Salem signifies peace, and Jerusalem does
signify a sight or vision of peace. It has other names in the Scripture, for
the prophet Isaiah (peradventure therein respecting the situation, and strong
habitation of the same, peradventure the virtue and valor of the inhabitants
thereof) calls it Ariel, Isa. 29.1, 17.
that is to say, the lion of God. And Lebanon, because it was much built of
Cedar trees brought from mount Libanus. And the valley of vision, because there
the prophets prophesyed. Isa. 21.1. Ezech. 23.4.
The prophet Ezechiel calls it Aholibah, My fixed tent or pavilion; because
God had chosen it before all the nations and places of the earth, to put his
name there. In that city stood the throne of David, called in the book of
Psalms, the thrones of the house of David, Ps, 122.5.
through the succession of one and twenty Kings of himself and his sons. It
was often assailed before the final surprisall of it.

Shishack King of Egypt, in the fifth year of the reign of Rehoboam, who took
away the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the Kings
house, ( viz. all the riches of Solomon, and all those spoils which David had
gotten from Hadadezer, the Moabites, the Ammonites, and other nations, 2 Samuel
8.11, 12. 1 King. 14.26.
together with the presents of Toi which David had dedicated to God) and all
the shields of gold which Solomon had made. 2ly By Iehoash King of Israel in
Amaziah's reign; who being provoked by Amaziah king of Judah, came up against
him, and took him prisoner at Bethshemesh, and then went to Jerusalem, and
brake down four hundr^d cubits of the wall, and having taken away all the gold
and silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of the Lord, and
the treasures of the Kings house, he received hostages, and then returned to
Samaria. 3ly It was besieged by Rezin king of Syria, and Pekah the son of
Remaliah king of Israel, in the reign of king Ahaz, 2 King. 14.14. 2 King.
16.5. Isa. 7.1.
but God kept it, so that they could not prevail against it. 4ly By Zenacherib
king of Assyria, in the fourteenth year of the reign of king Hezechiah: but
the Lord kept it, and sent his Angel, who made a great slaughter in the camp of
the Assyrians. 2 King. 19.34.
5ly By Pharaoh Necho, who carried away Iehoahaz prisoner into Egypt, and
condemned the land in an hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold.
Finally by Nebuchadonozer, king of the Caldees, 2 Chronicles. 36.4.
who made a great slaughter of the people, carried away all the treasures and
vessels of the temple, all the treasures of the king and of the princes, burnt
the Temple and the city, brake down the wall, and carried away the people
captive into Babylon; 2 Chronicles. 36.18, 19, 20.
where they remained in exile for the space of threescore and ten years. And
having first caused the sons of Zedechiah to be slain before his face, he put
out his eyes and bound him with fetters of brass, and carried him to Babylon.
A just reward for a perjured rebel, 2 King. 25.7. 2 Chronicles. 36.13.
which the Scripture observes expressly, saying, He rebelled against king
Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God.

After the return of the people, both the city and the temple Ptolemeus the son
of Lagus took it by a stratagem, which was this. He entered the city upon a
sabbath day, pretending to offer sacrifice, and while the Jews suspected
nothing, but spent the day in idleness and quiet, he surprised the city
without resistance, and oppressed the citizens with hateful captivity. 2ly
Antiochus being brought thither by a faction, received it by surrender, where
he committed great slaughters; robbed the temple of all the precious things
thereof, closed it up with high walls and towers, planted a garrison therein,
caused swines flesh to be offered upon the altar, interdicted Circumcision, and
the observation of the law; and raised most grievious persecution against those
that stuck fast to the religion of their country. 3ly It was conquered by
Pompey, and made tributary to the Romans, from whom Herod received the
kingdom: and then was Christ to come, for then was the scepter departed from
Judah, according to the prophecy of Jacob, Genesis 49.10.

When Christ came, he found it rather to be (as the prophets said) the valley
of slaughter, Jer. 19.6. Jer. 7.11.
and a den of robbers, than the royal seat of the King, or the place of holy
worship: guilty of all the righteous blood shed upon the whole earth, from the
blood of the righteous Abel, S. Mat. 23, 35
to the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias (supposed to be the father of
St. John the Baptist) whom they slew between the temple and the altar, (for
asserting, it is said, the perpetual virginity of Christ's blessed mother) who
also filled up the measure of their iniquity, in the blood of the great one,
even Jesus the Lord of life, who by his death, therein suffered, sealed the
redemption of the world, and put an end to the ceremonies and glory of the
place, Dan. 9.27.
according to the prophecy of Daniel.

Jews most wickedly imprecated upon themselves, S. Mat. 27.25
saying, His blood be on us, and on our children. Which wicked imprecation of
theirs, was neither forgotten, nor forgiven, in Gods most righteous judgment.
Therefore it came to pass that their city, by their own seditions, and by the
Caesar's cruelties was made so desolate, that a stone was not left standing upon
a stone, but were all cast down, as in the destruction of Sodom, the walls
removed, mount Sion excluded, and Calvary taken in; the name of Jerusalem
changed into Aelia, an unclean swine set over the chief gate of entrance, and
the Jews forbidden upon pain of death to look back upon the city. In this
state the Romans had it, and held it, till the year of God six hundred and
fifteen. From whose Empire the Persian wan it, and kept it the space of two and
twenty years, and then the Saracens got it, in the year six hundred thirty and
seven, and possessed it for the space of three hundred seventy and two years.
But in the year nine hundred and nine, the Turks wan it, and immediately lost
it to the Sultan of Egypt: And so the Egyptians were Lords over it by the space
of ninety years: until the christian Godfrey Bulloign conquered it, in the
year of our Lord, one thousand ninty and nine: and in possession of Christian
Princes was it kept by the space of eighty and eight years, till in the year
one thousand one hundred eighty and seven, it was surprised by Saladine Sultan
of Egypt, and by them was it held three hundred and thirty years, though not
without much variety of fortune, being in or about the year one thousand two
hundred twenty and eight regained by the Emperor Frederick the second; and in
the year one thousand two hundred forty and six, won by Cassanus king of the
Tartars; then destroyed by Tamerlane; and then by Mahomet the second. When
finally in the year one thousand five hundred and seventeen, it was invaded and
obtained by Selim the Turkish Emperor, who conquered Capson and Tomombeus
successive Sultans of Egypt, where to this day (I will not say to the shame of
all Christian princes) the abomination of wicked Mahomet is set up.

Now this City was not without great mystery, The mystery.
and such a covenant, and principally of the Evangelicall part of the
testament. For Abraham had two wives, Hagar and Sarah, the one a bond woman,
the other a free woman. And two sons, Ishmael the son of the bondwoman, born
according to the flesh; and Isaac the son of the free woman, born by promise.
And two seeds, a carnal seed, the seed of the bond woman; and a spiritual
seed, the seed of the free woman. There be also two mountains, mount Sinai in
Arabia, and mount Sion in the land of Canaan. And two testaments, the old
testament and the new testament: the old testament the law, delivered by Moses
from mount Sinai: the new testament the gospel, published by Christ from mount
Sion. And two people, the Jews and the Christians: the Jews seeking to be
made righteous by the law, the Christians by Christ. And two states, a state of
spiritual bondage to fear: and a state of spiritual liberty to believe, And
two mediators, Moses a human mediator, and Christ the divine mediator. And
two cities, Jerusalem the type, and Jerusalem typed. To the legal part of the
testament belonged the bond woman, and the son of the bond woman, and the
carnal seed, and the mount Sinai, and the old testament, and the Jews, and
the spiritual bondage, and the human mediator, and Jerusalem the type. To the
Evangelicall part of the testament, belongs the free woman, and the son of
the free woman, and the spiritual seed, and mount Sion, and the new testament,
and the Christians, and the spiritual liberty, and the divine mediator, and
Jerusalem typed. Jerusalem which was the type, did visibly represent the Church
of the new testament, teaching them to look for another Jerusalem, that
Jerusalem which is above, and is free, and is (as Saint Paul says) the mother
of us all, of which, Gal. 4.26.
those things which are spoken of Jerusalem in the best sense, are to be
affirmed in a spiritual and evangelicall sense and meaning. This city is
founded by Melchisedec indeed, Heb. 7, 2.
Jesus Christ the true king of righteousness and peace. Her foundations are
upon the holy hills, not mount Sion and mount Moriah; but Jesus Christ is the
foundation of this Jerusalem, this foundation is a sure rock; 1 Cor. 3.11. S.
Mat. 16.18 Ephesians. 1.20.
and the Apostles and Prophets are foundations strongly built and laid upon
that foundation. These foundations are in the holy mountains, the public
places of his worship where Christ is preached, the scriptures read, the
prayers made, the sacraments administered; unto those mountains has the
Christian to lift up his eyes from whence comes his help; Psalm. 121.1.
for upon those mountains shall he find the sure foundations. Glorious things
were spoken of that Jerusalem which was the type; far more glorious things are
spoken of this Jerusalem which was typed. S. Mat. 4.5. Psalm. 76.2. Isa. 22.1.
S. Mat. 5.35.
This Jerusalem is indeed the holy city, the true Salem, the valley of vision,
the city of the great king, wherein Christ does reign and rule by his word,
and by his holy spirit. That was the city of David from which he cast out the
Jebusites; this is the city of Christ from which he has cast out the devils.
There Abraham offered up Isaac for a burnt-offering; here is Christ offered up
for the sins of the whole world. There Solomon built his temple; here Christ
has his worship. That was Gods Aholibah for a time; this is his Aholibah for
ever, (Thy walls are continually before me). Isa. 49.16.
There was the throne of David for a time; here is the throne of Christ for
ever and ever. That was often assailed, and finally surprised; this is often
assailed, but shall never be surprised: for the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. S. Mat. 16.18.
And all this was mysteriously signified and showed by that city.

Evangelicall part of the testament, belongs the holy temple. History of the
Temple. Deuteronomy. 12.4, 5. and 13, 14. 1 King. 8.29. 2 Chronicles. 7.12.
And, that such a temple should be built, an habitation to the Lord, Moses had
sufficiently premonished them in the book of Deuteronomy, cap. 12. David
therefore having obtained rest from his enemies, thought that this duty might
concern him, and consulted with Nathan the prophet about it. But God by the
mouth of Nathan expressly forbids him to do it, giving him to understand,
that he would accept such a work, not at his, 2 Samuel 7. 1. Chron. 17. and 22.
but at his sons hands. David thereupon having purchased the threshing floor of
Araunah the Jebusite upon mount Moriah, makes ample provision for the building
of it, and leaves the work to be performed by Solomon his son. Solomon in the
fourth year of his reign begins the work upon mount Moriah, 1 Chronicles. 22.14. 2 Chronicles. 3.1.
compasses and ends it in the term of seven years; and having also made all
the ornaments and utensills of the same, in form and matter like unto those of
the Tabernacle, he brought the Ark with the Tabernacle of David, and all the
sacred vessels which were in that tabernacle, into the temple which he had
built, (concerning which stately structure, the magnificence and dimensions of
it, let him that pleases read 1 King. 6. 2 Chronicles. 3.) and placed the Ark in
the most holy place, under the wings of the Cherubims, in which at that time
there, was nothing, save the two tables of stone which Moses put there at
Horeb, as has been said before. And when he had prayed and blessed the people,
he offered his most rich and royal offerings, dedicating the temple, 1 King.
8.63, 64. 2 Chronicles. 7.7.
and hallowing the middle court, for the offering sake which he offered there.
Three times a year, namely at Easter, Whitsontide, and at the feast of
Tabernacles, did Solomon offer his offerings upon that Altar, which he had
built in the middle court which he had sanctified, for that the brazen altar
was not large enough to contain his offering.

But when the ten tribes made defection from Rehoboam the Solomon their lawful
King, 2 Chro. 8.12, 13.
and followed Jeroboam the son of Nebat in his rebellion; then did Jeroboam
(fearing lest if the tribes should go up to Jerusalem at the three solemn
feasts, according to the law, they would return again to their allegiance)
erect two calves, the one at Bethel, the other in Dan, which he made of gold,
and under pretense that it would be too tedious and laborious for them to go up
to Jerusalem, he drew away the people from the worship of God, to commit
idolatry, and to worship those calves with sacrifices, rejecting the tribe of
Levi, and making Priests of the lowest of the people. 1 Kin. 12.
Which state policy all the kings of Israel his successors followed, and
forsook the Temple, till in the end all the people together with Hoshea their
king were carried away captive by Salmaneser king of Assyria, and were by him
disposed in Assyria, and in cities of the Medes, from whence they never
obtained to return. 2 Kin. 17.6.
All this while the Temple at Jerusalem was held in great Veneration by the
other tribes, who adhered to the house of David; saving that it was once
expiled by Shishack king of Egypt, in the fifth year of the reign of Rehoboam.
1 Kin. 14.26 2 Kin. 14.14 2 Kin. 11.18 2 Chr. 28.24 2 Kin. 16.15
And at another time by Iehoash king of Israel in Amaziah's reign. And was
sometimes neglected out of impiety, as by Athaliah, who had in or nigh the
Temple, an house dedicated to Baal. Sometimes violenced and closed up, as by
king Ahaz; who also caused a strange Altar to be placed there. Notwithstanding
God had still a care of it, and raised up good Kings who repaired it, and
restored his worship; such were king Jehoash, king Hezechiah, and king Josiah,
kings of Judah: 2 Kin. 12. 2 Kin. 18. 2 Kin. 22.
till in the end for the wickedness of Zedechiah, (and because the priests and
people also committed idolatry and polluted it) Nebuchadnezzar king of the
Caldees, being raised up by God as a scourge for their impieties, took away all
the treasures and vessels thereof, and burnt it with fire, after that it had
stood by the space of four hundred and forty years, 2 Kin. 25. 2 Chro. 36.
from the time that Solomon had founded it. And so the people being carried
captive into Babylon, they abode many days (threescore and ten years) without
a King, and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and without an Image,
and without an Ephod, and without Teraphim, Hos. 3.4.
as the Prophet Hoseah prophesied.

But when the time determined upon them was ended, by the Cyrus king of Persia,
they returned out of the land of their captivity, and came unto Jerusalem,
where Joshuah or Jesus the son of Iozadak the high Priest, and Zerubbabel, or
Zorobabel the son of Shealtiel, or Salathiel the Prince, Ezr. 3.2.
first builded the Altar whereon they offered Sacrifices; and two years after
they began to build the Temple, v. 8.
in the second month of the second year current. But this great and good work
was interrupted by the Samaritans, and other idolatrous nations adjoining, and
by the commandment of Cambyses, Ezr. 4.5.
first in the life of Cyrus his father, and during the term of his whole life;
afterward by himself, Ezr. 4. 1 Esd. 2 Ezr. 5. Ezr. 6.15.
when he obtained the kingdom (yet upon false and malicious suggestions) till
by the concession of Darius in the 2d year of his reign (which was Darius the
son of Histaspis king of Persia) the work went forward, and was finished on the
third day of the month Adar (or February) in the sixth year of his reign,
which was forty and six years, computed from the first year of the reign of
Cyrus king of Persia (according to that which was said to Christ by the Jews in
the Gospel by St. John) which they dedicated with great solemnity, S. Joh. 2.20
Ezr. 6.20.
and afterward kept the passover according to the Law. But that Temple is said
to be much inferior to Solomon's Temple, and the Thalmudists do observe five
things which that Temple wanted of the former; for first it had not the divine
presence of God, which gave answers and Oracles by lively and audible voice,
from above the mercy-seat between the two Cherubims: in which manner God
communed with Moses, Number. 7.89
and Moses directed his voice thither, and did speak to God. 2ly The spirit of
prophecy, for from Malachi to St. John the Baptist, Levit. 6.13.
there arose no Prophet among them. 3ly The holy fire, concerning which it was
provided in the Law, that it should never go out. 2 Mal. 1.20
For this was hidden in a pit, to the end that it might not be surprised by the
Babylonians, and was found congealed to water. 4ly The Urim and Thummim a mute
Oracle; they say, it was certain precious stones in the pectorall of the high
Priest, by the radiancy whereof God was pleased to signify his approbation of
that which they desired; which was, if they appeared more radiant then at other
times, that then he approved their requests. Lastly, the Ark with the
propiciatory and Cherubims, 2 Mal. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
which together with the Tabernacle of David, were hidden by the prophet
Jeremiah, but could never be found again.

Temple, till it was dispoyled by Antiochus, surnamed Epiphanes, for he being
brought to Jerusalem by a faction, (for he was sent for out of Egypt by the
sons of Tobias, whom Onias the High Priest had by sedition cast out of the
city) received it by surrender, 1 Mac. 1.21, 22
and entered proudly into the Sanctuary, and robbed it of all the precious
things thereof; closed it up with high vvalls and Towers, planted a Garrison
therein, caused svvines flesh to be offered upon the Altar, upon which he set
up the abomination of desolation, v. 54.
by dedicating it (as Josephus says) to Jupiter Olympius. And having slain
Onias the high Priest, he gave the Priesthood to Alcimus, who was not of the
pontifical blood. But two years after, Judas surnamed Machabeus, having
received the City, cleansed and dedicated the Temple a new, which the
Gentiles had profaned, taking away the abomination, and reducing every thing
to its former state, as is to be seen at large, 1 Mac. 4. In which state it
continued till king Herod most sumptuously repaired and enlarged it, to the
admiration of all men, within the space of one year and six months, Joseph.
lib. 15. cap. 14. And so it stood in its glory to the passion of Christ; S.
Mat. 27.51
at what time the veil of the Temple rent in twain, from the top to the
bottom. Afterward Caligula the Emperor affecting Deity, reduced the Synagogue
of the Jews to his own worship, adorning them with his own statues, and the
Temple it self which to that day had been kept inviolate, he dedicated to his
own name. Whereby it appeared (says mine Author) that the speech which the
Jews unadvisedly had spoken before Pilate, when they said they would have no
other king but Caesar, to have deservedly fallen upon their own heads. After
this the Jews rebelling against Caesar their King, Titus Caesar in the reign of
Vespasian took the City, and whether willingly or unwillingly, that is not here
to be disputed, burnt the Temple, upon the same day that it had been burnt by
the Babylonians before. And that which made the judgment the more remarkable,
was, that after the Soldiers had kindled the fire, no humane industry was able
to extinguish it. Even so does God by man bring things to pass, which no human
power can prevent. But it was Adrian the Emperor who caused the abomination of
desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, Dan. 9.27.
to stand in the holy place. For he set up his own Statue, and an image of
Jupiter in the place of the Temple, and when the Jews rebelled, he subdued
them, laid the City level to the ground, burnt that which remained of the
Temple; and because he would utterly take away the Jews Religion, he
overwhelmed it with earth, and dedicated a Temple to Venus in place of it.

Like as the Temple had the same utensils which the Tabernacle mystery. The
Mystery.
For As much as the Tabernacle was no other but a portable Temple, neither was
the Temple any other thing but a fixed, and immovable Tabernacle. Yet because
the Temple did in many things excel the Tabernacle, therefore the mystery
must not go unobserved. The Temple did succeed the Tabernacle, which was to
give them to understand, that the Evangelical Church, (figured by the Temple)
should succeed the legal Tabernacle, or Jewish Synagogue. The Tabernacle was
built by Moses, and was so made that it might be dis-joynted and taken down;
but the Temple was built by Solomon, and was made to stand and remain:
signifying that the Jewish Synagogue, and legal worship given by Moses, should
be dissolved, but the Christian Church, and Evangelicall worship, founded and
built by Christ should stand, and remain unto the end of the world. The
Tabernacle had no foundation, but the Temple was surely founded upon a strong
Rock, signifying the weakness of the legal, if compared with the Evangelicall
worship founded upon Christ the Rock. The Temple was more great and glorious
then the Tabernacle; and all the utensils that Solomon made, did excel those
that Moses made for the use of the Tabernacle: teaching them to know that the
Evangelicall Church should be more great, and that far more glorious things
should be spoken of it in the time of the new Testament, then could be spoken
of the Jewish Synagogue, or legal worship in the time of the old Testament.
That it should be both of Jews, and Gentiles. That it should be extended all
the world over: that it should be adorned with gifts more rare and admirable,
in the persons of the Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Teachers;
that it should be enlightened with a more plentiful measure of Gods most holy,
and most blessed spirit. That it should be directed by the Evangelicall word.
That it should be confirmed by miracles greater, and more abundant. That it
should have Sacraments more venerable; a worship more plain and easy; a more
glorious, and victorious army of Martyrs, and Confessors. That Kings, and
Princes, and Magistrates, and all worldly Rulers, should cast down their Crowns
and Scepters, and all engines of honor and greatness, descend from their
Thrones, do homage unto Christ, bend and bow their knees, at or in the blessed
name of Jesus, wear the venerable sign of his Cross in their foreheads, fight
under his Banner, and account it their chiefest happiness to be Christ's his
servants.

Solomon dedicated the Temple, he also the same day hallowed the middle Court,
that was before the house of the Lord; and there he offered burnt-offerings,
and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings, (two and twenty
thousand Oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep) because the brazen
Altar that was before the Lord, 1 Kin. 8.63.64. 2 Chro. 7.7.
was too little to receive the burnt-offerings, and meat offerings, and the
fat of the peace offerings. The Holy Ghost thereby signifying the fullness of
the Gentiles, to be brought unto the father by Christ his son, who should
present their bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God. For
which cause when Christ suffered his passion and dyed, the veil of the Temple
rent in twain, from the top to the bottom, showing unto all those that looked
upon these things with spiritual eyes, fullness of the Gentiles might come in,
Concerning those who are to administer in, or attend upon holy things.
as St. Paul shows, Ephesians. 2.

Lastly, to the Evangelicall part of the Testament, belonged all those who by
their place and office, were to administer in, or give their attendance upon
holy things. These were first the Priests who were of the sons of Aaron, whom
God who is the God of order, distributed into two orders. The first was the
Pontifical order; of which order there was always one, and but one, who had
it, (or ought to have had it) from Aaron by succession, and birthright, if he
were in capability of it: that is to say, if he had no blemish, if he were not
blind, nor lame, nor had a flat nose, nor had any thing superfluous, nor were
broken footed, or broken handed, or crook-backt, or a dwarf, or had a blemish
in his eye, or scurvie, or scabbed, or had his stones broken, etc. For every
blemish made him incapable of the pontifical function. Then again he must not
uncover his head, nor rend his clothes, nor go into any dead body, nor defile
himself for his father or for his mother, nor go out of the sanctuary, nor
profane it; and might only take a virgin to wife of his own people, and might
not profane his seed among his people; for these are the conditions required,
Levit. cap. 21. His office was to order the lamps upon the pure candlestick
before the Lord continually. To offer upon the Altar, to burn incense, Levit.
24.4. 1 Samuel 2.28. Levit. 24.8. Levit. cap. 16
to wear the Ephod. To make and set forth in order the shewbread before the
Lord every Sabbath. To go within the veil, and to make the solemn atonement
once a year, in such manner and form as is prescribed, Levit. cap. 16. Under
these conditions Aaron first had it, then Eleazer his son, then Phinees the
son of Eleazar, etc.

The Priests of the second order, The priests of the second order. Levit. 21.21.
were all the sons of Aaron blemish, nor were blind or lame, etc. for the Law
was, No man that has a blemish of the seed of Aaron the Priest, shall come
nigh to offer the offerings of the Lord made by fire; he has a blemish, he
shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his God. These were consecrated as
the High Priests were, and with the same oil, though not to the same measure,
as has been said before. They might not defile themselves for the dead; yet
for their near kindred, their Mothers, their Fathers, their Sons, their
Daughters, their Brethren, and their Sisters which were Virgins, and had not
been married, they might defile themselves by going in unto them when they were
dead. They might uncover their head, but they might not make baldness upon it,
by shaving the hair quite off, neither might they shave all the corners of
their beards, nor make any cuttings in their flesh. It was not forbidden unto
them to marry with widows, though they might not take to wife a Whore, a
profane woman, or her that had been divorced: Number. 4.16. S. Luc. 1.9. Levit.
17.6. 2 Chronicles. 29.21, 22, 23, 24. and v. 34.
for these conditions are required, Levit. 21. Their office was to conserve the
oil, to oversee all the sacred Vessels, to offer incense every day, to offer
ordinary, and extraordinary sacrifices, to flay or take off the skin of the
burnt-offerings. They were in order, degree, and dignity, inferior to the high
priest, and therefore though they had vessels befitting their order and degree
which the high priest also had in common together with them, as the feminalls
or linen breeches, the strait linen coat, the girdle of needle work, the cap
or mitre of fine linen, the linen Ephod, as has been said before: yet the
peculiar robes and ornaments of the high priest, as the robe of the Ephod, the
Ephod or superhumerall, the breast plate of judgment, the Urim and Thummim,
and the plate of gold upon the Mitre or Cap, it was not lawful for them to
wear.

Aaron had four sons, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar; and these four were
first consecrated, Priests first consecrated.
being apparrelled with the sacerdotall garments. But Nadab and Abihu, did
rashly presume to offer incense with common and ordinary fire, and not with
that sacred fire which God commanded; therefore there went out fire from the
Lord, and devoured them, and they dyed before the Lord; Levit. 10.1, 2 1 Chro.
24.2
and left none to succeed them in the priesthood. Wherefore the priesthood was
continued by Eleazar and Ithamar, and in their stock and progeny, unto the
days of David. But David in his time, finding that there were sixteen families
which descended from Eleazar, and eight from Ithamar, distributed them into
four and twenty rancks or orders, according to the heads of the several
families by lot: that so they might orderly, and in their course (and not
altogether) give attendance upon the Temple. And these were called the first,
second, third, and fourth lots, etc. as is to be seen 1 Chronicles. cap. 24. This
being done by David, Solomon having builded and consecrated the Temple,
appointed according to the order of David his Father, 2 Chr. 8.14.
the courses of the Priests to their service. The several Orders served their
several weeks, and then others succeeded in their places. For Zacharias the
priest, the Father of St John the Baptist, executed the Priests office before
God, S. Luc. 1.8.
(...), in the order of his course, says the Translation. But (...) courses,
as Theophilact says, and after him, Scuttetus and Beza, were Hebdomadae,
weeks. It seems also, that when they were met together, they cast lots what
every man should do, and what service he should perform; for it is said of the
same Zacharias, that according to the custom of the Priests office (...), his
lot was, (or he obtained by lot) to burn incense. v. 9.
And by this the Reader may take notice, who those (...), those high priests,
or chief priests were, S. Mat. 2.4.
with whom Herod consulted; and who they were who so often in the new Testament
have obtained to be styled high Priests, or chief Priests. There was but one
high priest who was the high or chief Priest of all, as was Jehoiada the chief.
But there were high priests or chief Priests, 2 Chr. 24.6.
four and twenty in number, who were the highest or chiefest of the several
courses, orders or lots, the heads of the several families. These upon all
occasions assisted the high priest, and were of his counsel, as is to be seen,
Acts 4.6. Act. 4.6.
And because they were the heads of the several families of the priests, and
the chiefest of the several courses, orders, or lots, therefore called the
high priests, or chief priests.

The Levites, under which name and notion I comprehend tribe of Levi,
Concerning the Levites.
(the stock and progeny of Eleazer and Ithamar, from whom the high priest and
all the priests of the second order did descend, only excepted) were by divine
institution first set apart to the service of the Tabernacle. Their office was
to take care of the Tabernacle, and of all the vessels thereof, Number. 1.50. and
cap. 3.6, 7, 8.9. 1 Chronicles. 23.28.
and of all things that did belong to it, to bear it, and all the vessels of
it, to minister unto it, and to encamp about it, and to minister to the
priests. All which things they performed during the peregrination of the
Tabernacle, and to the days of David. But David reduced them into another
form; for the care of the Tabernacle being ceased, and the Temple to succeed,
Levites properly or specially. Ezr. 8.16. 1 Chronicles. 23.27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
he appointed some of them to attend the temple, and to minister to the
priests: these were twenty and four thousand, divided into four and twenty
orders, courses, or lots, according as their lot fell, who had also their
chief Levites as the priests had, and did give their attendance in their
turns, and were called the Levites. Concerning whose office and age, read 1 Chronicles. cap. 23. Giving also the Nethinims The Nethinims. Ezr. 8.20.
to minister unto them, and to do service for the levites, as the levites also
ministered unto the priests. Which Nethinims were the stock and progeny of the
Gibeonites, whom Ioshuah and the Princes spared, because of the oath which they
had sworn; but yet condemned to perpetual bondage, Josh. 9.21, 23, 27. 2 Chronicles. 8.14.
and to be hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the congregation, and for
the house of God for ever. Solomon therefore according to the order of David,
appointed the levites to their charges.

Again, David appointed four thousand of the tribe of Levi Singers, The
Singers.
distinguishing them by lots into four and twenty orders, courses, or lots,
according as their lot fell, and to give attendance in their several courses.
1 Chronicles. 23.5, 6. and cap. 25.1.
Their office was to praise the Lord with the instruments which David made for
the service and praise of God, and to prophesy with harps, with psalteries, and
with cymballs, and with lively and audible voice to praise and glorify God,
and to lift up their voice in their divine songs, saying, For he is good, for
his mercy endures for ever. They were arrayed in white linen, 2 Chronicles. 5.13.
but Solomon (as Josephus says) made for them two hundred thousand robes of
silk or bysse, whereby they were distinguished from the priests who ware a
linen Ephod. The Porters.
He appointed likewise four thousand of the tribe of Levi to be porters,
distinguishing them by lot into four and twenty orders, courses, or lots, and
assigning unto them the gates by lot. 1 Chronicles. cap. 26.
Their office was to watch, 1 Chronicles. 9.26, 27, 28, 29.
and to have the oversight of the gates of the temple, to take care of the
chambers and treasures, to lodge round about it, and to open and shut the gates
morning and evening, to have the charge of the ministering vessels, to bring
them in and out by tale. Also to oversee the vessels, and all the instruments
of the Sanctuary, and the fine flower, the wine, and the oil, and the
franckincense, and the spices. To stand at the gates, 2 King. 22.4. Philo de
praemiis sacerdotum.
and to prohibit all that were unclean in any thing to enter in. To gather the
money which the people were to pay toward the reparation of the temple. To sweep
the porches and the court, to carry out the dust and dirt, and to keep it sweet
and clean every way.

Levi six thousand to be officers and judges. 1 Chronicles. 23 4.
Who these officers and judges The officers and judges.
were, the Scripture makes no mention; yet forasmuch as the Greek interpreter
renders the place (...). I conceive them to be such as were appointed to read
the law, to expound the same, and to judge in controversies of religion, 2 Samuel
8.17. 2 King. 18.18. 2 King. 12.10.
if any should arise. For there were three sorts of scribes, the first were the
Kings secretaries. So David had Seraiah for his scribe, and Hezekiah had Shebna
for his scribe. And such a one is expressly called the kings scribe. The second
sort of scribes were scriveners or public notaries, who wrote instruments, and
drew public and private contracts; I should think those scribes to be such, of
whom mention is made 1 Chronicles. 2. 1 Chronicles. 2.55. Jer. 32.10. Psalm. 45.1.
Such were the evidences subscribed and sealed with witnesses by Jeremiah. To
whose dexterity and quickness in writing, David alludeth in the book of
Psalms, My tongue is the pen of a ready writer. The third sort of scribes were
not scribae a scribendo, but scribae a scripturis sacris; they had not their
name from writing, but from the holy scriptures which they read and expounded,
and because it was their office (...) to dijudicate, and to distinguish,
therefore called (...) judges: Ezr. 1.6. Nehem 8.4, 8. S. Mat. 2.4. S. Luc.
7.30. S. Luc. 11.46 Act. 5.34. Act. 22.3.
Such a one was Ezra, a ready scribe in the law of Moses, He read the law
standing in a pulpit of wood, gave the sense, and caused the people to
understand the reading. Such were the scribes whom Herod consulted with,
demanding where Christ should be born. They are called in the gospel lawyers,
and doctors of law. Such a one was Gamaliel, at whose feet Saint Paul was
brought up. These therefore had the care of religion, to examine doctrines, and
to know by what authority any one should take upon him to teach, And therefore
Saint Luke tells us, that when Christ taught the people in the temple, and
preached the Gospel, they came upon him to examine him, and to demand his
authority, saying, S. Luc. 20.2.
Tell us, by what authority do thou these things, or who is he that gave thee
this authority? which was, because he had no authority from them. When Christ
came, their doctrines and expositions were very corrupt, and through their
traditions, they had made the law of God of none effect. Yet he acknowledges
them to sit in Moses seat, (that they had a lawful institution, S. Mat. 23.2.
and were bound in duty to read and to expound the law), And every Scribe
(says he) which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, is like unto a man
that is an householder, which brings forth out of his treasure things new and
old. Yet for their pride, S. Mat. 13.53.
hypocrisy, and because they seduced the people, he denounces eight woes
against them, as it is to be seen, Saint Mat. cap. 8.

But we will now come unto the mysteries The mystery.
to be understood. high priest in his person, and by his consecration, and in
his place and office, and in all his robes and ornaments, and in every office
of his function, was a type of Christ. The conditions of his capability did
most excellently set forth the fullness of Christ his perfections every way;
for had there been any imperfections in him; he could not have redeemed
mankind, made imperfect by reason of sin. That he might only take a virgin to
wife of his own people, it did give them to understand, that Christ would be
betrothed to his own Church (the Christian Church) as to a pure virgin. His
offices, (namely, the offices of the high priest in the Temple) did mystically
set forth the offices of, Christ's priesthood in his Church, his sacrifice,
intercession, expiation, and doctrine, whereby the Church is enlightened, as the
temple was by the lamps ordered by the high priest, and spiritually fed and
nourished, as by that shewbread, or bread of proposition, which is set forth
to be received and believed all the world over.

The priests of the second order, as they were typical persons and types of
Christ upon some respects; even so upon other respects Evangelicall priesthood;
that although they have a true and a real priesthood, convenient to the new
testament, yet inferior, and of a second order to the priesthood of Christ.
That by their office and function they descend, and derive a spiritual and
evangelicall pedigree from Christ, the first, and the great high priest. The
conditions of their capability, (to wit, of the priests of the second order)
did mystically show what manner of men the evangelicall priests ought to be,
that they must be without all blemish, not in respect of sin as Christ was, for
that is impossible; but of scandal, for that is requisite. Therefore some
things were permitted to the priests of the second order, which were absolutely
forbidden to the high priest. The office of the priests of the second order, to
whom it was appointed, that they should conserve the oil, oversee the
vessels, offer incense and sacrifices, yet might they not go within the vail,
nor make the expiation; did mean, that although the evangelicall priests should
be ordained to preach the gospel, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, and to
intercede for the people as priests or ministers; yet that it is Christ alone,
who by his own blood should enter once into the holy place, having obtained
eternal redemption for us. To his superiority therefore belonged all that
which was meant, and intended by the peculiar robes and ornaments of the high
priest; and to their ministry, all that which was meant and intended by the
other vestes. The feminalls or linen breeches, and the strait linen coat,
that they must be expedite and diligent to do the duties of their calling; the
girdle of needle work, that they must be bound about with verity and truth; the
cap or mitre of fine linen, that they must in all things save and preserve
their head, which is Christ; and the linen Ephod, that they must be of a pure
and unspotted conversation. That whereas the priests of the second order were
distinguished into their classes, and appointed to their offices by lot: it
gave them to understand, that the priesthood of the new testament should be of
divine providence, and allotted unto his Church by Christ.

Levites, the Nethinims, the Singers, and the Porters, did signify the
inferior clergy of the new testament, and all others employed in the Church
to glorify God, to promote and set forth religion with decency and order. And
whereas the officers and judges were of the tribe of Levi, it gave them to
understand, that in the Church of Christ, the scriptures must be expounded, and
questions and controversies of religion decided by those only, who in respect
of their office and function do properly pertain to the Leviticall tribe. By
the distinct orders and offices of the high priest, the priests of the second
order, the levites, the singers, the porters,, the officers and judges, was
signified, that Christ in his Church would have distinct orders and officers,
to attend severally upon their several offices, and not to clash or interfere
one with another, Let the layicks (or lay-officers) be subject to the Deacons;
the Deacons to the Priests; the Priests to the Bishop; the Bishop to Christ; as
Christ himself is subject to the Father, says Saint Ignatius, Epist. ad
Smyrnens.

Concerning the Prophets.
and were organs or instruments, in, or by whom the word came; in whom God was,
by his most holy and most blessed spirit, and did regulate their mouths and
pens so, that look what they delivered to the Church either by preaching or by
writing, it was none of their word, but the word of God in and by them
delivered. For God spoke unto the fathers of old time (...), Heb. 1.1.
in or by the Prophets, as the Apostle says. And these Prophets, whether they
obtained to be called (...), Prophets, from the word (...), which signifies to
predict, because they did predict and foretell things to come, especially
concerning Christ and his kingdom. Or else (...), which signifies to show,
because they did show forth future events, but more especially, because they
did show Christ to come, and were themselves typical persons of Christ. Or
else (...), because they did interpret obscure oracles, and declare deep and
profound mysteries, especially such as lay hidden in the sacrifices and
ceremonies of the law: Certain it is, that they were more anciently by the
Hebrews called Seers, because they had their prophecies and predictions by
divine visions and revelation from God, and because by them men did enquire of
God. 1 Samuel 9.9. Definition of Prophets.
These Prophets therefore must be defined to be holy men, who being inspired by
Gods most holy and most blessed Spirit, did see, and had divine visions and
revelations from God, and did interpret obscure oracles, and declare great
mysteries, and did prophesy and foretell things to come, specially concerning
Christ and his kingdom, seeking only the glory of God, and the good of his
Church.

Of these Prophets there was no continued succession, neither Prophet as the
Priests did; yet we find them almost from the beginning of the world. For
although I shall make no doubt, but that Adam himself had the gift of
prophecy, and was able to prophesy and predict things to come, (especially
concerning that blessed seed, whom God had promised to break the serpents
head); and that his sons also had the same gift. Jud. v. 14, 15.
Yet Enoch the seventh from Adam is expressly noted a prophet, and that he did
see, and did prophesy and predict things to come concerning Christ, so far off
as his second coming. Neither were these Prophets all of the Jews, but there
were prophets also of other nations, as Balaam, Job, and the Sibylls, whose
fatidick verses are well known and remembered by the Fathers in their learned
Writings. But our definition holds good, specially of those Prophets, in and
by whom the word of God came unto his people the Jews, and which were raised
up among them, and of their own nation, although they were not all of them of
the tribe of Levi. Of these, some were before the law, as Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, and Joseph, whose prophecies are extant in the Scripture: Genesis 20.7.
and Abraham is affirmed to be a Prophet by God himself. Some of them were
under the law, first and principally Moses, to whom God spoke, not in visions
and dreams, as to other prophets; but mouth to mouth apparently, and not in
dark speeches, and to whom it was given to behold the similitude of the Lord.
Then the seventy Elders, Number. 12.7, 8.
who had the same spirit of prophecy put upon them (though not to the same
measure) that Moses had. In the time of the Judges, there was Deborah a
prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, who judged Israel. Number. 11.25. Judge. 4.4.
Judge. 6.8.
And one more, of whom mention is made, Judge. 6. In the days of Eli the high
priest, the word of the Lord was precious; there was no open vision: and then
the Lord spoke unto Samuel, and appeared again in Shiloh, (where the Tabernacle
and the Ark at that time were) and revealed himself unto him; And all Israel
from Dan even to Beersheba knew, 1 Samuel 3.20, 21.
that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the Lord.

Samuel taught the art of prophesying by the appointment of God, for which
cause many had recourse unto him, and by him were taught to prophecy; 1 Samuel
19.20. 2 King. 2.3, 5.
so that from that time forth, there were not only prophets in Israel, but
houses and Seminaries of the Prophets, at Naioh, at Bethel, at Jericho; and so
wonderfully were the sons of the prophets multiplied, that their Seminaries or
Colleges became in time too strait and little for them. 2 King. 6.1.
Among whom were most famous the Prophets, Gad, Nathan, Asaph, Iduthum, Ahias,
Samaias, Jad, Azarias, Hanani, Jehu, Jaziel, Eliezer, Zecharias, in the reign
of Uzziah, whose prophesies and predictions were not written, and if written,
not extant. But above all, 1 King 17.14. 1 King. 18.38. 2 King. 1.10.12 1 King.
17.1. 2 King. 2.11. 2 King. 4.34. 2 King. 13.21. 2 King. 6.17.
the prophet Elijah, who continued the oil from wasting in the cruse, brought
down fire three times from heaven, carried the rain in his tongue, raised the
dead, and was carried up into heaven (...), in a whirlwind of fire, says S
Epiphanius. And Elisha upon whom rested a double portion of the spirit of
Elijah, who raised two from the dead, one while he lived, and another by his
dead bones, multiplied the widows oil, to fill up all the vessels to the brim,
and brought horses and horsemen [and Chariots] of fire from heaven for the
defense of Israel, says Justine Martyr, or whosoever else is the Author of
those questions and answers ad Orthodox. 85. Prophets whose writings are
extant, and received in the Church as authentical, are the Prophets, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezechiel, and Daniel, who are called the greater Prophets, because
they wrote the greater volume. Also the Prophets, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah,
Jonah, Micha, Nahum, Habbakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, the son of
Barachiah, and Malachi, who are called the lesser Prophets, because they wrote
the lesser books. All these testified of Christ, and preached the redemption of
mankind by him, as the Apostle St. Peter shows in the Acts of the Apostles,
Act 3 18, 21, 22, 24. Mal. 3.1. S. Mar. 1.2. S. Joh. 1.29.
cap. 3. Now Malachi was the last of all the Prophets, and by the spirit of
prophecy, he foretold the coming of St. John the Baptist, a messenger sent
immediately before Christ to prepare his way, by his preaching, and by his
baptism, and to point him out saying, Behold the lamb of God, which takes
away the sin of the world. So that from Malachi to St John the Baptist, St.
John the Baptist.
they had no Prophet. But St. John the Baptist was a Prophet, ^uc. 1.17.
and more then a Prophet: he was a Prophet, for the spirit and power of Elias
was upon him. He was more then a Prophet, for he was an Apostle too,
extraordinarly called, and sent forth by Christ to preach, and to baptize, to
prepare his way, and to point him out: He was of greater holiness then any that
were before him; for though the Prophet Jeremiah were sanctified in his mothers
womb, Jer. 1.5. S. Luke 1.15.
yet St. John the Baptist was filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mothers
womb. He received greater grace then any that were before him: for the
mystery of the blessed Trinity was never so plainly revealed unto any as unto
him, in that he baptized Christ, saw the Holy Ghost descend upon him in a
bodily shape like a Dove, and heard the sweet voice of the Father from heaven
saying, S. Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.

Here the Reader may please to take notice, that God in time How God was
consulted with.
and to give answers to his people the Jews in four diverse manners. First by
Oracle, for so long as the Tabernacle and the first Temple were standing, they
came unto the Oracle, that is to say, to the Holy of Holies, where the Ark of
the Covenant was, and the propitiatory or mercy seat thereupon, covered aloft
with the wings of Cherubims, and although they might not enter in, yet they
stood before it without the veil, and enquired, and God answered by voice, for
they heard the voice of one speaking unto them, from off the mercy-seat that
was upon the Ark of the testimony, from between the two Cherubims. Exo. 25.22.
Number. 7.89.
But the second Temple had not the Ark and Oracle as the Talmudists do say, but
only that stone and censer of which mention has been made before;
notwithstanding they talk of answers by Bath-kol, which was, that sometimes
there came a small still voice from heaven, such a voice as St. John the
Baptist did hear, after that Christ was baptized: S. Mat. 3.17.
such as the Disciples heard at the transfiguration of Christ. Which voice came
unto him (as the Apostle St. Peter says) from the excellent glory. S. Mat.
17.5. 2 Pet. 1.17.
And which Bath-kol, or small still voice the people once heard, but knew not
what it was. 2ly By his Prophets, before time in Israel, S. Joh. 12.28 29.
when a man went to enquire of God, thus he spoke, Come, and let us go to the
seer; for he that is now called a Prophet, was before time called a seer.
Neither did they diffide the answers which the Prophets of the Lord should
give: For when king Ahab consulted with his false Prophets, 1 Samuel 9.9.
about the expedition that he intended to make unto Ramoth Gilead, and was
counseled by them, as from God, to undertake it; king Jehosaphat not satisfied
with their answer, required to know what God would have to be done, by the
mouth of one of his own Prophets. Is there not here a Prophet of the Lord
besides, that we might enquire of him? says he.

But these Prophets ceased, after the return of the people Babylon, and were
not under the second Temple, the Prophet Malachi being the last, as was
intimated before. 3ly By the Priest, that is to say, by the high Priest, who
when he asked counsel of God, had on his Ephod or superhumerall, and the
Rational or breast plate of judgment, wherein was the Urim and Thummim, a
mute Oracle placed within the duplicate, over against his heart, whereby when
he enquired he understood the will of God. But how, that is not known, because
it is not revealed in the Scriptures what the Urim and Thummim were. But they
say, that when God was propitious to the sacrifice, then that onyx stone which
was upon the right shoulder of the Ephod, which before was dim, did shine with
a wonderful luster, so that they who stood afar off might discern it. And
that the twelve stones in the Rational, by their more then usual radiancy,
before the battle was joined, were sure tokens of victory. Howsoever it were,
sure it is, that God was consulted with, and did give answers by the priests;
for it is said expressly, that Saul enquired of the Lord, and the Lord answered
him not, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets. And when the
Amalekites had spoiled Zicklag, 1 Samuel 28.6.
David said to Abiathar the priest, Abimelechs son, I pray thee bring me hither
the Ephod, and Abiathar brought thither the Ephod to David. 1 Samuel 30.7,
And David enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I pursue after this troop, shall
I overtake them? And he [Abiathar who had on the Ephod, and made enquiry for
David] answered him, 8.
Pursue, for thou shall surely overtake them, and without fail recover all. But
the second temple had not the Urim and Thummim, as before is mentioned. And
Josephus says, that about two hundred years before he wrote his History, the
Onyx stone of the Ephod, and the stones of the Rational, left off their former
divinatory splendency, God being offended with his people for the transgression
of his law, Antiqu. lib. 3. cap. 9. 4ly God was enquired of, and did give his
answers by visions, and by divine dreams, (visions are the representations of
things, to the outward senses of men being awake; and dreams are the
representation of things by the fantasy, in sleep) and the interpretation of
such dreams and visions was a peculiar gift of God. Genesis 41.16.
Such dreams had Abimelech, and Jacob, and Joseph, and Gideon; and such visions
had Jacob, and Samuel, and Nathan, and the Prophets. And this kind ceased not
under the second temple, and is frequently found in the new testament; for
Joseph in his dream was commanded to flee into Egypt with Christ, and with his
blessed mother; and in his dream he was commanded to return again. S. Mat.
1.12.20.
The Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul had divine dreams and visions, and
Saint John had his revelation by visions; and visions and dreams [divine
visions and dreams] were promised to the new testament. Joel 2.28.


Prophets were typical persons and types of Christ that great Prophet, The
mystery. Deuteronomy. 18.15.
of whom Moses prophesyed, saying what God had said unto him, I will raise them
up a prophet from among their brethren like unto thee, etc. Which prophecy is
no less then three times cited in the new testament. S. Joh. 1.45. Act. 3.22.
Act. 7.37.
Their immediate mission from God did signify Christ, to be sent from the
bosom of the Father. The unction which they had with material oil, did
signify Christ immaterially anointed by the Holy Ghost. That they brought the
word of God unto the people; it did signify, that the word himself should
come, who should fully reveal unto men the Father and his will. That it was
given unto them to work miracles, and to raise the dead; it did bid them expect
that great Prophet, who by his own power should work all manner of miracles,
and raise the dead, and raise himself from death to life again. There was
nothing which the Prophets had, or did, but in a spiritual and evangelicall
sense and meaning, it must relate to Christ. That David and Solomon were kings
and prophets of the tribe of Judah, it signified Christ the true king, of whose
gift it is, that all the kings of the earth have their crowns and scepters, to
be and descend according to his human nature of the kingly tribe. 1 King. 18.37.
The fire which Elijah brought from heaven to consume the sacrifice, did
represent the Holy Ghost, (oftentimes in the Scriptures compared to fire, and
meant and understood by fire) to be sent from heaven by Christ, to help our
infirmities, and to offer up our spiritual sacrifices, acceptable unto God
through Jesus Christ. 2 King. 1.10, 12. 2 King. 2.11. 2 King 4.34.
The fire which Elijah brought from heaven to consume the captains of the
fifties; did set forth Christ coming to judgment, whose coming shall be with
fire, to burn up the world of the ungodly. The ascension of Elijah into heaven
in a whirle-winde, did prefigure the ascension of Christ into heaven. That a
double portion of the spirit of Elijah rested on Elisha; it signified that
double portion of his spirit which Christ would give to his Evangelical
ministers. That Elijah raised the Shunamites son by applying himself unto him,
by putting his mouth unto his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands
unto his hands, and by stretching himself upon him; it did premonstrate, that
Christ by applying himself unto us in the human nature, would raise us up unto
a new and spiritual life.

The multiplying of the widows oil did foretell the pouring Spirit, 2 King. 4
6.
and the multiplying of his graces in the new testament. The raising of the man
that was dead by the touch of his dead bones; 2 King. 13.21.
did prefigure a quickening virtue in the dead body of Christ, by the power of
his Godhead, not only to raise himself from the dead again, but to raise all
true believers, who are buried with him by baptism, and touch him in his grave
by faith unto newness of life. 2 King. 6.17
Those horses and chariots of fire which he showed unto his servant, was the
mystery of Christ's divine protection of his Church for ever, to defend it
against the gates of hell. That the Prophets were Seers, 1 Samuel 9.9.
and that God did speak by them, and that the people enquired of them: it did
direct them unto Christ who is the true Seer, in whom are hidden all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, stored up in him as in a treasure-house: he
being the word it self, the coeternall, coessentiall, and consubstantiall
word; who spoke unto the Partriarks, and inspired the Prophets with his most
holy and most blessed Spirit. Thus there is a wonderful profundity (as Saint
Augustine also says) of the divine oracles of God; and to use the words of
Justine Martyr, Unless that a man by the great grace of God, shall obtain to
understand the sayings and deeds of the Prophets, it is to little purpose that
he can repeat their words and works, (...), If he have not obtained [by
unfolding the great mysteries contained in them] to render a sufficient reason
of them. Dialog. cum Tryphon. Jud.

college of Elders, nay Moses himself, who had the pattern showed unto him
in the mount, (if yet either he or they had the interpretation of them
revealed, to the perfection of all that which the holy Ghost intended.) Here is
Jacob's ladder, it reaches from earth to heaven, God stands upon the top of
it: by these rounds and spokes [the forementioned mysteries] God sent down his
son to be known and believed in such a manner, as was most convenient to the
old testament: and by these rounds and spokes, they ascended unto God that
stood at the top of the ladder; and had a saving knowledge of Christ,
sufficient for them to salvation and everlasting life, till the whole earth
should be filled with a more clear and perfect knowledge of the Lord, by his
coming in the flesh. Divina eloquia tanto quisque altius intelligit, quanto
altius in eis intendit, says Saint Gregory. They therefore that are better
studied in the Scriptures, will find out farther mysteries. But if any one
shall differ from me in judgment, I envy not unto him a greater soundness and
perspicuity. In eo quippe numero sumus, ut non dedignemur etiam nobis dictum ab
Apostolo accipere, Et si quid aliter sapitis, id quoque Deus vobis revelavit:
forasmuch as we rank our selves in the number of those, who disdain not to take
unto us that which was spoken by the Apostles, And if in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God also has revealed that unto you; to apply the words of
Saint Augustine to my self. Ad Vincent. Donatist. Epist. 48.

mysterious History, The Recapitulation.
having showed how, and in what manner, that covenant which God made with Adam,
and with all his posterity, during the first period of time, for the space of
about three thousand and nine hundred, threescore and ten years, was
administered, (till the promised seed did come, the son of God, made of a woman,
made under the law, To redeem them that were under the law, that we might
receive the adoption of sons, Gal. 4.4, 5.) By covenanting grace. By conferring
faith. By administering the covenant barely inform of a promise, from Adam to
Abraham. By renewing the covenant with Abraham. By adding circumcision a seal
of the covenant. By instituting the paschall lamb, another seal of the same
covenant. By disposing it into the form of a Testament. By the legal, and by
the evangelicall parts of it. Which evangelicall part of it was invested with
the Tabernacle: The Ark: the golden Table: The golden Candlestick: The Altar of
incense: The Sacred incense: The brazen Altar. The brazen Laver: The Leviticall
priesthood: The garments of the high Priest: The consecration of the high
Priest: The Leviticall offerings: The days, and months, and times and years:
The holy City: The holy Temple: The holy persons. All which things were
typical and mysterious, relating to Christ; to the new testament, confirmed by
his blood; to the Evangelicall Church.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE SACRED AND MOST MYSTERIOUS HISTORY OF MAN'S REDEMPTION.
period of time The second period of time
come, wherein that promised Seed should abolish the old Testament, first by
his coming in the flesh, 2ly By his administration of the Covenant in the
flesh: and 3ly by his death. He would abolish the old Testament, and he has
abolished it, by not urging or exacting perfect obedience to the Law, in a
double purity; a purity of nature, and a purity of works. He would abolish the
old Testament, and he has abolished it, by unvailing the Evangelicall part of
it, in that he has put away the shadows by the body it self: the figures by
the truth it self: the temporal priesthood of Aaron, by an eternal priesthood
of Melchisedec: and all those sacrifices which were offered year by year
continually, by that sole singular sacrifice of himself offered once for all.
He would abolish, and he has abolished the old Testament, by taking off the
two old seals, Circumcision, and the Paschal lamb, and by annexing in place
thereof, two new seals proper to the new Testament, Baptism, and the sacrament
of his Supper. He would abolish, and he has abolished the old Testament, by
transferring the keys of the kingdom of heaven from the legal to the
Evangelicall priesthood. After which manner God will have his Covenant to be
administered with men, unto the end of the world.

Almighty God, The Emperor Augustus his Decree.
that the Emperor Augustus, having completely reigned one and forty years, and
the two and fortieth being then current, there being peace all the world over;
(to the end that he might know his own strength in his Empire, the number of
those who had the privilege to be Citizens of Rome, what people were then
subject to the Roman Empire in every place, how disposed to peace or war; of
what power and wealth, what contracts, consanguinities, affinities, they had
among themselves; to the end that he might know how to impose tributes, how to
make wars, in whom he might confide, whom he had to distrust, whom to fear;)
set forth an edict or decree, that all the world, that is to say, his whole
Imperial Dominion, in all the parts and provinces subject to the same all the
world over, should be taxed, described, inventaried or enrolled, by appearing
personally before such persons as he had then deputed, for that service, and by
giving in their names, surnames, parentage, alliances, estates, arts, trades,
and conditions of life, what children, what families, etc. to the end that all
these things might remain upon Record to be made use of, as occasion should
serve. For, all this is meant by the word (...), and (...) (although our late
Translation render it [should be taxed,] and taxing, but in the Margin have
noted, [inrolled] Luc. 2. S. Luc. 2.1, 2
) For this cause Publius Sulpitius Quirinius, called by the Evangelist
Cyrenius, was sent with commission into Syria, (Judea being comprehended as a
part thereof) And because that Palestina was divided unto the tribes by lot,
and the several tribes into several families, who had also in their several
families the Cities of the heads of their families; therefore David being the
head of his family, and Bethlehem the city of David; holy Joseph with the
blessed Virgin St Mary his espoused wife being great with child, (both of them
being of the tribe of Judah, and of the house and lineage of David) in obedience
to the Imperial decree, went up from Nazareth the place of their habitation,
Nazareth. S. Luc. 4.29.
which was a little city of Galilee the lower, built upon an hill, in the tribe
of Zebulon, unto Beth-lehem Ephratah another city, Mic. 5.2. Bethlehem Ephratah.
distant from Jerusalem, about six miles toward the South, and was situate
upon an hill, threescore and twelve miles from Nazareth Southward; there to be
taxed or enrolled, and to give in before the Commissioner himself, or such as
were appointed by him, their names, surnames, parentage, alliances, estate, and
condition of life, or what else should be demanded of them, that so they might
be taxed or enrolled accordingly.

And being come thither, they find themselves prevented of lodging and
entertainment in the Inn, wherefore they turn Cave, (as all antiquity
affirms) where was a Stable and a Manger cut out of a Rock, and in that Cave
they made their present abode, which Cave (as Beda in the description of
Beth-lehem lib. de locis sanct. cap. 8. says) was at the East end of the Town,
seeming to be natural and in the form of a Semi-center, which of all
likelihood was without the city walls, the providence of God so disposing it,
to the end that the shepherds to whom the glad tidings should first be made
known, might easily have access thither by night, though the city gates were
shut, and see the truth of all that which the Angel had told them. And it was
so, that while they were there, S. Luc. 2.6.
the days were accomplished that she should be delivered. 7.
And she brought forth her first born son, and wrapped him in swaddling
clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the
Inn.

five and twentieth day of the month of December (according to the account
which the Church makes, Christ his nativity.
which also celebrateth the blessed nativity yearly upon that day) that the
blessed virgin St. Mary the daughter of Eliachim and Hanna, espoused to Joseph,
did, in the night bring forth that holy thing which was called, and was
indeed the son of God. The time appointed, and praedetermined of God for that
wonderful birth, being in, or about, the year of the world, three thousand
nine hundred threescore and ten; and in the two and fortieth year of the reign
of the Emperor Augustus; at what time the Scepter was departed from Judah
according to the prophecy of Jacob, Gen 49.10.
and Herod, in the three and thirtieth year of his reign. The place also
preordained for that purpose, being no other but the city of Beth-lehem, and
there also that Cave and Stable, where such a Manger was provided for his
Cradle. Nihilominus fulget etiam novus ille conceptionis modus, ut non in
iniquitate, quemadmodum caeterae omnes, sed superveniente Spiritu Sancto, sola,
and de sola sanctificatione, Maria conciperet; Yet notwithstanding that new
manner of conception shines, that Mary alone conc^ived, not in iniquity as all
other women, but by the Holy Ghost who came upon her, and by sole
sanctification, says St. Bernard, ser. de beata Maria. For the scripture
affirms, and the Church believes and confesses that blessed conception to
be, not of human seed and geniture, but by the power and virtue of the Holy
Ghost, who sanctified the Virgins womb for such a birth. A Child is borne
unto us (says St. Gregory Nyssen) by the Holy Ghost, and by the power of the
highest, neither has the Virgin suffered any thing at all, neither has the
spirit been diminished, nor has the power of the highest been dissected into
parts. For the spirit is whole, and the power of the highest remained entire
without any manner of immutation. And a whole son is born unto us, neither
has he impaired the integrity of his mother. (...). moreover flesh was
procreated of flesh, but yet without perpession. Cont. Eunom. Orat. 2.

Gospel is the glad tidings of the word made flesh, for the redemption of
mankind. The Gospel first preached by Ange^s upon Christmas day.
Christ therefore being born, God would that the Gospel should be immediately
preached; I say immediately, the same night, which was the night of the day
following, (for the Jews did reckon their day to begin when the sun went down)
and was the first part of that day, which we commonly call Christmas day. Opus
diet in die suo. The work of the day upon its own proper day. No day more
proper to preach and publish the glad tidings then that day. The fittest
Ministers for the work of the day, were the blessed Angels. For like as Christ
was sent out of the Father's bosom, to be incarnate in the Virgin's womb, and
by divine dispensation to be born upon that day: Even so were the blessed
Angels sent forth from the Fathers glorious presence, by divine dispensation,
to preach and publish the glad tidings of his birth upon that day. I should
think that great and glorious Angel, who by way of excellency is styled (...),
the angel of the Lord, to be no other then the Angel Gabriel himself, who
first brought the glad tidings of so great a mystery and grace of God to the
blessed Virgin. But because neither the Angel, nor the place, nor the
shepherds, are either numbered nor named, it will be sufficient to deliver the
story thus. Not far from Beth-lehem about a mile, (as is said) there were fair
and fruitful pastures, convenient for the feeding, depasturing, and folding of
sheep; where David also fed the sheep of Jesse his father: It was on the east
of Beth-lehem, 1 Samuel 12.15
where was that tower which of ancient times was called the tower of Edar, that
is to say, the tower of the flock, where Jacob sometimes dwelt, and not far
from which place he buried Rachel his wife; and retained the name still, Genesis
35.20, 21.
for that many flocks of sheep resorted thither. At that time there were
certain shepherds, (three shepherds, says the tradition; whether the owners
of the sheep, or their servants, or hirelings, that makes no question) who
abode in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night, in that very
place. Where they were (...), keeping their watches, whether under the shelter
of the tower, in the sheep-coats, or in the open air, that differs not.

Peradventure (because that (...)) being a word which holy Ghost thereby also
intimating what they were doing at that time, while they did (...), sing and
pipe with flutes and pipes in the field, (an usual recreation of shepherds in
the night, to keep themselves awake, and to beguile the time) the Angel
Gabriel, or some other great and glorious Angel, came upon them, (...) stood
over them and nigh unto them, in glory and great brightness. At which great
glorious and unusual apparition, (and for that the Jews also retained an
opinion, that if at any time they should see those divine and heavenly spirits,
they should die) the shepherds being in a great fear; Jud. 6.22.23 and 13, 22.
the Angel first dehorteth them from fear, and then tells them what his
message was, and what God had given him commission to do, it was to preach unto
them the Gospel, by bringing unto them good tidings of great joy which should
be to all people; for that which they had long expected was that day brought to
pass, Unto you (said he, speaking with a lively and audible voice) is born
this day in the city of David, a Savior which is Christ the Lord: And this
shall be a sign unto you, ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes,
lying in a manger. Then immediately appear in the like glory and brightness,
and with the divine glory of him that was born, shining round about them, a
multude of other Angels, not seen to the shepherds at the first, by the like
lively and audible voice, pronouncing the doxologie, and declaring the fruits
of the Gospel. That God would by this wonderful incarnation procure his own
glory, and give peace to the earth, making by that Savior so born, peace
between heaven and earth, peace betwixt God and man, peace betwixt men and
angels, peace betwixt man and man, peace betwixt men and the creatures, and
peace of men with themselves. And finally that from hence is that (...), that
good pleasure of the will of God, that good will toward men, whereby the
Father is well pleased with them in Christ his son For so says the Evangelist,
Saint Luke, S. Luc. 2.8, 9,
And there were in the same country, shepherds abiding in the field, keeping
watch over their flock by night. And lo the Angel of the Lord came upon them,
and the glory of the Lord shone round about them, 10,
and they were sore afraid. And the Angel said unto them, Fear not; for behold
I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people. 11, 12,
For unto you is born this day in the city of David, a Savior which is Christ
the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you, ye shall find the babe wrapped
in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. And suddenly there was with the Angel
a multitude of the heavenly host, 13, 14.
praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace,
good will toward men.

shepherd; (...), the good shepherd, Why the Gospel first preached to the
shepherds. 1 Pet. 5.4.
St Joh. 10.14. he was the great shepherd of the sheep, Heb. 13.20. (...) the
chief shepherd; it was he who had honored the shepherds life, in the
persons of the righteous Abel, of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and especially of
David himself, the head of his family, who had fed and kept the sheep of Jesse
his father in the same place. The pastoritial life was simple, innocent, and
harmless, such were the shepherds usually; therefore the shepherds,
according to the divine wisdom, which reaches from one end to another
mightily, and does order all things sweetly, were the fittest persons to be
brought first of all to the chief shepherd, Wisd. 8.1.
by the preaching of the Gospel. But this is not all, for he had promised to
his Church, pastors according to his own heart, which should feed them with
knowledge and understanding. Now he shows what he will do with those pastors
or shepherds, and what the shepherds themselves must do. Jer. 3.15.
For it was not without great mystery, The mystery.
that the shepherds were Evangelized by an angel from heaven; to teach us to
know, that the divine revelations are first made manifest to the shepherds of
the Church. It was not without great mystery, that the shepherds, so soon as
the Angels were gone up into heaven, consulted what was best to be done, and
then went unanimously to Bethlehem; to teach us to know, that the affairs of
the Church and of religion, must be managed by the shepherds of the Church,
who being led by one and the same spirit, must go hand in hand for the
preservation of truth, peace, and unity. It was not without great mystery, that
they went thither with haste: for this was to teach the shepherds of the
Church, to use no delay when there shall be cause to enquire about matters of
religion. It was not without great mystery, that the shepherds made known
abroad every where the things wherewith they were Evangelized: for this was to
teach the shepherds of the Church, to hide nothing from the people which shall
be necessary for them to know, that they may be saved; and to teach the people
also in matters of religion, to hearken to the shepherds of the Church.
Therefore the blessed Virgin, who had read the Scriptures diligently, and was
not ignorant of what was figured in the law and foretold by the prophets
concerning Christ, conferred, and compared the things which she had seen and
heard to be done and said concerning that blessed Babe, with those things which
she had learned out of the law and the prophets, and pondered them in her
heart, for the confirmation of her faith upon every respect. S. Luc. 2.15,
And it came to pass as the Angels were gone away from them into heaven, the
shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Beth-lehem, and see
this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto us. And
they came with haste, and found Mary, 16.17,
and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger: And when they had seen it, they
made known abroad the saying which was told them concerning this child. And
all they that heard it, 18, 19.
wondered at those things which were told them by the shepherds. But Mary kept
all these things and pondered them in her heart, as the text says.

Christ was factus sub lege, made under the law, as Saint Paul says,
Circumcision in the flesh of his foreskin. Gal. 4.4. Christ circumcised, and
why. S. Joh. 7.22.
For although that circumcision according to the primary institution of it, was
not of Moses but of the Fathers, as Christ says in the Gospel; yet the law
required circumcision, that so the circumcised party might become a debtor to
do the whole law. Levit. 12.3. Gal. 5.3.
What has been already declared in the former book of this our Sacred History
concerning circumcision, the mystery, and the use of it, may suffice for that
matter: the question now is, concerning Christ his obedience to the law,
whereunto he was obliged by his circumcision, wherein I suppose, the reader
will desire to be satisfied in two things, viz. 1st Why he was made under the
law, subject or obedient to the law, and therefore a debtor to it by his
circumcision. 2ly In what manner he became obedient to it, and was therefore
circumcised.

Christ his subjection and obedience to the Law. Why Christ was made subject or
obedient to the Law.
For first, He was obedient to the Law, that so he might give approbation
thereunto. For how shall it be known that the Law was holy, and just, and good,
and necessary for those times, and for that people? Was it so because that
Abraham, and his seed who had need of circumcision, and were bound in duty to
keep the Law, were circumiised, and did keep the Law? Or was it because the
word made flesh, who had no need of circumcision, nor was obliged by any duty,
to be circumcised, and to keep the Law; was yet circumcised and did keep the
law? Certainly a man cannot but rationally conclude, that Law in every part
thereof to be holy, and just, and good, and most necessary for those to whom it
was commanded, whereunto the son of God himself by voluntary dispensation
became obedient. 2ly He became obedient to it, that by the observation of it,
he might consummate, S. Mat. 5.17.
and finish it in himself: for the whole law was ordinated unto him. 3ly That
by his voluntary obedience, he might remove all occasion of scandal from the
Jews, to the end that they might neither complain of the hardness of their own
condition, as being obliged to bear the yoke and burden of the Law: nor yet
refuse to be saved by that Messiah, who submitted himself to the like condition
with them. And finally, that by his obedience to the law, Gal. 4.5, 6. In what
manner Christ became obedient to the Law
he might purchase true liberty, and an eternal redemption to them that were
under the law. Therefore his obedience to the law was double: active and
passive. His active obedience was his full absolute and perfect fulfilling of
the law to the least jot or tittle of the same; so that look what obedience
soever the law required, Christ performed. Three things there were which did
require of Christ such a perfect obedience to the works of the law. 1. The
justice of God, and that whether we look upon the nature of God himself who is
infinitely just: For how can it stand with the infinite justice of God to save
a man, but by such a justice, either proper to himself, or imputed to him by
some other? or if peradventure we look upon the will of God revealed in his
law, an everlasting rule of righteousness; for what other way has God
opened to everlasting life by that everlasting rule, Exo. 20.6.
but obedience? I show mercy unto thousands (says he) of them that love me,
and keep my commandments. It was Gods justice which exacted Christ his
active obedience in fulfilling the law for man's redemption. Christ is the end
of the law for righteousness to every one that believes. Romans 10.4.
2ly His mediatorship, whereby he became our surety or pledge, therefore of
his own free will must he do and suffer for us men, Heb. 7.22.
and for our salvation, all those things which all mankind were necessarily
obliged both to do, and to suffer. For which cause it was not only necessary
that he should die for all mankind, but that he should also fulfill the whole
law for them: for both these things were laid as a due debt upon all the
sons of Adam, Gal. 4.4, 5.
namely to fulfill the law: to die because they had not fulfilled it. 3ly The
salvation of all mankind, by a deliverance from death, by a donation of life;
both which can no otherwise be obtained but by his active obedience. The
first, by the expiation of sin; the second, Romans 3.24, 25.
by the gift of righteousness. And such was the active obedience of Christ.

His passive obedience was his sacrifice or passion, whereby he God in his
wisdom had decreed to be laid upon his person for satisfaction to divine
justice. Which passive obedience was necessary upon three respects. 1. In
respect of God, for his law was transgressed, and therefore his justice would
not be satisfied but by punishments answerable to the same: the blood of the
Redeemer therefore must be had for satisfaction to divine justice. For it is
not possible that the blood of bulls, and of goats, Heb. 10.4.
should take away sins. 2ly In respect of Christ, for he being our surety and
pledge did suffer for us: Isa. 53.4.
so that look what we should have suffered for our sins, the same according to
an absolute quantity was laid upon him. Lastly, In respect of our selves, Romans
4.25.
who by death were to be delivered from death. This was showed by all those
beasts that were killed by the Leviticall law; and expressly affirmed by the
Apostle St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.19.
that out redemption is by the precious blood of Christ. So then there is a
double debt of all mankind, that they should fulfill the law every moment from
their first beginning in a double purity; a purity of nature, and a purity of
works: which debt was primordially imposed upon mankind in the creation, and
is exacted by the law of God. The second debt is due satisfaction for the
transgression of it. For this double debt Christ was the surety; and because
none of the sons of Adam could pay it for themselves, Christ has paid it for
them all, and God accepts his obedience, as a full satisfaction according to
the tenor of his own law, effectual unto all those who by a true justifying
and saving faith, do render him up unto the Father for their surety, having
only to plead the satisfaction made by him.

Upon this respect, that neither God in the first institution of By whom it was
that Christ was probably circumcised.
nor the law which afterward confirmed and required the use of it, to the end
that the party circumcised might become a debtor to the whole law ordained, or
said any thing concerning the minister of circumcision, by whom, and by whose
hand the prepuce should be cut off: although I should think it convenient, and
answerable to the dignity of that Sacrament, that such an office should be
performed by the Priests or Levites, as by sacred persons: yet because I find
no such thing by divine institution, or legal precept, and do find that not
only Zipporah the wife of Moses did circumcise her son: Exodus 4.25.
but that in all probability, those callimartyrs who were put to death for
doing contrary to the Edict of Antiochus, 1 Mac. 1.6.
had circumcised their children with their own hands: I shall easily be induced
to assent unto those who think that office to be most probably performed by the
holy hands of the most blessed virgin, but because it is no matter of faith, I
shall not be positive in defining of it. I find nothing ordained, neither by
divine institution, nor by legal injunction, nor yet from the example of
Joshuah, who circumcised the people in Gilgal, Jos. 5. for imposing of names in
circumcision. The custom no doubt was most ancient and commendable, having its
original from Abraham, who had his name changed the day that he was
circumcised, Genesis 17. That Christ therefore should have his name imposed in his
circumcision, it did not pertain to his legal obedience properly, but because
it became him to fulfill all righteousness, therefore it became him in his own
person to give approbation to such an ancient, just, and laudable custom. His
name was sent from heaven to the blessed Virgin his mother, to Joseph his
supposed father; both of them commanded so to name him: neither of them must
fear to impose that name, for in imposing of it, they did both of them do the
will of God. Fear not Mary, for thou have found favor with God. S Luc. 1.30.
And behold thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and
shall call his name Jesus, says the Angel to her. 31.
Joseph thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for
that which is conceived in her, is of the holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth
a son, S. Mat. 1.20.21.
and thou shall call his name Jesus: says the Angel to him.

Joseph and Mary, who according to the good pleasure of the will of God,
Concerning the blessed name of Jesus.
signified unto them by his Angel, imposed upon him, the blessed name of Jesus
in his circumcision. A new name, and that new name foretold by the Prophet
Isaiah, saying, The Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy
glory, and thou shall be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord
shall name. Isai. 62.2.
For although the name of Jesus be the same with Jehosuah, and signifies a
Savior; for so the Angel himself expounds it: S. Mat. 1.21.
Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their
sins. And although it cannot be denied, but that diverse persons in the old
Testament had that name also imposed on them in circumcision, Hag. 2.2.
or otherwise, as Joshuah, or Jesus the son of Josedec the high Priest; And
Joshuah, or Jesus the son of Nun, Moses's minister and successor: yet was the
name a new name: Jos. 1.1,
1. In respect of him that was so named; for never such a person was named by
that name before; they were men, he was God and man, the word made flesh, novum
in terris, a new thing in the earth, Emmanuel, God with us, by assuming the
whole human nature into the unity of his own most sacred person. 2ly A new
name, a name newly and most highly honored; the name of him whom God has
highly exalted, a name above every name, That at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, Phil. 2.10.
of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth: thereby
worshipping, and acknowledging him that was named by that name, not only to be
called, but to be indeed the son of God. None of all those that were named
with that name, had it in that new manner, and to that new end; not Jesus the
son of Josedec, or Jesus the son of Nun, howbeit most excellent persons, and
types of Christ. 3ly A new name, wherein is newly showed to the believers; that
which never was showed before, even the great mystery of godliness, in him
that is named with that name; God manifested in the flesh, justified by the
spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world,
received up into glory. 1 Timothy 3.16.
And when the eight days were accomplished, for the circumcising of the
child, his name was called Jesus, which was so named of the Angel, S. Luc.
1.21.
before he was conceived in the womb.

Our blessed Lord being named in his circumcision, and circumcised as has been
said, the (...), the taxing description or taxed, Christ taxed or enrolled;
described or enrolled; had his name recorded in the censuall Tables. For
although there be no mention made of it in the Evangelicall History, yet
because it is sufficiently testified by the ancient Fathers, and
Ecclesiastical Writers, it must not be denied. Wherein the providence of God
ought highly to be admired, who by this means brought to pass, that they who
little regarded the authority of the Scriptures, might receive satisfaction
from the public records of the Empire, while they should find in records,
safely deposited into the Capitol, that Sentius Saturninus being then Governor
of Syria, ordinarily sent for the government of that Province, and for the
administration of justice there: Publius Sulpitius Quirinius, called by the
Evangelist Cyrenius, was extraordinarily sent, and by special commission, to
describe and inrolle the same Province whereunto Judea pertained as a part or
member. At that time were described at Bethlehem, Joseph the son of Jacob
Carpenter, and Mary his wife, the daughter of Eliachim and Hanna, of Nazareth,
both of them of the house and family of David, with Jesus their son born at
Bethlehem, upon the five and twentieth day of the month of December, in the two
and fortieth year of the reign of the Emperor Augustus. And how apposite such
a record was to stop the mouths of those impious Heretics, who denied the
verity and truth of his Incarnation, Tertullian who had to do with Marcion the
Heretic, and the Marcionites who denied it, very well knew. lib. 4. cont.
Marcion: cap. 9.

But when the days of her purification according to the law of Moses (who
ordained, Christ presented in the Temple.
that the woman who had conceived seed, and born a man child, should be
unclean seven days, according to the days of the separation for her
infirmity; her menstruous infirmity, Levit. 15.19. And that she should continue
in the blood of her purifying three and thirty days more, during all which
time she should touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the Sanctuary) were
accomplished: Levit. 12.2, 4
the blessed Virgin, whom this law nothing at all concerned, as neither having
conceived human seed, nor violenced her virginity by such a birth; yet to the
end that all righteousness might be fulfilled, and that she might give example
unto others of obedience and humility, she with Joseph her husband, brought the
child Jesus to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord, to whom the firstborn
did belong by special reservation, Exodus 13.2. Levit. 12.6.
and to offer that sacrifice which was appointed by the law to be offered by
women after childbirth. This presentation of his in the temple did belong
specially to that obedience, whereby he became obedient to the law actively, to
fulfill all the righteousness of the same. At what time old Simeon, to whom it
was revealed by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death, before he had
seen the Lord's Christ, came by divine instinct into the temple, took him up in
his arms, blessed God, and then desired to be dissolved, because his ^yes,
according to the divine revelation which he had received of the Holy Ghost, had
seen Christ the salvation of God, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the
glory of Israel his people. Finally having blessed them, if not as a priest
according to the set form of the sacerdotall benediction prescribed in the law,
Number. 6.24, 25, 26.
(for it is not said, whether he were a priest or no, and as well they who
affirm it, as they who deny it, have no ground at all either for the
affirmation or negation of it) yet with a christian benediction he did pray to
God to bless them, by multiplying his blessings upon them in body, in soul, in
goods, and fortune, blessings temporal, eternal blessings. Prophesying of
Christ, and foretelling to the Virgin her self, that which Saint Bernard
calls her martyrdom, a martyrdom by the sword, that sword which should
pierce through her soul; a sword of bitter grief and anguish, when she should
see him hanging upon the cross, and hear him calling unto her and saying,
Woman, behold thy son, S. Joh. 19.26
Ser. de bea^a virg. Maria. At the same time also, Anna, a prophetess, a woman
of great piety and devotion, who had lived a long and a virtuous life, came
into the temple, into that place where it was permitted the women to be, and
she also gave thanks to God, and spoke of him to all them that looked for
redemption in Jerusalem. For so says the history, observing every
circumstance according to the effect and substance of that which has been
related, S Luc. 2.22.
thus. And when the days of her purification, according to the law of Moses,
were accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord,
(As it is written in the law of the Lord, Every male that opens the womb
shall be called holy to the Lord.) And to offer a sacrifice, 23,
according to that which is said in the law of the Lord, a pair of turtle
doves, or two young pigeons. And behold there was a man in Jerusalem, 24,
whose name was Simeon, and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the
consolation of Israel; and the holy Ghost was upon him. 25,
And it was revealed unto him by the holy Ghost, that he should not see death,
before he had seen the Lord's Christ. And he came by the spirit into the
temple; 26,
and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the
custom of the law, Then took he him up in his arms, 27,
and blessed God, and said, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33,
according to thy word, For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, Which thou have
prepared before the face of all people. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and
the glory of thy people Israel. And Joseph and his Mother marvelled at those
things which were spoken of him. And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary
his mother, Behold, this child is set for ^he fall, and rising again of many
in Israel: and for a sign which shall be spoken against, 34,
(yea a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also) that the thoughts of many
hearts may be revealed. 35,
And there was one Anna, a Prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe
of Asser, she was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years
from her virginity. 36, 37,
And she was a widow of about fourscore and four years, which depar^^d not
from the Temple, but served God with fasting and prayer night and day. And she
coming in at that instant, 38.
gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spoke of him to all that looked for
redemption in Jerusalem. Such was the wonderful birth of Christ, his
circumcision, and presentation in the temple; and so was the first year of his
age transacted.

Whether his parents returned back immediately from Jerusalem Bethlehem, and
there abode either in the Inn, H^story concerning the coming of the wise men.
where they had lodgings, after the taxing ended, and the great concourse of
those of their tribe and family, who came up to be enrolled, was dissolved: Or
else in some house which they hired, or otherwise obtained, where they
continued till the coming of the wise men: Or whether they did not go
presently, so soon as they had performed all things according to the law of the
Lord, from Jerusalem into Galilee, and to their own city Nazareth; returning
from thence to Jerusalem, at the feast of the Passover, and then went when
that feast was ended, to Bethlehem again, and there abode either in the Inn,
or in some other house, where they made their habitation till the wisemen came;
our sacred history will not determine. Certain it is, that when they dwelt in
Nazareth, they went up yearly to Jerusalem, as Saint Luke says, at the feast
of the passover. S. Luc. 2.41.
And certain it is, that when the wise men came, they went not to Nazareth, but
to Bethlehem, and came unto him (...), not into the cave where the stable and
manger was, but into the house, where they saw the young child with Mary his
mother, and fell down and worshipped him, S. Mat. 2.11.
as Saint Matthew says. Most likely it is, that they dwelt not in Nazareth
till after their return out of Egypt; although Saint Luke (who was a gentile by
birth, a proselyte of Antioch, thought himself more specially concerned, to
make narration of those things which pertained to the law, and to the Jews)
omitteth the story wholly of the wise men, and of his slight into Egypt, and
respecting only the time that they dwelt in Nazareth, (which was after their
return out of Egypt) says, (not saying what passed in the mean time) that when
they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord, S. Luc. 2.39.
they returned into Galilee, to their own City Nazareth. Yet Saint Matthew, who
was a Jew born, thought himself more properly engaged to narrate those things,
which set forth in a more peculiar manner Gods great grace and mercy to the
Gentiles; and therefore declares both the history of the wise men, and Christ
his flight into Egypt.

The time of their arrival.
of these wise men at Bethlehem. Also concerning their persons what they were,
from whence they came, how they came thither, upon whose motion, and finally as
touching the star it self, what it was. It will be sufficient to our History,
omitting all disputes, to set down the truth of our opinion, as plainly and
briefly as we can. First therefore, we cannot assent unto those, who think the
access of those wise men to be the twelfth day after the blessed nativity,
within six days after the circumcision, and therefore antecedaneus to his
presentation in the temple; this had been too great a festination, they had
need of wings to have fled, especially if they came from the extremest parts
of the East, as some have lightly believed, and fabulously reported. We cannot
assent unto them, who think them to be two years a coming, and that the star
appeared at the day of the nativity, which so soon as they had seen, they
forthwith set forwards on their journey toward Judea, but by reason of the
remoteness of the place, they traveled two whole years, having in the mean
time their clothes, victuals, and shoes, miraculously kept from wearing and
consuming, by God. The argument which Saint Epiphanius brings from the
Scripture, to prove their coming to be at the expiration of two whole years,
St Mat. 2.16, does not necessarily conclude. What is it then that we say? We
say, that all circumstances being taken into consideration, it was upon the
sixth day of the month of January, upon which day the Church celebrateth the
feast of the Epiphany, (but not within twelve days after the blessed nativity,
but a year and twelve days after, that is to say, in the second year of his
age, he being then a year and twelve days old) that these wise men came unto
Bethlehem, and worshipped him there. And this does excellently reconcile Saint
Luke and Saint Matthew, the series of the story being, that Christ was born at
Bethlehem, as is confessed by both, and upon the five and twentieth day of
December, as the tradition of the Church is: that he was circumcised upon the
eighth day, which was the first day of January, and presented in the temple
upon the fortieth day, which was the second day of February next following,
according to the law; which Saint Luke says, but not Saint Matthew. That being
still at Bethlehem, he was there adored by the wise men, and then fled into
Egypt, as Saint Matthew says, but not Saint Luke. That after his return
thence, he was had to Nazareth by his parents, who came up yearly to Jerusalem
at the passover, as Saint Luke says.

The word (...) rendered in our English translation wise men, Originally to be a
Persick word, and is, as if you should say, What these wise men were.
Saints, or holy men; indeed not the Persians only, but almost all the nations
of the Gentiles, in time past had their Saints or holy men, their Philosophers,
wise men, lovers of wisdom. The thing professed by them all was that which is
to be understood by the name and notion of Philosophy, (...), it flourished
nationally, says Clemens Alex. Strom. 1. In several nations they obtained
several names; by the Egyptians they were called Prophets; among the
Babylonians they had the name of Caldeans; the Indians called them
Gymnosophists; the Gauls or French styled them Druids; and the Persians
comprehended them under the name of Magi, Magicians. These did profess to live
an austere life, they were famous for their learning in their several nations,
and were had in high esteem. So highly were the Egyptian Prophets accounted of,
that Licurgus of Lacedemonia, Plato of Athens, Pythagoras of Samos, Democritus
of Abderita; nay almost all the Grecians that were famous for wisdom and
learning, went into Egypt to hear those Prophets, and to be instructed by them.
The Caldeans or Babylonian Philosophers, are said to transcend all others, in
the knowledge of the stars and celestial bodies, they were most skillful in
the worship of their gods, making it their profession to teach, and speak
wisdom all their life long. The Gymnosophists of the Indians were had in such
admiration, that Alexander the great did both seek to them for counsel,
wondered at their wisdom, and rewarded them with gifts. The Druids had that
opinion for their wisdom among the Galli or French, that the determination of
all controversies was to them committed; they were held able to interpret their
religion, to discourse of the immortality of the soul, of the stars, and of
their motions, of the world, and of the magnitude of the same; also of the
power and strength of their gods: and what themselves understood, they imparted
unto others.

Persians were their Magi, to whom was committed the priesthood: they ordained
sacred ceremonies, they had the care of sacred things and places, and in
particular to guard and keep the Sepulcher of Cyrus, Cyprus his Sepulcher.
upon which was inscrived this ensuing Epitaph, O thou man whosoever thou art,
or whence soever thou come; for I was not ignorant that thou should come:
I am Cyrus that founded the Persian an Empire, do not envy unto me this little
earth, with which my body is covered. Strab. lib. 15. Which Sepulcher whether
it were robbed, either by the keepers themselves, or by others, I have not to
say. Quintus Curtius tells us, that Alexander the great, (whether upon hope
of treasure supposed to have been buried with him; or else upon desire to
honor his dead body with certain solemn ceremonies) caused it to be opened,
and found nothing there, saving an old rotten target, two Scythian bows, and a
sword. Whereupon he caused the coffine wherein his body lay, to be covered with
his own garment, and a crown of gold to be set upon it. Therefore if it had
been true that any gold had been laid up there, it was robbed before. These
Magi were counselors to their Princes, and had the highest honors; but
withal they taught a transmigration of the soul, a plurality of gods, and
other detestable things. They were most superstitiously addicted to curious
arts, from whence the word magic and magician, which primarily meant no other
thing but philosophy and philosopher, became to be taken in the worser sense,
and to be understood of those illicite arts which the Scripture condemns, and
of those that did profess them. They did not abhor incestuous copulations,
Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12.
no not with their own sisters and mothers. Now whether these magi were
magicians in the worser sense, (as many learned men suppose, and I should
think, that the worse they were, the greater glory was brought to God and to
Christ his son by their conversion; It is the argument which Saint Paul uses
concerning himself, Gal. 1.23, 24.
They heard only, says he, that he which persecuted us in times past, now
preaches the faith which once he destroyed. And they glorified God in me.) Or
whether they were no more but Philosophers, who had the knowledge of the
liberal sciences, and of the motions of the heavenly bodies, and were able to
judge and discern such an unusual star, and were peradventure in expectation
of such a star to be seen, when that star of Jacob should come to enlighten the
whole world, either from some hint taken from Balaams prophecy, Number. 24.17.
or from some old tradition, (as some others do conjecture, for as much as it
is no matter of faith, nor yet revealed in the Scriptures, it is not
pertinaciously to be stood upon. Which way soever we shall take the word, the
Translation is sufficiently significant, S. Mat. 2.1.
There came wise men from the East to Jerusalem.

It may probably be true also, that they were Kings, according kings because
Magi, That probably they were Kings.
although many kings especially of the Persians were Magi, Magitians, or
Philosophers, by knowledge, not by profession. And once it came to pass, that
Patizites and Smerdis, who were Magi by profession, had that advantage that
they possessed themselves of that kingdom, and that the magi had an usurped
royalty, which was overthrown by those seven great Princes, who chose among
themselves Darius the son of Hystaspes, King. Nor kings of Persia magi by
science; for at that time the Parthians had the Empire; the Persians had no
mornarch of their own; and yet peradventure many Toparchs, who because they
exercised kingly power in the places which they governed, according to the
oriental custom, had obtained the name of kings. Not (...) properly, but
(...), who supplied the office of kings in the places of their several
governments: many such there were at that time, who had both the Scepter and
the Diadem, yet were but Toparchs governors of Cities, or small countries, and
were themselves subject to the supreme Monarch. Some were not subject, but
hereditary, or elective governors of small jurisdictions or cities cum imperio
with dominion and power of the sword. Such as were those kings conquered by
Ioshuah in the land of Canaan, and such there are at this day in many places,
free Princes or Governors, which by an orientalism may be styled Kings. Neither
is it necessary, says Genebrard, Chron. lib. 2. that these Magi should be
great kings (indeed it is the judgment of many of the ancient Fathers, that
they were Kings, though they do not say them to be great Kings) for as much as
God does often choose the weaker things of the world to confound the mightier;
For after the manner of the East (says he) they were all called kings, who for
the setting forth of their dignity did wear the diadem, and sway the Scepter;
whether they were of themselves, or were subordinate unto others; and so were
they distinguished from Dukes, as Kimhi often notes. Lastly, this opinion
seems to be confirmed by the Scripture, and the coming of these Kings to
Christ, to be foretold by the Prophets in the old Testament. Indeed it were
strange if none of all the Prophets, who prophesied so diligently concerning
Christ, and concerning the calling and conversion of the Gentiles, should
neither foresee, nor foretell the coming of these magi by the spirit of
Prophecy, who yet were the first fruits of the Gentiles. Therefore it is said
in the prophet Isaiah, Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship
because of the Lord. Jsa. 49.7.
The Gentiles shall come to thy light, Isa. 60.3.
and Kings to the brightness of thy rising. The kings of Tarshish, Psalm. 72.10
and of the Isles, shall bring presents; the kings of Sheba, and Saba shall
offer gifts. Now if this be not the direct meaning of the Prophets, yet for as
much as it cannot be denied, but that these prophecies had respect to Christ,
and were to be understood concerning him: and because these magi did come to
his light, and to the brightness of his rising, and did see, and did arise, and
did worship, and did bring presents, and offer gifts: (all which the Prophets
did say that Kings should do) why might not the spirit of Prophecy look also
upon the coming of these magi to Christ? and why might not these magi also be
Kings, considering that else these things were never literally fulfilled by any
other, but only by the magi in the person of Christ?

magi whether Kings or not, were oriental, for so says the text in express
terms, (...), From the East. For (...) is the rising, From whence it was that
they cam^.
and properly of the Sun, which climate is the East, therefore their coming was
from the Eastern parts. We must therefore enquire from what Eastern parts, they
might probably come, seeing that some places in respect of Judea, were more,
some less remotely Oriental. Wherein there is a seeming difference among the
learned Fathers, while that some of them do say, that these magi came out of
Arabia; others that they came out of Persia, Caldea, Mesopotamia. But this
difference will aptly be reconciled, if we remember that these countries in
time past were deputed to Arabia, as parts or members thereof, Arabia being
spoken of in the larger sense, and comprehending Syria, Assyria, Persia, Media,
all the Oriental regions. Out of Arabia therefore they came as Justin Martyr,
Dialog. cum Tryph. says; and yet peradventure out of Persia, Caldea, or
Mesopotamia. Whencesoever it was that they did come, I do verily think that
besides their knowledge in Astrology, they had among them many Judaicall
traditions, concerning the Messiah, whom they looked for in the nature of a
great Prince of the house of David, to be born unto them, their king, whom all
nations should worship; which traditions they attained unto by commerce and
conversation with the Jews brought into those countries, first by Salmaneser;
afterward by Nebuchodonozer. Neither is it unlikely, but that they had also
seen and perused the writings and prophesies of Daniel, who himself was brought
up in all the Arts of the Caldeans, and was famous to posterity amongst the
Babylonians, and had in honor and high esteem by the Magi themselves, for that
he had revealed and interpreted Nebuchodonozers dream, and by his wisdom had
delivered the Magitians, Dan. 2.
Caldeans, and Astrologers from death. Nor yet could they be ignorant of
Balaams prediction, who himself was an Oriental of Mesopotamia, famous all the
East over, though he returned not again into his own country, but went and
inhabited among the Midianites, Number. 31.8.
amongst whom also he was slain by the Israelites, as it is to be seen in the
book of Numbers.

Hereupon the Star appearing unto them as they were in their signification of
it, They go into Judea by divine impulsion.
and being stirred up by divine impulsion, three of them (for that is the
ancient tradition concerning the number of those that came, and correspondeth
best with the number of the shepherds, who according to the old tradition were
likewise three) resolved to take the expedition upon them, and to go into
Judea, to find out the king that was born, to worship him, and to honor him
with gifts; the Star it should seem by what is intimated in the text ((...).
S. Mat. 2.2.
For we have seen his Star in the East) having not otherwise been seen of them,
but only in their own country, and before they came forth: the time of the
first apparition of it to them there, being in all probability the day of his
blessed nativity, and not before, as some grave Authors have thought; whereby
they knew that such a King was born indeed, not that he should be born.
Concerning the Star it self.
Which Star, if it were a star, and not rather an Angel in form of a
star (for Angels are sometimes in the Scripture, meant by the name of
stars, as it is in Job, when the morning stars sang together, and all the
sons of God shouted for joy. Job 38.7.
And in the Prophecy of Isaiah, The Devil before his fall, Isa. 14.12.
obtains the name of Lucifer, or day star) I say, if it were a Star, it is to
be differenced from all other stars. By Creation; they were created in the
beginning of the world: this was not, till the instant of time that Christ was
born, By Matter; the matter of those stars, was their own proper certain
caelestiall matter; The matter of this was Aereall or Angelical. By Place;
those stars have their place, and were placed in the firmament of heaven; there
they shine and glister; from thence they have their influences upon sublunary
bodies; this Star had no place, nor was placed in the firmament of heaven, but
was nigh unto the earth, and in the lower region of the air. By Motion; the
motion of those stars is circular: the motion of this star was not circular,
but straight. By splendency; those stars shine and glister by night: this star
had its fulgour and brightness also by day. By Duration; those stars are
perpetual: this Star was temporary. By Magnitude: those stars are said to
exceed the earth, and the moon in greatness; this Star was far less then
either. Lastly by Office: the office of those stars is to adorn the heavens, to
give light by night, to be seen of all, to distinguish the times and seasons of
the year to be for direction alike to them that travel by land and by water,
to have their influences severally upon sublunary things, and to incline the
mind also by mediation of the sensitive appetite. The office of this star was
to give them to understand, that in Judea was then risen by his birth, that
star, that bright morning star, that star of Jacob, that star by whom all the
stars of heaven, and every luminary, were made and created, whose glory should
be known unto all Nations, whose saving light should shine all the world over.
When therefore they saw the Star, and knew it by their Art to be such a star
which was different from all the other stars by creation, by matter, by place,
by motion, by splendency, by duration, by magnitude, and by office, they
understood the meaning of it by divine revelation, and having made due
preparation for their journey, they come into Judea, not to worship the stars,
as many of the Gentiles did, but the Lord of the stars, then born into the
world, to whom they would prostrate their bodies, S. Mat. 2.1.
and present their gifts: and so it came to pass that When Jesus was born in
Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of Herod the king, behold there came wise men
from the East to Jerusalem, saying, where is he that is born king of the Jews?
2.
for we have seen his star in the East, and are come to worship him.

Jerusalem was the Metropolis of the whole Land, it was the royal seat of the
King, The magi come to Jerusalem.
it was the peculiar place of divine worship: there were the Scribes, there
were the Priests, there were the Doctors, and interpreters of the Law, and of
the Prophets: with confidence therefore might the Magi come unto Jerusalem,
nothing doubting but that there they should be fully instructed in all things
concerning this great King, the time, the place, the manner of his birth, his
present abode, or whatsoever else curiosity or devotion should have a desire to
pry into. Neither could they think but that they should find the people in
great joy, and the city triumphing in such a birth. Wherefore being entered into
the city, they make enquiry every where, show the causes of their coming, and
relate the wonderful apparition of the star which they had seen in their own
country. Kings do see with many eyes, and hear with many ears; the news flies
presently to the Court; and when Herod heard of it, he was troubled, (...)
vehemently troubled, terrified, and perplexed: (for such is the force and
signification of the word, Herod hears the news and is troubled.
which is properly spoken of water when it is mudded and stirred) and all
Jerusalem with him. Perhaps also they might go unto the Court, demand him
there, and even of Herod himself. Herod could not be altogether ignorant of
that great expectation which the Jews had of their Messiah, at that time
wherein the Scepter was departed from Judah in his person, and the seventy
weeks of Daniel almost expired. He knew well enough what a great Prince the
Jews conceited their Messiah to be, a great King who should sit for ever upon
the throne of David, who should deliver them from all their enemies, destroy
all their oppressors, and make them happy above all nations. He also well knew
the manners of the Jews, and what they were, a rigid, obstinate, stubborn,
generation of people, apt to rebel and to betake themselves to arms upon
every occasion. He considered, that the kingdom descended not upon him by
inheritance, but that he was set over them by the Romans, as over a conquered
nation; that he had cruelly, proudly, and ambitiously governed, and that he had
by his many tyrannies incurred the general hatred of all the people. He was
most ambitious and jealous of his crown (as is most apparent unto them who
read his life and acts, set forth at large by J^sephus) above all others: and
therefore his serious cogitations were, what would become of him, and of his
house. For such a king (if permitted to grow up) would undoubtedly be followed
by all the people, destroy him and his whole family, and transfer the Scepter
again to the house of David.

Jerusalem also not seeing what cause she had to rejoice in Messiah, was no
less troubled, what to do; whose part they should take, whether Herod's or the
young King's; what would become of the city and of the temple, in so great a
confusion of things, as they fancyed to themselves through their own
blindness, unbelief, and hardness of heart. For Herod, there was but one way
(as he thought) to secure himself, and his kingdom to himself, and that was
to cut off the young Plant before he was grown up, and by his death to rid
himself of further fears and jealousies. Wherefore he calls to council the
chief priests, who were (as has been said before) the highest, or the
chiefest of the several courses, orders, or lots, the heads of the several
families, (...), all the chief priests, four and twenty in number; and
scribes of the people, whose office was to read the law unto the people, to
expound the same, and to judge in controversies of religion if any should
arise; these were also called Lawyers, or Doctors of law. And pretending to
give satisfaction to the magi or wise men, he demanded of them where Christ
must be born. For, (says the text) When Herod the king had heard these things,
he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. S. Mat. 2.3,
And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people
together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born. 4, 5,
And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judea, for thus it is written by the
prophet. And thou Bethlehem in the land of Juda, 6.
art not the least among the princes of Judah. For out of thee shall come a
governor, that shall rule my people Israel.

But Herod called not the magi to the council; wherefore the The Magi sent to
Bethlehem.
enquired of them diligently what time the star appeared unto them, at home in
their country; told them the result of the council, who had unanimously
resolved, that the king of the Jews, whose star they had seen in the East,
must be born not in Jerusalem but in Bethlehem. Wherefore (said he) go ye
thither first privately, imparting to none whither it is that you go, or that
you go any whither to such a purpose, (for Herod knew well, that if the going
of the wise men to Bethlehem should have been divulged, much people would have
gone thither with them, to see the young King, to behold the adoration of the
Magi, and to worship him themselves) but go forth of the city with all
secrecy, directly to Bethlehem, search there diligently for the young child,
and when ye have found him, adore and worship him your selves first, and then
return back hither to me, letting me to know where it is that I shall find
him, and then I also will go and worship him as you have done before. The magi
who suspected no evil, believed him, departed out of the city privately,
without company, or any one to attend or guide them upon the way. And the Star
which they had only seen in the East, was now their guide upon the way, and
when it had brought them to the place, it stood over the house where the young
child was. Wherefore they went on with great joy till the star stood still,
and then entering the house over which the star stood, they saw the young child
with Mary his mother, ( Joseph it should seem being then absent) in a mean
condition, at which they take no offense, being showed him by the star, and
being strong in faith they fell down and worshipped him, and according to the
custom of those Oriental countries, which was always to present the King
with gifts, so often as they should approach his presence, they present him
with their gifts, and (which was not without divine dispensation and
providence) they present him with such gifts, whereby they both professed what
they believed him to be, and also abundantly relieved the poverty and meanness
of his present condition. By the gold which they offered, they mysteriously
testify him to be that king, on whom the Gentiles should trust; by the
franckincense, to be that God, to whom all people should make their prayers; by
the myrrh, that it was he who should die as man, and be buried after the
manner of men, for all mankind.

first fruits of the Gentiles, The first fruits of the Gentiles.
these magi; accepted their persons, and for their faiths-sake, the gifts also
which they presented; and so was he manifested (as Saint Augustine observes)
iis qui prope sunt, and iis qui long: to them that were nigh at hand, and to
them that were afar off; to the Jews in the propinquity of the shepherds,
(the first fruits of the Jews) to the Gentiles in the remoteness of these
magi, (the first fruits of the Gentiles.) Which magi, how long they stayed with
him after they had seen, worshipped, and offered their gifts, our sacred
history cannot determine. Probable it is, for some short time, till St Mary his
mother had thoroughly instructed them concerning the manner of his conception,
and of his wonderful birth. And then, they knowing nothing of Herod's
mischievous intendments, thought to return back, and to make relation of all
that which they had seen and heard. But being warned of God in a dream, they
let fall that resolution, and departed to their own country another way. S.
Mat. 2.7
Then Herod when he had privily called the wise men, enquired of them
diligently what time the star appeared. 8,
And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go, and search diligently for the
young child, and when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come
and worship him also. When they had heard the king, they departed, and lo, the
Star which they had seen in the East, 9,
went before them, till it came and stood over where the young child was. 10,
11.
When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. And when they
were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and
fell down and worshipped him: And when they had opened their treasures they
presented unto him gifts, gold, and franckincense, and myrrh. And being warned
of God in a dream, 12.
that they should not return to Herod, they departed into their own country
another way.

The magi being departed, and as it should seem by the text, The flight of
Christ into Egypt.
communicating nothing with holy Joseph and Mary concerning what had passed
betwixt God and them, in the dream, (which dream, whether one of them only,
and not rather all of them had, it cannot be determined) God who knew Herod's
heart, to the end that he might deliver his son from his intended cruelty: And
that Christ by his example might teach the practice of his own doctrine, When
they persecu^e you in this city, S. Mat. 10.23 Hos. 11.1.
flee ye into another: And that the prophecy might be fulfilled, whereby it was
foretold of Christ, that he should be brought down into Egypt, and be called
out from thence again: sent his holy Angel to Joseph, to appear unto him in a
dream, and to command him to arise, and to take the young child and his
mother, and to be gone in all haste into E^ypt, and to be and remain there, til
that he should bring him word to return, because that by this means God would
have him to be safe out of Herod's bloody hands. God in times past so often as
he pleased, spoke unto men in dreams, advising them what they should do, and
what they should not do. And such divine dreams ceased not under the second
temple, and were frequent in the new testament. Joseph who was an holy man, and
acquainted with divine dreams, easily discerned this dream to be from God, and
therefore yielded ready obedience to that which was commanded him by the
Angel. He was commanded to arise; And he arose, (peradventure immediately) and
he took the young child and his mother by night, (peradventure the same night,
not regarding to dispose of any thing which he had in Bethlehem, but being
amply provided and enabled for such an expedition, by those rich presents which
the magi had presented) he departed into Egypt. It was the same night (say
some, upon what grounds I know not) that Herod caused the infants to be slain.
Most likely: for it is Gods time to frustrate the mischievous imaginations of
tyrants and other wicked persons, when they have even almost reduced them into
act, and to reach forth a saving hand unto his servants at the pits brinck.

The place of his habitation or abode.
in the land of Egypt, is said to be Hermopolis, a city of Thebais, which is a
country in Egypt bounding upon Ethiopia, distant from Bethlehem about two
hundred ninety and six miles. The report was, that then, when he was brought
unto the gate of that city, a certain great tree called Persis which stood
there, worshipped him, by bending it self to the ground, the fruits, leaves,
and bark of which tree had virtue curative, if applied to the sick, Sozom. Ec.
hist. lib. 5. cap. 20. His journey thither was not without great difficulty and
danger, for his way was through Arabia the stony, a land for the most part
barren and unfruitful, full of sands, rocks, and mountains, destitute of water
in many places, frequented with thieves and wild beasts. Such a journey must
Joseph, an old man, fourscore years old, undertake in his old age, together
with the blessed virgin, and the child Jesus, in the depth of winter, in
danger of thieves, subject to be smoothered by the sands, over high hills,
craggy rocks, and desert mountains, in peril every hour to be rent and torn
in sunder by wild beasts. Thus did it stand with the meekness and clemency of
Christ to give way unto Herod's cruelty, and not rather to destroy him, which
was in his power to do: but by the providence of his divinity to preserve the
humane nature, and that among the idolaters of Egypt, that it might afterward
be offered up upon the cross, a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice,
oblation, S. Mat. 2.13,
and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world. And (therefore) when they
were departed, behold the Angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream,
saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt,
and be thou there until I bring thee word; for Herod will seek the young
child to destroy him. 14,
When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and departed
into Egypt, 15.
and was there until the death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son.

Hilarious Arelatensis has well observed) why Herod should be jealous of his
kingdom: The infants sla n by Herod.
For Christ (says he) came not to invade another man's glory, but to bestow his
own freely: not to take by violence an earthly kingdom, but to confer an
heavenly kingdom: he came not by strong hand to acquire dignities, but to
suffer injuries: not to prepare his head to a diadem embellished with Pearls,
but to a crown of thorns: not in pomp to sway the Scepter, but in derision to
be crucified upon the cross. But this was more then Herod knew: therefore when
he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, he was exceeding wroth, (...), says
the text. (...) is excandescentia, an affection as Philosophers do say, mixed
and compounded of sorrow, and desire of revenge; they do say, that when a man
is angry, at the first his heart does shrink together, at the apprehension of
some present evil; and laboring to beat it away, it does dilate it self. Now
this motion stirs up heat; for the blood has recourse from the heart, into
the exterior parts, which heat being accompanied with a bilious, or chollerick
humor, fumeth up into the brain, whereby it comes to pass, that in their
excandescencie, men have little wit, or judgment, and some are furious, and
mad, beasts rather in condition then men. In which excandescency Baalam smote
his Ass with a staff, Number. 22.29.
and wished that he had had a sword in his hand to kill him. Xerxes threatened
both Sea and Land; Ajax drew his sword to fight with a flock of sheep. And in
such an excandescency, Herod sent forth and slew all the children that were in
Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under,
according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men. For
when he perceived and had certain intelligence that the magi were indeed gone,
and that he was deluded by them, in that they kept not promise with him, nor
returned to Jerusalem according to their words, to give him a full relation and
account of what they had seen, heard, and done concerning the new born king:
and because he knew not which way the magi were gone, nor had hopes to recall
them: his heart shranck together at the apprehension of the present evil: he
made no delay, nor stood to unty the knot, he sent forth and slew all the
children that were in Bethlehem it self, and in all the Castles, Villages, and
Hamlets of the circumjacent region, from two years old and under, according to
the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men.

Concerning the number of the children slain, and how they Evangelist, some say
fourteen thousand; Liturg. Aethiop. and Calend. Graecor. But how many soever,
it is most likely that under some specious pretense or other, to prevent the
diligence of the mothers in hiding them, they first gathered them altogether,
and then slew them at once. Which horrid and most cruel murder being related
with detestation in all places, was in the end known at Rome, and reported to
the Emperor Augustus himself, who hearing thereof, and that among those
children Herod's own son (a little child under the age of two years noursed it
should seem, in or nigh to Bethlehem) was one of them that were killed; he
replied, saying, It is better to be Herod's hog then his son. Macrob, lib.
Saturnal. 2. Cap. 4. reports the story, which because he had it not from the
Scripture, and was himself an heathen, it may easily be granted, that either it
came to his ear by tradition, or else that he took it upon the authority of
some Roman Author whose works are long since lost. There be three sorts of
Martyrs in the Church: Three sorts of Martyrs in the Church
Some are Martyrs both in Will, and Act: so was the blessed martyr St. Stephen,
a martyr in Will, for he was willing to lay down his life, and a martyr in Act,
for he was stoned. Some are Martyrs in Will, but not in Act: so was the blessed
Apostle and Evangelist St. John, a Martyr in Will, for being eighty and six
years old, he was cast into a vessel of boiling oil, and was willing to have
laid down his life, Deu. 3.27.
but by the providence of God was preserved, as the three children in the midst
of the fiery furnace, and came forth without hurt. Some are Martyrs in Act, but
not in Will: and such were these Innocents, who dyed for Christ and his cause,
though they had not the will to do it; because by reason of their tender age
they knew not what they did. Jesus Christ was the great Marty^, 1 Timothy 6.13
the Lord and Prince of the Martyrs, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
confession. The martyr St. Stephen was the first Martyr of the new Testament,
who after Christ was a Martyr both in Will and Act. St. John the first Martyr
likewise of the new Testament, who was a martyr in Will but not in Act. These
Innocents, the first Martyrs of the new Testament, who were Martyrs in act but
not in will. Upon which considerations it is probable that the Church, thereby
approving this distinction, would that the festival days for the
commemoration of their several martyrdoms, should in order next follow the
blessed day of Christ's nativity, for whom they were martyred. So by the death
and martyrdom of these Innocents, was fulfilled the prophecy of Jeremiah. Jer.
31.15.
Then Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding
wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in
all the coasts thereof, from two years old, and under, according to the time
which he had diligently enquired of the wise men. S. Mat. 2.16
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the Prophet, saying, In
Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, 17,
and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, 18.
and would not be comforted, because they are not.

Covenant administered by him in the two first years of his age, The
Recapitulation.
for the abolishing of the old Testament; By being born of a pure Virgin, by
being born at Bethlehem Ephrata. By taking in the first fruits of the Jews,
the shepherds, the same day. By being circumcised upon the eighth day. By
being presented in the temple upon the fortieth day. By receiving in the first
fruits of the Gentiles, the magi, upon the twelfth day of the second year of
his age. By his flight into Egypt for the preservation of the humane nature,
and to fulfill the scriptures. By taking in the first fruits of his martyrs in
the persons of the Innocents. It became him in his infancy, not to abhor the
virgins womb, to accept the manger, the doxology of Angels, the visitation of
the shepherds, the seal of the Covenant, the presentation of the law, the
testimony of Simeon, the gratulation of Anna, the presents of the Magi, the
providence of his Father, the premonition of his Angel, the security of his
flight, and the blood of his Martyrs. And thus our sacred History does put an
end to the second year of his age.

How long it was that Herod lived, after that Christ was gone Egypt, Christ his
return out of Egypt.
and the young children most inhumanely slaughtered: forasmuch as there is
nothing noted in the Scripture by the Evangelist; and other Authors (whereof
some will have it to be four years, some two years, some but three months, some
less) cannot be accorded, it is hard to determine. Venerable Bede, with others,
who ^t i^ likely either follow therein the old tradition of the Church, or
perchance had read it in some of the writings of the ancient Fathers now lost,
refer his return out of Egypt, to the seventh day of the month of January,
which is also generally assented to; w^^ch general opinion, seeing it ought
not to be denied, unless any one were able to bring good reason or authority to
the contrary, makes me to think that our blessed Lord made his abode in Egypt,
by the space of two whole years, till he was fully four years old, and made his
return from thence, in the beginning of the fifth year of his age. And this I
think to be most consentaneous to truth. For Herod dyed somewhat before Easter;
but the slaughter of the Infants was divulged far and near, and was come to
Rome, and to the ears of Augustus as was said before; therefore not before
Easter next and immediately following. Probably before the second Easter, when
his funerals being first most sumptuously solemnized, Archelaus went to Rome
for confirmation of his Kingdom, (as is observed by Josephus) was there at the
feast of Pentecost, and was not suddenly dispatched, for there he found his
brother Antipas a competitor for the Kingdom, and had there also to answer to
the accusation of Antipater the son of Salome, who was Herod's sister. Which
when he had cleared before the council, yet Caesar himself took time to
deliberate as touching the affairs, and how to settle Herod's kingdom. Mean
while came fifty ambassadors out of Judea, sent by the Jews, to make complaint
unto Caesar against Archelaus and his brother, and humbly to petition that they
might no more be governed by Kings, but by his Presidents in Syria. To which
Ambassadors coming from the whole nation, adjoined themselves eight thousand
Jews which dwelt at Rome, and these obtained audience of Caesar in the Temple
of Apollo, who that day determined nothing. Not long after he made Archelaus,
Archelaus made king or Ethnarch of Judea and Samaria.
not King of his Fathers whole kingdom, but Ethnarch or king of Judea, and
Samaria; and Herod Antipas he made Tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip
Tetrarch of Iturea, and of the region of Trachonitis: so dividing Herod's
Kingdom into four parts, for a tetrarchie is the fourth part of a Kingdom, and
he that obtains the fourth part of a Kingdom is called a Tetrarch. The fourth
Tetrarchie was that of Abilene, whereof Lysanias another brother (as some say,
but not truly) the son of Herod; others (but with as little truth) his nephew,
the son of Ptolomaeus and Alexandra the said Herod's sister, was, we know not
whether by Augustus or Tiberius, made Tetrarch, neither have we to say whose
son he was. These things being thus ordered at Rome, Archelaus betaketh himself
to his journey toward the beginning of winter, and arriveth in Judea.

Herod was dead, and before that Joseph had otherwise heard of it; the Angel
of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, told him of the death of Herod,
commanded him to return into his country, which Joseph readily performed; and
upon the seventh day of January returned. But when he heard what was done at
Rome, and that Archelaus had obtained the Ethnarchie of Judea, he went not to
Bethlehem, for fear least his return being known, the life of the young child
might be sought for; but by divine admonition turned aside into the parts of
Galilee, and dwelt in Nazareth, and so was fulfilled the prediction of the
Prophets, (but what Prophets we have not to say, Isa. 11.1. and 60, 21. Zech.
3.8. and 6.12.
for though both the Prophets Isaiah, and Zechariah, do style him Netzer, a
branch, yet none of all the Prophets which we now have, do style him a
Nazarene) doubtless some of those Prophets whose prophesies are not come to our
hands, who had said that he should be called a Nazarene. But when Herod was
dead, behold an Angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, S.
Mat. 2.19
saying; Arise, and take the young child, and his mother, and go into the land
of Israel: for they are dead which sought the young childs life. 20,
And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the
land of Israel. But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea, 21,
in the room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: Notwithstanding
being warned of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee: And
he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, 22,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets, 23.
He shall be called a Nazarene.

Egypt, and brought to Nazareth there to inhabit with his parents, Christ grew.
the child Jesus grew, having been nourished it seems before by his mothers
milk, as other children in their infancy; S. Luc. 11 27
and more especially as Isaac was, who was a type of Christ: Genesis 21.7.
he was in time convenient taken from his mothers breasts, and accustomed to
stronger meats, as the prophet Isaias before had prophesyed, Butter and honey
shall he eat. Isa 7.15.
As if he should say, The ordinary food of the land; for the land Canaan was a
land flowing with milk and honey. Exodus 3.8.
Being so fed and nourished in his infancy, and in his childehood, (...), he
grew aetate, and corporis quantitate, says Stella, in age, and in quantity of
body, quatenus homo, as being man; the solid parts of his body as he grew in
age were ampliated in longitude, latitude, and profundity. This will prove the
verity of his body, therefore his flesh was not fantastical, nor made of the
stars and celestial bodies, it was humane flesh, (...). He waxed strong in
spirit, his soul as he grew in body, did more and more exert and manifest the
powers and faculties of the same; therefore he had a soul, not the divinity in
stead of a soul, nor a soul converted into flesh, nor yet mixed and mingled
with his divinity, but a distinct soul, a reasonable soul. He was true man
consisting of body and soul, for he was filled with all wisdom, therefore with
acquisite or experimental wisdom, whereby nothing was wanting to him, which
might conduce to the perfection of the humane nature. And the grace of God was
upon him, for all his words and actions were gracious, no inordinate childish
mirth, or foolish pastimes were seen in him; by all that he said, by all that
he did, every man had to observe the grace of God. If he had no liberal
education and at the schools, S. Joh. 7.15,
(for he needed not to be taught by man) according to that which is objected,
St Joh. 7.15. How knows this man letters, having never learned? Yet no
question but he had religious education by his parents, (which he accepted by
divine dispensation) who instructed him privately and at home in the mysteries
of religion, Christ brought up to Jerusalem when he was twelve years old.
brought him unto the Synagogues upon the Sabbathdaies; and when he was twelve
years old, they brought him up to Jerusalem to the temple, to the end that he
might behold the worship of God in his Sanctuary; that he might worship in that
place which God had chosen to put his name there; that he might hear the
learned doctrines and expositions of the Scribes, who taught and expounded the
law; that he might bring his gift unto God, according as it was required by the
law; and finally that he might manifest his obedience to the law, which
required, that all the males should appear before the Lord, ter in anno, thrice
every year.

According to which law (Three times in the year all thy males peradventure,
Exodus 23.17. S. Mat. 1.19. Phil. 3.6.
who was a just man, and, as Saint Paul says of himself, touching the
righteousness which is in the law, blameless: after his return out of Egypt,
and when he dwelt in Nazareth, went up to Jerusalem three times a year.
Although they say, that there was an indulgence granted to them that dwelt more
remotely, and that it was sufficient for them if they went up once a year, at
the feast of the Passover, from which none might be excused, but only by
invalidity of body. The law concerned Joseph, not the blessed virgin Saint
Mary, Omne masculinum tuum, all thy males. The Evangelist therefore does
commend the piety and fervent zeal of the blessed virgin, in that she also took
the pains to go up to Jerusalem with Joseph her husband at the feast of the
passover sixty four miles, whereas by the law she might have stayed at home.

Christ being twelve years old, went up with his parents for the causes before
expressed. Why Christ went up to Jerusalem being twelve years old.
Whether he had been there before or not, the Evangelist does not determine. I
do rather think that he had not been brought up before, for fear of Archelaus,
and that this was the first time that he came up from Nazareth to Jerusalem;
his parents who before were afraid to return with him to Bethlehem, because
they heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea, being then confident to bring
him up thither, because they heard, that Archelaus had now lost his Ethnarchie,
being also exiled to Vienna in France. When the solemnity of the feast was
ended, his parents departed, but Jesus himself tarried behind in Jerusalem.
He tarried behind that he might be about the business of his heavenly Father,
in yielding obedience to his divine will, and that by hearing of the Doctors,
and asking them questions, he might manifest his divine wisdom for the honor
of God, show the zeal of Gods glory, which he had even in his childhood, and
give example unto others. And it was not without mystery, that he would be
pleased so to do, being twelve years old; for it was he that would send forth
his twelve Apostles to preach his Gospel all the world over. Again, the age of
twelve years, says Stella, is intelligendi and percipiendi aetas, the age or
time wherein children come to a ripe understanding or perception: therefore not
before, because he would do nothing in his childhood which should be accounted
a miracle; and yet then (because he would lose no time to do the business of
his Father) would he begin to evidence his divine wisdom. It was to avoid the
importunity of his parents, who in all likelihood would have urged or commanded
his departure, at leastwise have dissuaded him from disputing with the
Doctors, as one that was but a child in years, nor had ever frequented the
Schools; and withal to give them to understand, that he had another Father,
whose will he ought to prefer; which prevailed with him not to acquaint
them with his stay, and to conceal his resolution. The Galileans returning by
companies, his parents who knew nothing of his subduction and abobe in
Jerusalem, went on their journey the first day, together with their
neighbors, friends, and kindred; but missing him at night, they carefully
enquired after him, and when they could not find him, and saw that he was not
in the company that came forth together with them, they returned to Jerusalem,
and with heavy hearts, as fearing what had befallen him, sought him three days
together, going and enquiring from place to place, in all places where they
thought probably that he might be. What he did during those three days of his
absence from his parents, where he was, in what place, and with whom he
abode, how and by what means he got food to sustain himself, it is curious to
enquire, and rash to define.

After three days, which may also be understood upon the third day, Mat.
27.63. Mar. 8.31. they found him in the Temple, in that place of the temple
where the Scribes and Doctors of the law did teach and expound the law and the
prophets. Sitting in the midst of the Doctors, not in the Doctors high seats
I suppose, but in place convenient, and appointed for the younger sort to sit,
both to hear the Doctors, and to ask them questions, there was he together
with others of the younger sort, both hearing them, and asking them questions.
What he heard from them, we cannot say; doubtless the questions which he asked
of them were touching the Messiah who was expected, Of what tribe he should
come; Whose son he should be; what redemption he should procure to Israel; by
what means, and such like. That so he might in some sort manifest himself to
be that Messiah, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets did write; which
properly was the business of his Father. Whereupon as well his parents, as
also all others that heard him, even the Doctors themselves, were astonished,
(...), they admired above measure, and were ravished in mind, as men besides
themselves. Never heard they such acute questions, never such exact answers.
The disputation being ended first, (as is piously to be supposed, for it is
altogether unlikely that she would by any importune or unseasonable question
interrupt him, while he was asking and answering the Doctors) his mother
desirous to know upon what motives he had so absented himself, demanded of him
privately why he had dealt so with them, admonishing him of the care and sorrow
which they had by reason of his absence. They were both of them careful to
find him, and did both of them sorrow for the present loss of him, but more
especially the blessed virgin, whom it more nearly touched, whose motherly love
and affection was more tender and compassionate. The answer which he makes is
no reprehension, but a divine instruction. As if he should have said, I
acknowledge you my mother according to my humanity, of you it was that I took
flesh, in your womb was I conceived by the holy Ghost. I do likewise
acknowledge you to be my reputed father, a father according to the law: and
that upon both respects, as man I owe unto you both honor and obedience. But
as it is true, that, as made of the substance of you my dear mother, I am the
natural and consubstantiall son of man. Even so, being begotten of God and of
his substance, I am the natural and consubstantiall son of God. By him am I
sent to do his will, this temple is his house. How then is it that ye sought
me? did you not persuade your selves that I would not otherwise absent my self
from you, but to be about the business of my holy and heavenly Father? This
was the meaning of his answer, which at that time they understood not.

temple, and from Jerusalem, and went down to Nazareth, Christ, sbuject to his
parents, and how,
where he dwelt with them, and was subject to them, working without doubt at
his fathers trade, partly to avoid idleness in himself, and to condemn it in
others, as the mother of all mischief; for, nihil agendo homines male agere
discunt, in doing nothing men learn to do ill: partly to get his own living
with the labor of his hands, and to relieve his parents in their mean
condition. It was that which his country men had observed, and at which they
stumbled, Is not this the carpenter (say they), S. Mar. 6.3.
the son of Mary, the brother of James, and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? and
are not his sisters here with us? And they were offended at him. That he
disposed himself to prayers, fastings, and divine meditations, that must not
be denied, yet that he wrought carpenters work, and made plowes and yokes for
oxen, seeing that Justine Martyr says it more then once, (Dialog. cum Tryph.
Jud.) who no doubt had it from good hands, and that such a condition might well
stand with divine dispensation, and with the form of a servant, it may easily
be granted. All these words which she had heard in the temple, and which
elsewhere were spoken of him, and by him, the blessed virgin his mother, kept
in her heart as the richest and greatest treasure. And Jesus himself, who is
the fountain of all wisdom, S. Joh. 1.16.
and of all grace, of whose fullness have all we received, and grace for grace,
as Saint John says. Who had not his wisdom by measure or degrees, but above
measure altogether, and from the very moment of his conception, who was the
wisdom of the Father, and to whom no wisdom could be added by increase of age
or stature; yet as he increased in age, and grew up to the full stature and
proportion of a man, so did he more and more dispense his wisdom, whereby he
was well known and observed to be in favor with God, and was highly esteemed
of men. Being in the full perfection of the human nature, in whose body there
was no spot or blemish, Psalm. 45.3.
fairer then the children of men, whose lips were full of grace, because that
God by the hypostaticall union, had beyond all the sons of Adam, blessed him
for ever. Concerning whose stature, feature, and proportion, let the Reader if
he please, see Niceph. Callist. Ec. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 40. And the child grew,
and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon
him. S. Luc. 2.40 41.
Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the Passover.
And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom
of the feast. And when they had fulfilled the days, 42,
as they returned, the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem, and Joseph
and his mother knew not of it. 43,
But they supposing him to have been in the company, went a days journey, and
they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance. And when they found him
not, 44,
they turned back again to Jerusalem seeking him. And it came to pass that
after three days, they found him in the Temple, 45,
sitting in the midst of the Doctors both hearing them, and asking them
questions. And all that heard him, were astonished at his understanding and
answers. 46, 47,
And when they saw him, they were amazed: and his mother said unto him, Son,
why have thou thus dealt with us? Behold, thy Father and I, 48,
have sought thee sorrowing. And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought
me? wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business? And they understood
not the saying which he spoke unto them. And he went down with them, 49, 50
51, 52,
and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them; But his mother kept all these
sayings in her heart. And Jesus increased in wisdom, and stature, and in favor
with God and man.

Thus abode he at Nazareth with his parents for the space of eighteen years
almost, which was from the time of their return from Jerusalem, after that he
had disputed with the Doctors, (he being then completely twelve years old, and
going on in the thirteenth year) to the thirtieth year of his age current. For
during all that time, no further mention is made of him then has been made
before. Then began that acceptable year of the Lord, The acceptable year of
the Lord begun.
prophesied by the Prophet Isaiah, to be proclaimed and preached unto all the
world, by Christ the Fathers eternal word. The spirit of the Lord God is upon
me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek,
Isa. 61.1, 2.
he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the
captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound: To proclaim the
acceptable year of the Lord. Which prophecy is repeated by the Evangelist in
these words. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, S. Luc. 4.18, 19.
because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent
me to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised. To
preach the acceptable year of the Lord. This year was annus placabilis Domino,
a year placable to the Lord; a year in which the Lord was easily pleased with
all those things which were performed by Christ, for the redemption of all
mankind. This year was Annus Domini acceptus, the accepted year of the Lord; a
year in which the Lord was pleased to accept the merits of his son, a full and
sufficient price, satisfaction, and redemption for the sins of the whole world.
There were other types of this year which the law had; but this year was
specially figured by the great Jubilee of the fiftieth year. That year was
proclaimed by blowing up of trumpets of rams horns: this year was proclaimed
by the Ram himself, figured by that Ram which Abraham offered up in stead of
Isaac his son, and by all those Rams which were offered up in sacrifices
according to the Law. That year brought with it a temporal rest unto the land
of Canaan. This year brought with it a spiritual rest unto the whole world.
That year proclaimed liberty, and in that year all servants went forth
perpetually free from corporal bondage, and every one that had sold his
possession, did in that year return unto it again, Levit. 25. This year
proclaimed liberty, and in this year all that were servants to sin and Satan,
had a perpetual liberty obtained, and an eternal redemption, so that now there
is no let, but that all the sons of Adam who shall by a lively faith and true
repentance accept the liberty of this year, may return again to that holy, and
heavenly inheritance which Adam lost by reason of sin. That year took away
the distinction of master and servant: This year took away all distinctions,
not in respect of that relation which is between man and man in the world; but
in respect of that relation which is betwixt Christ and his Church. For like as
the Redeemer would buy them all with the same price, and would shed no more,
nor no other blood for the Jew then for the Gentile; for the bond then for the
free; for the male, then for the female; Even so the freedom of this year,
brought to pass that they should be all saved by the same grace, justified by
the same faith, have the same word, the same sacraments, the same worship, an
equal interest in Christ; according to that of St. Paul. Gal. 3.28.
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And in another
place, Col. 3.11.
There is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian,
Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and in all. Weeks in the scriptures
are not always weeks of days, nor years are not always years of months:
Though that acceptable year is properly said to begin then, yet must we not
think to terminate it in twelve months. It is (says that ancient Father
Irenaeus) the time, in which they are called of him, that do believe in him,
that is, all the time from his coming, to the consummation, in which he does
acquire as fruits, those that are saved, lib. 2. cap. 38. It is indeed, and
according to St. Paul, the whole time of Grace (Behold now is the accepted
time, 2 Cor. 6.2.
behold now is the day of salvation) in the largest sense. But strictly and
properly to his Ascension into heaven: in which year he completed all those
things which God accepted at his hands to be done for the redemption of
mankind, by his Baptism, by his preaching, by his miracles, by his passion,
death, burial, descent into hell; as also by his resurrection, and ascension.
We have therefore now to see how he did administer the covenant during that
year.

It was the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate
being then governor of Judea, and Herod being Tetrarch Galilee etc. as is
noted by the Evangelist, S. Luc. 3.1.
which was the thir^ieth year of his age current. Then began the Gospel of
Christ to be published, for then John the son of Zacharias and Elizabeth, S.
Mar. 1.1.
who had made his abode (...), in the deserts, or desert places; [places of his
own selection and choosing, S. John the Baptist.
for a solitary and contemplative life]; being immediately thereunto called by
God, actually, and externally, (for without an actual external mission, no
man must presume to preach, Romans 10.15.
or take upon him to administer divine things) (...), in the wilderness, began
that his ministry, unto which he was before appointed of God, foretold by the
Prophets, and at his circumcision designed by his father: which was that he
should be that Prophet, which should go before the face of the Lord to prepare
his ways. Isa. 40.3. Mal. 3.1.
He therefore began first to preach, and to baptize in the wilderness, or hill
country of Judea, where he had a great confluence of people from Jerusalem
and Judea; and from those hill countries or desert and less frequented places,
he went forth and came into the plain or champian, countries more peopled and
inhabited nigh unto Jordan, and there he preached and baptized. His habit and
food were answerable to his austere life, His habit and food.
and penitential Doctrine; for he had his raiment of Camells hair, and a
leathern girdle about his loins, and his meat was locusts, and wild honey. He
was of noble descent, for as Josephus says, S. Mat. 3.3.
The mark of true Nobility was, if a man could derive his pedigree from the
priesthood. He was born to the priesthood; but being immediately called by God
to go before the face of Christ, and to prepare his ways by preaching
repentance unto the people, and by baptizing of them; he assumes an habit
answerable to the work that he went about, and yet not without example of the
former Prophets, a rough hairie garment: and food or diet answerable to them
both; for his meat was locusts and wild honey. 1 Samuel 28.24 2 King. 1 8. 2 Kin.
2.13, 14. Zech. 13.4.
His immediate calling was a dispensation for his attendance upon the Temple in
his course or lot, from the priestly vests, and food indulged by the law. His
doctrine, habit, and food were penitential, and by his habit and food, he
commended unto the people the doctrine which he preached; as if he should say
with Demosthenes (...), in Epist. Look unto what things I exhort others, it is
fitting that I should first do them my self.

raiment, whatsoever he ware as raiment, was of Camels hair; Raiment of Camels
hair.
hirsute, rigid, sharp, pungent upon his bare soft and tender skin, not hanging
down loose, but bound close to his body with a leathern girdle. S. Mat. 11.9 A
girdle of leather.
He was a Prophet, and more then a Prophet; therefore his habit was
prophetical, and more then prophetical. We find the Prophets in rough
garments, and in sackcloth often; but, in a garment of Camels hair, the rough,
hard, pungent bristles of the Camel, we find none but S. John the Baptist
only. S. Luc. 1.17. S. Mat. 11.14
He came in the spirit and power of Elias; nay himself was Elias, that Elias
which was for to come; therefore he assumed the habit of Elias, and was girt
about his loins with a leathern girdle (a badge of mortality, fit for him to
wear that would preach the doctrine of Penance, fit for them to behold who
would receive and embrace his penitential doctrine and baptism) as Elias was.
2 King. 1.8. S. Mat. 11.18
He came neither eating nor drinking, but was most abstemious in his diet; he
did not eat and drink as other men did, and in company, but more sparingly, to
a less quantity, not so frequently, and alone: and is therefore said (not
absolutely, but upon these respects) not to eat and drink. Besides he came not
eating and drinking the common food and drink of the people of the Land, for he
drank neither wine nor strong drink; and his meat was locusts, S. Luc. 1.15.
and wild honey. Such food as the wilderness did plentifully afford, S. Mat.
3.4 What the locusts were.
and easily supply. And because the Evangelist says expressly, that his food
was locusts and wild honey, neither were locusts forbidden to the people of
Israel, but permitted to be eaten by the Levit^cal law; The locust after his
kind, and the bald locust after his kind, Levit. 11.21,
and the beetle after his kind, and the Grasshopper after his kind, as having
legs above their feet, to leap withal upon the earth. And because the land of
Canaan abounded with honey, every where to be found in the deserts, in and upon
the trees, and in the holes of the rocks; the honey dropped in the woods: as we
read in the story of Saul, 1 Samuel 14.26
and Jonathan. And the Psalmist bears witness to the honey in the Rock;
Therefore I affirm his meat to be such locusts permitted by the law to be
eaten, Psalm. 81.16
and eaten also in other nations. Nor shall I think those locusts to have been
the wild apples of the desert, nor the tender tops of herbs, or shrubs, nor any
herbs so called, but locusts indeed. The wild honey was honey of unhived Bees,
What the wild honey was.
which bred and swarmed in the wilderness, and in other places, making their
honey and honey combs, and disposing them in the trees, rocks, and in holes of
the ground: not the sweet leaves of any trees, or honey found in Canes, much
less that manna wherewith God fed the people of Israel in the wilderness, by
the space of forty years. So, in those days, namely in the fifteenth year of
the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and
Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, and
of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the Tetrarch of Abilene, Annas and
Caiphas being the high priests, [ viz. Annas who had been high priest,
obtained still to be so called, and Caiphas, as being the present high priest]
the word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness. In the
wilderness of Judea, And saying, Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. This was according to the prediction of the prophets, Isaiah and
Malachi, Isai. 40.3. Mal. 3.1. And he did baptize in the wilderness, and
preached the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. And he came into
all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins, S. Mat. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. S. Mar. 1.1, 2, 3, 4. S. Luc. 3.1, 2,
3, 4.
and did baptize there also. And the same John had his raiment of camells hair,
and a leathern girdle about his loins, and his meat was locusts and wild honey,
as is to be found by Saint Matthew, Saint Mark, and Saint Luke, compared
together. And this was the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which
began so to be published.

Thus came he by divine mission, that according to the prophecies Isaias and
Malachias, by the preaching of repentance, Concerning Saint John's Preaching
and Baptism.
and by the baptism of water, he might prepare the ways of the Lord, by
disposing the hearts of men to receive Christ, who was presently to be
manifested to the world. Such a preparation was to be made two manner of ways,
by preaching repentance for the remission of sins; and by baptizing with water,
for the seal and confirmation of his doctrine. Such as his preaching was, such
was his baptism; but his preaching was but a preparation to receive and
entertain Christ, therefore his baptism was no other. It was not a seal of the
covenant, therefore it was not a sacrament properly; and for that cause it
could not confer the grace of regeneration. Yet was it preached for the
remission of sins, and was the Baptism of repentance, because whom he baptized,
he taught to repent, disposed and prepared them to receive Christ and his
baptism, that so their sins might be remitted. Saint John's baptism was from
heaven, and therefore had its perfection, for Saint John came not of himself,
but was sent of God to baptize: S. Joh. 1.33.
But Saint John was the institutor of his own Baptism, therefore his Baptism
was no Sacrament properly, neither was grace conferred thereby: for sacraments
were not instituted by servants, but by the Lord himself; to him that made the
world, to him it belongs to make the sacraments. Saint John's Baptism did
not oblige to the participation, but only from contempt: all men were not
necessarily to receive it, though no man might contemn it, quia contemnens
consilium, contemnit consiliantem; he that contemns the counsel, contemns
him that gives it; therefore it was not a sacrament with promise of grace, for
such sacraments are generally necessary to salvation. Finally, it had not the
form of words, for Saint John did not baptize those whom he baptized, in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, forasmuch as some of
them who were baptized by him, had not so much as heard whether there be any
holy Ghost; It was personal to Saint John only while he lived, neither had he
any successor to baptize in that manner after he was dead. Therefore it was
not the Baptism of Christ begun in his person, howsoever necessary for the
present time, and that the ways of the Lord might be prepared by him. And this
which has been laid down thus plainly and briefly concerning the Baptism of
Saint John, Act. 19.2.
is consonant to the doctrine of the learned fathers, and school Divines.

S. Luc. 3.4, 5,
As Saint John was seriously employed crying out unto the people, and saying in
his doctrine, Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. Every
valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low, and
the crooked shall be made straight, 6.
and the rough ways shall be made smooth. And all flesh shall see the
salvation of God. And therefore exhorting and persuading them to fill up the
lovv valleys and concavities of their hearts, with all virtues; to pull down
the high mountains and hills of pride, by humility; to make straight the
crooked ways of injustice, by righteousness; and to make smooth the rough
ways of unjust and immoderate anger, by meekness: For that now (said he)
Christ who is the salvation of God, and brings salvation unto all the world,
is presently to show himself: that therefore they would hearken unto his
doctrine, and come unto his Baptism, that so they might be worthy to receive
and entertain him. I say, as Saint John was thus busied, Saint John sees the
Pharisees and Sadduces at his baptism.
and preaching and baptising, he espied among the promiscuous multitude certain
Sectaries, called Pharisees and Sadduces; the reader peradventure would know
what they were.

The Pharisees professed themselves to be very skillful of the law, whereof
they were great professors; they had their name Phares, which signifies
Division, for they had separated themselves from others, The Pharisees.
for certain voluntary superfluities in religion, which they had undertaken to
hold. The master of that sect is said to be one Aciba, or Bar-Aciba. They did
not believe a Trinity of persons in the Unity of one Godhead. They
acknowledged but one nature in the person of the Messiah. They supposed the
kingdom of the Messiah to be an earthly or worldly kingdom, and of this
world. They knew nothing of internal obedience. They held justification by
legal works only. And besides the written law, they had many unvvritten
traditions of their own, which they obtruded to the people for true
godliness. The Sadduces, The Sadduces
named themselves Sadduces, a justitia, from their justice, for Sadoc
signifies a just man. They held the same opinion with the Samaritans touching
the resurrection, and denied it. They did not believe that there be any Angels
or Spirits. They knevv nothing of the holy Ghost; and being Jews, they
complied with the Samaritans. When therefore he savv these, and knevv them to
be such (proud fastuous hypocrites, who came thither out of pride and
curiosity, to deride his doctrine, to despise his ministry, and to question his
authority, S. Luc. 7.30.
having no intention to be baptized by him, as indeed they were not baptized)
he breaks out into this bitter commination, S. Mat. 3.7, 8, 9,
O generation of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come.
Bring forth therefore fruits meet for rep^ntance. And think not to say within
your selves, we have Abraham to our father, for I say unto you, that God is
able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. 10,
And now also the ax is laid unto the root of the trees: therefore every tree
which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. 11,
I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance: but he that comes after me
is mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you
with the holy Ghost and with fire. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will
thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the garner; but will burn
up the chafe with unquenchable fire. Which commination taking a deep
impression in the hearts of the people, (but not of the Pharisees and Sadduces)
they, that is to say, all the people, crying out with one voice, asking him,
saying, (...), What shall we do then? He answers, S. Luc. 3.10,
and says unto them, He that has two coats, let him impart to him that has
none, and he that has meat, let him do likewise. 11,
The Publicans The Publicans.
or customers, who farmed and exacted the Roman imposts or customs, who came
not subtly and in hypocrisy, as the Pharisees and Sadduces did, but to be
baptized indeed, thought themselves more particularly concerned, and therefore
demanded for themselves and for those of their own profession, (...), Master,
what shall we do? And he said unto them, Exact no more then that which is
appointed you. 13,
The soldiers also hearing his answer to the publicans, desired the like
particular instruction for themselves, and for their commilitants, and
therefore demanded, saying, (...), And what shall we do? And he said unto them,
Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your
wages. 14,
His preaching and baptism were had in great admiration by all the people, and
much talk went concerning him, they mused in their hearts, and reasoned and
disputed one with another concerning him, whether he were the Christ or not,
whom all men then expected. This gave him occasion to put them out of doubt
concerning both his person and Baptism, and to inculcate that which he had
said before to the Pharisees and Sadduces in his commination, observed by Saint
Matthew. 15,
For says the text, The people were in expectation, and all men mused in their
hearts of John, whether he were the Christ or not. 16,
John answered saying unto them all, I indeed baptize you with water, but one
mightier then I comes, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose,
he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire. 17,
Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and will
gather the wheat into his garner, but the chafe he will burn with fire
unquenchable. 18,
And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people, passed
over by the Evangelists for that brevities sake, which the Scripture every
where affects.

Christ baptized by St. John the Baptist Bethabara.
While these things were thus transacted by Saint John at Jordan, (a fair river
in Judea, which divides Galilee from the residue of Judea, and falls into
the dead Sea) Jesus himself upon the sixth day of the month of January, in the
beginning of the thirtieth year of his age, came from Nazareth the place of his
education and abode with his parents, unto Bethabara where Saint John baptized.
It was a town situated upon the east side of the river Jordan, sixteen miles
from Jerusalem, and as they say, fifty and two miles from Nazareth, where it
seems was some bridge or ferry to pass over the river, from whence the place
had its name Bethabara; for Beth signifies an house, and Abbara is transitus a
passage; as if you should say, the house of the passage. Thither came he who
had no need of Baptism, to be baptized of his servant. It was, because it
became him to fulfill all righteousness. How? in fulfilling the types: for the
Ark which was a type of Christ passed through Jordan, and Elijah and Elisha,
who were typical persons and types of Christ, passed through Jordan,
prefiguring his Baptism. And not only to fulfill the types, but to sanctify
Jordan it self, and all other waters (in a lawful sacramental use) to the
mystical washing away of sin, (for so the Church of England, with consent of
the primitive Church believes and confesses) as Saint Ambrose says, Cum
salvator abluitur, jam tum in nostrum baptismum tota aqua mundatur. Sermon. 18.
in Epiphan. When the Savior is baptized, then is all the water made clean for
our Baptism. And no marvel, for if the temple sanctified the gold, and the
Altar sanctified the gift, surely Christ the Lord of the temple, and the true
altar, must needs sanctify; and who shall doubt but that by his baptism, he
sanctified the whole element of water for the sacrament of Baptism. It is
Christ's own prerogative to institute his sacraments, by sanctification of the
Elements. Therefore it is fond and frivolous to object, that Christ sanctified
not all those things that he touched, and therefore not the river Jordan by
being baptized in it, seeing that he has instituted this great sacrament in
the element of water: for sanctifications are ex consilio destinato, to the end
that being taken off from common and ordinary uses by divine institution, they
may serve for that purpose to the which they are sanctified. Therefore though
he descended into hell, he sanctified not hell, nor yet the Palace of the high
priest, nor all or any of those places in the land of Palestina into which he
came. In a word, he would be baptized of his servant for instruction, to teach
us neither to despise the Sacrament for the weakness of the Element, nor for
the unworthiness of the Minister: and withal to give us to understand, that
like as he in old time brought the people of Israel, the carnal seed, into the
earthly Canaan through the river of Jordan: Even so in these last days, does
he bring the spiritual seed into the heavenly Canaan through the sacrament of
Baptism. For therein are we made members of Christ, children of God, and
inheritors of the kingdom of heaven. Except a man be born of water, S. Joh. 3.5.
and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

Now when he was come, and tendered himself to be baptized St. John who knew him
in his mothers womb supernaturally, and by such a knowledge as was never given
to any other, and leaped for joy; and yet never knew him, nor had seen him in
all his life till that instant of time, knew him then by divine inspiration, S.
Luc. 1.44 S. Joh. 1.31.
and therefore thought himself altogether unworthy to baptize his Lord, and for
that cause forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee (I who am a
sinner, and born in sin, of thee, who art no sinner, nor born in sin; I who
am thy servant, of thee who art my Lord) and come thou to me? Thou the
immaculate lamb of God, thou the eternal word of God, thou the eternal God,
come thou to me? to me a servant, to me a sinner? O wonderful and mysterious!

Christ submonisheth him of his dispensation, and that he came all
righteousness; wherefore being presently admitted without further
contradiction or delay, he descended into the water and was baptized. (...) and
straight way, He went up straight way out of the water.
presently without delay, he went up out of the water: for he made all possible
speed to pray unto the Father; and that the Holy Ghost might descend upon him,
and that he might receive the Fathers testimony from heaven. And therefore St.
Luke says, That when all the people were baptized, and that Jesus also being
baptized, and praying the heaven was opened: And the holy Ghost descended in a
bodily shape like a dove upon him, and a voice came from heaven, which said,
Thou art my beloved son, in thee I am well pleased. I shall not doubt but
that he did pray for the holy Ghost, and that the element of water which he had
sanctified, in the lawful use of it might become a Sacrament, the first
sacrament of the new Testament, for the mystical washing away of sin. I shall
not doubt but that he did pray, that those who are baptized, might in that
Sacrament receive the holy Ghost. Therefore as he was praying, the holy Ghost
descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him. That Dove was not the holy
Ghost himself, it was but a visible testification of the special presence of
the holy Ghost. But it descended to bear witness unto Christ, and to his
Baptism, a baptism not of water only, as St. John's was, but of water and of
the holy Ghost. It descended upon him, S. Joh. 1.33.
to the end that St John himself might know him to be that Baptizer. And it
descended upon him as he was praying, to the end that his Church may know that
his prayers were heard, and that by his prayers he obtained, that in his
baptism we may receive the holy Ghost, as St. Augustine says, Water exhibiting
the Sacrament of grace without, and the spirit working the benefit of grace
within, loosing the bond of sin, reconciling the good of nature, do regenerate
a man in one Christ, that was generated of one Adam. ad Bonifac. Epist. 23. I
will not dispute what grace it is which is conferred in Baptism; it suffices
me to know that it is the grace of regeneration, whereby we are born again, and
do rise again with Christ unto newness of life, Romans 6.3. Gal. 3.27.
and of justification whereby we put on Christ. It suffices me to know, that
it is the grace of sanctification, whereby those that are baptized are purged
and cleansed, and made holy to the Lord. And therefore, Faelix sacramentum
aquae nostrae, says Tertullian, Ephesians. 6.23.
A happy Sacrament of our water, because the sins of our pristine blindness
being washed away, we are made free to everlasting life. De Bapt. cap. 1. And
Jesus when he was baptized, went up straight way out of the water; and lo the
heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the spirit of God descending like a
dove, and lighting upon him. S. Mat. 3.16, 17.
And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved son, in whom I am well
pleased.

Christ goes into the wilderness to be tempted.
Having ended his prayers, after that the holy Ghost had descended upon him
visibly, and his Father had proclaimed him his beloved son, (and therefore the
Messiah) from heaven, wherein the sacred und undivided Trinity was most
apparently manifested; for the Father spoke from heaven, the son was there
presently baptized, the holy Ghost visibly descended (a mystery not observed by
the multitude) he was directly and immediately led or driven by the Spirit into
the wilderness; that is to say, he went thither by divine impulsion, and by the
motion and instinct of the holy Ghost, that he might there be tempted of the
Devil. What wilderness that was, it is not mentioned, further then that St
Mark says, that he was there (...), with the wild beasts. And therefore in all
probability, that great wilderness (the wilderness of Arabia Petraea) through
which he led the wandering Israelites by the space of forty years, S. Mar. 1.13
Wilderness of Arabia Petraea.
a wilderness incult, dry, barren, without inhabitants, frequented by wild
beasts. A great and terrib^e wilderness (says Moses) wherein were fiery
Serpents, and Scorpions, and drought, where there was no water. Such there were
none in Judea, Deuteronomy. 8.15.
or in all the land of Canaan, though yet we read of many deserts there; it is
consequent therefore that this was that wilderness into which he went, where he
might be (...), with the wild beasts. For this wilderness extends it self
from the borders of Egypt, and the red sea, to Jordan, and to the place where
St. John baptized; and from thence by the country of Trachonitis, to the
mountain of Libanus. Itinerar: Scrip. 432. And in this wilderness were the
mountains Sinai and Horeb, two tops of one and the same mountain, where Moses
and Elias types of Christ, fasted by the space of forty days. Into this
wilderness he came, and there fasted forty days, and forty nights, abstaining
totally from all manner of sustenance, and during all that time he did eat
nothing, as St. Luke says. By fasting, he fitted and prepared himself to the
conflict which he was to have with the (...), the tempter. S. Luc. 4.2.
S. Mat. 4.3.
And by completing the number of forty days, he answered the Types. Therefore
went he fasting from Jordan, in all likelihood toward mount Horeb, one hundred
thirty and six miles, that so he might terminate his fast in that place where
Moses and Elias, the one being the lawgiver, the other the renewer of the law
suppressed, had terminated theirs.

The forty days being expired, and he remaining in the same place, the
tempter, the Devil, the Prince of Devils, who wilderness for the whole forty
days of his abode there, (as St. Mark, S. Mar. 1.13. Luc. 4.2.
and St. Luke do both of them expressly say) came unto him thither to tempt him
in a new manner, and with stronger temptations then ever before, the strongest
of all that he could devise. He saw that it was in vain for him to suggest
sinful thoughts, or otherwise to attempt which way to creep into his heart by
unlawful desires; by those ways he had always received the repulse, and
fallen off with loss. He must batter this fort with other manner of Engines if
he mean to take it. Wherefore he assumes a visible shape, and tempeth him face
to face, coming unto him with the greater confidence in such a desolate place.
Christ did not provoke the Devil to this combat, he sent him no challenge, he
was led or driven to it by the spirit, when the Devil came he gave not the
onset; but the Devil assailed him, and then he received him, with divine
resolution, and fortitude, threw him prostrate, and trod upon him. It was
foreseen and foretold by the Prophet in the spirit of prophecy. Thou shall
tread upon the Lion and Adder: Psalm. 91.13.
the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under feet. That therefore he
might trample under foot this Lion, this Adder, this young Lion, this Dragon,
Then was Jesus led up of the spirit in^o the wilderness, S. Mat. 4.1.
to be tempted of the devil.

combat, never were the like combatants, never such a brabium or reward fought
for. The combat was not corporal, but spiritual: The combatants, the prince
of Devils and chief captain of all the hellish army; and the captain of the
host of the Lord. The first temptation.
The prize or reward for which the combat was, the precious souls of all
mankind. The Devil gives the onset, for knowing him to be hungry, he first
tempts him, by divine power to turn all those stones which were there in that
stony place of the desert (likely the mount Horeb) where he was, into bread; or
at least one of them if he were able; showing him, and pointing at, as well all
the stones as that particular stone. Command that these stones be made bread.
S. Mat. 4.3. S. Luc. 4.3.
Command this stone that it be made bread. Christ replyeth, that there was no
necessity to command either the stones in general, or that stone in particular
to be made bread, for that God was able to feed and nourish him by other food,
by other ways and means; and although he should never eat or drink, by his own
word and power only: intimating thereby, that he had been nourished and
sustained without any manner of food, by the space of forty days, through the
word and power of God, as Moses and Elias had been before. And when the tempter
came to him, he said, S. Mat. 4.3,
If thou be the son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he
answered, and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by
every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. 4.


Dcut. 8.3.
And when he had cited that scripture, so written in Deuteronomie, to put him in
mind also, how that God fed the people of Israel in the wilderness by the space
of forty years without bread, The second temptation.
the Devil betakes himself to another engine, and seeing that he could not
tempt him to diffide, he tempts him to presume. He brought him to Jerusalem,
(...), the holy city, so called, because the Temple, and divine worship were
fixed there, as in that place which the Lord had chosen to put his name there;
though otherwise (as has been observed before) Jerusalem at that time was
rather the valley of slaughter, and a den of thieves, then the royal seat of
the King, or the place of holy worship, guilty of all the righteous blood shed
upon the whole earth, from the blood of the righteous Abel, to the blood of
Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom they slew between the Temple and the
Altar. S. Mat. 23.35
He brought him not thither by violence, but freely, voluntarily, and by his
own consent: he did as it were lead him thither by the hand, and transferred
him, as one that had submitted himself to be led, and transferred by him. For
so much I collect from the word (...) used by St. Luke, and from the word (...)
used by St. Matthew. He brought him not thither in a vision, neither did he
delude his senses: for the temptations of Christ were not visions or
fantasies, but realities, therefore though we cannot tell how he brought him
thither, whether by a terrestrial journey, or by swift motion through the air,
yet sure it is, he brought him thither really, actually, substantially,
locally; but whether visibly to any, or invisibly to all, we have not to say.
Having brought him thither, he sets him upon a pinnacle of the temple, an
exceeding high pinnacle, said to be six hundred foot from the bottom to the top;
bids him to declare himself to be the Son of God, by casting himself
down, for if that he were so indeed, he should receive no hurt, for as much as
God had commanded the care over him to his Angels, who would readily hold him
up in their hands. And because that Christ had repelled the former temptation
by the sacred authority of Scripture, he thought to prevail in this by the same
authority. Psalm. 91.11, 12.
He quoteth a place out of the book of Psalms, but not truly; for how could he
who is the father of lies? The prophet does not say, In their hands they shall
bear thee up; but that they shall keep thee in all thy ways. Christ repelleth
the temptation by authority of Scripture, rightly and truly alleged out of the
book of Deuteronomy; Deuteronomy. 6.16.
tells him that his ways are not ways of presumption but of providence, for
it is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. This was the second
temptation reckoned in the third place by Saint Luke the Evangelist, respecting
more the verity of history, then the exactness of order. Then the devil takes
him up into the holy city, S. Mat. 4.5,
and se^teth him on a pinnacle of the temple, and says unto him, If thou be the
son of God, cast thy self down; for it is written, 6,
He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they
shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. 7,
Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God.

Being repelled in this second temptation, and seeing he could divinity to do
miracles, either in diffidency or presumption: The third temptation.
he gives the onset once more, tempting him to abjure his divinity by the sin
of idolatry. He takes him as before, not by violence, but freely, voluntarily,
and by his own consent, not in a vision or by fantasy, and transferreth him,
really, actually, substantially, locally, but whether visibly to any, or
invisibly to all, we cannot say; and brings him up into an exceeding high
mountain, peradventure to the top of mount Horeb, where Moses and Elias fasted;
if not rather to the top of Pisgah, from whence Moses took a view of the land
of promise. And there, in such a manner as was possible for him to show them,
and for Christ to see and discern them, (for he did show them, and Christ did
see and discern them) he showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them. (...). We must not question how this could be done. This word
(...), how, or in what manner, is a manifest argument of incredulity, says
Iustine Martyr. Certain it is, the one did show them, and the other see them,
(...), in a moment of time. And then the devil takes up his old trade of
lying, tells him that all those things are delivered unto him to give and to
dispose at his pleasure; if therefore he would fall down and worship him, S.
Luc. 2.7.
all should be his. By covetousness and ambition, as by his greatest engine,
battering this impregnable fort. Idolatry, as Aquinas says, is gravissimum
peccatum, the greatest or most grievous sin. It presupposes infidelity, it
adds an undue external worship, a pernicious ly, great blasphemy against
God, and impugnation of the faith. Therefore when he tempted him to idolatry,
our blessed Lord would endure his pride and insolency no longer, (having thus
far by divine permission submitted himself to be tempted by him) but uses his
authority, commands him to depart, and tells him by authority of Scripture,
Deuteronomy. 10.20. S. Mat. 4.8,
who it is that is to be worshipped with divine honor. Again the devil takes
him up into an exceeding high mountain, and shows him all the kingdoms of
the world, and the glory of them: 9, 10.
And says unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me. Then says Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan; for it is
written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

The devil departs for a season.
Then the devil leaves him, being driven away from him by the power of his
most mighty word; but he went from him, animo revertendi, with a full purpose
and resolution to return again as he should find opportunity. For Saint Luke
says, that when the devil had ended all the temptation, S. Luc. 4.13.
he departed from him for a season. He tempted him no more in that manner, but
he tempted him by his agents and instruments upon every occasion, and most
probably came again in his own person, to tempt him at his passion. Which thing
Christ seems to intimate by those words, This is your hour, S. Luc. 22.53.
S. Joh. 14.30
and the power of darkness. And again in Saint John, The prince of this world
comes, and has nothing in me. He came in Judas who betrayed him, in Pilat
who condemned him, in the Jews that crucified him; but this was not temptatio
proprie dicta, properly temptation, which is the suggestion of the devil,
whereby he prompteth a man to do evil, but rather open persecution, whereby he
stirred up his enemies to kill him. Therefore ge came again to tempt him in his
own person. The tempter being departed from him, the Angels, who are ministering
spirits, Heb 1.14.
and, as the Apostle says, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs
of salvation, having beheld all this conflict, but came not unto him before,
lest they should seem to assist him by their presence, came and ministered unto
him, who is the author and prince of our salvation. By comforting him, by
counselling him, by rejoicing with him, by administering food to flake and
satisfy his hunger, and what else might be requisite to, and consisting with,
his present condition.

So he departed out of the desert, and from the place of his last temptation,
but whither he went, or what he did during the remainder of that year, it is
not said. It is but conjectured by some, that probably he returned to Nazareth,
to his former habitation and abode with his mother, remained there, and wrought
at his fathers trade as before; yet so, as that he also taught and preached
privately. By which means he began to be known and famed in Nazareth, and in
the adjacent places, though for the present he wrought no miracles. Which
conjecture may not inaptly consist with that of Saint Luke, where he says,
that the devil being departed from him for a season, S. Luc. 4.14
Jesus returned in the power of the spirit into Galilee, and there went out a
fame of him through all the region round about. It is less consisting with the
truth which is affirmed by others, that after the devil had left him, and the
angels also had ministered unto him; he came down from the top of Pisgah, and
went to Bethabara, where Saint John was baptizing, eight miles; and then Saint
John seeing him coming unto him, said to his disciples, Behold the lamb of
God, S. Joh 1.29.
which takes away the sins of the world. But how well this will stand with the
consequence and connection of things, our sacred history will show hereafter.

In the mean time we have to take notice how the covenant was administered by
him for the space of these twenty and eight years, for the abolishing of the
old testament: that is to say, from the expiration of the second year, to the
expiration of the thirtieth year of his age. By his return out of Egypt. By his
habitation in Nazareth. By growing up in age and quantity of body. The
Recapitulation.
By waxing strong in spirit. By manifesting his obedience in going up to
Jerusalem at the passover, according to the law. By doing his Fathers
business there at twelve years old. By returning with his parents, and by
being subject to them in his great humility. By proclaiming the acceptable year
of the Lord. By sending his messenger before his face in the spirit and power
of Elias, and to be that Elias which was for to come. By the preparatory
Baptism of Saint John. By being himself baptized by Saint John. By praying,
and by being testified from heaven by the Father, and by the holy Ghost. By
going into the wilderness, and by fasting there forty days and forty nights.
By submitting himself to be tempted by divine dispensation. By vanquishing the
prince of devils. By accepting the ministry of his Angels. It became him who
humbled himself, and was made man for the redemption of all mankind, to be
brought again out of Egypt; to dwell in Nazareth with his parents; to grow up
in age and quantity of body; to wax strong in spirit; to manifest his
obedience, by going up to Jerusalem at the passover according to the law; to
do his Fathers business there at twelve years old; to return with his parents,
and to be subject to them in his great humility; to proclaim the acceptable
year of the Lord; to send his messenger before his face in the spirit and power
of Elias, who was also that Elias which was for to come; to prepare the people
to entertain him, by the preparatory Baptism of Saint John; to be himself
baptized by Saint John; to sanctify the element of water; and to be testified
from heaven by the Father and by the holy Ghost; to go into the wilderness, and
to fast there forty days and forty nights; to submit himself to be tempted by
divine dispensation; to vanquish the prince of devils, to accept the ministry
of his Angels. And thus our sacred history does put an end to his baptismall
year, which was the thirtieth year of his age.

54. The Jews send Priests and Levites to St. John.
After that Saint John had preached and baptized by the space of a year, and
was had in great admiration among the people, for the severity of his life, the
excellency of his doctrine, and the rarity of his Baptism; and with great
success in his ministry, had brought great numbers of people to repentance, and
to his baptism: The supreme council at Jerusalem, to whom it belonged to
take the care of religion, and things pertaining thereunto, and that nothing
should be innovated, sent unto him priests and Levites, who were of the sect of
the Pharisees, with commission to examine his doctrine and authority, to inform
themselves who he was that took upon him so to do, without the approbation of
their Synedrion. They being come, declare their commission, they first examine
what he was, (...), Who art thou? It was the principal cause of their coming,
to know who he was. And because the people were in expectation of the Messiah
then to come, and all mused in their hearts of John, S. Luc. 3.15
whether he were the Christ or not; to examine him strictly whether he would
profess himself to be the Christ. Which when Saint John had absolutely and
flatly denied, then they ask him a second question, (...); what then; art thou
Elias? an impertinent question, for how could he be Elias, whom they knew to be
the son of Zacharias and Elizabeth, whose birth was so famous? But it seems by
this, that they held a (...) of the soul passing out of one body into another;
a doctrine fetched out of the school of Pythagoras, and so thought, that the
soul of Elias being entered into him, he might be the Elias, who according to
the doctrine of the Scribes, should personally precede the Messiah. Saint John
therefore who was Elias, S. Mat. 17.10 S. Mat. 11.14 S. Luc. 1.17
that Elias which was for to come, who went before him in the spirit and power
of Elias, denied himself to be Elias, and answered, I am not; because he was
not Elias in the sense of their question and opinion. This begat a third
question, for they were likewise in expectation of a great Prophet to be raised
up among them, like unto Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.15.
to whom they should all hearken: therefore they enquire concerning that
Prophet. (...); Art thou that Prophet? And when St. John who was a Prophet, S.
Mat. 11.9.
and more then a Prophet, had denied himself to be that Prophet (for that
Prophet was Christ); They persist to demand who he was, to the end that they
might give an answer unto them by whom they were sent, and desire to know from
his own mouth, whom he would set forth himself to be. He tells them who by
person, even he whose coming was prophesied by the Prophet Isaiah. Isa. 40.3.
And when they demanded further, why he took upon him to Baptize, seeing he had
confessed himself to be none of those, who only, as they thought, might take
upon them to Baptize by their own authority; he sets forth his office and
baptism, preaching Christ, and that he had been present among them, at his
baptism (for I collect that these Pharisees were of those that came before unto
his baptism, when Christ was baptized) and had been baptized by him, though
then they did not know him. And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent
Priests and Levites from Jerusalem, to ask him, who art thou? S. Joh. 1.19. 20,
And he confessed and denied not: but confessed, I am not the Christ. And they
asked him, what then? art thou Elias? and he says, I am not. Art thou that
Prophet and he answered, No. Then said they unto him, Who art thou, 21,
that we may give an answer to them that sent us? what say thou of thy
self? He said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, 232, 23, 24,
make straight the way of the Lord, as said the Prophet Esaias. And they which
were sent, were of the Pharisees. And they aked him, and said unto him, why
baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that
Prophet? John answered them, saying, I baptize with water, but there stands
(an incogitancie of the Translators, the word in the Greek is (...), and
accordingly the vulgar Latin medius autem vestrum stetit, there stood one
among you) whom ye know not: He it is, who coming after me, is preferred
before me, whose shoes latchet I am not worthy to unloose. This memorable
occurrence was at Bethabara; for says the text; These things were done in
Bethabara, beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.

Chirst comes to Jordan the second time to receive the testimony of St. Jhon.
The messengers being so answered, and departed; the next day St. John sees
Jesus himself coming unto him, not from the wilderness, but rather from
Nazareth, Chirst comes to Jordan the second time to receive the testimony of
St. Jhon.
where he had contained himself privately with his mother, from the time of his
temptation, to the end and expiration of his baptismall year: not doing any
miracles, nor teaching, unless privately. And then at the latter end of
December, which was the beginning of the one and thirtieth year of his age, he
comes to Bethabara again, where St. John remained all this time and baptized,
that so having received the testimony of his servant before all the people, he
might begin to make himself more publicly known, and by his divine doctrine
and miracles, manifest himself to be the son of God, and the promised Messiah.
St. John no sooner sees him coming, but he cried out in the audience of all
the people, bidding them to see and observe, that (...) (demonstratively) that
lamb of God that takes away, or bears ((...), demonstratively again, as if
he should say, who only bears) the sin of the world: the whole body of sin,
as well original sins as also all actual sins, of the whole world, and of
every particular person, descending from Adam: for he is the Redeemer of all
mankind. It is not that lamb which is offered twice every day at morning and
at evening; it is not the paschall lamb solemnly eaten by all the congregation
of Israel once a year, that can take away or bear the sin of the world: but
this is that lamb of God slain from the foundation of the world, who takes
away (says he) or bears the sin of the world. By laying it on himself to
bear it in his own person, by taking away the dominion of sin, to the end that
it should not reign in our mortal bodies in this life; by taking away the
imputation of sin, to the end that it should not condemn us in the life to
come. And to the end that all the people should the better understand who he
was, he recollecteth what he had told them before concerning him, adding
withal, that he knew him not then, according to his bodily presence,
notwithstanding that his preaching and baptism, had no other end but to
manifest him. But now, that he could confidently aver that this is he,
because he had seen the holy Ghost to descend upon him; and because that he who
sent him to baptize, had given it unto him for a token whereby he should know
him. S. Joh. 1.29, 30,
The next day John sees Jesus coming unto him, and says, Behold, the lamb
of God, which takes away the sin of the world. This is he of whom I said,
After me comes a man which is preferred before me; for he was before me. And
I knew him not; but that he should be made manifest unto Israel; therefore am I
come baptizing with water. 31,
And John bare record, saying, I saw the spirit descending from heaven like a
dove, and it abode upon him. And I knew him not: 32,
but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, upon whom
thou shall see the spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he
which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. And having such infallible assurance, 33,
he gave testimony to his divinity, teaching them to know Christ, (...) God and
man; for says he, I saw, and bear record, 34.
that this is the son of God.

John the Baptist; St. John testifies Christ to two of his Disciples.
and the next day after, Jesus walking that way, to the end that he might
receive another testimony from him; St. John stood and two of his Disciples
with him, to whom he said, Behold the lamb of God. Whereupon the two disciples
went after him. Which when Jesus perceived, he turned toward them, and
demanded of them what it was that they sought. They intimate unto him, that
their desire was to be his Scholars, and to hear his divine Doctrine.
Wherefore they call him Master, and desire to know the place of his present
abode. Jesus inviteth them home with him, and they went, and abode with him
that day, for it was too late for them to return back, it being then about two
hours before night. One of these two Disciples who followed Jesus, but not with
intent to desert their master the Baptist (as indeed they did not at that time,
neither did Christ then call them to be his Disciples) was Andrew the brother
of Simon Peter; the other not improbably conjectured to be St. John himself who
wrote the story. They departing from him, after they had for that day been
entertained by him; Andrew carefully seeks his brother Simon, finds him, tells
him where and with whom he had been, assuring him by the testimony of St. John,
and by the gracious words which they had heard, that he whom they had found was
indeed the Messiah. Upon his invitation Simon goes with him, whom when Jesus
saw, he entertained him with the promise of a future benefit, told him that he
was Simon the son of Iona, but that he should hereafter have another name, and
should be called Peter. Which promise in time convenient he performed. And so
we return again to our Evangelist. Again, the next day after, John stood, S.
Joh. 1.35.
and two of his Disciples; and looking upon Jesus as he walked, he says,
Behold the lamb of God. And the two Disciples heard him speak, 36,
and they followed Jesus. Then Jesus turned and saw them following, and says
unto them, What seek ye? they said unto him, 37,
Rabbi (which is to say being interpreted, Master) where dwell thou? He
says unto them, Come and see: they came and saw where he dwelt, 38,
and abode with him that day: for it was about the tenth hour. One of the two
which heard John speak, and followed him, 39, 40,
was Andrew Simon Peter's brother. He first finds his own brother Simon, and
says unto him, We have found the Messiah, which is being interpreted, the
Christ. 41,
And he brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art
Simon the son of Iona, thou shall be called Cephas, which is by interpretation,
a stone. 42.


(...), The day following, that is to say, the day next Peter, had been so
brought unto Christ by St. Andrew his brother; and been entertained with such a
promise, which was on the fourth day after that he came to his servant St.
John, and had been first proclaimed by him to be the lamb of God which takes
away the sin of the world: Christ goes into Galilee.
Jesus purposed to go forth into Galilee, and whether there, or upon the way,
whether casually or because he sought him, that is not determined: he found
Philip a Citizen of Bethsaida, whom he called to be his disciple, Saint Phi ip
first called to be Christ's disciple. Bethsaida.
saying, Follow me. Bethsaida was a town situated upon the west side of the
Galilean sea, in the tribe of Issachar, fifty six miles from Jerusalem
toward the north, which was at that time built into a fair city by Philip
tetrarch of Iturea and Trachonitis; of which city were also Saint Andrew and
Saint Peter, who had been with Christ, but were not yet called by him to be his
disciples. Saint Andrew was the disciple of Saint John, so was Saint Peter too
in all probability, whom Saint Andrew found so readily in or nigh unto
Bethabara, and brought him unto Christ, neither of whom he then commanded to
follow him as disciples, although he entertained them at the place of his
abode, where they heard such gracious words, as it ravished Saint Augustine to
think what it was that they might hear. What a blessed day did they pass? what
a blessed night (said he)? who is able to tell us what things they were which
they heard of the Lord? In Johan. Tract. 8. Saint Philip therefore had the
honor and prerogative to be first called by Christ's own mouth immediately to
be his disciple: The history of Nathaniel.
he diligently sought and found Nathaniel, whose name by interpretation is
donum Dei, the gift of God. And because there is no further mention made of him
under that name in the new Testament, but only here, and in St. Ioh. 21.2.
where it is said, that he was of Cana in Galilee; it is diversely conjectured
who he might be, whether Simon called also the Cananite: Act. 7.56.
or Saint Stephen the protomartyr, because that Christ promised that he should
see heaven open, which Saint Stephen did in the act of his Martyrdom: or some
master in Israel, such a one as Nichodemus was, learned in the law and in the
prophets, who being a Rabbi was not chosen an Apostle, (although he always
continued a disciple) because that he would not make choice of the learned, but
of the unlearned, to convert the world, as Aquinus says: S. Mat. 10.3. S. Mar.
3.18. S. Luc. 6.14.
or not rather Saint Bartholomew, because that Saint Philip and Saint
Bartholomew are coupled together, so often as the Apostles are recited by name.
Whatsoever he was, it seems he was not altogether ignorant of the Scriptures,
as neither was Saint Philip himself. And therefore he told him, that they had
found him (the Messiah) of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets did write,
and that the same was Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.

Messiah, and had often reasoned together concerning him, consulting the law
and the prophets. Nathaniel denies not that the Messiah was then to be found,
and might then also be found according to Moses and the prophets: but he
diffideth the person of him whom they had found. Not in respect of his
condition, whom it is likely that he knew; but of his person, that Jesus of
Nazareth could not be He, for that no prophet, and therefore not that great
prophet, was ever promised to come out of Nazareth. Besides that the place of
his birth was evidently foretold to be Bethlehem in the land of Judah, by the
prophet M cah. Mic. 5.2.
He had not read, (I believe) or else had forgotten at that time, that which
was spoken by the prophets, S. Mat. 2.23.
that he should be called a Nazaren. This made him to demand, saying, Can any
good thing come out of Nazareth? He did not believe that any prophet, and much
less that great prophet, should come out from thence. Saint Philip inviteth
him to come, and to see, namely to trust his own eyes by seeing, and his own
ears by hearing him. Nathaniel readily obeyed him, and coming toward Jesus
received this elogium or illustrious commendation from his own mouth, Behold
an Israelite indeed, an Israelite not in show and appearance, but in deed and
in truth: the carnal seed, the spiritual seed of Abraham; in whom there is no
guile; he does not say, in whom there is no sin, but in whom there is no guile:
who has spoken plainly, sincerely, and from his heart, what he has doubted
and disputed concerning me. Nathaniel perceived by this that Jesus knew him,
outwardly, inwardly, by his face externally, and much more by his heart
internally; and therefore demanded saying, (...); whence know thou me?
whence have thou that knowledge of me, that thou can know my heart? Christ
told him, that he had it of himself, and that he had observed him before that
Saint Philip called him, when he was under the fig tree, (reading the
Scriptures, it is likely, or at his prayers and devotions.) Nathaniel is
hereupon convinced, acknowledges him to be the son of God, and the promised
Messiah. Christ accepts his confession, promises him a more full and perfect
knowledge of himself, and that he should see greater things then these, in time
convenient, for that he together with others should see heaven open, and the
Angels of God ascending and descending upon him. Intimating thereby his
resurrection, and ascension into heaven, with the ministry and attendance of
Angels. The day following, S. Joh. 1.43, 44, 45,
Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and finds Philip, and says unto him,
Follow me. Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. Philip
finds Nathaniel, and says unto him, We have found him, of whom Moses in the
law, and the prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. And
Nathaniel said unto him, 46
Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip says unto him, Come and
see. Jesus saw Nathaniel coming to him, and says of him, Behold an Israelite
indeed, in whom is no guile. Nathaniel says unto him, 47,
Whence know thou me? Jesus answered and said unto him, Before that Philip
called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee. 48,
Nathaniel answered and says unto him, Rabbi, thou art the son of God, thou
art the king of Israel. Jesus answered and says unto him, Because I said unto
thee, 49,
I saw thee under the fig tree, 50, 51.
believe thou? thou shall see greater things then these. And he says unto
him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and
the angels of God ascending and descending upon the son of man.

Galilee, but upon the third day following, Christ present at the marriage in
Cana.
which was the sixth day of the month of January, there was a marriage in Cana of
Galilee; a city of Galilee, distant from Jerusalem sixty eight miles toward
the north, called Cana of Galilee, for distinctions sake, because there was
another Cana which stood upon the borders of Tyrus and Sidon in the tribe of
Asser; S. Mat. 15.22. S. Mar. 7.24.
of which the Syrophenician woman was, whose daughter Christ healed. Who they
were who were then coupled together in wedlock, is not said. The bridegroom, or
bride, or both, were doubtless of the acquaintance or kindred of the blessed
virgin, and, if any of her kindred, then allied unto Jesus too, according to
the flesh. At this marriage the mother of Jesus was, and that by solemn
invitation, according to Saint Chrysostom, and by the like invitation Jesus
himself and his disciples, those few disciples who made him their Master, and
did adhere unto him; especially those four which are named, Saint Andrew,
Saint Peter, Saint Philip, and Nathanael, with him that is not named. Although
at that time, Saint Philip only was properly his disciple, S. Joh. 1.43.
as being only called to the discipleship, sequere me, follow me. Ecce inter
caetera filius virginis venit ad nuptias, qui cum apud patrem esset, instituit
nuptias. Behold among other things the son of the virgin comes unto the
marriage, who when he was with the Father instituted marriage, says Saint
Augustine. He had honored marriage, 1st By divine institution, having made it
his own ordinance. 2ly By the place of primary solemnization, the garden of
paradise. 3ly By the parties first joined together in wedlock, Adam and Eve in
the state of innocence. 4ly By his own incarnation; for he was pleased to be
born in wedlock. Now finally he would honor it by his own most gracious
presence, and the miracle that he would do, to the end that he might manifest
his own glory, and that his disciples might believe on him.

blessed virgin perceived the defect, and that it would not be sufficient for
the feast, she then told him of it, (for she that pondered all things in her
heart ever since the first moment of his conception, thought it not fit to
conceal from him that which she believed he could and would remedy, by his
divine power and providence) vinum non habent, they have no wine, says she,
privately, and that others might not be conscious to what she said. Jesus
replied, that he had no need to be told by her, for that he had designed a time
for the doing of that which should be convenient to be done. The blessed virgin
did not sin by interceding in the behalf of the new married couple, nor did
she ask any thing that was unlawful for her to ask, God forbid. Therefore he
did neither reprehend her, nor reject her; The virgin neither reprehended nor
rejected.
but told her, that although it did nothing concern either him or her to take
care of the wine: although he had nothing to do with her as touching her care
for the bridegroom, and for the guests, (for the words (...), will excellently
carry both senses, What is that to me and to thee? what have I to do with
thee?) yet that he had a time of his own prefixing, which when it should come,
he would then do that which should be fittest to be done. Upon which answer she
conceives good hope, and therefore says unto the servants, Whatsoever he says
unto you, do it. The Jews had many washings and purifications by water,
according to the tradition of the elders, for which use at that time there were
set there six water pots of stone, after the manner of the purifying of the
Jews, containing two or three (some two, some three) metretae measures, or
firkins a piece, in the whole according to some, one hundred sixty and eight
gallons and three quarts or thereabouts, (but these men seem to be too
punctual, unless they would say how many of those water pots held two
metretae, and how many three) others do cast up the reckoning at four hundred
and fifty gallons. But to dispute the quantity, will be more difficult I
suppose then profitable. Jesus commanded the servants to fill those water pots
with water, and they in obedience to his command filled them up to the brim. By
this he would declare the verity and truth of his miracle, and take away all
cavills. They were water pots, not wine vessels, lest any one should think,
that the wine dregs or lees left in the bottom, might give both taste and
tincture to the water. They were water pots of stone, set or fixed in their
places, made and placed there, for no other use but to contain water. Therefore
(...), he says unto them, he commands the same servants that filled them,
and that immediately, to draw out and bear to the Architriclinus or ruler of
the feast, Architriclinus.
a steward chosen of purpose for the present time and occasion, to whom it
belonged to take care of the wine, and to proportionate what wine, and how much
should be spent, also to praetaste the same, to the end that only good and
wholesome wine might be set before the guests; to command the servants, and to
order the feast every way. Therefore when the servants brought this wine, and
told him that it had not been given unto the guests before; the steward
according to his office tastes it, and not knowing the miracle, called the
bridegroom, praising and commending the wine, and telling him, that he had kept
the best wine till the last, a course not usually taken by other men. And this
was the first of his miracles publicly wrought, Christ his first miracle.
and before the people, to manifest his glory, and that his Disciples might
believe on him; although peradventure secretly, privately, and out of the sight
of men, he had done some miracles before, for divine ends, and had fasted forty
days, and forty nights, which quoad substantiam operis, in as much as
concerns the substance of the work done, was a miracle, and not the least.
And the third day (says the text) there was a marriage in Cana, S. Joh. 2.1.2,
3,
a town of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there. And both Jesus was ca
led, and his Disciples to the marriage. And when they wanted wine, the mother
of Jesus says unto him, 4
they have no wine. Jesus says unto her, Woman what have I to do with thee?
mine hour is not yet come. His mother says unto the servants, 5,
whatsoever he says unto you, do it. And there were set there six water pots
of stone, after the manner of the purifying of the Jews, 6,
containing two or three firkins a piece. Jesus says unto them, fill the water
pots with water, and they filled them up to the brim. And he says unto them,
7, 8,
Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the feast, and they bare it.
When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine, and knew
not whence it was (but the servants which drew the water knew) the governor of
the feast called the bridegroom, 9,
and says unto him, Every man at the beginning does set forth good wine, and
when men have well drunk, then that which is worse: hut thou have kept the
good wine until now. 10,
This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth
his glory, and his disciples believed on him. 11.


miracles, and the causes of them; for so much as the miracles of Christ do
belong to his administration of the covenant in the flesh. Concerning miracles
what they are.
Miracles are (...) admirations, because they strike the hearts of men with
wonder and amazement. They are (...), portents or prodigies. They are (...)
signs and significations of Gods divine power and presence. They are (...).
virtues, powers: the effects of divine virtue and power. They are (...) violent
and efficacious effects besides, above, or against nature. There be in art many
wonderful and admirable things, which yet have been done by art, and seem
incredible! the Babylonian Gardens, the Egyptian Pyramides, the lake of Myris,
the stately tomb of Mausolus, the temple of Ephesus, the inventions of
Archimedes, and such like. But for as much as they did not utterly and
absolutely exceed all humane power and skill, nor yet were besides, above, or
against nature, they were great and wonderful works indeed: they were not
miracles. There be many strange portents, and prodigies in nature, monstrous
births, dreadful comets and apparitions in the air, which though wonderful in
our sight, yet because they do not utterly and absolutely transcend nature, and
because that some Philosophical cause or reason may be assigned for them,
quoad rem and substantiam rei, in as much as concerns the thing it self, and
the substance of it, they are not miracles. Miracles therefore which are
miracles indeed, quoad rem and substantiam rei, are either besides nature,
which is when there is an immutation of that order which nature observes by a
perpetual law, for the producing of the miracle. For so the sun and moon stood
still at the word of Josuah at one time; and at another time the sun went
back ten degrees, for a sign to Hezechia. Or else secondly, Jos. 10.13. Isa.
38.8. S. Joh. 9* 7.
they are above nature, which is when such an effect is immediately produced
which nature cannot bring forth, as when a blind man is immediately (though
born blind) made to see. Or when he that is lame from his mothers womb, is
presently, Act. 3.7.
and without the application of any external means made to go. Or thirdly,
contrary to nature, as when the fire which yet had its natural disposition to
burn, could neither burn nor cinge the garments of the three children, though
it had slain those that took them up. Dan. 3.27.
Nor the Lions rend or devour Daniel, which had the mastery of his accusers,
and brake all their bones in pieces, Dan. 6.24.
or ever they came at the bottom of the den. The Devils, and by their
instigation wicked men, have their (...), and quoad rem, and substantiam rei,
they have done, and can do miracles. The enchanters of Egypt did the same
things that Moses and Aaron did; Exodus 7 12, 22.
for they cast down their rods, and they became Serpents. They turned the
Rivers into blood. They caused the frogs to come up, and to cover the land of
Egypt. Exodus 8.7.^ 2 These. 2.9.
And the coming of Antichrist must be (as St. Paul says) after the working of
Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders. With true miracles, if the
thing it self or substance of the thing be respected, not in appearance only,
and by imposture, ( he shall work miracles, says Hippolytus, by cleansing the
leapers, by raising the paralytick, by casting out Devils, and it may be so)
but yet lying wonders, because directed to an undue end, and to av cuchlies.

Miracles therefore, which are true miracles, omnibus suis numeris perfect in
all parts and numbers, True miracles, and the causes of them. The efficient
cause.
and which are contradistinguished to lying miracles, must be known and
distinguished by the true and proper causes of them. For first the efficient
cause is God himself. And God does miracles two manner of ways; mediately or
immediately. Mediately by his servants, the Prophets and Apostles, and others
also to whom the power of working miracles has been concredited. Hitherto
refer all those miracles which Moses did in the land of Egypt, in the red Sea,
and in the wilderness. That Josuah divided the river Jordan, to open a passage
for the people of Israel into the land of promise. That at the sound of the
trumpets of rams horns, the walls of Hiericho fell flat to the ground. That at
his command the sun, and the moon stood still, for the space of a day. That
Elijah and Elisha raised the dead to life again. Hitherto also are to be
referred all those miracles which were done by the Apostles, and primitive
believers. A gift which Christ gave unto his Church to serve for a time. These
signs shall follow them that believe. S. Mar. 16.17
In my name they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues:
They shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not
hurt them: they shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover. 18.
His immediate miracles are properly said to be the creation of the world: the
divine and wonderful preservation of it: but above all, the redemption of all
mankind by Christ. In which work there are three sorts of miracles. Some, in
persona mediatoris, in the person of the mediator himself, such is that union
of natures which is not natural, S. Joh. 1.14.
the word made flesh: God and man hypostatically united in one person; the
hypostaticall union. Some, propter personam mediatoris, for the person of the
mediators sake. Such was that wonderful birth which was of a woman, Isa. 7.14.
without a man, and she a pure virgin too. Some, ab ipsa persona mediatoris,
from the person of the mediator himself: and such were all those miracles which
Christ did, coming in the flesh by divine dispensation, S. Joh. 20.30, 31.
which are written by the Evangelists, and many more then are written of him.

matter of Christ his miracles, in qua, in which they were, it was the diverse
miseries and calamities of men, The matter of Christ's miracles.
sickness, blindness, lameness, hunger, death, and such like, for the amoving
whereof miracles were done, by curing the sick, by giving sight to the blind,
by restoring limbs to the lame, by feeding the hungry, by raising the dead.
The matter of his miracles, ex qua, from which they did proceed, it was his own
divine power, the true and proper cause whereby all his divine miracles were
effected. S. Luc. 11.20
The matter of his miracles, circa quam, about which they were wrought, it was
the kingdom of Satan which he would destroy, and the sins of men which he would
remit. Satan like a strong man armed, kept his palace, and his goods were in
peace; till Christ a stronger then he came upon him, and took from him all his
armor wherein he trusted, even all his (...), and all his (...), his lying
wonders and miracles, by his own miracles, whereby he was declared mightily to
be the son of God, and so divided his spoils, S. Luc. 11.22
as to deliver the sinful souls of men out of his captivity.

formal cause of his divine miracles, quoad modum operandi, The formal cause.
in as much as concerns the manner of operation, is very various. Sometimes
he wrought his miracles by curing diseases only by his word, S. Mat. 9.2. S.
Mat. 8.13
if the party were present, as the paralytick man. Or if the party were absent,
as the Centurions servant. Sometimes he wrought his miracles by curing diseases
by his word, together with a touch of his hand, as in the leper: S. Mat. 8.13.
and sometimes by permitting the sick, and diseased to touch him, as once he
did the woman who was diseased of an issue of blood twelve years. Sometimes he
makes use of means, and things natural, S. Mat. 9.22.
for effecting of his divine miracles above nature. For once with five loaves
and two fishes only, he fed above five thousand men, besides women and
children, so that they did all eat, and were filled. Once also with seven
loaves, and a few little fishes, S. Mat. 14.20
he fed about four thousand men, besides women and children, so that they did
all eat and were filled. S. Mat. 15.37
If it were natural to be fed and satisfied with bread and fish, as by means
and things natural, the miracle was in the proportion: it was miraculous to
feed and satisfy so great a multitude with so small a quantity. Sometimes he
makes use of means, and things not natural or proper, it was when he made
clay, and anointed the eyes of him that was born blind, who having washed in
the pool of Siloam, received his sight. S. Joh. 9.7.


Christ his miracles in respect of the final cause, or ends for the two
purposes: The final cause.
for the glory of God; and for the utility and profit of men. I say, first for
the glory of God. For we read in the Gospel, that when he had cured him that
was sick of the palsy, and had also remitted his sins, saying, Thy sins be
forgiven thee. Howsoever some of the Scribes said within themselves, This man
blasphemeth: (because he attributed that unto himself, being but a mere man, as
they supposed, which belongs only unto God: namely to forgive sin, according
to that of the Prophet, I, Isa. 43.25.
even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake) yet when
the multitude saw it, they marvelled, and glorified God, S. Mat. 9.8.
which had given such power unto men. Certainly Maldonats note upon the place
is not amiss: Observation.
That like as the divinity of Christ, communicated to his humanity, the power
of doing miracles; Even so the power is dirived from Christ the head, unto the
ministers of his Church to forgive sins. Christ is the Lord, he as God has the
key of authority; to remit sins, tum quod culpam, tum quod poenam, as well in
respect of the fault and guiltiness of sin, as also of the consequent
punishment due unto the same, as God and man he has the key of excellency to
remit sins upon his own merit. His ministers have a ministerial key, to remit
sins in the name, and by the power of Christ. For, was this spoken by Christ,
and written by St. Matthew for our Instruction? Has God given such power unto
men, as to pronounce the pardon of sin to the sick man in his bed? Is the
doctrine of confession and absolution, agreeable as well to the Scriptures, as
also to the practice of the Church both present, and primitive? then may every
one who is a minister of the word and sacraments, (a priest in sacred orders)
rightly and duly ordained to his office and function, (upon good information of
faith and repentance) say to the sick sinner in his bed, thy sins are forgiven
thee. Or, by his authority committed unto me, I absolve thee from all thy sins
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. For
absolution as well private as public, belongs principally, yea properly, and
by virtue of his office, to the minister, as Christ his Ambassador in his
ministerial function. But of this we dispute no farther, but return again to
the

Christ's his miracles for the glory of God upon three respects
Christ his miracles were wrought for the glory of God, more particularly upon
three respects: 1st Because that Christ is thereby mightily declared to be the
son of God, and the promised Messiah. Saint John the Baptist did no miracles:
therefore when he sent two of his disciples unto Christ to ask him this
question, saying, S. Mat. 11.3.
Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another? he pleads his
miracles in evidence of his divinity, The blind (says he) receive their sight,
and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised
up, and the poor have the Gospel preached unto them. As if he should say, I
who do all these things, and am preached to be him; who else am I but the son
of God, and the promised Messiah? 2ly Because the doctrine of the gospel is
thereby confirmed. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me; S.
Joh. 14.11
or else believe me for the very works sake. We read, that when God offered a
sign or miracle unto king Ahaz, to the end that he might believe the words
which were spoken unto him by the mouth of the prophet Isaias, he refused,
saying, I will not ask, Isa. 7.12. Judge. 6.17.37, 39. S. Mat. 16.4.
neither will I tempt the Lord. Gideon required a sign or miracle, and he had
it more then once or twice. The Pharisees required a sign, and are sharply
reproved, and the sign denied. Thus their actions agreed not unto their ends.
Ahaz out of pride, 2 King. 16.
or peradventure out of that trust and confidence which he reposed in the
strength and power of Tiglath Pileser king of Assyria, refused the miracle; and
to contemn or refuse a sign or miracle when God shall offer it, is a sin. The
Pharisees were a generation of proud hypocrites, who had before hand set up a
resolution not to believe on him, whatsoever he should say, or whatsoever he
should do: therefore when they require a miracle, out of pride and curiosity,
they are condemned and rejected. But Gideon in his humility did ask a sign,
for the confirmation of his faith in the promise of God. It is no example for
us now; for the gospel is sufficiently confirmed by miracles, we must believe,
and have recourse unto the ordinary signs: the sacred and mysterious
sacraments. To refuse or contemn them is the sin of Ahaz. Lastly they make for
the glory of God, because thereby he breaks the serpents head, and destroys
his kingdom. Satan erecteth his kingdom among men by his works. When the
Jews boasted that they were the seed of Abraham, and the sons of God, Christ
told them, that the devil was their father, S. Joh. 8.48. 1 John 3.8.
because they did their father's lusts. The lusts of the devil are his works,
but Christ has destroyed them. He destroyed them by his miracles, for he cast
out devils, he purified the minds of men, he remitted sins, he raised the
dead; nay he himself dyed and rose again, Romans 6.9, 10, 11.
to the end that we also should die unto sin by virtue of his death, and rise
again unto newness of life, by virtue of his most blessed and glorious
resurrection. So the glory of God was the primary, and more principal end of
his Divine miracles.

But the Secundary and less principal end was the utility The secundary or
less principal end.
who had the present benefit, and were healed, and cured, and were raised from
the dead; for sickness and death being the effects of sin, they were hereby
taught to believe, and to hope for greater mercies. The wages of sin is death,
the bodily death, the spiritual death, with all manner of sicknesses and
diseases of the body, tending to the bodily death; and with all manner of
sicknesses and diseases of the soul, as grief, anger, anguish, horror,
dread, presumption, desperation, tending to the spiritual death. Add here,
all those evils in the city which the Lord has done; by war, by pestilence,
by famine; also all private crosses and losses, in the particular goods and
estates of men. But the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our
Lord. 2ly For the Church, Romans 6.23.
and for all her members generally, and that first, to the end that if any man
be sick or diseased, he may look up unto Christ the true physician. He that
has wrought all his Divine miracles, immediately and mediately; He that has
wrought his miracles in all the miseries and calamities of men; He that has
wrought all his miracles by his own divine power and virtue; He that wrought
his miracles to destroy the kingdom of Satan, and did remit the sins of men;
He that wrought his miracles by his word only, to them that were present, to
them that were absent: He that wrought his miracles by his word, together with
a touch of his hand, or by permitting the sick and diseased to touch him: He
that wrought his miracles, sometimes by means and things natural, sometimes by
means and things not natural or proper; It is he who forgiveth all thine
iniquities, Psalm. 103.3.
who heals all thy diseases. 2ly To the end that if any man would have a
strong faith, not to faint or waver in the day of temptation; if he would
believe all the articles of the faith, and all the mysteries of christian
religion faithfully; he should then come to the miracles of Christ. He has
wrought all his miracles for the glory of God. By these he was manifested to be
the son of God and the promised Messiah. By these the doctrine of the gospel
is confirmed. By these the kingdom of Satan is destroyed. Who shall doubt?
who shall waver? who shall faint, having his faith confirmed by so many
wonderful miracles? 3ly To the end that if any man would cleanse his ways (as
holy David counsels his young man to do) by taking heed thereto according to
the word of God; he should then have before his eyes the miracles of Christ. To
pray to him that opened the blind eyes, that he would open the eyes of his
understanding, to behold the wonderful things of his law; that he may see his
own sinful condition which is by nature, the mercy of God, and the merits of
Christ, to the end that he may know him, Phil. 3.10.
and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being
made conformable to his death. For the excellency of which knowledge-sake,
Saint Paul accounted all things but loss. To pray to him that restored feet to
the lame, that he would turn his feet out of every evil way, lest he walk in
the counsel of the ungodly, to tread in the paths of pride with the proud, of
covetousness and voluptuousness with the covetous and voluptuous. To pray to
him that opened the deaf ears, thar he would open his ears, so as that he may
hear, and be obedient unto his most holy and most blessed word: Seeing not the
hearers only, Romans 2.13.
but they that hear it and do it, shall be justified. To pray to him that cast
out devils, that he would cast out the suggestions and first motions of sin,
whereby the devil is in every one of us, for that all they who receive those
first motions and suggestions with delight and consent unto them, and reduce
them into act, and persevere in the act without repentance, have fulfilled the
lusts of the flesh, having nothing else to expect in their hardness and
impenitent heart, but that dreadful doom denounced by Saint Paul, Gal. 5.21.
They which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Finally to
pray to him that raised the dead to life again, S. Joh. 11.43.
and called Lazarus out of his grave, saying, Lazarus come forth: that he would
so raise him from the death of sin, unto a life of righteousness in this world;
that when the trump shall blow, and the graves shall open, and the earth
surrender, and the vast and huge seas yield forth those whom they have
devoured, he may then see God in the land of the living, being raised to life
immortal by him, S. Joh. 11.25.
who is the resurrection and the life,

Cana of Galilee, and the nuptial solemnities being ended; Jesus went directly
to Capernaum. Jesus goes to Capernaum.
It was a great mart town, pleasantly situated by the sea of Tiberias, and was
the metropolis of Galilee, having commerce with Tyrus and Zidon, which were
distant from it about forty and four miles; and Capernaum it self was from
Jerusalem about fifty and six miles, in the tribe of Issachar, being supposed
to be the meditullium of the twelve tribes, S. Mat. 9.1.
and is said to be his own city, because he came often thither, preached, and
did many great works there. Hither he came, accompanied with his mother, his
brethren, and his disciples. And because the feast of the passover drew near,
and he himself intended to go up to Jerusalem, and to be there at that feast,
to the end that he might manifest himself there, by his divine doctrine, and
by his miracles; he stayed not many days in Capernaum at that time, but
departed from thence with his disciples. They were yet his disciples but by
agnition and familiarity, he intended to have them to be his disciples by
vocation and by adhaesion, A threefold adm^ssion of the disciples.
and then to go up to Jerusalem attended by them. The order of the Evangelists
therefore must be observed. Saint John says, After this, (this his first
miracle so wrought, and the nuptial solemnities ended) he went down to
Capernaum, he and his mother, and his brethren, and his disciples, (who were
admitted to be his disciples by knowledge of him, and by acquaintance and
familiarity with him) and they continued there not many days. And the Jews
passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. S. Joh. 2.12, 13.
But first his disciples were gone to employ themselves in their own
profession, for they were fishers. S. Mar. 1.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. S. Mat. 1.18,
19, 20, 21,
Therefore Jesus (as Saint Matthew says, and with him Saint Mark almost
totidem verbis) walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called
Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, (for they were
fishers.) And he says unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of
men. And they straightway left their nets and followed him. And going on from
thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son of Zebedee, and John his
brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father, mending their nets: and he called
them. And they immediately left the ship, 22.
and their father, and followed him. They followed him, yet not so, but that
they returned again to their ships and nets to fish, and to acquire a
livelihood for themselves and for their families, though he had called them to
be his disciples. S. Luc. 5 1,
And it came to pass (after this) that as the people pressed upon him to hear
the word of God, he stood by the lake of Genezareth. 2
And saw two ships standing by the lake, but the fishermen were gone out of
them, and were washing their nets. 3,
And he entered into one of the ships which was Simons (whom before he had
called to the discipleship) and prayed him that he would thrust out a little
from the land: and he sat down and taught the people out of the ship. Now when
he had left speaking, 4,
he said unto Simon, Lanch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a
draught. And Simon answering, said unto him, Master, 5,
we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing; nevertheless at thy
word I will let down the net. And when they had this done, they enclosed a
great multitude of fishes, and their net brake. 6,
And they beckoned unto their partners which were in the other ship, that they
should come and help them. 7, 8,
And they came and filled both the ships, so that they began to sink. When
Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus feet, saying, Depart from me, 9,
for I am a sinful man, O Lord. For he was astonished and all that were with
him, at the draught of the fishes which they had taken. 10,
And so was also James and John, the sons of Zebedee, which were partners with
Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon, Fear not, from henceforth thou shall catch
men. 11.
And when they had brought their ships to land, they forsook all, and followed
him.

Hebrew tongue (as venerable Bede observes) every gathering together of waters
is called a Sea, be they sweet or salt. Hence the sea of Galilee, The sea of
Galilee.
which was little more then four miles broad, and in length from the north to
the south not above twelve miles, obtains the name of a sea. The sea of
Galilee, because it bordered upon Galilee. The sea of Tiberias, from the city
Tiberias that stood upon the shore of it. The lake of Genezareth, whether so
called, a crispantibus aquis, because the waters of that sea or lake, are
continually moved, and as it were curled by the wind; if not rather from the
pleasantness and fruitfulness of the soil, lying upon the north side of it.
The water of this sea is said to be very sweet and pleasant, abounding with
fish, for which cause many fishers inhabited thereabouts, had boats, and caught
great store of fish. These things therefore being thus transacted at the sea of
Galilee, and when the disciples who were called before, seeing the miraculous
draught of fishes, and receiving his promise that from thenceforth they should
catch men, had forsaken all to be his disciples by adhesion: Then Jesus goes
up to Jerusalem Christ goes up to Jerusalem.
to the passover. It was the second passover after his baptism, and in the
one and thirtieth year of his age. And being come thither, he first of all
visits his Fathers House, He visits the temple.
finds it sacrilegiously polluted and profaned, a market was kept there,
sheep, oxen, and doves were sold, and money was exchanged in the temple. This
market was not kept in the temple it self, if by the temple you understand the
sanctuary and other sacred places, where divine offices were performed; nor in
Solomon's porch, which was the court of those that were clean; nor in that
spacious and beautiful court built by Herod, into which the Gentiles might
come to do their devotions; therefore called vestibulum gentium, the porch or
outward court of the gentiles. But yet, within the sept or verge of the temple,
upon holy ground, within the outermost enclosure; for the temple is the
sanctuary, and all that which is enclosed with it. Nor was this market weekly
or monthly, but once a year, and at the passover; nor yet were the oxen, and
sheep, and doves, bought or sold for common and ordinary, but only for sacred
and religious uses.

market was this, the Jews were bound to feast before the Lord in the place
which he should choose to put his name there; thither therefore must they bring
the tithe of their corn, of their wine, and of their oil, and the firstlings
of their herds and flocks. But because this could not be done by those that
came from far, it was indulged unto them to bring up money, and to bestow it
there on those things which they should have brought up by the law, as is plain
to be seen, Deuteronomy. 14. Deuteronomy. 14.23, 24, 25, 26.
Now to the end that they might have these things at hand, and no other but
such as had been first inspected by the priests, and had obtained approbation
and allowance from them, to be such as were warranted by the law to be brought
and offered to God; And to the end that they who came out of foreign parts,
might not be destitute of current coin, therefore the mony-changers had their
tables, and did sit there. And this was the occasion of that market in the
temple, (which when it began first so to be profaned we do not find.) A thing
doubtless both good and necessary, had it not been in the temple: but God who
is jealous of his worship, is no less jealous of the place of his worship. He
will not hold him guiltless that shall profane his name, neither will he hold
him guiltless, who shall profane the place which is dedicated to the honor of
his name. Therefore when he had driven them all out of the temple with a
scourge of small cords, and the sheep and the oxen, and poured out the changers
money, and overthrown the tables; thereby manifesting his divine power and
pleasure which no creature is able to resist, (for we need not think that it
was the fame of that miracle which he wrought in Cana, or any other miracle, or
the opinion which they had of him for that miracles sake; or any extraordinary,
fyery, or sidereous brightness or sparkeling in his eyes or face, that made
them not to lift up a hand against him) and thereby given occasion unto his
disciples, Psalm 69.9.
either then or at some other time, most likely after his resurrection, to
remember that it was written of him in the book of Psalms, The zeal of thine
house has ea^en me up. I say then he commanded them to be only taken away, not
condemning the market nor the merchandise, but only the holding of the market
in that place (...) make not my fathers house an house of merchandise. S. Joh.
2.13, 14,
And the Jews passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. And
found in the temple those that sold oxen, and sheep, 15,
and doves, and the changers of money fitting. And when he had made a scourge of
small cords, he drove them all out of the Temple, 16, 17.
and the sheep and the oxen, and poured out the changers money, and overthrew
the tables, And said unto them that sold doves, Take these things hence, make
not my Fathers house an house of merchandise. And his disciples remembered that
it was written, The zeal of thine house has eaten me up.

This which Christ did, sorely startled the Jews, principally the chief
priests and scribes who were of the Synedrion, and had the care of religion,
The Jews offended, require a sign.
and were by their office to see that nothing should be innovated in the
Church, therefore they require him to manifest his authority and extraordinary
mission, by some miracle visibly, and before their eyes; for so came Moses and
the Prophets. Neither is it tolerable that any private person, by his own
private authority should innovate any received rite or custom in the Church.
Therefore if his commission were immediately from God, it was altogether
necessary that he should manifest it by some present miracle. It was that which
he had done, he came with commission from God to purge his temple, and he
manifested that his commission by the miracle which he did. For what greater
miracle, then that one man with a little whip, should drive out so great a
multitude, with the sheep and the oxen, pour out the changers money, and
overthrow the Tables? A greater miracle it was (says Origin) then that whereby
the water was turned into wine, for so much as the matter of that miracle was
inanimate, Christ promises a sign.
but here the wits of many thousands are subdued by miracle. But seeing they
would not see that which was done before their eyes, he tells them that he
would show them the greatest sign; namely that when they should dissolve that
Temple, in three days he would raise it up. Which when the Jews heard, and
thinking that he had spoken of the inanimate temple, they derided him as
Theophylact observes; telling him that the Temple, having respect unto that
very Temple in which they then were (yet not as it was lately raised into that
magnificent structure by Herod, but as builded, and in building by Zorobabel,)
was forty and six years in building. Herod indeed finished his wotk almost in
three years, nay in a year and six months, says Josephus, having provided the
materials in six years and an half before. But the Temple of Zorobabel was
forty and six years in building, 2 Chr. 36.22 Ezr. 1.1.
or thereabouts, if you compute from the first year of Cyrus, when he began
first to reign over the Persians, (although he could then decree nothing
concerning the Jews): but not, if you compute from the one and twentieth year,
which was the first year of his reign over the whole kingdom, he having then
taken in Babylon, and added it to his own kingdom (when he made the
proclamation;) for so you shall find but twenty four years, from the going
forth of the decree in that one and twentieth year, and the Jews licensed to
return, (who presently in the seventh month, set the Altar upon his bases, and
offered thereon the daily sacrifices) to the sixth year of the reign of Darius,
in which year notwithstanding the seventeen years interruption by Cambyses, it
was fully finished. But he spoke not of that Temple, the matter whereof was
wood and stone, but of his own body which properly is that temple in which the
divinity it self dwells by the hypostaticall union; a figure whereof was that
material temple which the Jews had. And indeed had they dissolved that
temple, he could have raised it up in less then three days; he could have
raised it in a moment only by his word. But because they dissolved this Temple,
the temple of his body, he could not by divine dispensation raise it, but in
three days: For the types, and prophecies of the scripture must be fulfilled in
him. It was a parable which the Disciples themselves, to whom he did not then,
nor afterward expound it, understood not till after his resurrection.

How be it at that feast he did many miracles, and for those miracles sake many
believed on him; to whom being persuaded but only by his miracles, he did not
commit himself, because he knew their hearts, and that they were not firmly
rooted, and would peradventure fall off again. Then answered the Jews, S. Joh.
2.18, 19,
and said unto him, what sign showest thou unto us, seeing that thou do
these things? Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and in
three days I will raise it up. Then said the Jews, forty and six years was
this temple in building, 20, 21,
and will thou rear it up in three days? But he spoke of the temple of his
body. When therefore he was risen from the dead, his Disciples remembered that
he had said this unto them: and they believed the Scripture, 22,
and the word which Jesus had said. Now when he was in Jerusalem, at the
passover in the feast day, many believed in his name, 23, 24, 25. Nichodemus
when they saw the miracles which he did. But Jesus did not commit himself unto
them, because he knew all men; and needed not that any should testify of man:
for he knew what was in man. Among these, Nichodemus a Ruler of the Jews, and
a Master in Israel, being attracted by those miracles (which yet are not
written) was one, but was desirous to be further confirmed by his heavenly
doctrine: for, as St. Chrysostom says; They who are more gross, are drawn by
signs, but they who are more rational by prophecies or by doctrine, Apud
Aquin. in Catena. He therefore came unto Jesus by night, acknowledges him to
be a master, and his master, and that he had by his miracles approved himself
to be a teacher come from God. Him Christ instructs wonderfully concerning
the necessity of regeneration; of faith in his death; concerning the love of
God toward the world, and condemnation for unbelief. As it is in the third
chapter of the Gospel by Saint John, from the beginning of the chapter to v.
21. But our sacred History leaves those things to expositers.

The paschall solemnities being ended, Jesus came from Jerusalem Judea, Christ
comes from Jerusalem into Judea, and baptizeth.
together with his Disciples, (...), and staying there some time with them, but
how long it is not mentioned, he baptized, says the text; as if it should say,
he baptized them. For it is congruous, that they who were to administer that
great and venerable Sacrament unto others, should first receive it themselves;
and how could they receive it but of Christ his own hands? They being baptized
by him, baptized others for him, and as his ministers, in no other manner then
they themselves had been baptized by him, in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. This indeed is not expressed in the Scripture, and
I know that many grave and learned Authors both ancient and modern do dissent
from this; some thinking that he baptized none with his own hands; some, that
he baptized only the Apostle St. Peter, and by him the other Disciples; some,
that he baptized all the Apostles, but most probably after his resurrection:
our History is not to dispute these things severally. I think it rightly
deduced from the text, that he baptized with his own hands his Disciples, at
that time in Judea where he then was, though it be not literally expressed that
he did baptize them, no more then it is said particularly where, whom, or how
he did baptize. And this I thought good for the order of our History, to
premonish the Reader: The Apostles themselves (or as many of them as were
called to be his Disciples (for as yet they were not made his Apostles) being
first baptized; then did he dispense his Baptism by their ministry unto
others, baptizing them also in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost. Whereupon much people came and were baptized of them in this
manner. And because the people magnified his baptism, some of the Disciples of
St. John, zealously affected in their masters cause, stood up for his baptism,
(which they feared would by means of this new bap isme be totally neglected)
and disputed with the Jews about purifying; They contending (as St.
Chrysostom says) that the baptism of their master ought to be preferred
before the baptism of Christ's Disciples, as if it had some greater thing:
these (as St. Augustine says) affirming Christ to be the greater, and that
therefore men ought to come unto his baptism. At that time St. John who was
not yet cast into prison, being gone from Bethabara, was baptizing in Aenon,
Aenon.
which was a certain town situate on the west side of the river of Jordan,
forty and two miles from Jerusalem northward, at the distance of two miles
from Salim, another town lying toward the east side of Jordan forty miles off
Jerusalem toward the north, Genesis 33.18.
a place of note, because that Jacob sometimes dwelt there. He went thither to
have the better opportunity of water, for as yet much people came unto his
baptism. To end the controversy, they appeal unto St. John himself, telling
him that the same person who had been with him beyond Jordan at Bethabara, whom
he had baptized, and to whom he bare witness, that he had now separated
himself, instituted a new baptism, and that his Disciples did baptize, and
that men preferred that baptism of theirs before his, and resorted unto him to
be baptized in far greater numbers. For says the text, After these things, S.
Joh. 3.22,
came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judea, and there he tarried with
them, and baptized. And John also was baptizing in Aenon, 23,
near to Salim, because there was much water there: and they came and were
baptized. For John was not yet cast into prison. 24, 25,
Then there arose a question between some of John's disciples and the Jews
about purifying. And they came unto John, and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was
with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, 26.
behold the same baptizeth, and all men come to him. Whereupon Saint John
takes occasion to preach unto them that most excellent Sermon, concerning the
person, merits, and office of Christ, the sum and substance of all the
Evangelicall doctrine, from v. 27. to the end of that third chapter.

And here to the end that our history be not lame, we must lay Christ his
baptism, Concerning Christ his baptism.
and that as well concerning the name, as also touching the thing it self. The
word Baptism is derived from the verb (...), or (...), which is to plunge or
dip into the water; as they do that wash any garment, or themselves. So that
baptism The word Baptism.
according to the meaning of the word, is plunging, dipping, or washing in
water. In the Scripture it is taken sometimes in a common sense, for all manner
of washing and purifying by water: but more especially such as the Jews had,
either by Mosaicall institution, S. Mar. 7.3, 4.
or by Pharisaicall tradition. Sometimes it is taken in a singular or special
sense, and that either metaphorically, so that by baptism is meant the cross,
affliction, martyrdom, S. Mat. 20.22
which is Baptismus sanguinis, the baptism of blood. Or Synecdochically, so
that by baptism is meant the effusion of the visible gifts of God, and the
graces of the holy Ghost, powered forth upon the Apostles; which is baptismus
flaminis, the baptism of the spirit. Sometimes in a most proper and
theological sense and meaning, Act. 1.5.
so that by baptism is meant that great and venerable sacrament of the new
testament, whereby we are initiated in Christ, and consecrated to him: and
wherein we are made members of Christ, children of God, and inheritors of the
kingdom of heaven; which is baptismus fluminis, the baptism of water; S. Mat.
28.19 Baptism defined.
Christ his baptism. It must be defined to be the sacrament of our purgation,
whereby we are received into the Church of God, that we may be numbered with,
and have our inheritance among the children of God. An happy sacrament of our
water, says Tertullian, because the sin of our pristine blindness being
washed off, we are enlarged to everlasting life, lib. de Bapt. cap: 1. The
Jews had their purgations and purifications by water; so had the Gentiles too,
as in the solemnities of Isis or Mithra: but Christ his baptism is the
peculiar washing of us that are christians. Those Leviticall washings which the
Jews had, could not make him clean that was washed, Heb. 9.10.
as touching sin; for so much as they were but carnal ordinances imposed on
them until the time of reformation. The priests of Isis washed four times a
day, and the priests of Methra they washed often; and the more they washed, the
fouler they were. But baptism saves us, (not the putting away of the filth of
the flesh, 1 Pet. 3.21.
but the answer of a good conscience toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ.

external part, and there is the internal part; The parts of Baptism.
that is to say, the outward visible sign, and the inward spiritual grace;
the signum, the sign or seal, and the res signi, the thing of the sign. The
external part, which is the outward visible sign, is applied visibly by the
priest or minister to the party baptized: the internal part, which is the
inward spiritual grace, the thing of the sign, is wrought invisibly in the
party baptized by the holy Ghost. As Saint Austin most excellently to
Bonifacius, Water exhibiting the sacrament of grace without, and the spirit
working the benefit of grace within, loosing the bond of sin, reconciling the
good of nature, do regenerate man in one Christ, generated of one Adam. Epist.
23. That external part, The external part.
or outward visible sign is water; wherein the person baptized is dipped or
sprinkled with it, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. So that the external part or outward visible sign comprehends two
things. 1st The elementary sign, which is water, and nothing else but water.
For, nihil habet rationem sacramenti extra usum a Deo institutum. Sacramental
signs are by divine institution only. Act. 10.47. Ephesians. 5.26.
Water is by divine institution, therefore this sacrament cannot be administered
in wine, or any other liquor. 2ly The ceremonial sign, which is either
immersion, aspersion, or pouring forth the water upon the party baptized; as
they say Saint Lawrence did. Those things which are by accident, vary not the
substance of the sacrament, says Aquinas. Of that nature is dipping,
sprinkling, poureing forth water, in that nothing is prescribed to the
contrary. If it be likely that Saint John the Baptist dipped or plunged those
whom he baptized in the river of Jordan, S. Mat. 3.6. Act. 8.38.
and that Saint Philip baptized the Eunuch in the same manner: it is altogether
as probable, that those three thousand who were baptized by Saint Peter and the
other Apostles in one day, Act. 2 41.
and that at Jerusalem, were not dipped, but sprinkled with water. If any will
object, against the use of our Church which baptizeth by aspersion, the custom
of other Churches which baptize only by immersion, let him learn to know that
which Saint Gregory to Leander a bishop, lays down as a rule, In una fide
nihil officit sanctae ecclesiae consuetudo diversa. So long as the faith be one
and the same, a different custom brings to the holy Church no detriment at
all. The internal part, The internal part.
or thing of the sign, communiter is Christ, for he is res sacramenti, the
thing exhibited in that sacrament, and in every sacrament, and that upon three
principal respects: 1st. In respect of his person, for Christus (...), Christ
God and man is exhibited, as well in regard of his divinity, as of his human
nature. 2ly In respect of his merit, in that the variety and utility of the
death of Christ, whereby he purchased life for us, is propounded and confirmed.
3ly In respect of his benefits, for look what Christ had, and what Christ did,
he sets forth by his sacraments, testifying by the visible signs, that he
had them, and did them for us, which benefits Saint Paul reduces to four
heads, wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30.
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. But the internal part, or
thing of the sign properly, is, 1st. The precious blood of Christ, shed for
the remission of sins, whereby our souls and bodies are so clean washed from
original, and all actual sins, that they shall never be imputed. It is that
blood of sprinckling, Heb. 12.24.
that speaks better things than that of Abel. Abels blood was vox sanguinum,
the voice of blood, and it cried aloud, but it cried for vengeance, Ephesians. 1.7.
not for remission of sins; but the voice of Christ his blood, is remission of
sins. 2ly The spiritual efficacy of the same blood, whereby we are regenerate
and born again, by the mortification of the flesh, and by the vivification or
quickening of the spirit. For these things does God require by the very text
and tenor of his covenant, of all those who are initiated to Christ, and
consecrated, and by the sign or seal of the covenant, Romans 6.3, 4.
do give their names to him. 3ly That near union and conjunction betwixt Christ
and us, whereby we are so joined unto Christ, and Christ to us, that we have
put him on, Gal. 3.27.
and are verily and indeed made partakers of his person, of his merit, and of
all his benefits.

The analogicall and sacramental relation The analogicall or sacramental re
ation.
betwixt the signs and signification, for by a most convenient proportion or
similitude, the water of Baptism does signify the blood of Christ; and the
dipping of the person baptized into that water, or the sprinckling of that
water upon him, the death of the old man, by mortification of the flesh; and
the life of the new man, by the vivification of the spirit. And the communion
of the Baptism of the faithful with Christ, does fitly set forth that near
conjunction which is betwixt Christ and them, in that he also was baptized.
This is a new birth, if we die unto sin, (which is signified and represented
when we are dipped into the water, or when the water is sprinkled upon us; for
then we are as it were laid into the grave, and are given to understand, that
we die unto sin by virtue of Christ his death, who was buried in the grave.)
And if we live unto righteousness, which is signified and represented, when we
are taken up from the water; for then we do as it were rise out of the grave,
and are given to understand again, that we live unto God, by virtue of Christ
his resurrection, Hos. 6.2.
who was raised again from the dead upon the third day. 2ly This analogicall or
sacramental relation consists in obsignation: And that because as well the
verity of that similitude, which is betwixt the sign, and the thing of the
sign, is confirmed; as also because that the power and efficacy of them both,
(in the lawful use of that sacrament) is assured by the seal. For when the
Eunuch said unto St. Philip, See here is water, what does hinder me to he
baptized? Act. 8.36,
to receive a full assurance by the seal? St. Philip said, If thou believe
with all thine heart, thou may? 37.
3ly In Praebition. For the things signified and represented in Baptism, the
same by baptism, are made good unto the person baptized, not by virtue of the
outward act of baptism, ex opere operato, but sacramentally, and by faith. 1.
Because by that sacrament he does exhibit them to the minds of those that
believe, as if they were visibly present. And again, because he does thereby,
as by his own seal, assure them that those things are certainly made good in
the soul, which are showed and promised by the visible sign. When they cried
out to the Apostle St. Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, saying, Men, and
brethren, what shall we do? St. Peter sends them away to the Sacrament of
baptism, saying, Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the
holy Ghost. Act. 2.38.
Rebecca (who was a type of the Church) found Abraham's servant at the well of
water, and the Church it self (as St Augustine says) found Christ at the
sacrament of Baptism.

Baptism was instituted and ordained, For what causes Baptism was ordained.
are either primary and antecedent, or secundary and consequent. The first
respect our faith toward God; the second, our confession before men. Upon the
first respect the end of baptism is, to signify, to seal, and to deliver in a
sacramental manner the remission of our sins, the benefit of our
regeneration, and our union with Christ. I say first, the remission of our
sins: for howsoever it must be affirmed that sin, for so the state of nature
does remain in those that have received remission of sins in baptism, as
touching the matter, the root, and disease of sin; (like the head of an arrow
sticking still in the flesh, though the deadly wound be cured) yet for the
state of the person baptized it is taken away, in as much as concerns the
guilt or form of sin, Act. 2.38.
which is not imputed to the believer. For baptism is given for the remission
of sins. And is (as Tertullian says) The ablution of sins which faith
obtains, sealed up in the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. The benefit of
our regeneration. For being ingraffed into Christ by baptism, 2 Pet. 1.4.
we are made pertakers of the divine nature: (not the divine essence, but
divine qualities, those supernatural graces lost by the fall of Adam, being
restored in us) and we are born again of water, and of the holy Ghost, that so
we may enter into the kingdom of God. S. Joh 3.5. Gal. 3.27. S. Mat. 28.19 2
Cor. 1.12 13. Romans 6.3, 4.
Our union with Christ. For we are baptized into Christ, and into the name of
Christ; and by baptism are buried with Christ: and are baptized into the death
and resurrection of Christ, as the Scripture speaks. 2ly The Sacrament of
baptism was instituted and ordained secundarily and consequently; To be a
testimony of our piety and God, together with the greatest gratitude for his
mercy communicated to us, in and by that Sacrament. To distinctive sign
whereby the Church in all her members may be visibly distinguished from the
idolatrous heathen and unbelieving Jews; and (as Tertullian says) the fishes,
from the Vipers, Apes, and Serpents. De Bapt. cap. 1. Finally, to be a
communion and fellowship which the Church has: and of that mutual love and
charity which all the members of the same, spiritual brethren and sisters by
baptism, are obliged to conserve among themselves. 1 Cor. 12.13
But having observed thus much briefly concerning baptism, we will now proceed
with our Sacred History.

Christ having baptized his Disciples, did then baptize others St. John the
Baptist goes into Galilee.
and great multitudes resorting unto his baptism, this was reported to St.
John the Baptist in such manner and upon such occasion as has been said
before: whereupon St. John, when that he had given ample testimony to the
person, merits, and office of Christ, did then presently, or not long after,
leave off to baptize any longer at Aenon, (for it became him to give place to
his Lord) and departed into Galilee, where he was imprisoned by Herod the
Tetrarch, as shall be showed more at large, when the order of the History shall
lead us to his decollation. But Jesus abode still in Judea, and his Disciples
baptized. He abode there till within four months before harvest: and then to
decline the malice of the Pharisees who maligned his baptism, and the Disciples
which he made and baptized; S. Joh. 4.35
in the month of November he departed to go into Galilee. For says the text,
When therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and
baptized me Disciples then John. (Though Jesus himself baptized not, but his
Disciples) He left Judea, S. Joh. 4.1, 2, 3. Christ's departure out of Judea
into Galilee.
and departed again in o Galilee. But his way lay directly through the country
of Samaria. Now the Samaritans were not Jews, nor did they worship or consent
in religion with the Jews, but were the stock and offspring of those whom
Salmaneser king of Assyria (having carried away the old inhabitants captive,
which were Jews) brought from Babylon, and from Cutha, and from Ava, and from
Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria instead
of the children of Israel. In this Province was the ancient town of Sichem,
then corruptly called Sichar, 2 Kin. 17.24
which name it got as some think, from the drunkenness and deboistness of the
inhabitants; for Sichar being derived of Schachar, signifies to be drunk. Nigh
to this place was that parcel of ground, which Jacob gave unto Joseph his son,
Genesis 48.22 Jos. 24.32.
a portion above his brethren: there was Joseph himself buried. And nigh to
this place was Jacobs well, a well which Jacob made and left to the inhabitants
of the place. To that Well the people of Sichar resorted for water, and Christ
being wearied with his journey, comes thither and sat upon the well about noon
tide, the usual time of refection, his Disciples being gone into the city to
buy meat for their dinners.

The History of the Sam^ritan woman.
of her, he asks water to drink. She perceiving him to be a Jew, demanded of
him why he would ask drink of her that was a Samaritane, seeing that the Jews
and Samaritanes had no converse. Christ hereupon takes occasion expressly to
preach himself to be the Messiah: For said he, If thou knew the gift of God,
and who it is that says unto thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked
of him, S. Joh. 4.10
and he would have given thee living water. The woman objected, (not knowing
what it was that he thirsted, namely her faith: nor what water it was that he
had to give, namely his Spirit; but knowing that the Jews did not, would not,
use the same vessels with the Samaritans) that he had nothing of his own to
draw the water with, and that the well was deep, from whence then could he have
that living water? 11,
That the water of any other fountain could not be better, nor more abundant,
seeing that for the goodness of it, Jacob himself, and his children drank
thereof, and were well content therewith; and for the abundance, he had enough
there for all his cattle. From whence she infers, that he who will pretend
to have any such living water, must make himself to be greater then Jacob.
Christ did not say in express terms, that he was greater then Jacob, 12,
but infers it from the woman's own argument, because he had better water to
give. For, says he, whosoever drinks of this water shall thirst again; But
whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, 13,
shall never thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a
well of water springing up into everlasting life. 14,
The woman thinking that he had spoken of some material water which he had to
give, does now her self thirst for that water, 15, 16,
saying, Sir, give me this water that I thirst not, neither come hither to
draw. Jesus says unto her, Go, call thy husband, and come hither: as if he
should say, that I may give it unto you both. 17,
The woman told him, that she had no husband. He tells her; that she said
truly, for she had five husbands before, but this with whom she did now
cohabit, 18, 19,
was not her husband. The woman thereupon affirms him to be a Prophet, Sir, I
perceive that thou art a Prophet: questions him concerning divine things; and
first of all, concerning the peculiar place of divine worship, whether the
temple at Jerusalem, where the Jews still worshipped, or the Anti-temple which
had been upon mount Garizim, where the Samaritans worshipped in times past,
before that temple was destroyed by John called Hircanus, high Priest of
Jerusalem (Vid. Joseph. antiq. lib. 11. 20.
) were that proper place where men ought to worship. He answered the question
aenigmatically, reproves the ignorance of the Samaritan-worship, tells her,
that salvation is of the Jews, and what is the true Evangelicall worship. The
woman tells him, v. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, v. 31, 32, 33,
34, 35, 36, 37
that the things concerning Gods worship, shall be fully regulated by the
Messiah. Christ tells her plainly, that he is the Messiah. Then came the
Disciples, and they marvelled that he talked with a woman. The woman leaves her
water pot, and goes into the city to call her neighbors to come forth, and to
see the Messiah; mean while the Disciples pray him to eat: he eats not, but
declares unto them his zeal to Gods glory. The woman made relation to the
Samaritans of what Christ had told her, 38, 39.
and many of them believed on him before they saw him. But when they were come
unto him, they besought him that he would tarry with them, and he abode with
them two days. And many more believed because of his own word, commended the
woman highly, v. 40 41, 42
and make a lively confession of their faith. A most remarkable History,
wherein the learned Fathers do find many excellent, and most profound mysteries.

Christ was not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel, S. Mat.
15.24
therefore might he not abide altogether among the Samaritans: it was his great
grace that he vouchsafed to abide with them two days; which being expired, he
left them by his bodily, but not by his spiritual presence, and went into
Galilee, Jesus comes into Galilee.
but not to Nazareth at that time: for he had testified, S. Mat. 4.13. S. Joh.
4.44,
that a Prophet has no honor in his own country. Then when he was come into
Galilee, the Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he did at
Jerusalem, at the feast: for they also went unto the feast. And first he goes
directly to Cana of Galilee, 45,
where he made the water wine. During the time of his abode there, (...), 46.
Heals the Rulers son by his word. St. Luc. 8.3.
a certain noble man, ruler, or courtier (probably Chuza Herod's steward, whose
wife Joanna was one of those believing women, who ministered unto him of their
substance) when he heard that Jesus was come out of Judea in to Galilee, came
unto him, and invited him to come unto Capernaum, and to heal his son, who was
sick there, and at the point of death. He went not presently down with him, but
cured his son who was dangerously sick of a fever, by the power of his word;
whereupon the ruler believed, and his whole house, as the story is reported at
large by St. John cap. 4. which was not the second miracle that he did, but the
second miracle which he did in Galilee, and was done when he was come thither
out of Judea. Shortly after he went down to Capernaum, v. 54.
and dwelt, or made some longer abode there, as St. Matthew says, who makes no
mention of his going to Cana first: in the mean time preaching the Gospel
wheresoever he came, he went first to Nazareth (which was but eight miles from
Cana), in which city he had been brought up. And as his custom was, went into
the Synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up to read. S Luc. 4.16
And there was delivered unto him the book of the Prophet Isaias, out of which
he read a Text, expounding the same to the admiration of all that heard him;
and although they could not deny the verity of his doctrine, but bare witness
to it, wondering at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth; yet
hecause he did not speak placentious things, they were all filled with wrath,
and thrust him out of the city, and would have brake his neck, as St. Luke
says, cap. 4.

Synagogues therefore were public Congregations, and places consecrated for
religion, and for the public worship and service of God, whither the people
resorted every sabbath day, to hear the law and the Prophets read and
expounded; and the Rector or Ruler of the Synagogue was called (...). Act.
15.21. S. Mar. 5 22
Christ therefore being come from Nazareth into Capernaum, straight way on the
sabbath day entered into the Synagogue and taught. S. Mar. 1.21,
And they were astonished at his doctrine, for he taught them as one that had
authority, and not as the Scribes. And there was in their Synagogue, 22,
a man with an unclean spirit, who hearing him to teach with authority as being
the Lord of Moses, and of all the Prophets, 23, Christ known of the Devils to
be the Messiah. 24,
and he who put his word into their mouth, cried out, saying, let us alone,
what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth, art thou cone to destroy
us? I know thee who thou art, The holy one of God. The Devils therefore knew
him to be the Messiah, though not certainly and without doubting; the knowledge
which they had of him, they had from him. Tantum vero iis innotuit, quantum
voluit; tantum autem voluit, quantum oportuit: says St. Augustine. Civit. Dei,
lib. 9. cap. 22. He was so much known of them as he pleased, and he was pleased
to be known by them, so much as it was fit for them to know him. That is, to
testify of him so far as he pleased that they should, and to obey his word. 25,
And Jesus rebuked him, saying, hold thy peace, and come out of him. And when
the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, 26,
he came out of him. And they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned
among themselves, saying, What thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for
with authority commands he even the unclean spirits, 27,
and they do obey him. And immediately his fame spread abroad (therefore would
he that they should obey his word) throughout all the region round about
Galilee.

As soon as he had wrought the miracle upon the daemoniak Synagogue: Saint
Peter's wives mother healed.
to the end that he might refresh himself, he entered into a certain house,
which was the house of Saint Peter and Saint Andrew, who dwelt together at
Capernaum, and had with him his disciples Saint James and Saint John. There
Saint Peter's wives mother lay sick of a feavour, and anon they tell him of her,
(and besought him for her, says Saint Luke) And he came and stood by (or over)
her, S. Luc. 4.38.
and took her by the hand, and lift her up, and immediately the feavour left
her, and she ministered unto them. S. Mar. 1.31,
She did wash their feet, and served at supper. And at even when the sun did
set, they brought unto him all that were diseased, and them that were possessed
with devils. And all the city was gathered together at the door, 32, 33,
(for then the sabbath was ended when the sun was set, and then it was lawful
for them to flock together to behold his miracles) And he healed many that were
sick, (for many there were which were brought unto him) and cast out many
devils, and suffered not the devils to speak, 34,
because they knew him; or to say that they knew him. For the devils, though
they knew not his divinity, yet as Saint Augustine says, they knew him to be
Christ, because they saw in him all those signs which were foretold by the
Prophets. But he would not receive the devils testimony, because he would
manifest himself to be the Messiah by his own works. Having lodged (as is
evident by the circumstances) that night in Saint Peter's house; in the morning
he rose up a great while before day, and went out and departed into a solitary
place, and there prayed. He needed not to pray, 35,
faith Saint Chrysostom, for it was he who received the prayers of men; but
this he did by dispensation, and to give good example unto u^. And Simon and
they that were with him, namely, 36,
Saint Andrew, Saint James, and Saint John, when it was day, and the sun was
up, followed after him. And when they had found him, 37.
they said un^o him, All men seek for thee, praying him, as it should seem,
that he would return again to Capernaum. S. Luc. 4.42.
The people also sought him, and found him, and stayed him that he should not
depart from them. And he said unto them, Let us go into the next towns, that I
may preach there also, for therefore came I forth. Or, as Saint Luke has it,
S. Mar. 1.38.
I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also; for therefore am I
sent. S. Luc. 4.43.
So he did not return with them to Capernaum, but went about, and preached in
their Synagogues, through out all Galilee, and cast out devils.

Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave S. Mat. 8.18. A Scribe
would follow Christ.
And as they went toward the sea to take shipping, a certain man who was a
scribe, a lawyer, or an interpreter of the law, taking occasion by the present
command, (whether out of hope of gain, out of ambition, or out of good
affection, we cannot determine) offered his attendance, and professed to follow
him, and to be his disciple whithersoever he should go. But Christ minds him
of his present condition, 20,
saying, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the
Son of man has not where to lay his head. Whereby he did not repel him, but
gave him to understand rather, that his disciples must be content to follow him
in poverty, and not to expect any worldly gain by being his disciples, as Saint
Hierom conceives this scribe did. Having made this answer to the scribe, he
calls one to be his disciple, and says unto him, S. Mar. 8.21. Another
called interposeth delay.
Follow me, therefore Saint Matthew says, that he was his disciple, because he
was then made his disciple by vocation. But he desired first to bury his
father, who was then either newly dead, or whom he expected that he could not
live long, by reason of his present weakness or great age. But Christ who did
not discommend his piety toward his father, gives him to understand, that his
disciples must set nothing in competition with the business of their Lord, S.
Luc. 9.60.
saying, Let the dead bury their dead, but go thou and preach the kingdom of
God. There was yet a third that would willingly follow him, but cannot
presently; he would first go home and take leave of his friends there. The
request of a third man. S. Luc. 9.61,
Lord (said he) I will follow thee; but let me first go bid them farewell which
are at home in my house. To whom he replied, that his disciples must plow in
the field of God, and to the end that they may make straight furrows, they
must have a care to look always forwards; 62.
for, No man having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the
kingdom of God. Ille aspicit retro, qui a bono inchoato deficiens, mente ad
saecularia redit. He looks backwards, who revolting from the good which he has
begun, does return in mind to worldly things; says Stella, upon the same
place.

occurrences being upon the way, they come unto the sea, and having dismissed
the multitude, he entered into a ship which was provided for him: there being
also other little ships. and when he had given command, they hoyse sails, and
make over the lake all together: and as they sailed he was in the hinder part
of the ship, and slept upon a pillow. He being asleep, (yet not unwitting of
their present distress, He stilleth the sea. S. Mar 4.37.
nor of the miracle that he would do) There arose a great storm of wind, and
the waves beat into the ship, so that it was now full. It was no ordinary
storm of wind, but extraordinary, and unusual, sufficient to put them in
fear and jeopardy; wherefore they came to him, and awoke him, saying, Master,
master, we perish: Carest thou not that we perish? S. Luc. 8.24. S. Mar. 4.38.
But he reproves the weakness of their faith, Why are ye fearful, O ye of
little faith? And then he arose and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea,
Be still, (...), S. Mat. 8.26. S. Mar. 4.39,
be thou bridled or muzzeled, a metaphor taken from dogs and wild beasts,
whose mouths are wont to be tied up and muzzeled to keep them from biting. And
the wind ceased, and there was a great calm. And they feared exceedingly, and
said one to another; What manner of man is this, that even the wind and the
sea obey him? 41.
They might well fear and wonder too, for they had seen two miracles in one,
both of them above nature; for the wind ceased, and the sea was presently
calm. And this may well be supposed to have been the subject of their talk, and
as well of these who were in the same ship with him, as of those also who
sailed by him in the other ships, till they arrived in the country of the
Gergesens or Gadarens, which the vulgar translation calls regionem
Gerasenorum, a country lying over against Galilee. Gadara, Gadara.
was a city of the Jews, in the tribe of Gad, or as some say, of Manasses,
situate in a very high mountain upon the east side of the sea of Galilee,
beyond Jordan, from whence the country had its name.

Being arrived there, immediately there met him two daemoniack Two demoniack
men cured. S. Mat. 8.28, 29. S. Luc. 8.27,
which came out of the tombs, very fierce, so that no man might pass by that
way. And they both cried out, What have we to do with thee, Jesus thou son of
God? Art thou come hither to torment us before the time? But one of them, whose
narration is particularly prosecuted by Saint Luke, had many devils, and a long
time he ware no cloths, neither abode in any house, but in the tombs; When he
saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, 28,
and with a loud voice said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus thou son of God
most high? I beseech thee torment me not. The reason why he so fell down and
besought him, was, because he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of
him, which did so much afflict him, that oftentimes it had caught him, and he
was kept bound with chains and in fetters: and he brake the bands, and was
driven of the devil into the wilderness. 29,
Jesus therefore demanded the name of that devil, and he said, Legion, (not
telling his name but their number) because many devils were entered into him.
30,
He asked his name, not because he knew it not, but that his divine virtue
might be the more conspicuous. He asked one devil, the chief of those devils
with which he was possessed, and one answered for all, and said, Legion. A
legion is said to be six thousand six hundred sixty and six; some say but six
thousand; some double the number for foot soldiers; some compute but seven
hundred thirty and two horsemen for a legion. Howsoever it be computed, for it
appears in Livy, that the number of a legion is not always certain: yet
certain it is, that a legion of devils did possess that miserable man. And all
the devils besought him that he would not command them to go out into the
deep, 31,
to go down into hell, so as never to return again. But if he would needs cast
them out, that then he would suffer them to go away into the heard of swine;
for there was an heard of many swine feeding on the mountain; which when he had
permitted, then went the devils out of the men, and entered into those swine.
And the whole heard possessed with the devils ran violently down a steep place
into the lake, and were choked, being about two thousand, as Saint Mark says,
cap. 5. v. 13. Whereat the heardmen fled, and made relation of it, both in the
city and in the country, and they came out to see what was done, and came to
Jesus, and found the man out of whom the devils were departed sitting at the
feet of Jesus, (hearing his heavenly doctrine, and acknowledging the benefit
which he had received) clothed, and in his right mind: 35, 36,
and they were afraid. They also which saw it, told them by what means he that
was possessed of the devils, was healed. Then the whole multitude of the
country of the Gadarens round about, besought him to depart from them, for they
were taken with great fear; and he went into the ship and returned back again.
37,
Now the man out of whom the devils were departed, besought him that he might
be with him. But Jesus sent him away, 38, 39.
saying, Return to thine house, and show how great things God has done unto
thee. And he went his way, and published through out the whole city, how great
things Jesus had done unto him. He would not have him to be with him, because
he would not seem to boast of what he had done; for if he should have led about
with him those whom he had cured, he might have been thought to have sought
glory of men. Neither would he have him with him, because he might do more good
by preaching Christ, and what he had done for him, then by following of him in
person. He was not commanded to preach what great things Christ had done unto
him, but what great things God had done unto him, and yet he preached how great
things Jesus had done unto him; for being illuminated from above, he believed
him to be God. And being healed both in mind and body, he knew Jesus to be
God, and by preaching him so to be, he fulfilled his commandment.

Gadarens. The devils petition three things. S Luc. 8.31. S. Mar. 5.10.
Three petitions they had to Christ. That he would not command them to go
(...); into the deep, into hell. That he would not send them away (...), out
of the country. That if he would needs cast them out, that then he would
send, or suffer them to go, (...), into the heard of swine. Hell they feared
and abhorred for the torments-sake. S. Mat. 8 31.
The country they liked for the success which they found there. But why into
the swine? They knevv the nature of the people, and that they were covetous:
this present loss would either enrage them against him, or put them in fear of
further and greater losses to be sustained by him. Therefore that which Christ
fore-knew, and which the Devils aimed at, came to pass, the Gadarens besought
him that he would depart out of their coasts; And he entered into a ship, S Mat.
9.1.
and passed over and came into his own city. That was Capernaum, for there he
dwelt, and in that place he left his mother, while he went about all the cities
preaching the Gospel of God, and doing good by the miracles which he wrought;
having left Nazareth, as is said before. Now as he was preaching upon a certain
day in some house of that city, (most likely his own where he dwelt) there
being present Pharisees, Scribes, and Doctors of law, which were come out of
every town of Galilee, and from Judea, and from Jerusalem, being brought
thither by the fame that went of him; A certain man sick of the Palsy, The
paralytick man cured.
who was not able to rise out of his bed, was brought, carried in his bed by
four men, who finding no means to bring him in, by reason of the multitude of
the people, thronging in the house, and about the doors; they ascend the house
withal, and having uncovered the roof, they let him down together with his
couch into the midst before him. Jesus seeing the faith as well of the sick
man, as also of those that brought him, forgave him his sins, saying, Thy sins
are forgiven thee. This when the Scribes and Pharisees heard, they reasoned
secretly, and in their hearts, saying, Who is this that speaks blasphemies?
Who can forgive sins but God alone? They thought him to be no other but a mere
man, but he will convince them of this divinity. 1. By discovering the secrets
of their hearts, which none can do but God that made the heart. They reasoned
in their hearts, and he replied, Why reason ye these things in your hearts. S.
Mar. 2.8.
2ly By evidencing his power and authority to forgive sins. For that they might
know that he had power and authority to forgive sins, He says to the sick of
the Palsy, I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy way unto
thine house. For to heal the body imperative, 11.
and by command of his own word only, is of equal power as to forgive sins,
which none can do but only God. Therefore when he rose up immediately before
them all, took up his bed, and went forth, they were all amazed and glorified
God, and were filled with reverentiall fear, S. Luc. 5.26. S. Mar. 2.20:
saying, We have seen strange things to day. We never saw it on this fashion,
viz. In the curation both of mind, and of body.

After this twofold mercy done to this Paralytick man, he sea side, S. Mar.
2.13.
and going by the place where the customs were received, he saw St. Matthew St.
Matthew called from the receipt of custom
whose name also was Levi the son of Alpheus, one of the Publicans, sitting
there to receive customs; for Capernaum was a sea town, and there the merchants
did pay the customs into the hands of the Publicans. He went not that way by
fortune or chance, but that according to the good pleasure of his will (then to
be manifested in the vocation of this blessed Apostle) he might find him there,
and call him from thence. Who being called in these words, S. Luc. 5.28, 29.
Follow me, he left all, rose up, and followed him. Yet not so, but that he
went home to his house, where he made a great entertainment for him. St. Luke
says, (...), a great feast, Splendidum convivium, a sumptuous banquet. For the
word (...) does not only signify a feast or banquet, but as Erasmus observes
out of Athenaeus, a rich or sumptuous feast, by which name the learned Fathers
are wont to style the sacred Eucharist. He would spare no cost to entertain his
Lord, who in great favor had called him to be his Disciple. At this feast was
a great company of guests, Publicans, and others who were criminous and
scandalous persons, with whom he vouchsafed to sit down, and to eat and drink.
Whereat the Scribes and Pharisees, (proud hypocrites) murmur, and obrayd him,
and his Disciples. But he defends both himself and them by a Proverbiall: S.
Mat. 9.12
The whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick; bids them to go and
learn the meaning of the Prophet, Hos. 6.6.
I will have mercy and not sacrifice: for he came not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance. Inferring that he would open heaven gates unto such
upon their true repentance, when such proud hypocrites as they, righteous in
their own eyes, shall be utterly excluded for their unbelief and hardness of
heart. Question proposed by St. John's disciples.
Now the Disciples of St. John, and of the Pharisees, used to fast often, and to
pray much; therefore some of the Disciples of St. John, (by the instigation of
the Pharisees, as it should seem) came unto him and said, Why do we, and the
Pharisees ^ast often, but thy Disciples fast not? S. Mat 9.14. S. Mar. 2.18, 19,
20, 21, 22 S. Mat. 9.14, 15, 16, 17. S. Luc. 5.33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.
his answer is not direct, but by similitudes, the children of the marriage
chamber must not fast in presence of the Bridegroom; a piece of new cloth must
not be put into an old garment: new wine must not be put into old bottles: No
man having drank old wine, straight way desires new; by all which he defends
his Disciples for not fasting, showing that it was not seasonable for them as
yet to fast.

Ruler, S. Mat. 9.18 S. Mar. 5.22 S. Luc. 8.41
one of the rulers of the Synagogue, Jairus by name, says St. Mark, and with
him St. Luke. Genebrard in his Chronology, tells us out of the Rabbines,
that the Prophets ceasing (which was under the second temple) the Jews had that
which they called the great Synagogue, The history of Iair^s, and of his
daughter cured.
consisting of an hundred and twenty men, whereof some were Nobles, some
Plebeians; those did amend the Scriptures where they had been depraved, and did
constitute the canon, of which great Synagogue were Princes, Ezra, Nehemiah,
Mardochai, Zorobabel, Joshuah, the son of Josodec, also Daniel, Ananias,
Azarias, Misael, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi. ad an. 3638. But the Synagogues so
often mentioned in the new Testament, were places of conveening, where the
people assembled to pray, and to hear the law and the Prophets. Their
antiquity seems to have been from the captivity of Babylon, to supply the
place of the Temple; and after their return were built, and the use of them
retained in their own country; and after their example in Asia, Egypt, and
Europe, whither the Jews were dispersed. So that finally their number so
increased, (especially in Judea) that in Jerusalem it self are reported to
have been, in the latter times of it, no less then four hundred and eighty
Synagogues, the rulers whereof were called (...), Princes or Praefects. And
such a one was this Iairus, (...) says St. Matthew, (...), says St. Luke, a
Prince or Ruler of the Synagogue. To this man there was one only daughter, at
that time dangerously sick, and even at the point of death; he therefore came
to Jesus, worshipped him, and fell down at his feet, instantly beseeching him
that he would come to his house, and lay his hands upon her, that she might be
healed and live. Christ took compassion upon him, went presently with him,
being attended by his Disciples, and much people, who followed, and thronged
him. And as he went, S. Mat. 9.19 S. Mar. 5.24 S. Luc. 8.42 S. Mar. 5.25 The
woman cured of a bloody issue^ 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
A certain woman which had an issue of blood twelve years. And had suffered
many things of many Physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing
bettered, but rather grew worse, when she had heard of Jesus, came in the press
behind, and touched his garment (the hemme, or border of his garment) For she
said (within her self) If I may touch but his clothes, I sh^^ be whole. And
straight way the fountain of her blood was dried up, and she felt in her body,
that she was healed of that plague. Jesus immediately knowing in himself that
virtue had gone out of him, turned him about, in the press, and said, Who
touched my clothes? when all denied; his Disciples, St. Peter, and the other
Disciples, thinking that to be a frivolous question, replied, that the
multitude pressed, and thronged him, and would he then ask, Who it was that
touched him? Indeed, the Disciples knew not to what end that question tended.
He did not ask this question, because he knew not who it was; but that upon the
confession of the woman, the miracle might be manifested, God also glorified,
the people edified, and the Ruler of the Synagogue confirmed as touching the
cure of his daughter. And Jesus said, S. Luc. 8.46 S Mar. 5.32
some body has touched me; for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me. And
he looked round about to see her that had done this thing. And when the woman
saw that she was not hid, she came trembling, and falling down before him, and
declared unto him before all the people, S Luc. 8.47
for what cause she had touched him, S Luc. 8.48 S Mar. 5.34
and how she was healed immediately. And he said unto her, daughter be of good
comfort, thy faith has made thee whole, go in peace, and be whole of thy
plague. This woman it seems was not a Iewess, but a woman of the Gentiles, who
had her habitation at Caesarea Philippi, which city was first called Laish, but
when the Danites had wan it, they called it Dan, after the name of Dan the son
of Jacob, Jud. 18.29.
the father of their tribe. But Philip Tetrarch of Iturea and Trachonitis, in
favor of Augustus Caesar, from whom he had his Tetrarchie, beautified that
city, and called it Caesarea Philippi, Caesarea Philippi.
after both their names. But the Greeks afterward called it Paneas, because
the image of their false God Pan, was erected there. It was situated nigh the
mountain Antilibanus, an hundred and four miles from Jerusalem toward the
north, not far from the mountains Jor and Dan, which joining and running
together on the east side of this city, give the name to the river Jordan. She
being cured in such manner as has been said, returned home to her house. And
because it was the manner of the Gentiles, to honor their Benefactors with
statues, She erected a statue.
she, to the end that she might express her gratitude for the benefit which she
had received, set up nigh to the door of her house a pillar of stone, and
thereupon a statue of brass, in form of a man, and at the feet of that, another
in form of a woman kneeling, and making supplication, as the image of Christ,
and of her self when she touched the hemme of his garment; which statue
remained there a long time. And we have it out of Nicephorus Callistus, that
when Julian the Apostata, to despite our Savior, caused it to be broken down,
and contumeliously used, commanding his own statue to be set up in place of it,
his statue was destroyed by fire from heaven, which smote through the breasts
of it, and having broken off the head (...) the neck, threw it with the face to
the ground. Lib. 10. cap. 30. If images be superstitiously abused, I deny not
but it is lawful for those that are in place, to take them away, (even the
images and statues of Christ, and of his Saints,) so that it be done orderly,
and without contumely to those whom they do represent; at no hand by a furious
rabble of Iconoclasts, under pretense of reformation. And thus much concerning
this Haemorrhous woman.

Rulers house, some who brought him sad tidings of the death of his daughter,
which said, S. Mar. 5.35. S. Luc. 8.49.
Thy daughter is dead, why troublest thou the master any further: Trouble not
the Master. They would not have him to be put to the pains of any further
travel, and wearied with the journey; for the child being dead, He goes to
Jairus house and raises up his daughter there.
there was nothing further to be expected. But they knew not his counsels; for
therefore (as St. Gregory Nyssen observes) did he stay upon the way, and spend
some time in the cure of that woman, that in the mean time the damsel might
dye. De opificio hom. cap. 25. This message being told unto him by Iairus
himself, He answered him, saying, Fear not, believe only, and she shall be made
whole. 50.
And so proceeds on the journey, and goes with him, till they come to his
house. There they find all the people weeping and bewailing her untimely
death, a great tumult and concourse of people, with whom were the minstrells,
pipeing, and playing upon pipes and flutes, in mournful and lugubrious
modulations, as the manner of the Jews then was at funerals, and in the
houses where the dead were: a custom which they had learned of the Romans. So
he goes into the house, permitting none to follow him, saving Saint Peter,
Saint James, and Saint John the brother of Saint James. And being come in, he
rebuked the people for tumulting in that manner, telling them that there was no
occasion for such their weeping, and wailing, and mourning, and pipeing, S.
Mat. 9.24. S. Mar. 5.39. S. Luc 8.52,
and therefore bidding them to give place; why did they make so much ado and
weep? Weep not, she is not dead, but sleeps. Hereupon they all left weeping,
and burst out into laughter, laughing him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.
But he put them all out, 53.
and then he takes the father and mother of the damsel, and those three
disciples whom he had with him, and enters into the place where she lay dead,
and took her by the hand and said unto her, Talitha cumi, which is being
interpreted, S. Mar. 5.41.
Damsel (I say unto thee) arise. So he took her by the hand, and her spirit
came again, and she arose straight way, and they were astonished with a great
astonishment. For now they understood in what sense he had spoken it, when he
said that she was not dead but slept: she did but sleep to him, to whom it was
as easy to raise her from the dead, as to wake her out of a natural sleep. S.
Luc. 8.56. S. Mar. 5.42.
And he charged them straightly (to wit her parents) that no man should know it:
and commanded that something should be given her to eat, that so by eating,
which is a vital operation, they might know that she was made alive indeed.
But such a miracle could not be hidden, for Saint Matthew says, S. Mat. 9.26,
that the fame thereof went abroad into all that land.

How long he stayed with Jairus and in his house, after that daughter, it is
not mentioned; probably till he had accepted his entertainment, and had
refreshed himself and his disciples, with some food after their travel. And
then as they went out, and were departed thence, Two blind men restored to
sight.
two blind men, (who it is likely had given their attendance about the door,
and watched the opportunity) followed him, crying and saying, Thou son of David
have mercy on us. He stood not still, 27,
nor conferred the cure presently, but after he was come into an house, the
blind men came to him: And Jesus said unto them, Believe ye that I am able to
do this? They said unto him, Yea Lord. 28, 29,
Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto you.
And their eyes were opened. And Jesus straightly charged them, saying, 30,
See that no man know it. Observation.
It was because he would decline the envy of the Pharisees, whom he knew that
they would slander him, and deprave his miracles. They could not endure to hear
with patience the report of his lesser miracles, much less would they have the
patience to hear that he had raised the dead, and given sight unto the blind.
For concerning these two sorts of miracles, he interdicted the reporting of
them. But these two blind men, notwithstanding the interdiction, when they
were departed, 31, A dumb man dispossessed of a devil. 32, 33, 34.
spread abroad his fame in all that country. Now as they went out of that
house, where he had wrought the former miracle, Behold they brought to him a
dumb man possessed with a devil. And when the devil was cast out (by the
power of his word) the dumb spoke, and the multitude marvelled, saying, It was
never so seen in Israel. But the Pharisees said, he casts out the devils
through the prince of the devils. Of which miracle, because there is no more
set down, I have no more to say.

covenant was administered by him the year past, for the breaking of the
serpents head, and for the abolishing of the old testament. The Recapitulation.
By the record of Saint John at Bethabara, to the priests and levites that were
sent. By coming to Jordan himself the second time to receive the testimonies
of Saint John, before all the people, and to his two disciples. By calling
Saint Philip first to be his disciple. By being present at the marriage in
Cana, and by his first miracle there. By doing all his miracles for the glory
of God, and for the utility and profit of men. By calling disciples to be his
disciples by adhaesion. By going up with them to Jerusalem, at the second
passover, after his baptism. By visiting the temple. By promising to raise
the temple of his body. By baptizing his disciples, and by dispensing his
baptism by their ministry. By converting the Samaritans. By healing the
rulers son by his word. By being known of the devils to be the Messiah. By
casting them out by his word. By healing Saint Peter's wives mother. By rebuking
and by stilling the winds and the sea. By casting out a legion of devils at
once. By remitting his sins to the paralytick man, and by curing his disease.
By calling Saint Matthew from the receipt of custom. By healing the
haemorrhous woman. By raising up Jairus daughter. By restoring sight to two
blind men. By dispossessing a dumb man. It became him who humbled himself,
and was made man for the redemption of all mankind, to be recorded by Saint
John; to receive his testimonies; to call Saint Philip first; to be present at
the marriage in Cana, and to do his first miracle there; to do all his miracles
for the glory of God, and for the utility and profit of men; to call disciples
to be his disciples by adhaesion; to go to Jerusalem; to visit the temple; to
promise the resurrection of his bodily temple; to baptize his disciples, and to
dispense his baptism by their ministry; to convert the Samaritans; to heal
the rulers son by his word; to be known of the devils to be the Messiah; to
cast them out by his word; to heal Saint Peter's wives mother; to rebuke and
still the winds and the sea; to cast out a legion of devils at once; to remit
the sins, and to cure the disease of the paralytick man; to call Saint Matthew
from the receipt of custom; to heal the haemorrhous woman; to raise up Jairus
daughter; to restore to sight two blind men; to dispossess a dumb man. And
thus our sacred history does put an end to the second year after his Baptism,
which was the one and thirtieth year of his age.

In the month of November, in that one and thirtieth year of four months before
harvest, S. Joh. 4.35.
as is expressly observed by Saint John) Jesus, to decline the malice of the
Pharisees, who maligned his baptism, and the number of his disciples, departed
out of Judea to go into Galilee. And Saint John makes relation of his going
through Samaria, and gives us the history of the Samaritan woman, which none
other of the Evangelists does: but says almost nothing of his acts for those
four months, neither was it needful, for he writing his gospel last of all,
regarded not to make repetition of those things which had been sufficiently
commemorated by the other, seeing that his drift was chiefly to observe those
things which had been pretermitted by them. The four months therefore being
expired, Christ goes up to the passover at Jerusalem. Levit. 23.10.
there was a feast of the Jews. It was the feast of the passover; for then
came harvest, and upon the second day after the eating of the passover, which
was the second day of sweetbread, the law commanded that they should offer a
sheaf of new corn before the Lord, to crave his blessing upon their harvest.
This was the third passover after his baptism, and to this passover went
Jesus, as well to fulfill the righteousness of the law, as also to do the work
for the which he was sent. Now there was at Jerusalem, Neh. 3.1, 32. The pool
of Bethesda.
nigh to the sheep-gate, or market, (...), a pond or poole, (...), a sheep pond
or pool: a pond or pool where sheep and other cattle were watered or washed,
and wherein specially the carcasses of sheep and other beasts to be sacrificed
were washed. That pool was called Bethesda, which signifies the house of
passage, effluxion or effusion of water: which pool had five porches. In these
lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, S. Joh. 5.1,
withered, waiting for the moving of the water. 2,
For an Angel went down at a certain season into the pool, and troubled the
water; whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in, 3.
was made whole of whatsoever disease he had. This was miraculous; but what
angel it was that troubled the water, how long that water had been so
troubled, at how many times of the year, whether at all the solemn feasts,
whether only at the feast of pentecost, or at the passover, whether once only
or at more times in the year, whether at times certain or uncertain, it is not
mentioned.

Evangelists, nor any other Scripture-writers, either canonical or
apocryphal, which were before Saint John, no nor Philo nor Josephus, who
were after Saint John, ever made mention of such a miracle there. It makes me
to conclude with my most learned author, and late reverend Diocesan, that
therefore it may seem nec antiquum fuisse, nec multum temporis perdurasse, not
to have been of antiquity, nor to have lasted long, Episcop. Norwic. (...).
Tom. 1. par. post. f. 112. The miracle was ceased before Tertullians time, and
as it should seem, so soon as they had filled up the measure of their
iniquities in the death of the just one, adver. Iud. cap. 13. It was not only
a miracle, but a great mystery: and so do the learned fathers understand it,
though they diversely apply it. Most of them to the sacrament of Baptism,
wherein a man is made whole of all spiritual diseases by the holy Ghost.
Among that multitude of impotent folk, lay a certain man which had an
infirmity (conjectured to be the palsy, a disease wherein either all the
body, The impotent man cured, who had been diseased 38 years.
or some one or more of the members, be mortified, and deprived of feeling and
moving, as the hands, the eyes, etc.) thirty and eight years. His disease had
made him impotent, his poverty had made him unable to hire any one to attend
upon him, and to put him into the water when it should be moved, and the long
continuance of his impotency had made him miserable. A fit object was he for
Christ his mercy. Therefore said he unto him, Will thou be made whole? not
be^^use he did doubt of it; for what impotent man would not be made whole?
But he would have him to behold the true physician, whose coming was to cure
those that are willing. The man tells him the cause why he had not been
cured. He was poor, and had no man when the water was troubled, to put him into
the pool: he was also more impotent then others, so that always while he was
coming, (who could make no haste by reason of his impotency) some one or other
stepped down before him. Christ therefore cures him by his word, commands
him to arise, to take up his bed and walk, which he did immediately. For so is
the history delivered by Saint John. S. Joh. 5.1,
And there was a feast of the Jews, 2,
and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep
market, a pool, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, 3,
having five porches. In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of
blind, halt, withered, waiting for the moving of the water. 4,
For an angel went down at a certain season into the pool, and troubled the
water; whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in, 5,
was made whole of whatsoever disease he had. And a certain man was there,
which had an infirmity thirty and eight years. When Jesus saw him lie, and knew
that he had been now a long time in that case, he says unto him, will thou be
made whole? 6,
The impotent man answered him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is troubled,
to put me into the poole; but while I am coming, 7, 8, 9.
another steppeth down before me. Jesus says unto him, Rise, take up thy bed,
and walk. And immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and
walked; and the same day was the sabbath.

By occasion of the Sabbath day, (and it seems that it was that John calls an
high day, S. Joh. 19.31
namely the first or great day of the feast, in which they did eat the
passover, and had eaten it the evening before) the Jews take upon them to
quarrel the poor man that was made whole, objecting to him the breach of the
law. It is the sabbath day, The poorman qua^elled by the Jews. v. 10.
it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed. It was indeed unto the Jews a
breach of the law, and a great offense to bear any burden upon the sabbath
day; for thus says the Prophet Jeremiah. Thus says the Lord; take heed to
your selves, and bear no burden on the sabbath day, nor bring it in by the
gates of Jerusalem. Jer. 17.21,
Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath day, neither do
ye any work, but hallow ye the sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers. 22,
The charge therefore against him was great that he violated the sabbath, nay
the greatest of all the sabbaths, the great day of the feast, the high day.
Neither does he deny the violation of the sabbath to be a great offense, nor
does he seek to extenuate his fault, but justifies the bearing of that burden,
by the authority of him that had commanded him so to do: and that was he by
whom he was made whole. He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take up
thy bed and walk. Hereat the Jews enraged, 11.
demand not the cure, nor who it was that had healed him, nor how, or in what
manner he had done it: but who it was that had given him commission to carry
a burden upon the sabbath day. What man is that which said unto thee, Take up
thy bed and walk? 12,
They enquire what man it was, to the end that they might persequute him. But
he that was healed, could give no satisfactory answer, for he knevv not who
it was, And Jesus had conveyed himself away, a multitude being in that place.
13,
Then having first disposed his burden, he comes to the Temple, to worship,
and to praise God; Jesus finds him there, puts him in mind of the benefit
which he had received, to the end that he should be thankful, acknovvledge
him the author, and look more carefully to his ways hereafter. Behold thou
art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. The man
departed at that saying, 14,
went boldly to the Jews, and (to the end that he might give God the glory,
and testify of Christ) told them that it was Jesus which had made him
whole. And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him, 15.
because he had done these things on the sabbath day. Because he had healed the
man, and had also commanded him to carry his bed. Christ avoucheth his
authority.
But when he told them by what authority, namely, that God was his Father,
and that he was equal with him, then were they the more enraged, and sought
the more to kill him. Yet he maintains his word, affirming the Fathers
operation and his, to be all one in every thing, and that he would do greater
things then those miraculous cures; for he would quicken the dead in soul by
sin, as being appointed judge of all, and quicken the dead in body also,
judging all with righteous judgment. And to the end that they might perceive
that he is God, and the son of God, he produces the testimony of St. John the
Baptist, his own miraculous works, the witness of his Father from heaven at his
Baptism, and the scriptures themselves which testify of him. And these are
the things which we read to have been done by him at that feast in Jerusalem.

Jerusalem, then in other places; in Galilee he healed all manner of sickness,
S. Mat. 4.23. S. Mat. 8.16.
and all manner of disease among the people. In Capernaum he healed all that
were sick. At the pool of Bethesda, lay a great multitude of impotent folk, and
he healed but one of them, although it must not be denied, but that he could
have healed them all with a word of his mouth. The reason was known only to
himself: S. Mat. 13.58
but where they would not believe, there he did not many mighty works. The
solemnity of the feast being ended, he went into Galilee, and went into a
Synagogue, and there cured a man that had a withered hand: but the story is
diversely reported by the Evangelists. The history of the man that had the
withered hand.
For although all of them do say that his enemies the Scribes, and the
Pharisees sought occasion against him to accuse him; (of cruelty or
imbecility, as S. Hierome observes, if he should not cure him; of breach and
violation of the sabbath, S. Mat. 12.10
if he should cure him:) yet St. Matthew says, that they asked him, saying,,
Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days? But St. Mark and St. Luke do say,
S. Mar. 3 4 S. Luc. 6.9.
that he asked them, Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do
evil? to save life, or to kill? In this there is no contrariety: if, as St.
Augustine says, it be understood, that they first asked him, and that he
understanding their thoughts, and that they sought matter of accusation against
him, commanded the man to stand forth, and then he asked them; and when they
held their peace, that then he proposed the similitude of the sheep fallen into
a pit on the sabbath day. De cons. Evang.

Hierome has observed out of that apocryphal Gospel which the Nazarites, a
sect of Heretics among the Jews, and the Ebioni^es, a judaizing sect among
the Christians, did use, called by them the authentic Gospel of St. Matthew.
Wherein it is written, that this man whose right hand was withered, was a
Playsterer, or rough Mason, who got his living by his painful labor, and that
he made supplication unto Christ in this manner; I was a Playsterer, I got my
living with my hands, I beseech thee Jesus to make me whole, that I may not
shamefully beg my food: Not unlikely; and then the story must be thus. And he
entered again into the Synagogue, and there was a man there which had a withered
hand; whose right hand was withered. S. Mar. 3.1. S. Luc. 6.6,
And the Scribes and Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal [him, Mar.
3.2.] on the sabbath day; that they might find an accusation against him. And
they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day? that they
might accuse him. And he said unto them, 7.
What man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep, S. Mat. 12 10
and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it, and
lift it out? How much then is a man bet er then a sheep? Wherefore it is
lawful to do well on the sabbath days. He stateth the question, 11,
and condemns them also of covetousness, as St. Hierome rightly observes, If
you, 12.
(says he) upon the sabbath day make all haste; to pull out a sheep, or some
other beast fallen into a pit, yet not for the beast's sake, but therein
serving your own covetousness, and least you should sustain the loss of the
beast; by how much more ought I to cure a man upon the sabbath day, who is much
better then a sheep? The man hearing this, probably cries out, saying, I was a
Playsterer, I got my living with my hands, I beseech thee, O Jesus, to make me
whole, that I may not shamefully beg my food. But he knew their thoughts, and
said to the man which had the withered hand, Rise up, S. Luc. 6.8.
and stand forth in the midst. And he arose and stood forth. Then said Jesus
unto them, I will ask you one thing, Is it lawful on the sabbath days, to do
good, or to do evil? to save life, or to destroy it? but they held their
peace, as Saint Mark says. And when he had looked round about on them, 9.
with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, he says unto the
man, stretch forth thine hand, and he stretched it out, S. Mar. 3.5,
and his hand was restored whole as the other. And the Pharisees wen^ forth,
and straight way took counsel with the Herodians against him, 6.
how they might destroy him,

But he withdrew himself with his Disciples, from their rage miracles sake, and
as many as had infirmities, and were all healed. And it came to pass in those
days, while he went about attended with such great multitudes, doing all sorts
of miracles; and having a small ship which waited on him, S. Mar. 3.9. S. Luc.
6.12, 13.
because of the multitude lest they should throng him; That he went into a
mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God. And when it was
day, he called unto him his Disciples, and of them he chose twelve, whom also
he named Apostles. He ordained twelve (says St. Mark) that they should be
with him; S. Mar. 3.14,
and that he might send them forth to preach. And to have power to heal
sicknesses, 15.
and to cast out Devils. He called them Apostles, because he made them his
legates or Ambassadors, The Apostles ordained, and why so called
whom he would presently send to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and
after his ascension to preach the Gospel unto all nations: for the verb (...)
signifies to send. And the word (...), is amandatus one sent away with
commission, or command, generally in any business, and with any ones commission
or command. But Christ his Apostles were sent by his commission and command
immediately; and therefore by the Evangelists, and Ecclesiastical Writers,
Heb. 3.1. S. Joh. 20.21
are understood specially by that name. Christ himself was an Apostle, and as
he was sent by the Father, even so sent he his Apostles. He sent them even so,
but their Sicut does infer no more but similitude in legation, not parity or
equality; they were not therefore equal and one with him, as he was equal and
one with the Father. He was sent by the Father, in that he was made of a woman,
and made under the law to redeem them that were under the law. They were not
sent in such a legation; howsoever they were sent in the greatest trust that
ever was committed to mortal men, and were sent forth by him immediately, even
as the Father had sent him. They were the Patriarks of the spiritual seed, The
number of the Apostles.
which is the Israel of God: therefore fitly according to the number of the
sons of Jacob, twelve. They were the pillars of religion, and of divine
worship; therefore fitly according to the number of those pillars, Genesis 35.22.
Exodus 24.4.
which supported the Altar built by Moses, twelve. They were wells to supply
the world with the spiritual water of divine doctrine; therefore fitly according
to the number of the wells in Elim, Exo. 25.27.
twelve. They were radiant pearls in the Church which is the robe of Christ:
therefore fitly according to the number of those precious stones, which were in
the Rational, or breast plate of judgment, twelve. They did communicate the
spiritual food, Exodus 39.14
that bread which came down from heaven unto all nations; therefore fitly
according to the number of the proposition cakes, twelve. They were Princes of
Israel in a spiritual and Evangelicall sense and meaning; Exodus 24.5.
therefore fitly according to the number of the Princes of Israel, twelve. Number.
1.44.
They were officers to whom pertained the stewardship of the mysteries of God;
therefore fitly according to the number of Solomon's officers, 1 King 4.7.
twelve. They were sent all the world over to baptize all nations; Therefore
fitly according to the number of the oxen which supported that sea which
Solomon made, whereof three looked toward the North, and three toward the West,
and three toward the South, 1 King. 7.25.
and three toward the East, twelve. They did support the kingdom of Christ, by
their doctrine, by their miracles, by their sufferings; therefore fitly,
according to the number of the lions that stood upon the steps of Solomon's
throne, twelve. 1 King. 10.20.
Upon them the fire of Gods Spirit came down from heaven; therefore fitly
according to the number of those stones, with which Elijah built the altar, 1
King. 18.38.
upon which the fire of the Lord fell, twelve. Whatsoever the reason was, why
he made choice of twelve only to be his Apostles, Adeo numerus iste sacratus
est, ut in locum unius, qui exciderat, non posset nisi alter nominari, says
Saint Augustine divinely. In Psalm. 103. So sacred is this number, that into the
place of one who had fallen away, it could not be, but that another must be
named. S. Mar. 3.13.
And he goes up into a mountain, and calls unto him whom he would; and they
came to him. And he ordained twelve that they should be with him; 14, 15,
and that he might send them forth to preach: And to have power to heal
sicknesses, and to cast out devils.

All the Apostles were Israelites, descended from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and the patriarchs; none of them strangers, The Apostles what they were.
Idumeans or Samaritans. Nor yet were any of them born in Judea or at
Jerusalem, but all of them Galileans by birth: and therefore (...), men of
Galilee. Act. 1.11. Act. 2.7.
Are not all these which speak, Galileans? But although none of them were born
in Judea, yet were some of them of the tribe of Judah, as the brethren of our
Lord, and the sons of Zebedaeus, Saint James and Saint John, the rest probably
supposed to be of the tribes of Zabulon and Nephthali; unless peradventure
Judas the traitor were of Issachar, which has been thought by some. Search
and look (said the chief Priests and Pharisees to Nichodemus) for out of
Galilee arises no prophet. S. Joh. 7.52.
But it was that transcendent honor that he would do unto Galilee to make it
his own country, to be incarnate in the womb there, to dwell there, to do his
most mighty works there, and that all his Apostles should be of Galilee. The
names of which twelve Apostles according to Saint Matthew are set down thus;
The first Simon, who is called Peter, S. Mat. 10.2,
and Andrew his brother, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother: Philip
and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the publican, 3, 4.
James the son of Alpheus, and Lebbeus whose surname was Thaddeus; Simon the
Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. But this order is not
kept neithrr in the Evangelists Saint Mark and Saint Luke; neither does Saint
Luke in the acts of the Apostles, S. Mar. 3.16. S. Luc. 16.14. Act. 1.13.
nominate them in the same order as in his gospel; notwithstanding in every
one of these, Saint Peter is named first; to him therefore is given priority,
but not majority. Simon the Canaanite was he who is also called Zelotes, and
Lebbeus whose surname was Thaddeus, he whom Saint Luke calls Judas the
brother of James. With these he came down from the mountain, and stood in the
plain, there being much people assembled from many places to hear, and to be
healed; in the presence of whom, (having first cured the diseased) he preaches
to his disciples of blessings, and curses. How we must love our enemies, and do
them all the good that we can. Not to judge rashly or uncharitably. That the
masters must first mend themselves. That we must join the obedience of good
works to the hearing of the word, S. Luc. from v. 17. to v. 49.
lest in the evil day of temptation we fall, like an house built upon the face
of the earth, without any foundation at all.

Apostles to preach, so soon as they were elected, but so soon as he had
sufficiently prepared and instructed them by his divine doctrine and precepts,
Christ his Sermon upon the mount.
whereunto pertains that famous Sermon of his preached unto his Apostles
after their election, before the multitude upon the mount, repeated by the
Evangelist Saint Matthew, Cap. 5.6.7. There were some brethren in Saint Hieroms
time, who were of those that were more simple, who thought that Sermon to have
been preached by Christ to his disciples before the multitude upon mount
olivet: but they were merely deceived, for all circumstances both antecedent
and subsequent, do plainly evince it to have been preached in Galilee, upon
mount Thabor, (says Saint Hierom) or upon some other mountain there. Mount
Thabor.
Thabor was a round high hill in Galilee, upon the borders of Issachar and
Zebulon, fifty and six miles they say from Jerusalem toward the north, of a
pure air, and wonderfully fertile; and I am easily induced to think, that his
concio ad clerum to have been preached to his elected Apostles, and other
disciples upon that mountain. It was not the former sermon mentioned by Saint
Luke to have been preached in the plain standing, but rather that sermon
enlarged, and preached at another time to his Apostles upon a mountain sitting:
which posture of sitting, as Saint Augustine says, did pertain ad dignitatem
magistri, to the dignity of the Master. For he taught them as one having
authority, (as one who had the reseration and understanding of all the
scriptures, and of all the prophets, by whose power (says Bid) the secrets of
the divine law of God, panduntur fidelibus, clauduntur infidelibus, are opened
to the faithful, are shut up unto the unbelievers. In Apoc. cap. 2. S. Mat.
7.29,
) and not as the Scribes. 1st He promises blessedness, as his own reward to
them that follow him in true piety, and a virtuous life. 2ly He admonishes his
Apostles what he had made them, (...), the salt of the earth, and (...), the
light of the world. That therefore they must diligently preach the word of God,
and abound in good works. 3ly He tells them, he came to fulfill the law: and
from thence takes occasion to expound diverse precepts of the law, perverted and
obscured by the impious glosses, and traditions of the scribes and pharisees,
as touching murder, adultery, divorce, swearing, revenge, and then sets
down diverse practick rules of charity, and commends perfection, with which
that Chapter is concluded. In the sixth Chapter he goes on, condemning the
feigned righteousness of the scribes and pharisees, who did play the hypocrites
in their alms, prayers, and fastings; instructing them now to give their
alms, to pray, and to fast. And because the pharisees were covetous, envious,
and distrustful of the providence of God; that therefore they must beware of
covetousness, an evil eye, and not to be solicitous of things pertaining to
this present life. In the seventh chapter, because the pharisees were
uncharitable judgers of others; therefore they must take heed that they judge
not any rashly or uncharitably. And because they were contumaciously wicked,
and would surely persecute them, that therefore they should not expose the holy
things of religion to their scorn and contempt. But because that they are not
able to perform these things of themselves; that therefore they must be
instant in prayer; for God will give them either the things which they pray
for, or some other things which shall be better, and more convenient for them.
Then gives he a general rule of righteousness, as well distributive as
commutative, which is the law and the prophets: admonishing them of the way to
heaven, and premonishing them of false prophets who would seek to divert them
from it. Finally not to be hearers of the word only, but doers of it, like
houses builded on a rock, and not on the sand. And so concludes his Sermon to
the admiration and astonishment of all the hearers.

Having ended his Sermon he came down from the mountain, The leper cured. S.
Mat. 8.2. S. Mar. 1.40. S. Luc. 5.12.
followed by great multitudes of people. And behold there came a leper and
worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. Saint
Mark says, that he came beseeching him, and kneeling down to him; Saint Luke,
that he was full of leprosy, and that seeing Jesus he fell on his face. And
both Saint Matthew, Saint Mark, and Saint Luke do say, that he made his
supplication, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. Therefore
have we to note the humility of this leper, (...), he worshipped him, he
worshipped him with bowing of his body, and holding up his hands to make
supplication. But this was not a posture low enough, for bodily reverence, and
for supplication to him that could cure him at his pleasure; therefore he came
down upon his knees, (...), kneeling down to him, says Saint Mark: and yet was
he not low enough; before he would tender his petition, he would go as low as
possibly he could, even to the earth, to manifest his humility by the lowest
deportment, (...), falling down on his face, as Saint Luke says. 2ly We have
to observe his faith, whereby he makes a good confession, acknowledges the
power of Christ, and consequently his Godhead, that he was able to make him
clean by the power of his word; and, with due submission unto his will, he
desired cure, yet not absolutely, but according to the good pleasure of his
will. Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. It was that which Christ
willed, And Jesus put forth his hand and touched him, S. Mat. 8.3.
saying, I will, be thou clean; and immediately his leprosy was cleansed. And
Jesus says unto him, See thou tell no man, but go thy way, show thy self to
the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.
The gift commanded by Moses was to be offered by him that was to be cleansed,
and in the day of his cleansing, Levit. 14. But Christ would have him that was
cleansed to offer the gift, for a testimony unto them, that he came not to
destroy, but to fulfill the law, as Tertullian observes, Lib. 4. cont.
Marcion. cap. 9. That the priest also might pronounce him clean, and testify
against themselves, in that they would not believe in him, who testified his
Divinity by all the miracles that he did. But he went out, S. Mar. 1.45.
and began to publish it much, and to blaze abroad the matter; insomuch that
Jesus could no more openly enter into the city, but was without in desert
places; and they came to him from every quarter. He published that which he was
forbidden, but not in that sense in which he was forbidden to publish it: he
was forbidden to publish it for his own sake, for he must not boast of the
benefit which he had received. He was forbidden to publish it for Christ his
sake, so as to procure to him the vain praise of man which he sought not for:
but he was not forbidden to publish it for the glory of God. And therefore he
did publish it, although he had been commanded to say nothing to any man, and
did blaze it abroad, as Saint Mark says.

Capernaum, where he healed the Centurions servant who was sick of a palsy,
The Centurions servant cured of a palsy.
and ready to die. The story is diversely reported by the Evangelists Saint
Matthew and Saint Luke, and must be reconciled thus. This Centurion (a
foot-captain or commander of an hundred footmen, but not an Israelite) hearing
of Jesus, made means unto him on the behalf of his servant, by the Elders of
the Jews, who having interceded effectually for him, S. Luc. 7.2, 3, 4, 5. v.
6, 7, 8,
Christ went with them, as Saint Luke says. But when he was not far from the
house, he sent friends to him with such a message, as Saint Luke also delivers.
Which when Jesus heard, he marvelled at him, and turned him about, and said
unto the people that followed him, I say unto you, 9, 10.
I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel. And they that were sent
returning to the house, found the servant whole that had been sick. In the mean
while the Centurion, for the love he bare unto his servant, came unto him in
his own person, and made supplication unto him, saying, Lord, my servant lies
at home sick of the Palsy, grievously tormented. And Jesus said unto him, S.
Mat. 8.6, 7, v. 8, 9.
I will come and heal him. (For he was then going to heal him.) The Centurion
replied, as it is in the two verses next following. When Jesus heard it he
marvelled, and said, (the second time) to them that followed, (averring the
truth of it by his usual asseveration which he had not done before, and
enlarging himself further) Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great
faith, no not in Israel. And I say unto you, 10,
that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. 11.
But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And then said he to the Centurion, Go
thy way, 12,
and as thou have believed so be it done unto thee; and his servant was healed
in the self same hour.

Having so cured the Centurions servant, the next day after he Naim (it was
situated in the north side of mount Hermon the lesser, in the tribe of
Issachar, The widows son raised from the dead
two miles off the mount Thabor, or there about) And when he came nigh to the
gate of the city, behold, there was a dead man carried out, the only son of
his mother, and she was a widow; and much people of the city was with her. All
which circumstances are diligently observed by St. Gregory Nyssen; he was a
young man, S. Luc. 7.12.
therefore his death the more deplorable; he was the son of a widow, therefore
the loss irreparable; he was her only son, therefore the stock of the
family, that branch by which posterity should have been propagated, the prop
also of her old age in him extinguished. These were the causes of her grief,
and of Christ's compassion, whom first he comforted by counsel, Weep not. Then
raised him from the dead by the power of his word, so turning her grief into
joy, and her mourning into gladness. And he came and touched the beer, (and
they that bare him stood still.) And he said, 14,
young man, I say unto thee, arise. And he that was dead sat up, and began to
speak: and he delivered him to his mother: 15.
Now the Disciples of St. John the Baptist, hearing of this, and of other
miracles which he did, came unto him in the prison, and told him of them.
Whereupon St. John, who before had testified of him, The legation of St. John
the Baptist to Christ. S Joh. 1.29.33.
saying, Behold the lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world; and
came to the knowledge of him by the holy Ghost; And had stated the former
controversy betwixt some of his Disciples and the Jews, and had preached unto
them that most excellent Sermon, concerning the person, merits, and office of
Christ, the Gospel epitomized (as it is repeated by St. John cap. 3. from the
27. v. to the end) he, to take away all occasion of doubting from his
Disciples, [and because he would surrender his Disciples to Christ, having
prepared them for him by his preaching and baptism] delegated two of them to go
unto Christ, to ask him this question, saying, Art thou he that should come, or
look we for another? They come and deliver unto him their embassage
accordingly. John Baptist (said they) has sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou
he that should come, or look we for another? But Christ (who knew of their
legation, S. Luc. 2 19 S. Mat. 11.3
and understood St. John's mind) did in the same hour cure many of their
infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits, and to many, that were blind, he
gave sight. It was to the end that he might answer them rather by his works,
then by his words. Therefore said he, Go your way, and tell John what things ye
have seen, and heard; how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are
cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to the poor the Gospel is
preached. S. Luc. 7.22 23.
And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me. They being gone,
Christ gives his testimony concerning St. John, Simon the Pharisee inviteth
Christ to his house. 36.
as it follows in both the Evangelists, St. Matthew, and St. Luke. At that
time, as it should seem by the story, a certain Pharisee whose name was Simon,
invited him to take an entertainment in his house, where, by occasion of St.
Mary Magdalen, who came with an Alabaster box of ointment, and stood behind at
his feet weeping, and did wash them with her tears, and wipe them with the
hairs of her head, and kissed them, and anointed them with ointment; he
declared himself to be a friend to sinners, yet not to maintain them in sin,
but to forgive them their sins, S. Luc. 7.44, 45, 46, 47.48, 49.50,
upon their faith and true repentance. St. Mary Magdalen was a true penitent;
and as St. Bernard says, by compunction and tears she obtained that Christ
should say unto her, Thy sins are forgiven thee. De compunct. cord. ser. 10.

These occurrences were probably at Naim; and when he was eat bread. S. Mar. 3
20
Then was brought unto him one possessed with a Devil blind and dumb, and he
healed him, in so much that the blind and dumb both spoke and saw. S. Mat. 12
22 A blind and dumb devil dispossessed. 23.
By occasion whereof he incurs a fourfold censure; for first, the multitude was
amazed, and by the miracle that he had wrought, they concluded for certain that
he was the son of David. 2ly His friends and kindred being well affected
toward him, and considering the great concourse of people that came unto him,
and that he neglected to take his food, thought him not well advised, and went
out and sought to lay hold on him, not to bind him as a demoniak, but to bring
him home to refresh himself, and that he might take his food; for said they,
(...), he is beside himself, non est apud se, He is not in a right mind, that
he should thus macerate himself. S. Mar. 3 21
3ly The proud Scribes could not but perceive the power of his Divinity, by the
words that he spoke, by the works that he wrought, and yet through pride and
envy, they condemned him as one that wrought by the Devil. The Scribes which
came from Jerusalem, said, he has Beelzebub, and by the prince of Devils,
casts he out Devils. 4ly The Pharisees, wilfully blind and willingly
ignorant, S. Mat 3.22
notwithstanding the conviction of their own consciences, assented to the vote
of the Scribes, and said even as they did, This fellow does not cast out
Devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of Devils. Hereupon others of their
consorts, S. Mat. 12.24
seeing that the Scribes and Pharisees had condemned this sign to be from
hell, tempted him, and sought of him a sign from heaven. They would have had
him peradventure (as St. Hierome also says) to have brought fire from heaven
as Elijah did; 2 King. 1.10 1 Samuel 12.18.
or to have caused it suddenly to thunder and rain, as the prophet Samuel did.
But he apologizeth, and recriminateth. By the apology he maintains his
divine power, whereby that, and all other his divine miracles were effected. By
the recrimination he convicteth them of that irremissible sin which is against
the holy Ghost, The Scribes and Pharisees convinced of the irremissible sin.
in that they saw and knew his divine power in the works which he did, and yet
blasphemed. The apology is grounded upon two arguments, whereof the first is
taken from the absurdity of the consequence, as if he should say, how
irrational is this? How does Satan cast out Satan? is his kingdom divided?
or does he himself seek the ruin of his own kingdom? or must it not needs be
so, if he will cast himself out where he has once gotten quiet possession?
This is true of every kingdom, S. Mat. 12.25 26 27, 28. S. Mar. 3.23, 24, 25,
26. S. Luc. 11.17 18, 19, 20.
and of every house, therefore of Satan's kingdom, and of Satan's house: how
then do I by Satan cast out Devils? or by whom do your children cast them
out? The second is taken from the manner of ejection, which is the necessity of
the consequence. How can I cast out Satan against his will, were I not
stronger then he? can any man enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his
goods, if he be not stronger then that strong man, first to bind him, and then
to spoil his goods? If I therefore have entered into Satan's house: If I have
bound him; S Mat. 12.29 30. S Mar. 3.27 S Luc. 11.21, 22, 23. S Mat. 12.31 32.
S Mar. 3.28, 29, 30. The irremissible sin against the holy Ghost.
if I have cast him quite out of his house, and despoyled him of his goods, as
you may see in this demoniak, am I not then stronger then Satan? And if
stronger then Satan, who else but God, and the son of God? The recrimination
follows, and is this; therefore you Scribes and Pharisees, because you have
said that I have an unclean spirit, and do cast out Devils by the Prince of
Devils, have sinned against the Holy Ghost to your own damnation. The
irremissible sin therefore is not blasphemy against the nature or person of the
holy Ghost, if a man shall deny that there is an holy Ghost, or third person,
as did the Photinians; or if he shall deny him to be God, or more then a
creature, as did the Macedonians. Quid ergo fiet de his, quos lucrari cupit
ecclesia? says St. Augustine. What shall then become of those whom the Church
desires to acquire? De verb. Dom. Ser. 11. cap. 4. The Church desires to
gain, and has gained such. But that irremissible sin is blasphemy against the
works of the holy Ghost, and is when he that is illuminated, shall against his
own knowledge and conscience slander, and blaspheme the holy Ghost in his
works, by a malicious obtrectation, by a wilful repudiation, and by an envious
persecution of those that work them. So the Scribes and Pharisees blasphemed
the holy Ghost, by affirming those works to be done by Beelzebub, which they
saw, and knew to be done by the finger of God, and by persecuting Christ for
his works sake.

Matthew and St. Luke proceed in the recrimination, and both of them do say, S
Mat. 12.39 40. S Luc. 11.29 30. The sign of the Prophet Jonah
that he denied them a sign from heaven: that is to say, such a sign, and in
such a manner as they desired: But yet promised the sign of the Prophet Jonas,
by the resurrection of his body upon the third day. Indeed Jonah was an
excellent type of the resurrection of Christ, and of his resurrection upon the
third day. For like as Jonah for three days was in the Whales belly, and
during that time no better then dead: but then the fish could hold him no
longer, for then the Lord spoke unto the fish, Jon. 2.10.
and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land. And Jonah is sent a Prophet to
preach to Nineveh, that they should repent. Piscis qui Ionam devoravit in
pelago, significat mortem quam Christus passus est in mundo, says one of the
Fathers. The fish which devoured Jonah in the sea, signifies the death which
Christ suffered in the world. For even so was Christ in the grave, as Jonah in
the Whales belly, till the third day: but then the earth could hold him no
longer, God speaks unto the grave, and the grave must surrender his blessed
body, and he arises and preaches to the Ninevites, for he sends his
Apostles with ample commission, Romans 10.18
And their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the
world. In amplifying of which recrimination, while he insisteth more sharply,
he tells them that the Queen of the south, and the Ninevites, shall rise up
in judgment against them for their unbelief, and hardness of heart, to their
condemnation, S Mat. 12.43 44, 45. S. Luc. 11.24 25, 26.
which he affirms to be just, for as much as the Devil whom he would cast
out of the world by the power of his Gospel, should in a worse manner than
ever, enter again into their nation.

Marcella, or whosoever it were, Blessedness of Christ's mother.
) cried out as in a divine rapture, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and
the paps which thou have sucked. Indeed the womb was blessed, the paps were
blessed, the body was blessed, the soul was blessed; S. Luc. 1.48
yea, and all generations shall call her blessed; but that blessedness came not
to her by bearing of Christ, but by believing in Christ; S. Luc. 11.28
and therefore he replyeth, saying, yea, rather blessed are they that hear the
word of God and keep it. So having pronounced his mother blessed, blessed in
bearing, more blessed in believing, she together with his brethren arriveth
there, S. Luc. 8.19.
desiring to speak with him; and because they could not come at him for the
preass, they sent unto him, calling him as Saint Mark says. The cause of her
coming to Christ as he was preaching.
No doubt but the cause of their coming was good, and (as they thought) at
that time necessary: peradventure to persuade him to take some pity upon
himself, considering his long fasting and continual pains; which also is the
judgment of Theophilact. Which compassion of theirs proceeded merely out of
humane affection, but was not sinful. Whatsoever the cause was, he knew it,
and being about the business of his holy and heavenly Father, he did not
intermit it, nor yet condemn his mother and brethren of importunity: but from
thence takes occasion to tell them of other mothers and brethren which he had
by the adoption of God. For, S Mat. 12.50 S. Mar. 3.35.
(says he) Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the
same is my brother, and sister, and mother. So when he had made an end, he went
to dinner with a certain Pharisee, where he reprehended the outward show, and
simulate sanctity of the pharisees, scribes, and lawyers, as it follows in
Saint Luke, cap. 11. from v. 37. to the end.

The same day (as Saint Matthew says) Jesus went out of the pharisees house
where he had dined; Christ teaches the people in parables. S. Luc. 11.53, 54.
S. Mat. 13.1,
for the scribes and pharisees did not patiently bear his reprehensions, but
began to urge him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of many things:
laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something out of his mouth, that they
might accuse him) and sat by the seaside. And great multitudes were gathered
together unto him, among whom were Saint Mary Magdalen, and Joanna the wife of
Chuza, and Susanna, Luc. 8.2.3. so that he went into a ship and sat, 2.
and the whole multitude stood on the shore. In that posture he taught them
many things by parables, Psalm. 49.4. and 78.2.
(for so the Scriptures had foretold of him) whereof Saint Matthew observes
seven. Of the sower and of the seed. Of the tares. Of the mustard seed. Of the
leaven. Of the hidden treasure. Of the pearl. Of the draw-net. Concerning all
which, the Rhemists gives this brief account. He shows (say they) by the
parable of the sower, The account which the Rhemists give of his parables.
that in the labors of the Church, three parts of four do perish through the
fault of the hearers. And yet by the parable of good seed and cockle, (as also
of the net) that his servants must not for all that, never while the world
lasts, make any schism or separation. And by the parable of the little
mustard seed, and leaven, that notwithstanding the three parts perishing, and
over-sowing of cockles, yet that fourth part of the good seed shall spread over
all the world; And withal what a treasure, and pearl it is. Now when he had
spoken unto them all these his parables, he departed thence and came into his
own country, He comes to Nazareth he second time.
namely to Nazareth, together with his disciples, and went into the Synagogue
upon the sabbath day and taught, but with no success; for they were offended
at him, and reproached him, saying, Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary,
the brother of James, and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? and are not his
sisters here with us? Therefore when he had testified against them, S. Mat. 13,
53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58. S. Mar. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. S. Mar. 3.7.
saying, A prophet is not without honor, but in his own country, and among his
own kin, and in his own house: he departed, doing no mighty works there, but
only that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk and healed them; marvelling at
their unbelief who had thus rejected him the second time. And he went round
about the cities and villages teaching and preaching in their Synagogues, and
working cures every where. But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with
compassion on them, because they fainted, and were scattered abroad as sheep
having no shepherd. S. Mat. 9.36. The Apostles sent forth two and two.
Hereupon he called together those twelve disciples whom he had ordained and
named Apostles, to the end that they should be with him, and that he might send
them forth to preach; and sends them forth by couples, S. Mar. 6.7. S. Luc.
9.2.
(...), two and two, to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick, by
casting out devils, and by curing all manner of sicknesses and diseases. These
he sends to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, S. Mat. 10.6.
with instructions accordingly, which Saint Matthew, who himself was one of
them, sets down at large. 1st He gives them a charge concerning the
execution of his commission, S. Mat. 10.7, 8,
by doctrine, by works. How they must go forth, not as the Ambassadors of
Princes, with much preparation; but as legates of Divine providence without
provision. For the workman is worthy of his meat. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28,
How they must deport themselves where they shall come. And concludes with a
commination against those who shall not receive them as his Ambassadors. 2ly
He tells them how he sends them forth, and that they must expect persecution in
the world. 3ly He comfort them as touching persecution, and exhorts them
to perseverance for the reward sake. 4ly He gives them leave to fly from city
to city, yet not to be disheartened nor to fear, but to speak his word boldly.
5ly He assures them of divine providence, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33,
and that there shall be no cause for them to fear, but to persevere, and to
expect the reward if they faint not. 6ly That the cause of his coming was not
to send peace to the wicked world, to the end that men should conclude and keep
an inviolable peace with their sins and vices, but the sword of persecution
accidentally by the gospel. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.
Lastly, He shows who are worthy of him; and promises a blessing to those
that shall receive them, or any other whom he shall send forth with his
commission to preach the gospel in his name. So the Apostles went forth as
they were commanded, thoroughly instructed, with an undaunted spirit and
resolution. S. Mar. 6.30. S. Luc. 9.10.
And when they were returned, they gave an account to him (which all his
ministers must also do) of all things both what they had done, and what they
had taught.

How long it was that the Apostles were absent from Christ in The decollation
of Saint John the Baptist.
Howbeit, so near as I can collect by all circumstances, in the time of their
absence it was, and while they went about two and two, preaching the gospel
and doing miracles in his name, that Herod took off the head of Saint John the
Baptist, whose imprisonment by him we mentioned before, but reserved the
history to this place. Herod the King, the first and greatest of that name, who
persecuted Christ in his cradle, and caused the poor infants to be massacred
for his sake; had a sister named Salome, married to Alexas; and two wives,
Malthace a Samaritan, and Mariamne who was niece to Hercanus by Alexandra his
daughter, and of the Assamonaean family. By Malthace he had three sons,
Archelaus who reigned after him in Judea, of whom St. Mat. 2.22. and Herod
Antipas Tetrarch of Galilee, and Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, and of the region
of Trachonitis, of whom St. Luc. 3.1. By Mariamne the Assamonaean he had two
sons, Aristobulus and Alexander. Aristobulus had to wife Bernice the daughter
of Salome his fathers sister, and of her he had a daughter whose name was
Herodias. But these were not all the wives that Herod had, for he had also to
wife another Mariamne, the daughter of Simon Boethus the high priest, born in
Alexandria, by whom he had also a son whose name was Herod; this Herod married
Herodias, and had by her a daughter whose name was Salome, and then he dyed.
After whose death Herodias married Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, a second husband,
the brother of Herod Antipas by father and mother, and both of them brethren to
Herod deceased, by the fathers side. Herod Antipas falls in love with Herodias
his brother Philips wife, and she consents to forsake Philip her husband, and
did so. Herod Antipas (for so it was agreed betwixt them) repuding his lawful
wife, who was the daughter of Aretas king of Arabia, took unto him this
Herodias, who was the wife of Philip his own brother both by father and
mother, as is said before, and had her home to his house, together with Salome
her daughter: but Philip whom she had forsaken lived still, and died not till
in the twentieth year of Tiberius the Emperor, after that he had governed his
Province thirty and seven years, as Josephus says; a good and quiet man, ready
to do justice to all men at all times; he obtained a sumptuous funeral, and
was laid into a monument which himself had builded. Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 6.
Such were the incestuous marriages of the Herodian family. But, hinc illae
lachrymae. For Saint John the Baptist coming out of Judea into Galilee, (as
before is said) and having access unto Herod's court, was had in esteem by
Herod himself, S. Mar. 6.20.
who observed him; and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him
gladly. But Saint John knew not how to daube with untempered mortar; he could
not dissemble the sins and vices of the court, nor would he permit a sin so
heinous to be unreproved, but told Herod plainly, It is not lawful for thee to
have her. S. Mat. 14.4. Levit. 18.16. Levit. 20.21.
Saint John spoke law; for the law of God says, Thou shall not uncover the
nakedness of thy brothers wife; it is thy brothers nakedness. And if a man
shall take his brothers wife, it is an unclean thing; he has uncovered his
brothers nakedness; they shall be childlesse. Herodias the cause of her hatred
against Saint John.
Hence sprung the hatred of Herodias against Saint John, who for that cause had
a quarrel against him, and would have killed him if she could. She was
impudent, and was not ashamed of her uncleanness; she was proud and obstinate,
so that she would not endure reproof. Besides it is well observed by venerable Bede, she did fear, lest that Herod should at length repent, or be reconciled
to his brother, whereby it would come to pass, that this her incestuous
marriage should be dissolved. Therefore watched she all opportunities to destroy
him, and no doubt had counseled her daughter to do the like; having by her
importunity so far prevailed with Herod, that he had laid hold on him, and laid
him a prisoner in bonds in the castle of Machaerun, which was a frontire town
betwixt his and Aretas king of Arabia Petraeaes country. Herod also himself (I
suppose) was not difficultly induced to imprison him, whom he knew to be a just
man, and an holy, justum quoad homines, sanctum quoad Deum; S. Mar. 6, 20.
just to men-ward, holy to Godward, as the Gloss says; such is the rage of
unlawful lust. He was vvilling, but durst not put him to death, and when he
would have done it, (...), he feared the multitude, lest they should make
insurrection, and revolt from his government, because they counted him as a
prophet. S. Mat. 14.5.


Herodias did neither fear nor care what would come after, so that she might
have her will, to wash away her present fear in the innocent blood of the
Baptist. Therefore attending all seasons, at length there came a convenient
day. It was the birthday of this Herod Antipas, which of custom he did
solemnize anniversarily, (an old custom in the courts of princes, especially
pagan) for the solemnity whereof, he made a supper to his Lords, high captains,
and chief estates of Galilee; and then the foresaid Salome the daughter of
Herodias by her first husband Herod, came into the presence, and danced before
Herod Antipas, and before all his guests. Wherewith he was so much taken, that
he bad her to ask whatsoever she would, swearing that whatsoever she should
ask, he would give it her to the half of his kingdom. She who had been
pre-instructed by her mother Herodias, S. Mat 14.8.
upon all occasions to work the destruction of St. John the Baptist, went in
presently and acquainted her mother how matters had passed betwixt the king and
her, demanding her advice what she should ask. She counsels, that setting
all other demands aside, she should ask the head of the Baptist, as being of
more consequence to them both, then any thing else which the Tetrarch could
give. And so it follows in the Evangelist, that she came in straight way with
haste unto the King, and asked, saying, I will that thou give me by and by in a
charger, S. Mar. 6.25
the head of John the Baptist. And the King was exceeding sorry, yet for his
oath's sake, and for their sakes which sat with him, he would not reject her.
26,
And immediately the King sent, (not to the castle of Maehaerun, which was in
the confines of his country, remote; but to some nearer place whither he had
removed him to another prison, 27,
and from whence he might presently send for his head) an executioner, and he
went, and beheaded him in prison. 28. S. Mat. 14.9, 10, 11.
And brought his head in a Charger, and gave it to the damsel, and the
damsel gave it to her mother.

Thus was the blood of that righteous man most unjustly spilt, Samaria, then
called Sebast, The body buried by his Disciples.
in honor of Augustus Caesar; or in what other place, it is not mentioned) was
buried by his Disciples, who so soon as they heard of it, took it up and buried
it, and went and told Jesus. But his head remained in the power of wicked
Herodias, S. Mat. 14.12 S. Mar. 6.29
by whom they say it was secretly buried, (...), in an obscure corner or place
of the palace, Niceph. lib. 1. cap. 19, after that it had been by her
contumeliously used, and his tongue pulled out and stricken through with a
Bodkin, as Saint Hierome says. Now wickedness condemned by its own witness is
very timorous, Wisd. 17.11
and being expressed with conscience, always forecasteth grievous things. This
appeared in this Herod Antipas, the guilt of whose conscience after this
facinorus act, The guilty conscience of Herod Antipas.
drove him into a doting suspicion of St. John, and that he was risen from the
dead, no doubt (as he thought) to do him some mischief. He could not but hear
of the fame of Jesus, and of his miracles done all over Galilee, and at his
gates, for almost two years together: yet now, when a greater report was made
of them then ever before, and his miracles were multiplied every where, and
that he was highly magnified in the mouths of all men, and that it was known
that his Disciples had been sent forth by him, and done great things in his
name, and that men began to think and speak variously of him at the court, that
Elias had appeared, or that one of the old Prophets were risen again; And
because that it was said of some, that St. John was risen from the dead;
therefore Herod, thereunto deluded by his own guilty conscience, was perplexed,
and could not be removed from that fond conceit. S Mat. 14.1.2 S. M^r. 6.14.15,
16. S. Luc. 9.7, 8 9.
It is John (said he) whom I beheaded, he is risen from the dead. And St. Luke
says, that he desired to see him; but to what end, he says not. So was that
verified in this Herod, which St. Chrysostom observes, Sinners, whether they
do know, or whether they do not know, do fear every noise; sin does bewray him
whom no man reproves, it condemeneth him whom no man accuses.

Apostles being returned, he takes them and departs thence by ship into a
desert place, Christ take^h his Apostles to a desert place. S. Mar. 6.31
belonging to the city of Bethsaida. It was not for fear of Herod, but to give
unto his Apostles some rest after their travel. Come ye your selves apart,
into a desert place, and rest awhile. For the place where they were, was not
convenient; there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much
as to eat: therefore went they thither in a ship privately. That desert place,
though it did belong to Bethsaida, The desert belonging to Bethsaida.
yet was it not far from Capernaum, and is said to be an exceeding high hill
standing upon the shore of the Galilean sea, beautified with many herbs and
flowers of diverse kinds, very fruitful and pleasant, and extends it self in
length almost two bows shoot, and one in breadth. From whence a man might take
a view of the whole sea of Galilee, and of the countries of Iturea and
Trachonitis, whereof Philip was Tetrarch, even to the mount Libanus; also the
mountains Sanir and Hermon, and of a great part of the upper and lower Galilee.
Itinerar Scrip. p. 446. Now when the multitude had true intelligence of his
going thither, He feeds 500 men with 5 loaves and two fishes.
and of his being there, they followed him on foot out of the cities, which
they might do by those bridges which were over Jordan, and at Tiberias. There
(as the story is set down at large by the Evangelists) with five loaves and two
fishes, he fed about five thousand men, besides women and children, who did all
eat and were filled, S. Mat. 14. S. Mar. 6. S. Luc. 9.
and they took up of the fragments that remained, twelve baskets full. From
which miracle so wrought there, they call that mountain, the table of Christ,
and of his Apostles. Then those men, when they had seen the miracle that Jesus
did, said, This is of a truth that Prophet that should come into the world.
Therefore they set up an unanimous resolution to make him a King. S Joh. 6.14.
For it was the common opinion of the Jews, that the Messiah should come to
take upon him an earthly kingdom. Which opinion the Disciples themselves held
after his resurrection. When they therefore were come together, they asked of
him, Act. 1.6.
saying, Lord, will thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?

Jesus constrained his Disciples to get into a ship, S. Mat. 14.22 S. Mar. 6.45.
and to go before him unto the other side, while he sent the multitudes away.
It was to Bethsaida that he would have them to go. They being dismissed, he
went up into a mountain apart to pray. It should seem to be the same mountain
from which he descended to dismiss the people, and St. John observes the
occasion of his going up by himself alone, it was because he perceived that
they would come, and take him by force to make him a King. S. Joh. 6.15.
Worldly honors and preferments are great temptations, a kingdom the greatest
of all; he would pray, that which he has taught us to pray (and for our
example, so often as temptation shall betide us) Lead us not into temptation.
He walks on the sea to his Disciples
But there was an other end, for he would confirm the faith of his Apostles by
another miracle; therefore he stayed behind in the mountain, but the ship was
in the midst of the sea, about five and twenty, or thirty furlongs off the
land, tossed with waves; and hindered by a contrary wind. In the fourth watch of
the night he came unto them walking on the sea, and would have passed by them;
S. Mat. 14.25 S. Mar. 6.48.
This put them all into a great fear, so that they cried out, saying, it is a
spirit; but he told them that it was no phantasm, it was himself. Whereupon
(the rest being silent) St. Peter replied, saying, Lord if it be thou, bid me
come unto thee on the water; Christ bad him, and he went; but being like to
drown he was afraid, and cried out; but Christ saved him. S Mat. 14.32
And when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased. Then they that were in
the ship, came and worshipped him, saying, of a truth thou art the son of God.
33.
And immediately (which was also miraculous) they were at the land, and went on
shore in the region of Genesareth, He ariveth in the land of Genezareth.
a country bordering upon the sea of Galilee, wherein stood Capernaum and
Bethsaida, a land pleasant and fruitful, abounding with many sorts of
excellent fruits, fair and goodly to the eye. And when they were come out of
the ship, straight way they knew him. And ran through that whole region round
about, S. Mar. 6.54, 55,
and began to carry about in beds those that were sick, where they heard he
was. And whithersoever he entered, into villages, or cities, or country, they
laid the sick in the streets, and besought him, that they might touch, if it
were but the borders of his garment; and as many as touched him were made
whole. All which in effect, is also reported by Saint Matthew. 56. S. Mat.
14.34 35, 36.
But Saint John proceeds in the story, cap. 6. setting down at large that
Sermon of his, wherein he reproves the people flocking after him, and all the
fleshly hearers of his word, preaches unto them the bread which he will give;
telling that he is come from heaven, and therefore that he is able to give such
bread as can quicken the world, even his own flesh, and that himself is the
bread of life to all that believe. At which doctrine many of his Disciples were
offended, revolted from him, and walked no more with him, though he had told
them that they should see by his ascension into heaven, that he came down from
heaven. Yet the twelve would not forsake him, because he had the words of
eternal life; and because they did believe and were sure, that he is Christ the
son of the living God. Upon which confession of theirs, made by St. Peter, he
intimates the treason of Judas, whom he says to be a devil, knowing that the
devil would enter into him, and put it into his heart that he should betray
him.

Jerusalem into Galilee, Pharisees, and certain Scribes, who observing the
demeanor of Christ's Disciples, The Disciples eat with unwashen hands. S. Mat.
15.2.
and that some of them did sit down to meat, and did eat with unwashen hands;
they took occasion from thence to fly upon Christ himself, saying, Why do thy
Disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they wash not their hands
when they eat bread. The Pharisees, and all the Jews had many washings and
purifications by water, superadded to those which Moses ordained, as the
washing of cups, and pots, and brazen vessels, and tables, to wash when they
came from the market, and to wash their hands before they did eat, and such
like: they called these the traditions of the elders, and did carefully observe
them as necessary duties, Traditions of the Pharisees reproved
and the neglect of them they utterly condemned. Christ therefore defends his
Disciples, by reproving their hypocrisy, whereby they laid aside the
commandments of God for their traditions sake. And by showing wherein they did
so. For Moses said, Honor thy father and thy mother, and who so curses father
or mother, S. Mar. 7.10 11.
let him dye the death. But ye say, if a man shall say to his father or mother
Corban, that is to say, a gift, (a gift devoted to the sacred treasury) by
whatsoever thou might be profited by me: Corban what it was.
he shall be free. We read in the book of Kings, that when Iehoash would repair
the Temple which was then in decay, 2 King. 12.9.
Iehoiada the Priest took a chest, and bored an hole in the lid of it, and set
it beside the Altar; That chest the Jews called Corban, a gift, from the
office which it had, or use whereto it was put, which was to keep and contain
the money given toward the reparation of the Temple; but the Greeks called it
Gazophylacium, (...), because the treasure was kept there. Howbeit, under the
second temple, it was no more a single chest, but a capacious building, called
the Treasury. The tradition of the Pharisees therefore was, S. Mar. 12 41 S.
Luc. 21.1.
that they who would give to the Corban, and put in their gifts there, should
not be obliged to any other charity, no not to the relief of their own
parents; by which tradition of theirs, they made the commandment of God of none
effect. This offended the Pharisees, but he regards not the offense which
they took, seeing they were justly reproved, and were the blind leaders of the
blind, S. Mat. 15.13, 14. v. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. S. Mar. 7.18, 19, 20, 21, 22
23.
who should fall into the ditch with those that were led by them. And to the
people he yielded the reason of that which they reproved, and again to his
Disciples, showing the ground of the Pharisaicall washing (to wit, that meats
otherwise defile the soul) to be false. Having thus shaken off the cavilling
Scribes and Pharisees, he went into the borders of Tire and Sidon cities of
Phoenicia, in the tribe of Nepthali; yet never subdued, but always inhabited
by Gentiles. He went thither to obscure himself for a time: for Saint Mark
says, that he entered into an house, and would have no man know it, but he
could not be hid. S. Mar. 7.24. The dau^hter of the Canaanitish woman healed.
For a certain woman who was a Greek or Gentile, of the stock and progeny of
the Canaanites, came to supplicate him on the behalf of her daughter
grievously vexed with a devil; the faith of which woman was notable, for she
came and fell at his feet, freely acknowledging him the Messiah, Have mercy on
me, O Lord, thou son of David. At first he seemed altogether to neglect her,
for he gave her no answer. Then to reject her, for his disciples besought him
to send her away. 3ly To excuse himself, as being sent only to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel. And when she would not be so answered, but still
persisted to worship him and to cry unto him; then fourthly he reproached her,
calls her dog, and that it is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast
it to dogs. That when she acknowledged to be true, and yet begged the crumbes of
his mercy, then obtained she her petition, S Mat. 15 28 S. Mar. 7.29.
with that singular Elogium: O woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee, even
as thou will. For this saying, go thy way, the devil is gone out of thy
daughter.

Being departed from the coasts of Tire and Sidon, he came Galilee, S. Mar.
7.31. Concerning Decapolis.
through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis. Which country took its name from
those ten principal cities which were situated in it That country I take it
to be, which the Scripture calls Gilead, and was a part of Galilee lying
beyond Jordan toward the East, and was so named of that heap of stones which
Laban and Jacob made, Genesis 31.47, 48, Number. 32.26. Deuteronomy. 3, 10.12. Josh. 3.8.
for a witness betwixt them, and was given to the Reubenites and Gadites for
their inheritance, together with the half tribe of Manasseh. Which those ten
cities were, from which that region took its name, I will not contend; there
were many fair cities in that land. At the request of the people of that place,
he healed a man that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech; One cured
that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech. S Mar. 7.33, 34,
he was (...), one that could not speak but with great difficulty. He cured him
with greater ceremony then any: for, He took him aside from the multitude, and
put his fingers into his ears, and he spit and touched his tongue. And looking
up to heaven he sighed, and says unto him, Epphata, that is, Be opened. And
why he did all this, that is only known to him that did it. And he charged
them (lest he should incense the Jews through envy to kill him before the
time, says Saint Chrysostom) that they should tell no man; but the more he
charged them, so much the more a great deal they published it, And were beyond
measure astonished, saying, 36,
He has don all things well; he makes both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to
speak. 37.


Galilee, S. Mat. 15.29
and went up into a mountain, and sat down there. And great multitudes came
unto him, having with them those that were lame, 30.
blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus feet, and
he healed them. And upon the third day, he fed about four thousand men, Four
thousand fed with seven loaves and a few little fishes.
besides women and children, with seven loaves, and a few little fishes, and
they took up of the broken meat that was left seven baskets full. What the
(...), and what the (...) did contain, I know not; but when he fed the five
thousand with five loaves and two fishes, they took up of the fragments that
remained (...). S. Mar. 8.8. S. Mat. 14.20. S Mar. 6 43.
But now that he fed four thousand with seven loaves and a few little fishes,
(...). The vulgar Latin keeps the distinction, twelve cophini, seven spor^ae;
I cannot think them to be baskets of equal measure; and some say that the
sportae did contain two cophini; and it is probable, for Saint Paul was let
down out of a window by the wall (...), in a sporta, which was a basket so
called. But if any man will think this no better then a nicety, so let it
pass. S Mat. 15.39. S. Mar. 8.10. Magdala and Dalmanutha.
And he sent away the multitude, and took ship, and came into the coasts of
Magdala. Dalmanutha, says Saint Mark. There is no dissonancy betwixt the two
Evangelists: for Magdala (as I read) was a city situated upon the Galilean
sea, the town of Saint Mary Magdalen; and Dalmanutha a spacious plain thereunto
adjoining. There the Pharisees and Sadduces came unto him, tempting him, and
requiring of him a sign from heaven; The Pharisees and Sadduces reproved.
but he sharply reproves their hypocrisy, who required that sign out of
pride and curiosity, having seen so many wonderful miracles, and having set up
their resolution before hand not to believe in him, whatsoever he should say,
or whatsoever he should do; S. Mat. 16.1, 2, 3, 4. S. Mar. 8, 11, 12, 13, 14.
flatly denying to show them any other sign from heaven, but only the sign of
the prophet Jonah, which sign he made good by his death and blessed
resurrection. And he left them, and entering into the ship again, departed to
the other side. Now the disciples had forgotten to take bread, neither had they
in the ship with them any more then one loaf. While they were in the ship
together, he charged them to bevvare of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the
leaven of Herod. They being conscious to themselves of their own neglect
missunderstood him, thinking he had taxed them of negligence, in not having
made such provision of bread as they ought to have done, and that they should
at no hand either buy or borrow it of the Pharisees or Herodians. This error
was both gross and childish, and yet utterly a fault in them, who it seems
had forgotten to take with them those seven baskets full of fragments that
were left. But it was by dispensation, says Theophilact, to the end that
being reprehended, they might be amended, and might come to the knowledge of
the divine power of Christ. The disciples reprehended, and why.
And indeed he never reproved them so sharply as now he did; for he condemns
them for making such construction of his words, he told them, that they did
neither perceive nor understand, that their hearts were hardened, S. Mar. 8.17,
18, 19, 20, 21. S. Mat. 16.8, 9, 10, 11,
that they had eyes but they did not see, that they had ears but they did not
hear, that they had forgotten his two late miraculous feedings, of the five
thousand with five loaves, when they took up twelve baskets, and of the four
thousand with seven loaves, when they took up seven baskets full of
fragments; and that therefore they did not understand concerning what bread he
spoke. 12.
Then understood they how that he bad them not beware of the leaven of bread;
but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadduces. Then comes he to
Bethsaida, He heals a blind man.
where some of the inhabitants of that place besought him to restore a blind
man to his sight by a touch of his hand. The ceremony which he used in this
cure was singular; for he led him out of the town, ( because of the
infidelity of those that dwelt in it, says Bid) he spit in his eyes, and put
his hands upon him, and asked him if he savv ought. The man looked up and said,
that he saw men as trees walking. He did not perfectly see, because he did not
perfectly believe; neither was he cured perfectly at first, because of the
unbelief of those that brought him, and for his own imperfect faith: fidem
sequitur medela, he would dispense his cures according to the faith of those
that were to be cured by him. Therefore when his faith was confirmed, he put
his hands upon him again, made him to look up, and he saw every man clearly. S.
Mar. 8.22, 23, 24, 25, 26
And that he might well know that he did it not for the praise and
commendations of men, he permits him not to go into the town to publish it
there, but commands him to go away presently to his own house.

And now have we likewise to take notice how the covenant serpents head, and
for the abolishing of the old testament. The Recapitulation.
By going up to Jerusalem at the third passover after his baptism. By curing
the impotent man there, who had been diseased thirty and eight years. By
avouching his authority, By curing the man that had a withered hand. By
ordaining his twelve Apostles. By preparing and instructing them to be sent
forth, by his divine doctrine and precepts. By curing the leper. By curing the
Centurions servant of a palsy. By raising the widows son from the dead. By
accepting a legation from Saint John the Baptist. By accepting the invitation
of Simon the Pharisee. By dispossessing a blind and dumb devil, By
convincing the scribes and pharisees of the irremissible sin. By promising the
sign of the prophet Jonas. By teaching the people in parables. By sending
forth his Apostles two and two. By feeding five thousand men with five loaves
and two fishes. By walking upon the sea to his disciples. By reproving the
traditions of the pharisees. By healing the daughter of the Canaanitish woman.
By healing him that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech. By feeding
four thousand with seven loaves and a few little fishes. By reproving the
pharisees and sadduces. By reprehending his disciples. By healing the blind
man. It became him who humbled himself, and was made man for the redemption of
all mankind, to do all these things. And thus (following herein my learned
author, and late right Reverend Diocesan, in his learned Theanthropicon) our
sacred history does put an end to the third year after his Baptism, which was
the two and thirtieth year of his age.

The first occurrence of the next year is, that Jesus with his disciples
Caesarea Philippi, not into Caesarea Philippi it self, S. Mar. 8.27. S. Luc.
9.18. S. Mat. 16 13 Christ interrogateth his disciples.
but into the towns of Cesarea Philippi, as St. Mark says, and in the way
having prayed alone, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the
son of man am? This question was propounded to them by the way as they went,
not out of ignorance, as if he had not known what it was that the people said
of him: nor out of curiosity, as if he were delighted to hear the rumors of
the vulgar concerning himself; but docendi gratia, because he meant to teach
and instruct them more perfectly. He did not ask whom the Pharisees and
Scribes did say him to be, that was publicly and notoriously known; for in the
blindeness of their own minds, and in the hardness of their hearts, (...),
says Saint Epiphanius. They knew not his Godhead, and they supposed that he
was no other but a mere man. Lib. Anchor. cap. 27. They knew nothing of his
wonderful conception, which was by the holy Ghost; nor of his wonderful
birth, which was of a pure virgin; nor of his special privilege, which was
that he was without all sin; nor of the hypostaticall union, whereby the word
was made flesh; not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by taking of
the manhood into God. They did therefore notoriously defame him, S. Joh 8.44.
S. Joh. 10.20
said that he was a Samaritan, and that he had a devil; That he had a devil,
and was mad. And because he came eating and drinking, S. Mat. 11.19
they said, Behold a man gluttonous, and a wine-bibber, a friend to publicans
and sinners. They undervalued all his miracles, and look what they saw and knew
to be done by the divine power and virtue of the holy Ghost, they affirmed of
the devil, S. Mar. 3.22.
saying, He has Beelzebub, and by the prince of devils casts he out
devils. Therefore he did not ask what they said him to be, but whom do men
(the people, the vulgar) say that I the Son of man am? The opinion of the
people concerning Christ.
They told him, (according to the common opinion of the people of the Jews in
those days, whereby it was believed, that the souls of the defunct, according
to the merits of each person, did commigrate into other bodies) that some said
that he was Saint John the Baptist, some Elias, others Jeremias or one of the
prophets; that is to say, of the old Prophets, and that he was such by (...),
for that the soul of Saint John the Baptist, Elias, or Jeremias, or of one of
the Prophets, was transmigrated into him, and that this was the vulgar error
concerning him. Whereupon he demanded of them, saying, But whom say ye that I
am? Simon Peter the mouth of the Apostles, replyeth both for himself and for
all the rest, Thou art Christ, Saint Peter's confession.
the son of the living God. He pronounces him blessed for his faiths-sake,
whereby he so believed, affirming that this his answer was by divine
revelation, For flesh and blood (says he) has not revealed it unto thee, but
my Father which is in heaven. And then admonishes him of the retribution for
his confession sake. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Promising also unto him the
keys of the kingdom of heaven, to the end that whatsoever he should bind on
earth, should be bound in heaven, and whatsoever he should loose upon earth,
should be loosed in heaven. His prerogative.
1st He confers upon him this prerogative, That he is Peter, that is to say, a
stone, for the word (...) in the greek signifies a stone. And it was his
prerogative that he was made a stone, not by conversion of his nature into
stone, but by the gift of grace; by his faith, and by his function. For in this
was Christ as good as his word, and performs that promise which he made, when
first he was presented to him by his brother Saint Andrew, Thou art Simon the
son of Jona, S. Joh. 1.42.
thou shall be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, a stone. And he did
reserve the confirmation of his promise, till Saint Peter had made this good
confession.

The Church of God, which is the whole number of those whom The Church compared
to a material temple. S. Mat. 21.13 1 Pet. 5.2.
is often in the Scriptures resembled to a material temple; and in particular
to the temple of Jerusalem. So that like as that temple was called an house,
the house of prayer: in like manner is this called an house, a spiritual
house, for distinction sake. The material house was built of stones laid one
upon another; the spiritual house is likewise said to be builded; but the
edification is not of natural and inanimate, 1 Cor. 12.26 1 Pet. 2.5.
but of spiritual and living stones. The natural stones of the material
temple were joined and cimented one unto another, that so the building might
rise to perfection; Ephesians. 2.21.
and the spiritual stones are in like manner fitly framed together, that the
building might grow unto an holy temple of the Lord. The material temple had a
strong foundation, that foundation was a rock, upon which were superstructed
great and mighty stones to support the whole fabric, which stones might not
improperly be called the foundation, and were indeed a second foundation most
necessary for so great a structure; which afterward was raised with costly and
curious stones, such as Solomon made ready, 1 King. 6.7.
and brought thither; or such as those stones which the disciples did marvel
at in the temple, S. Mar. 13.1. S. Mat. 24.1.
saying, Master, see wha^ manner of stones, and what buildings are here! (Which
stones, as Josephus faith, were twenty and five cubits long, eight cubits
high, and twelve cubits broad). Isa. 28.16.
In like manner this spiritual structure is built on Christ, who is the rock,
the strong and sure foundation; the prophets and Apostles, great and mighty
stones, a second foundation, necessary for the spiritual structure, upon whom
the members of the Church as fair stones are built, for an habitation of God
through the spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. Saint Peter a stone of the spiritual building,
and how.
as Saint Paul says. Of this spiritual building was Saint Peter, a stone by
his faith and by his function. By his faith he was made an elect and precious
stone: by his function he was made a great and mighty stone, a second
foundation, a necessary foundation stone. By his faith he was laid into the
building; by his function he was laid into the foundation of the building. By
his faith he had fellowship with the Saints; by his function he had equality
and copartnership with the Apostles. His function what it was.
His function was the office of his Apostleship, whereby he was made a
strong foundation stone, upon whom other stones in the building are fitly
placed. Ephesians. 4.11,
For Christ gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, 12.
and some Pastors and teachers; For the perfecting of the saints, for the work
of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. The Apostles, the
Prophets, the Evangelists, the Pastors and Teachers therefore, are necessary
stones for the building of the Church, that it might be raised. But the
greatest of all these were the Apostles, whose function none could attain unto,
but those twelve elected first by Christ, and after his resurrection Saint
Matthias, Act. 1.6. Act. 9.15.
who succeeded in the place of Judas the traitor. And Saint Paul that chosen
and elect vessel, the Apostle of the gentiles, last called.

Church which is now in the time of the new testament; sure foundations upon
Christ the rock or first foundation. Of whom they obtained commission to teach
all nations, S. Mat. 28.19
and to baptize them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. Which commission of theirs they faithfully executed; Romans 10.18.
for their sound went out into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of
the world. They had gifts and graces answerable to such a function, and by
their ministry, The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved.
These great stones upon diverse respects are said to lie, Acts. 2.47. The
Apostles how laid into the foundat^on.
and to be laid, in the foundation of the building, for the supportation of
other stones, less in graces, and less in office. 1st Because they were
called to that office and function, not by the ministry of man, but immediately
by God, (...), not of men, neither by man, as Saint Paul says of himself. 2ly
Because they first of all had commission to preach Christ crucified unto the
gentiles, and to join both Jews and Gentiles into one people, that so the
root of Jesse might stand for an Ensign of the people, Isa. 11.10.
and the Gentiles might seek unto it. 3ly Because that other great officers in
the Church, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, were ordained by their ministry,
and consecrated by the hand of their Apostleship; Act. 6.6.
but they themselves were not so ordained, but were chosen immediately by God,
and received their commission from Christ his own mouth. Lastly, they ordained
none to succeed in the fulness of their office and Apostleship: viz. To go
unto all nations, S. Mar. 16.16.
and to preach the Gospel unto every creature, (which was their immediate
commission Apostolical) but they ordained proper Pastors unto particular
Churches, to whose care they recommended the flock of Christ, in those places
where they themselves had preached and prevailed; reserving the oversight even
of the Bishops and priests unto themselves. And hence it is that Saint Paul
directs Timothy and Titus how to behave themselves in their function. And
that Saint Peter takes upon him to instruct the elders of the Church. And that
Saint John counsels, reproves, and commends the Angels or Bishops of the
seven Churches of Asia; these things being branches of the Apostolical
dignity. It was no small matter therefore that Christ performed unto Simon the
son of Jona upon his confession, Thou art Peter a stone, a great foundation
stone, the chief and principal of all the foundation stones; and as such a
stone, (...), as Saint Basil has it; For the eminency of his faith such a
stone, as should receive upon himself the whole fabric of the Church.

But if the house be built upon the sand, or in a marish foundation stones will
not, cannot assure the building from falling or sincking; therefore 2ly having
told him what he had made him to his Church, a stone; he proceeds to tell him
what he himself is to his Church, a rock, for the supportation of all the
foundation stones, and of the whole superstructed building. Upon this rock I
will build my Church. The Church built upon Christ the rock.
This rock which thou have confessed, (says Saint Augustine) Upon this rock
which thou have known, (saying thou art Christ the son of the living God) will
I build my Church. I will build thee upon me, not me upon thee. For men
intending to build upon men, said, I hold of Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas,
(that is Peter) and others who would not be builded upon Peter, but upon the
rock, said, I hold of Christ. For the rock was Christ, upon which foundation
Peter himself was builded. (De verb. Dom. ser. 13.) since no man can lay
another foundation besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. And in
the same sense have Saint Gregory Nyssen, Saint Cyril, Saint Chrysostom, Saint
Ambrose, Saint Hilarie, venerable Bede, and many other holy Fathers, and
learned Divines, understood this place; for against the Church so built, the
gates of hell shall not prevail.

gates of cities are most strongly fortified, The gates of hell.
and firmly barred and bolted; by gates is to be understood (as says the new
gloss) omne robur, and omne munimentum, every strength, and every muniment.
And by hell, omnem vim contrariam, and Satanicam, omnem hostis impetum, all
contrary and Sathanicall power, every incursion of the enemy. viz. The devil
himself, and all his angels, all the power that they have: the wicked world,
all tyrants and seducers, who are the devils instruments. For the state of the
faithful and chosen of God in this present life, is as it were a warfare,
whereof the Church is called militant. The adversaies and enemies whom we must
fight against, our Savior speaks of them as of a strong kingdom, which he
calls hell, because it warreth all for hell, and the devil is the prince of
it. Ephesians. 6.11. 2 Cor. 10.4.
The gates of hell therefore do signify those (...), those fortresses,
munitions, and strong holds, which the powers of hell do hold against the
Church, and from whence they assault it in all her members, by force or fraud.
All which is meant by gates, because the gates of castles and of strong holds,
are wont to have the best munition, and to be most strongly fenced. So that the
gates of hell are not only heresies, (although heresies are of them, as Saint
Epiphanius, lib. Anchor. and Saint Augustine. De symb. ad Catechum. do note)
but also persecutions, in name, in goods, in liberty, or in life, and specially
sins, with all manner of evils which seek to subdue us to everlasting death.
As is well observed by Origin, Saint Chrysostom, Saint Gregory, and others.
The gates of hell therefore may assault, but they shall not prevail against the
Church catholic, utterly to extinguish it, nor against any sound member of the
same, who is an homogeniall part of the whole, rightly built and abiding upon
the rock. Psalm. 139.1, 2, 3, 4.
Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say. Many a
time have they afflicted me from my youth; yet they have not prevailed against
me. The plowers plowed upon my back, they made long furrows. The Lord is
righteous, he has cut assunder the cords of the wicked. And this is the first
part of that retribution which the Apostle Saint Peter received from his Lord,
S. Mat. 16.18
upon his good confession, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

retribution was in expectance, and to be made good in the future; The keys of
the kingdom of heaven promised, and given.
that was, the keys of the kingdom of heaven, then to be given when he shall
be risen from the dead, and shall have fully accomplished the work of man's
redemption. Saint Peter for the present was not in capacity; and Christ
himself was not yet fully manifested to be the Savior and redeemer of all
mankind. That promise therefore must be performed in its season, after his
resurrection; and he performs it the same day. The same day at evening, being
the first day of the week, when the doors were shut, S. Joh 20.19
where the Disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood
in the midst, and says unto them, Peace be unto you. And when he had so said
he showed unto them his hands, and his side. Then were the Disciples glad when
they saw the Lord. 20,
Then said Jesus unto them again, Peace be unto you: As my Father sent me, even
so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, 21, 22,
and says unto them, Receive ye the holy Ghost. Whosesoever sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them, and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained.
23.
The power of Christ to give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, is
threefold. 1. The power of the Creator, By what power Christ gave the keys.
S. Joh. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.7.
All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was
made. Heaven it self was his creature: how shall he not dispose the work of his
own hands? 2ly The power of the Redeemer, in whom we have redemption through
his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. Is he
the redeemer of that Church of his, part whereof sings the songs of victory
in heaven, and is called the triumphant Church: part whereof lies in the camp
of warfare upon earth, and is called the militant Church; and must not then the
keys be his, to open the doors of heaven, by himself, and by his ministers
unto whom he shall commit them? 3ly He is the head of his Church, Ephesians. 5.23.
as the husband is the wives head. Is that head of his Church the Lord of
heaven? and has he not the keys to open the doors of heaven, to that
mystical body whereof he is the head? To that little flock of his, who are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. 30,
The keys of the kingdom of heaven were his to give, and he gave them
according to his word and promise; he did not delay to give them, but being
risen from the dead, he gave them the same day.

The kingdom of heaven in the scriptures, is compared to a city, Jerusalem,
Reu. 21.10, 12,
having a great and high wall, and twelve gates. Man was a citizen of that city
till he sinned, but by sin he lost his freedom there, in as much as there
shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever
works abomination, or makes a lie. 27,
For his sin he was banished this city, and the gates fast locked and shut
against him. He was cast out of Paradise, and God placed cherubims and a
flaming sword, which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.
Genesis 3.24.
So that there was found no way to return back into the city, or into Paradise,
from whence man was expulsed. But God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. Him therefore did God give to open the gates of heaven, which
were shut and locked by sin, and by the guilt thereof; to bring in man, and
to open them to the faithful, S. Joh. 3.10.
and to shut them against the unbelievers. What keys Christ had, and what keys
he gave to the Apostles. Rev. 3.7. S. Mar. 2.7. S. Joh. 1.29.
Who because he is the great King of this city, he is said to have the key of
David, and opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens. By a
twofold possession he is Lord of the keys. For 1ly As he is one God with the
Father, he has the same keys which the Father has, even the key of authority
to forgive sins. Who can forgive sins but God only? 2ly As he is the Son of
the Father made man, and, by the merit of his death and passion, is that very
lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world; he has the key of
excellency, and by a special prerogative does open and shut the gates of
heaven. Neither of these keys gave Christ to his Apostles: the keys which
they had by his Donation, were ministerial keys; to the end that not by
themselves, but by the power of God, and by the virtue of Christ his passion,
they might open and shut the gates of heaven. These keys as St. Chrysostom
says, are the knowledge of the scriptures; according to Tertullian, the
interpretation of the law; and as Eusebius says, the word of God. The matter
of them is a double act, Keys of two sorts.
of knowledge, and of execution: from whence also the keys are of two sorts,
the key of knowledge, whereby the man of God does judge rightly, to whom the
gates of heaven are to be opened, and against whom they are to be shut; like a
wise doorkeeper in the Lords temple, well knowing whom to admit, and whom to
repel. And the key of power, whereby accordingly he puts the matter in
execution, opening the doors of heaven to those that are worthy, and shutting
them against those that are unworthy. This judgment of discerning the worthy
from the unworthy, had the Apostle Saint Peter, Act. 8.23.
for he perceived and affirmed Simon the Sorcerer to be in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. And therefore he did not open the
gates of heaven unto him; but shut him out, Act. 10.48. How the keys are to be
administered.
and bound him as an unclean thing. But when Cornelius the Centurion had sent
for him, he found him worthy; and therefore opened the gates of heaven unto
him, and baptized him. The manner also how these keys are to be administered,
is to be respected. For the ministerial function, is either common to the whole
priesthood, 1 Cor. 4.1.
so far forth as all the priests are ministers of Christ, and stewards of the
mysteries of God. And are by their function obliged to preach the word, to
administer the Sacraments of the Church, 2 Timothy 4.2.
to be instant in season, out of season, to reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all
long suffering and doctrine. Or else it is peculiar to the Bishops, and
goverours of the Church, who because they are ordained not only to administer
in holy things, but to bear rule in the Church of Christ, S. Mat. 18.17
and to preside; therefore the keys are again to be distinguished. For there
is the key of Order which does belong to the inward court of conscience, and by
the ministry of the Gospel, does immediately open and shut the gates of
heaven, and is the common key of every priest, rightly and lawfully ordained to
his office and function by imposition of sacred ha^^s, of what degree or title
soever he be, by that authority which is delivered unto him to preach the
Gospel, and to administer the Sacraments. And there is the key of
jurisdiction, whereby Ecclesiastical censures (as public penance for public
crimes, admonitions, suspensions, excommunications, and such like) are
enjoined, and inflicted, which is not the common key of every priest, but does
belong only to the Bishops and governors of the Church, to whom it belongs
to bear rule, and to preside as before is said. Nor yet is this key admin^stred
in the inner court of conscience, but in the outward court of jurisdiction.
Neither does it open and shut heaven gates immediately, but before the militant
Church. And hence it is that the Apostle Saint Paul instructs Timothy, not
only as a Priest, how to administer his key of order in the inward court, and
to open and shut the gates of heaven immediately, by administration of the
Gospel: but also as a Bishop, how to administer his key of jurisdiction as a
Bishop, in the outward court, and to open and shut heaven gates in the
consistory, and before the militant Church, as is plainly to be seen 1 Timothy 5.

But these keys were not promised unto Saint Peter only, and Apostles, but
omnibus cum Petro, quia Petrus pro omnibus loquutus est Apostolis; To whom the
keys were prom sed and given.
to all the rest with Saint Peter, (because that like as Christ demanded of
them all, saying, Whom say ye that I am? even so by the revelation of the
father) Saint Peter answered for them all, saying, Thou art Christ the son of
the living God. Like as he demanded, so was he answered; as he was answered, so
did he promise; as he promised, so did he perform; for between these four
things, a question, an answer, a promise, and the performance, there is mutual
reference. Christ demanded of them all, saying, Whom say ye that I am? They all
answered by the mouth of Saint Peter, as a jurie of sworn men, giving up their
verdict by their foreman, Thou art Christ the son of the li^ing God. Like as
the tongue speaks on the behalf of all the body: (...). Even so was Saint
Peter the tongue of the Apostles, and he alone made the answer for them all.
Christ therefore makes his promise to all, by replying to St. Peter only,
because only St. Peter had spoken for them all, and given up their answer. And
finally, as the truth it self, what he had promised to all, he performed to
all. For he gave them all his peace. He breathed on them all the Holy Ghost. S.
Joh. 20.19 20, 21, 22, 23 S. Mat. 28.19, 20. S. Mar. 16.15
He gave them all the same power of remitting, and of retaining sins, that is
to say, the power of the keys promised before. He sends them all forth with
one and the same commission, to preach and to baptize all the world over. And
this is the doctrine of the catholic Fathers, and was of the Bishops of Rome
themselves in purer times; for said Leo, The jurisdiction of this power passed
over unto all the Apostles, Ser. de Apost. And when Christ (says he) said unto
Peter, I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, the right of
this power passed over unto others, and that which is commended in express
terms unto one, is intimated unto all, and Christ said it unto Peter
singularly, because the form of Peter is prop^sed to all the governors of the
Church. And so Pope Anacletus also, The rest of the Apostles (says he)
together with the like fellowship, received both honor, and power. Ad Epis.
Ital. Ep. 2. Saint Cyprian, The other Apostles were the same thing that Peter
was, endowed wi^h the like, (or equal fellowship, pari consortio) both of
honor and power. Lib. de unit. eccles. And finally, among many other, St.
Augustine, who speaking of the keys, and of the power of binding and loosing,
says plainly thus, Hoc Petrus pro omnibus, tanquam personam unitatis accepit.
This has Peter received for all, as it were the person of unity. Ser. 10. The
use of the keys.
super Johan. The use of the keys was from the beginning of the world; And God
himself did then first administer them by his own authority, by making unto
Adam the original promise. It succeeded in all ages before the resurrection of
Christ, Genesis 3.15.
in that ministry which God gave unto his Church. But Christ would abolish the
old Testament and legal worship; therefore must he transfer the keys to
another priesthood. And this was it which he promised St. Peter to do, and
performed it after his resurrection, as before is said. Blessed art thou Simon
Bar-Jona: for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, S. Mat. 16.17
but my Father which is in heaven. And I say also unto thee, that thou art
Peter. And upon this rock I will build my Church; and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it. 18,
And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever
thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; whatsoever thou shall loose
on earth, 19.
shall be loosed in heaven.

Apostles did highly rejoice, and were exceedingly glad to receive such a
promise from Christ, and began also to think of the performance of it, The
keys to be transferred from the legal to the Evangelical priesthood, and when.
and when it should be that such keys, with such power, should be conferred
upon them. But they must not expect the accomplishment, till after his
resurrection; for till then he might not by divine dispensation, transfer the
keys of the kingdom of heaven with that power of binding and loosing, from the
legal, to the Evangelicall priesthood. Therefore says St. Matthew, (...),
From that time forth, when he had first straightly charged them that they
should tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ (least his passion should be
hindered, for had they known him to have been Jesus Christ indeed, they would
not have crucified him) he began to show unto his Disciples, how that he must
go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders, 1 Cor. 2.8.
and chief priests, and Scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third
day. As if he should say, He foretells his passion, death, and resurrection.
when I I have been at Jerusalem, and when I have suffered, and when I shall
be risen again from the dead upon the third day, then will I make good my
promise, by giving unto you the keys of the k^ngdom of heaven. At this all the
Apostles being overcharged with sorrow, and because he spoke it openly, so
that the people also too notice of his words, Saint Peter the mouth of the
Apostles the second time came unto him privately, and began to rebuke him,
saying, Be it far from thee, Lord, this shall not be unto thee. At this he is
offended, reproves him sharply, calls him Satan, commands him to get behind
him, for that by giving him such counsel, he savoured not the things that be
of God, but those that be of men. For what, if the counsel that Saint Peter
gave proceeded from that love and affection that he did bear unto his Lord, who
knew also that he did love him? yet by giving him such counsel, which was
against the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God for the redemption
of all mankind by his death upon the cross, he was Satan and an adversary,
who must get behind him, viz. cease to withstand the will of God by carnal
counsel, From thence therefore he takes occasion to admonish his disciples
and the people, how to follow him in persecutions, and to bear his cross, S.
Mat. 16, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. S. Mar. 8.34, 35, 36, 37, 38. S. Luc. 9.23, 24,
25, 26, 27.
valuing their precious souls above their temporal lives, or the whole world;
telling them also that there were some standing amongst them, who should not
taste of death, till they should see the son of man coming in his kingdom^;
intimating thereby that glimpse of his glory which he would show unto some of
them by his transfiguration; if not rather the destruction of Jerusalem, which
Saint John lived to see.

And after six days, says Saint Matthew, and with him Saint but Saint Luke,
About an eight days after these sayings. S. Mat. 17.1. S. Mar. 9.1. S. Luc.
9.28.
(That is to say, six complete days after he had so said, not accounting the
day that he spoke, nor the day that he ascended into the mount, The
transfiguration of Christ.
but only the six intervening days) Jesus takes Peter, James, and John his
brother, and brings them up into an high mountain apart; supposed to be the
mount Thabor, a mountain in Galilee, of which something has been said before;
where also it is thought (as has been before observed) that he preached that
famous Sermon unto his Apostles before the multitude, repeated by the
Evangelist Saint Matthew, cap. 5.6.7. And was transfigured before them. But why
these three and none but these? I can give no reason but the special favor
and familiarity which they had with their Lord above the rest; and why that, he
only knows. But his special favorites he had in every degree. He had many
disciples, multitudes of disciples; but out of the whole number he made a more
special choice of seventy, that they might be more conversant with him than
the rest. S. Luc. 10.1.
And them he sent two and two before his face, into every city and place
whither he himself would come. There was a more special choice of twelve
Apostles, S. Mar. 3.14.
that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach. Of
which twelve also he admitted three to a more intimate familiarity, these were
Saint Peter, Saint James, and Saint John his brother. These only were permitted
to be present when he went in, S. Mar. 5.37.
and raised up Jairus his daughter; and these only he takes with him into the
mountain, and was transfigured before them. Not presently so soon as he had
ascended, but as he prayed, or was praying. He did not change the nature of his
body, but only the external form into a greater glory; for his face did shine
as the Sun, and his raiment was white as the light; white and glistering, says
Saint Luke, exceeding white as snow, so as no fuller upon earth can white them,
says Saint Mark. And so each Evangelist has his own expression. It was for
his disciples sake to whom he would show a glimpse of his glory, to the end
that the humility of his passion might not offend them. And it was for his
servants Moses and Elias sake, S. Mat. 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. S.
Mar. 9.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. S. Luc. 9.32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
whom he would entertain in robes of glory. For Moses and Elias talked with
him, appearing in glory, and speaking of his decease which he should accomplish
at Jerusalem. And so the other passages follow as they are set down by the
Evangelists. Of the motion made by Saint Peter, as touching three tabernacles
to be built there. Of the Fathers testimony from heaven. Of the disciples
question concerning the coming of Elias; and of Christ his answer thereunto.
And that first as he came down from the mountain, he charged them to conceal
the vision till after his resurrection, which also they did, questioning one
with another what the rising from the dead should mean.

Apostles all night upon the mount, and the next day he came down with them, S.
Luc. 9.37.
and when he came unto his disciples he found a great multitude about them, and
the Scribes questioning with them. And straightway (says Saint Mark) all the
people when they beheld him were greatly amazed, S. Mar. 9.15,
(for it is likely that his face shone as Moses's did, when he came down from
the mount) and running to him they saluted him. 16.
And he asked the Scribes, What question ye with them? But a certain man came
unto him, S. Luc. 9.38.
kneeling down, and supplicating on the behalf of his son, who was his only
child, who at certain seasons of the moon (and therefore said by Saint Matthew
to be Lunatic) was grievously vexed with a dumb and deaf spirit, S. Mat.
17.15. A dumb and deaf spirit dispossessed.
which wheresoever he took him, did throw him down, and tear him, so that he
fomed, and gnashed with his teeth, and pined away; telling him also that he had
brought him to his disciples, (those nine which did not ascend with him) and
they could not dispossess him. Christ having blamed the people for their
unbelief and hardness of heart, commanded him to be brought. And when he was
brought, straightway the spirit tare him, and he fell on the ground and
wallowed foming. These are the symptoms of an Epilepsie, but it was not
naturarall, (...), the spirit tare him. He demanded of his father (not because
he knew it not, but because he would have the multitude to know it) how long he
had been in that case? He told him, Of a child, and that oftentimes it had
cast him into the fire and into the water to destroy him, desiring him to help
both him and his child by his divine power. Christ requires his faith; of
which having received a good confession, he cured him by his word, saying, Thou
dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee come out of him, and enter no more into
him. The disciples demanded of him privately and when he was come into an
house, why they could not cast him out. He tells them, because of their
unbelief, (magnifying the power of faith) and for that they had not disposed
themselves thereunto by prayer and fasting. And so while he passed to and fro
in Galilee, S. Mat. 17.22, 23. S. Mar. 9.30, 31, 32. S. Luc. 9.44, 45.
before he went up to Jerusalem, he renewed unto them that doctrine which he
had taught them before, concerning his passion, death, and resurrection upon
the third day. But they understood it not, and were afraid to ask him, being
exceeding sorry. About this time also it was (as I think) that he visited the
house of Martha and Mary, as is to be seen, St. Luc. 10.38. they then having
their habitation in Galilee. And afterward, as he was praying in a certain
place, (likely upon one of the mountains upon which he ascended to pray) his
disciples came unto him, desiring him to teach them to pray (in public, and
when they came together, according to a set form, and conceptis verbis) as
Saint John the Baptist also taught his disciples. Whereupon he prescribed to
them his own prayer, directing and requiring of them to use it, totidem verbis,
teaching them to pray instantly, and with full assurance to obtain. St. Suc.
11. from v. 1. to 14.

Then came he to Capernaum where he dwelt, and where his Saint Peter also
dwelt, together with Saint Andrew his brother, as has been said before. And
being come thither, the collectors of the tribute money called didrachma, came
unto Saint Peter, Christ paid the didrachma.
demanding of him whether his Master did pay the tribute, or piece of money so
called, who answered, Yes, (it seems therefore that he had formerly paid it,
and Saint Peter did know that he did pay it so often as it was due.) That piece
of money called Didrachma was half a stater, and the stater was half an ounce
of silver, Epiph. lib. de men's. and pond. So that at the rate of five shillings
the ounce, the didrachma came to fifteen pence of our English sterling money,
Exodus 30.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
and the stater which was two didrachmaes two shillings and six pence. Some
think it to be that sacred tribute imposed by the law, which was paid of every
man by the pole, and was for the service of the tabernacle first, of the temple
afterward; which tribute was to be paid for ever, a memorial unto the
children of Israel before the Lord, to make atonement for your souls, said the
law, and was for the repair of the temple and other sacred uses. And was paid
in to the gazophylacium, being an anniversary payment, which continued to the
utter desolation of the temple, and dissolution of the Mosaical policy; and was
then (as I read) transferred to the Capitol, in Vespasians time. But this was
some other tribute, not sacred, but political, imposed not by the law of God,
but by the secular power, and paid anniversarily by the pole in the several
cities, of all the inhabitants, and was required of Christ as an inhabitant or
citizen of Capernaum. This the circumstances do plainly evince; for first, this
tribute was demanded and paid at Capernaum to the collectors there; but the
sacred tribute before mentioned, was brought to Jerusalem and paid in the
temple, 2 King. 12.4. 2ly The words of Christ to Saint Peter import so much,
For when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented him, saying, What think
thou Simon? of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their
own children or of strangers? A question at no hand to have been demanded, had
it been a divine or sacred, and not a humane or political tribute. Finally,
Christ paid it but to avoid scandal, (...), lest we should offend them, having
otherwise a sufficient exemption, had he been pleased to have used it: It was
not therefore enjoined by the law of God, against which (in that he came to
fulfill all the righteousness thereof) he would have pleaded no immunity. By
whom this tribute was imposed, whether by Caesar, by Herod, or peradventure by
Pompey, who first put them under tribute to the Romans, I have not to say: it
appears not to be a sacred but a civil tribute, paid by Christ both for
himself and for his Apostle Saint Peter, as inhabitants of Capernaum, who sent
him to the sea to fish and to find a stater, (which was two didrachmaes) that
he might pay it for them both. And when they were come to Capernaum, they that
received tribute money ((...), the didrachmaes) came to Peter, and said; Does
not your Master pay tribute? [(...), the didrachmaes.] He says, Yes. And when
he was come into the house, S. Mat. 17.24,
Jesus prevented him, saying, What think thou Simon, of whom do the kings of
the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children or of strangers?
Peter says unto him, Of strangers. 25, 26,
Jesus says unto him, Then are the children free. Notwithstanding lest we
should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook and take up the fish
that first comes up: and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a
piece of money (...), a (stater which was two didrachmaes) that take and give
them for me and thee. 27.


Saint Peter having taken the fish, paid the tribute money, and Capernaum. But
they held their peace, being ashamed it seems to say what it was; S. Mar. 9.33,
34. S, Luc. 9.46.
for by the way they had disputed among themselves who should be the greatest.
They disputed which of them should be the greatest, as St. Luke says: but
being loath to say it in plain terms, they came unto him as St. Matthew says,
and asked him, saying, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? S. Mat. 18
1.
But he perceived the thought of their heart; and therefore having answered the
question briefly, The most humble: If any man desire to be first, the same
shall be last of all, and servant of all; He teaches hit Apostles humility.
he brings forth and presents unto them a pattern of true humility, a little
child (said to be St. Ignatius, being then a little child) whom he called unto
him, set him in the midst, took him in his arms, and as it were making him
his text (for as St. Chrysostom says, a little child is void of envy, and
vain glory, S. Mat. 18.3, 4, 5, 6. S. Mar. 9.37. S. Luc. 9.48.
nor does it desire the primacy) he preaches unto them against ambition the
mother of Schism, warning them to be humble and harmless. And when he had
answered St. John, who told him that they had forbidden one who cast out devils
in his name, because he followed not him together with them, as a Disciple,
bidding them not to prohibit such as be not against them. He prohibiteth
scandal.
He denounces a woe unto them that give scandal justly, amplifying the
greatness of the sin, by the greatness of the punishment; It were better for
him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the sea. Teaching also how scandal must be avoided, and enforcing the
duty by diverse arguments, persued at large by Saint Matthew, and by Saint
Mark. Tutelary Angels.
Whereof this is one which comes with a caveat, Take heed that ye despise not
one of these little ones; for I say unto you, that in heaven their Angels do
always behold the face of my father which is in heaven. S. Mat. 18.19
From whence though it cannot be concluded, that every one has his tutelary
Angel assigned unto him in particular; from the hour of his birth, to the day
of his death; yet this will be inferred, that his little ones, who are his
little ones by the grace of regeneration, are not destitute of the care and
custody of the good Angels, from the first moment of their regeneration, to the
day of their death, who also when they do dye, are ready at hand to carry their
souls up with them into heaven. As it is plainly said of Lazarus, that when he
was dead, S Luc. 16.22
he was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom.

But then the question is, what we must do to them that offend us, Concerning
brotherly correption and remission. Levit. 19.17. S. Luc. 17.3.
and sin against us. 1. We must admonish them privately according to the law
(for it is written, Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart; thou shall
in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him) if they
acknowledge the wrong and repent, then must we forgive them. 2ly If they will
not acknowledge the wrong nor repent, then must the injury be expostulated
before one or two witnesses, that so it may be made appear to be a sin, and a
wrong, as the Gloss says. And before one or two witnesses, because it is
written in the law, One witness shall not rise up against a man for any
iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sins; at the mouth of two
witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, Deuteronomy. 19.15.
shall the matter be established. 3ly If they be obstinate, and will not so be
convinced, then must we tell it to those who have the government of the Church,
and the keys of the kingdom of heaven, to the end that they may be admonished
by them, and in case that they contumaciously persist, be excommunicated. By
which sentence of excommunication, The power of excommunication.
justly and lawfully inflicted, they are bound in heaven: and, so long as they
shall lie under that sentence perversely, and of obstinate malice, are to be
unto us as heathen men, or as publicans were unto the Jews. A great and
grievous sentence, and, as St. Augustine says, a greater punishment then if a
man were executed by sword, fire, or wild beasts. Wherein a man is more
sharply, S. Mat. 18.15 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
and pitifully bound, then with any iron, or adamantine manicles, or fetters in
the world. Cont. adver. leg. lib. 1. cap. 17.

But Christ had not said how often it is that we must forgive Peter would know,
fearing (it should seem) lest too much lenity and gentleness should give
occasion and liberty unto others to offend us. Remission, how often it is to be
done.
Therefore he came unto him, and said, Lord, how often shall my brother sin
against me, and I forgive him? till seven times? he proposes largely, as he
thought, S. Mat. 18.21
neither did he imagine that beyond seven times he should be bound to forgive.
Jesus says unto him, I say not unto thee until seven times; but until
seaventy times seven. So he answers both negatively, and affirmatively:
negatively, I say not unto thee, 22,
until seven times: affirmatively, until seventy times seven. Which is
numerus certus pro incerto, finitus pro infinito, a certain number for an
uncertain, a finite for an infinite; and therefore his answer is, So often as
he shall sin against thee. This he illustrateth by a similitude, showing
thereby how the case stands betwixt God and man. Therefore is the kingdom of
heaven likened unto a certain king, 23,
which would take account of his servants. One of them was deeply indebted, and
did owe unto him ten thousand talents. He had nothing to pay, therefore is
commanded to be sold with his wife and children, and all that he had. 24 25,
He beseeches patience; his Lord is compassionate and remitteth the debt. 26,
27, 28, 29, 30.
The same servant uses a fellow servant with extremity for a small debt, and
casts him into prison. The fellow servants report this to their lord, who
expostulateth his cruelty, and because he had forgiven him that great debt, but
upon condition that he should show the like mercy to his fellow servant (which
because he had not showed) he cast him into prison till he should pay it. 31,
32, 33, 34, 35.
Such is the case betwixt God and us; So likewise shall my heavenly Father do
also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses.

When Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed from Galilee, Judea beyond
Jordan. And he preached to the people who followed him in great multitudes, and
healed the sick. S. Mat. 19.1. S. Mar. 10.1. Concerning divorcement. S. Mat.
19.3. S. Mar. 10.2.
So go on St. Matthew and St. Mark with the story. Thither came the Pharisees
tempting him with a question which they moved, concerning the solubility or
insolubility of marriage. Is it lawful (said they) for a man to put away his
wife for every cause? or to put her away at all? Is it lawful for a man to put
away his wife? Christ his answer is negative, and for this cause he alleges
the original institution, and concludes with an Epiphonema, What God has
joined together, let not man put asunder: As if he should say, S. Mat. 19.6.
because that God made them at the beginning male and female, because he said
that a man shall leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his wife, and they
twain shall be one flesh; and because they are no more twain, but one flesh,
therefore that it is not lawful for a man to put away his wife. They
interrogate, why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and
to put her away? Moses indeed did permit the men to put away their wives for
uncleanness, and the woman divorced to be married to another man; this was but
a temporal permission to them only, Deuteronomy. 24.1, 2.
and for the hardness of their hearts: it must not be so now, for from the
beginning it was not so. S. Mat. 19.8, 9. S. Mar. 10.11, 12.
That therefore now neither must the man divorce his wife, nor the wife her
husband, but for fornication only. This seemed to his Disciples an hard
saying; If the case be so of the man with his wife, (said they) it is not good
to mary. He tells them, that continency, is a peculiar gift of God, rarely
given; and that there be three sorts of Eunuchs or continent men, for that
some are born Eunuchs, and are without natural ability; some castrated, and
made Eunuchs by men (the antiquity of which injury done to nature, Ammianus
Marcellinus, lib. 14. refers to Semiramis the wife of Ninus, Queen of the
Assyrians, who did first of all, as he says, cause it to be done:) others who
have made themselves Eunuchs, (to live chastely and unmarried, the better to
serve God in a chaste and single life, by the grace of God, S. Mat. 19.11 12.
subduing the flesh with the affections and lusts) for the kingdom of heavens
sake. This last is the expetible gift, and He that is able to receive it, let
him receive it.

Jerusalem; and his way from Galilee was through the country of Samaria. He is
denied entertainment by the Samaritans.
Wherefore he sent certain messengers before him to one of the villages of the
Samaritans to provide for his coming; but they hating the Jews, as the Jews
also did them, and declining to have commerce one with another, refused to
entertain him, upon no other reason, but because his face was as though he
would go up to Jerusalem. Whereupon two of his Disciples, S. James and S.
John, would, by his leave, have called fire from heaven to consume them, as
Elias did those two captains of the fifties, with their fifties, who were sent
by king Ahaziah to apprehend him, 2 King. 1. But Christ rebuked them, S. Luc.
9.51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56.
told them that they did not know what spirit they were of, for that his
coming was not to destroy any, but to save all. And so they went into another
village which entertained them. Ten lepers cleansed.
At that time (it should seem) as he went to Jerusalem, passing through the
midst of Samaria and Galilee, as he entered into a certain village, there met
him ten men that were lepers which stood afar off, and cried out unto him, to
heal them of their leprosy, Jesus, master, have mercy on us. The leprosy was
a foul disease, pertinacissimae scabiei genus, a kind of scab most hard and
difficult to be cured. Some think it to be that disease which the Greeks call
(...), because it breaks out in hard scabs or scales white and black, making
the skin harsh and rugged like the Elephants. Of all other diseases it was most
infectious, for it did infect the apparel; and the walls of the house were
sometimes infected with leprosy. Therefore were the lepers to be put apart
lest they should infect others, and to give warning of their uncleanness, by
wearing a covering upon their upper lip, and by crying out, and saying,
unclean, unclean; having also their clothes rent, Levit. 13.45.
and their head bare. This was the reason why he found these lepers without the
village, and why also they stood afar off. And when he saw them, he said unto
them, go show your selves unto the priests; namely, that the priests might see
and pronounce the cure, which part of their office he would not anticipate, S.
Mat. 8.4. S. Mar. 1.44 S. Luc. 5.14.
neither did he at all cure any of that disease (that we read of) but he sent
them to the priests. And it came to pass that as they went, they were
cleansed. Whereupon one of them who was a Samaritane, returned back to express
his gratitude for the cure which he had received, which he did, most humbly
giving glory to God. A duty which he rightly judged meet to be performed in the
first place, approved, accepted, and rewarded with a further benefit, the
spiritual sanitie of his soul; for when he lay prostrate at his feet; ex
procubitu, and supplicatione fidem suam simul cum benevolentia pandens, by
prostration and supplication laying open his faith and devotion. He bad him to
arise, saying, Arise, go thy way, thy faith has made thee whole. S. Luc.
17.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
As for the other nine, although they did hold on their way to go to the
Priest, as they were commanded, yet because they did not first return to give
glory to God, they were justly blamed.

So he comes to the feast of Tabernacles, of which feast, and for He goes to
the feast of Tabernacles.
Howbeit he came not up till the midst of the feast, which continued for the
space of eight days; he went not up sooner, because he would not comply with
the ambition and boldness of his kinsmen, who did not yet believe in him; but
having sent them up first, himself came after, S. Joh. cap. 7. from v. 1. to
14.
as is set forth by Saint John in his seventh chapter. At this feast he taught
openly in the temple, though they sought to kill him, and converted many. The
pharisees and chief priests sent officers to apprehend him, whom they
reprehend and revile because they had not brought him, and also quarrel
Nichodemus for taking his part in the council. S. Joh. 7.50, 51, 52. The woman
absolved that was taken in adultery.
At this feast also he absolved the woman taken in adultery, preached himself
the light of the world, justified his doctrine, exhorting the believers to
perseverance, confounds his adversaries, proving them neither to be free, nor
of Abraham, nor of God, but of the devil; proving himself to be God, greater
and ancienter then Abraham. S. Joh. 8.58, 59.
Wherefore when they would have stoned him, he passed through the midst of
them, and so went his way.

Being departed out of the temple, as he passed by, (with Baptism, A man cured
that was born blind.
which is the sacrament of illumina^ion or faith, he opens the eyes of t^ose
that are spiritually blind) he cured a man that was borne blind; when he had
spit upon the ground, made clay, anointed his eyes, and sent him to wash in
the pool of Siloam. S. Joh. 9.6, 7.
By the miracle it self, the attestation of the party and of his parents, both
the neighbors and the pharisees are plainly convinced. But the pharisees
condemn him because he had wrought the miracle upon the sabbath day; and after
much altercation with the poor man, they cast him out of the synagogue. Christ
finds him, tells him who he is; the man believes, and worshippeth; v. 39,
40, 41.
he foretells the gentiles to be illuminated through faith in his name, and
the Jews to be blinded through unbelief. And so proceeds as it is (...) the
next chapter to declare both his office and person in a parable, wherein he
compares Gods chosen to sheep, and himself to a shepherd; Christ the good
shepherd.
admonishing them of three sorts of men, who meddle with the sheep. The first is
the shepherd who has right unto the sheep, cares for them, and defends
them against the wolf, with the hazard of his own life. The second is the
hireling, who though he come into the sheepfold by the door as the shepherd
does, yet when the wolf comes he leaves the sheep and flees, and then the
wolf catches and scatters them. The third are thieves and robbers, who
break into the sheepfold, and come to steal, to kill, and to destroy. That he
himself is the good shepherd, who will lay down his life for his sheep, he
will not lay it down by constraint, but voluntarily, and at his own pleasure
will rise again. That he will bring the gentiles also into his fold, that so
there may be one flock, consisting both of Jews and Gentiles under Him the
good shepherd. For which divine sayings of his, a contention arose among the
people, S. Joh. 10.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Parable of the laborers. S.
Mat. 20.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Seventy disciples sent forth. S. Luc. 10.8,
9, 10, 11, 12.
some condemning, some defending him. During also the time of his abode there,
he proposed the parable of the laborers, hired by the householder to work in
his vineyard for a penny a day; showing thereby that God is no man's debtor, and
to show that the gentiles also who are called last shall be equal in reward
with the Jews who are his ancient people. Likewise at that time he sent out
his seventy disciples (seventy two, says the vulgar latin, and the Rhemists;
but the greek has seventy) to work miracles, and to preach; giving them ample
instructions how to demean themselves, as well toward those that should
receive them, as also toward those that would reject them. These were Christ's
inferior clergy; for like as the Apostles were his higher clergy, and did
represent the superior clergy, who are the Bishops; even so were the seventy
disciples his inferior clergy, and did represent the inferior clergy called
Priests. The one figured by the twelve wells of Elim, the other by the
threescore and ten palm trees there, where the people of Israel in their
peregrination (a type of the Church militant) encamped, Exodus 15.27.
but not without a further mystery. He did then also state the question
concerning the greatest commandment. S. Mat. 20.36, 37, 38, 39, 40.
Taught the lawyer how to attain eternal life, and to take every one for his
neighbor that needs his mercy, by the parable of that poor traveller that
fell among the thieves, S. Luc. 10.36, 37.
and the courteous Samaritan who showed mercy on him. With many other divine
doctrins scatteringly set down by the blessed Evangelists, who as they
professed to writ either annals or diaries, so was it sufficient for them to
enform the Church concerning his doctrines and miracles, as the holy Ghost gave
them to write, though they observe not the same order of time, place, or
occasion, in all things which they wrote.

Jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it was winter, therefore he
departed not out of Jerusalem till after that feast. S Joh. 10.22 The feast of
dedication. 1 King. 8.63
There were three solemn dedications of the temple, the first was the
dedication of Solomon's temple, in the month of September. The second was the
dedication of Zorobabels temple in the month of February. 2 Chronicles. 7.10. Ezr.
6.15, 16. 1. Mac. 4.56, 57.
The third was the dedication of the temple repurged, and the Altar repaired by
Judas Machabaeus, after that it had been profaned by Antiochus, in the month of
November, decreed to be solemnly kept from year to year by the space of eight
days. It appears also by Josephus, that there was a fourth dedication of the
temple, built and enlarged by Herod, solemnly kept upon the day of his
inauguration to the kingdom, which Herod observed during his life, S. Joh.
10.23. Solomon's porch.
to conduplicate the public joy upon that day. Lib. 15. cap. 14. And Jesus
walked in the temple in Solomon's porch. Solomon's porch is also called Atrium
mundorum, the Court of the clean, because none might enter into it but they
only that were clean according to the law; neither might any heathen man be
permitted to come in thither. And I read, that upon certain pillars of marble
which stood before the entry thereinto, it was engraven in the Hebrew, Greek,
Latin, and the Idumaean languages, that if a stranger should presume to go in
thither, he should be put to death. And that Herod also caused to be hanged
over the eastern gate, by which they came into this court, a golden sword,
whereon was enscrived, If a stranger go in, let him die. This court was not
without a great concourse of people, because thither they resorted to pray, and
did pray there, both men and women; the men on the south side, the women on the
north, a wall being betwixt them. It was not altogether unlawful for men at
some times to walk there. For at the feast of the Dedication, which was in
winter, namely in November, (that of the temple repurged, and the Altar
repaired by Judas Macchabaeus) Jesus walked there; And the Jews came round
about him, and said unto him, v. 24,
How long do thou make us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly.
He appealed to his works, and had that contest with them which follows to the
fortieth verse. The feast being ended, he departed from Jerusalem, but did not
go presently into Galilee, but first went to the place beyond Jordan, v. 40,
41, 42.
(that was Bethabara) where Saint John at first baptized. As he abode there
some little time, and much people resorted unto him; there came some who
brought news of a most horrid murder, perpetrated by Pilate upon certain
Galileans, The Galileans slain by Pilate.
whom he had caused to be slain in the temple, while their sacrifices were
offering; by this means profaning the house of God, and mingling their blood
with their sacrifices. So I understand the story. But who they were, and for
what cause they were so slain, it is not mentioned. Howsoever the common
opinion is, that they were certain sectaries, who held the opinions of Judas of
Galilee, Act. 5.37.
and denied to sacrifice for the Emperor and people of Rome, whereupon Pilate
caused them to be thrown upon their own sacrifices and slain, He preaches
repentance.
and so their blood was mingled with them. Whatsoever they were, he takes
occasion from thence to exhort them to repentance, proposing the parable of the
barren fig tree, S. Luc. 13.6, 7, 8, 9.
intimating thereby the utter destruction of the Jewish nation, (to whom he had
already preached three years without effect) in case they would not repent.

Galilee, as his custom was, he preached in the Synagogues upon the sabbath
days. A crooked woman cured. S. Luc. 13.11.
And upon a certain sabbath in a synagogue where he taught, there was a woman
which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and was bowed together, and
could in no wise lift up her self. This her infirmity therefore was not from
any na^urall cause, but from the devil; therefore said to be a spirit of
infirmity, because he kept her bowed together, depriving her of all strength to
lift up her self. At which cure, (for he healed her by his word, with
imposition of his hands) the ruler of the synagogue being offended, reproves
the people for coming to be healed upon the sabbath day, whose hypocrisy he
sharply reprehendeth, v. 14, 15, 16, 17,
and so appositely by similitude of an ox or ass loosed from the stall, and
led to the watering on the sabbath, that all the people rejoiced, and all his
adversaries were ashamed. Then he preached unto them concerning the kingdom of
heaven, 18, 19, 20, 21.
which he compares to a grain of mustard seed, and to leaven, showing thereby
the powerful working of the word in the hearts of his chosen, and the
propagation of his kingdom, by the ministry of the gospel, all the world
over. The same day some of the Pharisees (whether it were so indeed, or whether
it were but their own surmise, or peradventure to terrify him that he might
desist) came unto him, bidding him to be gone, for that Herod would kill him.
But he slighted the admonition, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.
designing Jerusalem for the place of his passion, and reproving both Herod
and Jerusalem. And upon the same day, or upon some other sabbath day, as he
went to dine with one of the chief Pharisees, He cures an hydropick man. S.
Luc. 14.1, 2, 3, 4 5, 6.
he cured an hydropick man; and knowing their hypocrisy, and that they watched
him, defended the fact and stopped their mouths by asking them this question;
Which of you shall have an an ass, or an ox fallen into a pit, and will not
straightway pull him out on the sabbath day? Saint Augustine observes the
aptness of his similitudes, in that he compared the hydropick man, whose
disease was too much moisture, or watery humor, to a beast fallen into a pit,
as also he had compared the crooked woman to a beast loosed from the stall to
be led to the water. De cons. Evang. And observing the pride and ambition of
the guests, v. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
striving for the chiefest rooms, he put forth a pararable, thereby teaching
them humility. And to him that bad him he gave counsel to feast the poor, not
for a recompense here, v. 12, 13, 14.
but for a reward in heaven. Which when one of the guests heard, being ravished
with his words, he cried out, saying, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the
kingdom of God. Which speech of his ushered in that parable of the great
Supper, 15. v. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 2^, 23, 24.
whereby was showed that worldly minded men who contemn the word of God, shall
be shut out of heaven; and that the Jews who made worldly excuses should be
shut out, and the Gentiles admitted in their room and stead.

And there went great multitudes with him: that is to say, after Pharisees
house. S. Luc. 14.25
To these he preaches by the way, giving them to understand, that it is no
light thing for any man to take upon him the profession of religion, Christ's
Disciples must bear their cross.
for that his Disciples must bear their Cross, to whom it must be nothing
grievous to forsake their parents, and wives and children, friends and kindred,
and to lay down their lives too, when there shall be good occasion, for a
testimony unto him. They therefore that will be his Disciples, must have a fixed
resolution, having first counted the cost, like him that would build a tower;
v. 28 29, 30. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.
and also carefully considered their strength of grace and christian fortitude,
as a King that is to war with another King, takes counsel concerning his
forces; for they that apostatize, will be altogether unprofitable, like salt
that has lost his savor. At that time also (it should seem) or not long
after, drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners, for to hear him. S.
Luc. 15.1, 2,
And the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying, This man receives sinners,
and eats with them. Those whom they call sinners, were those who then were,
or formerly had been of a scandalous conversation, either truly, or in their
opinion; with whom they always coupled the publicans, who were no less
scandalous unto them for their office sake. But by the parable of the lost
sheep, The parables of the lost sheep, and of the lost dram.
and of the lost dram, he shows that there shall be joy in heaven, and in
the presence of the Angels of God, over one publican or sinner that repents,
more then over ninety and nine proud hypocrites, such as Pharisees were, just
in their own eyes, who would find no sins in themselves to be repented of. And
so likewise for the younger son, the prodigal Gentiles; the elder, to wit, the
Jews disdaining, v. 7. and 10. Parable of the prodigal son. v. 28, 29, 30, 31,
32. Of the unjust steward.
and refusing to come into the Church, notwithstanding his loving invitations.
Then by the parable of the unjust steward, directing his speech unto his
Disciples, but in the presence and hearing of the Pharisees; he instructs
them to be faithful stewards of the goods of their Lord, whether spiritual
graces, or temporal blessings, and by the Mammon of unrighteousness (the goods
of the world, for mammon is a Syriack word, and signifies riches) to acquire
many fri^^ for the kingdom of heavens sake, and that by the dispensation of
this unrighteous Mammon, the servant will approve himself to be just or unjust.
S. Luc. 16. from v. 1. to v. 13.
The Pharisees who could not conceive in what sense worldly riches lawfully
acquired might be called unrighteous, the mammon of unrighteousness, being
themselves covetous, and knowing that temporal riches are promised by the
letter of the law, they derided him; showing by outward actions, and gestures,
that they had him in scorn and derision; (...). But he reproves their
hypocrisy, showing that the Law and the G^spell are not contrary, if the law
be understood in its right sense, for that as long as heaven and earth shall
stand, one title of the law (according to the spiritual, v. 14.15, 16, 17, 18.
and Evangelicall sense and meaning) shall not be frustrate. Foretelling them
further, that the covetous Jews shall be denied of their father Abraham, when
the poor penitent Gentiles shall rest in his bosom. Which he insinuates by a
narration of a certain unmerciful rich man, justly damned in hell, and of a
certain poor beggar, mercifully saved. Which narration, Narration concerning
the rich man and Lazarus S. Luc. 16.19 20, 21, 22, 23. S. Luc. 16.24 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
whether it be historical or parabolicall, and not rather in part historical,
so far as concerns the persons, their conditions here, and their several
estates after death; but parabolicall as concerning other things, as the
lifting up of his eyes in hell, where he saw Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in
his bosom; and also his petition as well for himself, that Lazarus might be
sent to dip the tip of his finger in water and to cool his tongue; as also on
the behalf of his brethren, that he might be sent to testify unto them;
together with Abraham's reply to both; I take not upon me to define.

Apostles for augmentation of Faith, The Apostles petition for increase of
faith.
saying, Lord, increase our faith. Whereupon he sets forth, and magnifieth
the power of faith, and that we must be fervent, and labor to be strong in
faith, but humble withal, waiting upon Gods commandments to do them, and
expecting a reward hereafter; like the good servant who does first make ready
for his master, S. Luc. 17.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and give his attendance upon him, and afterward sits down to his own
supper; knowing that we are bound to God, and not he to us. And either then
immediately, or not long after, The Pharisees question.
when the Pharisees moved a question concerning the kingdom of God (of the
approach whereof they had heard so much) when it should come; he answers,
that they must seek the kingdom of God within themselves; S. Luc. 17.21
for the kingdom of God is, that God reign within us. But to his Disciples he
discourses otherwise concerning the kingdom of God. Warning them after his
passion, to expect his second coming in glory: telling them in what manner he
will come, willing them to be always prepared, for that many will be suddenly
surprised, like the old world, and the men of Sodom. A^^ ^^en there shall be no
respect of persons, for that all persons, men and women, as they shall be found
meet or unmeet for his kingdom, v. 34 35, 36.
so shall they be accepted or rejected. These things when they understood not,
by reason of that carnal opinion concerning the worldly kingdom of the
Messiah, they reply, (...); Where, Lord? in what place shall it be, where they
shall be thus accepted or rejected? His answer is aenigmaticall, intimating,
that they shall be gathered unto him from all places of the world, 37.
like as the Eagles fly from all quarters to the dead carcass. Then follows
the parable of the importunate widow, Parable of the importunate widow.
who by her importunity obtained justice of an unjust judge; which he spoke to
this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint: assuring them
thereby, that God will avenge his own elect which cry day and night unto him,
and that he will do it speedily, though for the present he forbear with
patience. And though he be so zealous on the behalf of his elect, yet that
wickedness shall so abound upon earth, Luc. 18. from v. 1. to v. 9. The Parable
of the pharisee and of the Publican.
that when the Son of man shall come to judgment, the true believers shall be
but few. Hereunto he annexeth the parable of the Pharisee, and of the Publican,
both of them praying in the temple in the same posture of body, but to diverse
ends: the Pharisee to justify himself, the Publican to crave pardon for his
sins: the Pharisees prayer was Eucharistical in opinion of his own
righteousness: the Publicans was deprecatory in a true sense and feeling of his
own wretchedness. This was not directed to his Disciples as the former, but to
the Scribes and Pharisees, and such as they were, who trusted in themselves
that they were righteous, S. Luc. 18.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
and despised others; therefore if not spoken at the same time, and in the same
place, yet fitly to follow for the subjects sake. For they that will pray
continually, must pray with humility; because if they cannot say with the
Pharisee, that they be just; yet they can say with the Publican, that they be
sinners. Nor must any man presume to justify himself to God; For every one
that exalts himself shall be abased: and he that humbles himself shall be
exalted.

And now we must again take notice, how the covenant was Serpents head, and for
the abolishing of the old testament. The Recapitulation.
By interrogating the Disciples concerning himself. By making good his promise
to Saint Peter. By being himself the rock of the Church, upon which the
Apostles were to be laid as sure foundation stones. By promising to assure his
Church against the gates of hell. By promising the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, to be transferred to the Evangelicall priesthood. By foretelling his
passion, death, and resurrection. By his Transfiguration. By dispossessing a
dumb and deaf spirit. By paying the Didrachma. By teaching his Apostles
humility. By prohibiting scandal, and laying down the doctrine of brotherly
correption and remission. By stating the question concerning Divorcement. By
passing by the injury done to him by the Samaritans. By cleansing ten lepers.
By going up to the feast of Tabernacles. By absolving the woman taken in
adultery. By curing the man that was born blind. By setting himself forth to
be the good shepherd. By proposing the parable of the laborers. By sending
out his seventy Disciples. By other things which he said, and did there at that
feast. By abiding at Jerusalem the feast of dedication. By preaching
repentance. By curing a crooked woman. By curing an hydropick man. By teaching
his Disciples to bear their cross. By proposing the parables of the lost
sheep, of the lost dram, and of the prodigal son. By proposing the parable
of the unjust steward, and the parable of the rich man, and Lazarus. By
replying to his Apostles petition for augmentation of faith; and to the
Pharisees question concerning the kingdom of God. By the parables of the
importunate widow, and of the Pharisee and publican. It became him who humbled
himself, and was made man for the redemption of all mankind, to do all these
things. And thus, with my late learned Diocesan, our sacred History does put an
end to the fourth year after his Baptism, which was the three and thirtieth
year of his age. And this also shall be an end to the second book of this our
sacred History.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE SACRED AND MOST MYSTERIOUS HISTORY OF MAN'S REDEMPTION.
NOW the great day of Atonement draws high Priest will by the sacrifice of
himself once offered, make the atonement for all the people, expiate all
their sins, and reconcile them to God. Therefore went he through the cities and
villages; He journyeth toward Jerusalem. S. Luc. 13.22 23. Exhorts to enter
in at the strait gate.
teac^ing and journeying toward Jerusalem. And as he went, one demanded this
question, saying, Domine, si pauci sunt qui salvantur? Lord, are there few that
be saved? He tells him not whether many or few, but that the gate of heaven is
a strait ga^e, into which none can enter but they that strive as champions;
that it is yet open, but it will be shut, and then it will be too late for them
to strive. This will be when he shall come to judgment. At which day it will
wound their hearts to see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in
the kingdom of God, the Gentiles also from all parts and quarters of the
world, v. 28, 29, 30.
and themselves thrust out for their unbelief. Proceeding onwards in his
journey, S. Mat. 19.13 S. Mar. 10.13 S. Luc. 18.15
there were some who brought unto him (...), says Saint Matthew, and with him
Saint Mark; little children, (...), infants, says Saint Luke, children lately
born from their mothers womb, to the end that he should put his hands upon
them, pray for them, and bless them. B^esseth the little children. S. Mat.
9.18. S. Mar. 8.22.
It was not unusual with him to cure the diseased, and to confer other
graces by imposition of his blessed hands; it was that which the ruler
petitioned for, in behalf of his daughter: with the same ceremony he gave
sight to the blind man. And when they brought unto him many sick and
diseased, S. Luc. 4.40.
he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them. These things it is
likely they had observed in him; besides, S. Mat. 19.13, 14, 15. S. Mar. 10.14,
15, 16. S. Luc. 18.15, 16, 17.
they could not be ignorant that the patriarcks, priests, and Prophets, did
bless and consecrate by imposition of hands. Upon these grounds they brought
their children to him that he should bless them, pray for them, and consecrate
them to God by imposition of his hands. This offended the Apostles, who
therefore rebuked those that brought them, but Christ approving the fact,
deferred nothing to satisfy their desires.

Jerusalem, and Jesus went before them, and they were amazed, and as they
follovved they were afraid. S. Mar. 10.32
For he had diverse times before told them of his sufferings at Jerusalem,
being now to go up thither; they were amazed, and afraid, Ne vel ipsi cum eo
occiderentur; vel saltem, ille cujus vi a and magisterio gaudebant, inimicorum
manibus occumberet, lest either they should be killed with him, or he himself,
in whose life and magistery they rejoiced, should die by the hands of his
enemies, as Bede observes. Therefore he took them to him privately, and to the
end that he might prepare and fit them for the temptation to come, tells them
that he goes up voluntarily to Jerusalem, well knowing what should befall him
there. He enumerates particularly what he will suffer, that he shall be
betrayed unto the chief Priests and Scribes, that they shall condemn him to
death, S. Mat. 20.17, 18, 19. S. Mar. 10.32, 33, 34. S. Luc. 18.31, 32, 33.
they shall deliver him to the gentiles, to be mocked and scourged, spit upon
and crucified; but yet that they should not have their wills of him, for the
third day he would rise again; that these things were foretold of him by the
prophets, and must be accomplished accordingly. To all this the Apostles
replied nothing, and Origin thinks it was, lest he should make the like reply
unto them as he had done unto Saint Peter before: but Saint Luke sets down
the reason plainly to be, v. 34.
that they understood none of these things, and this saying was hid from them,
neither knew they the things which were spoken. They heard them indeed, and
understood the words, but the true sense and meaning of them was hidden from
their understanding. The petition of Salome and her sons.
Whence it came that the two sons of Zebedaeus, taking Salome their mother also
with them, she for them, they for themselves, petitioned that they might sit
the one on his right hand, S. Mat. 20.20.21. S. Mar. 10.35, 36, 37.
the other on his left hand in his kingdom; in that earthly kingdom, into
which they thought he would presently enter, so soon as he should be risen
again upon the third day. The reason of this petition, as Saint Chrysostom
has observed, was, because they saw themselves honored above others, and had
heard him also to say, that his Apostles should sit upon twelve thrones, in the
kingdom of his glory, S. Mat. 19.28.
judging the twelve tribes of Israel, they feared also that Saint Peter should
be preferred before them. And I shall add, that in respec^ that they did concern
him by affinity, they might peradventure think themselves more worthy then any
other. It was an ambitious petition, therefore he told them plainly, S. Mat.
20.22, 23. S. Mar. 10.38, 39, 40.
that they did ask they knew not what: for could they drink of that cup that he
should drink of? could they be baptized with his Baptism? They said, they
could. He told them, they should; and so they were, for Saint James was slain
with the sword and so was a blessed Martyr both in will and act; Saint John was
cast into a vessel of boiling oil, and though he did not die, yet was he an
holy Martyr in will, though not in act. When the ten heard his answer, S. Mat.
20.24 25, 26, 27, 28 S. Mar. 10.41 42, 43 44, 45
(for they also had their ambitious thoughts) they began to be much displeased
at them; but he doctrinateth them all with precepts of lowlynesse and humility.

Holding on his journey he approached Jericho, a city pleasantly Benjamin,
Concerning Hiericho, and the blind man cured. Deuteronomy. 34.3.
distant from Jerusalem an hundredth and fifty stades, says Josephus, the whole
space betwixt both (...), desert and stony, which desert is now called
Quarentena. It is called in the Scripture, the city of palm trees, because
there were those excellent palms, which being trodden or pressed did send
forth honey. It was first destroyed by Josuah, Jos. 6.26.
and a curse denounced by him against the rebuilder of it. Which curse long
after fell upon the head of Hiel the Bethelite, as we read in the book of
Kings. 1 Kin. 1634
As he came nigh to that city, he gave sight to a certain blind man, as Saint
Luke says, who sat by the way side begging. And as he departed thence, S. Luc.
18.35
he restored two blind men to their sight, who also sat by the way side, as
Saint Matthew says; S. Mat. 20.30 S. Mar. 10.46
one of which was Bartimeus the son of Timeus, named by Saint Mark, for that it
seems he was well known in the city, and it is likely, had fallen from some
good estate, not only to be blind, but also to be a beggar. So do I reconcile
the place with Saint Augustine; De cons. Evang. lib. 2. cap. 62. Utrumque
factum, sed non utrumque ab utroque dictum. He did both, though both the
Evangelists do not say both. And Jesus entered and passed through Jericho, S.
Luc. 19.1. The history of Zacheus.
therefore he made no stay there, and as he went forwards upon the way, a
certain man named Zacheus, (...), a chief publican or farmour of the tribute
money, having a great desire to see him, (and because he could not for the
preasse, and was little of stature) he ran before, and climbed up into a
sycamor tree, that so he might take a view of him from thence. When he came to
the place, he called him down, v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and told him that he would dine at his house that day. He came down hastily,
and entertained him joyfully. He did not therefore dvvell in Jericho, but
either in the road or near unto it, vvhither he might easily go with some
small diversion. At this the people murmured, saying, that he was gone in to
be a guest with a sinner; for such they accounted the publicans, whom they
hated mortally. But Zacheus (who was rich as the text observes) would no
longer be unjust, but he would break off his sins by righteousness, and his
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, (it was the counsel which the
prophet Daniel gave to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.27.) therefore without delay he
makes a present restitution, as well for unknown, as for known injuries. For
unknown injuries, which peradventure he had committed in exacting of tribute,
he gave the half of his goods to the poor; and for known wrongs, if any man
could accuse him, he tenders a fourefold restitution; that is, a perfect
restitution according to the law. That day salvation came unto his house, that
day was he made a son of Abraham, and of his spiritual seed. Christ also
defends his going in thither from the end of his mission: v. 7, 8, 9, 10.
The son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost. And because
they were nigh unto Jerusalem, and the people that went with him thought that
he would presently declare himself to be Messiah, and erect the throne of a
temporal kingdom in that place; The parable of the pounds
he put forth the parable of the pounds, showing thereby what he will do at his
second coming, as well to the servants, as also to those his spiteful
citizens the Jews, who would not that he should reign over them. from v. to
v. 27.
For he is that noble man who by his ascension must go into heaven to receive
the kingdom, and will return again in his bodily presence when he shall come
to Judgment.

Bethany was a village or town distant from Jerusalem about fifteen furlongs,
Bethany. The history of Lazarus raised from the dead.
which is almost two miles, toward the south-east. In that place dwelt Mary,
Martha, and Laza^us their brother; which Mary probably was Saint Mary Magdalen,
who being born at Magdala, a city situated upon the west side of the Galilean
sea about fifty and two miles from Jerusalem, was from the place of her
nativity and former habitation called Magdalen. She is particularly described
to be that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with
her hair. And we find that Christ was three times anointed: 1st In the house
of Simon the Pharisee, at what time she came behind him as he sat at meat,
brought an alabaster box of ointment, and did wash his feet with tears, and
wiped them with the hairs of her head, S. Luc. 7.37, 38.
and kissed them, and anointed them with the ointment. 2ly In her own house
at Bethany, six days before the passover as he sat at supper, at what time
she took a pound of ointment of spiknard, very costly, anointed his feet, and
wiped them with her hair. S. Joh. 12.3.
3ly In the house of Simon the leper, who dwelt also at Bethany, two days
before the passover; at what time she brought an alabaster box of ointment of
spikenard very precious, brake the box, and powered the ointment on his head. S.
Mar. 14.3.
Now Lazarus the brother of this Mary was sick: she understanding where Jesus
was, gave him notice of it by some messenger which she sent, not requiring him
to come, nor yet to speak the word that he might be healed, but only to plead
unto him his love. S. Joh. 11.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Lord, behold he whom thou love is sick. She thought it sufficient for him to
know it, she concluded with her self, that he would at no hand forsake him whom
he loved. Upon this message he abode two days still in the place where he was;
and then told his Disciples that he would go into Judea again, meaning
Jerusalem, and the parts adjacent, for he was not then in Galilee, (though
Saint Gregory Nyssen thinks so, De hom. opif. cap. 25.) but had passed through
Jericho, and was then in Judea as is said before.

The Disciples admonish him of the danger, the Jews had stone him, it would be
dangerous for him to go thither. He tells them that he is the day, they the
hours; the hours are enlightened by the day, and do follow the day, and not the
day the hours; even so must they follow him, and walk in his light, not he them
to be guided by their counsel. v. 6.7, 8, 9, 10.
Aug. Tract. 49. in Johan. Having in this manner meekly reproved them, he told
them of the death of Lazarus, but having said before, that that sickness was
not unto death, ( Quia ipsa mors non erat ad mortem, sed potius ad miraculum,
because he would miraculously raise him from the dead) he said now that he
slept, and that he went to awake him. They understand the natural rest in
sleep. Wherefore he told them plainly that he was dead; Lazarus is dead. That
he was glad that he was not there, to the intent that they might believe, ut
amplius robustiusque credatis, that your faith may be greater and stronger,
says St. Augustine. Therefore exhorting them to accompany him; v. 11.12, 13,
14, 15, 16.
St. Thomas also stirs up his fellow Apostes to go along with their Lord, not
to forsake him, but to dye with him. Being come to Bethany, Martha first
meets him, with whom he entertaineth speech concerning her brother, promises
to raise him up. She understands his promise of the general resurrection: he
confirms her by divine doctrine: v. 21.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
she makes a most excellent confession of her faith, and then goes away to call
her sister. Mary comes with haste, finds him in that place where Martha left
him, she falls down at his feet, and said as Martha had said before. They bring
him to the grave; he wept and was troubled, but voluntarily, because he would
weep and be troubled; it was in his own power to be so affected or not. v.
32.33, 34, 35.
He causes the stone to be taken away from the mouth of the cave, gives
thanks to the Father, then cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth. v.
39.40.41 42, 43.
And so Lazarus (...), says Saint Gregory Nyssen, leaps out of the Grave
perfect and safe, being nothing hindered by those bands with which his hands and
feet were bound, from coming forth. v. 44.
De hom. opific. cap. 25. But this miracle did so incense the chief priests and
pharisees through their blindness and malice, that they consult to kill him;
how be it the high Priest prophesies unawares of the salvation of the world by
his death; and he also absented himself by going to a certain city named
Ephraim, v. 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54.
(eight miles distant from Jerusalem, toward Jericho, in the wilderness of
Quarentena, as some say) and continued there with his Disciples.

Priests and Pharisees to consult his death, who having first taken counsel
together with Caiaphas the high Priest more clancularly; He left the Priests
and Pharisees to consult his death.
did afterward (it seems) impart it to the council, the great Council,
called the Sanhedrim; by the authority whereof they set forth a mandate, or
gave commandment, S. Joh 11.57
(...), that if any man knew where he were, he should show it, that they might
take him. They also consulted to put Lazarus to death; S. Joh. 12.11
Because that by reason of him, many of the Jews went away, and believed on
Jesus. For much people flocked out of the city, not only to see Jesus, when
they understood that he was there, but Lazarus also whom he had raised from the
dead. He comes to Bethany six days before the passover, and is first
anointed to his burying.
Six days before the passover he comes from Ephraim to Bethany, there the
sisters made him a supper, Martha served, Lazarus sat at table, Mary anointed
his feet with costly ointment of Spikenard, which filled the house with the
sweet odor of it, being in quantity a pound, as before is said. This pound of
ointment was worth three hundred pence, every penny at the value of seven pence
halfpenny, of our english sterling money, the whole amounts to nine pounds
seven shillings and six pence. At this Judas who bare the bag, and was a thief
murmured because it was not sold, and the money put into the bag for the use of
the poor; not because he cared for the poor, but in that he missed an
opportunity of theft. But he defends her, significat se moriturum, and ad
sepeliendum aromatibus esse ungendum: ideo Mariae, cui ad unctionem mortui
corporis multum desideranti pervenire non liceret, donatum sit viventi adhuc
impendere obsequium, quod post mortem celeri resurrectione praeventa nequiret,
says Alcuinus. He signifies that he must die, and be anointed with sweet
odours for his burial; and therefore it was granted unto Mary to anoint his
living body, S. Joh. 12, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
who would much desire to do that office toward his dead body, but should not,
because she could not, in that she would be prevented by his speedy
resurrection.

passover, The History of his triumphant riding into Jerusalem.
not regarding the consultations of the Priests and Pharisees, nor the mandate
which was given forth for his apprehension, because his hour was now almost
come that he should dye; he entered Jerusalem triumphantly in this manner. He
went from Bethany to Bethphage, which was a little village of the Priests,
situated upon the side of the mount Olivet, one mile distant from Jerusalem;
from thence he sent two of his Disciples, to a village that was over against
them, to bring unto him an Ass and a Colt, which were tied in a place where two
ways met; they went, loosed them and brought them. And when they had presented
them unto him, they cast their garments upon both, to the end that he might
take his choice upon which he would ride: so he mounted the Colt; upon which no
man had ever sat before, and rode up the mount of Olives, much people being
with him, whereof some went before, some followed after him. They that went
before, some of them spread their garments in the way, others cut down branches
from the trees, and strewed them in the way, much people also came out of the
city, when they heard that he was coming, took branches of Palm trees, and
went forth to meet him; all of them, they that went before, they that followed
after, they that met him, with joyful acclamations crying out, and saying,
Hosanna to the son of David; Blessed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord, Hosanna in the highest. Blessed be the kingdom of our father David, that
comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. S. Mat. 21.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9. S. Mar. 11, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Blessed be the king that comes in the name of the Lord, peace in heaven, and
glory in the highest. Hosanna, Blessed is the king of Israel, that comes in
the name of the Lord. All this was done, that the prophecy of Zechariah might
be fulfilled, but his Disciples understood it not at the first.

As he came down from the mount of Olives with these triumphs, S. Luc. 19.
from v. 29. to v. 45. S. Joh. 12.12 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. S. Mat. 21.10, 11.
and foretold the destruction of it. And being brought into the city with these
joyful acclamations, the people of all sorts young and old, strangers and
others, flocked together, demanding who it was that entered the city in that
manner; to whom the multitude that came with him, replied, This is Jesus the
prophet of Nazareth of Galilee. Now as he came down from the mountain, some of
the Pharisees (who peradventure were not of the number of those who consulted
his death,) not well pleased with the things which they heard and saw, bad him
to rebuke the people; but he replied, saying, I tell you, S. Luc. 19.40
if these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out. But
being entered the city, his enemies despaired, and whispered among themselves,
Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? Behold, S. Joh. 12.19
the world is gone after him. In this manner all the people attended him to the
t^m^le, which he found at that time also sacrilegiously polluted by the
forementioned market, and having purged it, he then cured the sick and diseased
that came unto him. S. Mat. 21.12 13, 14.
Whereupon certain strangers, Jews, who came out of Graecia to worship at the
feast, desirous to see him, obtained their request by the mediation of his
Apostles, Saint Andrew and Saint Philip. S. Joh. 12.20 21, 22. v. 23. to 36, v.
37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.
To whom he foretold the conversion of the whole world to be now at hand as the
effect of his death, receiving the testimony of his father from heaven for
their sakes. But he preached to an unbelieving people, as the Prophet Isaiah
had said before, Nevertheless among the chief rulers also, from v. 44 to 50.
many believed on him; but because of the Pharisees, they did not confess him,
lest they should be put out of the Synagogue. Therefore calls he earnestly
for confession of faith. So that day was brought to an end, and he departed out
of the temple at even, and hid himself from them, Saint John says. He left
them and went out of the city to Bethany, S. Mat. 21.17
and lodged there.

passover, He curses the fruitless fig tree.
he came early from Bethany, and being hungry, he sought fruit of a fruitless
fig tree which stood by the way; but finding nothing but leaves only, S. Mat.
21.19
he cursed it, saying, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever. He
never cursed any thing that we read of, but only that fig tree, and it seems
the more strange, because Saint Mark says, S. Mar. 11.13
that it was not then the time of figs. It was not the time of ripe figs, but
this tree had not so much as any young green figs; and he did condemn it to
perpetual sterility, Ut ostenderet plebem Judaeorum propter folia, id est,
verba justitiae quae habebat sine fructu, id est bono opere, non posse salvari,
sed scindi and in ignem mitti, says Bid, To show that the people of the Jews
for the leaves sake, that is, for the words of righteousness which they had
without fruit of good works, could not be saved, but must be cut down, and cast
into the fire. And when he was come into the Temple, He refuses to show his
authority to the chief priests.
the chief Priests, and the Elders of the people came unto him, as he was
teaching, and said, By what authority do thou these things? and who gave thee
this authority? But he could have avouched his authority by the testimony of
Saint John the Baptist, S. Mat. 21.23, 24, 25 26, 27. S. Mar. 11.28, 29, 30,
31, 32, 33. S. Luc. 20.1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
concerning whose Baptism, seeing they would not say plainly whence it was,
whether from heaven or of men; he would not tell them by what authority he had
purged the temple, and did also teach the people there. Then put he forth unto
them diverse parables; one concerning the two sons, commanded by their Father to
go and to work in his vineyard; whereof the first denied, yet went; the second
promised, yet went not. A second, concerning the husband men, who slew such as
were sent unto them; Parables signifying the reprobation of the Jews and
vocation of the Gentiles.
and last of all, the Son himself. A third, concerning the king that made a
marriage for his son, the invited guest, setting light of their invitation, and
neglecting to come. In all which he shows the most deserved reprobation of
the Jews, and the gracious vocation of the Gentiles in their place. With these
parables they were sorely galled, wherefore they took counsel how they might
entangle him in his talk, S. Mat. 21. and 22. S. Mar. 12. S. Luc. 20.
and so to bring him either into dislike of the people, or within compass of
treason. To this end they sent unto him the Disciples of the Pharisees with the
Herodians, He avoideth the snare of the Pharisees
(a sect of Heretics among the Jews, who said that Herod was the promised
Messiah) to know his opinion, whether it were lawful to pay tribute to Caesar.
To this question they thought he would answer either negatively or
affirmatively. If affirmatively, then the people who abhorred tribute, and the
Publicans for the tribute sake, would abhor him, and put him into their hands
to do with him what they pleased. If negatively, then they had him fast enough,
they would deliver him to the Roman magistrate to be put to death for his
treason. S. Mat. 22.21 S. Mar. 12.17 S. Luc. 20.25
He avoideth the snare by calling for the tribute-mony, demanding whose was the
image and superscription; and then bidding them to render to Caesar the things
which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are Gods. He confuteth the
Sadduces.
The Pharisees being departed from him, the Sadduces, another sect among the
Jews, who denied the resurrection, to overthrow the doctrine of it, (as they
thought) propose an absurd question concerning a woman married unto seven
brethren, S. Mat. 22.32 S. Mar. 12.26, 27. S. Luc. 20.37, 38.
and which of them should have her to wife at the resurrection. He confuteth
the error, stateth the question, and proves the resurrection by such a
necessary consequence of Scripture, as was undeniable.

And when the multitude heard this, they were astonished at scribes answering,
said, Master, S. Mat. 22.33 S. Luc. 22.39
thou have well said. But the Pharisees would not so be satisfied, and one of
them to tempt him, demanded to know of him the first or great commandment of
the law. To which question when he had made a short analysis of the first and
second tables of the moral law, that same pharisee, who was a scribe and a
lawyer, He analyseth the law.
S. Mat. 22.36, 37, 38, 39, 40. S. Mar. 12. v. 8. to 34. S. Luc. 20.40.
approved his answer, and Christ also told him that he was not far from the
kingdom of God. And no man after that durst ask him any question. This gave
him opportunity to question them; wherefore, while the pharisees were gathered
together, he puts forth a question concerning Christ whose son he must be;
whereunto when they had readily answered, The son of David; He questioneth them
concerning Christ.
he objecteth out of the hundred and tenth psalm, David called him Lord, how
is he then his son? Unto which objection being not able to reply, S. Mat. 22.46
S. Mar. 12.37 S. Luc. 20.44. S. Mar. 12.38, 39, 40. S. Luc. 20.46, 47.
he takes occasion of that bitter invective against the scribes and pharisees,
(which being but a little touched by the other Evangelists, Saint Mark and
Saint Luke, is set down at large by Saint Matthew, cap. 23.) representing to
the multitude and to his disciples, that the scribes and pharisees, after all
that he had said and done continuing still incorrigible, although he will have
the doctrine of their chair (eatenus quatenus, sitting in the chair of Moses
they taught Moses doctrine) to be obeyed, yet against their works, (and namely
their ambition) he openly inveigheth, crying to them eight woes for their
eightfold hypocrisy and blindness: and so concluding with the most worthy
reprobation of that persecuting generation, and their mother city Jerusalem,
he prophesies the destruction of it.

At that time he sat over against the treasury teaching in the temple, where
he saw how the people cast in their money; they that were rich cast in much, to
pious uses, and for the reparation of the temple; and a poor widow cast in two
mites; which gift of hers, S. Mar. 12.41, 42, 43, 44. S. Luc. 21.3, 4
in that it was all that she had, he preferrs before the great gifts of all
those who cast in of their abundance largely. So departed he out of the temple.
And as he went out, some of his disciples among themselves, He foretells the
destruction of the Temple. S. Mat. 24.1, 2. S. Mar. 13.1, 2. S. Luc. 2.5, 6.
and to him, spoke of the temple, the stones, the buildings, and gifts
vvherevvith it was adorned. But he replied that the days would come, that
there should not be one stone left upon another that should not be thrown
down. So they went forwards speaking (it should seem) of these things, till
he ascended the mount of Olives, where in a convenient place, over against the
Temple, and having the whole sight and prospect of it, he sat down. There his
Apostles, Saint Peter, Saint James, Saint John, and Saint Andrew came unto him
privately, desiring him to tell them when that desolation of the temple should
be, and by what sign it should be known, and what should be the sign of
his second coming and of the end of the world. He foretells persecutions to
the Gospel, calamities to the Jews, and shows the signs of his second
coming.
In all which he satisfied their desires, as well for their instruction, as
also for the information of all the rest of his Apostles; bidding them to
beware of deceivers to come; also to expect persecutions, and that great
calamities the forerunners of that desolation, should be to the people and
nation of the Jews; shows them the signs of his coming to judgment, and
the manner of it. And because that day and hour is unknown, that therefore
they must watch, like good servants expecting every moment the coming of their
Lord. So continuing his sermon he enforces that duty of watching by two
parables, of the Virgins, and of the Talents, thereby to show how it shall be
at the day of judgment with the faithful who shall be found prepared, and with
the unfaithful who shall not be fitted for his coming. Also that then he will
call all men to account, and reward or punish according to divine justice.
Finally without a parable he describes the last judgment, showing that such
faithful as do the works of mercy shall have life everlasting, but the
unfaithful who do them not, shall be sent away into everlasting fire. All
which things Saint Matthew sets down largely and plainly, Cap. 25.

Olives, as Saint Luke says, S. Luc. 21.37, 38.
and went not to Bethany, but returned early in the morning into the temple,
whither the people resorted to hear him; and this was the third day before the
passover. Concerning the transactions of which day we find, that as they
passed by, S. Mar. 11.20
they saw the fig tree which he had cursed, to be dried up from the roots. And
Saint Peter showing it unto him, he exhorted them to steadfastness of faith,
showing the power of it, and to forgive one another and their enemies when they
pray. That day also (it seems as he returned from the Temple to Bethany) he
foretold unto his disciples that after two days, at the passover, he should
be betrayed and crucified; S. Mat. 26.2.
of which his death he had often times premonished them. And so he came to
Bethany, where he was invited to supper in the house of Simon the leper, the
chief priests, the scribes, and the elders of the people in the mean time
consulting his death in the house of Caiphas the high priest; yet not to put
him to death, for that was agreed upon before; S. Mat. 26.4. S. Mar. 14.1. S.
Luc. 22.2. He suppeth in the house of Simon the leper, and is anointed the
second time to his burial.
but how to single him out from the people, and by some stratagem or subtle
device to get him into their power that they might kill him. Now as he sat at
meat in the house of that Simon who formerly had been a leper, and had received
cure from Christ, nomine pristino permanente, ut virtus curantis appareat,
called still Simon the leper, that the power of him that cured him may appear,
as says Saint Hierom. Mary the sister of Lazarus, who before in her own house
had anointed his feet with a pound of ointment of spiknard (pure or liquid,
nard or ointment) very costly, and wiped them with her hair, came now also and
brought an alabaster box of the same ointment, no less costly, and of no less
value, and having broken the box, she poured the ointment upon his head. At
this, some of the disciples, but specially Judas had indignation, and murmured
against her; and both they and he said, that it was a waste, and that it might
have been sold for more then three hundred pence (more then nine pounds, seven
shillings and six pence) and have been given to the poor. Both they and he
murmured, but they and he were not alike affected: they, because they were
pi^tifull and cared for the poor, whom they would have had to have been
relieved with the price of it; he, because he was a thief and would have
stolen a good part of it, had it come into his bag for the poors use. But our
Lord defends her; she did a good work, she did what she could, S. Mat. 26.6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. S. Luc. 14.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 9. Judas agrees to betray
him for 30 pieces of silver. S. Mat. 26.14.15, 16. S. Mar. 14.10, 11. S. Luc.
22.4, 5, 6.
she did come aforehand (by divine instinct) to annoint his body to the
burying. He did also greatly reward her, in that he made the gospel to be a
general and an eternal trumpet to sound forth this fact of hers all the world
over, to her praise. Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this gospel shall be
preached thorough the whole world, this also that she has done, shall be
spoken for a memorial of her. Hereupon Judas went presently away from Bethany
to Jerusalem, to the chief priests then sitting in consultation in the house
of Caiaphas the high priest, and agrees to betray him unto them for thirty
pieces of silver. And from that time forth he sought opportunity to betray him,
(to deliver him into their hands privately) without concourse, tumult, or
sedition. Likely it is (which the gloss also has observed) that he was
offended that the ointment was not sold, that so he might have stolen part of
the price, and therefore he would recompense this loss by prodition of his
Master. What those pieces of silver were, it is not determined; most probably
they were shekells, of which there were two sorts, the common shekell, being
half an ounce of silver in weight, and according to our money two shillings
and six pence, and the shekel of the Sanctuary which the priests had for sacred
uses, being double so much. So then if they were common shekells, the price
which Judas had for his treason was three pounds and fifteen shillings: but if
shekells of the Sanctuary, (which I rather think) seven pounds and ten
shillings. Some will have them to be Roman pieces, and of a far greater value,
every piece being a pound, that is to say, twelve ounces of silver; but the
reasons which they allege do not induce me to think so. For the prophet
Zechariah derideth the price, A goodly price that I was prized at of them;
Zech. 11.13.
therefore it seems not to have been so great a sum.

unleavened bread, (which was the Thursday, and the second day before the
passover, inclusively reckoning the day it self for one, (which is usual in
the Scripture) the disciples came to Jesus, The history of Christ his last
Passover.
saying unto him, Where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the
passover? This was upon the fourteenth day of the first month, upon which day
the passover was to be killed, that it might be eaten according to the law,
upon the evening of the fifteenth day; for the Jews began their day at Even,
and when the sun went down. I say according to the law; for the Jews by their
tradition, or law of their Sanhedrim, did forbear to eat the passover upon the
second, the fourth, or sixth days of the week; that is to say, upon our
monday, wednesday, or friday. So that if the fifteenth day of the month fell
upon either of those days, the passover was deferred till the next day;
Carol. Sigon. De Rep. Hebr. lib. 3. cap. 9. It is said to have fallen out so
that year. And that this was the reason why the passover was killed for him
upon the thursday, and eaten by him and by his disciples at Even, that is to
say, upon the friday; for the friday began when the sun went down. But that
friday to the Jews who followed the foremention tradition, or law of their
Sanhedrim, was the day of preparation, upon which they killed the passover, to
eat it after the sun was gone down, which was the evening of the sabbath.
Christ was factus sub lege, Gal. 4.4.
made under the law; and the disciples knew well, that he would eat the
passover according to the law; they had also heard him to say, that they
should take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadduces.
S. Mat. 16.6.
Therefore when the day of unleavened bread was come, namely the fourteenth day
of the first month, upon which day they must purge their houses of leaven, and
kill the lamb according to the law; the Disciples came unto him (probably all
the Disciples, Judas Iscariot being also with him) to know his pleasure, where,
and in what place they should prepare for him to eat the passover. Whereupon
he sends two of his Disciples, by name, Saint Peter and Saint John, bidding
them to go to Jerusalem and to prepare it. They say unto him, Where will thou
that we prepare? in what part of the city? in whose house? He directs them
(...), ad quendam, to a certain man, or to such a man; whether he named him, or
did not name him, it makes no matter, he had prepared a guide for them, to
bring them to the house. Behold, when ye are entered into the city, there shall
a man meet you bearing a pitcher of water, follow him into the house where he
enters in. And ye shall say to the good man of the house, the master says
unto thee, where is the guest-chamber, where I shall eat the passover with my
Disciples? The master says, my time is at hand, I will keep the passover at
thy house with my Disciples. And he will show you a large upper room furnished
and prepared, there make ready for us. He would go not only to eat the
Passover, but to abolish the bodily eating of it for the time to come, and to
institute another Sacrament instead thereof, more proper to the new Testament.
Mystery of the pitcher of water.
It is not therefore without mystery, that he will have them directed into the
house, by the pitcher of water. Paschae celebrandae locum de signo aquae
ostendit, sath Tertullian. He shows the place where he would celebrate the
passover, by the sign of water. De Bap. cap. 19. For in one house (his Church)
he will have both these great and venerable Sacraments, even the Sacrament of
water, and the Sacrament of his most blessed body and blood. The Sacrament of
water must bring us in; S. Mat. 26.17, 18, 19. S. Mar. 14.12 13, 14, 15, 16 S.
Luc. 22.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
the Sacrament of his body and blood must feed and nourish us when we are
there. That Sacrament is meat for the household, none must eat of it, but they
that are brought into the house by the pitcher of water; the holy Sacrament of
baptism. The Disciples went forth in the morning, because the passover must be
killed that day, that it might be eaten in the evenning, and found as he had
said unto them, and they made ready the passover.

Now when the even was come, he comes with the twelve; passover) he sat down
and the twelve together with him. I will not dispute concerning the manner of
their sitting. Theodoret moves the question, How is it (says he) that the Lord
is said to sit down, when as the Jews did stand when they did eat the
passover? The Jews indeed did eat the passover standing, in great haste,
having their loins girt, their shoes on their feet, and their staves in their
hands: for so God ordained it to be eaten. No question therefore to be made,,
Exodus 12.11
but that Christ and his Disciples did eat it in that manner. But after the
passover was eaten, it was no where forbidden in the law to feed upon other
meats: and it is said to be in common use among the Jews, after the passover
was eaten, to have the table plentifully furnished with other foods. Christ
therefore did first eat the passover with his Disciples standing, having his
loins girded, his shoes on his feet, and his staff in his hand, and he did
eat it hastily; and having so eaten it, he then sat down to feed upon other
meats, wherewith the table was furnished, either then, or presently after. And
from that supper which was then upon the table, he arose, washed his Disciples
feet, and preached unto them humility, in such manner as is set down more at
large, St. Joh. 13. v. 2. to 21. This being done, he sat down again to eat,
and to finish his supper. Then was he troubled in spirit, as Saint John says;
It was for Judas Iscariot, (as Saint Augustine judges) whom he did pity, and
for whom he was sorry, as he was also sorry for Jerusalem, and wept over it;
in Johan. tract. 60. He foresaw his eternal perdition, did inwardly bewail
him. He told them that one of them should betray him, they are exceeding
sorrowful, S. Mat. 26.21 22, 23, 24, 25 S. Mar. 14.18 19, 20, 21. S. Joh.
13.21 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
they demand who it should be, and every one for himself, saying, Lord, Is it
I? He gives them a sign, and curses the traitor, then did he institute the
Sacrament of his supper; and when Judas had unworthily eaten of that bread, and
drank of that cup, then was he fit for the devil, and then he gave him the
sop, and after the sop Satan entered into him, as St. John says.

And as they were eating (that is to say, the supper) Jesus took bread and
blessed it. Christ instituteth the sacrament of his supper.
So the Evangelists go on, setting down the divine institution of that great
and mysterious Sacrament, which is the Sacrament of his body and blood, from
the time, called the Lords supper, because it was instituted at supper time,
and while they were eating the forementioned supper. In the Historical
narration whereof they relate both what he did, and what he said. That he did
three things. 1. That he blessed and gave thanks. 2ly That he brake the bread,
and took the cup. 3ly That he did give and distribute unto them the bread which
he had broken, and the cup which he had taken. That he likewise said three
things, That he gave a commandment; That he made a promise; That he explicated
them both. The commandment is twofold, as well concerning the administration
of it to those that are to administer it; as also concerning the participation
of it to those that are to receive it. The words of promise are (...),
definitive or indicative, they define or declare the thing, they set forth the
inward matter or thing signified, affirming it either of the bread, or of the
cup sacramentally. Of the bread, This is my body which is given, and is broken
for you. Of the cup, This is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for
you, and for many for the remission of sins. The explication of them both, is,
S Mat. 26.27 28, 29, 30. S. Mar 14.22 23 24.25. S. Luc. 22.19, 20.
(...) in remembrance of me. Whereunto is added the attestation, Verily I say
unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine, until the day that I
drink it new in the kingdom of God. Our sacred History does require that we
should insist upon these things particularly.

He blessed and he gave thanks; that is to say, he designed, He blessed and he
gave thanks.
and consecrated the bread and the wine by prayers and benedictions to become a
Sacrament, the blessed Sacrament of his body and blood, not of their own
nature, but by divine institution. Been, antequam tantum and tam magnum
sacramentum institueret, gratias egit, says Stella; well did he give thanks
before he would institute such, and so great a Sacrament, in Luc. cap. 22. For
if when he would raise up Lazarus from the dead, he gave thanks, saying,
Father, I thank thee that thou have heard me: S Joh. 11.41
how much more now ought he to give thanks, in that by this wonderful
Sacrament he would raise up from the dead, not one man out of his grave to the
bodily life, for a short time upon earth, but innumerable souls, from the death
of sin to everlasting life? we must not descant upon the words (...), and
(...); that when he took the bread he blessed it, and that when he took the
cup, he gave thanks, as if it were one thing to bless, and another thing to
give thanks. As if he did somewhat else, or somewhat less, or somewhat more,
when he took the bread, than when he took the cup: for these two words (...)
and (...), are in the meaning and signification, often times in the scriptures,
(more especially in the divine institution of this Sacrament) one and the same
thing. S. Paul puts it out of doubt; for, says he, The Lord Jesus, 1 Cor.
11 123
the same night in which he was betrayed took bread, [(...)] And when he had
given thanks, he brake it. Saint Matthew says, 24. S. Mat 26.26 S. Mar. 14.22
S Luc. 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24
that he blessed; Saint Paul, that he gave thanks. Again, Saint Mark says,
that he blessed; Saint Luke, that he gave thanks. Therefore according to St.
Matthew, St. Mark, S. Luke, and S. Paul, it was one and the same thing that he
did to the bread, and to the cup, and neither more, less, or otherwise to
either.

But the question is, What blessing or thanksgiving, What was the blessing or
thanksgiving.
by which peculiar blessing or thanksgiving extemporarily conceived upon the
present occasion, and work in hand. I rather think it to be his ordinary
blessing or thanksgiving, if not that very blessing or thansgiving which was in
use among the Jews. They say, that at every solemn feast, the Father or Master
of the family sitting down at the table, took the cup in his right hand, saying
these words: Blessed be thou, O Lord, our God, the king of the world, who
createst the fruit of the Vine. Then he drank, and gave it to the guests.
Afterward he took the bread, pronouncing these words; Blessed be thou, O Lord
our God, which brings bread out of the earth. Stella in Luc. 22.19. Then he
brake the bread, and gave it also to the guests sitting at the table together
with him. Christ was the feast-maker, his Disciples were the guests; and that
he used no extraordinary form of blessing, thereby to bless the bread and the
cup, I show by these reasons following. 1. The Evangelists speak of it, S. Mat.
14.19 and 15.36.
as of the common and ordinary blessing, which they do call (...), and (...);
Blessing and thanksgiving. 2ly If it had been any extraordinary blessing which
he had not been accustomed to use, all the Evangelists doubtless would not have
pretermitted it. Saint Matthew and Saint Luke do both of them record that
prayer which he left unto his Church; St. Matthew as a rule or direction
according to which all prayers, public or private must be composed, After this
manner therefore pray ye. Saint Luke, S. Mat. 6.9. S. Luc. 11.2.
as a prayer to be used publicly in the Church, and totidem verbis. When we
pray, say, Our father which art in heaven. It was twice taught upon diverse
occasions, and to diverse ends. Saint John sets down the prayer verbatim,
which he made unto his father before he passed over the brook Cedron, Joh. 17.
It is therefore utterly improbable that they would all of them have omitted
this benediction or thanksgiving, had it been extraordinary and peculiar.
Lastly, he did not dictate unto his Disciples any new Hymn, but the hymn
which they sung was that which was in use; either the great Hallelujah, viz.
the hundred and thirteenth Psalm, Praise ye the Lord. Praise, O ye servants of
the Lord, etc. with the five Psalms next following, (as Paulus Burgensis, and
with him Theodore Beza, do tell us) or some other. Whatsoever it were, it was
the common and ordinary hymn accustomed to be sung at that feast; S Mat. 26.30
S. Mar. 14.26
which thing is sufficiently intimated by the word (...), hymno dicto, the
hymn being said, as the vulgar Latin renders it. He sang no extemporary hymn
afterward (for the Disciples sang with him) in relation to the Sacrament which
he had instituted; Why then a peculiar extemporary benediction before, in
relation to that Sacrament which he would ordain?

He brake the bread, and he took the cup, that is to say, he poured out wine
into the cup which he took; He brake the bread, and he took the cup.
or he took into his hand that cup into which the wine was poured out. It was
not so much that he might divide and distribute the elements of bread and wine
unto them; as that by breaking the bread, and by taking of that cup, he might
set forth all his sufferings together with his death. It is therefore a
sacramental and essential ceremony pertaining to the end and form of the
sacrament. Wherein the faithful have to behold Christ broken and poured out
for us men, and for our redemption. For like as the bread is broken and the
wine poured out; even so are we given to understand thereby, that he was
broken, poured, out, and exposed as it were a prey to the teeth of his enemies;
those many dogs that came about him, those strong bulls of Bashan, that
compassed him round about, those lions among whom his soul was; those unicorns
upon whose horns he was tossed, by whose horns he was gored. He was broken and
poured out in his fame, being laden with all manner of lies and slanders, to
wound him in his reputation, and to make him odious among the people; S. Joh.
10 20. S. Joh. 8.48. S, Mat. 11.19 S. Luc. 23.2.
that he had a devil and was mad, that he was a Samaritan, and had a devil or
familiar spirit. That he was a gluttonous man, a wine bibber, a friend to
publicans and sinners. That he perverted the nation, and forbad to give tribute
to Caesar. He was broken and poured out in his honor, while he was exposed to
all manner of contempt and scorn. For they crowned him with thorns, they
arrayed him in a purple robe; they put a reed in his hand; they bowed their
knees before him in mockage, abusing and dishonouring him in his kingly office.
They spit in his face; they did beat and buffet him with their fists, and the
reed, and with the palms of their hands, bidding him to prophesy who it was
that smote stim; so abusing, contemning, and dishonouring him, in his priestly
and prophetical offices. When he was crucified upon the cross, then did they
bid him to save himself, and to come down; so also blaspheming him as the
savior. He was broken and poured out in his goods and estate; for although he
came into the world in a voluntary poverty, S. Mat. 8.20.
and had not where to lay his head. (For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 8.9.
that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through
his poverty might be made rich.) Yet when he was crucified, they left him not
so much as the clothes that he did wear; they divided all his garments among
them, and for that (...), his coat, tunica a tuendo corpore, which was without
seam, woven from the top throughout, (supposed to be made by the hands of his
own blessed mother) in that it would be to no profit for them if they should
divide it, they cast lots for it, whose it should be. So was the Scripture
fulfilled; They parted my raiment among them, S. Joh. 19.24
and for my vesture they did cast lots.

He was broken and poured out in his soul, by fear. By fear of O my Father, S.
Mat. 26.39
if it be possible let this cup pass from me. He feared hell, and the judgment
of God due to mankind for sin, made his by imputation, [by such a fear as was
possible for him to fear them.] And there is a fourfold fear of hell, A
fourfold fear of hell
and of the judgment of God. There is a fear whereby a man does carefully
decline it, such a fear is in all the Saints and servants of God, and was in
Christ in a special manner, who is the Lord of all the Saints. There is a fear
whereby a man does anxiously or carefully conflict with it; such a fear none of
all the saints could avoid, nor would Christ avoid it, [as my learned author
saith] in that he was to be made a sacrifice for us; whose prayers and
supplications were therefore offered up with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5.7.
unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he
feared. Ne absorberetur, that he should not be svvallovved up by it. There is a
fear whereby a man despaireth utterly, it is the fear of those that cannot
truly repent, Genesis 4.13. S. Mat. 27.4.
and was in Cain and in Judas Iscariot; but such a fear is never to be found
in any of all the Saints, nor was it possible to be in Christ, who had no
sin. There is a fear of hell, in hell, which the damned retain as a part of
their punishment, S. Mar. 9.44.
never dying worm and inextinguishible fire. He was broken and poured out in
his soul by grief; for he was a man of sorrows, Isa. 53.3, 4, 5.
and acquainted with grief; He did bear our griefs, and carry our sorrows; he
was stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted; yet not for his own, but for our
transgressions. Lam. 1.12.
Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto
me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger. He
was broken and poured out in soul by heaviness. It was a grievious dump and
heaviness that was over his soul, wherewith he was amazed, and very heavy (as
Saint Mark notes) when he said unto his disciples, that his soul was exceeding
sorrowful unto death. S. Mar. 14.34
Finally he was broken and poured out in soul byshame. The death of the cross
was a most shameful and a most ignominious death; being therefore affected as
a man, he could not but shame to have that his chaste body exposed naked, all
bloody, at midday, to the view of his blessed mother, his disciples, kindred,
acquaintance, and to be made a scorn and greedy spectacle to his wicked
enemies. But he endured the cross, Heb. 12.2.
and despised the shame, as the Scripture notes. We cannot tell how many and
how great his sufferings in soul were, who knows the number or extent of
them; therefore have we to make it in our prayers, as the Greeks do in their
Liturgies, (...), By thy unknown sufferings, O Christ deliver us.

body, and that in all the parts of it. In his hands, and in his feet, by the
tearing nails: in his head by the wounding thorns: in his side by the piercing
spear: in his face by the unclean spittings, and cruel buffetings: and all
over by the merciless whip. Not from his side alone, but from all the parts of
the body of this true Pelican, spouted forth unto us his reviving blood;
wherein he was similis factus Pelicano, Ps. 102.6.
like unto the Pelican. He was broken and poured out in all his senses. In his
feeling, (says Mr. William Austen) by the blows, bloody thorns, nails, and
scourges. In his taste by vinegar. In his smell, by hanging in a filthy
stinking place of rotten dead men's skulls. In his hearing, by their base taunts
and blasphemies. In his sight, by seeing those (for whom he dyed, and dearly
loved) doing all this; and those that dearly loved him (his mother and Saint
John) stand by weeping. The feeling of all which was so sensible unto him, that
(in Jeremy) he calls from his cross, to all that go by the way to consider it,
Lam. 1.12.
and see if there were any pain like his. And now after all, upon an Attendite,
and a Videle, (on a sufficient view and enquiry) a non sicut is returned. And
that upon good reason. For none ever suffered for such a cause; therefore none
ever felt such pains. Excessere (says Thomas for their extent, Par. 3. 46.
art. 6.) Excessere omnes dolores, quos homines pati possunt in hac vita. When
God will suffer pain to make him die, [in all that wherein it was possible for
him to die] what pain must that be? Certainly, as much as humanity could bear;
so much did he endure, till sense of pain made him past sense, and his noble
soul expired; suffering in the mean time the violence of his passion, by the
fortitude of his patience. Medit. for good friday. He brake the bread, and he
took the cup.

He did give and distribute unto them the bread which he cup which he had
taken. He gave unto them the bread which he had broken, and the cup which he
had taken.
And not the bread and the cup only, but in, by, and with that bread and cup,
he gave his most precious body and blood. For the res sacramenti, the thing of
the sacrament, is generally all that which faith does apprehend to salvation,
and everlasting life. Now that, next and immediately, is Christ himself, who
is the thing of the sacrament three manner of ways; by his person, by his
merits, and by his benefits. By his person, for whole Christ, (...), God and
man is exhibited therein, as well in respect of his Divinity, as also in
reguard of his humanity; (although in the divine institution of it, mention be
made more specially of the human nature, and a peculiar regard be had
thereunto. 1st Because in that nature he is consubstantiall with us, and that
blessed Seed, in whom all the families of the earth are blessed. 2ly Because in
that nature he merited for us. 3ly Because by that nature we come to his
Divinity, and do obtain grace with God.) By his merit; for both the verity and
utility of the death of Christ, by which he purchased life for us, is
propounded and confirmed thereby. By his benefits; for look what Christ had,
and what Christ did, he testifies by his sacraments, that he had them, and did
them for us men, and for our salvation. Which benefits Saint Paul reduces to
four heads, wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30. 1 Cor. 2.7.
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. Wisdom, to know God
in Christ, which is that hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world
unto our glory. Righteousness, the righteousness which is of God by faith,
Phil. 3.9.
the imputed righteousness of Jesus Christ, apprehended, and applied by faith
to justification, with God, or in the sight of God. Gal. 3.11
Sanctification, whereby we are renewed in the spirit of our mind, and do put
on that new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.
Ephesians. 4.23, 24.
Redemption, whereby we are delivered from all evils, and are saved from our
enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us, from the devil and from death,
and are finally and eternally glorified. There is therefore a wonderful
difference, and a wonderful convenience to be observed as touching the matter
of the sacrament. Difference in nature; the sign is visible, the thing of the
sign is invisible. Difference in the object; the one is the object of the
body, the other is the object of the soul. Difference in manner of
communication; the one is communicated corporally, the other is communicated
spiritually. Yet is there a wonderful convenience; for though nothing can be
more different then the sign and the thing of the sign, yet are they joined
together in a sacramental bond. Such is the wonderful wisdom of Almighty
God, who by such weak elements, does vouchsafe to give unto every faithful
receiver his son Christ, with all his merits, and with all his benefits.

commandment concerning the administration of it to those who are to
administer it, Comman^ement for the a^ministration.
and to his Apostles first, (...), this do; are to be understood thus, That
like as he their Lord had blessed and given thanks, and by prayers and
thanksgivings had prepared, designed, and consecrated the bread and the wine to
become a sacrament, the sacrament of his blessed body and blood, not of their
own nature but by divine institution; Even so must they. Like as he did break
the bread and take the cup, not so much to divide and distribute it among them,
as that thereby he might signify, set forth, and represent his death; even so
must they. Like as he had given unto them the bread which he had broken, and
the cup which he had taken, to the end that they should eat the bread, and
drink the wine; Even so must they also give to those, to whom they should
administer the sacrament, the bread which they should break, and the cup which
they should take, to be eaten and drank. Like as he gave unto them not the
bread and the cup only, but in, by, and with the bread and the cup, himself,
with his most precious body and blood; even so in like manner that they should
give unto those to whom they should administer it, the same, and no other thing
but what he had given unto them; that is to say, not the bread and the cup
only, but by, in, and with the bread and the cup, himself, Two loves in Christ
t^wards his Church.
with his most precious body and blood. There were in Christ two special loves
toward his Church and chosen people. The one urged him to be gone, and to lay
down his life for an effectual redemption; the other urged him to stay still,
and to be with them unto the end of the world. He must go from them, by laying
down his life for them, or else it was not possible for him to redeem them;
expedit vobis ut ego vadam, S. Joh. 16.7.
it is expedient for you (said he) that I go away. He was willing to have
stayed, if it had been possible, and therefore he prayed, saying, O my Father,
S. Mat. 26.42
if this cup may not pass away from me except I drink it, thy will be done. He
found an expedient for both; he would go away, and yet he would stay; he would
go away by his bodily presence, but he would stay still by his sacramental
presence. It is not enough for the spouse if the bridegroom bestovv on her many
rare and rich jevvells, as pledges of his love; it is his presence which to her
is more expetible then gold or fine gold. Christ the bridegroom when he
ascended into heaven, gave unto his spouse the Church many rare and rich
jewels, wherein his Church also rejoices, highly esteeming them for the
bridegrooms sake. Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ. But all this is not
enough, his Church does desire his presence; Cant. 3.11.
it is that wherein she gloryeth; Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold
king Solomon, with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him, in the day of
his espousalls, and in the day of the gladness of his heart. She cannot have
his bodily, natural, or local presence; and yet such a presence she has, His
presence in the Eucharist.
as whereby she does behold him in the most sacred and mysterious Eucharist.
It is a presence whereby he is believed, and acknowledged by his Church to be
truly and really present, in respect of the signs, and in respect of the
worthy receivers. In respect of the signs; for the body and blood of Christ
are present with the bread and wine, which are the sacramental signs,
although not by coexistency and place, yet by a sacramental and relative
presence. In respect of the worthy receivers; for Christ is indeed present in
their hearts, by the same presence altogether, as the communion of his body and
blood, is exhibited unto them in that sacrament. This is a true real, though
not a corporal presence. Touch me not, S. Joh. 20.17
(said he unto Saint Mary Magdalen) for I am not yet ascended to my Father.
Touch me not, (says he to his Church) for I am ascended to my Father. S. Mat.
28.9.
And yet we do touch him daily; though not as the woman did, who held him by
the feet, yet in that we touch the visible signs, we touch all that which
is signified, assured, and delivered by them. Affectu, non manu; voto, non
oculo; fide, non sensibus. But this touching is by affection, not by the hands;
by desire, not by the eye; by faith, not by the senses.

But the commandment is not only concerning the administration of it, to those
that are to administer it; Commandment for the participation
but also concerning the participation of it to those that are to receive it.
And the duty enjoined is twofold; the first is (...), it is a sacramental
ceremony; for he that comes to the Lords table must take and receive the
Elements of bread and wine at the hand of the minister; by which taking a
spiritual reception of Christ, and of his benefits by the instrument of faith,
which is the hand of the soul, for the nourishing and feeding thereof to
salvation and everlasting life; is visibly showed and made good. 2ly (...). For
eating and drinking is the external use and end of the sacrament, ordained by
Christ, whereby according to divine institution, the eating and drinking of his
body and blood, which is internal and spiritual, is assured and made good.
Like as Saint Augustine says concerning the holy sacrament of Baptism, that,
Water exhibiting the sacrament of grace without, and the spirit working the
benefit of grace within, loosing the bond of sin, reconciling the good of
nature, do regenerate a man in one Christ, who was generated of one Adam. Ad.
Bonifac. Epist. 23. Even so in this blessed sacrament of the Supper, Two
persons.
there are two persons by whom it is administered, Christ, and his minister; his
minister which is to do all that which is to be done externally and without, by
designing, preparing, and consecrating the bread and the wine, by prayers and
benedictions, to become a sacrament by divine institution; by breaking of the
bread, and by taking of the cup, by delivering the bread and the cup, thereby
to set forth and represent his death; and in, by, and with the bread and cup,
to deliver Christ himself with his most precious body and blood. But it is
Christ by the gracious and efficatious operation of his most holy and most
blessed spirit, who must do all that which is to be done internally, and
within, and make it to be his body and blood to the worthy receiver. For the
whole action of the sacrament consists of two things, Two several sorts of
food.
or two several sorts of food; the one is earthly, corporeal, and sensible,
to be seen, tasted, and discerned by the senses; and that is the food which the
minister does deliver; and every priest is sufficiently qualified to deliver
that food; But the other is heavenly, spiritual, and intelligible, to be
understood by the mind; which food none can deliver but only Christ. Likewise
there be two parts of man, the body and the soul; and accordingly there be two
several sorts of taking, Two sorts of taking, eating, and drinking.
eating, and drinking; the one is external and sacramental pertaining to the
body; the other is internal and spiritual, belonging to the soul; The
external and sacramental, being a visible representation of that which is
spiritual and internal.

24. Both Element make but one Sacrament.
The elements of bread and wine are distinguished materialiter, in respect of
matter, for the matter of the bread and of the wine is not the same but diverse;
yet formaliter and perfective, formally and perfectively they make but one and
the same sacrament. 1. Because these two elementary signs, not more nor fewer;
bread and wine, and nothing else but bread and wine, are required to the
in^^egrity, and perfection of the Sacrament. Not more, because the bodily
refection is perfected in these two; and the spiritual refection in Christ, by
his blessed body and blood perfectly represented. Not fewer, because if either
of these be wanting, the Sacrament (which is the sacramen^ of perfect
refection) will be defective. 2ly Because that our blessed Lord to testify
that he took the whole human nature into the unity of his own most sacred
person, and was the word made flesh, perfect man, of a reasonable soul, and
human flesh subsisting, (as St. Athanasius says in his Creed) and also to
testify that he is the redeemer both of body and soul; instituted this
Sacrament in these two elements. For the bread, says St. Peter Lombard, is
referred to the f^esh, the wine to the soul; because wine operateth blood, in
which the Philosophers do say, that the soul is seated. lib. 4. did. 11.
Lastly, a mutila^ed sacrament is no sacrament at all, nor has it the promise,
nor can it signify, assure, or deliver the thing of the sacrament. Nor will it
be made a sacrament by concomitancy (a new doctrine not heard of in the Church,
till after a thousand two hundred and twenty years) nor will it consist with
the commandment which is as well concerning the administration, as also
concerning the participation of it, in both the species both of bread and wine.

The words of the promise, I said to be (...), definitive, or they define or
declare the things, Concerning the promise.
they set forth the in^ernall matter or thing signified, affirming it either of
the bread, or the cup sacramentally. Of the bread, Hoc est corpus meum quod pro
vobis datur and frangitur. This is my body which is given, and is broken for
you. Of the cup, Hic est sanguis meus, qui est novi testamenti, qui pro vobis
and pro multis effunditur in remissionem pecca orum; This is my blood of the
new Testament, which is shed for you, and for many, for the remission of sins.
Which words must be considered two ways, in the incomplex, How to be considered.
taken severally and by themselves; and in the complex, put altogether. Take
them in the incomplex severally and by themselves, then there is the subject,
the praedicatum, and the copula or bond whereby the thing affirmed, is knit or
coupled unto that whereof it is affirmed. The subject or matter is the pronoun
demonstrative Hoc, but not hoc adjectively, but hoc substantively [this thing]
as if he had said, This thing which I hold in my hand. What was that? It was
bread, and nothing else but bread; accepit Jesus pa^em, Jesus took bread. The
praedicatum, is, corpus meum, my body; what body? not his mystical body, for
that is his Church. It was therefore his natural, true, and proper body. Ephesians
4.11.12 Ephesians. 5.30.32
Quod pro vobis datur and frangitur; which is given, and is broken for you; and
qua tale, upon that respect that it was that natural, true, and proper body,
given and broken. Sanguis meus, my blood; what blood? His natural, true, and
proper blood; qui pro vobis, and pro multis effunditur, which is shed for you,
and for many; and qua talis, upon that respect that it was that natural true
and proper blood so shed. The copula or bond whereby the praedicatum or thing
affirmed, is knit or coupled to the subject or thing whereof it is affirmed, is
the verb substantive est. This is my body, this is my blood. Which verb est,
must not be taken pro esse naturali, vel substantiali, that it is so naturally
or substantially; but pro esse mystico vel sacramentali, that it is so
mystically or sacramentally; whereby the name of the thing signifying, has the
name of the thing signified, by reason of the analogy or similitude, which the
one has unto the other. He did not tell them what the bread and wine were by
nature, and substance, but what they were made by signification, office, and
use. By nature and substance they were bread and wine still, by signification
office and use, they were his body, and his blood. Now put all the words
together, and consider them in the complex, This is my body, this my blood;
they make indeed a proposition, but not according to the rules of logic; the
praedication is not orderly, for so much as the body and blood is no predicable
(neither the genus, species, differentia, proprium, or accidens) of the bread
and wine. Neither is it an identicall praedication, as when we say bread is
bread, wine is wine. What is it then? It is a figurative or sacramental
proposition. For the thing which is affirmed, is affirmed figuratively, and
sacramentally; figuratively, that is to say metonymically, whereby the name of
the thing is affirmed of the sign; a figure frequently used in the scripture.
Christ, our passover. Circumcision, the covenant. 1 Cor. 5.7 Genesis 17.10.
And as St. Paul says, concerning that rock which gave drink to the people of
Israel in the wilderness: (...), That rock was Christ; and there is an emphasis
in the article, ille Christus, 1 Cor. 10.4.
that Christ. Sacramentally; for the thing which is affirmed, is also assured
and made good by that whereof it is affirmed, whereby it comes to pass, that
the body and blood of Christ is verily and indeed taken and received of the
faithful in the Lords supper.

promise so considered, do lead us to the great benefit procured to mankind by
the merit of his body and blood, so broken, so poured out; and that is (...),
for the remission of sins. Remission of sins, therefore is the sweet fruit, and
effect of the death of Christ, Remission of sins.
through the effusion of his blood; and is an act of grace and mercy in God,
whereby he esteems of sin as no sin, or, as not committed. The word (...)
remission, is properly the sending of a thing back again to its right owner;
for remittere, is retro mittere, to send back. When God forgiveth sins, he does
send them away, like as the escape goat was sent away into the wilderness; he
does return them, as it were in full weight and measure, to the proper owner,
which is the Devil. The price The price.
of this grace on Christ his part, was his precious body, and blood, given,
broken, shed, to merit, and to procure it. One drop of that redeeming blood,
according to the dignity and worthiness of the person, had been sufficient to
have redeemed a thousand worlds, and yet no less price must be given then all
that which he suffered in the humanity, for the remission of sins. When the
Gentiles scoffed at that article of the Creed, wherein the Church acknowledges
to believe remission of sins; and said, that by this means the multitude of
sinners would easily be augmented, if remission of sins might freely be
expected, and so easily be obtained; Arnobius answered, Non emitur ista venia a
nobis, ut a vobis solet de vestris dijs; sed magno constat nempe sanguine
Christi, and proprium est numinis non emptitius, sed gratutitas, and liberales
habere peccatorum venias. lib. 7. This remission ir not of our purchasing, like
as you are wont to purchase of your gods, but the price was great, even the
blood of Christ, and it is Gods propriety not to sell, but freely and liberally
to forgive sins. The purchase therefore was on Christ his part, and magno
constat, the price given for it, was the greatest price that ever was; to us it
is a free grace without any price or merit on our parts.

Concerning which grace, diverse questions are to be demanded. God, The grace.
and to his Ministers. To God himself properly and authoritatively; to his
Ministers declaratively, ministerially, and by application. I say, first to God
himself properly, and authoritatively; for to him it belongs to remit sins by
his own authority. Sins remitted by God authoritatively
He against whom sins are committed, to him it does belong to forgive sins
properly, and by his own authority; but this is God, and none but God, the
breach of whose laws and commandments are properly sins, (for as much as the
offense done to any man, or to any other creature, is no more but an offense or
injury; nay, for as much as the breach of any man's commandment, is no sin,
unless it imply with all, the breach of the commandment of God) Therefore to
God, and to none but God, does it belong to forgive sins properly, and by his
own authority. This is clearly evinced by the Prophet David, who although he
had trespassed highly against Uriah, in that he had defiled his wife, and
caused him to be done to death, Psalm. 51.4. Ex. 34.6, 7. Psalm 32.5. Isa. 43.25.
Mich. 7.18. S. Mar. 2.7.
yet he acknoweldgeth the sin to be against God, and against him only, Tibi
soli peccavi, against thee, thee only have I sinned. And the whole scripture
is clear in this point; Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity?
who can forgive sins, but God only?

2ly I say, that remission of sins does belong to the ministers of God
declaratively, ministerially, and by application; for (says our Church in the
Absolution) He ha h given power and commandment to his ministers, Sins
remitted by the ministers, declaratively.
to declare and pronounce to his people being penitent, the absolution and
remission of their sins. For the ministers of the Church have the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, by the donation of Christ, whose right it was to transfer
them from the legal to the Evangelicall priesthood, which was first promised
to St. Peter, and with him to all the other Apostles, quia Petrus pro omnibus
loquutus est Apostolis, S. Mat. 16.19 S. Mat. 18.18
because he made answer for them all. Afterward renewed to them all. And
finally performed to them all, after his resurrection; at what time he breathed
on them the holy Ghost, and said, Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them; and whosesoever sins ye retain, S. Joh. 20.23
they are retained. But this power was not to dye with them, but according to
his own promise to remain with his Church to the end of the world. S. Mat.
28.20 The means.
And consists in application of the means whereby God does remit sins.
Which means are the word of God, the Sacraments of the Church, the relaxation
of Ecclesiastical censures, and prayer. I find this no where better set forth,
then in the form of our general absolution; He pardons and absolveth (not we
pardon and absolve) all them which truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his
holy Gospel. In quo non est peccatum, ipse venit auferre peccatum. Nam si
esset in illo peccatum, auferendum esset illi, non ipse auferret, says St.
Augustine. In whom sin is not, he came to take away sin. For if sin had been
in him, it must have been taken away from him, he himself should not have taken
it away. Tract. 4. in 1. Johan. 3. For who can remit sins but God only? who
does also remit them by those to whom he has given the power to remit them. S.
Amb. lib. 5. com. in Luc. 5.

The second is; What is the subject? who are they upon whom The subject.
and there are none to be found on earth, who do not need it. For (says Mr.
Calvin) be the children of God never so holy, yet in this condition are they
always, that without remission of sins they cannot stand before God. We must
every day pray for our daily bread; and we must every day pray for remission of
sins. No man is too rich to pray for daily bread; no man is too righteous
remission of sins. Against this it will be objected. 1. That sins are remitted
in baptism, and not only Original, but also actual sins; now it is needless
to pray for that which is forgiven already, therefore that it is needless to
pray for remission of sins. Answ. Sins are remitted in Baptism, and not only
original, but also actual sins (therefore the Novatians, the Melitians, and
the Donatists, did deny remission of sins to those who had sinned after that
grace received) and in Baptism we covenant with God, to forsake the Devil,
and all his works, the pomps and vanities of the wicked world, and all the
sinful lusts of the flesh. In Baptism we covenant to believe all the articles
of the Christian faith; and we also covenant to keep his holy will and
commandments, and to walk in the same all the days of our life. But because
the best and most righteous of those that are baptized, do not perfectly keep
the conditions of this covenant, (for in many things we all offend) therefore
even the very best and most righteous of those that are baptized, Jam. 3.2.
must pray for remission of sins.

2. It will be objected that sin perishes so soon as the act is transient and
vanish with the act. How remission of that which is not? Ans. The act of sin
indeed is transient and passes away, but the guilt remains; for sins
transient in the act, are permanent in the guilt, Aug. lib. 1. de Nuptiis. cap.
26. It is that guiltiness of sin, for which we pray that it may be remitted. 3.
It Church is holy, 1 Cor. 1.2. Phil. 1.1.
and the faithful are called Saints; Also that some have been found that have
not stood in need to have their sins remitted, Zacharias and Elizabeth were
both righteous before God, S. Luc. 1.6.
walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, blameless. 15.
Saint John the Baptist was filled with the holy Ghost even from his mothers
womb. Answ. The Church is holy, and the faithful are Saints, and yet, as
Fulgentius says, every one of the saints is perfect and imperfect; perfect, by
hope of glorification to come; imperfect, by the present burden of corruption
and mortality. Perfect, because that in mind he serves the law of God;
imperfect, because that in the flesh he serves the law of sin. Ad Monim.
Therefore are we called Saints in this world, because in affection we hold, and
wish for sanctity; says the book de ecclesiasticis dogmat. cap. 86. Then are
we just when we confess our selves to be sinners, and our righteousness does
not consist of our own merit, but of the mercy of God. Hieron. lib. 1. adver.
Pelag. Zacharias and Elizabeth were both righteous before God, and Saint John
the Baptist was filled with the holy Ghost even from his mothers womb. But
they were righteous before God, not by an inherent but by an imputed
righteousness; not by the righteousness of works, but by the righteousness
of faith; not by the legal, but by the Evangelicall justice, the imputed
righteousness of Jesus Christ, for the justification of a sinner in the sight
of God. Saint John the Baptist was filled with the holy Ghost from his mothers
womb; not that he should not sin; but as God said to Jeremiah, Jer. 1.5.
Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee, and before thou came forth
out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the
nations. Even so was Saint John the Baptist filled with those graces of the
holy Ghost from his mothers womb, which might best befit his wonderful
calling. I do not deny but that many of the dear Saints of God even in this
life, do walk in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless to
the world and to men: though not blameless to God. Blameless to the world and
to men, because without crime; not blameless to God, because not without sin.
Excellently Saint Augustine in his Enchiridion to Laurentius; Neque enim (says
he) quia peccatum est omne crimen, ideo crimen est omne peccatum; It does not
follow, that because every crime is a sin, that every sin is also a crime.
Therefore we do say, that the lives of holy men so long as they do live in this
death, may be found without a crime. Peccatum autem si dixerimus quia non
habemus, but if we say that we have no sin, S. 1 John 1.8.
as the holy Apostle says, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.
Cap. 64.

How far does God remit sins? Answ. God does not forgive sins by halfes. How
far God does remit sins. Jer. 31.34.
When God says, I will forgive their iniquities, and I will remember their sin
no more; his meaning is not to forgive the sin, and to remember the punishment;
he will remit both the culpa and the poena, according to that old distich,
Larga Dei bonitas veniam non dimidiabit; Aut nihil aut totum, te lachrymante,
dabit. The large bounty of God will not divide the pardon in the midst; He will
forgive all or nothing upon thy contrition. After what manner.
Fourthly, it is demanded, after what manner he does remit them? Answ.
Remission of sins is an action of God, whereby for the merit of Christ, he
esteems and accounts sin as no sin, or as if it had never been committed.
Therefore holy David, Psalm. 32.2. Isa. 44.22.
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. And the prophet
Isaiah, I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud
thy sins. Like as when a cloud is dispersed and gone, there is no sign or
remembrance of it; no more is there any sign or remembrance of sin when God
has forgiven it. Fifthly, Where remission of sins is.
Where does he remit them? Answ. Remission of sins is no where but in the
Church of God. Ipsa namque proprie Spiritum sanctum pignus accepit, sine quo
non remittuntur ulla peccata, ita ut quibus dimit^untur, consequantur vitam
aeternam. For the Church properly has received the holy Ghost a pledge,
without whom no sins are remitted, to the end that they to whom they are
remitted may obtain everlasting life, Isa. 33.24.
Aug. Enchir. cap. 65. The people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their
iniquity. It is a benefit so proper to the Church, that as Master Calvin says,
we cannot enjoy it upon any other terms, then that we remain in the communion
thereof. Whether any sin be irremissible.
Sixthly, Whether there be any sin which is irremissible? Answ, The sin against
the holy Ghost is irremissible; for the words of Christ are plain, He that shall
blaspheam against the holy Ghost has never forgiveness, S. Mar. 3.29.
Blasphemy against the holy Ghost.
but is in danger of eternal damnation. Which blasphemy against the holy Ghost
is both against knowledge, and against conscience, by abnegation of the known
truth, by universal apostasy from Christ, and from Christian religion, by
rebellion arising from the hatred of Gods truth, together with a tyrannical,
sophistical, and hypocritical impugnation of it.

Seventhly, Whether any sinner may despair to be forgiven? No sinner is to
despair of pardon and remission of sins, Whether a sinner may despair.
be they never so great, never so many, for if he shall truly repent, God will
freely forgive. Nemo post centum peccata, nec post mill crimina de
misericordia divina desperet, says Saint Augustine. Let no man despair of the
mercy of God, neither after an hundred sins, nor after a thousand crimes. De
temp. ser. 58. Repentance may be profitable unto every man, at what time soever
he shall do it, and be he never so bad, never so old, says the same Father.
Wash ye, make you clean, Isa. 1.16,
put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil,
Learn to do well, seek judgment, 17, 18.
relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. Come now
and let us reason together; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool; says
the prophet Isaiah. Eighthly, Whether the force and effect of remission, be more
to be discerned, etc.
Whether the force and effect of remission of sins be not more to be discerned
in the world to come then in this present world? Answ. The force and effect of
the grace of God in the free remission of sins, is more to be discerned in the
world to come, then in this present world; for in this world remission of sins
does not plainly and fully produce its effect, neither is the fruit of it fully
to be reaped till the day of judgment. 1st Because that they whose sins are now
remitted, are yet notwithstanding oftentimes vexed, and much afflicted in the
world; like as on the other side all sins are not punished in this life. 2ly
Because the Scripture ascribes remission of sins to the day of judgment, a day
of refreshing, (namely to those who have obtained remission of sins) when the
troubles and calamities of this present life shall be at an end. Repent ye
therefore, Act. 3.19.
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Ninthly, Why God will
forgive sins.
Why will he forgive sins? Answ. God will forgive sins for his own sake, that
he may be glorified in the pardon and remission of sins. And God will remit
sins for his elect and chosen sake, that they may be glorified together with
him, in the pardon and remission of their sins. As the Apostle Saint Paul
says, Romans 9.23.
That he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy,
which he had before prepared unto glory.

Thus the blessed Evangelists having observed both what Christ did, and what
Christ said, Concerning the explication.
Saint Luke sets down the explication, which shows the cause or reason, as
well of the administration, as also of the participation of it, (...), in
remembrance of me. It is to banish ingratitude from his Church for ever. We are
apt to forget the benefits which we have received at the hands of others, and
to bury our benefactours themselves in oblivion. Who would have thought that
Laban would so soon have forgotten the benefits which he received at the hands
of Jacob, who had served him so faithfully? It was that which Jacob complained
of to his wives, Genesis 31.5.
I see your fathers countenance, that it is not toward me as before. Who would
have thought that Pharaohs chief butler would so suddenly have forgotten
Joseph, and the interpretation of his dream? But it was his ingratitude that he
did not remember Joseph, Genesis 40.23.
but forgot him. Who would have thought that the kings of Egypt would ever have
forgotten Joseph, and the benefits which they received at his hands? Exodus 1.8.
Yet the Scripture says, that there arose a new king over Egypt, which knew
not Joseph. Which remembered not Joseph, nor all the benefits which he had done
unto Pharaoh, and to all the land of Egypt. Who would have thought that the
people of Israel would ever have forgotten their deliverance out of the land of
Egypt? Psalm 78.42,
and yet see what the Scripture says, They remembered not his hand; nor the day
when he delivered them from the enemy. 43.
How he had wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan.
It was a deliverance that must never be forgotten, and lest they should forget
it, he would have it to be remembered every year by the celebration of a solemn
sacrament. And it shall come to pass when your children shall say unto you,
Exodus 12.26
What mean you by this service? That ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the
Lords passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt,
when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. Our blessed Lord would
not be forgotten, the deliverance which he would work for his Church, would be
a far greater deliverance then that of the children of Israel out of the land
of Egypt. That was a deliverance out of a temporal bondage; this is a
deliverance out of an eternal bondage. That was a deliverance of the body;
this is a deliverance of body and soul. That was a deliverance from Egypt, and
from the heavy burdens of it; this is a deliverance from hell it self, and
from the eternal torments of it. By that deliverance they were brought into
the land of Canaan, by this deliverance we are brought into the kingdom of
heaven. It is a deliverance that must never be forgotten, and lest it should be
forgotten, he will have the memorial of it continued in his Church, by the
frequent celebration of so great a sacrament. When our children shall say unto
us, What mean you by this service? we must say unto them, that it is the
blessed sacrament of the Lords supper, which he has instituted to that end,
that we being continually fed and nourished by his most precious body and
blood, should never forget him, nor the benefits which we have received by him.
(...). Do this in remembrance of me. Yet not to a bare remembrance of him; for,
verba notitiae in sacris, etiam sequentes motus significant: words in the
scriptures that import knowledge, do also imply the motions consequent.
Therefore though we must remember the whole history of Christ, and of his
passion and death (and it is highly commendable in a Christian, to know and
remember the whole history of Christ, of his passion and death) yet must we not
sit down there; we must have a faithful remembrance of him, and we must have a
thankful remembrance of him. We must have a faithful remembrance of him to
believe that what Christ did, and what Christ suffered, he both did, and
suffered for us; we must make a particular application of his merits, and of
his sufferings to our selves, that we may say, (every one of us faithfully for
himself) with Saint Paul, (...). Call. 2 20.
I am crucified with Christ. We must have a thankful remembrance of him; for
this Sacrament is (...), grata beneficiorum recordatio, a grateful remembrance
of benefits received; it is grata animi significatio, a thankful signification
of the mind for benefits received. In which Sacrament we do commemorate Christ,
and his benefits in a special manner, testifying our gratitude, lauding,
praising, and magnifying the holy name of God therefore, for it is by way of
excellency (...).

Thus having instituted and administered this great and mysterious which has
obtained to be styled his body and blood, and is so indeed unto every faithful
receiver of it, and is to be seen and discerned, not (...), not with the eyes
of the body, but with the eyes of the mind; Christ his protestation.
he adds a protestation, that he will no more drink of the fruit of the Vine,
until the day that he shall drink it new with them in the kingdom of God his
father. This protestation is remembered by all the three Evangelists, S Mat.
26.29 S. Mar. 14.25 S. Luc. 22.18
and was made after the Sacrament instituted and administered according to St.
Matthew and St. Mark; but before the divine institution of it according to
Saint Luke, and either before they did eat the Passover, or immediately after,
as they sat at the supper. The difference is but seeming, Utrumque dictum, sed
non utrumque ab utroque dictum. Saint Matthew does not say that which Saint
Luke says, Saint Luke does not say that which Saint Matthew says; and yet
both Saint Matthew and Saint Luke, do say what Christ said. Saint Luke says,
what he said at supper, and before he administered; Saint Matthew and Saint
Mark, what he said after supper, and after that he had instituted and
administered this Sacrament. He was serious in his protestation, he spoke it
twice, and once at least confirmed it by his usual attestation (observed by
Saint Mark) (...), Verily I say unto you. Two things he protests; 1. That he
would no more eat the passover in that manner, nor drink any more wine with
them so as he had done; this was the last that he would eat or drink, therefore
that he would dye. He himself was the true passover, he would offer up
himself, and thereby antiquate the lesser passover. 2ly That he would eat it
when it should be fulfilled in the kingdom of God; that he would drink of the
fruit of the Vine, when the kingdom of God should come; that he would drink it
new with them, in the kingdom of God his father: therefore that he would not be
long dead; he would surely and certainly rise again. After the passover should
be fulfilled in the kingdom of God, that is to say, after his resurrection (for
by his death the true paschall lamb was offered up, and by his resurrection
the passover was fulfilled, the old passover that was then abolished; the new
passover, that was then offered up) when the kingdom of God should come: when
he should manifest his glory after his resurrection, then would he drink it new
with them, novo modo in a new manner; in the kingd^m of God his Father, the
Church of the new Testament confirmed by his blood. He did eat and drink with
them after his resurrection, but novo modo in a new manner; for before he dyed,
his body was passible, and he stood in need of food, but after he was risen,
his body was impassible, and he stood in no need of food: it was novo modo, in
a new manner, propter resurrectionis certitudinem, for the certitude of his
resurrection. He does eat the passover, and drink the new wine with his Church
militant, novo modo, in a new manner, whiles that he is incorporated into us,
and we into him by faith in the mystical eating and drinking of this
Sacrament; and he will eat and drink with his Church triumphant, novo modo, in
a new manner, in the kingdom of heaven by communication of his glory.

All this while Judas was present, and sitting at the table together passover,
but he had not purged out the old leaven. The impudency of Judas.
He had his feet washed, but he was not clean, because his conscience was
defiled. He was (as St. Augustine says) admitted by Christ unto the same
banquet in which he commended the figure of his body, and of his blood. Cont.
Adimant. Therefore did he receive the visible signs, the bread and the cup; but
he did not receive the invisible grace, (the body and blood in a mystery)
because he did not discern it. He knew his treason, and he knew that his Lord
also knew it. He dipped his hand with him in the dish, a sign given to all the
Disciples whereby to discover him: and Christ also told him plainly (though it
seems he ask't the question last of all) that he was the traitor, (...). S. Mat
26.25
Thou have said. Wherefore he complains of his impudency: But behold the hand
of him that betrayeth me, S. Luc. 22.21 22, 23.
is with me on the table. At this word they make a new enquiry among
themselves, who it was that should do this thing. St. Peter beckoneth to St.
John, that he should ask who it should be of whom he spoke: he demanded, Lord,
who is it? Jesus answered, He it is to whom I shall give a sop, when I have
dipped it: and when he had dipped the sop, he gave it to him, and then the
Devil entered into him ((...), took his heart into his own possession, S. Joh.
13.23 24, 25, 26, 27 28, 29, 30.
says Theophylact) and he went imediately out, it being night; Christ also
saying unto him, That thou do, do quickly: which words to what end they were
spoken, none of the Disciples then knew.

After he was gone forth, he discourses to his Disciples of Evangelists,
foretelling them the offense that they should take at him, He foretells the
offense of his disciples, and S. Peter's denial.
and to St. Peter his denial of him. Saint Peter was fervent in his love to
Christ, and was ready upon all occasions to lay down his life for him. Christ
tells him, that Satan had desired to have them, that he might sift them as
wheat, but that he had prayed for him, (and in him for all them) that his faith
should not fail. He replies presently, Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both
into prison, and to death. But Christ answers, I tell thee Peter, the cock
shall not crow this day, S. Luc. 22.31 32, 33, 34.
before that thou shall thrice deny that thou know me. Again, he told them
that he had but a little while to be with them, that they should seek him, but
(said he) As I said unto the Jews, whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I say
unto you. Saint Peter said, Lord, whither go thou? Jesus answered him,
whither I go thou can not follow me now, but thou shall follow me afterward.
Saint Peter would know the reason, Why not now? S. Joh. 13.33 34, 35, 36, 37,
38.
I will lay down my life for thy sake. Jesus answered him, Will thou lay down
thy life for my sake? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, the cock shall not crow
until thou have denied me thrice. Finally (which seems to be spoken not in the
chamber, but as they were going toward the mount of Olives) he premonisheth
them, that they should all be offended because of him that night; and that it
must be so, because the scritpure must be fulfilled, I will smite the
shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered; which thing was prophesied by
Zechariah, c. 13.7. Saint Peter had recourse again the third time to his former
confidence. Although all should be offended, yet will not I. Christ replies
again, Verily I say unto thee, That this day, even in this night, before the
cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice. S. Mat. 26.31 32, 33, 34, 35. S.
Mar. 14, 27 28, 29, 30, 31
But he spoke the more vehemently, If I should die with thee, I will not deny
thee in any wise. Which was also that which they all said. Ecce avis sine
pennis in altum volare nititur, sed corpus aggravat animam, ut timore humanae
mortis timor Domini superetur. See (says St. Hierome) a bird without wings
strives to fly aloft, but the body does overburthen the soul, that the fear of
the Lord should be praeponderated by the fear of human death. His will was
good, and his love was highly to be commended, but he had not rightly
considered his own humane imbecillitie.

he must go from them. Wherefore Judas being gone, before that he would go out
to be betrayed he spoke unto them all those sweet words which are recorded by
the blessed Apostle and Evangelist Saint John, Christ's farewell Sermon to his
Apostles.
a Sermon of valediction set down verbatim in the fourteenth, fifteenth, and
sixteenth chapters of his Gospel; of which briefly this is the sum. He
comfort them with the hope of heaven, his Fathers house, in which are many
mansions, assuring them that he is going before to prepare a place for them;
that he will come again and bring them thither, professing himself to be the
way thither according to his humanity, and the end according to his divinity,
the truth and the life, and consubstantiall with the Father. Assures their
prayers put up to the Father in his name to be effectual. Thereupon requesting
love and obedience, he promises to send unto them, and in them to his Church,
the holy Ghost the comforter, to be with them for ever, leaving unto them, and
to his Church, his peace. So he concludes the first part of his Sermon, cap.
14. Bidding them to arise, and to go from thence, leading them, it seems, to
another place, where he continues his divine doctrine. There, under the parable
of the Vine, he sets forth the consolation, and mutual love betwixt him and
his members; showing how he accounreth of them, by this that he dies for them.
Also what must be their comfort in the hatred and persecution of the world;
likewise showing what the holy Ghost the comforter will do on his part when he
is come; and that both he, and they, must testify of him, cap. 15. Now he
fortelleth them of persecution to come, to the end that they should not be
scandalized thereat, when it is come. And because that sorrow had filled their
heart, therefore he proposes the advantage which they should have by his
departure from them; (for by that means the holy Ghost would come, who should
testify against his enemies, and guide them into all truth:) and the
inestimable joy that shall be unto them by his resurrection. That the prayers
which they make to the Father in his name, shall be accepted. That he came down
from the Father, and that he would go unto him again. Wherefore when they all
professed that they did believe that he came forth from God; he replyeth that
presently when he shouldbe apprehended, they would all forsake him. And when he
had promised them his Peace against the afflictions of the world, he ends his
Sermon in these words, Be of good cheer [(...), be confident] I have overcome
the world, ca. 16. Having ended his Sermon, he then addresseth himself to his
holy and heavenly Father by prayer, that seeing he had now finished his work,
he would give him his appointed glory, to preserve his Apostles and his Church
for ever in unity, [against schism] and in verity, [against heresy.] Finally,
to glorify them all for ever in heaven, together with him. And then (...),
when they had sung an hymn, or the hymn, (...), says Saint Gregory Nyssen.
(An hymn is a benediction ascribed to God, for the benefits which he has done
unto us, in Psalm. lib. 2.) which was accustomed to be sung at that feast, S.
Mat. 26.30 S. Mar. 14.26
peradventure the great Halalujah, as has been intimated before; they went out
into the mount of Olives.

Nigh unto Jerusalem was the valley of Jehosaphat, through The brook Cedron.
a certain brook which sprang out of an hill not far off, upon the south; and
so passed through the east part of the city betwixt Jerusalem and the mount of
Olives, from whence it held its course through the cliffs of that mount, till
it fell into the dead sea. It had its name, and was called Cedron, from the
blackness of the waters, which were made black by the fertility of the soil
through which it ran; the valley of Jehosaphat being a very rich and fertile
soil. This brook was not great; upon any great rain it would be very full (as
they say), but was commonly dry in the summer time. Over this brook, as Saint
John says, S. Joh. 18.1. The mount of Olives.
they passed to go to the mount of Olives, which mount stood about half a mile
from the city, very fruitful and pleasant, abounding with many precious
fruits, especially with Olives, from whence it was called the mount of Olives.
S. Mat. 26.36 S. Mar. 14 32 Gethsemane.
At the foot of this hill there was a village called Gethsemane, situate in a
very pleasant and fruitful place; where, it is said, they used to press their
oil, from whence it obtained to be so called: for Gath signifies a press, and
schaemen oil. Nigh thereunto was a spacious and delightful garden, supposed
to have been first planted by David and Solomon, and afterward increased and
enlarged by the kings of Judah for their delight and recreation, to walk, and to
enjoy themselves. Into that garden Christ often went with his disciples, and
Judas knew it, and knew the place. Having therefore passed over the brook
Cedron, he came thither according to his wont; and being come into the garden,
he assigned a place to the other disciples to sit, and to remain, saying, Sit
ye here, while I go and pray yonder; but took with him Saint Peter, and the two
sons of Zebedee Saint James and Saint John, and began to be sorrowful and very
heavy, S. Mat. 26.37, 38.8. Mar. 14.33, 34.
says Saint Matthew; to be sore amazed, says Saint Mark. He tells them
whence that sorrow, heaviness, and amazement proceeded; it was from his soul,
which was exceeding sorrowful unto death; as if it had then been even in the
pangs, and pains, Christ sorrowful in soul.
and torments of death, immediately to depart out of his body, and to die the
spiritual or supernatural death. Such and so great was the sorrow of his
soul, having before his eyes the bitterness of that cup which he was to drink;
which he was amazed to behold, looking upon Adam and upon all his posterity
damned to the eternal torments of hell, by the sentence of the law, and not
otherwise to be redeemed, but by the merit of his passion only; seeing and
considering all the sins of men, from the first disobedience of Adam in
paradise unto the worlds end, and every sin deserving eternal death, to be
imputed unto him, and to be satisfied for, by him; seeing and considering that
he must now conflict with the devil, and with all the powers of hell, to break
the serpents head, and to overthrow them utterly by a shameful and ignominious
death upon the cross; seeing and considering that he must conflict with the
law, and with the malediction and curse of the law to take it away, and to nail
it unto the cross.

voluntary dispensation. He begins his passion.
He could presently have commanded all the joys of heaven, but he would not,
for the works sake which he was to do. Having therefore bidden them to tarry in
that place, and to watch with him, he went a little further about a stones
cast, he kneeled down and prayed, saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove
this cup from me; nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done. Then was he in
an agony, and prayed more earnestly, falling flat to the ground upon his face,
saying, O my Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me;
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. Abba Father, all things are
possible unto thee, take this cup from me: nevertheless not that I will, but
what thou will. In this agony he fell into a sweating passion, and his sweat
was as it were great drops of blood, He sweateth blood.
fal^ing down to the ground. And in this agony there appeared an angel unto
him strengthening him. The Divinity therefore had respect to the human nature
so overcharged with fear, sorrow, heaviness, and amazement, that all the pores
of his body were opened, by which the blood issued by drops trickling down to
the ground; whereunto must be added his vehemence and ardency in prayer, (...),
in that agony he prayed more earnestly. Violent passions produce violent
effects; it was true natural blood, the pure blood of his blessed body which
he did sweat, but the manner of its emanation was mavelous and mysterious.
After he had prayed a while, he arises from the ground, goes to his disciples
and finds them sleeping, whom when he had gently reprehended, but Saint Peter
by name, Simon, sleep thou? could not thou wa^ch one hour? Watch ye and
pray lest ye enter into temptation: S. Mat. 26.39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46.
the spirit is ready, but the flesh is weak; he goes away and prays again,
saying the same words, and then comes to them the second time, and finds
them sleeping as before. Wherefore he went away again and prayed, and spoke the
same words; S. Mar. 14.35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. S. Luc. 22.41, 42, 43,
44, 45, 46.
and when he came the third time, he told them that he was betrayed, and that
the traitor was at hand, saying, Rise, let us be going: (not to fly from
them, but to meet them) Behold he is at hand that does betray me.

So went he forward to meet them, marching (as it were) before his disciples as
a Captain, yet not to fight with the sword, but to conquer by his death; Judas
also led up his company His apprehension.
and officers from the chief priests and pharisees, accompanied with some of
the chief priests, captains of the temple, and Elders of the people, armed
with swords, staves, and other weapons, against resistance; and bringing
lanthorns and torches, lest he should hide himself from them in the garden,
and escape them by the darkness of the night. Judas also had given them a sign
before, to the end that they might not err in the person, and apprehend some
other in stead of him, which was his traitorous and perfidious kiss. He
thought by such a sign, as Theophylact says, to delude him; but Jesus knowing
all things that should come upon him, goes up close unto them, and gives the
onset, saying, Whom seek ye? They answered, Jesus of Nazareth; he replyeth, I
am he. At which word they went backward and fell to the ground. Tenere
volentibus, and non valen ibus, ostendit potestatem suam. Aug. It was to show
his power, and that he was voluntarily apprehended. Wherefore they being risen
from the ground, he asked them again, Whom seek ye? They answered, Jesus of
Nazareth. He replies, I have told you that I am he; if therefore ye seek me (ye
have nothing to do with these my disciples) let these go their way. Inimicos
jubet, and hoc faciunt quod jubet; sinunt scilicet nunc eos abire, quos non
vult perire. He commands his enemies, and they do that thing which he
commands them, they now suffer those to depart whom he would not have to
perish; so he fulfilled his own word, St. Joh. 17.12. Then came Judas and gave
the sign, signum osculi, cum veneno doli; the sign of a kiss, with the poison
of deceit, as says Saint Ierom, and for better direction to his accursed crew,
cried out, saying, Master, Master, hail Master, and kissed him. He admitted the
kiss, but reproved both his treason and hypocrisy. So they came, laid hands
on, and took him, who gave himself up voluntarily into their hands. And when
the disciples (who had two svvords with them) savv what would follovv,
they demanded, saying, Lord, shall we smite with the sword? But Saint Peter,
whose resolution was to lay down his life in his defense, drew one of the
swords (which was his) immediately, and smote a servant of the high priests
whose name was Malchus, and cut off his right ear. Christ would not be
rescued; therefore he commanded him to put it up, for that none must dravv the
svvord to kill and slay, but they only into whose hands it is delegated by
God; would he be rescued, he could be rescued by the ministry of Angels; but
the Scripture must be fulfilled. So when he had healed him whose ear was cut
off, by a touch of his hand, he expostulated with the chief priests and
captains of the temple, and with the whole multitude, for coming forth to
apprehend him in that hostile manner, and by night, who was daily with them
teaching in the temple, where, though they might have had him, yet they laid no
hold on him. As if he should have said, (for so Bid also does paraphrase the
words) Stultum est cum gladiis and fustibus quaerere eum, S. Mat. 26, 47, 48,
49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55 56. S. Mar. 14.43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50. S.
Luc. 22, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53. S. Joh. 18.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. S.
Mar. 14 51 52.
qui ultro se vestris tradidit manibus; and in nocte quasi latitantem per
proditorem investigare, qui quotidie in templo doc^bat. It is a foolish thing
with swords and clubs to seek him, who of his own accord has delivered
himself into your hands; and by a traitor to make search as for one latitant,
in the night, who taught daily in the temple. But this is your hour, and the
power of darkness. But the Scriptures must be fulfilled. At this word all the
disciples forsook him, and fled. Yet there followed him a certain young man,
(who was none of his disciples, for they all fled) having a linen cloth cast
about his naked body, and the young men laid hold on him. And he left the
linen cloth, and fled from them naked. Who this young man should be, what he
made in the garden at that time of the night, and in such a garb, it is not
mentioned; probably one of the servants of that house where they had eaten the
passover, who having heard what he had discoursed unto his disciples, came
thither out of curiosity to see the event. Whatsoever he were, the story I
suppose is told by Saint Mark to no other end, but to show the present danger
which the disciples escaped by their flight.

captain and officers of the Jews bound him; He is bound. Psalm. 118.27.
Brought to Annas.
for he was led away to be sacrificed, and to be bound even unto the horns of
the Altar. And first they bring him to Annas; and the reason why to him first,
is given by Saint John, For he was father in law to Caiphas, which was the high
priest that same year. It was not therefore because his house stood in the way
toward the palace of the high priest, it was out of reverence to him, he had
been high priest himself, and he was father in law to the present high priest.
This was Annas or Ananus the elder, (...), says Josephus. Which elder Annas
was said to be most happy, for he had five sons, all who ministered unto God in
the office of the high priest, he himself having enjoyed that honor along
time; which thing never happened to any of the high priests before him. Antiq.
lib. 20. cap. 8. I should have said so too, had I not now found him in the
counsel of the ungodly.

From Annas (and by his direction and commandment) they Caiphas, Annas send^th
him to Ca^aphas.
with whom were assembled all the chie^e priests, and the elders, and the
scribes, the whole S^nhedrim, (Annas himself doubtless following after) in
readiness to judge, and to condemn him, that upon their condemnation he might
be transmitted to Pontius Pilate the deputy. He is exam^n^d.
Being brought before them, the high priest asked him of his disciples and of
his doctrine. Concerning his disciples he answered nothing; (they had saved
themselves by flight, and he would not that they should then be sought for, and
apprehended for his sake.) As touching his doctrine, he frames his answer in
these words, I spoke openly to the world, I ever taught in the synagogue, S.
Joh. 18 12 13, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in s^cret have I said
nothing; Why ask thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have said unto
them: behold they know what I said. When he had so spoken, one of the officers
which stood by, smote him with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou
the high priest so? To whom he replied no more but this, If I have spoken
evil, bear witness of the evil, but if well, why smitest thou me? in that
manner checking him for the injury which he had done unto him. Being not able
by examination to evict him, the whole council unanimously betook themselves
to false witnesses, that so they might have some color to condemn him. They
produced many, False witnesses produced.
but proved nothing, because their testimonies did not agree; for the law
required two concurring testimonies, and amongst them all, there were not found
any two which did speak ad id^m. At the last, when they had made much search
and enquiry, two false witnesses were brought in, sumphonous in evidence, which
said, We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and
within three days I will build another made without hands. They were false
witnesses indeed, they did pervert both his words and meaning; he did not say
that he would destroy the temple; he did not speak of the material temple; he
did not say that he would raise any temple at all without hands: but he spoke
of a living temple, foretelling his resurrection upon the third day. Destroy
this temple, and in three days I will raise it up. St, Ioh. 2.19. S. Mat.
26.59, 60, 61. S. Mar. 14.55, 56, 57, 58, 59.
But this testimony was invalid, neither so did their witness agree together;
it was not (...) it was not equal; for though they were false witnesses, yet
they had not agreed betwixt themselves to testify matter sufficient to condemn
him.

Whilst these things were thus agitated in the palace of the high priest, Saint
Peter lapsed most miserably, Saint Peter's denial.
and three several times (according to that which Christ had foretold him)
denied his Lord. For he, together with Saint John, when all the rest of the
disciples provided for their own security by flight, follovved him afar off to
the palace of the high priest; and being brought in thither by the mediation of
Saint John, was three times charged to be one of his Disciples, which thing he
denied three times, and the last time with cursing and swearing; nay, he did
(...), as it were curse himself with the curse of anathema, wishing all plagues
and punishments, miseries and misfortunes to be unto him; he did devove
himself to the Devil, imprecating damnation to himself, to be eternally
separated from the glorious presence of God, and a peculiar gift to the Devil
for ever; all which, or so much in effect he most wickedly imprecated,
confirming his most impious imprecations by oaths. It was high time for the
Lord to look upon him with mercy, never was any man posting with greater speed
to hell, S Mat. 26, 69 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75. S. Mar. 14.66 67, 68, 69, 70,
71, 72. S. Luc. 22.55 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62 S. Joh. 18.15 16, 17, 25, 26,
27.
it was high time for the Lord to return him; the cock crew the second time,
and the Lord turned and looked upon him, and S. Peter remembered the words of
the Lord, Before the cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice; and then his
bowels yerned upon his Lord, and upon himself for his sin; and he went out and
wept bitterly. Faelices, o Apostole, sanctae lachrymae tuae, quae ad diluendam
culpam negationis, virtutem sacri habuere baptismatis. Affuit enim dextera
Domini Jesu Christi, quae labentem te priusquam degicereris exciperet, and
firmitatem stanti in ipso cadendi periculo recepisti; cito itaque ad
soliditatem rediit petra, tanquam recipiens fortitudinem; ut qui tunc in
Christi expaverat passione, in suo post supplicio non timeret, sed constans
permaneret. A golden sentence of Pope Leo! Happy, O Apostle, thy holy tears!
which to wash away the sin of thy denial, had the virtue of sacred baptism.
For the right hand of the Lord Jesus Christ was present with thee, to lay hold
upon thee as thou wast slyding, before thou was quite thrown down, and being in
danger of falling, thou receivedst strength to stand; suddenly therefore did
the rock return to his solidity, as if receiving fortitude, that he who had
then been sorely afraid in the passion of Christ, should not afterward dreadin
his own torment, but should remain constant. Apud Aquinat. in catena. All this
came to pass unto Saint Peter, but Christ himself was kept in safe custody the
remainder of the night, and early in the morning they conveened their council,
and Christ being brought before them, the high Priest first admonishes him of
what the witnesses had given in evidence against him, requiring his answer. But
when he made none, nor would open his mouth in his own defense, (for so was it
prophesied, Christ adjured.
Isai. 53.7.) Then the high Priest adjured him, I adjure thee, by the living
God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ the Son of God; Jesus
answered, (...), Thou have said, thou have spoken the word; I am. Adding also
concerning his second coming; Hereafter ye shall see the Son of man sitting on
the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. At this the high
Priest rent his clothes as the hearing of blasphemy, affirming that he had
spoken blasphemy, and that it would be needless to produce, or to examine any
more witnesses against him, seeing that they themselves had heard the
blasphemy; wherefore he calls for the Vote of the council, who, all of them
unanimously, S Mat. 26.62 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68. S. Mar. 14.60 61, 62, 63, 4,
65. S. Luc. 22.63 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71.
denounced the sentence of condemnation against him, saying, He is guilty of
death. Which sentence being so denounced, they then insult over him with all
manner of indignities: for they spit in his face, covering it with spittle,
they blind-folded him, they buffetted him, they smote him with the palms of
their hands, they call him Christ in dirision, and they bid him to prophecy
who it was that smote him: and such was the insolency not only of the masters,
but even of the servants themselves.

Where Judas was latitant all this while it is not mentioned, high priests
house, having an eye to the business in hand, thinking peradventure that his
Lord would have extricated himself well enough, and that the money which he had
received for his prodition, Judas hanged himself.
should have been his own clear gains; wherefore when he saw that he was
condemned indeed, he repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of
silver to the chief priests and elders, telling them that he had sinned, in
that he had betrayed the innocent blood. They answered, that it concerned not
them, let him look to what he had done. So he cast down the silver pieces in
the temple, the price of his treason, and departed, and went and hanged
himself; some say (by what warrant I know not) upon that fig tree which two
days before Christ had cursed, so the cursed thing hung upon the cursed tree.
He being gone, they took up the silver pieces, they consult what to do with
them, they conclude it not lawful to put them into the Corban, and so to
intermix them with the sacred treasure, being the price of blood; wherefore
upon consultation had, they did in some short space afterward, buy with them
the Potters field, (which upon that occasion was called Aceldama, the field of
blood) to bury strangers in. And was a little piece of ground not far from the
valley of Hinnon toward the East, and upon the south side of mount Sion, S.
Mat. 27.3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
in length seventy and two foot, and in breadth fifty, which place was
afterward walled in by Helen the mother of Constantine that noble Emperor. In
buying of which field they fulfilled the prophecy of Zechariah, c. 11. 13.

When the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of the to deliver
him into the power of the Roman Deputy, which was Pontius Pilate, He is brought
before Pilate
that he might be crucified, for the power of life and death by crucifying was
consistent in the Romans at that time, who had forbidden it to the Jew's
Sanhedrin. Which thing was divinely disposed by God, that so both Jews and
Gentiles might obtain mercy by it. Therefore when they had bound him, they led
him away early to the door of the judgment hall, and there delivered him to
Pilate, themselves not going in, because it was the parasceue or day of
preparation, lest they should be defiled, and rendered unfit for the passover,
which they were to eat at even. Pilate therefore came forth, and desired to
know what accusation they brought against him. They answered, If he were not a
Malefactor, we would not have delivered him unto thee. Pilate bids them to
take him, and to judge him according to their own law. They reply, that it is
not lawful for them to put any man to death. As if they should say, It is not
lawful for us to judge him of such crimes as we have to accuse him of, nor to
put him to such a death as those crimes have deserved. S Mat. 27.1, 2 S. Mar.
15, 1. S. Lu. 23.1, 2 S. Joh 18, 28 29, 30, 31, 32 He is accused.
So they give in their accusation, laying three things to his charge; That he
perverted the nation; That he forbad to give tribute to Caesar, That he said he
was Christ a king. These things indeed (had they been true) had been worthy of
Pilates cogniscence; but this was, that the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled,
which he spoke, signifying what death he should die. Pilate having received
such an accusation aganist him, thought it fitting to take notice of it;
wherefore he goes into the judgment hall again, and calling him before him,
said, Examined, and demands to know his accusers.
Art thou the king of the Jews? To which question he answered neither
negatively nor affirmatively at first; but that which stands with all reason
and law (in that no man is bound to accuse himself) desires to know his
accuser; and whether Pilate said it of himself, and would therefore be his
accuser; or, if any other said it, of him, to accuse him, and so to justify
and prove it. Pilate answers satis humaniter, that he is no Jew, that it was
his own nation, the whole multitude of those that brought him, and the chief
priests themselves who had delivered him upon that accusation; therefore said
he, What have thou done? Thereupon he witnesses a good confession, as Saint
Paul says, 1 Timothy 6.13. Answers fully.
For he makes a full, and a plain answer, which must be reduced to these four
heads; 1. That he confessed himself to be a king, and a true king, the king of
the Jews. (...), Thou say it; that is the word: I am so indeed. 2ly He
expresses himself, he is a king, and the king of the Jews; yet not a worldly
king, nor of the carnal seed, nor had he any soldiers to fight for him,
therefore no disturber of the public peace. 3ly That his kingdom is upheld
and maintained not by worldly power and policy, but by his sufferings, and by
his death, whereby he bears witness to the truth. 4ly That his subjects are
they who hear his voice, and that such only are of the truth, who because
they are of the truth, do therefore hear his voice. Pilate hearing no more
matter concerning the kingdom, when he had only said, What is truth?
(intimating thereby the falsity of his accusation, and the falsehood of his
accusers) he went out unto the Jews again, and said, I find in him no fault at
all. S. Mat. 27.1 2, 11, 12, 13 14. S. Mar. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. S Luc. 23.1, 2,
3, 4, 5. S. Joh. 18, 28 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38.
Whereupon the elders and the chief priests cried out vehemently against him,
laying many things to his charge (to which he answered nothing, whereat Pilate
much wondered) and specially that he stirred up the people to sedition,
forbidding them to give tribute to Caesar, fomenting and teaching his seditious
doctrine all over Jury, and having begun it in Galilee, he had now brought it
to Jerusalem the great city, and metropolis of the whole land, to infect it
also, and to scatter the seeds of his seditious documents in that place.

Pilate gave no credit to their accusations, for he knew that envy they had
delivered him; wherefore he thought to rescue him out of their hands by policy.
Pilate sends him to Herod.
And first when he heard that he was of Galilee, he demanded whether he were a
Galilean, which when he knew, and that he belonged to Herod's jurisdiction, he
sent him to Herod, who was at that time in Jerusalem; for that Herod, was
Herod Antipas Tetrarch of Galilee. This he did to rid his hands of him, and
that he might not against his own conscience shed the innocent blood; but it
was not just, for in that he held him innocent, he ought not only to have
absolved him, but to have punished his accusers, and to have protected him by
his power. Herod was exceedingly glad of his coming; for he was desirous to
see him of a long season, because he had heard many things of him, and hoped to
have seen some miracle done by him. He questioned with him in many words, and
the chief priests, and scribes, accused him vehemently, but he answered
nothing either to him, or them. Whereupon Herod with his men of war, set him at
naught, and mocked him, S. Luc. 23.6.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
(...), and arrayed him in a gorgeous or splendent robe, [of purple like a king,
thereby diriding him as a scenicall or fictitious king] and in that manner
remanded him to Pilate. And the same day, Pilate and Herod were made friends
together; for before, they were at enmity between themselves.

When Pilate saw that this plot took not, he devised another; to be scourged,
Pilates second policy
and the soldiers crowned him with a crown of thorns, and put on him a purple
robe, and mocked him, saying, Hail king of the Jews, and smote him with their
hands; and in that ignominous manner, Pilate thinking to slack their bloody
thirst, brought him forth unto the Jews, bidding them to behold him, so
scourged and abased, telling them, that he found no fault in him, S. Joh. 19.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. S. Luc. 23.13 14, 15.
no nor had Herod to whom he had sent him: but they all cry out against him,
Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate expostulateth much with them on his behalf,
seeking by all means to release him, but availed not; for they still cried out
against him, that he might be crucified; and in fine, told him to his face, S.
Joh. 19.6, 7, 8, 9 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
If thou let this man go thou art not Caesar's friend; whosoever makes himself
a king speaks against Caesar. That word tied Pilates tongue; yet had he one
policy more, which was, Pilates third policy.
if he could release him upon their own option. The Jews had a custom which
Pontius Pilate had alvvaies observed with them, for the solemnity of the
feast, which was this: the Jews desired the governor to release unto them a
prisoner, and the governor released unto them vvhomsoever they should ask;
now to the end that they should ask Jesus, he sets him in competition
with one Barabbas a notorious malefactor, who had been a principal
incendiary in a late insurrection which was in the city, and had also
committed murder, for which cause he was odious to the people; he easily
supposed, that rather then they would permit such a one to be released, they
would by all means be induced to ask Jesus. But the chief priests moved the
people, and the people with loud vociferations cried out for Barabbas, and that
Jesus might be crucified. And though Pilate spoke much on his behalf, yet
would they not be beaten off, but still cried out, saying, Let him be crucified.

Pilate was the more earnest to release him, because that even then when he
sat upon the judgment seat, Pilates wives dream.
his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man;
for I have suffered many things this day in a dream, because of him. What
Pilates wives dream was, it is not mentioned. Dreams are of three sorts,
Concerning dreams and their causes.
natural, diabolical, and divine. For the causes of dreams are either
interior, or exterior: and the interior are either from the mind, when
those things do occur to the fantasy in sleep, which a man thought upon,
affected, or devised when he was waking. Or from the body; for as the body is
disposed, so is the fantasy often times affected. The exterior causes of
dreams are either corporal, which is, when the imagination of him that
sleeps, receives some mutation, either by the air or by the influence of
the stars and celestial bodies. Or spiritual, which is either when God by his
angels does reveal some things unto men in their dreams; or when the devil
does cooperate with the fantasy for his own ends. Aquin. 22. Q. 95, art. 6.
con. Of which sort Pilate's wives dream was, it is hard to define; peradventure
it was no more but natural, ex praecedente cogitatione, she had heard much of
Christ, and did think much upon those things which she had heard while she was
waking; they did occur to her fantasy in sleep. Peradventure it was divine,
and by angels, for a further manifestation of Christ his innocence. Yet no man
shall blame me if I assent unto Rabanus, as I find him cited by Aquinas, in
Catena. Number demum diabolus intelligens per Christum se spolia sua amissurum,
sicut primum per mulierem mortem intulerat; ita per mulierem vult Christum de
manibus Judaeorum liberare, nec per ejus mortem, mortis amittat imperium. That
now at the last the devil understanding that he should by Christ lose the
spoils which he had gotten, made use of a woman, to the end that like as by
one woman he had brought death into the world; even so by another woman would
he deliver Christ out of the hands of the Jews, and not lose the power of
death by his death. According to him therefore the dream was diabolical. Upon
this advertisement sent from his wife, and because he thought him to be a just
man, Pilate washes his hands.
and knew that for envy they had delivered him; Pilate, to testify his
innocence, and that he would not defile himself by shedding innocent blood;
came ^orth, and before all the multitude washed his hands, S. Mat. 27.15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. S. Mar. 15.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
S. Luc. 23.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
as the Jews were wont to do, (for the Jews washed before, the gentiles after
the fact committed) saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see
ye to it. Whereupon they all cried out, His blood be on us, and on our children.

That, when Pilate heard, being moved thereunto, partly with the impatiency of
the Jews, and their clamorous outcries, who the more he sought to release him,
made the more tumult; and partly for fear lest he should be accused to Caesar,
if he should release him; brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the gabbatha or
the pavement; Pilate condemns him to be crucified.

He is scourged the second time.


giving sentence that he should be crucified. So he delivered unto them
Barabbas to be set free, and Jesus he scourged, as was the manner of the
Romans: so was he twice scourged; once by Pilate before his condemnation with
intent to move the Jews to pity, as has been before rehearsed; and once
again by Pilate after his condemnation, according to the Roman law, which was,
that he that was crucified should first be scourged, as Saint Ierom says. At
both times in a merciless manner; which was also foreseen, and foretold of the
prophet by the spirit of prophecy. The plowers plowed upon my back: they made
long furrows, Psalm. 129.3. Being so condemned and scourged the second time,
the soldiers took him into the common hall, where they gathered unto him the
whole band; there they stripped him, put on him a scarlet robe, S. Mat. 27.26,
27, 28, 29, 30, 31. S. Mar. 15.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. S. Luc. 23.24 25. S.
Joh. 19.14, 15.
and crowned him with thorns again, put a reed into his hand, bowed the knee,
mocked him, saying, Hail king of the Jews, spit upon him, and took the reed
and smote him on the head; and in this condition Pilate presented him unto the
Jews again, saying, Behold your king; for he thought yet to move them to
pity; but contrariwise they cried all out, Away with him, away with him,
crucify him. What? said Pilat, shall I crucify your king? The chief priests
answered, We have no king but Caesar. He is led away to be crucified.
Then was he delivered to be crucified; so the soldiers took off the purple
robe from him, and put his own cloths on him, and led him out to crucify him.
Thus Pilate against the conviction of his own conscience, (though with much
reluctance) to pacify the Jews, and for fear of an accusation to Caesar,
polluted those hands of his which he had washed, Pilate, Annas, and Caiaphas
deservedly punished.
and made himself guilty of the innocent blood. For which his in justice he
escaped not Gods justice; for not long after he lost his procuratorship and
Caesar's favor, and fled to Vien^a in France, where living in exile, after he
had sustained much misery, he killed himself. Eusebius. Ec. hist. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Neither did Annas and Caiaphas, or the Scribes and Pharisees escape unpunished,
(...), says Nicephorus. Who also were deservedly and diversely punished, for
that they had unjustly promoted the death of Christ. Lib. 2. cap. 10. No, nor
the whole nation, upon whom the curse fell, and is to this day, according as
they had most wickedly imprecated upon themselves.

cross through the streets of Jerusalem, He bears his own cross
as was the manner of malefactors (it should seem) condemned by the Romans;
but was indeed to fulfill the type: for Isaac did bear the vvood of the
sacrifice, and was sacrificed in the ram; to show that Christ should bear his
cross, but should only suffer and be made a sacrifice in the human nature. He
is led out of the city to be crucified, as was the manner of the Jews to do
by those that were condemned to death; but was foreshevved of Christ in the
bodies of those beasts which were burnt without the camp. Heb 13.11, 12.
Thus having born his cross some part of the way; they encounter with one
Simon a Cyrenian, [a Cyrenian by birth, though otherwise a Jew] the father of
Alexander and Rufus, Simon of Cyrene, compelled to bear his cross.
who are expressly named, either because (I suppose) they were well known in
the city, or else peradventure because they were of note among the disciples
of Christ, when Saint Mark wrote his evangelicall history. Upon him coming out
of the country at that instant, they laid his cross, for that after his
scourging and other injuries, as bufferings, and the effusion of his blood by
the thorns wherewith he was twice crowned; being also kept from sleep all that
night, the human nature (by divine dispensation, and to show that he was very
man) fainted, and sunk under the burden of it. So this Simon bare his cross
by compulsion, following after him. S. Mat. 27.32 S. Mar. 15.21 S. Luc. 23.26
27, 28, 29, 30, 31. S. Joh. 19.16, 17. Mount Calvary.
There being also a great company of people which followed, and women who
bewailed and lamented him, to whom he turned about, foretelling the miseries
and miserable destruction of that wicked city Jerusalem shortly to approach.
And in that manner they bring him to the place of execution; which was an hill
standing on the west side of the city, being a part of the mount Gihon, called
Calvary, but in the Hebrew tongue Golgotha, the place of a skull. Which name it
had, as many of the Fathers do probably affirm, by occasion that Adam was
buried there, and his scull found in that place; which was not without divine
dispensation, (...) as says Theophylact, That so death might be destroyed in
the same place where it took its beginning, in Mar. 15. Howsoever Bid
thinks, that it took its name from the heads of malefactors condemned to
die, which were cut off in that place. Some also will have it to be so called
from the bones of the dead which were carried and heaped up there. And possible
it is that the malefactors might be executed, and their heads cut off, and the
bones of the dead also be heaped up in that place where Adams skul was found.

Having brought him thither, they gave him to drink wine but he received it
not. They give him wine mingled with myrrh. S. Mar. 15.23.
And in that he received it not, I am easily induced to think that it was some
potion which the Jews were wont to give to those that were to be crucified, to
revive their spirits, and that they might with the greater courage undergo
their torments; which he therefore would not receive, (a point to be specially
observed in the Evangelist) because he needed it not, and because by divine
dispensation he would admit no human help in any thing toward that work which
he was to do. Nor would he receive any potion to stupifie his senses, or to
revive or exhilarate his spirits. He is fastened to the cross. Deuteronomy. 21.23.
Having refused the wine he was fastened to the cross, that so he might die the
cursed death, and be made a curse in his death according to the Scripture. Ipse
habitus crucis fines and summitates habet quinque, duos in longitudinem, and
duos in latitudine, and unum in medio, ubi requiescit qui clavis affigitur.
Iren. lib. 2. cap. 42. The cross therefore was made of three pieces of wood,
The form of the cross.
the one was fastened upright in the ground, to which the back was applied; the
second was a cross beam going overthwart, to which the hands (the arms being
stretched out at length) were nailed; The third piece was sub-pedaneous, upon
which the party that was crucified did stand, and was about the midst of the
first which stood upright in the ground, to which he had his feet set close
together, and severally nailed. In this manner was Christ crucified, being
nailed to the cross with four nails; whereof two did nail his hands to the
cross beam above; and two his feet to that piece below, (...), as says
Iustine Martyr, upon which they that are crucified are carried or sustained.
Dialog, cum Tryph. In the same manner also were the two malefactors that
were crucified with him, nailed to the several crosses upon which they
were crucified; and such crosses were also called patibuli, a patendo,
because the bodies that were crucified upon them were laid open, and
extremely racked; as Tertullian says, in patibulo corpore expanso, the body
expanded upon the cross. lib de pudicitia cap. 22.

super-eminent to his head, was affixed (as it should seem) a table, wherein
was written by Pilate, that which Saint John calls a Title, St. Mark the
Superscription of his accusation: The superscription of his accusation.
that is to say, a superscription setting forth the crime of which he was
accused, and for which he was condemned, in these words, Jesus of Nazareth king
of the Jews. For he was condemned, because he affirmed himself to be a king, a
true king, and king of the Jews. This title was written in Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin, that so it might be read of all the people, and that all that passed by
might read and understand the cause of his crucifixion. Which three tongues, as
St. Augustine observed, had eminency above the rest, the Hebrew for the Jews
sake, who gloryed in the law of God; the Greek, for the wise men of the
Gentiles sake [viz. for the Greeks or Gentiles sake who sought after wisdom,
worldly wisdom and humane learning.] The Latin for the Romans sake, who then
had the Empire over many, 1 Cor. 1.22.
and almost over all nations. This title read many of the Jews, and among the
rest, the chief priests themselves who disliked it, and therefore expostulated
with Pilate, saying, Write not, The king of the Jews: but that he said, I am
king of the Jews. The titles of malefactors crucified, were, according to the
manner of the Romans set up, to the end that the people might know the crimes
for the which they were crucified; that justice might receive its due
commendations, and to warn others to take heed of the like offenses. I shall
not doubt therefore, but that the two malefactors which were crucified with
him, had also their titles set up, and affixed to their crosses in the same
manner, showing the crimes which they had committed, and for which they
suffered. But Pilate by this title does justify him from murder, and
sedition, and such like crimes; objecting against the Jews malice and envy in
crucifying of their king; which thing he did to be avenged of them, for that
their importunity, whereby they had with an unsatiable blood-thirstiness urged,
and in some sort compelled him to condemn him. But the title preached the
Gospel upon the cross, and therefore though the chief priests take offense,
yet Pilate (who nevertheless knew not the verity of what he had written) would
not, S. Mat. 27.33, 37, 38. S. Mar. 15.22 23, 26, 27, 28 S. Luc. 23.32 33, 38.
S. Joh. 19.17 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
could not, must not alter it: Quod scripsi, scripsi. What I have written, I
have written. So, hung he upon the cross naked, and all bloody; for the
soldiers had stripped him of his garments; and the two malefactors in the like
manner, who were crucified with him, the one on his right hand, the other on
his left. Wherein the scripture was fulfilled, whereby it was prophesied, that
he should be numbered with the transgressors, Isa. 53.12.

cross in that manner, the soldiers divided his garments among themselves; The
Soldiers divide his garments.
and they being in number four, divided them into four parts, to every soldier
a part, and cast lots which part every man should take. As for his coat,
because it was without seam, and woven from the top throughout, and could not
commodiously be rent into four parts and divided, therefore they cast lots for
it which of them should have it, whereby the scripture was fulfilled, Psalm.
22.18.
which foretold that so it should be. In this the Fathers with great piety do
also find much mystery. Quadripartitae autem vestis Domini nostri Jesus Christi,
quadripartitam figuravit ejus Ecclesiam, quatuor scilicet partibus in orb
diffusam, and in eisdem aequaliter, id est concorditer distributam: The
apparel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, of which four parts were made,
figured his quadripartite Church, which is diffused by four parts in the world,
and in the same four parts equally, that is, concordantly distributed. Tunica
vero illa sortita, omnium partium significat unitatem, quae charitatis vinculo
continetur. But that vesture for which the lots were cast, signifies the unity
of all the parts, which is contained in the bond of charity. He is mocked of
all sorts of people.
So Saint Augustine. Then was he mocked of all sorts of people, and railed
upon, by the chief priests, the scribes, and elders, by the standers by, by the
passers by, by the soldiers, S. Mat. 27.35 38, 39, 40, 41 42, 43, 44. S. Mar.
15.24 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. S. Luc. 23.32 33, etc. S. Joh. 19.23, 24.
and by the malefactors themselves which were crucified with him. But he prayed
for them all, saying, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. He
prayed for them all, but they were not all forgiven, because by unbelief and
hardness of heart, they refused the pardon which they might have had. This is
cleared by the two thieves that were crucified with him; for they both mocked
and reviled him at the first; but one of them was not pardoned, because he did
not desire it.

He was so far from desiring it, that even then when he hung cross, he railed
on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thy self and us. But the other thief
repented of his railing; and by the grace of him that was crucified upon the
cross, obtained that forgiveness which he had prayed for. History of the
penitent thief.
His repentance was hearty, his conversion true and unfeigned, his faith fully
testified by the fruits of repentance; an example unparalleld in the whole
scripture. 1. He reproves the other malefactor. Do thou not fear God, seeing
thou art in the same condemnation? 2ly He confesses his sin, acknowledging the
sentence given against him to be just; We indeed justly, for we receive the due
reward of our deeds. 3ly He justifies Christ in his cause, and therefore
condemns that unjust sentence, by which he was most unjustly and injuriously
put to death. Lastly, he makes confession of his faith in a word, acknowledging
him to be the Lord, that he had power to forgive sins, and to dispose of
heaven: in full assurance of whose power, and of whose goodness, he made his
supplications, saying, Lord remember me, when thou come into thy kingdom.
Faith is an immortal eye. The mortal eye could see nothing in Christ at that
time, but ignominy, contempt and reproach, nakedness, torment, and the cursed
death of the cross; but the eye of faith sees his kingdom, beholds him crowned
with glory, and judging both quick and dead, giving life and salvation, as the
only true and proper Lord of life, and of eternal glory. No less to be
admired was Christ his mercy, whereby he granted him more then he desired; for
he should go with him from the Cross into Paradise, as the first fruits of his
triumph, S. Luc. 23.39 40, 21, 42, 43
so soon as he had merited to open the way into it by his death. To day shall
thou be with me in Paradise. That day was the way opened into Paradise, the
heavenly Paradise, and by his conquest upon the cross. So sings the Church;
When thou had overcome the sharpness of death, thou did open the kingdom of
heaven to all believers.

blessed Mother, He commends his mother to Saint John.
and his beloved Apostle Saint John, for they standing by his cross, together
with his mothers sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Saint Mary Magdalen; he
bequeathed his mother as a legacy to St. John, and he bequeathed St. John as a
legacy to his mother. She must take St. John for her Son, to love him as a son;
he must take her for his Mother, to reverence, love, and succor her as his
mother. S. Joh. 19.25 26, 27.
According to which bequest, they went together from the cross so soon as he
had expired, to Saint John's house upon mount Sion, where she lived with him by
the space of eleven years, till she dyed in the nine and fiftieth year of her
age. Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 5. Having so disposed of his mother, then cried he
out with a loud voice, Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani, My God, He cries out upon
the cross.
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Qui non dissolvit unionem, subtraxit tamen
visionem. The Father had not dissolved the hypostaticall union, but he had
subtracted the divine vision, which the manhood always had in the Godhead;
therefore he complains that he was forsaken. These were his (...), those
unknown sufferings of his, which no human understanding is able to comprehend.
Some of the standers by, hearing him to cry out in that manner, said, that he
called for Elias, and that they would stay and see whether Elias would come and
take him down from the cross. Who they were that said so, it is not mentioned.
St. Hierom thinks that they might be Roman Soldiers, who not understanding
the propriety of the Hebrew language, thought that he had invocated Elias, when
they heard him to say, Eli, Eli. But (says he) if we will understand them to
be Jews, that then they, according to their old wont, did this to infame him
of imbecility, as if he had implored succor of Elias. Indeed I think them to
be Jews, the chief priests, scribes and elders, who had before mocked and
obrayded him with his trust and affiance in God, and do now out of malice, and
with subsannation, say, that he had forsaken God, and betaken himself to
Elias, whom he called out of the earthly Paradise (where they supposed him to
be kept, till the coming of the Messiah, and that he should then come forth
from thence, and anoint him) to come unto his relief. Then he complains of
thirst, saying, He complaneth of thirst Jud. 4.19.
(...), I thirst. That thirst of his was a considerable part of his passion,
and no small affliction. For we find in the scripture, that Sisara was more
afflicted with thirst, then with the fear of death. And when Sampson had beaten
down the Philistims, Jud. 15.18.
and killed a thousand of them, he then complained that he should die for
thirst. Hereupon one of them runs and filled a sponge of vinegar, and put it
upon hyspop [a reed or stalk of hysop, which it seems grows of great length in
that country, like unto a reed] and put it to his mouth (it was a prepared
potion, as St. Chrysostom observes, for those that were condemned, and for
that cause the vinegar and hysop were there in a readiness, to be given unto
them when they should complain of thirst) of which when he had tasted, he said
no more but this, (...), S. Mat. 27.46 47, 48, 49, 50 S. Mar. 15.34 35, 36, 37.
S Luc. 23.46 S. Joh. 19.28.29, 30. He gives up the Ghost.
It is finished; intimating thereby, that his passion, and those things which
were prefigured and praedicted concerning it, were fulfilled in him. So he
cried with a loud voice, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. And having
said thus, be bowed his head, and gave up the Ghost. He gave it up freely and
voluntarily; not by compulsion, but by divine dispensation; he laid it down,
because he would take it again; for he had power to lay it down, and he had
power to take it again, St. Ioh. 10.17, 18.

This was at the ninth hour. But there seems to be some difference
Evangelists, The time of his abode upon the cross. S. Joh. 19.14 S. Mar. 15.25
as touching the time of his abode upon the cross. For St. John says, that it
was about the sixth hour, when Pilate gave the sentence of condemnation against
him, and then he said unto the Jews, Behold your king. And Saint Mark says
expressly, that it was the third hour when they crucified him. So that Saint
Mark seems to say, that he was crucified three hours before he was condemned
according to St. John. Hence it must needs follow, that according to Saint
Mark, his abode was six hours upon the cross; according to Saint John, only
three. But Saint Mark, and Saint John, wrote by the dictate of one and the same
spirit; and therefore the difference betwixt them is but seeming. He was
crucified the same hour that he was condemned, and that was the third hour
according to Saint Mark, if you compute the Jews artificial day by twelve
hours, from the morning, which began about six of the clock; so that the third
hour was (according as we account, and follow the Romans, reckoning the hours
from twelve to twelve, and beginning at midnight) nine of the clock in the
fore-noon. And yet the sixth hour too, according to Saint John, that is to say,
the second part or quarter of the artificial day, for the Jews did also
distinguish the artificial day into four equal parts or quarters. The first
was from the morning to the third hour, called the morning; the second from
the third hour to the sixth, called the sixth hour; the third was from the sixth
hour to the ninth, called the ninth hour; the fourth from the ninth hour to
the twelfth, called the evening; it was (...), about the sixth hour; for the
sixth hour or second quarter of the day so called was then nigh approaching.
And this also does reconcile Saint Ignatius with both the Evangelists; (...).
That he was condemned by Pilate the third hour; that the sixth hour he was
crucified, that the ninth hour he dyed, that before sunset he was buried. Ep.
ad Trallian. His abode therefore upon the cross was about the space of six
hours. Aug. Ser. 119. de temp. For the death of the cross was a lingering
death: and for the first three hours, from the third hour to the sixth hour,
we read of nothing but of his mockings and revilings mentioned before; the sun
also shining, and imparting its light unto the world as at other times.

sixth hour to the ninth; Darkness over all the land, and other miracles.
there was a supernatural and miraculous defect of light in the sun, and a
most horrid darkness, if not over the face of the whole world; yet at least
over all the land of Judea, sufficient to bear witness to the God of nature
then crucified by their infidelity. Which defect was not caused by
interposition of the moon, for the moon was then in opposition to the sun, and
in the full; whereas all Eclipses are in the new moon, and by interposition of
the moon, S. Mat. 27.45 S. Mar. 15.33 S. Luc. 23.44
shaddowing the light of the sun from the earth. Nor yet was there any other
efficient cause, but the power and pleasure of him that was then crucified upon
the cross; nor any other final cause but the manifestation of his Divinity,
and that he might be believed and confessed to be the Son of God. The vail of
the temple rent.
Having rendered his sweet soul into the hands of his most holy and most
heavenly Father, forthwith the vail of the temple (which was a most beautiful
wall of firm stone, and of great strength, which divided the holy from the most
holy, which was only pervious to the high Priest, as has been said before) was
rent in twain from the top to the bottom, together with the hanging or vail
which was hung before it, being of blue, and purple, and scarlet, Exodus 23.31
and fine twined linen of cunning work; and made with cherubims. For by the
death of Christ, the gates of heaven figured by that vail were opened, and the
middle wall of partition between the Jew and the Gentile was broken down. And
forthwith the earth did quake, The earth did quake.
(not universally, but in Judea and about Jerusalem) and by virtue of this
earthquake the rocks did rent, The rocks did rent.
(not all the rocks of the world, but some particular rocks in Judea where the
earthquake was.) And forthwith the graves did open, The graves did open.
and many of the bodies of the Saints which slept, arose from the sleep of
death, but came not out of their graves so as to appear to any, till after his
resurrection, and then they went into the holy city Jerusalem, so called in
respect of the temple and divine worship yet fixed there, S. Mat. 27.51, 52,
53. S. Mar. 15.38 S. Luc. 23.45.
though otherwise it was a valley of slaughter, a den of thieves, and the place
of dragons; and there they appeared unto many that knew them; therefore it
seems they were of those who had not been long dead. From which holy city
after his resurrection (it is piously to be conjectured) they went up with him
into the holy and heavenly Jerusalem which is above; that so he that came down
alone might go up with company. He carried the soul of the thief into paradise
together with his soul; he carried the bodies of the saints into heaven
together with his body.

All these miracles attending his death, to the end that he Son of God; The
Centurions confession.
though the Jews remained still blinded in mind, and hardened in heart, so as
neither to have remorse of conscience for the perpetration of so great a
wickedness, much less to believe in him whom they had crucified. The Centurion
and the soldiers that were with him, who had divided his garments, and cast
lots for his vesture, and were appointed to watch, and to see the execution
done, taking notice of the miracles, of the darkness, and of the earthquake,
and of the manner of his death, that he cried with a loud voice, whereby they
perceived that he did not languish; and that he bowed his head and gave up the
ghost, whereby they also perceived that his death was voluntary, and that it
was in his power to die when he pleased; S. Mat 27.54. S. Mar. 15.39. S. Luc.
23.47.
they were all exceedingly afraid, and the Centurion for his part, confessed
him to be the Son of God, saying, Truly this was the Son of God. An egregious
confession of an heathen man, extorted from him by fear; but servile fear
serves oftentimes to a good end, for if right use be made of it, it will bring
a man to the chaste fear, whereby God is loved for his own sake. Serviliter
times, formido est mali, nondum dilectio boni; sed time tamen, ut ista formido
custodiat te, and perducat ad dilectionem, says Saint Augustine excellently.
Thou fear servilly, it is the fear of that which is evil, it is not yet the
love of that which is good; But yet fear notwithstanding, that so this fear may
keep thee, and bring thee to the love of that which is good. De verb. Apost.
Ser. 18. I cannot say that this Centurions name was Longinus, though some
contend to have it so: the Scripture names him not, nor any of the ancient
Fathers. But I shall easily be induced to believe, that he who first confessed
him upon his expiration to be the Son of God, received further grace at his
hand to confess him by blessed Mar^yrdome.

parasceue or day of preparation, and every friday was a parasceue, The
parasceue.
or day of preparation to the sabbath ensuing; for upon that day they did
prepare and make ready such things as they would eat upon the sabbath. But that
sabbath day was an high day, as Saint John observes; for upon that day they
would eat the passover. Wherefore because the law had provided concerning
those malefactors that were hanged upon the tree, that their bodies should not
remain all night upon the tree, but that they must in any wise be taken down,
Deuteronomy. 21.22, 23.
and buried the same day: and because it was then drawing toward the Evening
of the sabbath, which would then begin so soon as the sun was set; therefore
the Jews came unto Pilate, and besought him that their legs might be broken,
to the end that they might the sooner die, (the subpedaneous part of the cross
being by that means made useless to preserve their life longer in torment) and
that they might be taken away. Pilate having given them leave so to do; the
soldiers came and brake the legs of the first, and of the other which was
crucified with him, but seeing that Jesus was dead before, they brake not his
legs; But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith (not
without great mystery) came there out blood and water. Saint John testifies
that he saw it, and thereunto applies two places of Scripture, the one taken
out of Exodus, cap. 12. v. 46. A bone of him shall not be broken; S. Joh. 19.31
32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
which was literally spoken of the paschall lamb, but spiritually meant of
Christ. The other taken out of the prophecy of Zecharias, Zech. 12. v. 10. who
foretold it of Christ. They say that the pericardium, which is a skin or filme
about the heart, contains in it clear water to cool the heat of the heart.
Colum. de re Anat. lib. 7. If this be true, it is likely that skin was then
pierced. Hovvever, the blood and the water setting forth in a mystery the great
sacraments of the Church, are pregnant proofs of a true, and not a putative
death. O mors, unde mortui reviviscunt! quid isto sanguine mundius? quid isto
vulnere salubrius? cries out Saint Augustine. O death whereby the dead
revive! what is more clean then this blood? what is more salubrious then this
vvound?

fourth part of the artificial day, The history of his burial. Arimathea.
called the Even, (as has been observed before) and began from the ninth
hour, Joseph of Arimathea (a city situate sixteen miles from Jerusalem
toward the north-west, called in the old testament Ramathaim Zophim of mount
Ephraim, the city of Elkana the father of Samuel the prophet) a rich man, 1 Samuel 1.1.
an honorable counselor, a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the
Jews, which also waited for the kingdom of God, a good man and a just, who had
not consented to the counsel or deed of them who gave up Jesus to death,
consulted (it should seem) with Nicodemus who was a pharisee, and a ruler of
the Jews, (who came to Jesus by night, St. Joh. 3.1, 2. and had formerly
declared against them, St. Ioh. 7.50, 51.) concerning his burial; to the end
that he might not be laid, or cast aside with the other malefactors, but might
have an honorable interment. Whereupon Joseph went in boldly unto Pilate, and
begged his body; for it did belong unto him to dispose of it. Pilate marvelling
that he was so soon dead, called unto him the Centurion, and being certified by
him that he was dead indeed, he gave his body unto Joseph, who took it down
from the cross; having first bought fine linen to wrap it in. Then came
Nicodemus bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound
weight. So they did unto the body according to the manner of the Jews, viz.
they washed it; for the Jews did wash the bodies of the dead, before they
wrapped them up for the grave. Act. 9.37. Then they wound it in the linen
clothes, with the spices, as the manner of the Jews was to bury; which being
done, they caused it to be carried into a garden near at hand, where was a new
sepulcher wherein no man had ever been laid; which Joseph had made for
himself, causing it to be hewn out of the rock, intending it for himself
when he should depart out of the world by death. In that new sepulcher they
disposed that blessed body, and when they had rolled a great stone to the door
of it, they departed. S. Mat. 27.55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61. S. Mar. 15.40 41,
42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47. S. Luc. 23.49 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55. S. Joh. 19.38 39,
40, 41, 42.
All which things were observed by Saint Mary Magdalen and the other women
mentioned by the Evangelists, who saw what was done unto him, and where they
had laid him. Nor were they much scanted of time to do all this, and to bury
him, (...), before the sun went down, as Saint Ignatius says, in that they had
the whole Evening, or the greatest part of it, which was (of the artificial
day) from the ninth hour to the twelfth to do it.

In which pious act Joseph and Nicodemus did wonderfully cooperate with the
divine providence and will of God. 1st To keep that sacred body from corruption
with the myrrh and aloes, which must not have entered into the least degree of
corruption. 2ly That his resurrection might be the more apparent and
undeniable; for had his body been laid with the bodies of others, tomb hewn
out in the rock, but built of many stones, they would have said that some one
or other had undermined, and taken him away. So likewise had he been laid in a
grave of earth, that the earth had been removed, and that he had been stolen.
For which cause God also would that a great stone should be rolled to the door
of the sepulcher, which might not be removed but by the help of many. Aquin. 3.
q. artic. 2, 3, 4. Thus did Joseph and Nichodemus testify their love and
affection toward him; but they did not believe that he would rise again upon
the third day; for had they believed that, they would have understood that it
had been needless for them to wrap his body in such a quantity of myrrh and
aloes to keep it from putrefaction, which God had promised not to see
corruption. But the Jews thought they would make all safe enough: therefore
the next day that followed the day of the preparation, the chief Priests and
the Pharisees came together unto Pilate, S. Mat. 27.62, 63,
saying, Sir, We remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive,
After three days I will rise again. Command therefore that the sepulcher be
made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night and steal him
away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: 64, 65, 66.
So the last error shall be worse then the first. Pilate said unto them, Ye
have a watch, go your way, make it as sure as you can. So they went and made
the sepulcher sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch. Thus did these
sanguinarious hypocrites to satisfy their own malice, Profanation of the
sabbath.
most impiously profane the great sabbath, by going to Pilate an heathen man,
by setting the watch, by sealing the stone, (especially if so much labor were
bestowed about it, as Nicephorus tells us by a nothing unlikely tradition, Lib.
1. cap. 32.) who had so often pretended against him the violation of the
sabbath for the good which he did upon that day.

soul went immediately into the heavenly paradise, The state of his soul after
death. 1st. Going into paradise S. Luc. 23.43 2ly. Descending into hell.
to open the gates thereof to all believers; and in particular to prepare a
mansion for the penitent thief, according to his own word and promise upon the
cross, To day shall thou be with me in paradise. And having first opened the
kingdom of heaven, he then persues his victory against the enemy, who had
caused the gates of that kingdom to be shut against all mankind by sin. This
he does by descending into hell; for that he did descend into hell it is an
article of the christian faith, believed and confessed all the world over;
which the Church of England constantly professes, and in terminis, while the
creed is repeated in the public worship, by the minister, and by the people
standing. Also in the administration of the holy sacrament of Baptism, where
the party baptized does profess by the mouth of his sureties, that he does
believe that he descended into hell. Hell is the place of the damned, not a
purgatory, a limbus patrum, or a limbus infantium, much less the grave, or the
pains and torments, such as he suffered in his soul upon the cross; least of
all a temporal captivity of his blessed body in the grave. But he descended
into hell, therefore into the place of the damned, into which he descended
according to all that wherein it was possible for him to descend; now God does
neither ascend, nor descend, nor is he moved from place to place, he contains
heaven and earth, but is not himself contained in heaven or earth. 1 Kin. 8.46
His body was confined to the grave, though not there to see corruption.
Therefore he descended in soul, for his soul went down into the place of the
damned really, and by local motion (so that he descended not only by effect
and virtue, but by actual descent) the divinity being also present therewith,
by the hypostaticall union. Which thing is no less, no otherwise, nor by any
other faith to be believed, but in the same measure, in the same manner, and by
the same faith, by which we believe his death and burial. For (says the
Church of England) As Christ dyed for us, and was buried; so also is it to be
believed, that he went down into hell, Art. 3.

It is to be believed, because it was predicted, and foretold by old Testament;
Thou will not leave my soul in hell. It is to be believed, because it was
typed, by Sampson and by Jonah the prophet. It is to be believed, because it
pertained to his triumph over principalities and powers, Psalm. 16.10. Jud.
16.3. Jon. 1.17.
to spoil them utterly of all that they had, and to enter as a conqueror into
their strong city, there to triumph over them, and to spoil them of that
dominion which they had there; seeing that he was made not in his divinity, for
that he was before; but in his humanity (wherein he was crucified, and wherein
he conquered) Lord of hell, and of all infernal things. It is to be believed,
because Saint Peter says expressly. That he went and preached unto the spirits
in prison, which sometimes were disobedient, 1 Pet. 3.19,
when once the long sufferings of God waited in the days of Noah, while the
Ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is eight souls were saved by water. 20.
He sealed up their just condemnation for their incredulity, by exhibiting
himself there, who would not believe in him, the seed of the woman, who should
break the Serpents head; whom Noah had preached unto them, that they might be
saved. Finally, it is to be believed, because this Creed, and all other creeds
are to be understood only in the literal sense, and without tautalogies.
which, while some have not observed, they have been put to miserable shifts,
and have thereby fallen into diverse errors, while some by hell understand the
grave; others, those sufferings wherewith his soul was afflicted upon the
cross; others, his captivity in the grave, whereby his body lay in bondage
under death till the third day; some have flatly denied the article it self,
and have not spared to style it a fiction; some think the Creed to be
corrupted, and that the words in time got in by negligence. Some have
translated hell to the garden of Gethsemane, and to mount Calvary, and said
that there he descended into hell both in soul and body, by his sufferings in
both, and that he suffered there the torments of hell, rejection, desperation,
the second death. Some also do describe as perfectly as if they had been there,
and do say, that in hell there be four receptacles, the one where the souls of
the righteous Fathers, who departed this life before the coming of Christ in
the flesh, and before his death, were kept; and thither went the soul of Christ
(say they) by actual reality, and brought them out from thence, and this they
call limbus patrum. Another receptacle they say there is, where the souls of
penitent Christians are kept, which have not been perfectly cleansed from the
blemish of sin in this life; and this they call Purgatory: A third, wherein
are kept the souls of children, departing this life before baptism, which
they call limbus puerorum or infantium. And the fourth, into which the damned
are sent to suffer eternally by a double penalty, of the loss, and of the
sense. And this they call the hell of the damned, into which (if we will
believe them) Christ descended not by actual reality (as neither did he into
purgatory, and the limbus puerorum) but only by a virtuall and operative
descent. But the Creed having told us what became of his body after death, and
that he was buried; does likewise tell us what his soul did, after it was
departed from his body, and that he descended into hell; so that his descending
into hell did not pertain to his humiliation, but to his glorification
inchoated and begun, which was manifested by his glorious resurrection, whereby
he was declared to be the Son of God with power, Romans 1.4.
as Saint Paul says, but was fully consummated by his ascension into heaven.

third day was come, after that his soul had done all those things in the
heavenly paradise, The history of Christ his blessed resurrection.
and in hell, which he in his soul by divine dispensation was first to do: and
after that his blessed body had rested in the grave, about the space of thirty
six, or thirty eight hours, from the friday at what time he was laid into his
sepulcher by Joseph of Arimathea and Nichodemus, before the sun went down, to
the morning of the first day of the week, to the end that he might fulfill the
types and prophecies of the scripture, Genesis 22. Genesis 41. Jon. 2. and 3. S. Mat.
16.21
and also his Evangelicall word whereby he had promised his resurrection upon
that day. And that his Church in all her members might know and believe, that
he had fully conquered and subdued death: And that he might fully manifest
himself to be the Son of God, S. Joh. 10.17, 18.
and Lord of life, and that he dyed not by compulsion, but of his own free
will: And to the end that he might make a gracious, and effectual application
of his obedience and of his sufferings, and of his death to all true believers
by ascending into heaven, Heb. 9.24. Romans 8.34. S. Joh. 2.1, 2.
to appear in the presence of God, and to make intercession for them, and to be
their advocate with the Father. Upon all these respects, and for all these
great and weighty causes, he delayed no time, but early in the morning somewhat
before day (and to that end that he might with all speed comfort his sorrowful
Disciples, who as yet believed not that he would rise again) by his own power
and virtue, S. Joh. 20.9.
he arose from the dead, and went out of the sepulcher, leaving behind him the
linen clothes, and the napkin wrapped together in a place by it self, (...),
the stone which was rolled, S. Jo. 20.6, 7.
yet remaining upon the door of the sepulcher. Theoph. in Mat. 28. Then was
there a great earthquake, S. Mat. 28.2,
for the Angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the
stone from the door, and sat upon it. His countenance was like lightning, 3,
and his raiment white as snow. And for fear of him, the keepers did shake,
and became as dead men. Such was the cause of the earthquake, 4.
and of the coming of the Angel: It was not to role back the stone, to the
end that his body might come forth; for like as he rose by his own power, even
so did he go forth by his own power notwithstanding the stone; nor needed he
the ministry of an Angel, or that the stone should be rolled back for his
going forth. The Angel descended and caused the earthquake, to the end that
the Soldiers being terrified and affrighted with the presence of the Angel,
and with the earthquake, might fly away from the sepulcher, and make report of
that which they had seen. And he rolled away the stone for the women's sake
which were to come thither; to the end that they might look into the sepulcher,
and see that he was risen.

The watch therefore being run away in great fear and amazement, and the
stone being rolled away: then came St. Mary as the day began to dawn, very
early in the morning, when it was yet dark, bringing the spices and ointments
which they had prepared, the day before the Sabbath (after they had observed
where it was that he was buried) to the end that they might anoint him. And as
they came, they were very solicitous concerning that great stone which they had
seen to be rolled to the door of the sepulcher, how, S Mat. 28.1. S. Mar. 16.1,
2, 3. S. Luc. 24.1. S. Joh. 20.1.
and by whose help (having heard nothing it should seem concerning any watch to
have been set there, to keep the sepulcher) they should procure the stone to be
rolled away. As they talked of this among themselves they came into the garden,
where they see the stone rolled away, and the Angel sitting upon it. An Angel
fitteth upon the stone. S. Mat. 28.5, 6, 7.
Being sorely affrighted at his presence, the Angel comfort them, bidding
them not to fear, For I know (says he) that ye seek Jesus which was
crucified, He is not here: for be is risen, as he said; come see the place
where the Lord lay. And go quickly and tell his Disciples that he is risen from
the dead. And behold, he goes before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him;
lo I have told you. So they entered into the sepulcher, An Angel sits in
the sepulcher.
and saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white
garment; and they were affrighted. (terrified also at the sight of him.) But he
in like manner comfort them, S Mar. 16.5,
saying, Be not affrighted, ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified;
he is risen, he is not here: 6,
behold the place where they laid him. But go your way, tell his Disciples, and
Peter, that he goes before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him, 7.
as be said unto you. Then went they out with fear and trembling, being sore
amazed, and yet overcome with joy, and not communicating a word with any one by
the way, they did run to carry the good tidings to Saint Peter, S Mat 28.8. S
Mar. 16.8. Two Angels stand in the sepulcher. S Luc. 24.4, 5,
and to the rest of the Apostles. Saint Luke reports the story a little
otherwise. For he says, that when they came into the sepulcher, and found not
the body of the Lord Jesus, two men stood by them in shining garments. And as
they were afraid, and bowed their faces to the earth, they said unto them, why
seek ye the living [(...), him that liveth] among the dead? He is not here,
but is risen: Remember how he spoke unto you when he was yet in Galilee, 6, 7,
8.
saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be
crucified, and the third day rise again. And they remembered his words. So that
the first Angel came also into the sepulcher (whom they saw sitting upon the
stone) and probably it was he that spoke unto them these words there, which so
soon as they had heard, and remembered also the words which Christ had spoken
unto them in Galilee. They went out quickly, fled from the sepulcher, ran unto
the Apostles, and to the Disciples that were with them; to whom they made a
narration of these things, namely St. Mary Magdalen, S Mar. 16.1. S Luc. 24.10
and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, and other women that
were with them, who came altogether with the report: Saint Mary Magdalen being
the mouth of the other women, to begin and tell it first, as it should seem by
Saint John. S Joh. 20.2. S Luc 24.11
And their words seemed unto them as idle tales, and they believed them not.

St. Peter and St. John ran to the sepulcher, to the end that they might see
the truth of that which was reported. Saint Peter and St. John run to the
sepulcher.
St. John as being the younger man, and more agile of body, out-ran Saint
Peter, and came thither first; but he went not in, but abode the coming of
Saint Peter, who was hasting on with speed; yet he stooped down, and looked in,
and saw the linen clothes lying. Saint Peter came, and went in first without
delay, and St. John followed, and they both saw the linen clothes and the
napkin. Whereupon Saint John believed that he was risen: S Luc. 24.12 S Joh.
20.3, 4. etc.
but St. Peter departed, wondering in himself at that which was come to pass.
For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.
And so they returned home. All this while he had not appeared unto any. His
first apparition to Saint Mary Magdalen.
But St. Mary Magdalen loved much, and therefore went the second time unto the
sepulcher, after that St. Peter and St. John were returned home again. When
she came thither, she stood without at the door weeping (for it is likely she
went to weep there.) And as she wept she stooped down and looked into the
Sepulcher. S. Joh. 20.11,
And sees two Angels in white sitting, the one at the head, and the other at
the feet, where the body of Jesus had layen. And they say to her, Woman, why
weepest thou? 12,
She (being now more confident, and nothing afraid, by reason that she had been
strengthened by the former vision) says unto them, Because they have taken
away my Lord, 13,
and I know not where they have laid him. And when she had thus said, she
turned her self back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.
14,
(For her eyes were holden that she should not know him at the first) Jesus
says unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? She supposing him to be the gardener,
says unto him, Sir, if thou have born him hence, tell me where thou have laid
him, and I will take him away. 15,
(lest the Jews should insult, and offer indignity to his dead body). Then
Jesus opens her eyes, to the end that she might know him, and calls her by
name, saying, Mary. 16,
She turned her self, and says unto him, Rabboni, which is to say, Master.
Jesus says unto her, Touch me not, 17,
for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto
them, I ascend unto my Father, and your father, and to my God, and your God. 18.
Mary Magdalen came and told the disciples, that she had seen the Lord, and
that he had spoken these things unto her. And this was his first apparition to
Saint Mary Magdalen. S. Mar. 16.10 11.
And she went and told them that had been with him, as they mourned and wept.
And they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had been seen of her,
believed not.

The next apparition was to the other women, namely to Mary James and Salome,
and to Ioanna and the rest; His second apparition to the other women. S Mat.
28.9.
for they also went the second time to the sepulcher, and what they saw there
it is not expressed: but as they returned to give an account to the disciples,
Jesus met them, saying, All hail. And they came and held him by the feet, and
worshipped him. Saint Mary Magdalen was not permitted to touch him, (...),
Touch me not; For she must not expect to have his bodily presence as formerly
she had; nor did she doubt but that he had raised up his own body. Tenendos
autem mulieribus nunc praebuit pedes, ut intimaret veram se carnem habere quae
a mortalibus tangi posset. But now he permits the women to touch his feet, to
intimate unto them, (who were not so strong in faith as Saint Mary Magdalen
was) that he has true flesh, such as could be touched by men, Then said Jesus
unto them, Be not afraid, go tell my brethren, v. 10.
that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me. By this time some of
the watch (who in fear and amazement ran some one way some another,) were come
into the city, and had reported unto the chief priests what things had been
done at the sepulcher, and that he was risen and gone. Whereupon they
assembled, and consulted with the elders, how, and by what means they might
suppress the rumor of his resurrection, The chief priests consult to
suppress the rumor of his resurrection.
so that it might not be believed of the people that he was risen. They could
not say that it was some other, not him; for no other was then, or ever had
been laid into that s^pulchre. They could not say that the tomb had been
undermined, or the earth removed; for he was not laid into a grave, or into a
walled tomb, but in a tomb hewn out in the main rock. They could not say
that he was not perfectly dead, and so revived of himself; for the Centurion
had testified to Pilate that he was dead. They could not say that the sepulcher
was unguarded, and that therefore he was easily taken out by his disciples, for
they themselves had set the watch, and sealed the stone. Therefore in fine,
they betake themselves to a miserable, poor, ridiculous shift. An impudent lie
must be averred by the watchmen, who must take the blame upon themselves; they
must say that they slept, and that his disciples came and stole him away while
they were fast asleep. S Mat. 28.11, 12, 13, 14.
For this impudent senseless lie, they were presently rewarded with a large sum
of money, and promise made to persuade the governor, and to secure them in case
it should come to his ears. If they slept, how did they see the theft? If they
did not see it, how were they witnesses? Therefore that which they would, they
could not do, says Remigius. But the Jews are a miserable deluded nation, to
whom God has sent strong delusions to believe a lie. They took the money, and
did as they were taught. v. 15.
And this saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day.

apparition was to Saint Peter, but where, when, and in what manner, His third
apparition to St. Peter. 1 Cor. 15.5.
it is not said; how be it, it is plain that he appeared unto him before he
showed himself alive to the other Apostles; for Saint Paul says, that he was
seen of Cephas, then of the twelve. And in all probability before he showed
himself to the two disciples that went to Emaus: for when they returned and
came to the eleven, they were presently entertained, and welcomed with the most
joyful news of his resurrection. S Luc. 24.34
The Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared to Simon. Which when they had
heard, then they told what things were done in the way, 35.
and how he was known of them in breaking of bread. Saint Peter no doubt was
yet in great heaviness for the loss of his Lord, but much more because he had
denied him; therefore would he lose no time to comfort him by his resurrection,
and that he might not think himself rejected because he had denied him. It was
also congruent that he should first and before all the rest of the Apostles
appear to him, to whom he had given the primacy; he was (...), worthy of credit
and belief; they did not give full credence to the report which the women
made, but when Saint Peter came and said also that he had seen him, then they
made no further doubt or question. The Lord is risen indeed [(...), truly,
certainly, without deception] and has appeared unto Simon.

His fourth apparition was to two disciples [two of his seventy Emaus, which
was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs, His fourth apparition to two of
his d^sciples.
and was situated (as it is said) toward the north-west. Who these two
disciples were, it is not manifest, further then that the one of them was
called Cleophas; the other in all probability Saint Luke himself, who because
he makes the narration, would not be named. The manner of it, was this. These
two disciples as they went on their way, talked and discoursed of all that
which had been done unto him, and of the tidings which Saint Mary Magdalen, and
the other women brought of his resurrection, which because they believed not
they were exceeding pensive. Jesus came unto them as one that traveled the
same way, and went with them, but held their eyes that they should not
discern him. Then demanded he what it was they talked of, and desired to know
what made them so sad. Cleophas makes a brief recital of all; that he was a
great prophet; that he had been crucified; that they trusted he had been the
Messiah; that this being the third day, his body was missing out of the grave;
that the women had seen a vision of Angels, S. Luc. 24.13 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
who said that he was alive, and that some of their company who had visited
the sepulcher, found that his body was gone indeed. ^leophas having related
these things, he reproved them sharply for that they did not understand the
Scriptures of the prophets concerning him. And beginning at Moses and all the
prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning
himself. Which while they heard, their hearts did burn within them: for he
did touch them with the fire of his most holy Spirit. So they came nigh unto
Emaus, where three several ways were, whereof two went on either side of
the town, and one thorough it, (for so the situation of the town is
described.) But he made as if he would have passed by the town to have gone
further, whereupon they constrained him, saying, Abide with us, for it is
toward evening, and the day is far spent: and he went in (probably into the
house of Cleophas who is said to have dwelt there) to tarry with them. And it
came to pass, as he sat at meat with them, he took bread and blessed it, and
brake, v. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.32.
and gave to them: By his ordinary benediction, and usual manner of breaking
bread they knew him; who yet had not known him, had he not opened their eyes,
that they might know him. And so he vanished out of their sight, or ceased to
be seen of them: he was suddenly gone out of their sight, so that they did not
see, nor observe when he went; such therefore are the supernatural proprieties
of a glorified body.

apparition was to all the other Apostles in the absence of Saint Thomas, His
fifth apparition to his Apostles, the doors ^eing shu^.
and in the night following the day of his Resurrection. For the disciples who
had entertained him at Emaus in the evening, so soon as they knew him, and that
he was vanished out of their sight; they rose up, and made toward Jerusalem
with speed, but they had about eight miles to go; therefore before they could
come thither it was late in the evening. And at their coming they found the
eleven Apostles gathered together; who so soon as they were come unto them,
told them of Christ his resurrection, and that he had appeared to Saint Peter.
Then began they to reply, and to tell what things were done to them in the way,
and how he was known of them in breaking of bread. But Saint Thomas who did
not believe, regarded not to hear, but withdrew himself from the company. (So
Saint Augustine will reconcile Saint Luke with Saint John. Aug. de concord.
Evang.) And so as they continued the narration which they made, Jesus himself
stood in the midst of them, and says unto them, S. Luc. 24.36 37.
Peace be unto you. But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that
they had seen a spirit. It was his sudden appearance (and because they knevv
that the doors were safely shut for fear of the Jews) that did terrify and
affright them. And indeed he came in, the doors being shut: he did not knock to
be let in, Act. 12.16.
as St. Peter did: nor did any one open for him the doors, as for Saint Peter.
He did not cause them by the power of his Divinity to open of their own accord,
as the iron gate of the city did, v. 10.
when the Angel brought Sa^^t Peter out of prison: much less did he come in
at the window, or chimney; or by altering the substance of the doors, that so
his body might penetrate or pierce through (...), (says Justine Martyr, or
whosoever else was the author of those questions and answers ad Orthodoxos
which go under his name. Q. 117.) Things aequipotentiall are alike to be
believed, whether they be granted or denied. To be born of a pure virgin, and
to come forth of her womb without violation of her virginity; to walk upon the
sea; to come forth of the sepulcher the stone remaining still upon the door of
it; and to come in when the doors were shut, are things aequipotentiall, and
are alike to be believed. (...). And that the things which in nature are done
above nature, by divine virtue, cannot possibly be apprehended or asserted
according to any natural reason. He appeared naked.
Curiosity enquires whether he showed himself unto his Apostles naked, or
apparelled. And because they knew that the soldiers had stripped him of all his
garments, and that the linen clothes wherewith he was buried were (...) chre;
therefore I shall not think that he made or assumed clothes, but that he
appeared naked; wherein he answered to the condition of Adam in the state of
innocence, and showed ours also in the resurrection. It was not needful for
him to be apparelled, who would presently convince them of the verity and truth
of his natural body, by permitting them to feel it, and by showing them the
wounds which had been made in it. Therefore I conclude, that as he ascended
into heaven, so was he conversant with them after his resurrection; that is to
say naked, to the end that he may so come again even as he ascended naked, that
they who pierced him may see and behold his wounds, Zech. 12.10 S. Joh. 19 37
Rev. 1.7.
as the scripture speaks. He therefore seeing them terrified and affrighted,
comfort and confirms them diverse ways; 1. By telling them that there was
no reason of their present trouble, for that it was he that was come in who was
God, and knew their hearts. S. Luc. 24.38
Why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? 2ly By showing
them his hands and his feet, whereby they might well know that it was no other,
but even he who had been nailed to the cross. 3ly By inviting them to handle
him, and to look upon him, that so they might well perceive that it was his own
body, and not the airy apparition of a Spirit as they supposed. 4ly By eating
in their presence; a further proof of his humanity; although otherwise a
glorified body stands in no need of food. 5ly By recollecting to them what he
had formerly taught them; which when he had done, he opened their understanding
that they might understand the scriptures, v. 39, 40, etc.
proving by them the necessity of his passion, and of his death, and of his
resurrection upon the third day; and of the Gospel to be preached, and
testified by them unto all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

Having thus evidenced the verity and truth of his resurrection, scriptures;
then were they glad, He transferreth the keys from the legal to the
evangelicall priesthood.
their sorrow was turned into joy. For then was it done unto them according as
he had said: I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy
no man takes from you. By all which preparatives, they being rightly disposed,
(and the time being come, when according to divine dispensation, he would
transfer the keys of the kingdom of heaven from the legal to the
Evangelicall priesthood, according to his own word and promise, S Joh. 16 22.
S. Mat. 16.17 18, 19, and cap. 18.18.
) have now those keys committed unto them, the use whereof was from the
beginning of the world, which God himself did then first administer by his own
authority, when he made unto Adam the original promise; and which succeeded in
all ages before the resurrection of Christ, in that ministry which God gave
unto his Church, Genesis 3.15.
to be administered by them and by their successors in another manner (yet by
them more excellently then by their successors) unto the end of the world. Then
said Jesus unto them again, peace be unto you: As my Father has sent me, S.
Joh. 20.21
even so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and said
unto them, Receive ye the holy Ghost, whosesoever sins ye remit, 22,
they are remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye retain, 23.
they are retained. He gives unto them his peace, to have it in themselves,
and among themselves, and to impart it to the world by the Gospel which they
should preach. He sends them as his Father sent him: in like manner, not with
equal power. He sent them to do the same things, but not in the same manner.
He gave unto them the same spirit, but not to the same measure. He gave unto
them to remit, and to retain sins, but not with the same excellency. He sent
them to the end that they also should send others, that so the keys of the
kingdom of heaven might remain with the Evangelicall priesthood, to the end of
the world. By virtue of which sending every priest rightly and lawfully
ordained into his function, has the keys of the kingdom of heaven unto him
committed, to the end that he should administer the same in remitting and
retaining the sins of men; nor can any one have that grace but by an orderly,
ordinary mission. Nor must any man think to have his sins remitted, and heaven
opened without the keys dispensed by the Evangelicall priesthood. Nor yet that
the Church can be without such a priesthood, The Evangelicall priesthood began.
or such a priesthood without the Church. Thus began the Evangelicall
priesthood in the persons of the Apostles, Christ the high Priest giving unto
them of his fullness which he had by the hypostaticall union, a ministerial
power of remitting and retaining sins, not by denunciation only, but by
application. Which power they received not personally for themselves only, but
really for the whole priesthood; to the end that every priest, rightly and
lawfully ordained, might by the word of absolution, no less truly, and really
remit sins in the Church to them that are truly penitent (although not in their
own names, nor with the same liberty, power and authority) then Christ himself.
For Tabitha whom Saint Peter raised from the dead by the power of Christ, was
no less truly and really raised then Lazarus, Act. 9.40.
whom Christ called out of the grave by his own word and power. It is because
Christ is with his Church, S. Joh. 11.43
to do it in his Church by them, and by their ministry. Come thou to man?
or does man remit thee thy sin? Thou come unto the Lord, and to God the king
of all, who does remit sins unto thee by the priest, says Saint Chrysostom.
And yet we must not say, but that the Apostles themselves had a personal power
by those superabundant gifts with which they were endowed, to do it in a more
excellent manner then any of their successors in the ordinary way, by the
immediate mission, and commission which they had.

St. Thomas, called by interpretation Didymus, that is to say, St. Thomas
inaugured to the priesthood.
the twinne (because peradventure he was a twinne by his bi^th) was not with
them when Jesus came; for he was gone out before, therefore he had not his
mission, and inauguration to the priesthood at that time, together with the
other ten his colleagues. Nor is it said expressly when he had it. Yet that he
had it, no man must deny, because he received the same commission with the
other Apostles to preach, and to baptize (and consequently to administer the
keys of the kingdom of heaven) all the world over. Therefore it will be safe
to say that he had it at the next apparition of his Lord, which was thus. When
he was come again unto the Apostles, they told him that they had all of them
seen the Lord; no doubt but they told the manner, relating every thing in
particular. That he came in when the doors were shut, and stood in the midst
visibly. That he spoke and gave them his peace. That they were terrified and
affrighted, supposing that they had seen a spirit. That he had told them their
thoughts. That he had showed them his hands and his feet, bidding them to
handle and to see that it was he himself, and to know and discern by his
flesh, and by his bones. That he called for meat and did eat before them. That
he had told them what he had spoken unto them while he was with them. That he
had opened their understanding, and made them to know by authority of the
scriptures the necessity of his death, and of his resurrection upon the third
day. That they were filled with joy by his presence. That he gave them his
peace the second time. That he had breathed on them the holy Ghost. That he had
ordained them into the Evangelicall priesthood, transferring the keys of the
kingdom of heaven unto them, and giving power unto them to remit and retain
sins. All this Saint Thomas hears with a deaf ear, and replyeth with resolution
that he would not believe, except he should see in his hards the print of the
nayls, S. Joh. 20.25 St. Thomas his incredulity.
and thrust his hand into his side. He was incredulous, and his incredulity
cannot be excused, although some in times past have gone about to excuse it,
(as also Saint Peter's denial) that he did but simulate, and was not faithless
indeed. His incredulity was accompanied with blindness of mind, whereby he did
not understand what Christ had taught him concerning his resurrection upon the
third day: with hardness of heart, not to be persuaded by all the Apostles:
with obstinate wilfulness, that he will not believe unless he shall see in
his hands the print of the nayls, and put his finger into the print of the
nayls, and thrust his hand into his side; and in this obstinate wilfulness he
does pertinaciously persist eight days. Christ also leaves him for such a time,
Ut in medio a discipulis admoni^us accendatur in majus desiderium, ac fidelior
fieret in futurum. Chrysostom. apud Aquin. in Catena. That in the mean space
being admonished by the Disciples, he should be inflamed into a greater desire,
and be made more faithful for the future.

apparition therefore was after eight days, that is to say, His sixth
apparition, to St. Thomas with the other Apostles
upon the eighth day, the sunday or Lords day, which was the first day of the
week; at what time the disciples were within, and Saint Thomas also with them.
For then came he in, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, giving them
his peace as before; Peace be unto you. This seems to be that apparition of
which Saint Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 15.5. He was seen of Cephas, then of the
twelve. And he says, of the twelve, because they were twelve at first by
election; they were twelve, before Judas fell away, and that number was made up
again by Saint Matthias chosen in his place. Therefore Saint Thomas is said
before, v. 24. to be one of the twelve. In his dealing with Saint Thomas, for
whose sake principally he appeared at that time, we have to observe, 1st. (that
which Saint Chrysostom also observes) That he did not expect that Saint
Thomas should ask him any thing, but to show that he knew what it was that he
had spoken, he answers him according to the tenor of his own words. It was
to convince him, and to give him to understand, that although he were absent by
his humanity, yet he was present by his Divinity to hear what it was that he
said. Then with a gentle increpation he condescendeth to his infirmity, Reach
hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust
it into my side, and be not faithless, but believing. Finally he awakens his
faith which did as it were lie asleep in him; for when he had done so, then
makes he a good confession, acknowledging that he believed both natures in the
unity of one and the same person; S. Joh. 20.26 27, 28.
(...), My Lord, and my God. All the Apostles no doubt had felt him, and did
see in his hands and feet the print of the nails, to the end that they might
not think themselves fascinated or deluded in the verity of his appearance,
whom they did believe to be risen from the dead. But Saint Thomas his
infidelity will not be cured, neither by seeing nor by feeling, unless he put
his finger into the print of the nails, and thrust his hand into his side.
Posset autem si vellet de corpore suscitato and clarificato omnem maculam
cujuslibet cicatricis abstergere; sed sciebat quare cicatrices in suo corpore
reservaret. Sicut enim demonstravit Thomae non credenti nisi tangeret and
videret; ita etiam inimicis suis vulnera demonstraturus est sua, non quod eis
dicat sicut Thomae, Quod vidisti, credidisti; sed ut convincens eos veritas
dicat, Ecce hominem quem crucifixistis, videtis vulnera quae inflixistis,
agnoscitis latus quod pupugistis, quoniam per vos, and propter vos apertum est,
nec tamen intrare voluistis. Aug. de Symb. Christ could, if he would, wipe away
every spot of whatsoever scarre from that his body, which was raised up and
clarified; but he knew why he would reserve those scars in his body. For like
as he showed them to St. Thomas, who would not believe unless he should touch
and see them: Even so also will he show unto his enemies his wounds, not them
as to Saint Thomas, That which thou have seen thou have believed; but to the
end that the truth convincing them may say, Behold the man whom ye crucified,
ye see the wounds which ye inflicted, ye know the side which ye pierced, which
by you, and for you was opened, neither yet would ye enter in.

After which six apparitions which were in, or nigh unto Jerusalem, passover
being ended, S. Mat. 26.32. S. Mar. 16.7.
he went before them into Galilee, according to his promise both before and
after his resurrection. There he appeared unto them the seventh time at the sea
of Tiberias; His seventh apparition, at the sea of Tiberias.
and it is noted before out of venerable Bede, that according to the custom of
the Hebrew tongue, every gathering together of waters is called a sea, be they
sweet or salt. This sea of Tiberias was the sea of Galilee, called the sea of
Galilee, because it bordereth upon Galilee. And the sea of Tiberias, from the
city of Tiberias which stood upon the shore of it. The waters of this sea are
said to be very sweet and pleasant, abounding with great variety of fishes; for
which cause it was much frequented by fishers, who did fish there, and caught
great store of fishes. The disciples being come into Galilee, there were
together (says the text) Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathaniel
(Saint Bartholomew I suppose) of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee,
Saint James and Saint John, and two other of his disciples. Those two disciples
are not named; I conjecture they might be those that went to Emaus. The number
seven. Saint Peter who had not left off, but intermitted his old profession,
told them that he would go a fishing; they all concluded to go with him. So
they went forth and entered into a ship immediately, and labored all night,
but caught nothing. In the morning Jesus stood on the shore, but they did not
know that it was he; for as Saint Chrysostom says, he could not be known
after his resurrection but by his own condescension, because his body was
incorruptible. He demanded of them if they had any meat, if they had caught any
fishes to be eaten; and when they told him that they had not, he directed them
to cast the net on the right side of the ship, and that there they should find
a draught. A ship has neither right side, nor left side, but according to the
posture of those that are in it: their right side is the right side of the
ship. For dextrum and sinistrum, and aliae differentiae situs, sunt in
inanimatis, quoad nos tantum; sed in animatis secundum se. Aquin. part. 1. Q.
13. art. 7. con. The right side, and the left side, and other differences of
situation, are in things without life only in respect of us; but in things
animate with respect to themselves. The disciples understood his meaning, S.
Joh. 21.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and did according to his direction, and obtained a great draught, so that they
were not able to pull it up into the ship for the multitude of fishes. By this
miracle Saint John knew him, and told Saint Peter that it was the Lord. Which
when he heard, he girt his fishers coat unto him (for he was naked) and swam to
land. But the other disciples who were not far off came in the ship, dragging
the net with fishes; because they were not able to take it in. As soon as they
came to land, they see the provision which the Lord had made for their
entertainment; a fire of coals, and fish laid upon it, and bread. And when he
had bidden them to take up the fish which they had caught; Saint Peter went and
drew the net to land, full of great fishes, an hundred fifty and three: and for
all there were so many, yet was not the net broken. Afterward he calls them to
come and dine with him, and gave them of the bread and of the fish which he had
prepared for them. This is now the third time that Jesus showed himself to his
disciples, v. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
after that he was risen from the dead. It was the third time in respect of the
days, though the seventh time in respect of his several manifestations. The
first day was the day of his resurrection; the second day was eight days
after; and this was the third day.

After dinner follows his conference with Saint Peter, His conference with
Saint Peter.
Saint Peter had pretended greater love to Christ, then had the rest of the
Apostles. Insomuch that when Christ had told them of their frailty the night
before his passion, All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it
is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be
scattered abroad. Saint Peter answered and said unto him, S. Mat. 26.31
Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be
offended. Whereunto Christ replied, 33, 34, 35.
Verily I say unto thee, that this night before the cock crow, thou shall deny
me thrice. Saint Peter answered him again, Though I should die with thee, yet
will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all the disciples. This promise as it
was made by all the Apostles, but chiefly by Saint Peter: so was it broken by
them all, but chiefly by him. For they did all forsake Christ; Saint Peter did
not only forsake him, but forswear him too. Wherefore when our Savior after
his resurrection, would gather them together, to confirm them from their fear,
and give them power to preach the Gospel to all nations: he that in comforting
them all (before his passion) remembered Saint Peter chiefly, as needing it
most, S. Luc. 22.32.
(...). But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: did then (in
sending for them to meet him in Galilee) remember Saint Peter namely, by the
voice of his Angel saying to the women, S. Mar. 16.7.
Go your way, tell his disciples, and Peter, that he goes before you into
Galilee, there shall ye see him, as he said unto you. Saint Peter a disciple:
yet named beside the disciples, as who might think himself not worthy of the
name of a disciple, that had denied his Master thrice. Now when they were come
to him into Galilee, and had received common comfort, Christ admonishes Saint
Peter particularly of his duty, and moved him specially to do it faithfully;
like as he before had specially betrayed it, and had behaved himself most
fearfully above the rest. To encourage him therefore with assuring his
conscience of the forgiveness of his sin, and strengthen him to constancy,
that he offend no more so, he demands of him whether he does love him: which
when Saint Peter had affirmed, he charge him to feed his lambs and his sheep.
(Two sorts of Christians, the one younger and more tender, fitly compared to
lambs, who are to be taught the first principles of religion, and to be, as it
were, Heb. 5.12.
fed with milk, as Saint Paul fed the Corinthians, (...), I have fed you with
milk, and not with meat. 1 Cor. 3.7.
The other elder, stronger, and more perfect, fit to learn the profound
mysteries, and to be fed (as it were) with strong meat, aptly compared to
sheep.) In demanding of him, Love thou me more then these? First, he touches
his fault, who had professed more then these, but had performed less then
these. Then he assures him that it is pardoned; an assurance whereof was his
great love. In charging him to feed his lambs and his sheep, he sharpeneth his
care that he be faithful for the future, and firm in following him, though he
shall come to danger, yea to death thereby. Both which, viz. the demand and
charge, are thrice repeated: the demand, that by his threefold answer, he may
countervail his threefold denial: the charge, to the end that it might be the
more strongly enforced; for nails the oftener they are stricken, the deeper do
they pierce. Dr. Rainolds conf. cap. 3. Divis. 1. So when they had dined, Jesus
says to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, love thou me more then these? He
says unto him, Yea, Lord, S. Joh. 20.15,
thou know that I love thee. He says unto him, Feed my Lambs. He says unto
him again the second time, Simon, son of Jonas, 16,
love thou me? He says unto him, Yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee.
He says unto him, Feed my sheep. He said unto him the third time, Simon, son
of Jonas, love thou me? Peter was grieved, 17.
because he said unto him the third time, Love thou me? And he said unto him,
Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. Jesus says unto
him, Feed my sheep. Such was the sermocination of Christ to Saint Peter, in
conclusion whereof he foretells his martyrdom which should be by crucifixion,
Martyrdom foretold to St. Peter.
bidding him to follow him as being his Martyr, and by the same manner of
death. Saint Peter sees Saint John following, and enquireth also concerning
him, viz. how, and in what manner he should die, Lord, and what shall this man
do? Christ reproves his curiosity, If I will that he tarry till I come, what
is that to thee? Follow thou me. (...). Prepare thou thy self, as it is
appointed for thee, to follow me to the death of the cross. But concerning
John, or any of the rest, it shall not be thy care, but mine. Niceph. lib. 1.
cap. 35. Yet the ambiguity of his words gave occasion of that report, v. 18,
19, etc.
which went for current among the Christians in those days, that S. John
should not die, but live till the end of the world. And though S. John himself
confuted the error, yet the report went on, and gave occasion of those fables
which ensued; some saying that he is not yet dead, but sleeps in his grave,
into which he laid himself being alive; others, that he went out of his
sepulcher into which he entered being alive, and shall live till the end of the
world, and then shall be slain of Antichrist, together with Elias preaching the
Gospel. And Theodore Beza, tells of one that was burnt in his time at
Toulouse, who said that he was St. John. Annot. in Johan. 21.23.

apparition was upon a mountain in Galilee, where he had appointed to appear
unto them, His eighth apparition upon a mountain in Galilee. S. Mat. 28.16, 17.
S Mat. 26.32 S Mar. 14.28 S Mar. 28.7 S Mar. 16.7 S Mat. 28.10
as St. Matthew says, Then the eleven Disciples went away into Galilee, into a
mountain where Jesus had appointed them. And when they saw him, they worshipped
him: but some doubted. His appearance to them in Galilee, was promised both
before, and after his resurrection. Before his resurrection, by himself: After
I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee. After his resurrection,
first by his Angel; Tell his Disciples that he is risen from the dead. And
behold he goes before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him. 2ly By
himself; Go and tell my brethren, that they go into Galilee, and there they
shall see me. No doubt but the time and place was appointed by himself, though
it be not mentioned when it was that he appointed it. Probably at Jerusalem,
when he came in unto the eleven the eighth day after his resurrection, in the
evening when the doors were shut, permitting unto St. Thomas to put his finger
into the print of the nails, and to thrust his hand into his side. The
mountain is commonly thought to be the mout Thabor; where it is also supposed
that he preached unto his elected Apostles, and other Disciples that most
divine Sermon, which is contained in the 5; 6, 7 chapters of Saint Matthew's
Gospel; S Mat. 17 2, 3
and that upon that mountain he was transfigured, and had conference with Moses
and Elias. The apparition it self seems to be that which is mentioned by
Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthians, After that, he was seen of above
five hundred brethren at once; 1 Cor. 15.6
of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.
This apparition was most illustrious, nor could it be, but that the time and
place must be appointed, and intimation also given by the Apostles to the other
Disciples of his appearing there. Among so many, there were Matthew says.

His ninth apparition to St. James. 1 Cor. 15.7.
His ninth apparition was to St. James alone, and was after that his apparition
upon the mount; for St. Paul observes order. (...). After that he was seen of
James; when, where, and how, he says not. But (...), deinde, after that. It is
therefore fabulous which S. Hierom reports out of that apocryphal book,
called the Gospel of the Nazarens, That St. James had sworn, that from that
hour wherein he had drank the cup of the Lord, he would eat no bread till he
should see him risen again from the dead. That therefore so soon as he was
risen he went unto him, commanded the table to be set, and bread to be brought;
and then took the bread, brake it, and gave it unto S. James called Iustus,
saying, My brother eat thy bread, for that the Son of man is risen from them
that sleep. De ecclesiast. Script, Which St. James it was that he appeared unto
privately, after he had been seen by them all upon the mount, St. Paul says
not. Upon consideration of his former privileges, I am easily induced to think
that it was S. James the son of Zebedaeus, and brother of S. John.

His tenth and last apparition, was the fortieth day after his resurrection:
for S. Luke says, His tenth apparition, to all the Apostles at meat. Act. 1.3.
That he showed himself alive unto them after his passion, by many infallible
proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining
to the kingdom of God. Saint Paul mentions this his last apparition, next in
order to the former which was to S. James: After that he was seen of James,
then of all the Apostles. The manner was this. The eleven Apostles were sitting
at meat together, he comes in, shows himself unto them, and eats with them;
(for the word (...), Act. 1.4. does import that he did eat or use the same salt
with them) obraiding them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because
they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen. S. Mar. 16.14
They had been very hard of unbelief as touching his resurrection; he had often
told them that he would rise again after that he should be killed, but they
understood him not. And when he was risen indeed, they would not be persuaded,
but by so many infallible proofs; it was meet therefore that he should obraid
them with their former incredulity, and then specially when he was to be gone
from them in respect of his bodily presence, Ut verba quae recedens diceret, in
cord audientium arctius impressa remanerent, as says St. Gregory. That those
his words spoken unto them at his departure, might take the deeper impression
in their hearts. For this cause he gave them their commission after such an
exprobation, that they should go into all the world and preach the Gospel to
every creature. St. Matthew sets it down in express terms. All power is
given unto me in heaven, S Mat. 28.18
and in earth. Go therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. 19,
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo I
am with you always, even to the end of the world. Amen. 20.
St. Mark adds, He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; S. Mar.
16.16
but he that believes not shall be damned. And then concerning the signs and
miracles to be wrought for confirmation of the faith. These signs shall follow
them that believe, In my name they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with
new tongues, 17,
they shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not
hurt them, they shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover. 18.
This must they do after necessary endowments first received, which would be
when they should receive the holy Ghost promised by the Father; S. Luc. 24.49,
50.
till then they must abide in Jerusalem. So he led them out as far as to
Bethany. As they went (it should seem) they demanded of him this question;
Lord, will thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? They fancied
still an earthly kingdom, Act. 1.6.
and thought that he would sit upon the throne of David, and reign for ever in
the earthly Jerusalem; and that they also should reign with him, sitting upon
their thrones with power, and judging the twelve tribes of Israel. But he
answers them, saying, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, v. 7.
which the Father has put in his own power. Power they should receive after
that the holy Ghost is come upon them; not such as they imagined, but power to
go forth in his name, and in the power and might of the holy Ghost, to be
witnesses unto him both in Jerusalem, and in Judea, and in Samaria, and unto
the uttermost part of the earth. 8.
So when he had spoken all these things, and was come unto the place where he
would ascend up from them into heaven, (which was the mount of Olives, upon the
confines of Bethany) while he blessed them, S. Luc. 24.51 S Mar. 16.19. Act.
1.9.
he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven, and sat on the right
hand of God. He ascended, and they looked after him, and a cloud received him
out of their sight.

finally, we must take notice how the covenant was further administered by him
this year also, The Recapitulation.
for the breaking of the serpents head, and for the abolishing of the old
Testament. By going to Jerusalem to suffer. By exhorting to enter in at the
straight gate. By blessing the children. By disallowing the petition of Salome,
and her sons. By restoring sight to the blind men, as he went in, and as he
departed out of Jericho. By dining with Zacheus. By putting forth the parable
of the pounds. By raising up Lazarus from the dead. By leaving the chief
Priests and Pharisees to consult his death. By coming to Bethany six days
before the passover. By being first anointed to his burying. By his
triumphant riding into Jerusalem. By cursing the fruitless fig tree. By
refusing to show his authority to the chief Priests. By parables signifying the
reprobation of the Jews, and vocation of the Gentiles. By avoiding the snare of
the Pharisee. By confuting the Sadduces. By analyzing the law. By questioning
them concerning Christ. By foretelling the destruction of the Temple. By
foretelling persecution to the Gospel; calamities to the Jews; and the signs of
his second coming. By being anointed to his burial the second time. By being
to be betrayed for thirty pieces of silver. By eating his last passover. By
directing them to the house by the pitcher of water. By instituting the
Sacrament of his supper. By foretelling the offense that his Disciples should
take at him, and S. Peter's denial of him. By his farewell Sermon. By being
sorrowful in soul. By beginning his passion in the garden. By his
apprehension. By being bound, and brought to Annas first, and from him to
Caiaphas. By being examined by the high Priests. By permitting false witnesses
to be produced against him. By being adjured. By being brought before Pilate.
By being examined by him. By answering fully. By being sent to Herod. By being
condemned to be crucified. By being twice scourged. By bearing his own cross.
By refusing the wine mingled with myrrh. By being fastened to the Cross. By
the superscription of his accusation. By being stripped of his garments. By
being mocked of all sorts of people. By crying out upon the cross. By
complaining of thirst. By giving up the ghost. By the time of his abode upon
the cross. By the darkness, and by other miracles. By his burial. By going in
soul into Paradise. By descending in soul into hell. By his blessed
Resurrection upon the third day. By his first apparition to St. Mary Magdalen.
By his second apparition to the other women. By his third apparition to St.
Peter. By his fourth apparition to the two Disciples. By his fifth apparition
to all the other Apostles in the absence of St. Thomas. By transferring the
keys from the legal, to the Evangelicall priesthood. By his sixth apparition,
to Saint Thomas with the other Apostles. By his seventh apparition, at the sea
of Tiberias. By his conference with St. Peter. By his eighth apparition, upon a
mountain in Galilee. By his ninth apparition, to St. James. By his tenth
apparition, to all his Apostles as they sat at meat. It became him who humbled
himself, and was made man for the redemption of all mankind, to do and to
suffer all these things, and then to ascend into his glory, carrying up with
him our flesh, which he has fully glorified, and placed at the right hand of
God.

There sits he highly exalted, and far above all principality, Ephesians. 1.21.
making intercession for us, as God and man, exhibiting his infinite merit, and
the sufferings of his humanity, by showing of his bloody wounds, and (in such a
manner as is convenient for the Son) making request to the Father for us, Romans
8.34.
that the satisfaction made by him to divine justice may be accepted on our
behalf. And because all power is given to him in heaven, and in earth: S Mat.
28.18
there sits he administering of that kingdom which he has purchased with his
blood, by gathering his subjects together into the unity of a Church-catholique
through the Gospel, externally dispensed in the word and sacrament, and
internally by his blessed spirit enlightening the mind, mollifying the heart,
and converting the whole man to God. By showing them the way which leads to
everlasting happiness, and by conducting them therein by the scriptures, and by
his Spirit. By experimenting the graces which he has conferred on them,
through many and manifold temptations, and afflictions, whereby they are taught
to know the sufficiency of his grace, and to live a new and spiritual life by
faith. By saving and defending them against all their enemies ghostly and
bodily; in limiting their power, so that they shall not be able to do unto them
the hurt that they intend; in giving to his people faith, patience, and
spiritual fortitude to resist and withstand them; in moderating their
sufferings, and in causing all things to work together for their good. By
bringing all his enemies to confusion, in permitting them to go on in unbelief,
and hardness of heart not to understand, not to repent, not to believe the
Gospel, that so their damnation may be just. And having administered his
kingdom in this manner, till the Gospel shall be preached unto all nations,
till Antichrist shall be revealed, the Jews converted, and the whole number of
his elect completed; 1 These. 4.16
Then shall the Lord Jesus descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of
the Archangel, and with the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise
first. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; 17.
and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Thus ends the Sacred and most
mysterious History of Man's Redemption; to the praise and honor of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.
AN Alphabeticall Index, setting forth the heads of things chiefly insisted
upon. The figures direct to the Folio.
A.
ADAM's sin. 1. The Ark, 19. history of it, 22.
Altar of Incense, 20. brazen Altar, 21.
Aenon, 132. Apostles. Ordained; why so called; the number of them. 156. What
they were, 157. sent forth two and two, 166. how laid into the foundation, 178.
petition for increase of faith, 198.
Annas sends Christ to Caiaphas, 239. Acceptable year of the Lord begun, 97.
Angels. Angels tutelary, 189. Angel sits upon the stone, 259. Angel
sits in the Sepulcher, ib. Two Angels in the Sepulcher, 260.
Archelaus made King or Ethnark of Judea and Samaria, 92. Architriclinus, 119.
Arimathea, 254. Atonement, the day, 37.
B.
SAint John the Baptist, 60, 61. Saint John the Baptist, 99. his raiment, 100.
his food, ib. his Preaching and Baptism, 101, 102, Pharisees and Sadduces come
to his baptism, 102. Publicans and Soldiers also come, 103. Jews send Priests
and Levites to him, 112, 113. testifies Christ to two of his disciples, 114,
115. goes into Galilee, 137. his legation to Christ, 161. His decollation,
167. His body buried by his disciples, 169.
Baptism. The word Baptism, 133. Baptism defined, ib. The parts of it, 134.
the external part, ib. the internal part, 134, 135. The analogicall or
sacramental relation, 135. For what causes ordained, 136.
Bethlehem Ephratah, 67. Bethsaida, 116. Bethesda pool, 151, 152. Bethabara,
104, 105. Bethany, 204. Blasphemy against the holy Ghost, 228. Blessedness of
Christ's mother, 164. the cause of her coming to him as he was preaching, 65.
Two blind men restored to sight, 149. Breast plate of judgment, 28. Brotherly
correption and remission, 190. Brook Cedron, 235.
C.
GOlden Candlestick, 20. Covenant. Covenant of grace, 2. diversely administered,
5. how in the first period of time, 6. renewed with Abraham, 8. disposed into
the form of a Testament, 17. the legal part, ib. the evangelicall part, 18.
Circumcision. Concerning Circumcision, 8. the mystery 9. the use 11, 12. the
periods of time. 13.
Consecration of the high Priest, 30. Cyrus his Sepulcher, 8. Christ. His
nativity, 68. circumcised, and why, 71. Why subject to the law, and in what
manner obedient thereunto, 72, 73. By whom probably circumcised, 73, 74. taxed
or enrolled, 75. presented in the temple, 76. flees into Egypt, 78. place of
his abode there, 88. his return, 91, 92. he grew, 92. was brought up to
Jerusalem at 12. years old, 93. why he went up then, 94, 95, subject to his
parents, and how, 96. Baptized by Saint John, 104. went up straightway out of
the water, 105, 106. goes into the wilderness to be tempted, 106. His first
temptation, 108. His second temptation, 108, 109. His third temptation, 109,
110. The devil departs from him for a season, 110. comes to Jordan the
second time, 113, 114. goes into Galilee, 115, 116. present at the marriage in
Cana, 118. His first miracle, 120. goes to Capernaum, 126. His baptism, 133.
His departure out of Judea into Galilee, 137. raises the widows son, 161.
dispossesseth a blind and dumb devil, 162. Teaches the people in parables,
165. comes to Nazareth the second time, 166. Takes his Apostles to a desert
place, 170. feeds five thousand with five loaves and two fishes, 171. Walks
on the sea, ib. arriveth in the land of Genazereth, ib. heals the daughter of
the Canaanitish woman, 173. one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his
speech, ib. feeds four thousand with seven loaves, and a few little fishes,
174. heals a blind man, 175. interrogateth his disciples, 176. foretells
his passion, death and resurrection, 185. is transfigured, ib. Teaches his
Apostles humility, 189. prohibiteth scandal, ib. goes to the feast of
Tabernacles, 193, is the good shepherd, ib. cures an hydropick man, 196.
journyeth toward Jerusalem, 201. exhorts to enter in at the strait gate,
ib. blesses the little children, ib. Rides into Jerusalem, 206. curses the
fruitless fig tree, 208. Refuses to show his authority, ib. foretells the
destruction of the Temple, persecutions to the Gospel, calamities to the Jews,
and signs of his second coming, 210. His last passover, 212. instituteth the
sacrament of his supper, 214. blessed and gave thanks, 215. what was the
blessing or thanksgiving, ib. brake the bread, and took the cup, 216. gave the
bread and the cup, 219. His presence in the Eucharist, 221. commands the
participation of it, 221 222. the explica^ion, 229. 230 His pro^estation, 231.
232. Foretells the offense of his Disciples, and Saint Peter's denial, 233.
His farewell Sermon, 234. sorrowful in soul, 235. 236. goes into Paradise,
256. descends into hell. ib. His resurrection, 258. 259. His first apparition
to St. Mary Magdalen, 260. His second apparition to the other women, 261. His
third apparition to Saint Peter, 262. His fourth apparition to two of his
Disciples, 263. His fifth apparition to his Apostles, the doors being shut.
264. appeared naked, ib. transferreth the keys, 265. His sixth apparition to
St. Thomas with the other Apostles, 268. His 7th apparition at the Sea of
Tiberias, 269. His conference with S. Peter, 270. His 8th apparition upon a
mountain in Galilee, 272. His ninth apparition to St. James, 272. His tenth
appari ion to all the Apostles at meat. ib. See Jesus.
Capernaum, 126. 127. Caesarea Phlippi, 148 Centurions servant cured of the
Palsy. 160 Corban, what it was, 172 Church compared to a material temple,
177. built upon Christ the rock, 179

D.
Days, and months, and times, and years, which the Jews had, viz. new moons,
etc. 35 Decree of the Emperor Augustus, 66. 67.
Devil. Tempts Christ in the wilderness, 106. his first temptation, 108.
his 2d. temptation, 108. 109. his 3d. temptation, 109. 110. he departs for a
season, 110. two demoniak men cured, 143. Dumb man dispossessed of a devil 150.
devils petition 3 things, 144. a blind and dumb devil, 162.
Decapolis 173 Dalmanutha, 174 Disciples. A threefold admission of Disciples
127. Disciples eat with unwashen hands, 172. reprehended and why, 175. 70
Disciples sent forth, 194. must bear their cross, ib.
Darkness over all the land, 252. Desert belonging to Bethsaida, 170
Divorcement, 191 Dreams and their causes, 244
E.
Feast of Easter, 37 Earth did quake, 252 Elements, both of them make but one
Sacrament, 222. 223. Ephod. The linen Ephod 27. Robe of the. Ephod. ib. Ephod
of the high Priest, ib.
Excommunication. The power of it, 190.
Eucharist. The presence of Christ in the Eucharist, 221. commandment for the
participation, 221. 222. two several sorts of food. 222. Two sorts of taking,
eating and drinking, ib. The promise, 223 how to be considered, ib.
Evangelicall priesthood begun, 266
F.
Faith. Concerning faith, 2. faith toward men, 3. toward God, ib. the
efficient cause of justifying faith, ib. the matter, 4. the form, 5. the final
cause, 5. observation concerning faith, 5. faith of the ancient righteous
Fathers, 6 the efficient cause of their faith, 7 the matter, ib. the form and
final cause, 8.
The Feminalls, 27 Feast of Dedication, 194 Fear of hell fourfold, 217
G.
Sea of Galilee, 128 Gadara, 143 Gates of hell, 18 Galileans slain by Pilate,
195 Gethsemane, 235 Girdle, 27 Gentiles, the first fruits of them, 86 God, how
he was consulted with, 61. 62. Gospel. First preached by Angels upon Christmas
day, 68. 69. why first to the shepherds, 70. the mystery, 70. 71.
Graves did open, 253
H.
Herod. Troubled, 84. 85. slays the infants, 88. 89. Herod Antipas his guilty
conscience, 169
Herodias, the cause of her hatred against Saint John the Baptist, 168
Hermopolis, 88 History. Of the Tabernacle, and Ark, 22. of the holy city
Jerusalem, 44. 45. 46. of the temple, 48. 49. 50. of the wise men. 77. of
Nathaniel, 116. 117. of the Samaritan woman, 138. 139. of Jairus and his
daughter, 146 147. 148. of the man that had the withered hand, 154. 155. of
Lazarus, 204. 205. of Christ his triumphant riding into Jerusalem, 206. 207. of
his last passover, 212. of the penitent thief, 249. of Christ his burial,
254. 255. Of his blessed resurrection, 258. 259.
Holy things. Concerning those who were to administer in, or to attend upon
holy things, 52. The Priests. The pontifical order, 53. Priests of the second
order, 53. 54. Levites, 55 Nethinims, Singers, Porters, 55. Officers and
Judges, ib. Honey wild, what it was, 100. Hiericho, and the hlind man cured, 203

I.
Jesus. The blessed name, 74. 75. Jesus goes up to Jerusalem, 128. visits
the Temple, 129. promises a sign, 130. comes from Jerusalem into Judea and
baptizeth, 131. 122. comes into Galilee, 139 heals the Rulers son, 139.
known of the devils, 140. heals St. Peter wives mother, 141 stilleth the Sea,
142. cures two demoniak men, 143, 144. cures a paralytick man, 145. calls
St Matthew, 145. 146. cures a woman of a bloody issue, ib. raises up Iairus
daughter, 148. 149. restores two blind men to sigh^, 149. 150. dispossesseth a
dumb man of a devil, 150. goes up to the passover at Jerusalem, 151. cures
the impotent man, 152. avoucheth his authority, 154. ordains his Apostles,
156. his Sermon upon the mount, 158. cures the leper, 159. 160. the Centurions
servant, 160. dispossesseth a dumb and deaf Spirit, 186. 187. pays the
didrachma, 187. 188. is denied entertainment of the Samaritans, 192. absolveth
the woman taken in adultery, 193. cures a man born blind, ib. preaches
repentance, 195. his Disciples must bear their cross, 197. leaves the Priests
and Pharisees to consult his death, 206. comes to Be^hany six days before
the passover, where he is anointed to his burial the first time, 206.
avoideth the snare of the Pharisees, 208. 209. confuteth the Sadduces, 209.
analyzeth the law, ib. questioneth them concerning Christ, ib. suppeth in the
house of Simon the leper, and is anointed to his burial the second time, 211.
begins his passion, 236. sweateth blood, ib. is apprehended, 237. bound and
brought to Annas 238 sent to Caiaphas, examined, 239. false witnesses produced
against him, ib. adjured, 240. brought before Pilate, 241. accused, examined,
answers fully, 242. condemned, scourged the second time, led away to be
crucified, 245. 246. bears his cross, 246. fastened to it, 247. the form of
it, ib. the superscription annexed, 248. He is mocked, 249 commends his
mother to St. John, 250. cries out, ib. complains of thirst, 251. gives up
the ghost, ib. the time of his abode upon the cross, ib. confessed by the
Centurion, 253. his burial, 254. the state of his soul after death, 256. See
Christ.
Incense sacred, 21. the mystery, ib. Infants slain by Herod, 88, 89. Jubilee of
the 50th year, 38 Judges and officers, 56 Judas. Agrees to betray Jesus for
thirty pieces of silver, 211. his impudency, 232. he hangs himself, 241.

K.
Keys. Of the kingdom of heaven, promised and given, 180. By what power, 181.
what keys Christ has, and what keys he gave to the Apostles. 182. Keys of
two sorts, ib. how to be administered, ib. To whom promised and given, 183. the
use of them, 184. the keys to be transferred from the legal, to the
Evangeliall Priesthood, and when, 184. the performance of the promise, and the
keys transferred, 265.

L.
BRazen Laver, 22 Lazarus raised from the dead, 204. legation of St. John the
Baptist to Christ, 161
Leper cured, 159, 160. ten lepers cleansed, 192
Linen coat, 27. linen Ephod, ib.
Levitical offerings, 32, Levites, 55
Locusts eaten by St. John the Baptist, 110 Loves in Christ toward his Church
120
M.
MAn made in the image of God, 1 Martyrs, three sorts, 90 Martyrdom foretold to
St. Peter, 271. Magdala and Dalmanutha; 174, St. Matthew called from the
receipt of custom, 145. 146
Miracles. First miracle of Christ, 120. what they are, 120. True miracles, and
the causes of them, 121. the efficient cause, ib. the matter of Christ his
miracles, 122. the formal cause ib. the final cause, 123. Christ's miracles for
the glory of God, 124 the secundary or less principal end of them, 125, 126
The Mitre, 27 Mount Calvary. 246 Mystery. Of the garments of the high priest,
29. of his consecration. 30. of the leviticall offerings. Of the quotidian
profeast. Of the new moons. Of the sabbath. Of the seventh day. 39 of the feast
of Easter. Of the feast of Pentecost. Of the feast of Trumpets. Of the day of
Atonement. 40. Of the feast of tabernacles. Of the sabbath of the seventh
year. Of the Iubilee of the 50th year, 43, Of the holy city Jerusalem, 47. Of
the temple, 51, 52. Of the high Priests, 57. Of the Priests of the second
order, ib. Of the Levites, the Nethinims, the Singers, and the Port^rs, 58. Of
Officers and Judges, 58. Of the Prophets, 62, 63. Of the Pitcher of water. 213.

N.
NAim, 161 Narration concerning the rich man and Lazarus, 198 Nathaniel, 116,
117 Nazareth, 67 Nethinims, 55 Nichodemus, 131 New moons, 35
O.
Offerings. THe whole burnt-offering, the continual burnt-offering, the
meat offering, the drink offering, the sin-offering, the peace offering, 32, 33
Observations concerning Leviticall offerings, 33 Officers and Judges, 56
Opinion of the people concerning Christ, 176 Mount of Olives, 235.
P.
Primordiall law, 1 Propagation of Adams sin, 2 Periods of times to be
observed, 13 Paschall Lamb. Concerning the paschall lamb, 13. the time, 14,
the place, ib. the persons, 15. the ceremonies, the meaning, the mystery, ib.
the use, 17.
Priests. The high Priest's garments, 26. his consecration, 30. Priests of the
pontifical order, 53. of the second order, ib. Priests first consecrated, 54
chief priests consult to suppress the rumor of Christ's resurrection, 262.
Porters, 55. Paralytick man cured, 145. Prophets wha^ they were, 58, 59.
Pharis^es what ^hey were, 102. Pharisees repro^ed, 174. Saint Peter. His
confession, 177. his prerogative, ib. a stone of the s^irituall building, 178.
his function, ib. his denial, 239. runs to the sepulcher, 260.
Period of time, the second, 66. St. Philip first called to be Christ's
disciple, 116. Publicans what they were, 103 Parable. Of the laborers, 194. of
the lost sheep, and of the lost dram, 1^^ of the prodigal son, ib. of the
unjust steward, ib. of the impor^unate widow, 199. of the ph^^see and the
publican, ib. of the pounds, 204. parables signifying the reprobation of the
Jews, and vocation of the Gentiles, 208.
The parasceue. 254. The plate of gold, 28. Pool of Bethesda, 151. Poor man
quarrelled by the Jews, 153. Pentecost a feast, 37. Pilate. Sends Christ to
Herod, 243. his second policy, ib. his third policy, 244. his wives dream, ib.
washes his hands, 245. condemns Christ to be crucified, ib. his punishment,
246.

Q.
QUestions proposed by the disciples of St. John the Baptist, 146. By the
pharisees, 198.
R.
Recapitulation. OF the first book of the Sacred and mysterious history, 64,
65. of the first two years o^ Christ his age, 90. from the expiration of the
second year, to the expiration of the thirtieth year of his age, 111, 112. of
the one and thirtieth year of his age, 150. of the two and thirtieth year of
his age, 175, 176. of the three and thir^ ^^^ar of his age, 199, 200. (...)
expiration of the three (...) ^rtieth year, to his Ascen^ in fine.
Remission of sins. Remission of sins, 224. the ^^ice, 225. the grace, ib.
remitted by God authoritati^^ly, ib. by the Minister d^claratively, 226. the
means, ib. the subject, ib. How far God does remit sins, after what manner,
where remission of sins is, whether any sin be irremissible? 228. whether a
sinner may despair, 229. whether the force and effect of remission of sins be
more to be discerned in the world to come, ib. why God will forgive sins, ib.
Rhemists account of Christ's parables, 165. Remission how often it is to be
done, 190. Robe of the Ephod, 27. Rocks did rend,. 253
S.
Sabbath of the seventh day, 36. of the seventh year, 38. Sabbath profaned,
256. Sadduces come to Saint John's baptism, 102. what they were, 103.
Sacrament of the Supper commanded, 202. Scribe, would follow Christ, 141. so
would two other, 142.
Sepulcher of Cyrus, 80. Sea of Galilee, 128. Samaritan woman, 138, 139.
Singers, 55. Simon the Pharisee inviteth Christ to his house, 162. Salome her
petition, and her sons. 202. Scribes and pharisees convinced of the
irremissible sin, 163. Sin irremissible, what it is, ib. Sign of the prophet
Jonah, 164. Simon of Cyrene compelled to bear the cross. 246. Soldiers divide
Christ's garments, 249. Solomon's porch, 195. Superscription of Christ's
accucusation, 248.
T.
TAbernacle, the mystery of it, 18. history of the Tabernacle, and of the Ark,
22. feast of Tabernacles, 38.
Temple, history of the temple, 48, 49, etc. Temptations of Christ in the
wilderness, 106, 107, etc. Thabor mount, 158. Thief penitent, 249. Saint
Thomas inaugurated to the priesthood, 267. his incredulity, ib.
Times distinguished into two periods. 6. Traditions of the pharisees reproved,
172. Transfiguration of Christ, 185.
U.
VRim and thummim, 28. Virgin Saint Mary neither reprehended nor rejected, 119.
Vail of the temple rent, 252.
W.
WIsemen, Their coming to Christ, 77. the time of their arrival, 78, what
they were, 79. probably kings, 81 from whence it was that they came, 82. They
go into Judea by divine impulsion, 83. the star their guide, ib. they come to
Jerusalem, 84. Herod troubled at their coming, 84, 85. are sent to Bethlehem,
85, 86. they were the first fruits of the Gentiles, 86.
Wild honey, what it was, 100. Wilderness of Arabia Petraea, 106, 107. Women.
Cured of a bloody issue, 147. she erecteth a statue, ib. a crooked woman cured,
196.
Withered hand, the man cured who had a withered hand, 154, 155. Widows son
raised from death, 161. Wine mingled with myrrh, 247.
Y.
ACceptable year of the Lord, 97, 98.
Z.
ZAccheus, the story of him, 203.
FINIS.

