A Canterbury TALE, TRANSLATED Out of CHAUCERS old English Into our NOW VSVALL
LANGVAGE.

Whereunto is added the Scots Peddler.

Newly enlarged by A. B.

Printed in the year 1641.

A CANTERBVRY TALE.
IN Calidon did live a Potent Peer,
Who had three Princely Sons of courage bold,
For brave Achivements beyond all compare,
Nere fairer Creatures ere were framed on Mould,
Whose fame, whose honor and terrene renown,
Unto hopes highest station did aspire,
Till fate and falsehood sought to pull them down,
By breeding discord 'tweene them and their sire:
Hell to their ruin being soly bent,
Had not blessed heaven crossed their damned intent.
For some malignant sprights had so inflamed
Their fathers wrath against one of his said sons,
That he his death and downfall only aimed,
So hot the rancor of his fury burns;
The sacklesse son on bended knees falls down,
Begging the favor of his frowning sire,
The more he seeks the farther from his boon,
For kindled was the the fury of his ire,
By powerful Prelates, who so fed the flame,
That naught but his heart blood could quench the same.
First he debars his guiltless son of bread,
Aiming by famine for to work his fall,
Next him imprisons, oh most doleful deed!
When as the father shall the son enthrall,
But life is sweet, and liberty so dear,
To free and noble minds, that he breaks ward,
And to his fathers presence does repair,
With resolution not to be debard:
His Princely reconcilement for to gain,
And punishment of those had bred his baine.
His father meets him with an angry brow,
And all his force in fury against him bends,
He draws his sword to give the fatal blow,
But God who always Innocents defends,
Protects the son, who then himself to free
From stripes, imprisonment, and cruel bands,
From direful death, and Romish slavery,
Boldly steps in, and gently holds his hands,
Begging still humbly on his bended knee,
His grievances to hear, and him to free.
The enraged father calls his other sons,
Him to assist against this their loving brother,
Commands them bring their Pistolls, Pikes, and Guns,
They stand amazed, looking each at other,
Yet forth the elder steps, and with like zeal,
On bended knees implores their wrathful sire,
His brothers suite to hear, perchance our weal,
It may concern (good Sir) grant his desire.
The younger seconds him, they both prevail,
The father is content to hear his tale.
In presence then of his kind loving brothers,
His grievances he gently gins relate,
All plots and stratagems he then discovers
Which were contriv'ed against their fathers state,
Each damned design he plainly then relates,
Which had been hatched by hell, at Rome or Spain,
For bringing in the Babylonish rites
To brand them and their fathers house with shame,
Making them hateful to the great Commander,
That he might list them in black Pluto's Callender.
Dear Sir, quoth he, will you gain heavens frown,
Through the bad counsel of accursed misleeders?
Or will you lose the comfort of a son,
For pleasing Parasites or mischief breeders?
Nay will you hazard all? For all their ends,
Aim at my brothers ruin as well as mine,
The Sychophants which now do seem their friends
Will prove tart foes if they find place and time.
Consider then it is not I alone
Must smart and suffer, though I soly groan.
This mischief which has now befalne to me,
At first was framed against my elder brother,
By that cursed conclave of impiety,
The Cardinals and painted whore their mother.
But great Iehova who did then foresee
How that their damned designs were to oppose
The glory of the eternal Deity,
Was pleased that I their plots should counterpose,
And gave me courage with a filial awe,
Against foes in your defense my sword to draw.
Think what pernicious plots have been contrived
By fire and water for to work your baine,
Consider what Armados have ariv'd
Upon your costs your Countries for to gain,
Yet all in vain, praised be the power divine,
The ruin they have sought of you and yours,
And ever shall while you and they combine
In perfect love, in spite of all their powers,
Crush then that cursed and most viperous brood,
That moves you thus to spill your childrens blood.
See then the sufferings of your sakelesse son,
And his intentions with a gracious eye,
View their endeavors who would have undone
Your self, your state, and Princely Progeny,
Ponder their plots who plundered have the stream,
And current of your hoped happiness,
Weigh all their actions with an upright beam,
That Justice may embrace fair Righteousness;
So none shall dare t'eclipse, or once pull down
The glorious splendour of your high renown.
This said, his brothers shed some brinish tears,
Which molified their furious fathers heart,
Who then replied (dear sons) it now appears,
You are resolved all to take one part,
And so am I, I Will second you, go on,
And rid me of these fire brands of debate,
Root them all out, be sure you leave not one
That sought the ruin of you, or my state;
And thou my son, whose bane I late did wish,
Receive thy reconciled fathers bless.
For henceforth my dear children I shall know
Our friends from foes, since truly now I find,
Who aimed our bless, our bane, our weal, our woe,
Which I have printed in my heart and mind,
No damned design hereafter shall take place,
Or once be harbor'd in your fathers breast,
Which him, or his may in the least disgrace,
And you oppress, or rob of quiet rest;
Sweet peace and plenty each where shall abound,
While all our actions with love shall be crowned.
Down at their fathers feet these joyful wights,
Prostrate themselves and lie as men amazed,
At length courageously they rouse their sprights,
Which long with care and grief had been surpised,
And all resolve unfainedly to see
Their fathers foes cut off by fatal stroke,
That sought the downfall of his dignity,
And against them his displeasure did provoke,
The hand is up (oh speak that word again)
To give the blow let all hearts say Amen.
Thrice blessed be that peerlesse Paragon,
The potent Princely Peer of Calidon.
THE SCOTS PEDDLER.
The Peddler now has open his pack,
Come Gentlemen see what you lack.
Here Is Spanish Needles, that will shrewdly prick
Fair Englands foes and lance them to the quick,
Here Is Romish Gloves perfumed, whose very sent
Will cause the Babylonians to be shent.
Here Is French toys too, whose fashions came from Rome,
Prized at no less then at a Kingdoms Crown,
Here Is Flanders Lace, which is most closely woven,
Pieces of knavery made up by the dozen,
But here is Holland I dare say it is right,
Tear it you cannot, it is so good and tight,
And for Scots cloth though it be slight and thin,
Yet safely you may wear it next your skin.
If these shall not you please, here is ware divine,
Late consecrated at Saint Thomas Shrine,
In Canterbury by a holy Friar,
As some men say, or else the Deel's a liar.
For Relics, here is the hand of Signior Con,
The fingers of a Spanolized Don,
Who pointed out three Kingdoms overthrow,
Good Pan be praised who did divert the blow,
See here is the brains of that Capuchi^n Friar,
Who whilome set all Germany on fire,
And blowed the cole great Britain to have brent,
But that Iehova did his plots prevent.
And here is the Scull of a damned Jesuit,
Conspiring heads, and hearts and tongues, and feet,
Of Popes, of Prelates, Cardinals, and Priests,
Who living were in their blood thirsty feasts,
Drunk with the gore of Potentates and Kings,
Such ware my pack affords, and finer things,
For here is a Miter which from Rome was sent,
Not for Pope Ioane, but for the man of Kent,
Gay Copes, Hare Sarkes, Holy Bread, and Crosses,
For Altars, penance, Mattens and for Masses,
Here Is Bulls, Indulgences, and Absolutions,
For Murders, Massacres, and bloody Treasons,
From Babylon by Toby late brought ore,
As a Propine from that enchanting whore:
Yet here is a spell will keep you from all harms,
And eke prevent and frustrate all her charms,
A precious Balsome that will clear your sight,
And bring you out of darkness into light,
Take from before your eyes that misty fog
That plainly you may see Gog and Magog.
Lo here is an Antidote which will you free
From that vilde strumpet of impiety,
And crush her cursed designs, whose damned intent,
Three Kingdoms to confound, was soly bent:
And here is a Corosive that sharply bites,
And will eat out the Babylonish Rites,
And macerate the bulk of that base slut,
With all the crew of the Antichristian cut;
A whip, a whip to mortify her skin,
And lash her soundly like an arrant queen,
From place to place, and so sign her a pass
To Rome from whence she came, with all her trash.
Here Is Hoods, fair Rochets, and fine Tiburn Tippets,
For Priests, for Jesuits, and Popish Bishops;
Nay here is a halter otherwise a rope,
Sauce for the Dee'ls good servants, and the Pope,
And here are Towerhill knives, or Scottish Tweasers
To cut off Trayters, and all mischief breeders,
Fine Pins and Points, Box Combs, and Looking-glasses,
Your friends from foes to try, and know their faces,
So prict and pointed out that future Ages,
The Pedlers ware shall praise upon their Stages.
Come then and welcome to the Pedlers pack,
Here Is that will do it, will do it, see what you lack.
FINIS.

