

The Puritan.

Covenanter.

An Exact COLLECTION of ye Choicest Poems and Songs, Relating to the late
times, and Continued by the most Eminent Wits from A 1639. to 1662.



RUMP: OR AN EXACT COLLECTION Of the Choycest POEMS AND SONGS RELATING TO THE
Late Times.

By the most Eminent Wits, from Anno 1639. to Anno 1661.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane, and Henry Marsh at the
Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. 1662.

TO THE READER.
THou have here a Bundle of Rodds; not like those of the Roman Consulls, for
these are signs of a No-Government. If thou read these Ballads (and not sing
them) the poor Ballads are undone. They came not hither all from one Author;
(thou will soon perceive the same hand held not the Pen) yet none but show
either Wit or Affection (and that is better) or Both, which is best of all. The
truth is, this Rump, and indeed the whole Carcass was so odious and bloody a
Monster, that every man has a stone or rotten Egg to cast at it. Now if you
ask who named it Rump, know 'twas so styled in an honest Sheet of Paper (called
The Bloody Rump) written before the Trial of our late Sovereign of Glorious
Memory: but the Word obtained not universal notice till it flew from the mouth
of Major General Brown at a Public Assembly in the days of Richard Cromwell.
You have many Songs here, which were never before in Print: We need not tell
you whose they are; but we have not subjoyned any Authors Names; heretofore it
was unsafe, and now the Gentlemen conceive it not so proper. It Is hoped they
did His Majesty some Service, 'twas for that end they were scribbled Now
(thanks be to God) we have lived to that day, that there is no Cavalier,
because there is nothing else, and it is wondrous happy to see how many are his
Majesty's Faithful Subjects, who were ready to hang the Authors of these
Ballads. But he that does not blot out all that is past, and frankly embrace
their New Allegiance, or remembers ought but what shall preserve Universal
Peace and Charity, let him be Anathema; For he were a strange man that should
now he unsatisfied, when those that writ against the King do now write for Him,
and those who wrote for Him, need now write no more. Let Heaven now continue
these Blessings on His Majesty, that no one Enemy live unreconciled, nor any
false Friend be undiscovered, that so there be no strife, but who shall show
most Duty to so Excellent a KING.

Farewell.
The Stationers to the Reader.
Gentlemen,
YOu are invited here to a Feast, and if Variety cloy you not, we are
satisfied. It has been our Care to please you; and it is our Hope you will
retribute an Acknowledgement. These are select Things, a work of Time, which
for your sake we Publish, assuring you that your Welcome will Crown the
Entertainment.

Farewell.
Yours, H. B. H. M.

RUMP-SONGS. The First Part.
The ZEALOUS PURITAN. 1639.
MY Brethren all attend,
And list to my relation:
This is the day, mark what I say,
Tends to your renovation;
Stay not among the Wicked,
Lest that with them you perish,
But let us to New England go,
And the Pagan People cherish;
Then for the truths sake come along, come along,
Leave this place of Superstition:
Were it not for we, that the Brethren be,
You would sink into Perdition.
There you may teach our hymns,
Without the Laws controulment:
We need not fear, the Bishops there,
Nor Spiritual-Courts inroulment;
Nay, the Surplice shall not fright us,
Nor superstitious blindness;
Nor scandal-rise, when ^e disguise,
And our Sister-kiss in kindness;
Then for the truths sake, etc.
For Company I fear not,
There goes my Cousin Hannah,
And Ruben, so persuades to go
My Cousin Joyce, Susanna.
With Abigal and Faith,
And Ruth, no doubt, comes after;
And Sarah kind, will not stay behind,
My Cousin Constance Daughter;
Then for the truth, etc.
Tom Tyler is prepared,
And the Smith as black as a coal;
Ralph Cobbler too with us will go,
For he regards his soul;
The Weaver, honest Simon,
With Prudence, Jacobs Daughter,
And Sarah, she, and Barbary
Professes to come after;
Then for the truth, etc.
When we, that are elected,
Arrive in that fair Country,
Even by our faith, as the Brethren says,
We will not fear our entry;
The Psalms shall be our Music,
Our time spent in expounding,
Which in our zeal we will reveal
To the Brethrens joy abounding;
Then for the truths sake, etc.
Pyms Juncto* 1640.
TRuth I could chide you Friends, why, how so late?
My Watch speaks Eight and not one pin o'th State
This day undone, can such remissness sit
Your Active spirits, or my more Hellish wit?
The Sun each step he mounts to Heavens Crown,
Whilst Pym commands, should see a Kingdom down;
You Have spurs enough I Am sure to make you run.
HOPES guilty, FORTUNES cracked, and the ILLS you have done.
Thus Whilome seated was Great James his Heir,
Just, as you see me now, in the Kingdoms Chair:
There the Great Seal, there Richmond, Hertford sat,
There Marshall, D^rset, Fristol^'s temperate pate,
But there sat P^mbroke, life of Loyalty,
There Holland, flower of Fidelity.
We are no less then Charles in power and state,
You are our Junctoes, who were his of late;
Here sits K -- Holy Say, and Seal,
With Whartor, Warwick, Brooks inspired zeal:
Stro^d, Hampden, H -- Has^^rigge, bold spirits,
Bold Martin, Ludlow, Vain, unmatched wights,
But their Church-Elder, Whites Religious beard,
There sits Abomination Statists: Perd*
Charles wear at York thy Crown that pretty thing
We must most humbly be at London King*
But what is the business of the House this day,
How speaks my note, Commissioners of Array,
The nineteen Propositions to be scand
A second time, M -- Train-band,
Letters from Tristram Whitcombe, and from Hull,
From Amsterdam, the Admiral; how full
Of high concernments are we Sirs, advise
How we most warily may weigh our prise:
I do conceive it must be our first play,
Be It right or wrong, by Vote to damn the Array,
If ever that take footing and advance,
Farewell Militia, and our Ordinance,
But what will the appearance be? yet stay,
Who dares our leading Votes and Wills gainsay?
Should any haughty spirit presume so far,
What serves the Tower for then, or the Bar?
But if we fear the business will not bend
As may be most conducing to our end:
By some feignd wile it must be our next Plot
To put it off, and a new time alot,
And just Jumpe for our turn: these Letters shall
From Whitcombe, Hotham, or our Admiral,
(Though forged untruths) be interposed and read,
To spend the time, and maze the Peoples head;
If the next day we yet suspect to find
Such whose just Conscience cannot be inclined
To be made Vassals to our desperate sense,
It Is easy to procure a Conferrence,
Which shall out-spin the leisure of the morn,
Then we'^e resume the House, and so adjourn
Till five at night, the moderate wearied thus,
Will quit their seats and leave us, none but us;
There Is President for this, this was the feat
That plucked the Bishops from the Barons seat,
This wrought good Orders, managed many a Vote,
This Art must my Disciples learn by Rote.
But if the Accommodation chance to spring
Into debate, then your Artillery bring,
And lay that flat, that cold: my Genius starts
With fear to find in the House two Loyal hearts;
Seem though we must teeth outward to comply,
And humbly kiss the feet of Majesty,
Yet live we cannot, but obedience dead,
Nor stand elsewhere but on the Kingdoms head;
Calmes proper are for guiltless sons of Peace,
Our Vessels bear out best in storming Seas;
Charles must not reign secure whilst reigns a Pym,
The Sun if it rise with us must set with him;
You have one pleasure which must be expressed
To Leicester Pembroke, St -- and your rest,
Bid Essex, Percy, and your Quondam Grom
O'th stool, to wait us in the Princes Room:
Some of you subtly may in Cottons walk,
Sit and allure Affection by your talk,
'Twill be a work worthy your nimble wit,
To gain the Devil and us a Proselyte.
So, to your business, yet ere you be gone
Take my advice, then blessing light upon
Your nimble Votes, and first be sure you shroud
Your dark designs in a Religious Cloud,
Gods Glory, Churches Good, Kings head Supreme,
A Preaching Minister must be your T^eame;
Next structure of your Babel to be built,
Must speciously be varnisht over, and gilt
With Liberty, Propriety of lives
And fortunes, against the high stretched Prerogatives.
And then a Speech or two most neatly spent,
For Rights and Privilege of Parliament;
These two well mixed, you're need no other lures
To gain the People, and to make them yours.
If Charles displeased, with some witty, tart
Message (and justly too) shall make you start,
Saying ye have put him to his Guard, be sure
Ye then be loud enough, and first cry Whore,
War raised against the Parliament, a great
Hinderance of the Irish Aid, and strong Abet
Unto the Rebels: then if any thing
You have may blast the Honor of the King,
Be it had enough, no matter from what hand,
We Will Vote it true, and then to believe command;
But on your memories if I impose no more,
You cannot miss your way when I Am before:
Rise Synna, Sylla, Marius, Gracchus Ghost,
With the rest of the whole Mechanic Host,
Romes greatest Earthquakes, and this little trunck
Make with your desperate Spirits deeply drunk,
Up from your drousie urnes, the Ghost of those
My Ancestors that Richard did depose,
Drop fresh into my breast, my soul inspire,
And strongly actuate me with your fire,
That theirs thus mixed with my Malicious Gall,
Mine may with theirs fully possess you all.
Go and exceed their Villainies as much more
As theirs did all attempts that was before;
Act past example, that it may be known
You copied no example but your own.
And if in after times, when silently
We sleep, another si^ebrand chance to be,
'Twill be chief Crown and Glory unto him,
To say he played his Prancks like you and Pym.
Upon Mr. Pyms Picture.
REader, behold the Counterfeit of him
Who now controuls the Land; Almighty Pym*
A man whom even the Devil to fear begins,
And dares not trust him with succesless sins;
A man who now is wading through the Flood
Of Reverend Lauds, and Noble Straffords Blood,
To strike so high as to put Bishops down,
And in the Miter to control the Crown;
The Wretch has mighty thoughts, and entertains
Some Glorious Mischief in his Active Brains,
Where now he is plotting to make England such
As may out-vye the villainy of the Dutch;
He dares not go to Heaven, 'cause he does fear
To meet (and not pull down) the Bishops there:
Is it not strange, that in that Shuttle-head
Three Kingdoms ruins should be buried?
Is it not strange there should be hatched a Plot
Which should out-doe the Treason of the Scot,
And even the Malice of a Puritan?
Reader behold, and hate the poisonous man;
The Picture's like him; yet it is very fit
He add one likeness more, that is hang like it.
A Song.
To the Tune of Blue Cappe for me.
LEt Scots now return at Lesleys demand,
How all the Affairs in the North-part do stand,
And tell him the Parliament is fully agreed
To send him good store of Money with speed,
To serve their occasions: thus say, they shall find
For to come to pass, when the Devil is blind.
Let all their Brethren be new circumcised,
And Burton and -- for Saints canonis'd,
And at the Sacrament sit for their ease,
And pray unto God, even just when they please,
The Scots in despite shall please their own mind,
And do what they please, when the Devil is blind.
Next they will have in each City and Town
All painted Glasse-windows to be pulled down;
One Bell in a Church to call them away,
It Is enough when the Spirit does move them to pray,
Without any Surplice or Tippet behind
The Priest shall say Service, when the Devil is blind.
Lastly, the Parliament in any case
Will down with all Organs, for Piping is base;
No cringing below the Altar shall be,
For that is a Trick of Idolatry:
Now tell me good Scots, are not Englishmen kind,
But when this comes to pass, say the Devil is blind.
Mr. Hampdens Speech against Peace at the close Committee.
To the Tune of I went from England.
BUt will you now to Peace incline,
And languish in the Main design,
And leave us in the lurch?
I would not Monarchy destroy,
But only as the way to enjoy
The ruin of the Church.
Is not the Bishops Bill denied,
And we still threatened to be tried?
You see the King embraces
Those Councillors he approved before:
Nor does he promise, which is more,
That we shall have their Places.
Did I for this bring in the Scot,
(For it is no Secret new) the Plot
Was Says and mine together:
Did I for this return again,
And spend a Winter there in vain,
I went more to invite them hither.
Though more our Money than our Cause
Their Brotherly assistance draws,
My labor was not lost.
At my Return I brought you thence
Necessity, their strong Pretense,
And these shall quit the Cost.
Did I for this my County bring
To help their Knight against their King,
And raise the first Sedition?
Though I the Business did decline,
Yet I contrived the whole Design,
And sent them their Petition.
So many nights spent in the City
In that invisible Committee;
The Wheel that governs all;
From thence the Change in Church and State,
And all the Mischiefs bear the date
From Haberdashers Hall.
Did we force Ireland to despair,
Upon the King to cast the War,
To make the World abhor him:
Because the Rebels used his Name,
Though we our selves can do the same,
While both alike were for him.
Then the same Fire we kindled here
With that, was given to quench it there,
And wisely lost that Nation:
To do as crafty Beggars use,
To maim themselves thereby to abuse
The simple man's compassion.
Have I so often past between
Windsor and Westminster unseen,
And did my self divide:
To keep his Excellence in awe,
And give the Parliament the Law,
For they knew none beside.
Did I for these take pains to teach
Our zealous Ignorants to preach,
And did their Lungs inspire,
Read them their Text, showed them their Parts,
And taught them all their little Arts,
To fling abroad the Fire.
Sometimes to beg, sometimes to threaten,
And say the Cavaliers are beaten,
And stroke the Peoples ears;
Then straight when Victory grows cheap,
And will no more advance the heap,
To raise the price of Fears.
And now the Book, and now the Bells,
And now the Act the Preachers tells
To edify the People;
All our Divinity is News,
And we have made of equal use
The Pulpit and the Steeple.
And shall we kindle all this Flame,
Only to put it out again,
And must we now give over,
And only end where we begun
In vain this Mischief we have done,
If we can do no more.
If men in Peace can have their right,
Where Is the Necessity to fight,
That breaks both Law, the Oath;
They Will say they fight not for the Cause,
Nor to defend the King and Laws,
But as against them both.
Either the Cause at first was ill,
Or being good it was so still;
And thence they will infer,
That either now, or at the first
They were deceived; or which is worse,
That we our selves may err.
But Plague and Famine will come in,
For they and we are near of kin,
And cannot go asunder:
But while the wicked starve, indeed
The Saints have ready at their need
Gods Providence and Plunder.
Princes we are if we prevail,
And Gallant Villains if we fail,
When to our fame it is told;
It will not be our last of praise,
Sin' a New State we could not raise
To have destroyed the old.
Then let us stay and fight, and vote
Till London is not worth a Groat;
Oh it is a patient Beast:
When we have galled and tired the Mule,
And can no longer have the rule,
We Will have the Spoil at least.
A Song.
To the Tune of The Queens old Soldier.
TO make Charles a great King, and give him no Power,
To Honor him much, and not obey him an Hour;
To provide for his Safety, and take away his Tower,
And to prove all is sweet, be it never so sower.
The new Order of the Land, and the Lands new Order.
To secure men their Lives, Liberties and Estates
By arbitrary Power, as it pleases the Fates
To take away Taxes, by imposing great Rates,
And to make us a Plaster by breaking our Pates*
The new Order of the Land, and the Lands new Order.
To sit and consult for ever and a day,
To counterfeit Treason by a Parliamentary way,
To quiet the Land by a tumultuous sway,
New Plots to devise, then them to betray.
The new Order, etc.
To leave all Votes free by using of Force.
That one make Petitions for Countie^ by course,
To make Pym as great as his Mothers great Horse,
Which William left Agnus, though his meaning was worse.
The new Order, etc.
To encourage good Soldiers by cashiering the Band,
To hearten brave Spirits by expelling the Land,
To quit Digby and Deering, whom they cannot understand
To frame not new Laws, but new Words, if well scanned.
The new Order, etc.
To put by brave Doctors, because they are not taught,
To set for Preachers men, very well wrought,
Who all the day fish, but nothing ere caught;
This, Brethren, were good, if not very naught.
The new Order, etc.
To send them their Zealots to Heaven in a string,
Who else to Confusion Religion will bring,
Who say the Lords Prayer is a Popish thing,
Who pray for themselves, but leave out their King.
The new Order of the Land, and the Lands new Order.
A Song.
To the Tune of Cuckolds all a-row.
KNow this my Brethren Heaven is clear,
And all the clouds are gone,
The righteous men shall flourish now
Good days are coming on;
Come then my Brethren and be glad,
And eke rejoice with me,
Lawn sleeves and Roc^ets shall go down,
And hey then up go we.
We Will break the Windows which the Whore
Of Babylon has painted,
And when the Popish Saints are down,
Then Burges shall be Sainted;
There Is neither Cross nor Crucifix
shall stand for men to see,
Romes trash and trumpery shall go down,
And hey then up go we.
What ere the Popish hands have built,
Our Hammers shall undo,
We Will break their Pipes, and burn their Copes,
And pull down Churches too:
We Will exercise within the Groves,
And teach beneath a Tree,
We Will make a Pulpit of a Cask,
And hey then up go we.
We Will down with all the Versities,
Where Learning is professed,
Because they practice and maintain
The language of the Beast;
We Will drive the Doctors out of doors,
And parts what ere they be;
We Will cry all Arts and Learning down
And hey then up go we.
We Will down with Deans and Prebends too,
And I rejoice to tell ye
How that we will eat Pigs our fill,
And Capon by the belly;
We Will burn the Fathers Learned Books,
And make the Schoolmen flee;
We Will down with all that smells of wit,
And hey then up go we.
If once the Antichristian crew
Be crushed and overthrown,
We Will teach the Nobles how to stoop,
And keep the Gentry down:
Good manners have an ill report,
And turns to pride we see,
We Will therefore cry good manners down,
And hey then up go we.
The name of Lords shall be abhorred,
for every man's a Brother,
No reason why in Church and State
One man should rule another.
But when the Change of Government
Shall set our fingers free.
We Will make the wanton Sisters stoop,
And hey then up go we.
What though the King and Parliament
Do not accord together,
We have more cause to be content,
This is our Sunshine weather;
For if that reason should take place,
And they should once agree,
Who would be in a Roundheads case?
And hey then up go we.
What should we do then in this case,
Let Us put it to a venture,
If that we hold out seven years space,
We Will sue out our indenture.
A time may come to make us rue,
And time may set us free,
Except the Gallows claim his due,
And hey then up go we.
The Humble Petition of the House of Commons.
IF Charles thou will but be so kind
To give us leave to take our mind,
Of all thy store.
When we thy Loyal Subjects, find
Thou Have nothing left to give behind,
We Will ask no more:
First, for Religion, it is meet
We make it go upon new feet,
'Twas lame before:
One from Geneva would be sweet,
Let Warwick fetched home with his Fleet,
We Will ask no more.
Let us a Consultation call
Of Honest men, but Roundheads all,
God knows wherefore;
Allow them but a place to baul
Against Bishops Courts Canonical,
We Will ask no more.
Let him be hanged a Surplice wears,
And Tippet on his shoulders bears,
Rags of the Whore;
Secure us from our needless fears,
Let -- and Burton have their ears,
We Will ask no more.
Reform each University,
And in them let no Learning be,
A great Eyesore;
From hence make Romes Arminians flee,
That none may have free will but we,
We Will ask no more.
Lest the Elect should go astray,
Let Cobblers teach you the right way
To Heavens door;
And lest their soles should wear away,
Let them their Sisters underlay,
We Will ask no more.
Next from the Bishops Hierarchy,
Oh the word sounds but scurvily,
Let Us hear't no more;
It never was taught the Apostles by,
Lay Elders may the place supply,
We Will ask no more.
Next, for the State, we think it fit
That Mr. Pym should govern it,
He Is very poor:
The money that is for Ireland writ,
Faith let them have the Devil a bit,
We Will ask no more.
For ordering the Militia,
Let us ordain a new new way,
Never heard before;
Let the Great Council bear the sway,
If you will give us leave you may,
We Will ask no more.
In this we will not be denied,
Because in you we will not confide,
We know wherefore
The Citizens their Plate provide,
Do you but send in yours beside,
We Will ask no more.
Now if that you will make Hull your own,
There Is one thing more we must set down
Forgot before;
Sir John shall then give up the Town,
If you will but resign your Crown,
We Will ask no more.
The Answer to the Petition, etc.
I Charles the King will be so kind,
To give you leave to take your mind,
Of all my store,
When I you Loyal Subjects find,
And you those Members have resigned,
I asked before.
And when Religion's all your cares,
Or London have such heed of theirs,
They had before:
When Warwick from Geneva dares,
Now Printed, bring the Common Prayers,
And read them over.
When all your Consultations tend,
To pay what you have made men lend,
None knows wherefore;
When you no more shall say you will send,
And bring me fairly to mine end,
You Will ask no more.
When your Smectymnuus Surplice wears,
Or Tippet on his shoulders bears,
Rags of the Whore;
When Burton, -- and Bastwick dares,
With your good leaves, but show their Ears,
They Will ask no more.
When what I borrowed I shall see,
You Have paid each Universitie,
Of the City store:
And Doctors, Chaplains, Fellows, be
Free-willers of plurality,
They Will ask no more.
When the elect shall make such have,
By the Brethren to be embraced
In Tubs on floor;
When Cobblers they shall preach their last
At Conventicles on a Fast,
They Will ask no more.
When Bishops all the House adorns,
And Roundheads for their absence mourns,
A great Eyesore;
When every Citizen less scorns
Lord Wentworth's head, then Essex horns,
You Will ask no more.
When you no more shall dare hereafter,
A needless thing which gains much laughter,
Granted before;
When Pym is sent to Ireland slaughter,
And never more hopes to marry my Daughter,
You Will ask no more.
When you have found a clearer way
For ordering the Militia,
Then heard before;
When Atkins on the Training day,
Shall Not dare his Office to bewray,
He Will ask no more.
When naught to me shall be denied,
And you shall all in me confide,
Good cause therefore;
When Denmark shall for me provide,
And now Lord Digby's on my side,
Ask me no more.
Last, when I shall make Hull my own,
This one thing more I must set down,
Forgot before,
When I have got into the Town,
I Will make ten more besides that Clown,
Kneel and implore.
To the five Principal Members of the Honorable House of Commons.
The Humble Petition of the POETS.
AFter so many Concurring Petitions
From all Ages and Sexes, and all conditions,
We come in the Rear to present our Follies
To Pym, Stroude, Haslerig, Hampden and --
And we hope for our labor we shall not be shent,
For this comes from Christendom, and not from Kent;
Though set form of Prayers be an Abomination,
Set forms of Petitions find great Approbation:
Therefore, as others from the bottom of their souls,
So we from the depth and bottom of our Bowls,
According unto the blessed form taught us,
We thank you first for the Ills you have brought us,
For the Good we receive we thank him that gave it,
And you for the Confidence only to crave it.
Next in course, we Complain of the great violation
Of Privilege (like the rest of our Nation)
But it is none of yours of which we have spoken
Which never had being, until they were broken:
But ours is a Privilege Ancient and Native,
Hangs not on Ordinance, or power Legislative.
And first, it is to speak whatever we please
Without fear of a Prison, or Pursuivants fees.
Next, that we only may lie by Authority,
But in that also you have got the Priority.
Next, an old Custom, our Fathers did name it
Po^tical license, and always did claim it.
By this we have power to change Age in Youth,
Turn Nonsense into Sense, and Falsehood to Truth;
In brief, to make good whatsoever is faulty,
This art some Poet, or the Devil has taught ye;
And this our Property you have invaded,
And a Privilege of both Houses have made it:
But that trust above all in Poets reposed,
That Kings by them only are made and Deposed,
This though you cannot do, yet you are willing;
But when we undertake Deposing or Killing,
They Are Tyrants and Monsters, and yet then the Poet
Takes full Revenge on the Villains that do it,
And when we resume a Scepter or a Crown,
We are Modest, and seek not to make it our own.
But is it not presumption to write Verses to you,
Who make the better Poems of the two,
For all those pretty Knacks you do compose,
Alas, what are they but Poems in prose,
And between those and ours there is no difference,
But that yours want the rhyme, the wit and the sense:
But for lying (the most Noble part of a Poet)
You have it abundantly, and your selves know it,
And though you are Modest, and seem to abhor it,
'T has done you good service, and thank He'ven for it:
Although the old Maxim remains still in force,
That a Sanctified Cause, must have a Sanctified Course:
If poverty be a part of our Trade,
So far the whole Kingdom Poets you have made,
Nay even so far as undoing will do it,
You have made King Charles in manner a Poet,
But provoke not his Muse, for all the world knows,
Already you have had too much of his Prose.
The Parliaments Pedigree.
NO Pedigrees nor Projects
Of aftertimes I tell,
Nor what strange things the Parliament
In former times befell,
Nor how an Emperor got a King,
Nor how a King a Prince,
But you shall hear what Progenies
Have been begotten since.
The Devil he a Monster got,
Which was both strong and stout,
This many-headed Monster
Did strait beget a Rout:
This Rout begat a Parliament,
As Charles he well remembers,
The Parliament got Monsters too,
The which begot Five Members.
The Members Five did then beget
Most of the House of Peers,
The Peers mis-understandings got
All Jealousies and Fears;
The Jealousies got Horse and Men,
Lest Wars should have abounded,
And I dare say this Horse got Pym,
And he begot a Roundhead.
The Roundhead got a Citizen,
That great Tax-bearing Mule,
The Mule begot a Parliament Ass,
And he begot a Fool:
Some say the Fool got Warwick,
And Rich gave him his whole Land,
In zeal Lord Rich got God knows who,
And God knows who got H --
This H -- Surplices got down,
And those Church Rites that were,
He has Petitions enough each day,
No need of the Lords Prayer:
But it is no wonder that is cried down,
And that indeed the rather,
Cause Pym and he two Bastards are,
And dare not say, Our Father.
Now since this is the chiefest thing,
Has got this great division,
Which London for to reconcile,
Has got this great Munition:
The City has now been refined,
From all her Dross and Pelf,
They Are now about for to new mold,
And Coin the Commonwealth.
To those who desire no Peace.
SHould all those various Gales, whose titles are layn
Enrol'd within the Pilots Register,
Break from their drowsy Dens, where they have
Bound up in slumbers, and invade the Main,
They could not raise a storm like that which they
Raise in the Commonwealth, who would betray
Our Peace to Civil War, in which the State
Must bleed it self to death, and have the fate,
After its stock of life is spent, to lie
Buried in the Rubbish of an Anarchy.
Should Ravens, Bats, and the shrill Owl conspire
To twist their Notes into a General Quire,
And choose the Mandrake for the Chaunter, they
Could not shrill forth such an ill-boding lay,
Or strains so Jarring, as do those whose throats
Warble the clamorous and untunefull Notes
Of Blood and Death, some whirlwind, Sirs, has taken
Its Lodging up in the Fanatic brain
Of these bold sons of tumult, I dare say
They molded were of some distempered Clay,
Which from its Center was by Earthquake torn,
A Tempest shook the world when they were born;
Sure from its Sphere the Element of Fire
Is dropped, and does their bosoms now inspire,
The flame locked up in bold Ravillacks urne,
Is snatched from thence, and in their hearts does burn.
Night, open thy black womb, and let out all
Thy dreadful furies, yet these furies shall
Not chill my heart with any fear, since day
Has furies shown, blacker by far then they.
Let Vaux now sleep until the day of Doom,
Open his eyes, forgotten in his Tomb,
Let none revile his dust, his Name shall be
Extirpated from every History,
To yield a room for others, for it is fit
Their Names in place of his should now be writ,
Who think that no Religion can be good,
Unlesse't be writ in Characters of Blood,
No marvail if the Rubric then must be
Blotted from out the Sacred Liturgy,
And those red Letters now no more be known,
They Will have no other Rubric but their own.
But shall they thus impetuously roll on,
And meet not any Malediction?
Yes sure, may sleep, that mild and gentle balm,
Which all unkind distempers does becalme,
Be unto them a torture, may their Dreams
Be all of Murders, Rapes, and such like Theams;
And when they are spent, may Wolves approach and howl,
To break their slumbers; may the Bat and Owl,
Before their Gates, to usher in the days
Unwellcome light, stretch out their direful lays;
Amongst their disordered humors, may there be
A deadly Feud, and fatal mutiny;
May sudden flames their houses melt away,
And Fevers burn their houses too of Clay;
May all their faculties and senses be
Astonished by some drousie Lethargy,
That there may be allowed them only sense
Enough to feel the pangs of Conscience,
Griping their souls, that they who thought it sin
To have peace without, may have no peace within
The French Report.
ME have of late been in England
Vere me have seen much sport,
De raising of de Parliament,
Have quite pulled down de Court,
De King and Queen dey separate,
And rule in Ignorance,
Pray judge ye Gentlemen, if dis
Be a la mode de France:
A vise man dear is like a Ship
Dat strikes upon de shelves,
Dey Prison all, Behead and Whip
All viser den demselves,
Dey send out men to fetch deyr King,
Who may come home perchance,
Oh fie, fie, fie, it is be Gar
Not a la mode de France.
Dey raise deyr Valiant Prentices,
To guard deyr Cause with Clubs,
Dey root deyr Bishops out of doors,
And Presh demselves in Tubs,
De Cobbler and de Tinker too,
Dey will in time advance,
Pox take them all, it is ( Mort Dieu)
Not a la mode de France.
Instead of bowing to deyr King,
Dey vex him with Epistles,
Dey furnish all deyr Soldiers out
With Bodkins, Spoons, and Whistles,
Dey bring deyr Gold and Silver in,
De Brownists to advance,
But if dey be cheat of it all,
'Tiz a la mode de France.
But if when all deyr wealth is gone,
Dey turn unto deyr King,
Dey will make all amends again,
Den merrily we will sing,
VIVE LE ROY, VIVE LE ROY,
Vee'le Sing, Carouse and Dance,
De English men have done fort Bon,
And a la mode de France.
A Loyal Subjects Oath.
THis is my Oath, for ever to despise,
With heart and soul and all my Faculties
The Kings proud foes, and with my life subdue
All that to his Sacred Majesty are not true,
To execute his Precepts with my Blood,
So far as Conscience dictates it is good;
To make my body a Bullwark against his foes,
And to maintain his red and whitest Rose,
Venture Life and Living, Sword and Muse,
Still to uphold the Glorious Flower-de-luce:
To be the same to Prince, and Duke of York,
Or for a cursed Jew that eats no Pork,
Let me be Cursed, and receive the Curse
Hangs over Pym, and Hotham, and a worse
I cannot wish, he that denies this Oath,
Let these, and my Curse, light upon them both.
Short and Sweet.
WIse men suffer, good men grieve,
Knaves devise, and Fools believe,
Help, O Lord, send aid unto us,
Else Knaves and Fools will quite undo us.
To the City of London.
TEll me Cittz. what ye lack,
That the Knaves of the Pack
Ye do not see forth coming,
Love ye Treason so well,
That ye neither buy nor sell,
But keep a noise with your Drumming.
What is it that you guard,
With your double watch and ward,
Your own wares, or your wises things,
If down come the Blades,
Then down go the Trades,
They Will not leave a dead or a live thing.
What does your profit say,
When shall we see the day,
That money shall be paid in,
Great Strafford he is dead,
Ye have cut off his bead,
And the Bishops all are laid in.
And yet you grow poor,
As any Common whore,
That has been long a fading;
There Is no man will buy,
Ye may leave to swear and lie,
As ye use to do in your trading.
There Is something Behind
That lies in the wind
And brings you thus to nothing,
What does then remain?
O the Parliament must reign,
And you will have A King and no King.
But though their power can
From a Woman turn a Man,
If they please so to declare him;
Yet let them take heed,
The King is King indeed,
And the Soldiers cannot spare him*
Is It nothing ye think
24. in a Link
Kings that make his succession:
Besides for our Good,
Three Princes of the Brood,
And three Kingdoms in Possession.
And all his Virtues too
Should be something to you,
If they could ought amend you;
But 'cause He Is Chaste and Just,
You Would have Cruelty and Lust,
Another King Harry God send you.
But if you mean to thrive,
And keep your trades alive,
And bring to your City treasure,
Give the King his full Rate,
As well as to the State,
And let Him have London measure.
The Players Petition to the Parliament.
Heroic Sirs, you glorious nine or ten,
That can depose the King, and the Kings men,
Who by your Sublime Rhetoric agree,
That prisons are the Subjects liberty:
And though we sent in silver at great rates,
You plunder, to secure us our Estates.
Your serious subtilty is grown so grave,
We dare not tell you how much power you have,
At least you dare not hear us; how you frown
If we but say, King Pym wears Charles his Crown,
Such a word's Treason, and you dare not hear it,
Treason to speak it, and yet not to wear it.
O wise mysterious Synod, what shall we
Do for such men as you e're forty three
Be half expired, and an unlucky season
Shall set a period to Triennial Treason,
When the fields pitched, and some, for all their skill,
Shall fight a Bloody Battle on Tower Hill;
Where Master Pym, your wise judicious Scholar,
Ascends his Throne, and takes his Crown in Collar;
When Canterbury coming forth shall wonder
You have so long secured him from the Thunder
Of King-hunting Prentices, and the Mayor
Shall jussel zealous Isaac from his Chair.
Foreseeing Brooks, thou drewst a happy lot,
'Twas a wise Bolt, although 'twas quickly shot;
But whilst you live, our loud Petition craves,
That we the true Subjects, and the true Slaves,
May in our Comic mirth and Tragic rage,
Set up the Theater, and show the Stage,
The shop of truth and fancy, and we Vow
Not to Act any thing you disallow:
We will not dare at your strange Votes to Jea^,
Not personate King Pym with his State-flear;
Aspiring Cataline shall be forgot,
Bloody Se^anus, or who e're would Plot
Confusion to a State; the Wars betwixt
The Parliament, and just Henry the sixth,
Shall have no thought or mention, cause their power,
Not only placed, but left him in the Tower;
No^ yet the Grave advice of learned Pym,
Make a Malignant, and then Plunder him.
All these and such like actions as may man
Your soaring Plots, and show you what you are,
We will omit, lest that your mention shake 'um,
Why should the men be wiser then you make 'um.
Methinks there should not such a difference be
'Twixt our profession and your quality,
You meet, plot, talk, consult, with minds immense,
The like with us, but only we speak sense
Inferior unto you; we can tell how
To depose Kings, there we are more then you,
Although not more then what you would; the^ we
Likewise in our vast Privilege agree,
Only yours are the longer; and controules,
Not only Lives and fortunes, but men's Souls;
For you declare by Aenigmatick sense,
A Privilege over men's Conscience,
As if the Trinity would not consent
To save a Soul without the Parliament.
We make the People laugh at some vain show,
And as they laugh at us, they do at you;
But then in the Contrary we disagree,
For you can make them cry faster then we:
Your Tragedies more really are expressed,
You murder men in Earnest, we in Jest.
There we come short: But if you follow't thus,
Some wise men fear you will come short of us.
Now humbly, as we did begin, We pray,
Dear Schoolmasters, you would give us leave to play
Quickly before the King come, for we would
Be glad to say you have done a little good
Since you have sat, your Play is almost done,
As well as ours, would it had never begun;
For we shall see e're the last Act be spent,
Enter the King, Exeunt the Parliament.
And hey then up go we, who by the frown
Of guilty Consciences have been kept down:
So may you still remain, and sit and Vote,
And through your own beam see your brothers mote,
Until a legal trial do show how
You used the King* and hey then up go you:
So pray your humble Slaves with all their powers,
That they may have their due, and you have yours.
A Madrigall on Justice, alluding to the PARLIAMENT.
JUstice is here made up of Might,
With two left hands, but never a right,
And men that are well-sighted, find
This Justice sits with both eyes blind:
Yet though the Matron cannot see,
She holds that edged Sword, Cruelty,
Which that it may not rust, she whets
In cutting off the Islands Teats,
Who long since did Anathemize
Englands too too much seeing eyes,
Because they have been found to be
Guilty of Wit and Piety:
All this and more they rudely vent,
By Privilege of Parliament.
All former Laws fall headlong down,
And are themselves now lawless grown;
Equity has been lately tried,
And Right it self been rectin'd;
The rules that show a Christian how
To live, must all be ruled now;
The Lesson here to learn, is brought,
And Ethics better manners taught;
Religion, and the Churches wealth,
Of late deprived of their health,
Were brought to the House, that they might be
Cured of their Integrity;
We found a seam for this great rent,
By Privilege of Parliament.
Most men do now the Buttocks lick
Of their great body Politic;
For not the head, but breech, is it
By which the Kingdom now does sit;
The world is changed, and we have Choyces,
Not by most Reasons, but most Voices,
The Lion's trod on by the Mouse,
The lower is the upper House:
As once from Chaos order came,
So do their orders Chaos frame,
And smoothly work the Lands delusion,
By a Methodical Confusion;
These are the things that lately went
By Privilege of Parliament.
They would not have the kingdom fall
By an Ignoble Funeral;
But piously prefer the Nation
To a renowned Decollation,
The feet, and lower parts, it is sed,
Would trample on, and off the head,
What ere they say, this is the thing,
They love the Charles, but hate the King;
To make an even Grove, one stroke
Should lift the Shrubb unto the Oak;
Anew-found music they would make,
A Gamut, but no Ela take.
This is the pious good intent
Of Privilege of Parliament.
In all humility they crave
Their Sovereign, to be their Slave;
Desiring him, that he would be
Betrayed to them most loyally:
For it were Meekness sure in him
To be a Viceroy unto Pym;
And if he would a while lay down
His Scepter, Majesty, and Crown,
He should be made for time to come
The greatest Prince in Christendom.
Charles at this time not having need,
Thanked them as much as if he did.
This is the happy wished event
Of Privilege of Parliament.
Pym, that adored Publicola,
Who played the base --
Who got a Lust to sacrifice
The Heroe^ to the Peoples Eyes,
Whose back-from-Hell-fetch'd-knaverie
By some is nick-nam'd policy,
Would be a Lion with a pox,
When at the best he is but a Fox;
And just like him that set on fire
The hallowed Ephesian Spire,
Has purchased to be largely known,
In that he is an Addage grown:
All this to honest John is lent,
By Privilege of Parliament.
The Valiant House was not afeard,
To pull our Aaron by the Beard;
To hide dark deeds from Gazers sights,
Strove to blow out the Churches Lights,
That squares might run round as their head,
They long to have the Rochet sped:
They Vote down Universities,
Lest men from thence become too wise,
And their benighted deeds display,
Whose works of darkness hate the day;
Hence they prefer in every Town,
The Petticoat before the Gown;
These blessings to the Land are sent
By Privilege of Parliament.
They put forth Orders, Declarations,
Unacted Laws, and Protestations,
O^ which all can be said, is this,
The whole is one Parenthesis,
Because the sense (without all doubt)
Were never the less, were all left out.
Petitions none must be presented,
But what are by themselves invented,
Else they not heal, but Cicatrize,
And from the cure a Scar does rise,
Though Holy Cut, the fault commit,
Yet ^ong tail must be paid for it;
Unto this wound was laid a Tent,
By Privilege of Parliament.
They paid the Scottish debt, and thus,
To be more honest, they robbed us;
They feed the poor, with what think ye,
Why sure with large Calamity,
And once a month they think it fitting
To fast from sin, because from sitting,
They would have wind and storms suppressed,
To drive the Hallcyon from her Nest:
Charles is a Picture, they make bold
To use the Scepter he should hold:
They Would pull down one, but give as good
A Golden Crown, made up of Wood,
And thus is Justice justly rent,
By Privilege of Parliament.
The Call.
Hoe Yes,
IF there be any Traitor, Viper, or Wigeon,
That will fight against God for the true Religion,
That to maintain the Parliaments Votes,
Of all true Subjects will cut the throats,
That for the King and his Countries good,
Will consume all the Land with Fire and Blood.
I say,
If any such Traitor, Viper, Mutineer, be born,
Let him repair to the Lord with the double gilt Horn.
Englands Woe.
I Mean to speak of Englands sad fate,
To help in mean time the King, and his Mate,
That Is ruled by an Antipodian State,
Which no body can deny.
But had these seditious times been when
We had the life of wise Poet Ben,
Parsons had never been Parliament men,
Which no body can deny.
Had Statesmen read the Bible throughout,
And not gone by the Bible so round about,
They would have ruled themselves without doubt,
Which no body can deny.
But Puritans now bear all the sway,
They Will have no Bishops as most men say,
But God send them better another day,
Which no body can deny.
Zealous P -- has threatened a great downfall,
To cut off long locks that is bushy and small,
But I hope he will not take ears and all,
Which no body can deny.
P -- Burton, says women that is lewd and loose,
Shall wear no stallion locks for a bush,
They Will only have private boys for their use,
Which no body can deny.
They Will not allow what pride it brings,
Nor favors in hats, nor no such things,
They Will convert all ribbands to Bible strings,
Which no body can deny.
God bless our King and Parliament,
And send he may make such K -- repent,
That breed our Land such discontent,
Which no body can deny.
And bless our Queen and Prince also,
And all true Subjects both high and low,
The Brownings can pray for themselves you know,
Which no body can deny.
Upon Ambition.
Occasioned by the Accusation of the Earl of STRAFFORD, in the year 1640.
HOw uncertain is the State
Of that greatness we adore,
When Ambitiously we sore,
And have taken the glorious height,
It Is but Ruin gilded over,
To enslave us to our fate,
Whose false Delight is easier got, then kept,
Content never on its gaudy Pillow slept.
Then how fondly do we try,
With such superstitious care,
To build Fabrics in the Air?
Or seek safety in that sky,
Where no Stars but Meteors are,
That portend a ruin nigh?
And having reached the object of our aim,
We find it but a Pyramid of flame.
The Argument.
WHen the unfettered Subjects of the Seas,
The Rivers, found their silver feet at ease,
No sooner summoned, but they swi^tly went
To meet the Ocean, at a Parliament:
Did not the petty Fountains say their King,
The Ocean, was no Ocean, but a Spring?
As now some do the Power of Kings dispute,
And think it less, 'cause more is added to it.
Pale Ignorance, can the excess of store
Make him seem poorer then he was before?
The Stars, the Heavens, inferior Courtiers, may
Govern Nights Darkness, but not rule the Day;
Where the Sun Lords it, should they all Combine
With Lucia in her brightest dress, to shine,
Their light's but faint: Nor can he be subdued,
Although but one, and they a Multitude.
Say Subjects, are you Stars? be it allowed,
You justly of your numbers may be proud,
But to the Sun inferior; for know this,
Your Light is borrowed, not your Own, but His:
And as all streams into the Ocean run*
You ought to pay your Contribution;
Then do not such Ingratitude oppress,
To make him low, that could have made you less
The Character of a Roundhead. 1641.
WHat Creature's this with his short hairs,
His little band and huge long ears,
That this new faith has founded,
The Puritans were never such,
The Sanits themselves, had never so much,
Oh, such a knave's a Rounded.
What Is he that does the Bishops hate,
And count their Calling reprobate,
Cause by the Pope propounded,
And says a zealous Cobler's better,
Then he that studieth every letter,
Oh, such a knave's a Roundhead.
What Is he that does high Treason say,
As often as his yea and nay,
And wish the King confounded,
And dare maintain that Master Pym,
Is fitter for the Crown then him,
Oh, such a rogue's a Roundhead.
What Is he that if he chance to hear,
A piece of London's Common Prayer,
Does think his Conscience wounded.
And goes five miles to preach and pray,
And lies with his Sister by the way,
Oh, such a rogue's a Roundhead.
What Is he that met a holy Sister,
And in an Hay-cock gently kissed her,
Oh! then his zeal abounded,
Close underneath a shady willow,
Her Bible served her for her pillow,
And there they got a Roundhead.
A Curtain Lecture.
The Tune, Cannot keep her Lips together.
WILL you please to hear a Song,
Though it want both rhyme and reason,
It was pend to do no wrong,
But for description at this season,
Of he or she what ere they be,
That wish Church-orders quite confounded,
Yet makes a show, where e're they go,
Of Fervent zeal: I mean a Roundhead.
First he will have a smoothing tongue,
Next he will learn for to dissemble,
And when he hears of wilful wrong,
He Will sigh and look as he would tremble,
The next of all then let him fall,
To praise men's hearts in secret bravery,
A speaking still against all ill,
That is the Cloak to hide their Knavery.
Let Charity be used much,
In words at length and not in action,
It is the Common use of such,
Not to do, but give direction,
They Will be loath to swear an Oath,
By yea and nay, you may believe them,
But for their gains, they will take pains,
To cheat and ly, and never grieve them.
The Common Prayer they like it not,
For they are wise and can make better,
And such a Teacher they have got,
Confutes it all in word and letter;
For he can rail men's hearts to quail
With deep damnation for their sinnning,
But to amend they never intend,
And to transgress they are now beginning.
But here is a very worthy man,
That undertakes more than he is able,
That in a Tub sometimes will stand,
In Hey-barn, Sheep-house, or a Stable,
That all the Rout that comes about
To hear his Doctrines, Saints he calls them,
They vow and swear they nere did hear
Such worthy things as he has told them.
They will not hear of Wedding Rings
For to be used in their Marriage,
But say they are Superstitious things,
And does Religion much disp^rage,
They are but vain, and things profane,
Wherefore now no Wit be-speaks them
So to be tied unto the Bride,
But do it as the Spirit moves them.
No Paternoster nor no Creed
In their Petitions never mention,
And hold there is nothing good indeed
But what is done by their pretention,
Prayers that are old in vain they hold,
And can with God no favor merit,
Therefore they will nothing say,
But as they are moved by the Spirit.
The wisest Schools they count but Fools,
Which do no more than they have taught them
For Brownists they can preach and pray
With Wits their Fathers never bought them;
Then I perceive that wit they have
They gather it by Inspiration,
No Books they need to learn to read,
If all be true of their relation.
Only the Horn-book I would have
Them practice at their beginning,
That you the better may perceive
The Fruits that comes by fleshly sinning.
Nevertheless I would express
All other Books that now are used,
Least that the Ghost that lea^s you most
By too much Art to be abufed.
Their Hair close to their Heads they crop
And yet not only for the fashion,
But that the Ear it should not stop
From hearing of some rare Relation;
Therefore his Ears he will prepare
To hearken to an Holy Brother.
That in regard he may be heard
From one side of the Barn to the other.
They count their Fathers were but Fools,
Which formerly became such Debtors,
To spend their Means upon the Schools,
To teach their Sons a few fond Letters,
The Christ Crosse-row's enough to know,
For it is the Horn that must exalt 'em,
Their General Vows his Antler'd Brows
Shall gore the Proudest dare assault 'em*
At the last when they must part,
Male and Female go together
Joynd in hand, and joined in heart,
And joined a little for their pleasure.
First for a Kiss they will agree,
And what comes next you may conjecture,
So that the Wicked do not see,
And so break up the Roundheads Lecture.
A Mad World My Masters.
WE have a King and yet no King,
For he has lost his Power,
For against his Will his Subjects are
Imprisoned in the Tower.
We had some Laws (but now no Laws)
By which he held his Crown,
And we had Estates and Liberties
But now they they are voted down.
We had Religion; but of late
That Is beaten down with Clubs,
Whilst that Profaneness Authorized
Is belched forth in Tubs.
We were free Subjects born, but now
We are by force made Slaves,
By some whom we did count our Friends,
But in the end proved Knaves.
And now to such a grievous height
Are our Misfortunes grown,
That our Estates are took away
By tricks before never known.
For there are Agents sent abroad
Most humbly for to crave
Our Alms: but if they are denied,
And of us nothing have.
Then by a Vote ex tempore
We are to Prison sent,
Marked with the Name of Enemy
Of King and Parliament.
And during our Imprisonment,
Their lawless Bulls do thunder
A License to their Soldiers
Our Houses for to plunder.
And if their Hounds do chance to smell
A man whose Fortunes are
Of some Account, whose Purse is full,
Which now is somewhat rare.
A Monster now Delinquent termed,
He is declared to be,
And that his Lands as well as Goods
Sequestered ought to be.
And as if our Prisons were too good,
He is to Yarmouth sent
By virtue of a Warrant from
The King and Parliament.
Thus is our Royal Sovereigns name
And eke his Power infused,
And by the virtue of the same
He and all His abused.
For by this Means his Castles now
Are in the power of those
Who treacherously with Might and Maine
Do strive him to depose.
Arise therefore brave British men,
Fight for your King and State,
Against those Traiterous men that strive
This Realm to Ruinate.
It Is Pym, it is Pym, and his Colleagues,
That did our woe engender,
Naught but their Lives can end our Woes,
And us in safety render.
The Riddle.
S-Hall's have a Game at Put, to pass away the time,
X-pect no foul-play; though I do play the Knave
I- have a King at hand, yea that I have:
C- Cards be ye true, then the Game is mine.
R-ejoyce my Heart, to see thee then repine.
A- that is lost, that is Cuckolds luck.
T-rey comes like Quater, to pull down the Buck.
An Answer to a Love-Elegy (written from I. P. one of the Five Members, to his
Delightful Friend) in Latin.
WHat Latin Sir? why there is no man
That e're thought you an English-Roman.
Your Father Horse could teach you none,
Nor was it e're your Mother tongue,
Your Education too assures
Me, that your Poem is not yours:
Besides, I thought you did detest
The Language of the Latin Beast,
But now your Impudence I see
Did hereby show its Modesty;
Each syllable would blush you thought,
If it had bin plain English taught,
And that your foul debauched stuff
Might do its Errand fast enough,
Forsooth your Wisdom thought it meet
That Words might run to give 'em feet,
Pardon me, Sir, I Am none of those
That love Love-verse, give me your Prose,
I wish each Verse to make delay,
Had turned lame Scazon by the way,
I read a Hell in every line
Of your Polluted Fescennine;
Your Verses stunk; to keep 'em sweet
You should have put Socks on their Feet.
And that the Answer which I shall
Now write, may be Methodicall,
I Will briefly make ('it is not amiss)
An Anacephalaeosis.
And first I looked for Nestor; when
Mere Cupid trickl'd from your Pen,
Who was your Father, you make proof
By your Colt's tooth, though not your hoof,
She that was great with you, you hold
Did not lie in, but was with fole'd.
I wonder one so old, so grave
Should yet such Youth, such Lightness have;
Of the Five Members you alone
Shall be esteemed the Privy One,
Who (like the Gnostics) preach your Text,
Increase and Multiply, and next
Convincing Doctrines you deduce,
Put out the Lights, and make Use.
You say I am a Maid exceeding
Apt to be taught by you good breeding.
But where there is breeding, it is said
There Is none, unless a broken Maid
Turn Papist, ( Stallion) they will dispense
With Whoredom, by an Indulgence,
Turn Friar, that thou may be free
At once with a whole Nunnery,
There 'twill be virtue to ride on
The Purple Whore of Babylon.
Thou may as soon turn Turk, as King,
And that, O that is the tempting thing
That thou may glut thy Appetite
With a Seraglio of Delight.
I am no Proserpine, that thus
I should desire an Incubus:
But you must vote (if Me you will win)
No Fornication to be Sin,
You say the House takes it not well
The King against Rebels should Rebel;
And that is the reason why you stand
To be Dictator of the Land,
Which moved me to a mighty toil
Of getting Vardygrease and Oil.
'Cause such Itch-Med'cine is a thing
That Is fittest to anoint you King.
You say youl'd undertake and do
Wonders, would I undergo you,
For my sake you would Cobbler play,
Your Trade should be to underlay,
For Me you would your chiefest blood,
Pray spend it on the Sisterhood,
You wish to dye in those great Fights
Of Venus, where each Wound delights,
And should I once to Heaven take wing,
Youl'd follow me, though in a string;
Thank you (good Sir) it is our Will
You your last Promise do fulfill;
There Is nothing spoke that pleases us
Like your ( In funes Cedulus)
Next come those idle Twittle-twats,
Which calls me many God-knows-whats,
As hallowed, beautiful, and fair,
Supple and kind, and Debonaire.
You talk of Women that did woo,
When I am mad I Will do so too;
Then that my Father may not spy
The coupling of you and I,
He shall be guiltlesly detected,
As a true Subject ill-affected,
And so the Protestant shall lie
In Goal for fear of Popery.
(From hence it is that every Town,
Almost is now a Prison grown,
Where Loyalty lies fettered, then
You do commit more sins then men.)
But those your words I have thought best,
Should punished be by being pressed;
And that this Body Politic
May then be well, which now lies sick,
May the Greek P, that fatal Tree,
This Spring bear all such fruit as thee.
The Penitent Traitor. The Humble Petition of a Devonshire Gentleman who was
Condemned for TREASON, and Executed for the same, An. 1641.
To the Tune of Fortune my Foe, etc.
ATtend good Christian People to my story,
A sadder yet was never brought before ye;
Let each man learn here like a good Disciple,
To shun foul Treason, and the tree that is Triple.
Long time I lived in the Country next to Cornwall,
And there my Children were both breed and born all,
Great was my Credit, as my debts did speak,
And now I Will show you why my neck must break.
There being a Parliament called in September,
I was for the Commons an Elected Member,
And though there were besides above four hundred
Yet I at last was for the fifth part numbered.
For first, I joined with some whom Piety
Made Knaves, lest such their Fathers proved should be;
Their Ignorance to sin enjoined many Voices,
Which made bad Speeches, but Excellent Noyses.
Thus by my faction the whole House was swayed,
All sorts of people flockt to me for Aid;
They brought me Gold and Plate in Huggar Muggar,
Besides eight hundred pounds worth in Loaf-sugar.
What e're the Grievance was, I did advise
They should Petitions bring in Humble wise,
Which I did frame my self, and thus did rook them,
They paid me when I gave, and when I took them.
By this I gained, and by the Money-Pole,
Which paid my debts, 10000 pounds in the whole,
My Childrens Portions too, with much content,
I paid in State, by Acts of Parliament.
Thus though I make all Jesuits fly the Nation,
My self did practice much Equivocation,
For often I Vowed the Commonwealth as honey
Was sweet to me, but I, by wealth, meant money.
And lest my Plots should after be unmasked,
And how I got such Wealth, chance to be asked,
I cast about how I might gain such power,
As might from Justice safely me secure.
Then first I labored to divest the Crown,
Of all Prerogatives, and bring them down;
First, to both Houses, and then but one should have them,
Five Members next, and last my self would have them
Because I knew the State would not admit
Such Change, unless the Church did Usher it,
I left the old Religion for advantage,
Endeavoring to set up one that did want age.
Which when all Learned Levites did withstand,
(Regarding Gods Word more then my command)
I such suppressed, and made (for which I woe am)
The basest people Priests, like Jeroboam.
Then each profession sent out Teachers, more
Then both the Universities could do,
To handle a Text the Good-wifes fingers itches,
And vows she will preach with her Husband for the Breeches.
By this new Godly lives but few did gain,
The rest for want of Trading they complain,
I told them 'twas a wicked Counselors plot,
And till his head went off, their wares would not:
This Great man's guilt was Loyalty and Wisdom,
Which made me cast about to work his Doom;
The Sword of Justice was too short to do it,
2000. Clubs must therefore jerk it out.
He being knocked down, some others for the like Crime,
Were sent to Prison, some escapt in time;
Thus Law and Equity in awe was kept here,
And Clubs were taught how to control the Scepter,
We took from the Upper-house Votes five times five,
And they aimed all the Kings Voice Negative,
Which to effect we did an Order make,
That what he would not give, our selves would take.
Then we petitioned that the Forts and Towers,
And all the strength o'th Kingdom might be ours,
And thus to save the King from Sovereign dangers,
As if he had better Fall by Us than Strangers.
Whilst he denies they Legally are stayed on
By a ^aw called, Resolved upon the Question,
But still his Chief strength was above our Arts,
His righteous Cause, and loyal Subjects hearts.
Being Armed with these, by Heaven he was so blessed,
That he soon honor Got, and all the rest,
Bringing all such to punishment endignant,
As were of my Contrived part, Malignant.
O Tyburn, Tyburn; O thou sad Tryangle,
A vyler weight on thee never yet did dangle,
See here I am at last with Hemp to mew,
To give thee what was long before thy due.
How could I bless thee, could thee take away
My Life and Infamy both in one day;
But this in Ballads will survive I know,
Sung to that preaching tune, Fortune my Foe.
Then mark good Christian people, and take heed,
Use not Religion for an upper weed,
Serve God sincerely, touch not his Anointed,
And then your Necks shall never be disjoynted.
God bless the King, the Queen, and all the Children,
(And pardon me all, that I against them have ill done)
May one of that brave Race still rule this Nation,
And now I pray you sing the Lamentation.
The Passage of a Coach traveling to Dover.
THe Foundation of the Coach, a Guilty Conscience.
The Axeltree, Ambition and Cruelty.
The Wheels, Fears and Jealousies.
The Reins, too much liberty and licentiousness.
The six Horses, five Members and K --
The Postillion, Captain Venne.
The Coachman, Isaac Pennington Lord Mayor:
In the two ends of the Coach sat Essex and B -- In the Boots sat Say and
Seal, and the silent Speaker. On the hinder part of the Coach was written this
Anagram.

Robert Devereux General. Never duller Ox greater Rebel.
After the Coach follows Straffords Ghost, crying, Drive on, drive on, Revenge,
revenge.

As this Coach was going through the City it was staid by a Court of Guard, who
cried, Where Is our Money? where is our Plate? the Speaker said, Ye have the
Public Faith for it. Whereupon they passed toward Gravesend, where they stayed
at the Sign of the Hope, where was the Earl of Warwick, with a Ship called the
Carry-Knave.



The Five Members Thanks to the Parliament.
NOw tend your ear a while
To a tale that I shall tell,
Of a lusty lively Parliament
That goes on passing well.
Which makes our Gracious King, a King
Of so much worth and glory,
His like is not to be seen or found
In any Humane Story.
Win him who knows how many Crowns,
With loss of two or three,
Within so short a time as this,
As Wonder is to see,
The Country eased, the City pleased,
O what a World is this!
When upright men did stand at Helm,
How can we fail or miss?
And yet beyond all this, the King
Does in abundance swim,
Gramercy K -- and Stroud say I,
Haslerigge, H -- Hampden, Pym.
And when as our Church Government
Was fallen into Disorders,
As that upon Gross Popery
It seemed somewhat to border.
So sweet a Course is taken now,
As no man need to fear,
For Bishops learned, and Learned men
Have nothing to do here:
But every one shall teach and preach,
As best beseems his Sense:
And so we'll banish Popery,
And send it packing hence:
Now for that happy Church and State,
Dressed up so fine and trym:
Gramercy K -- and Stroud say I,
Haslerigg, H -- Hampden, Pym.
For Arbitrary Government,
Star Chamber, High Commission,
They will themselves do all that Work,
By their good Kings permission.
If any else presume to do it,
They weigh it not a straw:
They Will club such saucy Fellows down,
As Beasts debarred of Law.
And let no Wights henceforth presume
To hold it Rhyme or Reason,
That Judges shall determine what
Is Felony or Treason:
But what the Worthies say is so,
Is Treason to award,
Albeit in Council only spoke,
And at the Councel-board.
I Will show you yet another thing,
Which you will rejoice to see,
The Prince and People know that these
Men cannot Traitors be.
Then let our King, our Church and State
Acknowledge as is due,
The Benefits they do receive
From this right Divine crew.
And for this Sea of Liberty,
Wherein we yet do swim,
Gramercy K -- and Stroud say I,
Haslerigg, H -- Hampden, Pym.
Upon the Parliament Fart.
DOwn came Grave Ancient Sir John Crook,
And read his Message in a Book;
Very well quoth Will. Norris, it is so,
But Mr. Pym's Tail cried No.
Fie quoth Alderman Atkins I like not this passage,
To have a Fart inter voluntary in the midst of a Message.
Then upstarts one fuller of Devotion
Than Eloquence, and said, a very ill Motion.
Not so neither quoth Sir Henry Jenking,
The Motion was good but for the stinking.
Quoth Sir Henry Poole 'twas an audacious trick
To fart in the face of the Body Politic.
Sir Jerome in Folio swore by the Mass
This Fart was enough to have blown a Glass:
Quoth then Sir Jerome the Lesser, such an Abuse
Was never offered in Poland nor Pruce.
Quoth Sir Richard Houghton, a Justice in the Quorum
Would take it in snuff to have a Fart let before him.
If it would bear an Action quoth Sir Thomas Holecraft
I would make of this Fart a Bolt or a Shaft.
Then quoth. Sir John Moor to his great Commendation
I will speak to this House in my wonted fashion.
Now surely says he, For as much as, How be it,
This Fart to the Sergeant we must commit.
No quoth the Sergeant, low bending his Knees,
Farts often will break Prisons, but never pay Fees.
Besides, this Motion with small reason stands,
To charge me with that I cannot keep in my hands.
Quoth Sir Walter Cope 'twas so readily let,
I would it were sweet enough for my Cabinet.
Why then Sir Walter (quoth Sir William Fleetwood)
Speak no more of it, but bury it with Sweetwood;
Grave Senate, quoth Duncombe, upon my salvation,
This Fart stands in need of some great Reformation;
Quoth Mr. Cartwright, upon my Conscience
It would be reformed with a little Frankencense;
Quoth Sir Roger Aston it would much mend the matter,
If this Fart were shaven, and washed in Rosewater;
Per verbum Principis, how dare I tell it,
A Fart by hearsay, and not see it, nor smell it.
I am glad quoth. Sam: Lewknor we have found a thing,
That no Talebearer can carry it the King,
Such a Fart as this was never seen
Quoth the learned Council of the Queen,
Yes quoth Sir Hugh Breston the like has been
Let in a dance before the Queen,
Then said Mr. Peak I have a President in store
His Father Farted last Sessions before,
A Bill must be drawn then, quoth Sir John Bennet,
Or a selected Committee quickly to pen it,
Why quoth Dr. Crompton no man can draw
This Fart within Compass of the Civil-Law,
Quoth Mr. Jones by the Law't may be done
Being a Fart intayld from Father to Son,
In truth quoth Mr. Brook, this Speech was no lie
This Fart was one of your Post-Nati
Quoth Sir William Paddy a dare-assuram
Though twere contra modestum: it is not prater naturam,
Besides by the Aphorisms of my art
Had he not been delivered, h'ad been sick of a Fart;
Then quoth the Recorder, the mouth of the City,
To have smothered that Fart had been great pity,
It is much certain quoth Sir Humphrey Bentwizle,
That a Round-fart is better then a stinking fiezle:
Have patience Gentlemen, quoth Sir Francis Bacon
There Is none of us all but may be mistaken;
Why right, quoth the great Attorney I confess,
The Echo of ones -- is remediless.
The old Earl of Bristol's Verses on an Accommodation.
THe Parliament cries Arm, the King says No,
The New Lieutenants cry Come on, let us go;
The Citizens and Roundheads cries So, so;
The People all amazed cries Where Is the Foe;
The Scots that stand behind the Door cries Boe,
Peace, Stay awhile and you shall know:
The King stands still faster than they can go.
If that the King by force of Arms prevail,
He is invited to a Tyranny;
If that by power of Parliament he fail,
We heap continual War on our Posterity.
Then he that is not for Accommodation,
Loves neither God, nor Church, nor King, nor Nation.
The Rump's Hypocricy
WE fasted first, then prayed that War might cease,
When Praying would not serve, we paid for Peace;
And glad we had it so, and gave God thanks,
Which made the Irish play the Scottish Pranks.
Is there no God? let us put it to a Vote;
Is there no Church? some Fools say so by rote;
Is there no King, but Pym, for to assent
What shall be done by Act of Parliament?
No God, no Church, no King, then all were well,
If they could but Enact there were no Hell.
The Parliaments Hymns.
O Lord preserve the Parliament,
And send them long to reign,
From three years end, to three years end,
And so to three again.
Let neither King nor Bishops, Lord,
Whilst they shall be alive,
Have power to rebuke thy Saints,
Nor hurt the Members five.
For they be good and godly men,
No sinful path they tread;
They now are putting Bishops down,
And setting up Roundhead.
From Holdsworth, Bromrigge, and old Shute,
Those able learned Scholars,
Good Lord deliver us with speed,
And all our zealous Followers.
From Fielding and from Vavasour,
Both ill affected men;
From Lunsford eke deliver us,
That eats up Children.
Thy holy Burton, Bastwick, --
Lord keep them in thy Bosom;
Eke him that has kept out the King,
Worshipful Sir John Hotham.
Put down the King and Hartford, Lord,
And keep them down for aye;
Thy chosen Pym set up on high,
And eke the good Lord Say.
For Warwick we beseech thee Lord,
Be thou his strong defense,
Holland, Brooks, and S -- shield,
And eke his Oxcellence.
For B -- and K -- to
That are both wise and stout,
Who have rebuked the King of late,
And his ungodly Rout.
Once more we pray for Parliament,
That they may sit secure,
And may their Consultations,
From Age to Age endure.
Let all the Godly say Amen,
And let them Praises sing
To God and to the Parliament,
And all that hate the King.
The Roundheads Race.
I Will not say for the Worlds store,
The World's now drunk, (for did I)
The Faction which now reigns would roar,
But I will swear it is giddy.
And all are prone to this same Fit,
That it their Object make,
For every thing runs Round in it,
And no form else will take.
To the Round-Nose Peculiar is
The Ruby and the Rose;
The Round-lip gets away the Kiss,
And that by Favor goes.
The Round-beard for Talk of State,
Carry it at the Club;
The Round-Robin by a like fate
Is Victor in the Tubb.
Hanworths Round-block speak policy,
The Round-hose Riches draw.
The Roundheads for the Gospel be
The Round Copes for the Law.
Tom his Round Garb so rules all over,
The pox take him for me
That e're looks for square dealing more,
And hears an health to thee.
On the Queens Departure.
UP, up wronged Charles his friends, what can you be
Thus Mantled In a stupid Lethargy,
When all the world's in Arms? and can there be
Armies of Fears abroad and none with thee?
Breath out your souls in sighs, melt into tears,
And let your griefs be equal to your fears;
The Sphaeres are all a jarring, and their jarres
Seems counter-like to Calculate the Stars;
The Inferior Orbs aspire, and do disdain
To move at all, unless they may attain
The highest Room, our Occedentall Sun
Eclipsed by Stars, forsakes his Horizon,
Bright Cinthia too (they say) has hid her face
As 'twere Impatient of her Sol's disgrace;
And our fears tell us, that unless the Sun
Lend us his beams again, the World will run
Into another Chaos, where will be
Naught but the cursed Fruits of Anarchie;
Sedition, Murder, Rapine, and what is worse
None to Implore for Aid; Oh, here is the Curse,
But stay ye Stars, what will ye wish to be?
More Sunns then one will prove a Prodigy:
To afright the Amazed World, will ye be-night
That glorious Lamp, that Fountain of all light,
Will none but Sol's own Chair, please your desire?
Take heed bold Stars you will set the world on fire.
Pyms Anarchy.
ASk me no more, why there appears
Daily such troops of Dragooners?
Since it is requisite, you know;
They rob cum privilegio.
Ask me no more, why the Jail confines
Our Hierarchy of best divines?
Since some in Parliament agree
It Is for the Subjects Liberty.
Ask me no more, why from Blackwall
Great tumults come into Whitehall?
Since it is allowed, by free consent,
The Privilege of Parliament.
Ask me not, why to London comes
So many Muskets, Pikes and Drums?
Although you fear they will never cease;
It Is to protect the Kingdoms peace.
Ask me no more, why little Finch
From Parliament began to winch?
Since such as dare to hawk at Kings
Can easy clip a Finches wings.
Ask me no more, why Strafford's dead,
And why they aimed so at his head?
Faith, all the reason I can give,
It Is thought he was too wise to live.
Ask me no more, where is all the Plate,
Brought in at such an easy rate?
They will it back to the Owners bring
In case it fall not to the King.
Ask me not why the House delights
Not in our two wise Kentish Knights?
There Counsel never was thought good,
Because it was not understood.
Ask me no more, why Lesley goes
To seize all rich men as his foes?
Whilst Country Farmers sigh and sob,
Yeomen may beg when Kings do rob.
Ask me no more, by what strange sight
Londons Lord Mayor was made a Knight?
Since there is a strength, not very far,
Has as much power to make as mar.
Ask me no more, why in this Age
I fing so sharp without a Cage?
My answer is, I need not fear
Since England does the burden bear.
Ask me no more, for I grow dull,
Why Hotham kept the Town of Hull?
This answer I in brief do sing,
All things were thus when Pym was K --
To my Lord B. of S. he being at York.
My Lord,
WHen you were last at London 'twas our fear,
Lest the same Rout which threatened Majesty,
Might strike at you: it is but the same Career
To aim at Crowns, and at the Miter fly.
For still the Scepter and the Crosier staff
Together fall, 'cause they are together safe:
Yet while the sense of Tumults deepest grow,
And press in us, no doubts in you arise;
There still dwelt calm and quiet in your Brow,
As our Distractions were your Exercise:
And taught us, all assaults, all Il^s to bear,
Is not to fly from Danger, but from Fear.
That Courage waits you still, some merely rode
From Tumults and the Peoples frantic Rage,
Counting their safety by their far abode,
And so grew safer still at the next Stage:
But it is not space that shelters you, the rest
Secure themselves by Miles, you by your Breast.
And now my Lord, since you have London left,
Where Merchants wives dine cheap, and as cheap sup,
Where Fools themselves have of their Plate bereft,
And sigh and drink in the course Pewter cup.
Where Is not a Silver Spoon left, not that given than
When the first Cockney was made Christian.
No not a Bodkin, Pincase, all they send
Or carry all, what ever they can hap on,
Even to the pretty Pick Tooth, whose each end
Often purged the Relics of continual Capon.
Nothing must stay behind, nothing must tarry,
No not the Ring by which dear Joan took Harry.
But now no City-Villain, though he were
Free of a Trade and Treason, dares intrude,
No saucy Prentises assault you there,
Engaged by their Indentures to be rude:
Whom for the two first years their Masters use
Only to cry down Bishops, and cleanse Shoes.
There as in silent Orbs you may ride on,
And as in Charles his Wain move without jarres,
Your Coach will seem your Constellation,
Not drawn about by Horses, but by Stars.
Till seated near the Northern Pole, we thence
Judge your seat Sphere, you its Intelligence.
An Elegy on the Most Reverend Father in God William, Lord Archbishop of
CANTERBURY.
Attached the 18. of December, 1640. Beheaded the 10. of January, 1644.
Most Reverend Martyr,
THou, since thy thick Afflictions first begun,
Make Dioclesian's days all Calm, and Sun,
And when thy Tragic Annals are compiled,
Old Persecution shall be Pity styled,
The Stake and Faggot shall be Temperate names,
And Mercy wear the Character of Flames:
Men knew not then Thrift in the Martyrs breath,
Nor weaved their Lives into a four years Death,
Few ancient Tyrants do our Stories Tax,
That flew first by Delays, then by the Axe,
But these ( Tiberius like) alone do cry,
It Is to be Reconciled to let Thee die.
Observe we then a while into what Maze,
Compass, and Circle they contrive Delays,
What Turns and wild Perplexities they choose,
Ere they can forge their Slander, and Accuse:
The Sun has now brought his warm Chariot back,
And rode his Progress round the Zodiac,
When yet no Crime appears, when none can tell,
Where thy Guilt sleeps, nor when 'twill break the shell.
Why is His Shame deferred? what is in it that brings
Your Justice back, spoils Vengeance of her Wings?
Has Mercy seized you? will you rage no more?
Are Winds grown tame? have Seas forgot to roar?
No, a wild fierceness has your minds possessed,
Which time and sins must cherish and digest:
You durst not now let His clear Blood be spilt,
You were not yet grown up to such a guilt;
You try if Age, if Seaventy years can Kill:
Then you have your Ends, and you are harmless still,
But when this failed, you do your Paths enlarge,
But would not yet whole Innocence discharge;
You Will not be Devil All, you fain would prove
Good at a Distance, within some Remove,
"Virtue has sweets which are good Men's due gain,
"Which Vice could not Deserve, yet would Retain.
This was the Cause, why once it was your Care,
That Storms and Tempests in your Sin might share,
You did engage the Waves, and strongly stood
To make the Water guilty of his Blood.
Boats are dispatched in haste, and it is his doom,
Not to his Charge, but to his Shipwreck come;
Fond men, your cruel Project cannot do,
Tempests and storms must learn to kill from you;
When this comes short, he must Walk^ Pilgrimage,
No Coach nor Mule, that may sustein his Age,
Must trace the City (now a Desert rude)
And combat salvage Beasts the Multitude.
But when his Guardian Innocence can fling,
Awe round about, and save him by that King.
When the Just cause can fright the Beasts away,
And make the Tiger tremble at her prey.
When nether Waves dare seize him, nor the Rout;
The storm with Reason, nor the storm without:
Lost in their streights when Plots have vanquished bin,
And Sin perplexed has no Relief, but Sin.
Agents and Instruments now on you fall,
You must be Judges, People, Waves, and All.
Yet 'cause the Rout will have't performed by you,
And long to see done what they dare not Do.
You put the Crime to use, it swells your Heap;
Your Sin's your own, nor are you Guilty cheap,
You Husband All; there is no Appearance lost,
Nor comes he once to the Bar but at your cost;
A constant Rate well Taxt, and Levied right,
And a Just value set upon each sight.
At last they find the Days by their own Purse,
Less known from him than what they do disburse:
But when it now strikes high for him to appear,
And Chapmen see the Bargain is grown dear;
They Muster hands, and their hot suits enlarge,
Not to pursue the Man, but save the Charge;
Then least you loose their Custom, (a just fear)
Selling your Sins and others Blood too dear.
You grant their Suits, the Manner, and the Time,
And he must Dye for what no Law calls Crime.
The Afflicted Martyrs, when their pains began.
Their Trajan had, or Dioclesian.
Their Tortures were some Colors, and proceed;
Though from no Guilt, yet 'cause they disagreed:
What league, what friendship's there? They could not join,
And fix the Ark and Dagon in one Shrine.
Faith, combats Faith; and how agree can they,
That still go on, but still a several way?
Zeal, Martyrs Zeal, and Heat against Heat conspires.
As Theban Brothers fight though in their Fires.
Yet as two different Stars unite their Beams,
And Rivers mingles Waves and mix their Streams;
And though they challenge each a several Name,
Conspire because their moisture is the same.
So Parties knit, though they be diverse known,
The Men are many but the Christian, one.
Trajan, no Trajan was to his own Heard,
And Tigers are not by the Tigers feared.
What strange excess then? what is that menstruous Power,
When Flames do Flames, and Streams do Streams devour?
Where the same Faith against the same Faith does knock,
And Sheep are Wolves to Sheep of the same Flock?
Where Protestant the Protestant defies,
Where both Assent, yet one for Dissent dies?
Let these that doubt this, through his Actions Wade,
Where some must needs Convince, All may persuade.
Was he Apostate, who your Champion stood,
Bathed in his Ink before, as now in Blood?
He that unwinds the subtle Jesuit,
That Feels the Serpents Teeth, and is not bit?
Unites the Snake finds each Mysterious knot,
And turns the Poison into Antidot.
Does Nicety with Nicety undo?
And makes the Labyrinth the Labyrinth's clew?
That slight by sleight subdues, and clearly proves,
Truth has her Serpents too, as well as Doves.
Now, you that blast his Innocence, Survey,
And view the Triumph of this Glorious day;
Could you (if that might be) if you should come
To seal God's cause with your own Martyrdom,
(Could all the blood whose Tides move in their veins,
Which then perhaps were Blood, but now in stains)
(Yield it that Force and strength, which it has took
Should we except his Blood) from this his Book,
Your Flame or Axe would less evince to Men,
Your Block and Stake would prop less than his Pea;
Is he Apostate, whom the Baits of Rome
Cannot seduce, though all her Glories come?
Whom all her specious Honors cannot hold,
Who hates the snare although the Hook be Gold?
Who Prostituted Titles can despise,
And from despised Titles, greater Rise?
Whom Names cannot Amuse, but seats withal
The Protestant above the Cardinal?
Who sure to his own Soul, does scorn to find
A Crimson cap the Purchase of his Mind?
"Who is not Great, may blame his Fate's Offense,
"Who would not be, is Great in's Conscience.
Next these His Sweat and Care how to advance
The Church but to Her Just Inheritance,
How to gain back her Own, yet none Beguile,
And make her Wealth her Purchase, nor her spoil:
Then, shape Gods worship to a joint consent;
'Till when the seamlesse Coat must still be Rent:
Then, to repair the Shrines, as Breaches sprung,
Which we should hear, could we lend Paul's a Tongue,
Speak, Speak great Monument! while thou yet art such,
And Rear him 'bove their Scandals and their Touch;
Had he survived thou mighst in Time Declare,
Vast things may comely be, and Greatest Fair.
And though thy Limbs spread high, and Bulk exceed,
Thou Would proved that Giants are no monstrous breed:
Then 'bove Extent thy Luster would prevail,
And against Dimension Feature turn the Scale;
But now, like Pyrrah's half adopted birth.
Where the issue part was Woman, Part was Earth,
Where Female some, and some to stone was Bent,
And the one half was to others Monument,
Thou must imperfect lie, and learn to Groan,
Now for his Ruin, straightway for thine own:
But this and Thousand such Abortives are;
By Bloody Rebels Ravished from his care;
But yet though some miscarried in their Womb,
And Deeds Still-born have hastened to the Tomb,
God (that Rewards him now) forbad his store,
Should all lie hid, and he but give in the Ore.
Many are Stamped, and shapt, and do still shine,
Approved at Mint, a firm, and Perfect Coin.
Witness that Mart of Books that yonder stands.
Bestowed by him, though by another Hands:
Those Attick Manuscripts, so rare a Piece,
They tell the Turk, he has not conquered Greece,
Next these, a second beautuous Heap is thrown,
Of Eastern Authors, who were all his own.
Who in so Various Languages appear,
Babel, would scarce be their Interpreter.
To These, we may that Fair-built College bring,
Which proves that Learning's no such Rustic thing;
Whose structure well contrived does not relate
To Antic fineness, but strong lasting state:
Beauty well mixed with strength, that it complyes
Most with the Gazer's use, much with his Eyes,
On Marble Columns thus the Arts have stood,
As wise Seth's Pillars sa^'d 'em in the Flood.
But did he leave here Walls, and only Own
A Glorious Heap, and make us rich in Stone?
Then had our Chanc'lour seemed to fail, and here
Much honor due to the Artificer:
But this our Prudent Patron long foresaw,
When he Refined rude Statutes into Law;
Our Arts and Manners to his Building falls,
And he erects the Men, as well as Walls:
"Thus Solons Laws his Athens did Renown,
"And turned that throng of Building to a Town.
Yet neither Law nor Statute can be known
So strickt, as to Himself he made his own,
Which in his Actions Inventory lies,
Which Hell or -- can never scandalize:
Where every Act his rigid eye surveyes,
And Night is Bar and Judge to all his Days;
Where all his secret Thoughts he does comprize,
And every Dream summoned to an Assize;
Where he Arraigns each Circumstance of care,
Which never parts dismissed without a Prayer;
See! how he sifts and searches every part,
And ransacks all the Closets of his heart;
He puts the hours upon the Rack and Wheel,
And all his minutes must confess or feel:
If they reveal one Act which forth did come.
When Humane frailty crept into the Loome,
If one Thread stain, or sully, break, or faint,
So that the Man does Inteerrupt the Saint,
He hunts it to its Death, nor quits his fears,
Till't be Embalmed in Prayers, or drowned in Tears.
The Sun in all his journeys never did see
One more devout, nor one more strict than He.
Since his Religion then is Unmixed and Fine,
And Works do warrant Faith, as Ore the Mine:
What can his Crime be then? Now you must lay
The Kingdoms Laws subverted in his way:
See! no such Crime does over his Conscience grow,
(Without which Witness never can make it so;)
A clear Transparent White, bedecks his mind,
Where naught but Innocence can shelter find,
Witness that Breath which did your stain and blot
Wipe freely out, (though Heaven I fear will not)
Witness that Calm and Quiet in His Breast,
Prologue and Preface to his Place of Rest;
When with the World He could undaunted part,
And see in Death nor meagre Looks; nor Dart:
When to the Fatal Block His Gray Age goes
With the same Ease, as when he took Repose.
"He like old Enoch to His Bliss is gone,
"It Is not his Death, but his Translation.
A Mock Remonstrance referring to the Porters Petition.
To Pym King of the Parliamented,
The Grievances are here presented
Of Porters, Butchers, Broom-men, Tanners,
That fain would fight under your Banners;
Weavers, Dyers, Tinkers, Cobblers,
And many other such like Joblers,
As Watermen, and those called Dray-men,
That have a long time sung Solamen, etc.

WHereas, Imprimis, first, that is, the Porters,
The heavy burdens laid on their four Quarters
Is not complained of here; nor of Us, any,
Although We have good Causes, and full many,
As yet unknown; but there is a day will come
Shall pay for all, We say no more but Mum.
It is well said by some, You are about
To give the Church and Government a Rout,
Let it be so cry We, for it is known,
To do it, you will want more hands than your own.
And since you are Their Declaration.
necessitated to
Raise war, 'ifaith (Sirrevence) do, do, do;
It Is fit that Old things should grow out of date,
Like Hampden's Sister, or that Beldame Kate.
Old things in course do commonly decay,
When New perhaps may last full many a day;
Old Frocks, old Shirts, old Brooms, old Boots, old Skins
Are much addicted to the Venial sins
Of wearing out; and why not then the Church,
That has left many a simple man in the lurch.
Beside, the Porters so the Surplice hate,
Their very Frocks they have casheer'd of late;
And rather than endure 'em, you may see,
They wear the Rope, the Hang-mans Livery.
The Butchers too, inspired are at least,
And know the very Intrails of the Beast
That wears those Surplices.
Smocks, and though they love a Whore,
A Babilonish one they do abhor.
In fine, in this great work of Reformation,
Which you intend shall stigmatize the Nation,
We pray to be Fellow Laborers, and
That you our Virtues right may understand,
Know that the Porters shall for Eighteen-pence
Carry the Dreggs of Rome in Bottles hence
To any Foreign part you will think upon,
And bring the Juice of the Turks Alcaron
In lieu of it; the Butcher killed in Slaughter
Shall send Gods, and the Laws Disciples after:
There shall not a Religious Relic be
Left in the Church, or in the Library,
But shall be swept away by the Nice hand
Oth' Broom-mens Art, who nothing understand
More than Kent-street; If any them deride,
The Tanners come, and then beware their Hide;
And for the Weavers, they can preach, or pray,
As is well known to the Lords, Brooks and Say.
The Dyers they delight you know in Scarlet,
And care no more for Blood, than any Varlet;
Like Archers good they will come on so pouring,
That who escapes them will escape a scowring.
The Tinkers they can both make Holes, and mend 'em
In Church or State; if you will but befriend 'em
With Mettle; They care not for God or Devil;
A Pack of sturdy Rogues inured to Evil.
The Cobbler vows, and that you will say is News,
To venture All, what over Boots, over Shoes?
And likewise undertakes at a Cheap rate
The Government, though Crabbed, to Translate.
The Watermen more fly than any Otters,
Knowing it is good fishing in troubled Waters,
If any do Oppose them, though their Betters,
They will betake themselves unto their Stretchers,
And so belabour 'em in Church and Cloisters,
Their Bones shall rattle, like a Sack of Oysters,
In their thin Skins. The Dray-men likewise shall
With Crusted Fists, fling 'um and fling 'um all.
Thus in Our several Functions We can serve ye,
Men fit for your Employment, pray observe ye;
And therefore list Us, where your best defense is,
In the Yealow Regiment of's Oxcellencies:
So taking leave, resting at your Commands,
We do subscribe either Our Horns, or Hands,
The Caution. A SONG.
To the Tune of Oh Women, Monstrous Women.
YOu Sep'ratists that Sequister
Your selves from Laws are good,
Your Courses so irregular
Shall now be understood;
Your fond Expounding corrupts the Bibble,
Yet you will maintain it with your Twibble.
Oh Roundheads, Roundheads, damnable Roundheads,
What do you mean to do?
He that does swear, though to a Truth,
You count him far worse than a Liar,
Yet you will firk your Sister Ruth,
So it may edify her;
You, like the Devil, abhor a Cross,
But I Will have as good Reason from Pyms Stonehorse.
Oh Roundheads, Roundheads, damnable Roundheads,
What do you mean to do?
Our Churches Hierarchy you hold
Within a foul Suspicion;
And say the Prelates Sleeves are old
Relics of Superstition;
The very Rags of Rome they are
Such as the Whores of Babylon wear.
Oh Roundheads, Roundheads, damnable Roundheads,
What do you mean to do?
Therefore in Zeal and Piety,
You Will die their Lawn in blood,
And root out their Society,
A work you think is good;
The Malice is, some of your Ears
Were cropped far shorter than your hairs.
Oh Roundheads, Roundheads, damnable Roundheads,
What do you mean to do?
When you the Miter have pulled down,
You Will be hanged before contented,
Your next Pluck must be at the Crown,
A Plot long since invented:
But Grigge swears Tyburn shall have her due,
He Will be hanged himself, if he hang not you.
Oh Roundheads, Roundheads, damnable Roundheads,
What do you mean to do?
The Cobblers were astonished,
The Porters eke, also;
To hear the Noise that ecchoed
From your vast Tubb below:
But let him be hanged will never mend,
The Cobbler thinks upon his end.
But you to whom my Lines do tend
Have a care of what you do.
Lilly contemned. A SONG.
WHy art thou sad? Our Glasses flow
Like little Rivers to the Main;
And never a Man here has a Shrew,
What need'st thou then complain?
Then Boys mind your Glass,
And let all News pass
That treats not of this our Canary,
Let Lawyers fear their Fate,
In the turn of the State,
We suffer if this do miscarry,
Chor. It Is this will preserve us against Lillies predictions,
And make us contemn our Fate and his Fictions.
It Is this that setts the City Ruff;
And lyne^ the Aldermen with Fur;
It makes the Watchmen stiff and tuff
To call, where go you Sir?
It Is this does advance
The Cap of Maintenance,
And keeps the Sword sleeping or waking;
It Courage does raise
In such Men now adays,
That hereto^ore cried at Head-aching,
Chor. It Is this does infuse in a Miser some pity,
And is the Genius, and Soul of the City.
Then why should we despair, or think
The Enemy approaches near?
Let such as never used to drink
Sack, be enslaved to Fear.
Then to get Honor,
And that waits on her,
Strange Titles, Illustrious and Mighty.
We Will have a smart Bout
Shall speak us Men and stout,
And I Will be the first that shall fight ye.
Chor. He that stiffly can stand to it, and has the best Brain;
Shall be styled Son of Mars, and God of the Main.
A Monster to be seen at Westminster. 1642.
WIthin this House is to be seen
Such a Monster as has not been
At any time in England, nay
In Europe, Africa, Asia.
It Is a Round body, without a Head
Almost three years, yet not dead.
It Is like that Beast I once did see,
Whose Tail stood where his Head should be;
And, which was never seen before,
Though It want a Head, 'thas Horns good store,
It has very little hair, and yet
You Will say it has more hair than wit,
'Thas many Eyes and many Ears,
'Thas many Jealousies and ^ears,
'Thas many Mouths, and many Hands,
It Is full of Questions and Commands.
It Is armed with Muskets, Pikes, it fears
Naught in the World but Cavaliers;
'Twas born in England, but begot
Betwixt the English and the Scot.
Though some are of Opinion Father
That the Devil was its Father,
And the City, which is worse,
Was its Mother, and its Nurse.
Some say (though perhaps in scorn)
That it was a Cretan born,
And not unlike, for it has the fashion
Just as may be of that Nation;
For it is a Liar, none oth' least;
A slow Belly, an Evil beast;
Of what Religion none can tell,
It much resembles that in Hell.
Some say it is a Jew disguised,
And why, because it is circumcised;
For 'twas deprived long ago
Of many a Member we well know.
In some points it is a Jesuited Priest,
In some it is a Calvinist:
For it is not Justified, it says
By Good works, but by Public Faith.
Some called an Anabaptist: Some
Think now that Antichrist is come.
A Creature of an uncouth kind,
Both for its Body, and its mind:
Make have and see it, else 'twill be gone,
For now it is sick, and drawing on.
London sad London. AN ECHO.
WHat wants thee, that thou art in this sad taking?
A King
What made him first remove hence his residing?
syding.
Did any here deny him satisfaction?
Faction.
Tell me whereon this strength of Faction lies?
On lies.
What did thou do when the King left Parliament?
Lament.
What terms would give to gain his Company?
Any.
But how would serve him, with thy best endeavor?
Ever.
What would thou do if here thou could behold him?
Hold him.
But if he comes not what becomes of London?
Undone.
Upon bringing in the Plate.
ALL you that would no longer
To a Monarch be subjected,
Come away to Guildhall, and be there liberal,
Your Wish shall be there effected.
Come come away, bring your Gold, bring your Jewels,
Your silver Shaped, or Molten,
If the King you will have down, and advance to the Crown
Five Members and K --
Regard no Proclamations,
They Are Subjects fit to Jest on,
Henry Elsing's far better than C. R.
Resolved upon the Question.
Come come away, etc.
You Aldermen first send in
Your Chains upon these Summons,
To buy Ropes ends, for all the Kings Friends,
They Are Traitors to the Commons*
Come, come away, etc.
Your Basins large, and Ewers,
Unto this use alot them,
If ere you mean your hands to clean
From th'Sins by which you got them.
Come, come away, etc.
Bring in your Cannes and Gobletts,
You Citizens confiding,
And think it no scorn, to drink in a Horn
Of your own Wives providing.
Come, come away, etc.
Ye Brethren strong and lusty,
The Sisters Exercise ye,
Get Babes of Grace, and Spoons apace,
Both Houses do advise ye.
Come, come away, etc.
Let the Religious Sempstress
Her silver Thimble bring here,
'Twill be a fine thing in deposing a King,
To say you had a Finger.
Come, come away, etc.
Your Childe's redeemed Whistle
May here obtain Admittance,
Nor shall that Cost, be utterly lost,
They Will give you an Acquittance.
Come, come away, etc.
The Gold and Silver Bodkin,
The Parliament wooed ha both,
Which often does make, the House to take
A Journey on the Sabbath.
Come, come away, etc.
You that have store of Money
Bring't hither, and be thrifty,
If the Parliament thrive, they will so contrive
You shall have back Four for Fifty.
Come, come away, etc.
If when the Councell's ended,
Your Plate you will recover,
Be sure you may the chief Head that day
On the Bridge or Tower discover.
Come, come away, etc.
The Prentices Petition to the Close Committee.
TO you close Members, we the Young men come
(If Justice in this house has any Room?)
With a Petition, but it is for peace;
If you are vexed, pray let all Quarrels cease;
First, for Religion.) If It be no offense,
Nor hinder things of greater Consequence)
We hope you do suppose there is some such thing,
'Cause 'thas bin often mentioned by the King.
Wee'ld hav't established, and do hold it fit
That no Lay-Levites ought to meddle with it.
Next, that in spite of Treason, we may have
A happy peace, but that we need not crave,
For when our bodkins cease 'twil be your pleasure
That arms may cease, not wanting will, but treasure;
Else you will but put the King to farther trouble,
To beat you to it, and make you Subjects double.
We know you are powerful, and can wonders do
Both by your Votes and Ordinances too;
In case all those Murdered Innocent men
May by your Votes be made alive again,
Then your admiring Spirits shall persuade us
That neither War nor Famine can invade us:
Till then you will give us leave to trust our Eyes,
And from our sad Experience, now grow wise:
Let not the Collonell's gaping son of the City
Be made the Mouth unto this close Commit;
Whose gaudy Troop, because they are boys, he boasts
They are the Children of the Lord of Hosts;
And knows no reason, (for indeed tis' scant)
Why States are not like Churches Militant.
Next, that Truth, Wisdom, Justice, Loyalty,
And Law, five Members of our Faculty
(Who not by the King; but you, have been so long
By Votes Expelled from your Rebellious throng)
May be restored; and in spite of Pym
Be heard to speak their mind as well as him.
Which if not granted, we do tell you this,
Your Lord (whose head's in a Parenthesis)
Shall not secure you, but we shall unty
That twisted Rabble of the Hierachy,
Clubs are good payments, and'mongst other things
Know we are as many Thousands as you Kings.
In the Interim pray tell your fore-horse Pym,
Just as he loves the King, so we love him.
Londons Farewell to the Parliament.
FArewell to the Parliament, with hey, with hey,
Farewell to the Parliament, with hoe,
Your dear delight the City,
Our wants have made us witty,
And a -- for the Close Committee,
With a hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell the Lord of Essex, with hey, with hey,
Farewell the Lord of Essex, with hoe,
He sleeps till eleven,
And leaves the Cause at six and seven,
But it is no matter, their hope's in Heaven,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell the Lord Wharton, with hey, with hey,
Farewell the Lord Wharton, with hoe,
The Saw-pit did hide him,
Whilst Hastings did out-ride him,
Then came Brooks and he out-ly'd him,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell Billy Stroud, with hey, with hey,
Farewell Billy Stroud, with hoe,
He swore all Whartons lies were true,
And it concerned him so to do,
For he was in the Saw-pit too,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell the Lord Brooks, with hey, with hey,
Farewell the Lord Brooks, with hoe,
He said (but first he had got a Rattle)
That but one hundred fell in the Battle,
Besides Dogs, Whores, and such Parliament Cattle,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell Say and Seal, with hey, with hey,
Farewell Say and Seal, with hoe,
May these Valiant Sons of Ammon,
All be Hanged as high as Haman,
With the old Anabaptist they came on,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell K -- with hey, with hey,
Farewell K -- with hoe,
Thy Father writ a Godly Book,
Yet all was fish that came to the hook,
Sure he is damned though but for his look.
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell K -- with hey, with hey,
Farewell K -- with hoe,
Thy House had been confounded,
In vain he had compounded,
If he had not got a Roundhead,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell D -- H -- with hey, with hey,
Farewell D -- H -- with hoe
It Was his Ambition, or his need,
Not his Religion did the deed,
But his Widow has tamed him of the speed.
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell John Hampden, with hey, with hey,
Farewell John Hampden with hoe,
He Is a sly and subtle Fox,
Well read in Buchanan and Knox,
And he is gone down to goad the Ox,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell John Pym, with hey, with hey,
Farewell John Pym with hoe,
He would have had a place in Court,
And he ventured all his party for it,
But bribing proves his best support.
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell John Pym with hey, with hey,
Farewell John Pym with hoe,
For all the feigned disaster
Of the Tailor and the Plaster,
Thou shall not be our Master,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo,
Farewell Major Skippon, with hey, with hey
Farewell Major Skippon with hoe,
Ye have ordered him to kill and slay,
To rescue him and run away,
Provide you vote fair weather, and pay,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell our Worthies all, with hey, with hey,
Farewell our Worthies all with hoe,
For they instead of dying,
Maintain the truth by lying,
And get victories by flying,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell our Scotch Brethren, with hey, with hey,
Farewell our Scotch Brethren, with hoe.
They March but to the border,
But will be brought no farther,
For neither Ordinance nor Order,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell my little Levites, with hey, with hey,
Farewell my little Levites, with hoe,
Though you seem to fear him,
Yet you can scarce forbear him,
And when you thank him, you but jeer him,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell fears and jealousies, with hey, with hey,
Farewell fears and jealousies, with hoe,
Which, with lying Declarations,
Tumults, traitors, and protestations,
Have been the ruin of two Nations,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell little Isaac, with hey, with hey,
Farewell little Isaac, with hoe,
Thou have made us all, like Asses,
Part with our Plate, and drink in Glasses,
Whilst thou growst rich with 2 s. Passes,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell Plate and Money, with hey, with hey,
Farewell Plate and Money, with hoe,
It Is going down by water,
Or something near the matter,
And a Public Faith's going after,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
Farewell Members five, with hey, with hey,
Farewell Members five, with hoe,
Next Petition we deliver,
Sends you packing down the River,
And the Devil be your driver,
With hey trolly, lolly, lo.
A SONG.
NEw- England is preparing a-pace,
To entertain King Pym, with his Grace,
And Isaac before shall carry the Mace,
For Roundheads Old Nick stand up now.
No Surplisse nor no Organs there,
Shall ever offend the Eye, or the Ear,
But a Spiritual Preach, with a 3. hours Prayer,
For Roundheads, etc.
All things in Zeal shall there be carried,
Without any Porredge read over the buried,
No Crossing of Infants, nor Rings for the Married,
For Roundheads, etc.
The Swearer there shall punished be still,
But Drunkenness private be counted no ill,
Yet both kind of lying as much as you will,
For Roundheads, etc.
Blow winds, Hoyse sails, and let us be gone,
But be sure we take all our Plunder a long,
That Charles may find little when as he does come,
For Roundheads Old Nick stand up now.
Sir John Hotham's Alarm.
COme Traitors, March on, to the Leader Sir John,
Though King Charles his Friends disaffect you,
Do not obey him, but obey Devil Pym,
And the Parliament will protect you.
Let us plead that we Fight, for the King and his Right,
But if he desire for to enter,
Let us Armed appear, and let us all swear
Our lives for his sake we will venture.
But if he give Command, to disarm out of hand,
As we our Allegiance do tender,
Let us presently Swear, that Commanded we are
By the Parliament not to surrender.
If he desire for to see, what Command that may be,
We then will resolve him no further,
But entreat him to stay, while we send Post away,
He shall have a Copy of the Order.
But if he Proclaim, me a Traitor by Name,
And all you that adhere to my Faction,
What an Honor it will be, when my Country see me,
Second Pym in a Traiterous Action.
But when the King sends, to require an amends
Of the Parliament for such denial;
Whether Treason or no, the Law shall never know,
I must be put to your Vote for a Trial.
And to put it to the Voice, or the Parliaments choice,
The House being now so empty;
If there be such a thing, as God or a King,
We'll carry it by five in the twenty.
If so please the Fates, as to change our Estates,
That the King his own Rights does recover,
We will turn to their way, and the Town will betray,
Though a Ladder for our pains we turn over.
The Public Faith.
SOme tell of Africa Monsters, which of old,
Vain Superstition did for God-heads hold,
How the Egyptians, who first knowledge spread,
Adored their Apis with the white Bulls head;
Apis still fed with Serpents that do hiss,
Hamon, Osiris, Monster Anubis.
But Sunburned Africa never had, nor has
A Monster like our English Public Faith;
Those fed on Snakes, and satisfied, did rest,
This, like the Curtain Gulf, will have the best
Thing in the City, to appease its still
Increasing hunger, Glutting its lewd will
With Families, whose substance it devours,
Perverting Justice and the Higher Powers;
Contemning without fear of any Law,
Preying on all to fill its ravenous Maw;
Whose Estrich stomach, which no steel can sat,
Has swallowed down Indies of Gold and Plate:
This is the Public Faith, which being led
By the Cities wealth, has in this Kingdom bred
Such various mischiefs with its viperous breath,
Blasting its peace and happiness to death;
And yet this Idol which our world adores,
Has made men prostitute their truth like Whores,
To its soul Lust, which surely may as well
And soon be satisfied, as the Grave, or Hell;
This preys on Horses, yet that will not do,
Unless it may devour the Riders too:
This takes up all the Riches of the Land,
Not by entreaty, but unjust Command,
Borrowing extortively without any day
But the Greek Calends, then it means to pay;
This against the Law of Nations does surprise
The Goods of Strangers, Kings, and in its wise
Discretion, thinks (though its not worth their note)
They Are bound to take the Public Faiths trim Vote
For their security, when this Public Faith
Has broke more Merchants then e're Riot has,
And yet, good men o'th City, you are proud
To have this Bankrupt Public Faith allowed
More credit then your King, to this you will lend
More willingly then ever you did spend
Money to buy your Wives and Children bread,
By such a strange Enchantment being misled
To your undoings; you who upon Bond,
Nay scarcely upon Mortgage of that Land,
Treble your Moneys value, would not p^rt
With your loved Coin, vanquished by the powerful art
Of this Magician Public Faith, justly install
Him Master of your Bags, the Devil and all
That taught you get them by deceitful wares,
And sucking in (like Mornings draughts) young Heirs:
Well, certainly if this fine humor hold,
Your Aldermen will have no other Gold
But what is in Thumb-rings, for their ponderous Chains,
They Will be the Public Faiths just lawful gains,
And have the Honor afterward to be
Hanged in them for its Public Treachery.
What will become of you then, Grave and Witty
Inhabitants of this Enchanted City?
Who is it shall those vast Sums to you re-pay,
When Master Public Faith is run away?
O^ who shall those prodigious heaps renew,
Which were prodigally decreased by you?
Whom the whole world imagined men of thrift,
What will your Orphans do? How will they shift,
Whose whole Estates in the City Chamber, has
Been given a spoil to ruined Public Faith?
Perhaps you will pawn your Charter to supply
The worthy wants of your Necessity.
Who is 't will take it, when all (but men misled
Like you) know it is already forfeited?
Who is it will then into New Coin translate
Such monstrous Cupboards of huge antic Plate?
To Public Faiths vast Treasury bring in,
From the Gilt Goblet, to the Silver Pin,
All that was Coinable, and what to do?
Even to create you Knaves, and Traitors too.
Faith if you chance to come off with your Lives,
Your way will be to live upon your Wives,
Their Trading will be good, when Fortune wears
Your Colors in the Caps of the Cavaliers,
Whose Cuckolds you will be then, and on your brow,
Wear their Horns, as you Public Faith's do now;
Then, then you will howl, when you shall clearly see
That Public Faith, was Public Treachery:
Then you will confess your selves to 've been undone
By Public Faith's man, Isaac Pennington;
Then you will repent that ever you did fling
Such monstrous Sums away against your King;
When he in Triumph, with his Warlike Train,
Shall to your terror view your Town again;
Unless his Mercy mittigate his wrath,
Justly conceived against you and Public Faith;
That Reverent Alderman which did defile
His Breeches at the Mustering ere while.
Shall then again those Velvet Slops bewray,
Cause Public Faith did make him go astray:
Paul's shall be opened then, and you conspire
No more against the Organs in the Quire,
Nor threat the Saints in the Windows, nor repair
In Troops to kill the Book of Common Prayer;
Nor drunk with Zeal, endeavor to engrosse
To your own use, the stones of Cheap Side Cross:
Then, then you will bow your heads, your horns and all,
That so exalted were to save from thrall
Your ruined Liberties, and humbly pray
For Mercy, more then upon each Fast Day;
When your Seditious Preachers to the throng,
Make Prayers Ex Tempore of five hours long;
Lest you by early penitence prevent
Your certain danger, if not punishment,
Which you by no means may so safely do,
As quitting Public Faith, and Treason too:
Then, then, though late, you to your grief will find,
That you have walked (as Moles in the Earth do.)
Of your fair reason, and obedient light,
Involved in Mists of black Rebellious Night: blind
If these Instructions will not make you see
Your Error, may you perish in it for me,
And to your Ruin walk in deathfull path,
That leads to the Gallows with the Public Faith.
The Sense of the House, or the Reason why those Members who are the Remnant of
the two Families of Parliament cannot consent to Peace, or an Acccommodation.
To the Tune of The New England Psalm, Huggle Duggle, ho ho ho the Devil he
laughed aloud.
COme come beloved Londoners, fie fie you shame us all,
Your rising up for Peace, will make the close Commit fall;
I wonder you dare ask for that, which they must needs deny,
There Is 30. swears they will have no Peace, and bid me tell you why.
First I Will no Peace quoth Essex, my Chaplain says it is Sin
To loose 100 l. a day, just when my Wife lies in;
They cry God bless your Excellence, but if I loose my Place
They Will call me Rebel, Popular Ass, and Cuckold to my face.
You Citizen Fools, quoth W -- d' ye talk to to me of Peace,
Who not only stole his Majesty's Ships, but robbed him of his Seas,
No no I Will keep the Water still, and have my Ships well manned,
For I have lost and stole so much, I know not where to land.
Do Brother do, says H -- for Peace breeds us no quiet,
Besides my Places to have lost, with sixteen Dishes diet,
I played the Judas with the King, which makes the World detest me,
Nay should his Majesty pardon me, 500. would arest me.
K -- said, these Londoners deserve to loose their Ears.
For now they will all obey the King, like Citizen Cavaliers;
Let Us vote this Peace a desperate Plot, and send them a denial,
For if they save the Kingdom, they will give us a Legal trial.
The Welsh-men rage quoth S -- and call me villainous Goat
For plundering Hereford's Aldermens Gowns to make my Besse a Coat,
It Is true the Town did feed me well, for which I took good Fleeces,
But if Peace come they will tear me and all my Whores in piece.
Fight fight quoth Say, now now hold up these Jealousies and Fears,
The work will show I laid the Plot above these 17. years;
It Is I that am your Engineer', but if for Peace you vote,
Oh then they will make me go to Church, or else they will cut my Throat.
My Father Goodwin quoth W -- calls me a silly Lad,
And wonders theyl'e ask Peace of me who have been lately mad;
You choose me Irish General, and I choose to stay here,
For should we fight among the Boggs, there is never a Sawpit near.
Those Heathen Prentices quoth Brooks, that made my Coachman stay,
Bid me be bare, although I spoke but 13. Bulls that day,
But if Peace lop off my learned Skull, then all my House you will see
The Sword of Guy, the Dun-cows rib, the Asses tooth, and me.
I made a Speech quoth R -- when his Excellence first began,
For which he swore by a Pottle of Sack to make me a Gentleman:
But if the King get to Whitehall then all my hopes are past,
My Father was first Lord of the House, and I shall be the last.
Keep Silence, quoth Mr. Speaker, but do not hold your peace,
Let Us sit, and vote, and hold them to it, for I Will do what you please;
I have had but poor 6000 l. besides some Spoons and Bowls,
Nay, grant a Peace, and how shall I be Master of the Rolls?
Then spoke 5. Members all at once; who for an Army cried,
Last year, quoth they, you rescued us else we had all been tried:
What though you be almost undone, you must contribute still,
Or we will convey, our Trunks away, and then do what you will.
My Venom swells, quoth H -- that his Majesty full well knows,
And I, quoth Hampden, fetched the Scots, from whence this Mischief flows.
I am an Ass quoth Haslerigg, but yet I Am deep in the Plott,
And I, quoth Stroud, can lie as fast, as Mr. Pym can trott.
But I, quoth Pym, your Hackney am, and all your drudgery do,
Have made good Speeches for my self, and Privileges for you:
I can sit down and look on men, whilst others bleed and fight,
I eat their Lordships meat by day, and giv't their Wives by night.
Then Vane grew black in the face, and swore there is none so deep as I,
The Staff and Signet slipped my hand, my Son can tell you why,
The name of Peace they say it is sweet, but oh it makes me shrink,
Straffords Ghost does haunt me so, I cannot sleep a wink.
Were Strafford living, Mildmay said, he would do me no ill,
I hid my selfith' Privy, when the House did pass his Bill:
But all my Gold and Silver thread Gregory calls his own,
Though in a Ship I made my will, I was not born to drown.
You found me, quoth Sir R -- P -- I had been long a Knave;
You promised I should be so still, if you my Vote might have.
And I, quoth Laurence Whittaker, agreed to do so too,
But if you serve old Courtiers thus, they will do as much for you.
This Peace, quoth Michael Oldsworth, will bring me never a Fee,
Although my Lord have sworn for Peace, and will not follow me.
Down, down with Bishops, Wheeler said, for I have robbed the Church*
Oh base, will you conclude a Peace, and leave me in the lurch.
Who speaks of Peace quoth Ludlow, has neither Sense nor Reason,
For I never spoke in the House but once, and then I spoke High Treason,
Your meaning was as bad as mine, you must defend my Speech,
Or else you make my mouth as foul as was my Fathers breech.
I Will plunder Him, quoth Baynton, that mentions Peace to Me,
The Bishop would not grant my Lease, but now I Will have his Fee.
A Gunpowder Monopoly quoth Evelyn raised my Father,
But if you let this War go down, they will call me Powder Traitor.
Oh Jove, quoth Sir John Hotham, is this a time to treat?
When Newcastle and Cumberland me to the Walls have beat?
You base-obedient Citizens d' ye think to save your Lives?
My Son and I will serve you all as I have served Five Wives.
Indeed, quoth Sir Hugh Cholmley, Sir John you speak most true,
For I have sold, and morgaged, most of my Land to you;
My Brother would have served the King, but was forbid to stay;
The King fore saw at Keynton-field, Sir Harry would run away.
I went down, quoth Sir Ralph Stapleton, with Musket, Pike and Drum,
To fetch Sir Francis Wortley up, but truly he would not come.
Oh Lord, Sir Robert Harlow said, how do our Foes increase?
I wonder who the Devil it was that first invented Peace.
Treason, Treason, Treason, Sir Walter Earl cries out,
Worse than blowing up the Thames, the Dagger, or the Clout.
Hang me, quoth Miles Corbet then, for we are all confounded,
And Cavaliers will Cuckold me, as well as did the Roundhead.
Quoth Sir John Wray, Mr. Speaker? I Will end this matter streit,
For this which is my Ninth Speech, I Am sure is none of my Eight;
I tried it at my Tables end, my Neighbors know it is right,
But Peace will make me speak less wit, and then farewell your Knight.
A-vengeance, quoth Harry Martin then, I Will ha no Accommodation,
For it was I, that bravely tore his Majesty's Proclamation;
In The House I spoke High Treason, I have sold both Land and Lease;
I shall not then keep but 3. Whores, Apox upon your Peace.
You see beloved Londoners, your Peace is out of season,
For which you have the sense of the House, and every Members reason:
Oh do not stand for Peace then, for trust me if you do,
Each County in the Kingdom will rise and do so too.
Essex Petition to the Best of Princes.
Sir,
THat All-Majesty (from whom you take
Your Heaven-Anointed Scepter) for whose sake
You drink the Dregs of Bitterness, which turns
Your Crown of Glory, to a Crown of Thorns;
Viewed sinful Sodom, Sodom that offended
Even him, as we do you, that vilely blended
His gracious Promises, did wrest his Powers,
And violate his Laws, as we do yours;
Yet urged by him whose Zeal brookt no denial,
Would have saved all, if ten were found but loyal.
Great Prince, to whom the Breath of Heaven has read
The Principles of Mercy, in whose stead
You sit as God to punish, or to spare,
Whose equal Hand can ruin, or repair
Our staggering Fortunes* Pity, and behold
Rebellious Essex! People now grown old
In Dis-obedience, who deserv'dly stand
Like Calves, expecting Death from your Just hand.
'Twas we that bleated first Rebellion out,
Who being Pulpit-led, not apt to doubt
Our Lecturing Zealots, and but green in reason,
Were made too wise, and frighted into Treason:
We are a Cock-brain'd Multitude, a Rabble
Of all Religions, and we daily squabble
About vain shades, and let the substance pass,
Hating good Manners as we hate the Mass;
Our new discretions every day convince,
Our old Rebellions, against so mild a Prince
Were scarcely fixed, but a fresh Ordinance comes,
And damns our Conscience into deeper Sums;
Breaks open our Houses, Rifles all our Stuff,
Nay more, as if we had not yet enough,
Plunders our very wits; nay if we do
Show but a sorry shrug, Malignants too;
That in so much our people now obeys
As many Tyrants as the Year has days:
But we have ten, ten, ten times multiplied,
And thousands more to that, which have denied
To bend their knees to Baal, whereof some lie
Cloystered in Grates, where they unpittied, cry
For Superannuated Crusts, and there remain,
Even taking Gods and Charles his Name in vain:
Some scorning to be awed by Subjects, fled
From their dear Wives and Children; led
Like Thieves to Gaols, saluted with the Curse
Of every Dunghill scurfe, with dirt and worse,
Where they are sadly, but yet dearly fed,
Some aged, some weak, some dying, and some dead:
For their dear sake (great Charles) they undertake
Deaths willing Martyrdom, for Charles his sake;
Be gracious to their County, let her know
That she, a miserable Land, does owe
Her sweet Redemption to their Congruous merit,
And least they will abjure what now they scarce inherit,
Let that accustomed Sunshine of your Eye
Enrich her soil, that she may still out-vye
Her Neighboring Shires, and let that brand which now
She wears, be set on the Epidemick brow;
And let the Loyal Gentry still be known
By this firm Mark from the perfidious Clown;
Let them, like treacherous slaves, be always bound
To pay Rack-rents, and only Till the ground;
Let neither them nor their base offspring dare
To be so rich as buy a Purchase there.
Dread Sovereign,
Forgive, Forget, Remember, and Relent,
Resemble him you so much represent,
And when pleased Heavens shall set thy Scepter free,
Triumph in him, and we will triumph in thee.
The Crier.
O Yes, if any Man or Woman,
Of what degree soever,
Lord, Knight, Esquire, Gentleman, or Yeoman,
Felt-maker, Button-Maker, or Weaver,
Coachman, Cobbler, or Brick-layer,
Sheriff, Alderman, or Mayor,
In City, Town, or Country, has
Lost his Religion, or his Faith,
Let him forth with repair to the Crier
Of Westminster, where let him bring
The Mark of what he does require,
And he shall hear on it, if God bless the King.
O Yes, if any Man or Woman,
Of what degree soever,
From the Marquis, to the Yeoman,
From the Straw-hat to the Beaver,
From the Landlord, to the Dray-man,
Whether the Clergy, or the Layman,
Has l^st a War-Horse-Armes, or Dragoones,
That were the Treasure of Buffoones;
Jewels* Money, Pearl, or Plate,
Cups for Service, or for State;
Come to the Crier, and you then
Shall find them he knows where, but God knows when.
The Cavaliers Prayer.
GOd bless the King and Queen, the Prince also,
And all his Loyal Subjects both high and low,
For Roundheads can pray for themselves we know;
Which no body can deny.
The Devil take Pym and all his Peers,
God bless Prince Rupert and his Cavaliers,
For if they come hither Pym will stink with fears;
Which no body can deny.
God bless Rupert and Maurice withal,
That gave the Roundheads a great downfall,
And knocked their Noddles against Worcester wall;
Which no body can deny.
Lawn sleeves and Surplices must go down,
For why, King Pym does sway the Crown;
But all are Bishops that wears a Black Gown;
Which no body can deny.
Let the Canons roar, and the Bullets fly,
King Pym does swear he will not come nigh,
He says, its a pittyfull thing to dye;
Which no body can deny.
The Horners they are brave Blades,
I do not know, but it is said
The stout Earl of Essex is free of that trade;
Which no body can deny.
The Baker over Burton cannot domineer,
For it is most firmly reported here,
He Is as free of the Pillory as ever they were;
Which no body can deny.
There is Isaac Pennington both wise and old,
I do not know, but it is for truth told
That he is turned poor Sexton of Paul's.
Which no body can deny.
There is a Lord W -- both wise and round,
He will meet Prince Rupert upon any ground,
And if that his hands behind him be bound;
Which few people will deny.
To whom it concerns.
COme, come, ye Cock-brain'd Crew, that can suppose
No truth, but that which travells through the Nose;
That looks on Gods Anointed with those Eyes,
You view your Prentices; ye that can prize
A Stable with a Church; that can Impeach
A Grave Devine, and hear an Hostler preach:
Are ye all mad? has your Fanatic zeal
Stifled your stock of Senses at a Meal?
Have ye none left to look upon these Times?
With Grief, which you and the unpunisht Crimes
Have brought upon this miserable Land?
Are ye all Bruits? not apt to understand
The neighboring stroke of Ruin, till't be past?
And you become the Sacrifice at last?
What would you have? can Reformation border
On Sacrilege? or Truth upon Disorder?
Can Rifleing, and Religion dwell together?
Can the way hence be said the next way thither?
Go, ply your Trades, Mechanics, and begin
To deal uprightly, and Reform within;
Correct your prick-ear'd Servants; and persuade
Your long loved Arm-fulls; if you can thus trade
In Pigges and Poultry: let them cease to smooth
Your Rumpled Follies, and forbear to sooth
Your pious Treasons, thus to kick and fling,
Against the Lords Anointed, and your King.
By the Author.
That neither loves for Fashion nor for Fear,
As far from Roundhead, as from Cavalier.
To the City.
DRaw near you factious Citizens; prepare
To hear from me what hideous Fools you are;
What lumps of sordid Earth; in which we find
Not any least Resemblance of a Mind;
Unless to Baseness and Rebellion bent
Against the King, to aid the Paliament;
That Parliament, whose Insolence will undo
Your Cities Wealth, your Lives, and Safety too:
Are you so stupid, dull, you cannot see
How your best Virtues now are Treachery?
Apparent Treason, Murder, and the like:
How with unhallowed hands your strive to strike
Him, whom you should your Loyalty afford,
( Great Charles) the blessed Anointed of the Lord?
How you do daily contribute, and pay
Money, your Truths and Honors to betray?
Bigg with Phanatique thoughts, and wild desire:
It Is you, that blew up the increasing Fire
Of foul Rebellion, you that only bring
Armies into the Field against your King;
For were it not for supportment from your Baggs,
That Great and Highest Court that only braggs
Of your vain folly, long ere this had bin
Punished for their bold Sacrilegious sin,
Of Actual Treason, there had never come
Upon this Kingdom such a Martyrdom.
Arms hanged up as useless, and the State
Retained his freedom; had you kept your Plate,
No Keinton-Battails had with Mothers curse,
Made Childless there the Treason of your Purse;
The Public Purse o'th City; which must be
Esteemed the Cause of Public Misery;
No Drums had frighted silken Peace from out
The Neighboring Countries, nor need you about
Your City with your gilded Muskets go
Trayning, not for good Service, but for Show;
That the whole Town may see your Feathers spread
Over your Hatts, as the Horns do over your Head;
The Humble Parliament had never dared
To have prescribed Laws to their King, but spared
Their Zeal in bringing Innovations, and
Distractions over the beauteous face oath Land,
They would not then have so Supreamly brought
Their Votes, to bring the Kingdoms Peace to naught;
Nor with so slight a value looked on Him,
King Charles, and only doted on King Pym;
Nor for Authentic doctrine, have allowed
As Law, the Precepts of Ingenuous Stroud;
Hampden nor Martyn had not then looked big
Upon their King, nor Arthur Haslerigge;
Nor yet K -- on whom we now confer
The style of Traiterous Earl of M --
Secured by you, the Patrons of the Cause,
Condemned his Loyalty, and the Kingdoms Laws;
Nor misled Essex* had not you been, nere
had acted on this Kingdoms Theater
So many Tragedie^; nor Warwick sought
T'ingrosse the Naval Honors, no nor thought
On any Action so unjust, unmeet,
As keeping from his Majesty his Fleet;
It Is you have done all this, you have been the Head.
The very Spring from whence this River spread
The streams of foul Rebellion; which we know
At last will drowned you with its overflow;
You the Arch-Traytors are, you, those that slew
The Kingdoms happiness, and the Allegiance due
Unto his Sacred Majesty; you, you that have
Betrayed this Nations Honor to the Grave
of lasting Obloquy; you that have destroyed
The smiling wealth of the City, and made void
The good Opinion, which the King before
Had of your Loyalties, and the Faith you bore
To the Royal Stem; which still has to your great
Advantage made this City their Chief Seat.
Fond and seditious Fools, do you think, ye
Are wiser than Times numerous Progeny?
That have Adored your City, when did They
Your harmless Ancestors, strive to give away
Their Wealth, and Duty from their Sovereigne Lord,
To make themselves Traitors upon Record?
When did they their Plate and Coin bring in?
To be the Cause of their own Ruyning?
They never used to fright their King, nor draw
Tumults together, to affront the Law.
No, nor good Houses, their Corslets slept, and all
The Arms they used hung up in each man's Hall.
They did not then enameled Muskets carry
To Train in Moor-fields, and in Finsbury:
But did in Comely Archery excel,
Like honest grave Children of Adam Bell,
And Climme oth' Clough, now each of you will be
More than a furious Wi^liam Cloudeslee;
And trace the Streets with terror, as if Ven,
With Fulk and Mannwaring, were the only Men
Whom you did owe Allegiance to; as if They
Could give you privilege to disobey
The Royal Mandate, which does them proclaim
Guilty of Treason, and you of the same;
As deeply stand Impeacht, and will at last
Pay dearly for it, when your vain hopes are past.
All succors, which you credit for your Merit,
Will be afforded you, by the help oth' Spirit,
That is the Devil; sure the Heavenly Powers,
Will never Patronize such Acts as yours.
Poor baffled City! baffled by a Crew
Of Men, which are as arrant Fools as you;
Surely your Brains can never be so dull
As not conceive this, which each empty Skull
Must needs resent; how that their only Aim
Is, to create your City all one Flame,
And as the Smoke and Sparks do up aspire,
They Will sit and laugh (like Nero) at the Fire
Themselves have made; unless your Heads be all
Horns and no Flesh, you needs must see the Fall
That threatens you, like Lightning: To eschew
Which Ruin, 'twould be Wisdom to renew
Your lost Allegiance, and Repentance bring,
As a fresh Victim, to appease your King;
For be assured, Who to the King's untrue,
Must in their Nature needs be false to you.
The MONSTER.
PEace, Vipers peace, let Crying blood nere cease
To haunt your bloody Souls, that love not Peace.
And cursed be that Religion, that shall cry,
A Reformation with Phlebotomye;
Your Impious Firebrands, whom the very Tears
Of Growning England, buried in their Fears,
Cannot extinguish; whom the bleeding Veins
Of desperate Ireland, which even now remains
A very Golgotha, cannot assuage
Those Stripes, the earnest of Another Age
Taste of your salvage Piety, and ly
The Lamb-less Martyrs of your Cruelty;
Whilst you lie softly emb'red, to increase
The flames of Christendom, and cry no Peace,
Let Sampsons coupled Messengers convey
Those Firebrands hence, and let them make their way
To their own Houses, consume and devaste,
Burn down their Barnes, and lay their Graynards waste,
Demolish all within doors, and without,
Make havoc there, destroy both Branch and Root.
Let all their Servants flee amazed; and cry,
Fire, Fire, and let no helping hand be nigh;
Let their Wiv^s live, but only live to appear
Thorns in their Sides, and Thunder in their Ears;
May all their Sons run mad into the Street,
And seeking Refuge there, there may they meet
The encountering Sword, and whom it spares to kill,
May they be Slaves, and labor at the Mill:
Let all their Daughters beg, and beg in vain;
Let them be ravished first, and then be slain;
Let all their Kindred wander up and down,
Like Vagabond* be lasht, from Town, to Town:
Let baseness be Entitled on their Names,
Too firm for all recoveries: O let Shames,
Reproach, and Lasting Infamy, remain
In deeper Characters than that of Cain;
Let Caitiff P -- and that Bloody Plot,
Be Sanctified now, or at least forgot;
And let those Vipers vindicate their Crimes
In every Almanac to after times;
Where may there Treason live among their senses,
More firm then Reigns of either Kings or Princes.
Thus may these Firebands thrive, and if this Curse
Succeed not, let it yield unto a worse.
For them, let them burn still, till Heaven thinks good,
To Quench them in their Generations Blood;
So that the World may hear them hiss and cry,
Who loved not Peace, in Peace shall never dye.
The Earl of Essex his Speech to the Parliament after Keinton Battle.
HAil to my Brother Roundheads, you that sit
At home, and study Treason, 'bove my Wit
Or Valor to maintain; it is you whose hearts
And brains are stufft with all Devilish darts
Of Rapine, and Rebellion; you whose dark
Religious Villainies, hates the least spark
Of Justice or Obedience to the King;
To you, and none but you, true News I bring,
With all my Fellow Rebels that survive,
Amongst whom in faith my self escaped scarce alive:
For when the Cavaliers, and Popish Scholars
Charged us so hot, my Coach full of Rex-dollers
I could have given to have been ten miles off;
And though the Zealots of our Party scoff,
And taunt the King's well-wishers, take it from me,
Happy were all the Roundheads that did flee;
They escaped a scowering, which through very fear
Took me and all my Regiment in the Rear,
At the first Charge; for that when we should fight,
We sneakt away* and had more mind to --
For had I dard, to venture my dear life,
I should have rought once for the Whore my Wife;
Yet I dare swear that we had won the day,
Had not so many fallen and run away:
And yet for all this Blood that has been spilt,
My Sword is guiltless, for fast by the hilt
I held it in my Scabbard, and still cried,
Well done, Fight on, unto the Fools that died;
Whilst I stole toward Warwick, to avoid
The Field, with the sad Spectacle quite cloyd:
I lost my Coach, and (which does make me fret)
I lost ^lake's Letter in my Cabinet,
That revealed all our Treason, he good man
Suffered at Oxford, and unless I can
Repent, it is said, that I must dye like him,
Be Hanged and Quartered, and you Mr. Pym:
We must be cautious, for the Cavaliers
Have desperate souls, concerning those base fears
That brought me back again; besides, the King
Has a Just Cause you know, and though we bring
The silly Multitude into the Noose,
Our own hearts tell us we are like to loose
Our heads, if Charles prevail; which we must do
If he proceeds thus, to kill ten for two,
You must provide new Armor, and more Arms,
And a new General, that dares hear Alarms
Of Drums and Trumpets; one that may have sense
And valor to excel my Excellence.
The Peev^sh Women as I passed the Strand,
Bless me knee deep, and would have kissed my hand,
As King, whilst I most courteously vayl'd
My Hat, and Feather to them, others rayl'd;
And them as wished, or knew I had the worst,
For one that prayed for me, dovoutly cursed.
The truest News of all I hope to tell ye,
Is that I have more mind to fill my belly,
Then fight again, for that same Dutchland Devil,
Rupert, the Prince of mischief, and all evil,
My Victuals took away, and burst my Wagons,
Whilst the Kings Forces fought with fiery Dragoons,
And beat me out of the Field; although we blind
The Multitude, and say w' had sea and wind,
Yet I protest the Elements themselves
Conspired to ruin us, Rebellious Elves:
And to conclude, some Jeering Cavalier,
Has put upon us, in a Song, this Jeer,
Rather than they should have the better a,
That you and I were drawn and hanged, etc.
A Dialogue between two ZEALOTS upon the etc. in the Oath.
SIr Roger from a zealous piece of Freeze,
Raised to a Vicar of the Children threes;
Whose yearly Audit may, by strict account,
To twenty Nobles, and his vails Amount;
Fed on the common of the female charity,
Until the Scots can bring about their parity,
So shotten, that his Soul like to himself,
Walks but in Querpo: this same Clergy Elf,
Encountering with a Brother of the Cloth,
Fell presently to Cudgels with the O th:
The Quarrel was, a strange misshapen Monster
etc. (God bless us!) which they conster
The brand upon the buttock of the Beast,
The Dragons tail tied on a knot, a neast
Of young Apocraphas, the fashion
Of a new mental Reservation.
While Roger thus divides the text, the other
Winks and expounds, saying, My pious Brother,
Hearken with reverence; for the point is nice,
I never read on it, but I fasted twice;
And so by revelation know it better,
Than all the Idolaters of the Letter.
With that he swelled, and fell upon the Theme,
Like great Goliath with his Weavers beam:
I say to thee, etc. thou lie,
Thou art the curled lock of Antichrist:
Rubbish of Babel, for who will not say,
^ongues were confounded in etc?
Who swears etc. swears more Oaths at once
Than Cerberus out of his triple Sconce:
Who views it well, with the same eye beholds
The old half Serpent in his numerous folds.
Accursed etc. thou, for now I scent,
What lately the prodigious Oysters meant.
Oh Booker, Booker, how came thou to lack
this Sign in thy prophetic Almanac?
It Is the dark Vault wherein the infernal plot
Of Powder against the State was first begot.
Peruse the Oath, and you shall soon descry it,
By all the Father Garnets that stand by it;
Against whom the Church, whereof I am a Member,
Shall keep another fifth day of November:
Yet here is not all, I cannot half untrusse
etc. it is so abominous.
The Trojan Nag was not so fully lined!
Unrip etc. and you shall find
Og the great Commissary, and which is worse,
The Apparatour upon his skew-ball'd horse.
Then (finally my Babe of Grace) forbear,
etc. will be too far to swear;
For it is (to speak in a familiar style)
A Yorkshire wea-bit, longer, than a mile.
Then Roger was inspired, and by Gods-diggers,
He Will swear in words at large, and not in Figures.
Now by this drink, which he takes off as loath
To leave etc. in his liquid Oath.
His Brother pledged him, and that bloody wine,
He swears shall seal the Synods Cataline.
So they drunk on, not offering to part
Till they had quite sworn out the eleventh quart:
While all that saw and heard them, jointly pray,
They and their tribe were all, etc.
The Public Faith.
STand off my Masters: It Is your pence a piece,
Jason, Medea, and the Golden Fleece;
What side the line good Sir? Tigris, or Po?
Lybia? Japan? Whisk? or Tradinktido?
St. Kits? St. Omer? or St. Margaret's Bay?
Presto begone? or come aloft? what way?
Doublets? or Knap? the Cog? low Dice? or high?
By all the hard names in the Letany,
Bell, Book and Candle, and the Pope's great toe
I conjure thy account: Devil say no.
Nay, since I must untruss, Gallants look to it,
Keep your prodigious distance forty foot,
This is that Beast of eyes in the Revelations,
The Basilisk has twisted up three Nations.
Ponteus Hixius doxius, full of tricks,
The Lottery of the vulgar lunaticks.
The Knapsack of the State, the thing you wish,
Magog and Gog stewed in a Chaffendish.
A bag of Spoons and Whistles, wherein men
May whistle when they see their Plate again.
Thus far his Infancy: his riper age
Requires a more mysterious Folio page.
Now that time speaks him perfect, and it is pity
To dandle him longer in a close Committee,
The Elf dares peep abroad, the pretty Fool
Can wag without a truckling standing-stool;
Revenge his Mother's infamy, and swear
He Is the fair Offspring of one half-score year;
The Heir of the House and hopes, the cry
And wonder of the Peoples misery.
It Is true, while as a Puppy it could play
For Thimbles, any thing to pass the day;
But now the Cub can count, arithmetize,
^link Masenello with the Duke of Guise;
Sign for an Irish purchase, and traduce
The Synod from their Doctrine to their Use;
Give its Dam suck, and a hidden way
Drink up arrears a tergo mantica.
An everlasting Bale, Hell in Trunk-hose,
Uncased, the Divel's Don Quixot in prose.
The Beast and the false Prophet twined together,
The squint-eyed emblem of all sorts of weather.
The refuse of that Chaos of the earth,
Able to give the World a second birth.
Afric avaunt! Thy trifling Monsters glance
But Sheeps-eyed to this Penal Ignorance.
That all the Prodigies brought ^orth before
Are but Dame Natures blush left on the score.
This strings the Baker's dozen, christens all
The cross-leg'd hours of time since Adam's fall.
The Public Faith? why it is a word of kin,
A Nephew that dare^ Cozen any fin.
A Term of Art, great Bohemoth's younger Brother,
Old Machiavel, and half a thousand other.
Which when subscribed writes Legion, names on truss,
Abaddon, Beelzebub, and Incu^us,
All the Vice-Royes of darkness, every spell
And Fiend wrapped in a short Tri^^illable.
But I fore-stall the Show. Enter and see,
Salute the Door, your Exit shall be free.
In brief it is called Religions ease, or loss;
For no one's suffered here to bear his cross.
A Committee.
CAst Knaves my Masters, fortune guide the chance,
No packing I beseech you, no by-glance
To mingle pairs, but fairly shake the bag,
Cheats in their spheres like subtle spirits wag.
Or if you please the Cards run as they will,
There is no choice in sin and doing ill.
Then happy man by's dole, luck makes the ods,
He acts most high that best out-dares the gods.
These are that Raw-bon'd Herd of Pharaoh's Kine,
Which eat up all your Fatlings, yet look lean.
These are the after-claps of bloody showers,
Which, like the Scots, come for your guide and yours.
The Gleaners of the Field, where, if a man
Escape the sword, that milder drying pan;
He leaps into the fire, cramping the claws
of such can speak no English but the Cause.
Under that foggy term, that Inquisition,
Y' are wrackt at all adventures On suspicion:
No matter what is the crime, a good estate's
Delinquency enough to ground their hate.
Nor shall calm innocence so escape, as not
To be made guilty, or at least so thought.
And if the spirit once inform, beware,
The flesh and world but renegadoes are.
Thus once concluded, out the Teazers run,
And in full cry and speed till Wat's undone.
So that a poor Delinquent fleeced and torn
Seems like a man that is creeping through a horn,
Finds a smooth entrance, wide, and fit, but when
He Is squeezed and forced up through the smaller end,
He looks as gaunt and pined, as he that spent
A tedious twelve years in an eager Lent;
Or bodies at the Resurrection are
On wing, just rarifying into air.
The Emblem of a man, the pitied Case
And shape of some sad being once that was.
The Type of flesh and blood, the Skeleton
And superfices of a thing that is gone.
The winter quarter of a life, the tinder
And body of a corpse squeezed to a cinder;
When no more tortures can be thought upon,
Mercy shall flow into oblivion.
Merciful Hell! thy Judges are but three,
Ours multiform, and in plurality!
Thy calmer censures flow without recall,
And in one doom souls see their final All.
We travel with expectance: Sufferings here
Are but the earnests of a second fear.
Thy plagues and pains are infinite; it is true;
Ours are not only infinite, but new.
So that the dread of what is to come, exceeds
The anguish of that part already bleeds.
This only difference swells 'twixt us, and you,
Hell has the kinder Devils of the two.
The Model of the New Religion.
WHoop! Mr. Vicar in your flying frock?
What news at Babel now? how stands the Cock!
When wags the flood? no Ephimerides?
Naught but confounding of the languages?
No more of the Saints arival? or the chance
Of three pipes two pence and an ordinance?
How many Queer-religions? clear your throat,
May a man have a peny-worth? four a groat?
Or do the Junsto leap at truss-a-fayle?
Three Tenants clap while five hang on the tail?
No Querpo model? never a knack or wile?
To preach for Spoons and Whistles? cross or pile?
No hints of truth on foot? no sparks of grace?
No late sprung light? to dance the wilde-goose chase?
No Spiritual Dragoones that take their flames
From the inspiration of the City Dames?
No crumbs of comfort to relieve your cry?
No new dealt mince-meat of Divinity?
Come lets's project: by the great late Eclipse
We justly fear a famine of the lips.
for Sprats are rose an Omer for a sowse,
Which gripes the conclave of the lower House.
Let Us therefore vote a close humiliation
For opening the sealed eyes of this blind Nation,
That they may see confessingly, and swear
They have not seen at all this fourteen year.
And for the splints and s^avins too, it is said
All the joints have the Riffcage, since the head
Swelled so prodigious, and exciz'd the parts
From all Allegiance, but in tears and hearts.
But zealous Sir, what say to a touch at Prayer?
How Quops the spirit? In what garb or air?
With Souse erect, or pendent, winks, or haws?
Sniveling? or the extention of the jaws?
Devotion has its mode: Dear Sir, hold forth,
Learning's a venture of the second worth.
For since the peoples rise and its sad fall,
We are inspired from much, to none at all.
Brother adieu! I see you are closely girt,
A costive Dover gives the Saints the squirt.
Hence (Reader) all our flying news contracts
Like the States Fleet, from the Seas into Acts:
But where is the Model all this while, you will say
It Is like the Reformation, run away.
To a Fair Lady weeping for her Husband Committed to Prison by the Parliament.
1643.
TUsh, let them keep him if they can,
He Is not in hold while you are free,
Come, sigh no more, but pledge the man,
What though in Fetters, yet can he
Be Prisoner unto none but thee;
Then dry your Eyes, for every tear
Makes them like drowned worlds appear.
Post through the Air, my fancy went,
With wings disguised, and there stood by
When he was brought to the Parliament,
And straight to the Bar, to the Bar, they cry,
The smiling Captain asked, Why?
With that they soon drew up his Charge,
Which Lady you shall hear at large.
Imprimis, he was married late
With a Gold Ring, unto a Dame,
Would make the best of us a Mate;
Witty, Pretty, Young, and Quaint,
And fairer then our selves can Paint:
Her lips do set men's teeth on edge,
Sure it is a Breach of Privilege.
And her Malignant beauty, can
Provoke our Members up to rise,
Nay make our General prove a man;
And the Star Chamber of her Eyes,
Robs Subjects of their Liberties:
And then her voice keeps Ears in awe,
Even like the High Commission Law.
Nay more, the fair Delinquent has
A pair of Organs in her throat,
Which when she does inspire with breath,
She can command in every noat,
More then both our Houses Vote
Her very Hair, put in Array,
Can fetter our Militia.
Her Cheeks still Natures Pattent have,
Not yet called in, for only (...)
In them engrossed all that is brave,
And other Ladies Hucksters be,
Her Beauty's the Monopoly;
When theirs is spent, to her they come,
And chaffer with her face for some.
She keeps an Alter on her brow,
Her Eyes two Tapers on each side,
There Superstitious Lovers bow;
Her Name is Mary too beside,
Who owns a Faith that is sanctified;
Let Us clap up him till further leisure,
And send for her to wait our pleasure.
Then go fair Lady, follow him,
Fear no Trumpet, fear no Drum,
Fair Women may prevail with Pym,
And one sweet smile when there you come,
Will quickly strike the Speaker dumb:
If not, then let one tear be spent,
And 'twill dissolve the Parliament.
Mr. Fullers Complaint.
ENgland once Europes joy,
Now her scorn;
Ambitious to be forlorn,
Self, by self torn;
Stand amazed?
Thy woes are blazed,
By silence best,
And wanting words, even wonder out the rest.
Help Gracious King,
The source and spring
Of all our bliss,
Alas the fault's not his;
Good Prince how is he grieved,
That he is mistook?
Or what is a Curse,
Far worse, he is not believed.
Help long-wisht for Parliament,
If so good by your intent;
And will,
And skill,
Why ill is your success?
Alas Malignant humors lurk,
And cause the Physic not to work,
To give our woes redress.
Help in the Law, ye Learned Sages,
Studied well in former ages:
But our Rents
Are above all Presidents;
In fight, what is might,
That Is right:
For Statutes are by Lawyers awed,
And Common Law by Canon Law outlawed.
Help ye Divines our souls to plaster,
Settle the Legacy which your Master
Bequeathed to his own at his decease,
Even Peace:
Alas alas in Gilead,
Where is no balm for to be had;
O Cruel,
They that should holy water bring, bring fiery fuel.
No help, no help,
Why then it is vain
For to complain;
And why men sin with all their heart,
Sorrow only but in part;
And still they cry
That all is ill,
And love to make it and keep't so still.
Since then our wounds
Are grown so wide,
And all means tried,
And all denied;
Good God help us at last,
Before all help be past,
For this is sure,
Men made the wounds, but God alone can help the cure.
Upon wearing the Kings Colors.
ALas, what take ye pepper in the Nose
To see King Charles his Colors worn in Pose?
'Twas but an Ornament to grace the Hat,
And must we have an Ordinance for that?
O serious worthies! how can you dispense
With so much time to draw a Grievance thence?
But you do very well to make it known,
When others Liberties surmounts your own;
You can and will suppress it, well, you may
Do even what you please, we must obey;
I hope you will take in hand the Tailors Trade,
And teach us how our Apparel must be made,
That women in a Vote shall plainly see
How wide their Smocks and Petticoats shall be:
If this continue, faith turn Barbars too,
And cut our hair of the same length you do;
And let it be no less a Crime then Treason,
To wear, do, or speak any thing that is reason:
As for the King, you will say he is King, it is true,
But he can rule himself, and order you:
What, can he so? he is mightily too blame,
And fallen into displeasure for the same;
He will not grant that you're his Friends, it is true,
Should you rule two Kingdoms as a third does you,
Lest from a Ribbin then, should spring a Faction,
'Twas wisely done to stop its growth in the Action;
Yet in despite of you, that this control,
I Will wear my Sovereigns Colors in my Soul.
A Western Wonder.
DO you not know, not a fortnight ago,
How they bragged of a Western wonder?
When a hundred and ten, slew five thousand men,
With the help of Lightning and Thunder.
There Hopton was slain, again and again,
Or else my Author did lie;
With a new Thanksgiving, for who are living,
To God, and his Servant Ch^dleigh.
But now on which side, was this Miracle tried,
I hope we at last are even;
For Sir Ralph and his Knaves, are risen from their Graves,
And Cudgel'd the Clowns of Devon.
And now St -- came, for his Honor was lame
Of the Gout three months together;
But it proved when they fought, but a running Gout,
For his heels were lighter then ever.
For now he out-runs, his Arms and his Guns,
And leaves all his money behind him;
But they follow after, unless he take water
At Plymouth again, they will find him.
What Reading has cost and St -- has lost,
Goes deep in the Sequestration;
These wounds will not heal, with your new Great Seal,
Nor Jepsons Declarations.
Now Peter's, and Case, in their Prayer and Grace,
Remember their new Thanksgiving;
Isaac and his Wife, now dig for their life,
And shortly must do it for their living.
A SONG.
THe world is now turned upside-down,
It Is thought K. Charles will keep his Crown,
The Roundheads now shall all be put down,
And alas poor Parliament now, now, now.
Prince Rupert made fair work the other day,
He killed all the Troopers that durst to stay,
The rest he killed, their Horses running away:
And alas poor Parliament now, now, now.
And Essex his horns hung so in his light,
Alas poor Cuckold, he could not see to fight,
And both Houses they were all ready to --
And alas poor Parliament now, now, now.
Then send for W -- and give him good pay,
He Will hoise up his Sails and carry you away,
In hopes you will stand his Friend another day:
And alas poor Parliament now, now, now.
Upon Alderman Atkins bewraying his Slops on the great Training day.
I Sing the strange adventures and sad Fate,
That did befall a Colonel of late,
A portly Squire; a Warlike hardy wight,
And pity it is, we cannot call him Knight,
A stout man at Custard, and Son of Mars,
But oh the soul disaster of his. --
Before the Worthies, and the rest beside.
Who saw how he his Courser did bestride,
Weilding his Truncheon, like a Weavers beam,
And yet -- his hose in every seam;
I cannot tell how fair he was in the Cradle,
But sure I am he was foul enough in the Saddle:
For feats of Arms none could come near him then,
He smelt so strong, and when eight thousand men
Discharged their Muskets, he discharged too,
But what? his Office and his Guts? what though
He made a House of Office of his Hose?
Stand further off, if it offend your Nose:
Belike he meant to hansell his New Satin,
Or, like fat Oxen, in his dung to batten;
But when in triumph he from Finsbury
Came home to Leaden Hall, he called to see
His Hellena, his Sultanesse, when she
At's first approach smelt out his Knavery;
And lest by the hot skirmish of the day,
Her Paris might miscarry in the way,
Or met with some wounds, sends for in all haste
Shambrook the skillful Surgeon, who begins at the waste
T'untruss, and as he fumbling downwards tends,
He had the business at his fingers ends;
Foh, quoth the Surgeon, call the Kitchen Queen
With clout in hand to make his Worship clean;
Then about the Master all the Servants shuffl'd,
He, like old Lockwood in the Counter, scuffl'd,
Showed two broad mighty Hanches all bew ray'd,
Nay then, quoth Shambrook, how shall I be paid;
The Devil a wound I see, is this the prime
Of six City Colonels in good time?
They say that shitten luck is good, and I
Will put it to the Vote of Chivalry,
Whether all be not likely well to jump
In the New Militia, when a -- is trump.
The Downfall of Cheapside-Crosse, May 2, 3, 4. 1643.
WHat have thou done poor Cross, that this hard doom
Is laid upon thee? what is now become
Of all thy gilded Images? for behold,
That now is Stone and Brick, which once seemed Gold,
The City-Rulers, in their Graver wit,
And late got Power, have now thought it fit,
That thou should be demolisht, and plucked down
By the warrant of Lord Isaac Pennington;
London's chief ( ut vis) who thinks store of good
He does, in prisoning, hanging, shedding blood,
In robbing, plundering each that is good to's King,
Because no Plate, nor Money, they will bring
Into Guildhall: nay then it is no wonder,
If by his Order thou art plucked asunder,
When first the top of thee with many a knock
They did beat down, (Lord) how the silly flock
Of Roundheads shouted, looking up to the Skies,
Giving God thanks for the great Victories
They had got against thee, whilst the Drums did beat,
And Trumpets sounding; truly it was meet:
They threw their Hatts up, and their Muskets shot,
They shook their Heads, and clapped their Hands, what not?
And thus when any Picture, Leg, or Arm
Was thrown to the Ground, the Roundheads all did swarm,
And sundry heaps tumbling one on another,
Striving who first should see it, then a Brother
A long Prayer made for thanks, that now they might,
Do what they list, be it nor Just, nor Right;
For now they keep the whole City in awe,
With wrong-expounded, and misconstrued Law,
Doing what they think fit, what is good in the eyes
Of them, being led even as their Spirits rise.
But for their Misdemeanors let this Curse
Light upon them, or a ten-times far worse:
May they no Silver have, nor yet no Gold,
Because there is Crosses in it: and, to be bold,
May they lead Lives so crossed with grief and care,
That, at the last, may bring them to despair,
May they no good thing quietly enjoy,
May they even perish as they walk, and dye,
And may they still crossed be, and crossed again,
May Crosses mixed with Losses be their pain,
Nay, because Crosses they desire none,
May they have ever Crosses two for one,
May all their Noses rot, that we may know
Them, may their Ears as long as Asses grow,
May their Hair nere be long, and may their hands
Even pine away, may they stink as they stand:
And to conclude, may they all lead cross Lives,
Nay, which is worse, be troubled with cross Wives.
A Vindication of Cheapside-Crosse against the Roundheads.
MUst I then down? is an eternal doom
Past out against me? must I needs to Rome?
And why? it is contrary to the Laws,
To judge the offender e're they hear the Cause.
Why come you armed against me? what may be
The cause of difference 'twixt you and me?
Have I transgrest the Law? or did I ever
Our gracious Sovereign from his People sever?
Did I to a factious Covenant subscribe,
Or turn a Jack-on-both-sides for a bribe?
Rebels have long our wished for bliss deferred,
All rose in arms, but yet I never stirred.
When such a Prick-ear troop upou me gazed,
Crying (no Cross) good faith I stood amazed:
I was struck dumb with wonder, and which worse,
Because I Would gold about me, feared my Purse.
This zealous rabble came not to adore me,
Yet (thanks to the Butchers) some fell down before me,
Others ran quite away, the rest disputed,
Mis-using Scripture phrases, but confuted.
Wisdom they called Apocriphal, threw di^t on
All Fathers faces, but Saint P -- and Burton.
Was God in the middle of this Congregation?
Or were they led by instinct, or revelation?
Kings do^t their Crowns, and Cardinals their Copes,
All must be bare unto a crew of Crops.
But does Religion such a hatred bring,
To hate the very picture of a King?
Brethren what would you have? or what do you fear?
I draw no sword, nor do I wear long hair.
I Will do no wrong (though armed with Pikes about)
Would you know why? 'twas to keep Roundheads out,
Who have not sworn, but taken a Protestation
To leave no golden Cross to bless our Nation.
They will divide my Coat, my Flesh, my Bones,
Theyl'e share the Gold, and give their Wives the Stones.
They say they will pluck the Tower of Babel down,
All things go right when there is no Cross in the Town.
But who can live without them? Crosses are
The good man's blessings, and his certain share.
He that would win an everlasting Crown,
Must elevate his Cross, not throw it down.
They Will have no Common Prayer, but do abhor
All that is common, but a common W --
Will you ^ear reason? that is not common to ye,
Will Prayers prevail? He pray ex tempore.
You think it is justice that your factious crew
Are cross to me 'cause I am Cross to you:
You will have flesh for flesh, It Is very dear
That Peter's nose should pay for Malchas ear.
If he should snuffle now, that were a jest,
That very thing would make him full blessed:
You Will run to hear him, and cry's doctrine strong,
Though nonsense, in regard he stands so long.
Put out his eyes next time, and you may may find
A second like the first, and doctrine blind.
Some call me Popish, and report they see
Diverse adore me, what is all that to me?
Because they worship me shall I fall down
Unto such Calves, Mechanics of the Town.
It Is Popery, let them kneel that list, I Will stand?
Before I Will bow, I Will fly to some new Land.
Be sorry Brethren, I am pleased to think
'Twas from too little wit, or too much drink.
I Will be a Roundhead spiritually sent
To pardon your affronts, if you will repent.
I am a foe to Rome, for you shall find
When I am gone, there is the more room behind.
A Song in defense of Christmas.
NOw Christmas is come, let us beat up the Drum,
And call our good Neighbors together,
And when they appear, let us make them good cheer,
That will keep out the wind and the weather,
To feast at this season, I think it is no treason,
I could give you a reason why,
Though some are so pure, that they cannot endure to see a Nativity Pie.
I cannot but wonder, that the Soldiers should plunder,
For keeping our Saviors birth,
For all Christians then, or I cannot tell when,
Should show forth their joy and their mirth.
But our Saints now adays, despise good old ways,
Against which they both preach and pray,
But to give them their dues, they are no better than Jews,
That speak against Christmas day.
These like the good cheer, all times oth' year,
It Is the birth day that does them annoy,
Plumb-porrage and brawn, and the Do and the Fawn,
With the Creature, they love to enjoy,
They often have meetings, and then there is such greetings,
Such traceing of Sisters about,
They preach and they pray, but I must not now say
What they do when their Candles are out.
Yet I cannot forbear, to tell in your ear
What befell at a breaking of bread,
How a Virgin full neat, went thither to eat,
But it cost her, her Maidenhead;
These men of high merit, though much for the spirit,
Are yet for the Flesh now and than,
For a new Babe of Grace, was got near the Place,
By a Congregational man.
The Dippers and Ranters, and our Scotch Covenanters,
That brag of their Faith and their Zeal,
These abound in their fainings, but I Will make no complainings,
Nor will I their Secrets reveal,
The poor Cavaliers, that still lives in fears
Of Prisons, and Sequestration,
Though they keep Christmasse day, are more honest than they,
But Honesty's quite out of fashion.
If you view our great Cities, and our Country Committees,
You will not find overmuch there,
Our Divines, though they preach it, themselves do scarce reach it;
And our Lawyers have little to spare.
I could tell of some more, that have no great store,
Of our Gentry, both Old and New,
But I think it is best, with edge tools not to jest,
Nor to speak all we know to be true.
But the poor Cavalier, as to mirthe and good cheer,
But now bid Christmas adieu,
If the Taxes hold on, their Money will be gone,
They will want both to bake and to brew,
Their Healths are put down, who adhered to the Crown,
It Is they that must fast and pray,
For to any man's thinking, both their eating and drinking,
Is like to be taken away.
The Bishop of Ossery on the Rebels.
LEt proud Babylon cease to boast
Of her Pyramid's stately spires,
This Rebellion is more strange,
Surmounting all Infernal fires.
No Age the like has ever bread,
Nor shall when these Rebels be dead.
A Bill on St. Paul's Church Door.
THis House is to be let,
It is both wide, and fair;
If you would know the price of it,
Pray ask of Mr. Mayor.
Isaac Pennington.

A SONG.
WHat though the Zealots, pull down the Prelates,
Push at the Pulpit, and kick at the Crown,
Shall we not ever, strive to endeavor
Once more to purchase our Royal Renown?
Shall not the Roundhead first be confounded?
Sa, sa, sa, sa boys, ha, ha, ha, ha boys,
Then we will return home, with Triumph and Joy,
Then weel'e be merry, drink Sack and Sherry,
And we will sing Boys, God bless the King Boys,
Cast up our Caps, and cry, Vive le Roy.
What though the wise, make Alderman Isaac,
Put us into Prison, and steal our Estates;
Though we are forced, to be un-horsed,
And walk on foot, as it pleases the Fates,
In the Kings Army, no man will harm ye;
Then come along Boys, valiant and strong Boys,
Fight for your Goods, which the Roundheads enjoyes;
And when you venture, London to enter,
And when you come Boys, with Phife and Drum Boys,
Isaac himself shall cry, Vive le Roy.
If not then, choose him, 'twill not excuse him,
Since honest Parliaments never made them Thieves;
Charles never did further, Thieves dipped in Murder,
Never by Pardon, long Lease, or Reprieves;
For such Conditions, and Propositions
Will not be granted, then be not daunted,
We will our honest old Customs enjoy:
Paul's now rejected, shall be respected,
And in the Quire, Voices sing hire,
Thanks to Jehovah, then Vive le Roy.
On two Parliaments dissolved.
TWo Parliaments dissolved! then let my heart;
As they in Faction, it in fraction part,
And, like the Levite sad with rage, ascribe
My piecemeal Portion to each broken Tribe,
And say, that Bethlehem, Judahs love, has been
Wronged by the Fag-end crew of Benjamin.
O Let such High presumption be accursed,
When the last Tribe shall wrong the best, and first;
While, like the Levite, our best Charles may say,
The Ravenous Wolf has seized the Lions prey.
Thus often Inferior Subjects are not shye,
A love to mock at Sacred Majesty.
What Faculty should not be injured,
If that the Feet had Power to spurn the Head?
And Kings Prerogative may soon fall down,
When Subjects make a Footstool of a Crown:
The Stars, the Heavens Inferior Courtiers, might
Command the Darkness, but not rule the Light,
Nor him that made it; should they all combine
With Luna at the fu^l, our Sun should shine
Brighter than they, nor can he be subdued,
Though he but one, and they a Multitude.
Say, Subjects ye were Stars, and 'twere allowed,
You justly of the Number might be proud;
Yet to your Sun be humble, and know this,
Your Light is borrowed, not your own, but His.
When the unfettered Subjects of the Seas,
The Fountains, felt their feet, and ease,
No sooner summoned, but they nimbly went
To meet the Ocean at a Parliament.
Did then these petty Fountains say their King,
The Ocean, was no Ocean, but a Spring?
Let me alone, if fresh excess of store
Can make me poorer than I was before.
And shall we then the power of Kings dispute?
And count it less, when more is added to it?
No, let the Common body, i^ it can,
Be not a River, but an Ocean,
And swell into a Deluge, till it hide
The top of Mountains in its teeming pride.
Kings, like Noah's Ark, are nearer to the Skies,
The more the Billows underneath them rise.
You then, who if your hearts were first in love,
Might sit in Counsel with the Gods Above:
You, that do question your Kings Power Below,
If you come there, will you use Heavens King so?
Do not aspire, you must take up you rest
More safe Below, than in the Eagles nest.
Has Clemency offended? will you harm,
And pluck the Sun from Heaven that makes you warm?
No King nor Bishops please? what, have we got
An Outside English, and an Inside Scot?
If Faction thus our Countries Peace distracts,
You may have want of Parliaments, not Acts.
Ill-ended Sessions, and yet well begun,
Too much being spoke has made too little done.
So Faction thrives, Puritanism bears sway,
None must do any thing but only Say.
Stoop, stoop, you baren-headed Hills, confess
You might be fruitfuller, if ye were less.
Tremble ye threadbare Commons: are you vexed
That Lambs feed on ye? Lions will come next.
Colonel Vennes Encouragement to his Soldiers. A SONG.
Fight on brave Soldiers for the Cause,
Fear not the Cavaliers,
Their threatenings are, as senseless as
Our jealousies and fears.
It Is you must perfect this great Work,
And all Malignants slay,
You must bring back the King again
The clean contrary way.
It Is for Religion that you fight,
And for the Kingdoms good,
By robbing Churches, plundering them,
And shedding Guiltless blood.
Down with the Orthodoxal train,
All Loyal Subjects slay,
When these are gone, we shall be blessed
The clean contrary way.
When Charles we have made Banckrupt,
Of Power and Crown bereft him,
And all his Loyal Subjects slain,
And none but Rebels left him.
When we have beggared all the Land,
And sent our Trunks away,
We Will make him then a Glorious Prince
The clean contrary way.
It Is to preserve his Majesty,
That we against him fight,
Nor ever are we beaten back,
Because our Cause is right.
If any make a scruple at
Our Declarations, say
Who fight for us, fight for the King
The clean contrary way.
At Keinton, Brainsford, Plymouth, York,
And diverse Places more,
What Victories we Saints obtain,
The like nere seen before.
How often we Prince Rupert killed,
And bravely won the day,
The wicked Cavaliers did run
The clean contrary way.
The true Religion we maintain,
The Kingdoms Peace and Plenty,
The Privilege of Parliament,
Not known to One of twenty.
The ancient Fundamental Laws,
And teach men to obey
Their lawful Sovereign; and all these
The clean contrary way.
We, Subjects Liberties preserve
By Imprisonment and Plunder,
And do enrich our selves and State,
By keeping the Wicked under.
We must preserve Mechanics now
To Lectorize and pray,
By them the Gospel is advanced
The clean contrary way.
And though the King be much misled
By that Malignant Crew,
He Will find us honest at the last,
Give all of us our due.
For we do wisely plot, and plot
Rebellion to allay,
He sees we stand for Peace and Truth
The clean contrary way.
The Publique-Faith shall save our Souls,
And our good Works together,
And Ships shall save our Lives that stay
Only for Wind and Weather.
But when our Faith and Works fall down,
And all our Hopes decay,
Our Acts will bear us up to Heaven
The clean contrary way.
A Second Western Wonder.
YOu heard of that wonder, of the Lightening and Thunder,
Which made the lie so much the louder;
Now li^t to another, that Miracles Brother,
Which was done with a Firkin of Powder.
Oh what a damp, struck through the Camp,
But as for Honest Sir Ralph,
It blew him to the Vies, without beard, or eyes,
But at least three heads and a half.
When out came the book, which the New-monger took
From the preaching Ladies Letter,
Where in the first place, stood the Conquerors face,
Which made it show so much the better.
But now without lying, you may paint him flying,
At Bristoll they say you may find
Great William the Con, so fast he did run,
That he left half his name behind.
And now came the Post, saves all that was lost.
But alas, we are past deceiving,
By a trick so stale, or else such a tail
Might mount for a new Thanksgiving.
This made Mr. Case, with a pitiful face,
In the Pulpit to fall a weeping,
Though his mouth uttered lies, truth fell from his eyes,
Which kept our Lord Mayor from sleeping.
Now shut up shops, and spend your last drops,
For the Laws of your Cause, you that loath 'um,
Lest Essex should start, and play the Second part,
Of Worshipful Sir John Hotham.
The Battle of Worcester.
ALl you that be true to the King and the State,
Come listen, and I Will tell you what happened of late,
In a large field near Worcesters gate.
Which no body can deny.
Brave Sir John Byron, true to the Crown,
With forces too few, it is very well known,
Went thither, it is said, to keep the Town,
Which no body can deny.
But whether 'twas true, ye have learned to guess,
As for my own part I think no less,
To give you a taste of our Future success,
Which mo body can deny.
Thither came Fines with arms Complete,
The Town to take, and Byron defeat,
Provisions were made, but he staid not to eat,
Which no body can deny.
But as soon as he heard our great Guns play,
With a Flea in's ear, he ran quite away,
Like the lawful begotten Son of Lord Say,
Which no body etc.
Nay had the old Crop-ear'd his Father dared
To approach the walls, his design had bin marred,
For Byron would not have proved a Ward.
Which no body can deny.
Pox on him he keeps his Patent yet,
But I hope next Term he shall not fit,
'Twas but quam diu se been Gesserit,
Which no body, etc.
But now behold, increased in force,
He comes again with ten Troops of Horse,
Oh bloudy-Man he had no remorse,
Which no body, etc.
They marched up boldly, without any fear,
Little thinking Prince Rupert was come so near,
But alas poor souls it cost them dear,
Which no body, etc.
The Prince like a Gallant man of his trade,
Marched out of the Town till this quarter was made,
Sir, the Enemies are near at hand it is said:
Which no body, etc.
Where, where are they? Prince Rupert cries,
And looking about with fiery eyes,
Some thirty behind a hedge he spies.
Which no body, etc.
This Forlorn-hope he no sooner saw,
But 4. or 5. more did toward them draw;
He asked, who is there? one answered him, haw,
Which no body, etc.
The man you will say was rudely bred;
The Prince shot a Bullet into his head,
His haw had been better spared then said,
Which no body, etc.
Prince Maurice then, to second his Brother,
Discharged his Pistol, and down fell another,
'Twere pity but news were sent to his Mother,
Which no body, etc.
Lord Digby slew one to his great fame,
So did Monsieur de Lisl^, and Sir Rich. Crane,
And another French man, with a harder name,
Which no body, etc.
Prince Rupert to his own Force retired,
And bad them not shoot till their Doublets were fired,
His Courage and Conduct were both admired,
Which no body, etc.
He Charged but twice, yet made them shrink,
'Twere hard to get off now one would think,
Yet both can do it as easy as drink.
Which no body, etc.
Then have amongst ye, quoth Sir Jews Dives,
For a good Cause you know always thrives,
His heart in his shoulders cost many men's lives,
Which no body, etc.
John Byron did as bravely fight;
To the Prince of Wales his great delight,
He came home in safety and was made a Knight.
Which no body, etc.
My Friend David Walter in Doublet white,
Without any Arms either rusty or bright,
Charged through them twice like a little spright,
Which no body, etc.
But oh Prince Maurice, where was he?
Where one of us would be loath to be,
Surrounded with Butchers three times three,
Which no body, etc.
These men of East-cheap little said,
But all their blows at his head they made,
As if they had been at work at their Trade,
Which no body, etc.
Then came a Frenchman fiery and keen,
He broke the Ring and came in between,
Ere a man let a -- not a Butcher was seen.
Which no body, etc.
Brave Lord Wilmot, by whose hands did fall
Many a Rebel stout and tall,
Came to him without any Arms at all,
Which no body, etc.
Their Horses then close up they spurred,
The wounds they gave were all with the Sword,
Their Pistols proved not worth a --
Which no body, etc.
But the Parliament having quite forgot
To Vote that Sandys should not be shot
By the hand of a Mounsier he went to the pot.
Which no body, etc.
Douglas a Scotch-man of great fame
Was slain that day for want of the same;
The Houses in this were much to blame,
Which no body, etc.
Of all their chief Commanders that day,
I hold it fit I should something say,
His name was Brown, and he ran away,
Which no body, etc.
If a few more o'em should show such a freak,
Both Houses surely would quickly break,
And honester men would have leave to speak,
Which no body, etc.
They fly, they fly, Prince Rupert cried,
No sooner said, but away they hy'd;
The force of his Arms they durst not abide,
Which no body can deny.
Smectymnuus, or the Club-Divines.
SMectymnuus! the Goblin makes me start!
In The Name of Rabbi Abraham, what art?
Syriack? or Arabic? or Welsh? what skilt?
Ap all the Brick-layers that Babel built!
Some Conjurer translate, and let me know it,
Till then it is fit for a West Saxon Poet.
But do the Brotherhood then play their Prizes
Like Mummers in Religion with disguises?
Out-brave us with a name in Rank and File,
A name* which if 'twere trained, would spread a Mile;
The Saints monopoly, the zealous cluster,
Which, like the Porcupine, presents a muster,
And shoots his quills at Bishops and their Sees,
A Devont litter of young Maccabees.
Thus Jack of all trades has devoutly shown
The twelve Apostles on a cherry-stone,
Thus fashion's Al-a-Mode in Treasons fashion;
Now we have heresy by Complication.
Like to Don Quixots Rosary of slaves
Strung on a chain; a Murnival of Knaves
Packt in a trick, like Gypsies when they ride,
Or like Colleagues, which fit all on a side:
So the vain Satyrists stand all a row,
As hollow teeth upon a Lute-string show:
The Italian Monster, pregnant with his Brother,
Natures Diaeresis, half one another,
He, with his little sides-man Lazarus,
Must both give way unto Smectymnuus.
Next Sturbridge Fair is Smecks, for lo his side
Into a five-fold Lezar's multiplied.
Under each arm there is tuckt a double gyssard,
Five faces lurk under one single vizard:
The Whore of Babylon left these brats behind,
Heirs of confusion by Gavelkind.
I think Pythagoras's foul is rambl'd hither,
With all the change of Raiment on together:
Smec is her general Wardrobe, she will not dare
To think of him as of a thorough fare;
He stops the Gossiping Dame; alone he is
The purlew of a Metempsichosis.
Like a Scotch Mark, where the more modest sense
Checks the loud phrase, and shrinks to 13. pence*
Like to an Ignis fatuus, whose flame,
Though sometimes tripartite, joins in the same:
Like to nine Tailors, who if rightly spelled,
Into one man are Monosyllabel'd:
Short-handed zeal in one has cramped many,
Like to the Decalogue in a single penny.
See, see! how close the curs hunt under sheet,
As if they spent in Quire, and scanned their feet;
One Cure, and five Incumbents leap a truss:
The title sure must be litigious!
The Sadduces would raise a question,
Who must be Smec at the Resurrection.
Who cooped them up together were to blame,
Had they but wire-drawn, and spun out their name,
'Twould make another Prentices Petition
Against the Bishops and their Superstition.
Robson and French (that count from five to five,
As far as nature fingers did contrive,
She saw they would be sessors, that is the cause
She cleft her hoof into so many claws,)
May tire their Carret-bunch, yet never agree
To rate Smectymnuus for Pole Money.
Caligula, whose pride was mankinds bail,
(As who disdained to murder by retail)
Wishing the world had but one general neck,
His glutton blade might have found game in Smec.
No echo can improve the Author more,
Whose lungs pay use on use, to half a score:
No Felon is more lettered, though the brand
Both superscribes his shoulder and his hand.
Some Welsh-man was his Godfather, for he
Wears in his name his Genealogy.
The Banes are asked, would but the time give way,
Beewixt Smectymnuus and Et caetera;
The Guests invited by a friendly Summons,
Should be the Convocation and the Commons;
The Priest to tie the Foxes tails together,
Mosely, or Sancta Clara, choose you whether.
See, what offspring every one expects!
What strange pluralities of men and sects?
One says he will get a Vestery, another
Is for a Synod: But upon the Mother:
Faith! cry St. George, let them go to it, and stickle,
Whether a Conclave or a Conventicle:
Thus might Religions catterwaul, and spite,
Which uses to divorce, might once unite.
But their cross Fortunes interdict their trade,
The Groom is Rampant, but the Bride displaid.
My task is done, all my Hee-Goats are milkt,
So many Cards in the stock, and yet be bilkt?
I could by Letters now untwist the Rabble,
Whip Smec from Constable to Constable.
But there I leave you to another dressing,
Only kneel down and take your Fathers blessing,
May the Queen Mother justify your fears,
And stretch her Patent to your leather ears.
A Lenten Letany. Composed for a confiding Brother, for the benefit and
edification of the Faithful Ones.
FRom Villainy dressed in the Doublet of Zeal,
From three Kingdoms baked in one Common weal,
From a gleek of Lord Keepers of one poor Seal,
Libera nos, etc.
From a Chancery-writ, and a whip and a bell,
From a Justice of Peace that never could spell,
From Colonel P. and the Vicar of Hell.
Libera nos, etc.
From Neat's feet without socks, and three-peny Pyes.
From a new sprung Light that will put out ones eyes,
From Goldsmiths-hall, the Devil, and Excise,
Libera nos, etc.
From two hours talk without one word of sense,
From Liberty still in the future tense,
From a Parliament long-wasted Conscience,
Libera nos, etc.
From a Coppid Crown-tenent pricked up by a Brother,
From damnable Members, and fits of the Mother.
From Ears like Oysters that grin at each other,
Libera nos, etc.
From a Preacher in buff, and a Quarter-staff-steeple*
From the unlimited Sovereign Power of the People,
From a Kingdom that crawles on its knees like a Creeple,
Libera nos, etc.
From a vinegar Priest on a Crab-tree stock,
From a foddering of Prayer four hours by the Clock.
From a holy Sister with a pitiful Smock,
Libera nos, etc.
From a hunger-starved Sequestrators maw,
From Revelations and Visions that never man saw,
From Religion without either Gospel or Law,
Libera nos, etc.
From the Nick and Froth of a Penny Pot-house,
From the Fiddle and Cross, and a great Scotch Louse,
From Committees that chop up a Man like a Mouse,
Libera nos, etc.
From broken shins, and the blood of a Martyr,
From the Titles of Lords, and Knights of the Garter,
From the teeth of mad-dogs, and a Country man's quarter,
Libera nos, etc.
From the Public Faith, and an Egg and Butter,
From the Irish Purchasers, and all their clutter,
From Omega's nose, when he fettles to sputter,
Libera nos, etc:
From the zeal of Old Harry locked up with a Whore,
From waiting with Plaints at the Parliament door,
From the death of a King without why or wherefore,
Libera nos, etc.
From the French disease; and the Puritan fry,
From such as nere swear, but devoutly can lie,
From cutting of capers full three story high,
Libera nos, etc.
From Painted glass, and Idolatrous cringes,
From a Presbyter's Oath that turns upon hinges,
From Westminster Jews with Levitical fringes,
Libera nos, etc.
From all that is said, and a thousand times more,
From a Saint, and his Charity to the Poor,
From the Plagues that are kept for a Rebel in store.
Libera nos, etc.
The Second Part.
THat if it please thee to assist
Our Agitators, and their List,
And Hemp them with a gentle twist,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to suppose
Our actions are as good as those
That gull the People through the Nose,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee here to enter,
And fix the rumbling of our center,
For we live all at peradventure,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to unite
The flesh and bones unto the sprite,
Else Faith and literature good night,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee O that we
May each man know his Pedigree,
And save that plague of Heraldry,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee in each Shire
Cities of refuge Lord to rear,
That failing Brethren may know where,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to abhor us,
Of any such dear favor for us,
That thus have wrought thy peoples sorrows,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to embrace
Our days of thanks and fasting face,
For robbing of thy holy place,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to adjourn
The day of judgment, least we burn,
For lo it is not for our turn,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to admit
A close Committee there to sit,
No Devil to a Humane wit!
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please to dispense
A little for convenience,
Or let us play upon the sense,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to embalm
The Saints in Robin Wisdom's Psalm,
And make them musical and calm,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee, since it is doubt,
Satan cannot throw Satan out,
Unite us and the Highland rout.
Quaesumus te, etc*
AN ELEGY On the Death of Sir B^vile Grenvile.
TO build upon the merit of thy Death,
And raise thy Fame from thy expiring Breath,
Were to s^eal Glories from thy Life, and tell
The World, that Grenvil only did dye well.
But all thy Days were fair, the same Sun rose,
The Luster of thy Dawning, and thy Close.
Thus to her Urn the Arabian wonder flies,
She lives in Perfumes, and in Perfumes dies:
E're storms, and tumults (Names undreaded here)
Could in their Bloome and In^ancy appear;
He in the stock and treasure of his mind
Had heaps of Courage, and just heat combined.
Where, like the thrifty Ant, he kept in store
Enough for Spring, but for a Winter more.
In Peace he did direct his thoughts on Wars,
And learned in silence how to combat Jarres.
And though the Times looked smooth and would allow
No track of Frown or Wrincle in their Brow:
Yet his quick sight perceived the Age would lower,
And, while the Day was fair, foresaw the Shower.
At this the prudent Augur did provide
Where to endure the storm, not where to hide,
And sought to shun the Danger now drawn nigh,
Not by Concealment but by Victory.
As valiant Seamen, if the Vessel knock,
Rather sail over it, than avoid the Rock.
And thus Resolved, he saw on either hand,
The Causes, and their bold Abettors stand.
The Kingdoms Law is the pretense of each,
Which these by Law preserve, these by its breach,
The Subjects Liberty each side maintains,
These say it consists in freedom, these in Chains,
These love the decent Church, but these not pass
To dress our Matron by the Geneva Glass?
These still enshrine their God; but these adore
Him most at some Ara^nah's Threshing-floor.
Each part defends their King a several way,
By true Subjection these, by Treasons they.
But our Spectatour soon unmask't the sin,
And saw all Serpent through that specious skin.
And midst their best Pretext did still despair,
In any dress to see their Moor look fair.
And though the Number weighed in the popular scale
As light things float still with the tide and gale,
He with the solid mixed, and did conclude,
Justice makes Parties great, not Multitude.
And with this constant Principle possessed,
He did alone expose his single Breast,
Against an Armies force, and bleeding lay,
The great Restorer of the Declining Day.
Thus slain thy Valiant Ancestor did lie,
When his one Bark a Navy durst defy,
When now encompassed rounds he Victor stood,
And bathed his Pinnace in his conquering Blood.
Till all his Purple current dried and spent,
He fell, and left the Waves his Monument,
Where shall next famous Grenvills Ashes stand?
Thy Grandsire fills the Seas, and Thou the Land.
To my Lord Bishop of S. on New Years day.
THough with the course and motion of the year,
Not only Stars and Sun
Move where they first begun;
But Things and Actions do
Keep the same Circle too,
Returned to the same point in the same Sphere.
Griefs and their Causes still are where they stood,
It Is the same Cloud and Night
Shuts up our Joys and Light:
Wars as remote from Peace,
And Bondage from Release,
As when the Sun his last years Circuit rode.
Though Sword and Slaughter are not Parted hence,
But we like years and times,
Meet in unequal chimes,
Now a Cloud and then a Sun,
Undo and are undone,
Let loose and stopped by the Orbs intelligence.
Though Combats have so thick and frequent stood,
That we at length may raise
A Calendar of days,
And style them foul or fair,
By their success, not Air:
And sign our Festivals by Rebels blood.
Though the sad years are clothed in such a dress,
That times to times give place,
And seasons shift their grace,
Not by our Cold or Heat,
But Conquest or Defeat:
And Loss makes Winter, Summer, happiness.
Nay though a greater Ruin yet await;
Such as the Active curse, The new disease.

Sent to make worst times worse,
Deaths keen and secret dart,
The shame of Herbs and Art
Which proves at once our Wonder and our Fate.
Though these conspire to fully our request,
And labor to destroy,
And kill your New Years joy.
Yet still your wonted Art
Will keep our wish in heart.
Proportioned not toth' times but to your breast
Thus in the Storm you Calm and Silence find,
Nor Sword nor Sickness can approach your mind.
A SATYR, Occasioned by the Author's Survey of a Scandalous Pamphlet, entitled
The Kings Cabinet opened.
WHen Laws and Princes are despised and cheap,
When High patcht Mischiefs all are in the heap;
Returns must still be had; Guilt must strive more
Though not to' Enoble, yet to Enlarge her store.
Poor cheap Design! the Rebel now must fly
To Packet War, to Paper-Treacherie.
The Basiliskes are turned to Closet-Spies,
And to their Poisonous add Enquiring eyes:
As Snakes and Serpents should they cast their sting,
Still the same Hate, though not same Poison fling;
And their Vain teeth to the same point address,
With the like Rancor, though unlike Success:
So those that into undiscerning veins,
Have thrown their Venom-deep, and their dark stains,
By frail Advantages, still find it good,
To keep the Infection high in the Peoples Blood.
"For Active Treason must be doing still:
"Lest she unlearn her Art of doing ill.
Who now have waded through all Public aw,
Will break through Secrets and profane their Law.
Know you, that would their Act and Statute see,
Nature kept Court, and made it her Decree.
When Angels talk, all their Conceits are brought
From Mind to Mind, and they discourse by Thought.
A Close Idea moves, and Silence flies
To post the Message, and dispatch Replies,
And though Ten Legions, in the Round are bent,
They only hear to whom the Talk was meant.
Now, though in Men a different Law controules,
And Souls are not Ambassadors to Souls:
Nature gave Reason power to find a way,
Which none but these could venture to betray.
"Two close safe Paths she did bequeath to men,
"In Presence, Whisper; and at Distance, Pen.
Public Decrees and Thoughts were else the same,
Nor went it to Converse, but to Proclaim.
Conceits were else but Records, but by this care
Our Thoughts no Commons, but Enclosures are:
What bold Intruders then are, who assail
To cut their Prince's Hedge, and break his Pale?
That so Vmanly gaze, and dare be seen
Even then, when He converses with his Queen?
Yet, as who breaks the tall Bank's rising Side,
And all the Shore does levy with the Tide,
Does not confine the Waves to any Bound,
But the whole Stream may gain upon the Ground;
So these, straight Prospect scorn, and Private View,
"The Crime is small that does engage a Few.
These print their Shame, they must complete their Sin:
Not take some Waves, and shut the Sluice again
But, to the Raging of their Sea, they do
Let in the Madness of the People too.
But, 'cause their Crime must wear a Mask and Vail,
And fain the Serpent would conceal his Tail.
No sooner comes the Libell to our view,
But see a stayed demure, grave Preface too:
Which seems to show they would not thus intrude,
Nor press so far, but for the Public good:
But as some London Beggars use to stand,
In Grecians Coats with Papers in their hand,
Who are (as them indifferent Parts we meet)
English at Home, but solemn Greeks in the street.
Of whom unclothed, and when the truth is heard,
Constantinople only knows the Beard.
So this sly Masker, lay its Tinsell by,
Is only Painted Zeal, and Pageantry,
We need not let our Satyr here compute,
How it prophanes God in his Attribute. See the Preface

But for it^s Light it need no B^shell call,
A Sempstresse Thimble will Eclypse it all.
O! in what meekness it pretends to creep!
How well the Tiger personates the Sheep!
It not Returns ill Language to the King,
Though the next Lines the Psalms against Him bring.
Then it to the Business comes, and lets us know,
Who reads it either is its Friend, or Foe.
If Friend, the Scandals all must true appear:
If Foe (alack the man is never the near.)
Foe no Light moves, no Miracles like these,
He Will say they are not the Kings too, if he please.
And tell us pray? what, may not your last words stand?
You counterfeit his Seal, why not his Hand?
But to admit, We now deduce and bring,
What after-notes clearly imply oth' King.
First, They His Comfort from His Secrets wrest.
They do allow the King, but not the Breast,
The Sacred Knot must have a Tie, and Force,
To join their Hands, but yet their Thoughts Divorce:
And, as the Ivye weddes her Consort-Tree,
Though joined, and close their chaste Embraces be,
Yet in those Twins and Circuits we can find
No Traffic, no Commerce of mind with mind:
So must the Sacred Laws of Marriage pierce;
Here she may Sprout and Grow, but not Converse.
And, like a Plant removed by Grafters toil,
She finds not Nuptials, but a change of Soil.
England to the Queen transplanted thus must prove,
No Foreign Kingdom^, but a Foreign Grove.
But, least this groundless seem, they reasons vex,
And tell the World She Is of the Weaker Sex.
In what wild Brains this Madness first began!
They Are wondrous angry, 'cause the Queen's no Man.
Fond Sirs forbear, do not the world perplex:
Reason and Judgment are not things of Sex.
Souls and their Faculties were never heard
To be confined to the Doublet, and the Beard.
Consult one Age from this, and you shall find
A Queen the Glory of your Annals shined.
But who to far and distant Objects flies,
Must say the Sun wants Luster, or he Eyes.
Our Present injured Queen returns that store,
And does again, what could be done before:
By the King's Judgment, shows Her own is Right,
And still she meets His Ray with her own Light.
Thus the wise King to Shebah's Queen was known,
Who knew Him wise by Wisdom of her own.
But as all Public Knowledge barred must be,
So Houshold-Acts must have their Mystery:
No Circumstance can pass, no Servant made,
But must be wrapped in silence and close shade.
One Place in Court a Riddle must afford,
Worthy a secret Sybi^s dark Record.
As the Kings Acts must all their limits prove,
So their Restraint and Reins must check his Love.
Esteems of's Consort by their pitch must fly,
Nor must He rate his Dear Queens Health too high.
He must affect thus far, and then no more,
His Tides must be proportioned to their shore;
His Tenderness their Weights and Ballanc^ wear,
By Grains and Scruples they Confine His Care,
But (Savage) know, there can no ransom be
Poys'd with the Health of such a Queen as She.
She that at once such weighty Acts can do,
That can be Queen and yet negotiate too:
Send and be sent, and without more demurre,
Be both the Queen and her Ambassador.
That gives dispatch for Ships, and when she please,
Divides the Empire with the Queen o'th Seas:
Who dares the threats of any danger stand,
The stubborn Rock, or the Devouring Sand.
And though the Sea swell like Her fate, and Grave,
Look at Her Consort, and despise the Wave.
The Captive Queen did (thus) the Tyrant tell,
I am no Captive so my King be well. Q. Curtius, lib. 3.

By these her worth and rate is faintly known,
Past stories blush when she erects Her own.
Search old gray Annals, you may find at length,
Some Queen in Vigor, and her midday strength;
Who in her injured Consorts cause, referres
To Copies glancing at these Acts of Hers.
But if Infirm and Sickly Queens we scanne,
No story patterns her, None ever can
Show us a Queen fraught with such wide Affairs,
Here private Weakness, there a Kingdom's cares,
Perplexed and tortured from her rest and ease,
By a Rebellion here, there a Disease:
Advice, and Medcines at one time we view,
A Counsel-board, Board of Physicians too.
Yet her Capacious Soul both these defeats,
While this hand holds Instructions, that Receipts.
These are our famed Queens Crimes, but yet one more
Must be the main Ingredient of the store.
Which seems to press so deep, there is naught so bright,
But this may sully all its luster quite:
It Is her Religions Care: She tryes Her Powers
To keep that still, do not we so for Ours?
Why to one Face so different shapes have bin,
What Virtue is in Us, in Her is Sin.
Our different Faiths did long together grow,
And neither suffered, neither loss did know:
And like a stream, which 'twixt two fields does flow,
Which as it Moistens, so Divides them too:
So did the Kingdoms Law throw Dew and growth,
In Weight and just proportion unto both,
And like a parting Current, slide along
To keep them wide, that neither neither Wrong.
Our Faiths were then but Two, but since a sp'rit
So many Mushrome Sects raised in a Night:
The Protestant (as she could Parties gain
Who unconcerned were in the Dregs and stain)
Did recommend her Votaries, and bring
Her Faith to its Defender, our Just King.
Who with such Zeal has kept her Rites entire,
As well from Languishing, as from strange Fire:
That still the Censer savours its true scent,
Without Accession, yet no Perfume spent;
The happy Martyrs find their Faith had stood
In Him, as when they bathed it in their blood.
They joy to see, that He his God adores,
Not at High Places, nor at Threshing-floores,
But spite of Scandals, pays his Homage still
In the Just Beauty of the Sion-Hill.
The Other Sects, though as in Common-fields,
Which Swine, and Horses, Mules and Oxen yields,
Who though at Distance fed, Approaching clash,
And disproportioned shapes together dash*
So they, though one Rebellion them sustain,
Themselves Accuse, and are Accused again.
Could they comply, then possibly might dwell
Some faint Agreement, though no Peace in Hell:
Now, these nice tastes no Foreign aids endure,
(Their Rebel Scots are English Rebels sure,)
No, nor the Papists: much it with them sticks,
Lest these Men's Punniards should be Heretics:
Their souls would be profaned, and clean undun,
Should they be slain by an Idolatrous Gun.
Go lay your Vizar by, your Masking stuff,
The Devil is tired, and Hell has laughed enough:
The world descryes the Cheat, it is quickly known
They no Faith hate, who have Resolved on None.
These may not fight: that is, the King you would have
Tamely forsake his Crown, and be your Slave.
His Easier Subjects long ago you gat,
All who approved your Bait, and swallowed that.
Indeed, Discerning souls the snare forsook,
And through the Wave did still descry the Hook:
But yet so close designs were cast about,
Your Race was half run e're the King set out,
Yet you complain, and guilty fears do gnaw,
Lest you should scanted be for Space and Law:
Conscious, though you your cause did forward meet,
Its Guilt and Sin hangs Plummets at its feet.
Are not the Jews, Walloones, the Turks, and all meet,
Whom from as Different Gods as Lands you call,
An Army strong to keep the cause in heart,
But that the King must with His Subjects part?
Can no Accession so much safety send,
But you will Dread Him still before you end?
Sometimes at Ebbes his God does let Him stand,
That so the Rescue may declare His hand.
But, what (you hope) may make the King's side pause,
Is what he writes about the Penal Laws.
Poor shallow souls, I deem it one from hence
To forfeit Loyalty, and forfeit Sense.
Shall such as wast their Blood be quite debarred,
And kept without the Pale from all Reward?
Shall fame report, shall after Ages tell,
So just a King regards not who do dwell?
But you pretend, this was a State-Decree,
Nor without Power which made may canceled be
The King never says it shall: but cannot doubt
That when his God has brought his work about,
And shifted Jarres and Tumults into Ease,
And set him 'midst his Counsel in High peace:
Their joint united suffrage will think fit
To give this Act, or something Great as it.
But see, His Pardon then to Ireland came,
(Wild Rebels) offers he not you the same?
He holds still out the same fresh cheerful Ray,
You shut your Windows and exclude the Day:
Embrace the shine, or else expect the stroke,
The Flint the Sun never melts, at last is broke.
But now the Floodgates op^, and a free ^luce,
^ets in all senseless Doctrines, and wild use;
And by Comparing what is said long ago,
Finds Disproportion in the King's Acts now.
His past Resolves it up to Present brings,
His Vows to Vows, and Things to combat Things.
A Different face throughout, and a fresh Scene
Succeed: and all his Acts seem shifted clean.
Weak men! who are deprived by Guilt or chance,
Of all the lights of Common Circumstance;
That have unlearn't that Actions shift their Face,
And da^e their worth from Persons, Time, and Place.
And sundry such, from whose Negl^cts appear
Acts as Sins there, which are Tried Virtues here.
For instance then, o^t as the King reflects
His Oath's enjoin, His People he protects.
Which Oaths extent, and Circuit we may view
Spread ore the Five Execrable Members too.
Yet (far as't them concerns) that Chain is broke,
That Oath left Him, because they le^t His Yoke*
Now of this Pitch, and Size, do still appear
All Aerie Scruples which are started there.
The King Declared, He thought you meant no ill,
Say, would you have the King Declare so still?
Allow but Different Circumstance, and we
Find all your Scandalls will his Glories be.
Now, as the worst things have some things of stead,
And some T^ades treasure Jewels in their Head.
So does this Libels womb Girt, and contain.
What though it compass Round? it cann^t stain
Lines of so clear, yet ^o Majestic strain;
A most Transparent, yet a close-wove Vein;
Which when we reach its Sense, we may descry,
We see more by its Light, then our own Eye.
So Phoebus (when the Cloud and Night is done)
Lends us his Light, to know he is the Sun.
Yet this expressive clearness is but bark,
An Outside Sun which guards us from the dark.
Here the Bright Language shuts in Brighter sense,
Rich Diamonds sleep within a Crystal Fence.
Gemmes of that rate, to Tully they would appear
Fit purchase for his Critic Senates Ear:
And their whole Shine in a full Luster tends
To God, His Conscience, Consort, and his Friends.
THE CLOSE.
No winding Characters, no secret Maze,
Could so perplex, but they have found their ways.
They thread the Labyrinth, and what to do?
Whe'r tends the Guide? what purchase in this Clew?
Rash Alexander forced King Gordius Knot, Q. Curtius lib. 2.

And so in hand found he a Rope had got.
A New Diurnal of Passages more
Exactly drawn up then heretofore.
Printed and Published, it is ordered to be,
By Henry Elsing the Clerk of the P.
1 June 1643.
Since many Diurnals (for which we are grieved)
Are come from both Houses, and are not believed;
The better to help them for running and flying,
We have put them in Verse to Authorize their lying.
For it has been debated, and found to be true,
That lying's a Parliament Privilege too:
And that they may the sooner our Conquests rehearse,
We are minded to put them in Galloping Verse;
But so many Maimed Soldiers from Reading there came,
That in spite of the Surgeons, make our Verses go lame.
We have ever used Fictions, and now it is known,
Our Poverty has made us Poetical grown.
Monday.
On Monday both Houses fell into debate,
And were likely to fall by the ears as they sat;
Yet would they not have the business decided,
That they (as the Kingdom is) might be divided.
They had an intention to Prayers to go,
But Ex tempore Prayers are now Common too.
To Voting they fall, and the key of the work,
Was the raising of Money for the State and the Kirk*
It Is only Free-loan, yet this Order they make,
That what Men would not lend they should Plunder and take;
Upon this, the word Plunder came into their minds,
And all of them did labor a new one to find;
They called it distraining: yet thought it no shame,
To persist in the Act, which they blushed for to name.
They Voted all Persons from Oxford that came,
Should be apprehended: and after the same,
With an Humble Petition, the King they request,
He Would be pleased to return, and be served like the rest.
A Message from Oxford conducing to Peace,
Came next to their hands, that Arms might cease:
They Voted and Voted, and still they did vary,
Till at last the whole sense of the House was contrary
To reason; they knew by their Arms they might gain*
What neither true reason, nor Law can maintain.
Cessation was Voted a dangerous Plot,
Because the King would have it, both Houses would not.
But when they resolved it, abroad must be blown,
(To baffle the World) that the King would have none.
And carefully muzled the mouth of the Press,
Least the truth should peep through their juggling dress.
For they knew a Cessation would work them more harms,
Than Essex could do the Cavaliers with his Arms.
While they keep the Ships and the Forts in their hand,
They may be Traitors by Sea, as well as by Land.
The Forts will preserve them as long as they stay,
And the Ships carry them and their Plunder away.
They have therefore good reason to account War the better,
For the Law will prove to them but a killing Letter.
Tuesday.
A Post from his Excellence came blowing his Horn,
For Money to advance, and this spun out the Morn;
And strait to the City some went for relief,
The rest made an Ordinance to carry Powder-Beef.
Thus up go the Roundheads, and Essex advances,
But only to lead his Soldiers new dances.
To Reading he goes, for at Oxford (they say)
His Wife has made him Bull-works to keep him away.
Prince Rupert, for fear that the Name be confounded,
Will saw off his Horns, and make him a Roundhead.
The news was returned with General fame,
That Reading was taken ere ever he came.
Then away Rode our Captains, and Soldiers did run,
To show themselves valiant, when the Battle was done,
Preparing to plunder; but as soon as they came,
They quickly perceived it was but a flam:
An Ordinance of Parliament Essex brought down,
But that would not serve him to batter the Town.
More Money was raised, more Men and Ammunition,
Carts loaded with Turnips, and other Provision.
His Excellence had Chines, and Rams-heads for a Present,
And his Council of War had Woodcock and Pheasant.
But Ven had 5000. Calves-heads all in Carts,
To nourish his Men, and to cheer up their Hearts.
This made them so valiant that that very day,
They had taken the Town but for running away.
'Twas ordered this day, that thanksgiving be made,
To the Roundheads in Sermons, for their Beef and their Bread.
Wednesday.
Two Members this day at a Conference sat,
And one gives the other a knock on the Pate.
This set them a voting, and the Upper House swore,
'Twas a breach of Privilege he gave him no more.
The lower the breaking their Members head voted
A breach of their Privilege; for it is to be noted,
That Reason and Privilege in it did grow,
'Twas a breach of his Crown and Dignity too.
Then came in the Women with a long long Petition.
To settle Militia, and damn the Commission.
For if fighting continue, they say they did ^ear.
That Men would be scarce, and Husbands be dear.
So plainly the Speaker the Business unties,
That presently all the Members did rise
They had hardly the leisure all things to lay open,
But some felt in their Bellies if they had not a Pope.
Some strictly stood to them, and others did fear,
Each carried about them a fierce Cavalier.
This Business was handled by the close Committee,
That privately met at a Place in the City.
So closely to voting the Members did fall,
That the humble Sisters were overthrown all.
But they and their Helpers came short at the last,
Till at length the whole Work on Prince Griffith was cast.
And he with his troup did handle the matter
He pleased every Woman, as soon as he came at her.
The Business had like to have gone on her side,
Had not Pym persuaded them not to confide.
For rather than Peace, to fill the Commonwealth,
He said he would do them every night himself.
Thursday.
This Day a great Fart in the House they did hear,
Which made all the Members make Buttons for fear;
And One makes nine Speeches while the Business was hot,
And spoke through the Nose that he smelt out the Plot.
He takes it to task, and the Articles draws,
As a breach of their own Fundamental-laws.
Now Letters were read, which did fully relate
A Victory against Newcastle of late;
That hundreds were slain, and hundreds did run,
And all this was got ere the Battle begun.
This they resolved to make the best on;
And next they resolved upon the Question,
That Bonfires and Prayse^, the Pulpit and Steeple,
Must all be suborned to cousen the People.
But the policy was more Money to get,
For the Conquest's dear bought, and far enough set;
Such Victories in Ireland, although it be known
They strive to make that Land as bad as our Own.
No sooner the Money for this was brought hither,
But a crowd of true Letters came flocking together,
How Hotham and's Army, and others were beaten,
This made the blew Members to startle and threaten.
And these by all means must be kept from the City,
And only referred to the Privy Committee.
And they presently with an Ex tempore Vote,
Which they have used so long, that they learned by rote,
They styled them Malignant, and to Lies they did turn them,
Then Corbet, in stead of the Hangman, must burn them.
And he after that an Ordinance draws,
That none should tell truth that disparaged the Cause.
Then Pym like a Pegasus trots up and down,
And takes up an Angel to throw down a Crown.
He stand like a Creature, and makes a long Speech,
That came from his mouth, and part from his breech.
He moves for more Horse, that the Army might be
Part Man's flesh and Horse flesh, as well as he;
And heel'l be a Colonel as well as another,
But durst not ride a Horse, 'cause a Horse rid his Mother.
Friday.
Sir Hugh Cholmley for being no longer a Traitor,
Was ac^us'd of Treason in the highest Nature;
'Cause he (as they bad him) his Soldiers did bring,
To turn from Rebellion, and fight for the King.
They voted him out, but, nor they nor their men
Could vote him into the House again.
Sir David's Remonstrance next to them was read,
From the Cities Round-body, and Isaac's the Head.
'Twas approved; but one Cause produced a denial,
That all Traitors be brought to a Legal trial.
For it is against Reason to vote, or to do
Against Traitors, when They are no other but so.
Because about nothing so long they sit still,
They hold it convenient Diurnalls to fill.
And therefore they gave their Chronographer charge
To stuff it with Orders and Letters at large.
The King by's Prerogative, nor by the Law,
Can speak nor print nothing his People to draw,
Yet Pennyles Pamphletters they do maintain,
Whose only Religion is Stipendary gain.
Yet Cum Privilegio, against King and the State.
The Treason that is taught them (like Parrats) they prate.
These Hackneys are licens't what ever they do,
As if they had Parliament privilege too.
Thus then they consult: so zealous they are,
To settle the peace of the Kingdom by War.
But against Civil-war their hatred is such,
To prevent it they will bring in the Scotch and the Dutch.
They had rather the Land be destroyed in a minute,
Than abide any thing that has Loyalty in it;
And yet their Rebellion so neatly they trim,
They fight for the King, but they mean for King Pym
These all to fight for, and maintain are sent
The Laws of England; but New England is meant.
And though such disorders are broke in of late,
They keep it the Anagram still of a State.
For still they are plotting such riches to bring,
To make Charles a rich and glorious King.
And by this Rebellion this good they will do him,
They Will forfeit all their Estates unto him.
No Clergy must meddle in Spiritual affairs,
But Layton nere heard of it, losing his ears,
For that he might be deaf to the Prisoners cries,
To a spiritual Goalers place he must rise.
The rest have good reason for what they shall do,
For they are both Clergy and Laity too.
Or else at the best when the Question is stated,
They are but Mechanics newly translated.
They may be Committees to practice their bawling,
For stealing of Horse is Spiritual Calling.
The reason why People our Martyrs adored,
'Cause their Ears being cut off their Fame sounds the more.
'Twas ordered the Goods of Malignants, and Lands,
Shall be shared among them, and took into their hands.
They have Spirits of more Malignants to come,
That every one in the House may have some
Then down to Guild Hall they return their thanks,
To the Fools whom the Lottery has cheated with Blanks.
Saturday.
This day there came news of the taking a Ship,
(To see what strange wonders are wrought in the deep)
That a troop of their Horse ran into the Sea,
And pulled out a Ship alive to the Key.
And after much prating and fighting they say
The Ropes served for Traces to draw her away.
Sure these were Sea-horses, or else by their lying
They Will make them as famous for swimming as flying.
The rest of the day they spent to bemoan
Their Brother, the Roundhead that to Tyburn was gone.
And could not but think it a barbarous thing,
To hang him for killing a friend to the King.
He was newly baptized, and held it was good
To be washed, yet not in water, but blood.
They ordered for his honor to cut off his ears,
And make him a Martyr: but a Zealot appears,
And affirms him a Martyr, for although 'twas his fate
To be hanged, yet he died for the good of the State
Then all fell to plotting of m^t^ers so deep,
That the silent Speaker fell down fast asleep.
He recovers himself and rub^ up his eyes,
Then motions his House that 'twas time to rise.
So home they went all, and their business referred
To the Close Committee by them to be heard;
They took it upon them, but what they did do,
Take notice that none but themselves must know.
Postscript.
Thus far we have gone in Rythme to disclose,
What never was uttered by any in Prose.
If any be wanting, 'twas by a mishap,
Because we forgot to weigh't by the map.
For over the Kingdom their Orders were spread,
They have made the whole Body as bad as the Head.
And now made such work that they all do,
Is but to read Letters and answers them too.
We thought to make Finis the end of the story,
But that we shall have more business for you.
For (as their proceedings do) so shall our Pen,
Run roundly from Monday to Monday again.
And since we have begun, our Muse does intend,
To have (like their Votes) no beginning nor end.
The holy Peddler.
FRom a Foreign shore
I am come to store,
Your Shops with rare devices:
No drugs do I bring
From the Indian King,
No Peacocks, Apes, nor Spices.
Such Wares I do show
As in England do grow,
And are for the good of the Nation,
Let no body fear
To deal in my Ware,
For Sacrilege now is in fashion.
I the Pedlar am,
That came from Amsterdam
With a pack of new Religions,
I did every one fit,
According to's wit,
From the Tub to Mahomets pigeons.
Great Trading I found,
For my spiritual ground,
Wherein every man was a Medler;
I made People decline,
The learned Divine,
And then they bought Heaven of the Peddler.
First Surplices I took,
Next the Common Prayer Book,
And made all those Papists that used 'um;
Then the Bishops and Deans,
I stripped of their means,
And gave it to those that abused 'um.
The Clergymen next,
I withdrew from their Text,
And set up the gifted Brother;
Thus Religion I made,
But a matter of trade,
And I cared nor for one or the other.
Then Tithes I fell upon,
And those I quickly won,
'Twas profane in the Clergy to take 'um.
But they served for the Lay,
Till I sold them away,
And so did Religious make 'um;
But now come away,
To the Peddler, I pray,
I scorn to rob or cozen;
If Churches you lack,
Come away to my Pack,
Here Is thirteen to the dozen.
Church Militants they be,
For now we do see,
They have fought so long with each other;
The Rump's-Churches threw down,
Those that stood for the Crown,
And sold them to one another.
Then come you factious Crew,
Here Is a Bargain now for you,
With the spoils of the Church you may revel;
Now pull down the Bells,
And then hang up your selves,
And so give his due to the Devil.
The Hue and Cry after Sir John Presbyter.
WIth hair in Characters, and Lugs in text;
With a splay mouth and a nose circumflext;
With a set Ruff of Musket-bore, that wears
Like Cartrages, or linen Bandileers,
Exhausted of their sulphurous contents,
In Pulpit fireworks, which that Bomball vents;
The Negative and Covenanting Oath,
Like two Mustachoes, issuing from his mouth;
The bush upon his chin (like a carved story,
In a box-knot) cut by the Directory;
Madams Confession hanging at his ear,
Wire-drawn through all the questions, How and Where
Each circumstance so in the hearing felt,
That when his ears are cropped he will count them gelt;
The weeping Cassock scared into a Jump,
A sign the Presbyter's worn to the stump:
The Presbyter though charmed against mischance,
With the Divine Right of an Ordinance.
If you meet any that do thus attire 'em,
Stop them, they are the tribe of Adoniram.
What zealous frenzy did the Senate seize,
To tare the Rochet to such rags as these?
Episcopacy minced, reforming Tweed
Has sent us Runts, even of her Churches breed;
Lay-interlining Clergy, a device
That Is nickname to the stuff called Lops and Lice.
The Beast at wrong-end branded, you may trace
The Devils footsteps in his cloven face.
A face of several parishes and sorts,
Like to a Sergeant shaved at Innes of Courts.
What mean these Elders else, those Kirk Dragoons
Made up of Ears and Ruffs like Ducatoons?
That Hierarchy of Handicrafts begun,
Those new Exchange-men of Religion?
Sure they are the Antic ^eads, which placed without
The Church, do gape and disembogue a sprout:
Like them above the Commons house have been
So long without, now both are gotten in;
Then, what imperious in the Bishop sounds,
The same the Scotch Executor rebounds.
This stating Prelacy, the Classick rout,
That spoke it often, e're it spoke it out;
So by an Abbeys Sceleton of late,
I heard an Echo supererogate
Through imperfection, and the voice restore,
As if she had the hiccop over and over.
Since they our mixed Diocesans combine
Thus to ride double in their Discipline,
That Paul's shall to the Consistory call
A Dean and Chapter out of Weavers-Hall?
Each at the Ordinance for to assist,
With the five thumbs of his groat-changing fist.
Down Dagon Synod with thy motley ware,
Whilst we do swagger for the Common Prayer;
That Dove-like Embassy, that wings our sense
To Heavens gate in shape of innocence.
Pray for the Miter'd Authors, and defy
These Demicasters of Divinity.
For where Sir John with Jack- of-all-trades joins,
His Finger's thicker than the Prelates Loins.
The way to woo a Zealous Lady.
I Came unto a Puritan to woo,
And ^oughly did salute her with a Kiss;
She should me from her when I came unto;
Brother, by yea and nay I like not this:
And as I her with amorous talk saluted,
My Articles with Scripture she confuted.
She told me, that I was too much profane,
And not devout neither in speech nor gesture;
And I could not one word answer again,
Nor had not so much Grace to call her Sister;
For ever something did offend her there,
Either my broad beard, hat, or my long hair.
My Band was broad, my 'Parrel was not plain,
My Points and Girdle made the greatest show;
My Sword was odious, and my Belt was vain,
My Spanish shoes was cut too broad at toe;
My Stockings light, my Garters tied too long,
My Gloves perfumed, and had a scent too strong.
I left my pure Mistress for a space,
And to a snip-snap Barber straight went I;
I cut my Hair, and did my Corpse uncase
Of 'Parrels pride that did offend the eye;
My high-crown'd Hat, my little Beard also,
My pecked Band, my Shoes were sharp at toe.
Gone was my Sword, my Belt was laid aside,
And I transformed both in looks and speech;
My 'Parrel plain, my Cloak was void of Pride,
My little Skirts, my metamorphis'd Breech,
My Stockings black, my Garters were tied shorter,
My Gloves no scent; thus marched I to her Porte^.
The Porter spide me, and did lead me in,
Where his sweet Mistress reading was a Chapter:
Peace to this house, and all that are therein,
Which holy words with admiration wrapped her,
And ever, as I came her something nigh,
She, being divine, turned up the white of the eye.
Quoth I, dear Sister, and that liked her well,
I kissed her, and did pass to some delight,
She, blushing, said, that long-tail'd men would tell,
Quoth I, I Will be as silent as the night;
And least the wicked now should have a sight
Of what we do, faith, I Will put out the light.
O do not swear, quoth she, but put it out,
Because that I would have you save your Oath,
In truth, you shall but kiss me, without doubt;
In troth, quoth I, here will we rest us both;
Swear you, quoth she, in troth? had you not sworn
I Would not have don't, but took it in foul scorn.
A Hue and Cry after the Reformation.
WHen Temples lie like battered Quarrs,
Rich in their ruined Sepulchers,
When Saints forsake their painted Glass
To meet their worship as they pass,
When Altars grow luxurious with the dye
Of humane blood,
Is this the flood
Of Christianity?
When Kings are cup-boarded like cheese,
Sights to be seen for pence a piece,
When Dyadems, like Brokers tire,
Are custom'd relics set to hire,
When Sovereignty and Scepters loose their names,
Streamed into words,
Carved out by swords
Are these refining flames?
When Subjects and Religion stir
Like Meteors in the Metaphor,
When zealous hinting and the yawn
Excize our M^niver and Lawn;
When blue digressions fill the troubled air,
And the Pulpit's let
To every Set
That will usurp the Chair?
Call ye me this the night's farewell,
When our noon day's as dark as Hell?
How can we less than term such lights
Ecclesiastic Heteroclites?
Bold sons of Adam when in fire you crawl,
Thus high to be,
Perched on the tree,
Remember but the fall.
Was it the glory of a King
To make him great by suffering?
Was there no way to build God's House
But rendering of it infamous?
If this be then the merry ghostly trade?
To work in gall?
Pray take it all
Good brother of the blade.
Call it no more the Reformation,
According to the new translation:
Why will you wrack the common brain
With words of an unwonted strain?
As Plunder? or a phrase in senses cleft?
When things more nigh
May well supply
And call it downright theft.
Here all the Schoolmen and Divines
Consent, and swear the naked lines
Want no expounding or contest,
Or Bellarmine to break a jest.
Since then the Heroes of the pen with me
Nere scrue the sense
With difference,
We all agreee agree.
The Times.
TO speak in wet-shod eyes, and drowned looks,
Sad broken accents, and a vein that brooks
No spirit, life, or vigor, were to own
The crush and triumph of affliction;
And creeping with Themistocles to be
The pale-faced Pensioners of our enemy.
No it is the glory of the Soul to rise
By falls, and at rebound to pierce the skies.
Like a brave Courser standing on the sand
Of some high-working Fretum, views a land
Smiling with sweets upon the distant side,
Garnished in all her gay embroydered pride,
Larded with Springs, and fringed with curled Woods,
Impatient, bounces in the cap'ring floods,
Big with a nobler fury than that stream
Of shallow violence he meets in them;
Thence armed with scorn and courage ploughs a way
Through the impostum'd billows of the Sea;
And makes the grumbling Surges slaves to oar
And waft him safely to the further shore:
Where landed, in a sovereign disdain
He turns back, and surveys the foaming main,
While the subjected waters flowing reel,
Ambitious yet to wash the Victor's heel.
In such a noble Equipage should we
Embrace the encounter of our misery.
Not like a field o^ corn, that hangs the head
For every tempest, every petty dread.
Crosses were the best Christians arms: and we
That hope a wished Canaan once to see,
Must not expect a carpet-way alone
Without a red sea of affliction.
Then cast the dice: Let Us foord old Rubicon,
Caesar it is thine, man is but once undone.
Tread softly though, least Scyllah's ghost awake,
And us in the roll of his Proscriptions take.
Rome is revived, and the Triumvirate
In the black Island are once more a State;
The City trembles: there is no third to shield,
If once Augustus to Antonius yield,
Law shall not shelter Cicero, the Robe
The Senate: Proud success admits no Probe
Of Justice to correct, or quare the fate
That bears down all as illegitimate;
For whatsoere it lists to overthrow,
It either finds it, or else makes it so.
Thus Tyranny's a stately Palace, where
Ambition sweats to climb and nustle there;
But when it is entered, what hopes then remain?
The^e is no Salliport to come out again.
For Mischief must roll on, and gliding grow,
Like little Rivulets that gently flow
From their first bubbling springs, but still increase
And swell their Chanel as they mend their pace;
Till in a glorious tide of villainy
They overrun the banks, and posting fly
Like the bellowing Wave^ in tumults, till they can
Di^play themselves in a full Ocean.
And if ^lind rage shall chance to miss its way,
Bring stock enough alone to make a Sea.
Thus trebble treason* are secured and drowned
By louder cries of deeper mouth and ^ound.
And high attempts swallow a puny p^ot,
A^ Cannons overwhelm the smaller ^hor
Whiles the deaf senceless World inured a while
(Like the Catadupi ^t the fall of Nile)
To the fierce tumbling wonder, think it none,
Thus Custom hallow^ ^rreligion!
And strokes the patient beast till he admit
The now-grown-light and necessary Bit.
But whither do I ramble? Gauled times
Cannot endure a smart hand ore their crimes
Distracted age? What Dialect or fashion
Shall I assume? to pass the approbation
Of thy censorious Synod; which now sit
High Areopagites to destroy all wit?
I cannot say, I say, that I am one
Of the Church of Ely-hous^, or Abington,
Nor of those precious Spirits that can deal
The Pomegranates of grace at every meal.
No zealous Hemp-dresser yet dipped me in
The Laver of adoption from my sin.
Put yet if inspiration or a tale
Of a long-wasted six hours length prevail
A smooth Certificate from the sister-hood,
Or to be termed holy before good,
Religious malice, or a faith 'thout works
Other than may proclaim us Jews or Turks:
If these, these hint at any thing? Then, then
Whoop! my dispairing Hope come back again:
For since the inundation of grace,
All honesty's under water, or in chase.
But it is the old worlds dotage, thereupon
We feed on dreams, imagination,
Humors, and cross-grained passions which now reign
In the decaying elements of the brain.
It Is hard to coin new fancies, when there be
So few that lanch out in discovery.
Nay Arts are so far from being cherished,
There Is scarce a College but has lost its Head,
And almost all its Members: O sad wound!
Where never an Artery could be judged sound!
To what a height is Vice now towred? When we
Dare not miscall it an Obliquitie?
So confident, and carrying such an awe,
That it subscribes it self no less then Law?
If this be Reformation then? The great
Account pursued with so much blood and sweat?
In what black lines shall our sad story be
Delivered over to posterity?
With what a dash and scar shall we be read?
How has Dame Nature in us suffered?
Who of all Centuries the first age are
That sunk the world for want of due repair?
When first we issued out in cries and tears,
(Those salt presages of our future years)
Headlong we dropped into a quiet calm;
Times crowned with rosy Garlands, spice and balm,
Where first a glorious Church and mother came,
Embraced us in her arms, gave us a name
By which we live, and an indulgent breast,
Flowing with stream to an eternal rest.
Thus ravished, the poor Soul could not guess even,
Which was more kind to her yet, earth or heaven.
Or rather wrapped in a pious doubt
Of heaven, whether she were in or out.
Next the Great Father of our Country brings
His blessing too, (even the Best of Kings)
Safe and well-grounded Laws to guard our peace,
And nurse our virtues in their just increase;
Like a pure Spring from whom all graces come,
Whose boun^y made it double Christendom:
Such and so sweet were those Halcyon days,
That rose upon us in our Infant rays;
Such a composed State we breathed under,
We only heard of Jove, nere felt his thunder.
Terrors were then as strange, as love now grown,
Wrong and Revenge lived quietly at home.
The sole contention that we understood,
Was a rare strife and war in doing good.
Now let us reflect upon our gratefulness,
How we have added, or (O:) made it less,
What are the improvements? what our progress, where
Those handsome acts that say that some men were?
He that to ancient wreaths can bring no more
From his own worth, dies banq'rupt on the score.
For Father's Crests are crowned in the Son,
And glory spreads by propogation.
Now virtue shield me! where shall I begin?
To what a labyrinth am I now slipped in?
What shall we answer them? or what deny?
What prove? or rather whither shall we fly?
When the poor widdow'd Church shall ask us where
Are all her honors? and that filial care
We owed so sweet a Parent as the Spouse
Of Christ, which here vouchsafed to own a house?
Where are her B^anerges? and those rare
Brave sons of consolation? which did bear
The Ark before our Israel, and dispense
The heavenly Manna with such diligence?
In them the prim'tive Motto's come to pass,
Aut mortui sunt, aut docent literas.
Blessed Virgin, we can only say we have
Thy Prophets Tombs among us, and their grave.
And here and there a man in colors paint,
That by thy ^uines grew a mighty Saint.
Next Caesar some accounts are due to thee,
But those in Blood already written be;
So loud and lasting, in such monstrous shapes,
So wide the never to be closed wound gapes;
All ages yet to come with shivering, shall
Recite the fearful pres'dent of thy fall.
Hence we confute thy tenent Solomon,
Under the Sun a new thing has been done*
A thing before all pattern, all pretense
Of rule or copy: Such a strange offense
Of such original extract, that it bears
Date only from the Eden of our years.
Laconian Agis! we have read thy fate,
The violence of the Spartan love and hate.
How Pagans trembled at the thought of thee,
And fled the horror of thy tragedy;
Thyestes cruel feast, and how the Sun
Shrunk in his golden beams that fight to shun*
The bosoms of all Kingdoms open lie,
Plain and emergent to the inquiring eye.
But when we glance upon our native home*
As the black Center to whom all points come,
We rest amazed, and silently admire
How far beyond all spleen ours did aspire.
All that we dare assert, is but a cry
Of an exchanged peace for Liberty*
A secret term by inspiration known,
A mist that brooks no demonstration,
Unless we dive into our purses, where
We quickly find Our Freedom purely dear.
But why exclaim you thus? may some men say,
Against the times? when equal night and day
Keep their just course? the seasons still the same?
As sweet as when from the first hand they came?
The influence of the Stars benign and free,
As at first Peep up in their infancy?
It Is not those standing motions that divide
The space of years, nor the swift hours that glide
Those little particles of age, that come
In thronging Items that make up the Sum,
That Is here intended: But our crying crimes,
Our Monsters that abominate the times.
It Is we that make the Metonimie good
By being bad, which like a troubled flood
Nothing produce but slimy mire and dirt,
And impudence that makes shame malepert.
To travel further in these wounds that lie
Rankling, though seeming closed, were to deny
Rest to an ore-watch'd world, and force fresh tears
From stench'd eyes, new alarmed by old fears.
Which if they thus shall heal and stop, they be
The first that ere were cured by Lethargy.
This only Axiom from ill Times increase
I gather, There Is a time to hold ones peace.
The Commoners.
1
COme your ways
Bonny Boys,
Of the Town,
For now is the time or never,
Shall your fears,
Or your cares
Cast you down?
Hang your wealth,
And your health,
Get renown,
We all are undone for ever.
Now the King and the Crown
Are tumbling down,
And the Realm does groan with disasters,
And the scum of the land,
Are the men that command,
And our Slaves are become our Masters.
2
Now our lives
Children, wives
And Estate,
Are a prey to the lust and plunder,
To the rage
Of our age;
And the fate
Of our land
Is at hand,
It Is too late
To tread these Usurpers under.
First down goes the Crown,
Then follows the Gown,
Thus levelled are we by the Roundhead,
While Church and State must
Feed their Pride and their Lust,
And the Kingdom and King confounded.
3
Shall we still
Suffer ill
And be dumb?
And let every Varlet undo us?
Shall we doubt
Of each Lowt,
That does come,
With a voice
Like the noise
Of a Drum,
And a Sword or a Buff-coat to us?
Shall we lose our estates
By plunder and rates
To bedeck those proud upstarts that swagger,
Rather fight for your meat,
Which these Locusts do eat,
Now every man's a beggar.
The Scots Curanto.
1.
COme, come away to the English wars,
A fig for our Hills and Valleys,
'Twas we did begin and will lengthen their jarrs,
We Will gain by their loss and folleys;
Let the Nations
By invasions,
Break through our bars,
They can get little good by their salleys.
2.
Though Irish and English entered be,
The State is becom^ our Debtor.
Let them have our Land, if their own may be free
And the Scot will at length be a getter.
If they crave it
Let them have it,
What care we:
We would fain change our Land for a better.
3.
Long have we longed for the English Land,
But we are hindered still by disasters,
But now is their time, when they cannot withstand,
But are their own Countries wasters.
If we venture,
We may enter
By command,
And at last we shall grow to be Masters.
4.
When at first we began to rebel,
Though they did not before regard us,
How the name of a Scot did the English quell*
Which formerly have out-dar'd us.
For our coming
And returning,
They paid us well,
And royally did reward us.
5.
The better to bring our ends about,
We must plead for a Reformation;
And tickle the minds of the giddy-brain'd rout*
With the hopes of an innovation.
They will love us
And approve us,
Without doubt,
If we bring in an alteration.
6.
Down with the Bishops and their train,
The Surplice and Common Prayers,
Then will we not have a King remain,
But we will be the Realms surveyers.
So by little
And a little
We shall gain
All the Kingdom without gainsayers.
7.
And when at the last we have conquered the King,
And beaten away the Cavaleers,
The Parliament next must the same ditty sing,
And thus we will set the State by the ears.
By their jarring
And their warring
We will bring,
Their Estates to be ours, which they think to be theirs.
8.
And thus when among us the Kingdom is shared,
And the People are all made Beggars like we;
A Scot will be as good as an English Leard,
O! what a unity this will be.
As we gain it
We Will retain it
By the sweard;
And the English shall say, bonny blew-cap for me.
An Answer to a Letter from Sir John Mennis, wherein he jeers him for falling
so quickly to the use of the Directory.
FRiend thou do lash me with a story,
A long one too of Directory;
When thou alone deserves the Birch,
That brought the bondage on the Church.
Did thou not treat for Bristol City,
And yield it up? the more's the pity.
And saw thou not, how right or wrong
The Common Prayer Book went along?
Did thou not scourse, as if enchanted
For Articles Sir Thomas granted?
And barte^, as an Author says,
The Articles oth' Christian Faith?
And now the Directory jostles
Christ out oth' Church and his Apostles;
And tears down the Communion rayles,
That men may take it on their tails.
Imagine, Friend, Bochus the King
Engraven on Sylla's Signet ring,
Delivering up into his hands
Fugurth, and with him, all his Lands;
Whom Sylla took and sent to Rome,
There to abide the Senates doom.
In the same posture I suppose,
John standing in's Doublet and Hose,
Delivering up amidst the throng
The Common Prayer and Wisedoms song
To hands of Fairfax, to be sent
A Sacrifice to the Parliament.
Thou little thought what Jear began,
Wrapped in that Treaty? Busy John*
There lurked, the Fire that turned to Cinder,
The Church her Ornaments to Tinder.
There bound up in that Treaty lies
The fate of all our Christmass-pyes;
Our Holydaies there went to wrack,
Our Wakes were laid upon their back,
Our Gossips spoons away were lurcht,
Our Feasts and Fees for Women churcht;
All this, and more ascribe we might
To Thee at Bristol, wretched Knight.
Yet thou upbraid'st and rayld'st in rhyme,
On me, for that which was thy Crime.
So froward Children in the Sun,
Amidst their sports some shrewd turn done,
The faulty Youth begins to prate,
And lays it on his harmless Mate.
Dated,
From Nympton where the Cider smiles,
And James has horse as lame as Giles,
The fourth of May, and do thou hear?
It Is as I take the 8th. year
Since Portugal by Duke Braganza
Was cut from Spain without a Hand-saw.
I. S.

The Kings Disguise.
ANd why a Tenant to this vile disguise,
Which who but sees, blasphemes thee with his eyes?
My twins of light within their penthouse shrink,
And hold it their Allegiance now to wink.
Oh! for a state-distinction to arraign
Charles of High Treason against my Sovereign.
What an usurper to his Prince is wont,
Cloister and shave him, he himself has don't.
His muffled feature speaks him a recluse,
His ruins prove him a religious house.
The Sun has mewed his beams from off his lamp,
And Majesty defaced the Royal stamp.
It Is not enough thy Dignitie's in thrall,
But thou wilt transmute it in thy shape and all?
As if thy blacks were of too faint a dye,
Without the tincture of Tautology.
Flay an Egyptian for his Cassocks skin,
Spun of his Countries darkness, line't within
With Presbyterian budge, that drowsy t^ance,
The Synod-sable, foggy ignorance:
Nor bodily, nor ghostly Negro could
Rough-cast thy figure in a sadder mould:
This Privy-Chamber of thy shape would be
But the close-mourner of thy Royalty:
Twill break the circle of thy Jaylors spell,
A Pearl within a rugged Oyster shell.
Heaven, which the Minster of thy Person owns,
Will fine thee for Dilapidations:
Like to the martyred Abbeys courser doom,
Devoutly altered to a Pidgeon-room:
Or like the college by the changeling rabble,
M -- Elves, transformed into a s^able.
Or if there be a prop^anation higher,
Such is the Sacrilege of thine attire,
By which the art half deposed: thou lookst like one
Whose looks are under sequestration.
Whose Regenado form, at the first glance,
Shows like the self-denying Ordinance,
Angel of light, and darkness too, I doubt,
Inspired within, and yet possessed without:
Majestic twilight in the state of grace,
Yet with an excommunicated face.
Charles and his Mask are of a different Mint,
A Psalm of mercy in a miscreant print
The Sun wears midnight, Day is beetle-brow'd,
And lightning is in Keldar of a cloud.
Oh the accursed Stenography of fate!
The Princely Eagle shrunk into a Bat.
What charm, what Magic vapor can it be,
That shrinks his ^ayes to this Apostasy?
It is but subtle ^ilm of tiffany air,
No Cob-web vizard, such as Ladies wear,
When they are veiled on purpose to be seen,
Doubling their luster by their vanquished skreen,
Nor the false scabbard of a Princes tough
Metal, and three pild darkness, like the slough
Of an imprisoned flame: it is Faux in grain,
Dark-Lanthorn to our high Meridian.
Hell belcht the damp, the Warwick-castle Vote
Rang Britains Corfeu, so our light went out.
Thy visage is not legible, the letters,
Like a Lords name writ in fantastic fetters:
Clothes where a Switzer might be buried quick:
Sure they would fit the Body politic.
False beard enough to fit a stages plot,
For that is the ambush of their wit, God wot.
Nay all his Properties so strange appear,
You Are not in the presence, though the King be there.
A Libel is his dress, a garb uncouth,
Such as the Hue and Cry once purged at mouth.
Scribbling assassinate, thy lines attest
An ear-mark due, Cub of the Blatant beast,
Whose wrath before it is syllabled for worse,
Is Blasphemy unfledged, a callow curse.
The Laplanders, when they would sell a wind
Wafting to Hell, bag up thy phrase, and bind
It to the Barque, which at the Voyage-end
Shi^ts Poop, and breeds the Collicke in the Fiend.
But I Will not dubbe thee with a glorious scar,
Nor sink thy Skullar with a man of War.
The black mouthed Si-quis, and this slandering suit,
Both do alike in picture execute
But since we are all called Papists, why not date
Devotion to the rags thus consecrate?
As Temples use to have their Porches wrought
With Sphynxes, ^reatures of an antic draught,
And puzling Pourtraictures, to show that there
Riddles inhabited, the like is here.
But pardon Sir, since I presume to be
Clerk of this Closet to your Majesty;
Me thinks in this your dark mysterious dress
I see the Gospel coucht in Parables.
At my next view my pur-blind fancy ripes,
And shows Religion in its dusky types.
Such a Text-Royal, so obscure a shade,
Was Solomon in proverbs all arrayed.
Come all the brats of this expounding age,
To whom the spirit is in pupillage;
You that damn more than ever Sampson slew,
And with his engine the same jaw bone too:
How is it he scapes your Inquisition free,
Since bound up in the Bibles livery?
Hence Cabinet-intruders, Pick-locks hence,
You that dim Jewels with your Bristol-sence:
And Characters, like Witches so torment,
Till they confess a guilt, though innocent.
Keys for this Coffer you can never get,
None but St* Peter ope's this Cabinet.
This Cabinet, whose aspect would benight
Critic spectators with redundant light.
A Prince most seen, is least: What Scriptures call
The Revelation, is most mystical.
Mount then thou Shadow-royal, and with have
Advance thy morning star, Charles overcast.
May thy strange journey contradictions twist,
And force fair weather from a Scottish mist;
Heavens Confessors are posed, those star-ey'd sages
To interpret Eclipse, thus riding stages.
Thus Israel-like, he travels with a cloud,
Both as a conduct to him and a shroud.
But oh! he goes to Gibeon, and renews
A league with moldy bread, and clouted shoes.
The Rebel SCOT.
HOw! Providence! and yet a Scottish crew!
Then Madam nature wears black patches too?
What? shall our Nation be in bondage thus
Unto a Land that truckles under us?
Ring the Bells backward, I am all on fire,
Not all the Buckets in a Country Quire
Shall quench my rage. A Poet should be feared,
When angry, like a Comets flaming beard.
And where is the Stoic? can his wrath appease
To see his Country sick of Pym's disease,
By Scotch Invasion to be made a prey
To such Pig-wiggin Myrmidons as they?
But that there is charm in verse, I would not quote
The name of Scot without an Antidote,
Unless my head were red, that I might brew
Invention there that might be poison too.
Were I a drowsy Judge, whose dismal note
Disgorgeth halters, as a Juglers throat
Does ribbands: could I (in Sir Emp'rick's tone)
Speak Pills in phrase, and quack destruction:
Or roar like Marshall, that Geneva Bull,
Hell and Damnation a Pulpit full:
Yet to express a Scot, to play that prize,
Not all those mouth-Granadoes can suffice.
Before a Scot can properly be cursed,
I must (like Hocas) swallow daggers first.
Come keen Iambicks with your Badgers feet,
And Badger-like, bite till your teeth do meet.
Help ye tart Satyrists to imp my rage,
With all the Scorpions that should whip this age:
Scots are like Witches, do but whet your pen,
Scratch till the blood come, they will not hurt you then.
Now as the Martyrs were enforced to take
The shapes of Beasts, like Hypocrites at stake,
I Will bait my Scot so, yet not cheat your eyes;
A Scot within a Beast is no disguise.
No more let Ireland brag, her harmless Nation
Fosters no Venom, since the Scots plantation:
Nor can ours feigned antiquity maintain,
Since they came in, England has Wolves again.
The Scot that kept the Tower, might have shown
(Within the grate of his own breast alone)
The Leopard and the Panther, and ingrost
What all those wild Collegiates had cost
The honest high-shoes in their termly fees,
First to the salvage Lawyer, next to these.
Nature her self does Scotch-men Beasts confess,
Making their Country such a wilderness:
A Land that brings in question and suspense
Gods omni-presence, but that Charles came thence,
But that Montross and Crawfords loyal band
Atton'd their sins and christ'ned half the Land.
Nor is it all the Nation has these spots;
There is a Church, as well as Kirk of Scots:
As in a picture, where the squinting paint
Shows ^iend on this side, and on that side Saint.
He that saw Hell in's melancholy dream,
And in the twilight of his fancy's theme
Sca^'d from his sins, repented in a fright,
Had he viewed Scotland, had turned Proselyte.
A Land where one may pray with cursed intent,
O may they never suffer banishment!
Had ^ain been Scot, God would have changed his doom,
Not forced him wander, but confined him home:
Like Jews they spread, and as infection fly,
As if the Devil had Ubiquity.
Hence it is they live at Rovers, and defy
This or that place, Rags of Geography.
They Are Citizens of the world; they are all in all,
Scotland's a Nation Epidemicall.
And yet they ramble not, to learn the mode
How to be dressed, or how to lisp abroad;
To return knowing in the Spanish shrug,
Or which of the Dutch States a double Jug
Resembles most, in belly, or in beard;
(The Card by which the Mariners are steered.)
No, the Scots-Errant fight, and fight to eat,
Their Ostrich-stomachs make their Swords their meat:
Nature with Scots, as Tooth-drawers has dealt,
Who use to hang their teeth upon their Belt.
Yet wonder not at this their happy choice,
The Serpent's fatal still to Paradise.
Sure England has the Hemeroids, and these
On the North posture of the patient seize,
Like Leeches: thus thy Physically thirst
After our blood, but in the cure shall burst.
Let them not think to make us run of the score,
To purchase villanage as once before,
When an Act passed to stroke them on the head,
Call them good Subjects, buy them Gingerbread;
Nor Gold, nor Acts of grace, it is Steel must tame
The stubborn Scot: a Prince that would reclaim
Rebels by yielding, does like him, (or worse)
Who sadled his own back, to shame his horse.
Was it for this you left your leaner soil,
Thus to lard Israel with Aegypts spoil?
They are the Gospels Life guard: but for them
The Garrison of new Jerusalem!
What would the Brethren do? the Cause! the Cause!
Sack possets, and the Fundamental Laws!
Lord! what a goodly thing is want of shirts!
How a Scotch-stomach, and no meat, converts!
They wanted food and raiment, so they took
Religion for their Seamstresse and their Cook.
Unmask them well, their honors and estate,
As well as conscience are sophisticate.
Shrive but their titles, and their money poize,
A Lord and twenty pounds pronounced with noise,
When construed, but for a plain Yeoman go,
And a good sober twopence, and well so.
Hence then you proud Impostors, get you gone,
You Picts in Gentry and Devotion;
You scandal to the stock of Verse, a race
Able to bring the Gibbet in disgrace.
Hyperbolus by suffering did traduce
The Ostracism, and shamed it out of use.
The Indian, that Heaven did forsware,
Because he heard the Spaniards were there,
Had he but known what Scots in Hell had been,
He would, Erasmus like, have hung between:
My Muse has done. A voider for the nonce;
I wrong the Devil should I pick their bones.
That dish is his, for when the Scots decease,
Hell, like their Nation, feeds on Barnacles.
A Scot, when from the Gallow-tree got loose,
Drops into Styx, and turns a Soland-Goose.
The Scots Apostasy.
Is It come to this? what shall the cheeks of fame,
Stretched with the breath of learned Londons name,
Be flag'd again? and that great piece of sense,
As rich in Loyalty and Eloquence*
Brought to the Test, be found a trick of State?
Like Chemists tinctures, proved adulterate?
The Devil sure such language did atchieve,
To cheat our un-forwarned Grandam Eve,
As this impostour found out, to besot
The experienced English to believe a Scot.
Who reconciled the Covenants doubtful sense?
The Commons argument, or the Cities pence?
Or did you doubt persistance in one good
Would spoil the fabric of your Brotherhood,
Projected first in such a forge of sin,
Wa^ fit for the grand Devils hammering?
Or was it ambition that this damned fact
Should tell the world you know the sins you act?
The infamy this super-treason brings,
Blasts more than Murders of your sixty Kings;
A crime so black, as being advis'dly done,
Those hold with these no competition.
Kings only suffered then, in this does lie
The Assassination of Monarchy.
Beyond this sin no one step can be trod,
If not t'attempt deposing of your God:
Oh were you so engaged, that we might see
Heavens angry lightning 'bout your ears to flee
Till you were shrivel'd to dust, and your cold Land,
Parcht to a drought beyond the Lybian sand*
But it is reserved, till Heaven plague you worse:
Be Objects of an Epidemick curse.
First, may your Brethren, to whose viler ends
Your power has bawded, cease to be your friends;
And prompted by the dictate of their reason,
Reproach the Traitors though they hug the Treason.
And may their jealousies increase and breed,
Till they confine your steps beyond the Tweed.
In foreign Nations may your loathed name be
A stigmatizing brand of infamy;
Till forced by general hate, you cease to rome
The world, and for a plague to live at home:
Till you resume your poverty, and be
Reduced to beg where none can be so free
To grant; and may your scabby Land be all
Translated to a general Hospital,
Let not the Sun afford one gentle ray,
To give you comfort of a Summers day;
But, as a guerdon for your Traiterous War,
Live cherished only by the Northern star.
No stranger deign to visit your rude coast,
And be to all but banished men, as lost.
And such in heightning of the infliction due,
Let provoked Princes send them all to you.
Your State a Chaos be, where not the Law,
But power, your lives and liberties may aw.
No Subject amongst you keep a quiet breast,
But each man strive through blood to be the best;
Till, for those miseries on us you have brought,
By your own Sword our just revenge be wrought.
To sum up all -- let your Religion be,
As your Allegiance, masked hypocrisy:
Until, when Charles shall be composed in dust,
Perfumed with Epithetes of good and just;
HE saved, incensed Heaven may have forgot
TO afford one act of mercy to a Scot,
Unless that Scot deny himself, and do
(What Is easier far) renounce his Nation too.
The Scots Arrears.
FOur hundred thousand pounds!
A lusty Bag indeed:
Was It ever known so vast a Sum
Ere past the River Tweede?
Great pity it is, I swear,
Whole Carts was thither sent,
Where hardly two in fifty knew,
What Forty shillings meant:
But 'twas to some perceived,
Three Kingdoms were undone.
And those that sit here thought it fit,
To settle them one by one,
Now Ireland has no haste,
So there they will not begin;
The Scottish aid must first be paid,
For ye came freely in,
And William Lilly writes --
Who writes the truth you know;
In frosty weather they marched hither.
Up to the chins in snow.
Free quarter at excess,
They do not weigh a feather,
Those Crowns for coals, brought in by shoals;
Scarce kept their men together,
Of Plunder they esteem
As trifles of no worth,
Of force ye dote, because recruit
Issued no faster forth.
If once this Cash is paid,
I hope the Scot be spedd,
He need not steal, but fairly deal,
Both to be clothed and fedd.
Our sheep and Oxen may
Safe in their pastures stand,
What need they filch the cow
That Is milch to sojourn in their land.
I wonder much the Scot
With this defiles his hand,
Because the summ's a price of Rome,
Raised out of the Bishops lands;
But too too well ye know
To what intent they in come;
'Twas not their pains produced this gains,
'Twas sent to pack them home:
Methinks I hear them laugh
To see how matters proved,
And give a shout, it so fell out,
Ye were more feared than loved.
If Jockey after this
Reneaginge has forgot,
From ancient fires, he much retires,
And shows himself no Scot.
A SONG On the Schismatic ROTUNDOS.
ONce I a curious Eye did fix,
To observe the tricks
Of the Schismatics of the Times,
To find out which of them
Was the merriest Theme,
And best would befit my Rimes;
Arminius I found solid,
Socinians were not stolid,
Much Learning for Papists did stickle.
But ah, ah, ha ha ha ha Rotundos rot,
ah, ha ha ha ha ha Rotundos rot,
It Is you that my spleen does tickle.
And first to tell must not be forgot,
How I once did trot
With a great Zealot to a Lecture,
Where I a Tub did view,
Hung with apron blew;
'Twas the Preachers as I conjecture,
His Use and his Doctrine too
Were of no other hue,
Though he spoke in a tone most mickle:
But ah, ha ha ha, etc.
He taught amongst other pretty things
That the Book of Kings
Small benefit brings to the godly,
Beside he had some grudges
At the Book of Judges,
And talked of Leviticus odly,
Wisdom most of all
He declares Apocryphal,
Beat Bell and the Dragon, like Michael:
But ah, ah, ha ha ha ha, etc.
Against Humane Learning next he envyes,
And almost boldly says,
It Is that which destroys Inspiration,
Let superstitious sense
And wit be banished hence,
With Popish Predomination
Cut Bishops down in have,
And Cathedrals as fast
As Corn that is fit for the sickle:
But ah, ah, ha ha ha ha Rotundos rot,
ah, ha ha ha ha ha Rotundos rot,
It Is you that my spleen does tickle.
Cromwell's Panegyric.
SShall Presbyterian Bells ring Cromwels praise,
While we stand still and do no Trophyes raise
Unto his lasting name? Then may we be
Hung like the Bells for our dependencie.
Well may his Nose, that is Dominicall,
Take pepper in it, to see no Pen at all
Stir to applaud his merits, who has lent
Such valor, to erect a Monument
Of lasting praise; whose name shall never dye,
While England has a Church, or Monarchy.
He whom the laurell'd Army home did bring
Riding triumphant over his conquered King,
He is the Generals Cipher now; and when
He Is joined to him* he makes that One a Ten.
The Kingdoms Saint; England no more shall stir
To cry St. George, but now St Oliver.
He Is the Realm Ensign; and who goes to wring
His Nose, is forced to cry, God save the King.
He that can rout an Army with his name,
And take a City, ere he views the same:
His Soldiers may want bread, but n'ere shall fear
(While he is their General,) the want of Beer;
No Wonder they wore Bays, his Brewing-fat
( Helicon-like) make Poets Laureat.
When Brains in those Castalian liquors swim,
We sing no Heathenish Pean, but a Hymn;
And that by the Spirit too, for who can choose
But sing Hosanna to this King of Jews?
Tremble you Scottish Zealots, you that han't
Freed any Conscience from your Covenant:
That for those bal'd Appellatives of Cause,
Religion, and the Fundamental Laws,
Have pulled the old Episcopacy down,
And as the Miter, so you will serve the Crown.
You that have made the Cap to the Bonnet veil,
And made the Head a Servant to the Tail.
And you cursed spawne of Publicans, that sit
In every County, as a plague to it;
That with your Yeomen Sequestrating Knaves,
Have made whole Counties beggarly, and Slaves.
You Synod, that have sat so long to know
Whether we must believe in God, or no;
You that have torn the Church, and sat to impair
The Ten Commandments, the Creed, the Prayer;
And made your honors pull down Heavens glory,
While you set up that Calfe, your Directory:
We shall no wicked Jews-ear'd Elders want,
This Army's built of Churches Militant:
These are new Tribes of Levi; for they be
Clergy, yet of no Universitie.
Pull down your Crests, for every bird shall gather,
From your usurping back, a stolen feather.
Your great Lay Levite, whose great Margent tires
The patient Reader, while he blots whole quires,
Nay reams with Treason; and with Nonsense too,
To justify what e're you say or do:
Whose circumcised ears are hardly grown
Ripe for another Persecution:
He must to Scotland for another pair;
For he will lose these, if he tarry here.
^urges that Reverend Presbydean of Paul's,
Must (with his Poundage) leave his Cure of Souls,
And into Scotland trot, that he may pick
Out of that Kirk, a nick-nam'd Bishopric.
The Protean Hypocrites, that will never burn,
Must here, or else at Tyburn take a turn.
And Will. the Conqueror in a Scottish dance
Must lead his running Army into France.
Or he and's Juncto among those Crews
In Holland build a Synagogue of Jews,
And spread Rebellion; Great Alexander
Fears not a Pillory, like this Commander.
And Bedlam John, that at his Clerks so raves,
Using them not like servants, but like slaves.
He that so freely railed against his Prince,
Called him dissembling s^btile Knave, and since
Has styled the whole Army Bankrupts; said, that none
Of their Estates were equal to his own:
He that was by a strong Ambition led
To set himself upon the Cities head:
But when he has restored his both-side fees,
He Will be as poor, or they as rich as he is.
And that still-gaping Tophet Goldsmiths Hall,
With all his Furies, shall to ruin fall.
We Will be no more gulled by that Popish story,
But shall reach Heaven without that Purgatory:
What Honor does he merit? what Renown?
By whom all these Oppression are pulled down.
And such a Government is like to be
In Church and State, as eye did never see:
Magicians hold, he will set up Common Prayer;
Looking in's face they find the Rubric there.
His Name shall never dye by fire nor flood,
But in Church-windows stand, where Pictures stood*
And if his Soul lothing that house of clay,
Shall to another Kingdom march away,
Under some Barnes floor his bones shall lie,
Who Churches did, and Monuments defy:
Where the rude Thrasher with much knocking on,
Shall wake him at the Resurrection.
And on his Grave since there must be no Stone,
Shall stand this Epitaph; That he has none.
The Scotch War.
WHen first the Scottish War began
The English man, we did trapan, with Pellit and Pike,
The bonny blythe and cunning Scot
Had then a Plot, which they did not, well smell, it is like;
Although he could neither write, nor read,
Yet our General Lashly crossed the Tweed
With his gay gangh of Blew-caps all,
And we marched with our General;
We took New Castle in a trice,
But we thought it had been Paradise,
They did look all so bonny and gay,
Till we took all their Pillage away.
Then did we straight to plundering fall
Of great and small, for were all most valiant that day;
And Jinny in her Satin Gown the best in Town,
From Heel to Crown was gallant and gay;
Our silks and sweets made such a smother,
Next day we knew not one another:
For Jockie did never so shine,
And Jinny was never so fine;
A geud faith a gat a ged Beaver then,
But it is beat into a Blew-cap again
By a Redcoat, that did still cry, Rag,
And a red snowt, a the Deel aw the Crag.
The English raised an Army straight
With mickle state, and we did wate to face them as well;
Then every valiant Musket man put fire in pan,
And we began to lace them as well;
But before the Sparks were made a Cole,
They did every man pay for his Pole;
Then their bought Land we lent them again,
Into Scotland we went with our men;
We were paid by all, both Peasant and Prince,
But I think we have soundly paid for it since,
For our Silver is wasted, Sir, all,
And our Silks hang in Westminster Hall.
The Godly Presbyterian, that holy man,
The War began with Bishop and King,
Where we like Waiters at a Feast
But not the least of all the guest, must dish up the thing,
We did take a Covenant to pull down
The Cross, the Crofier, and the Crown,
With the Rochet the Bishop did bear.
And the Smock that his Chaplain did wear:
But now the Covenant's gone to wrack,
They say, it looks like an old Almanac,
For Jockie is grown out of date,
And Jinny is thrown out of late.
I must confess the holy firk did only work
Upon our Kirk for silver and meat,
Which made us come with aw our broods,
Venture our bloods for aw your goods, to pilfer and cheat;
But we see what covetousness does bring,
For we lost our selves when we sold our King;
And alack now and welly we cry,
Our backs mow and bellies must dye;
We fought for food, and not vainglory,
And so there is an end of a Scottish man's Story;
I curse all your Silver and Gold,
Aw the worst tale that ever was told.
The Power of Money.
It Is not the silver nor gold for it self
That makes men adore it, but it is for its power:
For no man does dote upon pelf because pelf,
But all Court the Lady in hope of her dower:
The wonders that now in our days we behold,
Done by the irresistible power of gold,
Our Zeal, and our Love, and Allegiance do hold.
This purchases Kingdoms, Kings, Scepters, and Crowns;
Wins Battles, and conquers the Conquerors bold;
Takes Bulwarks, and Castles, and Cities, and Towns,
And our prime Laws are writ in letters of gold;
It Is this that our Parliament calls and creates,
Turns Kings into Keepers, and Kingdoms to States,
And peopledomes these into highdomes translates.
This made our black Synod to sit still so long,
To make themselves rich, by making us poor;
This made our bold Army so daring and strong,
And made them turn them, like Geese, out of door;
'Twas this made our Covenant-makers to make it,
And this made our Priests for to make us to take it,
And this made both Makers and Takers forsake it.
'Twas this spawned the dunghill Crew of Committees and 'strators,
Who live by picking the Crockadile Parliaments gums;
This first made, and then prospered the Rebels and Traitors,
And made Gentry of those that were the Nations scums:
This Herald gives Arms not for merit, but store,
And gives Coats to those that did sell Coats before,
If their pockets be but lined well with argent and ore.
This, plots can devise, and discover what they are;
This, makes the great Fellons the lesser condemn;
This, sets those on the Bench, that should stand at the Bar,
Who Judge such as by right ought to Execute them;
Gives the boisterous Clown his unsufferable pride,
Makes Beggars, and Fools, and Usurpers to ride,
Whiles ruined Propriators run by their side.
Stamp either the Arms of the State or the King,
St. George or the Breeches, C. R. or O. P.
The Cross or the Fiddle, it is all the same thing;
This, still is the Queen whosoe'er the King be;
This, lines our Religion, builds Doctrine and Truth,
With Zeal and the Spirit the factious endueth,
To club with St. Katharine, or sweet Sister Ruth.
It Is money makes Lawyers give Judgment, or plead
On this side, or that side, on both sides, or neither;
This makes young men Clerks that can scarce write or read,
And spawns arbitrary Orders as various as the weather;
This makes your blew Lecturers pray, preach, and prate
Without reason or sense against Church, King, or State,
To show the thin lining of his twice-covered pate.
It Is money makes Earls, Lords, Knights, and Esquires
Without breeding, descent, wit, learning, or merit;
This makes Ropers, and Ale-drapers, Sheriffs of Shires,
Whose trade is not so low, nor so base as their spirit:
This Justices makes, and wise ones we know,
Furred Aldermen too, and Mayors also;
This makes the old Wise trot, and makes the Mare to go.
This makes your blew aprons Right Worshipful;
And for this we stand bare, and before them do fall;
They leave their young heirs well fleeced with wool,
Whom we must call Squires, and then they pay all:
Who with beggarly souls, though their bodies be gaudy,
Court the pale Chambermaid, and nickname her a Lady,
And for want of good wit, they do swear and talk bawdy.
This Marriages makes, it is a Center of love,
It draws on the man, and it pricks up the woman
Birth, virtue, and parts no affection can move,
Whilst this makes a Lord stoop to the Brat of a Broom-man;
This gives virtue and beauty to the Lasses that you woo,
Makes women of all sorts and ages to do;
It Is the soul of the world, and the worldling too.
This procures us whores, hawks, hounds and hares;
It Is this keeps your Groom, and your Groom keeps your Gelding;
This built Citizens Wives, as well as wares;
And this makes your coy Lady so coming and yielding;
This buys us good Sack, which revives like the spring,
It Is this your Poetical fancies do bring;
And this makes you as merry as we that do sing.
Contentment.
WHat though the ill times do run cross to our will,
And Fortune still frown upon us,
Our hearts are our own, and shall be so still,
A fig for the plagues they lay on us;
Let us take the other cup, to cheer our hearts up,
And let it be purest Canary;
We'll never shrink nor care, at the Crosses we bear,
Let them plague us until they be weary.
What though we are made both Beggars and Slaves?
Let Us endure it, and stoutly drink on it,
It Is our comfort we suffer 'cause we wont be Knaves,
Redemption will come e're we think on it;
We must flatter and fear, those that over us are,
And make them believe that we love them,
When their Tyranny is past, we can serve them at last
As they have served those have been above them.
Let the Levites go preach for the Goose or the Pig,
To drink Wine at Christmas or Easter:
The Doctor may labor our lives to new trig,
And make Nature fast while we feast her;
The Lawyer may bawl, out his Lungs and his Gall
For Plaintiff, and for Defendant,
At his Book the Scholar lie, while with Plato he dye
With an ugly hard word at the end on it.
Then here is to the man that delights in solfa,
For Sack is his only Rozin.
A load of hey ho, is not worth a ha ha,
He Is a man for my money that draws in;
Then a pin for the muck, and a pin for ill luck,
It Is better be blithe and frolic,
Than sigh out our breath, and invite our own death
By the Gout, or the Stone, or the Colic.
On the Goldsmiths Committee.
COm Drawer, some wine,
Or we will pull down the Sign,
For we are all joviall Compounders:
We'll make the house ring,
With healths to our KING,
And confusion light on his Confounders.
Since Goldsmiths Committee
Affords us no pity,
Our sorrows in Wine we will steep 'um,
They force us to take
Two Oaths, but we will make
A third, that we never meant to keep 'um.
And next, who e're sees,
We drink on our knees,
To the King, may he thirst that repines:
A fig for those Traitors
That look to our waters,
They have nothing to do with our Wines.
And next, here is a Cup
To the Queen, fill it up,
Were it poison we would make an end on it;
May Charles and she meet.
And tread under feet
Both Presbyter and Independent.
To the Prince, and all others,
His Sisters and Brothers,
As low in condition as high born,
We'll drink this, and pray
That shortly they may
See all them that wrongs them at Tyburn.
And next, here is three bouls
To all gallant souls,
That for the King did, and will venture;
May they flourish when those
That are his, and their foes,
Are hanged and ram'd down to the Center.
And next, let a Glass
To our undoers pass,
Attended with two or three Curses:
May plagues sent from Hell
Stuff their bodies as well
As the Cavaliers coin does their purses.
May the Cannibals of Pym
Eat them up limb by limb,
Or a hot Fever scorch 'um to embers;
Pox keep 'um in bed
Until they are dead,
And repent for the loss of their Members.
And may they be found
In all to abound,
Both with Heaven and the Countries anger,
May they never want Fractions,
Doubts, Fears, and Distractions,
Till the Gallow-tree choaks them from danger.
The mad Zealot.
AM I mad, O noble Festus,
When Zeal and godly knowledge
Have put me in hope
To deal with the Pope,
As well as the best in the College?
Boldly I preach, hate a Cross, hate a Surplice,
Miters, Copes, and Rochets:
Come hear me pray nine times a day,
And fill your heads with Crochets.
In the house of pure Emanuel
I had my Education,
Where my friends surmise
I dazell'd mine eyes
With the light of Revelation.
Boldly I preach, etc.
They bound me like a Bedlam,
They lasht my four poor quarters;
Whilst thus I endure,
Faith makes me sure
To be one of Foxes Martyrs.
Boldly I preach, etc.
These injuries I suffer
Through Antichrists persuasions;
Take off this Chain,
Neither Rome nor Spain
Can resist my strong invasions.
Boldly I preach, etc.
Of the beasts ten horns (God bless us!)
I have knocked off three already:
If they let them alone,
I Will leave him none:
But they say I am too heady.
Boldly I preach, etc.
When I sacked the seven-hill'd City,
I met the great red Dragon;
I kept him aloof
With the armor of proof,
Though here I have never a rag on.
Boldly I preach, etc.
With a fiery Sword and Target
There fought I with this Monster:
But the sons of Pride
My Zeal deride,
And all my deeds misconster.
Boldly I preach, etc.
I unhors'd the Whore of Babel
With the Lance of Inspirations:
I made her stink,
And spill her drink
In the cup of Abominations,
Boldly I preach, etc.
I have seen two in a Vision,
With a flying Book between them:
I have been in despair
Five times a year,
And cured by reading Greenham,
Boldly I preach, etc.
I observed in Perkins Tables
The black Lines of Damnation,
Those crooked veins
So stuck in my Brains,
That I feared my Reprobation,
Boldly I preach, etc.
In the holy tongue of Canaan
I placed my chiefest pleasure,
Till I pricked my foot,
With an Hebrew root,
That I bled beyond all measure.
Boldly I preach, etc.
I appeared before the Archbishop,
And all the High Commission:
I gave him no Grace,
But told him to his face
That he favored Superstition.
Boldly I preach, hate a Cross, hate a Surplice,
Miters, Copes, and Rochets:
Come hear me pray nine times a day,
And fill your heads with Crotchets.
Of banishing the Ladies out of Town.
1.
A Story strange I will unfold,
Then which a sadder never was told,
How the Ladies were from London sent,
With mickle woe and discontent.
2
A heart of Marble would have bled,
To see this rout of white and red,
Both York and Lancaster must fly,
With all their painted Monarchy.
3.
Those faces which men so much prize,
In Mrs. Gibbes her Liveries,
Must leave their false and borrowed hue,
And put on grief that is only true.
4.
Those pretty patches long and round,
Which covered all that was not sound;
Must be forgotten at the Farms,
As useless and suspicious charms.
5.
Now we must leave all our Designs,
That were contrived within the Lines;
Communication is denied,
If to our Husbands we be tried.
6.
And here is the misery alone,
We must have nothing but our own,
Oh give us Liberty, and we
Will never ask propriety.
7.
Alas how can a Kiss be sent,
From Rocky Cornwall into Kent?
Or how can Sussex stretch an arm
To keep a Northern servant warm,
8.
Oh London! Center of all Mirth,
The Epitome of English Earth;
All Provinces are in the streets,
And Warwickshire with Essex meets.
9.
Then farewell Queen Street, and the Fields,
And Garden that such pleasure yields,
Oh who would such fair Lodgings change,
To nestle in a plundered Grange!
10.
Farewell good places old and new,
And Oxford Kates once more adieu;
But it goes unto our very hearts,
To leave the Cheese-cakes and the Tarts.
11.
Farewell Bridge-foot and Bear thereby,
And those bald-pates that stand so high,
We wish it from our very Souls,
That other Heads were on those powles.
12.
But whether hands of Parliament,
Or of Husbands, we are content,
Since all alike such Traitors be,
Both against us and Monarchy.
Loyalty confined.
BEat on proud Billows, Boreas Blow,
Swell curled Waves, high as Jove's roof,
Your incivility does show,
That innocence is tempest proof.
Though surely Nereus frown, my thoughts are calm,
Then strike affliction, for thy wounds are balm.
That which the world miscalls a Goal,
A private Closet is to me,
Whilst a good Conscience is my Bail,
And Innocence my Liberty:
Locks Bars and Solitude together met,
Make me no Prisoner but an Anchorit.
I whilst I wished to be retired
Into this private room was turned,
As if their wisdoms had conspired,
The Salamander should be burned.
The Cynick hugs his poverty,
The Pelican her wilderness,
And it is the Indians pride to be
Naked on frozen Caucasus.
Contentment cannot smart, Stoics we see
Make torments easy to their Apathy.
These Menacles upon my Arm,
I as my Mistris's favors wear;
And for to keep my Ankles warm,
I have some Iron Shackles there.
These walls are but my Garrison; this Cell
Which men call Goal, does prove my Citadel.
So he that struck at Jasons life,
Thinking he had his purpose sure:
By a malicious friendly Knife,
Did only wound him to a cure.
Malice I see wants wit, for what is meant,
Mischief oft-times, proves favor by the event*
I Am in this Cabinet locked up,
Like some high-prized Margaret,
Or like some great Mogul or Pope,
Are cloystered up from public sight.
Retirement is a piece of Majesty,
And thus proud Sultan, I Am as great as thee.
Here sin for want of food must starve,
Where tempting Objects are not seen;
And these strong Walls do only serve,
To keep Vice out, and keep me in.
Malice of late's grown charitable sure,
I Am not committed, but I Am kept secure.
Whence once my Prince affliction has,
Prosperity does Treason seem;
And for to smooth so tough a Path,
I can learn Patience from him.
Now not to suffer, shows no Loyal heart,
When Kings wants ease, Subjects must bear a part.
Have you not seen the Nightingale,
A Pilgrim koopt into a Cage,
How does she chant her wonted tale,
In that her narrow hermitage.
Even then her charming melody does prove,
That all her Boughs are Trees, her Cage a Grove.
My soul is free as the ambient air,
Although my baser part's immured,
Whilst Loyal thoughts do still repair,
TO accompany my Solitude.
And though immured, yet I can chirp and sing,
Disgrace to Rebels, glory to my King.
What though I cannot see my King,
Neither in his Person or his Coin,
Yet contemplation is a thing,
That renders what I have not mine.
My King from me, what Adamant can part,
Whom I do wear engraven on my heart.
I am that Bird whom they combine,
Thus to deprive of Liberty;
But though they do my Corpse confine,
Yet maugre hate, my Soul is free.
Although Rebellion do my Body bind,
My King can only captivate my mind.
On the demolishing the Forts.
IS this the end of all the toil,
And labor of the Town?
And did our Bulwarks rise so high
Thus low to tumble down?
All things go by contraries now,
We fight to still the Nation,
Who build Forts to pull down Popery,
Pull down for Edification.
The Indepedents tenets, and
The ways so pleasing be.
Our City will not be bound about,
But stands for Liberty.
The Popish doctrine shall no more
Prevail within our Nation;
For now we see that by our works,
There is no Justification.
What an Almighty army's this,
How worthy of our praising,
That with one Vote can blow down that
All we so long were raising!
Yet let us not wonder at this Change,
For thus 'twill be with all.
These works did lift themselves too high,
And Pride must have a fall.
And when both Houses vote again,
The Cavies to be gone,
Nor dare to come within the lines
Of Communication.
They must reserve the sense or else,
Referr't to the Divines,
And they had need fit seven years more
Ere they can read those lines.
They went to make a Gotham on it,
For now they did begin
To build these mighty banks about,
To keep the Cuckoes in.
Alas what need they take such pains!
For why a Cucko here
Might find so many of his Mates,
He Will sing here all the year.
Has Isaac our L. Mayor, L. Mayor,
With Tradesmen and his Wenches,
Spent so much time, and Cakes and Beer,
To edify these Trenches!
All trades did show their skill in this,
Each Wife an Engineer;
The Mairess took the tool in hand,
The maids the stones did bear.
These Bulwarks stood for Popery,
And yet we never feared um,
And now they worship and fall down,
Before those Calves that reared 'um.
But though for Superstition,
The Crosses have been down'd,
Who'ld think these works would Popish turn,
That ever have been round?
This spoils our Palmistry; for when
We Will read the Cities fate,
We find nor Lines nor Crosses now,
As it has had of late.
No wonder that the Aldermen,
Will no more money lend,
When they that in this seven years,
Such learned works have penned.
Now to debase their lofty lines,
In which the wits delighted*
It Is thought they will nere turn Poets more,
Because their works are slighted.
These to a doleful tune are set,
For they that in the town.
Did every where cry Up go we,
Now they must sing down down.
But if that Tyburn do remain,
When the other slighted be,
The Cits will thither flock and sing,
Hay, hay, then up go we.
Upon Routing the Scots Army. A SONG.
To the Tune of Through the Wood Lady.
1.
Came lend, lend you are lugs Joes, an Ise speak a Song,
Sing heome again Jocky, sing heome again Jocky,
O hes velient Acts an hes Prowes among,
Sing heome again heome again O valent Jocky.
2.
Sirs, Jockie's a Man held a mickle Note,
Sing heome again Jocky, etc.
Tha Breech o tha Covenant stuck in hes Throat,
Sing heome again, heome again, etc.
3.
For Jockie was riteous, whilk ye wad admire,
Sing heome again Jocky, etc.
A fooght for tha Kirk, bet a plundered tha Quire
Sing heome again Jocky, etc.
4.
An Jockie waxt roth, and toll Angland a came,
Sing heome again Jocky, etc.
Fro whence he would return, but alack a is lame,
Sing heome again Jocky, etc.
5.
An Jockie was armed fro topp toll to toe,
Sing heome again Jocky, etc.
Wi a po're o Men and they are geod D -- I tro,
Sing heome again Jocky, etc.
6.
So valent I wis they were, an sa prat,
Sing heome again Jocky, etc.
Ne Cock nor Hen durst stand in their gat,
Sing heome again Jocky, etc.
7
In every street they ded sa flutter,
Sing heome again Jocky, etc.
Ne Child durst shaw his Bred and Butter,
Sing heome again, Jocky, etc.
8.
When the Anglish Forces they her'd on over night,
Sing heome again Jocky, etc.
Next Morn they harnest themsels for a fight,
Sing heome again, heome again, etc.
9.
Their D -- was tha Mon that wad be sen ^^oot,
Sing heome again, Jocky, etc.
He feas't tham awhile, then turned Ars's about,
Sing heome again, heome again, etc.
10.
Tha Men that ater this valent Scot went,
Sing heome again Jocky, etc.
Had ner foond him oout, bet by a strong sent,
Sing heome again, heome again O val^nt Jocky.
11.
Bet se tha reward o that Cowardly Crew,
Sing heome again Jocky, etc.
Their Countremon Ballatine sent 'em to Corfew,
Not home again, home again, O slavish Jocky.
The disloyal Timist.
1.
NOw our holy Wars are don,
Betwixt the Father and the Son;
And since we have by righteous fate,
Distressed a Monarch and his Mate.
And first their heirs fly into France
To weep out their Inheritance;
Let Us set open all our Packs,
Which contain ten thousand wracks;
Cast on the shore of the red Sea
Of Naseby, and of Newbery.
If then you will come provided with Gold,
We dwell
Close by Hell,
Where we will sell
What you will,
That is ill;
For Charity waxes cold.
2.
Have thou done murder, or blood spilt,
We can soon giv't another name,
That will keep thee from all blame:
But be it still provided thus,
That thou have once been one of us;
Gold is the God that shall pardon the Guilt,
For we have
What shall save
Thee from the Grave,
Since the Law
We can awe;
Although a famous Prince's blood were spilt.
3.
If a Church thou have bereft
Of its Plate, it is holy-theft;
Or for Zeal-sake, if thou be
Prompted on to take a Priest;
Gold is a sure prevailing Advocate:
Then come
Bring a sum,
Law is dumb:
And submits,
To our wits;
For it is Policy guides a State.
A Medley.
1.
ROom for a Gamester that plays at all he sees,
Whose fickle faith is framed, Sir, to fit such times as these;
One that cries Amen, to every factious Prayer,
From Hugh Peter's Pulpit, to St. Peter's Chair:
One that can comply with Crosier and with Crown;
And yet can bouze
A full carouze,
While bottles tumble down,
Dery down.
2.
This is the way to trample without trembling.
Since Sycophants only secure;
Covenants and Oaths are badges of dissembling,
It Is the Politic pulls down the pure:
To plunder and pray,
To protest and betray
Are the only ready ways to be great,
Flattering will do the feat:
Never go, never stir
Have ventred farther,
Then the greatest of the Damme's in the Town,
From a Copper to a Crown.
3.
I am in an excellent homor now to think well,
And I Am in another humor now to drink well;
Fill us up a Beer-bowl boy,
That we may drink it merrily;
And let none other see,
Nor cause to understand,
For if we do, it is ten to one we are Trepand.
4.
Come fill us up a brace of Quarts,
Whose Anagram is called true hearts;
If all were true as I would hav't,
And Britain were cured of its humor,
Then I should very well like my fate,
And drink off my Wine at a freer rate,
Without any noise or tumor;
And then I should fix my humor.
5.
But since it is no such matter, change your hue,
I may cog and flatter, so may you;
Religion
Is a wigeon,
And reason
Is Treason;
And he that has a Noble heart may bid the world adieu.
6.
We must be like the Scottish man,
Who with intent to beat down schism,
Brought forth a Presbyterian,
A Canon and a Catechism.
If Beuk wont do it, then Jockie shoot,
The Kirk of Scotland does command;
And what has been, since he come in,
I am sure we have cause to understand.
A Medley of the Nations.
The Scot.
1.
I Am the bonny Scot Sir,
My name is Mickle John;
It Is I was in the Plot Sir
When first the Wars began:
I left the Court one thousand
Six hundred forty one;
But since the flight
At Worster fight
We are aw undone.
I served my Lord and Master
When as he lived at home,
Until by sad disaster
He received his doom;
But now we sink,
Uds bred I think
The Deel's gat in his room.
He ne man spares,
But stamps and stares
At all Christendom.
2.
I have traveled mickle grounds,
Since I came from Worster bounds,
I have gang'd the jolly rounds
Of the neighboring Nations;
And what their opinions are
Of the Scotch and English war,
In geed faith I sal declare,
And their approbations.
Jockie swears
He has his load,
Bears the rod,
Comes from God,
And complaints go very odd
Since the siege at Worster;
We were wounded
Tag and rag,
Foot and leg,
Wemb and crag;
Hark I hear the Dutchman brag,
And begin to bluster.
The Dutch.
3.
Uds Sacrament, sal Hoghen Moghen States
Strike down der top sails unto puny Powers;
Ten twosand tun of Tivel Dammy Fates,
If dat der Ships and Goods prove not all ours:
Since dat bloot and wounds do delight them,
Tararara Trumpet sounds,
Let Van Tromp go fort and fight them;
All de States shall first be crowned,
English Skellam fight not on goat side;
Out at last the Flemins bear,
Dey have given us sush a broad side;
Dat ick sal be forced to retreat,
See de French man he comes in complete.
The French.
4.
By Gat Mounsieur it is much in vain
For Dushland, France, or Spain,
To cross de English main;
De Nation now is grown so strong,
De Divla er't be long
Must learna de same tongue.
It Is bettra den far to combine,
To sell them Wine,
And teasha them to make der Laty fine;
We'll teash them for to trip and minsh,
To kick and winsh,
For by de Sword we never sal convince,
Since every Brewer dear can beat a Prince.
The Spaniard.
5.
What are the English to quarrel so prone,
Dat dey cannot now adays let deir neighbor alone,
And sal de Grave and the Catholic King,
Before ever dus controlled wid a sword and a sling;
Sal bode de Indias be left unto de sway,
And purity a dose dat do plunder and pray;
E're dat we will suffer such affronts for to be,
We'll tumble them down, as you sal sennon see:
The Welsh.
6.
^affy was once a Cottamighty of Wales,
Put her Cousin O. P. was a ^reater,
Was come in her Country Cats^pluttery nails,
Was take her welsh hook and was peat her;
Was eat up her Shee^e,
Her Tuck and her Geese,
Her Pick, her Capon was ty for it;
Ap Richard, ap Owen* ap Morgon, ap S^ef^n,
Ap Shenkin, ap Powel was fly for it.
The Irish.
7.
O hone, O hone, poor Teg and shone,
O hone may howl and cry,
St. Patrick help die Country men,
Or fait and trot we dye;
De ^nglish steal our heart of Vsquebagh,
Dey put us to de sword all in Dewguedagh*
Help us St. Patrick we ha no Saint at all but dee*
O let us cry no more, O hone, a cram, a cree!
The English.
8.
A Crown, a Crown, make room,
The English man is come,
Whose valor
Is taller
Than all Christendom:
The Spanish, French, and Dutch,
Scotch, Welsh, and Irish Grutch,
We fear not,
We care not,
For we can deal with such.
You thought when we began in a Civil war to waste,
Our Tillage
Your Pillage
Should come home at last:
For when we
Could not agree,
You thought to share in our fall;
But nere stir Sir,
For first Sir
We shall noose you all.
A Medley.
3.
The English. LEt the Trumpets sound,
And the Rocks rebound,
Our English Natives coming;
Let the Nations swarm,
And the Princes storm;
We value not their drumming.
It Is not France that looks so smug
Old fashions still renewing,
It is not the Spanish shrug,
Scottish cap, or Irish rug;
Nor the Dutch-mans double jug
Can help what is ensuing,
Pray my Masters look about,
For something is a Brewing.
2.
He that is a Favorite consulting with Fortune,
If he grow not wiser, then he is quite undone*
In a rising Creature we daily see certainly,
He is a Retreater that fails to go on:
He that in a Builder's trade
Stops e're the Roof be made,
By the Air he may be betrayed
And overthrown:
He that has a Race begun,
And let us the Goal be won;
He had better never run,
But let 't alone.
3.
Then plot rightly,
March fightly,
Show your glittering Arms brightly:
Charge hightly,
Fight sprightly:
Fortune gives renown.
A right riser
Will prize her,
She makes all the World wiser;
Still try her,
We Will gain by her
A Coffin or a Crown.
4.
If the Dutchman or the Spaniard
Come but to oppose us,
We will thrust them out of the Main-yard,
If they do but nose us:
Hans, Hans, think upon thy sins,
And then submit to Spain thy Master;
For though now you look like Friends,
Yet he will never trust you after;
Drink, drink, give the Dutchman drink,
And let the tap and kan run faster;
For faith, at the last I think
A Brewer will become your Master.
5.
Let not poor Teg and Shone
Vender from der Houses,
Lest dey be quite undone
In der very trowzes:
And all her Orphans bestowed under hatches,
And made in London free der to cry matches;
St. Patrick wid his Harp do tuned wid true string
Is not fit to unty St. Hewson's shooes-strings.
6.
Methinks I hear
The Welsh draw near,
And from each lock a louse trops;
Ap Shon, ap LLoyd,
Will spen'd her ploot.
For to defend her mouse-traps:
Mounted on her K^fflebagh
With coot store of Koradagh,
The Pritish war begins.
With a hook her was over come her
Pluck her to her, thrust her from her,
By cot her was preak her shins.
Let Taffy fret,
And Welch-hook whet,
And troop up Pettigrees;
We only tout,
Tey will stink us out,
Wit Leeks and toasted Sheeze.
7.
But Jockie now and Jinny comes,
Our Brethren must approve on it;
For pret a Cot dey beat der drums
Only to break de Couvenant.
Dey bore St. Andrew's Cross,
Till our Army quite did rout them,
^ut when we put um to de Loss
De deal a Cross about them:
The King and Couvenant they crave,
Their Cause must needs be furthered;
Although so many Kings they have
Most barbarously, basely murdered.
8.
The French. The Frenchman he will give consent,
Though he trickle in our veins;
That willingly
We may agree,
To a marriage with Grapes and Grains:
He conquers us with kindness,
And does so far entrench,
That fair, and wise, and young, and rich
Are finified by the French:
He prettifies us with Feathers and Fans,
With Petticoats, Doublets, and Hose;
And faith they shall
Be welcome all
If they forbear the nose.
For love or for fear,
Let Nations forbear;
If fortune exhibit a Crown,
A Coward he
Must surely be,
That will not put it on.
The Levellers Rant.
TO the Hall, to the hall,
For justice we call,
On the King and his powerful adherents and friends
Who still have endeavored, but we work their ends.
It Is we will pull down what e're is above us,
And make them to fear us, that never did love us,
We Will level the proud, and make every degree,
To our Royalty bow the Knee,
It Is no less then treason,
Against freedom and Reason
For our brethren to be higher then we.
2.
First the thing, called a King,
To judgment we bring,
And the spawn of the court, that were prouder then he,
And next the two Houses united shall be,
It does to the Romish religion enveagle,
For the State to be two-headed like the spredeagle
We Will purge the superfluous Members away,
They are too many Kings to sway,
And as we all teach,
It Is our Liberties breach,
For the Freeborn Saints to obey.
3
Not a claw, in the Law,
Shall keep us in aw;
We Will have no cushon-cuffers to tell us of hell,
For we are all gifted to do it as well,
It Is freedom that we do hold forth to the Nations
To enjoy our fellow creatures as at the creation,
The Carnal men's wives are for men of the spirit
Their wealth is our own by merit,
For we that have right,
By the Law called Might,
Are the Saints that must judge and inherit*
The Safety.
SInce it has been lately enacted high Treason,
For a man to speak truth of the heads of the state
Let every wise man make use of his reason,
See and hear what he can, but take heed what he prate.
For the proverbs do learn us,
He that stays from the battle sleeps in a whole skin,
And our words are our own, if we can keep 'um in.
What fools are we then, that to prattle begin
Of things that do not concern us?
2
Let the three kingdoms fall to one of the prime ones
My mind is a Kingdom, and shall be to me,
I could make it appear, if I had but the time once,
I Am as happy with one, as he can be with three.
If I could but enjoy it
He that's mounted on high, is a mark for the hate,
And the envy of every pragmatical pate,
While he that creeps low, lives safe in his state,
And greatness do scorn to annoy it.
3
I am never the better which side gets the battle,
The Tubs or the Crosses, what is it to me?
They Will never increase my goods or my cattle,
But a beggar's a beggar and so he shall be,
Unless he turn Traitor,
Let M^sers take courses to hep up their treasure,
Whose lust has no limits, whose mind has no measur^
Let me be but quiet and take a little pleasure,
A little contents my nature.
4.
My Petition shall be that Canary be cheaper,
Without Patent or Custom, or cursed Excise;
That the Wits may have leave to drink deeper and deeper,
And not be undone, while their heads they baptize,
And in liquor do drench 'um;
If this were but granted, who would not desire,
To dub himself one of Apollo's own Quire?
We'll ring out the Bells, when our noses are on fire,
And the quarts shall be the buckets to drench 'um,
5.
I account him no wit, that is gifted at railing,
And flirting at those that above him do sit,
While they do out-wit him, with whipping and goaling,
Then his purse and his person both pay for his wit,
It Is better to be drinking;
If sack were reformed into twelve-pence a quart,
I Would study for money to Merchandise for it,
And a friend that is true, we together will sport.
Not a word, but we will pay them with thinking.
The Leveller.
NAy prithee don't fly me,
But ^it thee down by me,
I cannot endure
A man that is demure,
Go hang up your Worships and Sirs;
Your Congies and Trips,
With your legs and your lips,
Your Madams and Lords,
And such finikin words,
With the Complements you bring,
That do spell NO-THING,
You may keep for the Chains and the Furs:
For at the beginning was no Peasant or Prince,
And 'twas policy made the distinction since.
2.
Those Titles of Honors
Do remain in the Donours,
And not in that thing,
To which they do cling,
If his soul be too narrow to wear 'um,
No delight can I see
In that word called degree,
Honest Dick sounds as well
As a name of an ell,
That with Titles does swell,
And sounds like a spell,
To affright mortal ears that hear 'um,
He that wears a brave soul, and dares gallantly do,
May be his own Herald and Godfather too,
3.
Why should we then dote on,
One with a Fools coat on?
Whose Coffers are crammed,
But yet he will be damned
Ere he will do a good act or a wise one?
What Reason has he
To be ruler over me?
That Is a Lord in his chest,
But in's head and his breast,
Is empty and bare,
Or but puffed up with air,
And can neither assist nor advise one.
Honor's but air, and proud flesh but dust is,
It Is we Commons make Lords, and the Clerk makes the Justice.
4.
But since men must be
Of a different degree,
Because most do aspire,
To be greater and higher,
Then the rest of their Fellows and Brothers.
He that has such a spirit,
Let him gain it by's merit,
Spend his brains, wealth, or blood
For his Countries good,
And make himself fit
By his valor or wit,
For things above the reach of all others.
For Honor's a Prize, and who wins it may wear it,
If not it is a Badge and a burden to bear it.
5.
For my part let me
Be but quiet and free,
I Will drink Sack and obey,
And let great ones sway,
And spend their whole time in thinking,
I Will never busy my Pate
With secrets of State,
The News books I Will burn all,
And with the Diurnall
Light Tobacco, and admit
That they are so far fit,
As they serve good company and drinking.
All the name I desire is an honest Good Fellow,
And that man has no worth that will not sometimes be mellow.
The Royalists Answer.
I Have reason to fly thee,
And not sit down by thee;
For I hate to behold,
One so saucy and bold,
To deride and contemn his Superiors,
Our Madams and Lords,
And such mannerly words,
With the gestures that be
Fit for every degree,
Are things that we and you
Both claim as our due
From all those that are our Inferiors.
For from the beginning there were Princes we know,
'Twas you Levellers hate 'um, 'cause you cannot be so.
2.
All Titles of Honors
Were at first in the Donours.
But being granted away
With the Grantees stay,
Where he wear a small soul or a bigger.
There Is a necessity
That there should be degree.
Where it is due we will afford
A Sir John, and my Lord,
Though Dick, Tom and Jack,
Will serve you and your Pack,
Honest Dick's name enough for a Digger.
He that has a strong Purse can all things be or do,
He is valiant and wise and religious too.
3.
We have cause to adore,
That man that has store,
Though a Bore or a sot,
There Is something to be got;
Though he be neither honest nor witty;
Make him high, let him rule,
He Will be playing the fool,
And transgress, then we will squeze
Him for fines and for fees.
And so we shall gain,
By the wants of his brain,
It Is the Fools-cap that maintains the City.
If honor be air, it is in common, and as fit,
For the fool and the clown, as for the champion or the wit.
4.
Then why may not we be
Of different degree?
And each man aspire
To be greater and higher
Then his wiser or honester brother,
Since Fortune and Nature
Their favors do scatter;
This has valor, that wit,
The Other wealth, nor is it fit
That one should have all,
For then what would befall
Him, that is born nor to one nor to'ther?
Though honor were a prize at first, now it is a chattle,
And as merchantable grown as your wares or your cattle.
5.
Yet in this we agree,
To live quiet and free,
To drink sack and submit,
And not show our wit
By our prating, but silence, and thinking,
Let the politic Jews
Read Diurnals and News,
And lard their discourse,
With a Comment that is worse,
That which pleases me best
Is a Song or a Jest,
And my obedience I Will show by my drinking.
He that drinks well, does sleep well, he that sleeps well, does think well,
He that thinks well, does do well, he that does well must drink well.
The Independents resolve.
COme Drawer and fill us about some Wine
Let Us merrily tipple the day's our own,
We Will have our delights, let the Country go pine,
Let the King and his Kingdom groan.
The Crown is our own, and so shall continue,
We Will Monarchy baffle quite,
We Will drink off the Kingdoms revenue,
And sacrifice all to delight.
It Is Power that brings
Us all to be Kings,
And we will be all crowned by our might.
2.
A fig for divinity lectures and law,
And all that to Loyalty do pretend,
While we by the sword keep the Kingdom in aw,
Our Power shall never have end.
The Church and the State we will turn into liquor,
And spend a whole Town in a day,
We Will melt all their bodkins the quicker
Into Sack, and drink them away.
We Will keep the demeans
And turn Bishops and Deans,
And over the Presbyters sway.
3.
The nimble St. Patrick is sunk in his boggs,
And his Country men sadly cry O hone! O hone!
St. Andrew and's Kirk-men are lost in the foggs,
Now we are the Saints alone.
Then on our Superiors and Equals we trample,
And Jockie our stirrup shall hold,
The City's our Mule for example,
That we may in plenty be roul'd.
Each delicate dish,
Shall but Echo our wish
And our drink shall be cordial gold.
The Lamentation.
MOurn, London, mourn,
Bathe thy polluted soul in tears;
Return, return,
Thou have more cause of grief, then thou had for fears,
For the whole Kingdom now begins
To feel thy sorrow as they saw thy sins,
And now do no
Compassion show
Unto thy misery and woe,
But slight thy sufferings as thou did theirs.
2.
Pride towering Pride,
And boiling lust, those fatal twins,
Sit side by side,
And are become Plantations of sins.
Hence thy Rebellions first did flow,
Both to the King above, and him below.
And sordid sloth
The Nurse of both,
Have raised thy crimes to such a growth,
That sorrow must conclude as sin begins.
3.
Fire raging fire,
Shall burn thy stately towers down,
Yet not expire,
Tygres and Wolves, or men more savage grown,
Thy Childrens brains, and thine shall dash,
And in your blood their guilty tallons wash,
Thy Daughters must
Allay their lust,
Mischiefs will be on mischief thrust,
Till thy Cap tumble as thou made the Crown.
4.
Cry London cry!
Now now petition for redress,
Where can thou fly?
Thy emptyed Chests augment thy heaviness,
The Gentry and the Commons loath,
The adored Houses slight thee worse than both,
The King poor Saint,
Would help, but cannot;
To heaven alone unfold thy want,
Thence came thy Plagues, thence only Pity flow'th.
The Reformation.
TEll not me of Lords or Laws,
Rules or Reformation,
All that is done's not worth two straws,
To the welfare of the Nation.
Men in power do ra^t it still,
And give no reason but their will,
For all their domination.
Or if they do an act that is just,
It Is not because they would* but must,
To Gratify some parties lust,
Or merely for a fashion.
2.
Our expense of blood and purse
Has produced no profit.
Men are still as bad or worse,
And will be what e're comes of it.
We Have shuffled out, and shuffled in,
The persons, but retain the sin,
To make our game the surer,
Yet spite of all our pains and skill,
The Knaves all in the pack are still,
And ever were and ever will,
Though something now demurer.
3.
And it cannot but be so,
Since those toys in fashion,
And of Souls so base and low,
And mere Bigots of the Na^ion,
Whose designs are power and wealth*
At which, by rapines, fraud, and stealth,
Audaciously they vent ye,
They lay their Consciences aside,
And turn with every wind and tide,
Puffed on by Ignorance and Pride,
And all to look like Gentry.
4.
Crimes are not punished 'cause their Crimes,
But 'cause they are low and little,
Mean men for mean faults in these times
Make satisfaction to a tittle;
While those in office and in power,
Boldly the underlings devour
Our Cobweb laws cannot hold 'um.
They sell for many a Thousand crown,
Things which were never yet their own,
And this is law and custom grown.
'Cause those do judge that sold 'um.
5.
Brothers still with Brothers brawl,
And for trifles sue 'um,
For two Pronouns that spoil all,
Those contentious Meum, Tuum,
The wary Lawyer buys and builds,
While the Client sells his fields,
To sacrifice to's fury;
And when he thinks to obtain his right
He Is baffled off, or beaten quite,
By the Judges will, or Lawyers slight,
Or ignorance of the Jury.
6.
See the Tradesman how he thrives
With perpetual trouble,
How he ^heats, and how he strives
His Estate t'enlarge and double,
Extort, oppress, grind and encroach,
To be a Squire, and keep a Coach,
And to be one of the Quorum,
Who may with his Brother worships ^it,
And judge without law, fear or wit,
Poor petty Thieves that nothing get,
And yet are brought before 'um.
7.
And his way to get all this
Is mere dissimulation,
No factious Lecture does he miss,
And scapes no schism that is in fashion.
But with short hair and shining shoes,
He with two Pens and's Note-book goes,
And winks and writes at random;
Thence with short meal and tedious Grace,
In a loud tone and Public place,
Sings Wisedoms hymns, that trot and pace,
As if Goliath scanned um.
8.
But when death begins his threats,
And his Conscience struggles,
To call to mind his former cheats
Then at heaven he turns his juggles.
And out of all is ill-gotten store,
He gives a dribling to the poor,
In a Hospital or School-house,
And the suborned Priest for's hire
Quite frees him from the infernal fire,
And places him in the Angels quire,
Thus these Jack-puddings fool us.
9.
All he gets by's pains in the close,
Is that he dyed worth so much,
Which he on's doubtful seed bestows,
That neither care nor know much,
Then Fortunes favorite his heir,
Bred base, and ignorant and bare,
Is blown up like a bubble,
Who wondering at's own sudden rise,
By Pride, Simplicity and Vice,
Falls to's sports, drink, drab and dice
And makes all fly like stubble.
10.
And the Church the other twin,
Whose mad zeal enraged us,
Is not purified a pin,
By all those broils in which she engaged us,
We, our Wives turned out of doors,
And took in Concubines and Whores,
To make an alteration
Our Pulpitteers are proud and bold,
They their own Wills and factions hold,
And sell salvation still for Gold,
And here is our Reformation.
11.
It Is a madness then to make,
Thriving our employment,
And lucre love, for Lucres sake,
Since we have possession, not enjoyment.
Let the times run on their course,
For opposition makes them worse,
We never shall better find 'um,
Let Grand^es wealth and power ingrosse,
And honor too, while we sit close,
And laugh and take our plenteous dose,
Of sack and never mind 'um.
CHRONOSTICON Decollationis CAROLI Regis tricesimo die Januari^* secunda hora
Pomeridiana, Anno Dom. MDCXLVIII.
Ter Deno Ianl Labens ReX SoLe CaDente CaroLVs eXVtVs SoLIo SCeptroq Ve SeCVto.
CHARLES -- ah forbear, forbear! lest Mortals prize
His Name too dearly, and Idolatrize.
His Name! Our Loss! Thrice cursed and forlorn
Be that Black Night which ushered in this Morn.
CHARLES our Dread Sovereign! -- hold! lest Outlawed Sense
Bribe, and seduce tame Reason to dispense
With those Celestial powers; and distrust
Heaven can behold such Treason, and prove Just.
CHARLES our Dread Sovereign's murdered! tremble! and
View what Convulsions shoulder-shake this Land,
Court, City, Country, nay three Kingdoms run
To their last stage, and Set with him their Sun.
CHARLES our Dread Sovereign's murdered at His Gate!
Fell fiends! dire Hydra's of a stiff-neck'd-State!
Strange Body-politick! whose Members spread,
And Monster-like, swell bigger than their HEAD.
CHARLES of Great Britain! He! who was the known
King of three Realms, lies murdered in his own;
He! He! who lived, and Faith's Defender stood,
Died here to re-Baptize it in his blood.
No more, no more, Fame's Trump shall Echo all
The rest in dreadful Thunder. Such a Fall
Great Christendom nere pattern'd; and 'twas strange
Earth's Center reeled not at this dismal Change.
The Blow struck Britain blind, each well-set Limb
By dislocation was lopt off in HIM.
And though she yet lives, she lives but to condole
Three Bleeding Bodies left without a Soul.
Religion puts on Black, sad Loyalty
Blushes and mourns so see bright Majesty
Butchered by such Assassinates; nay both
Against God, against Law, Allegiance, and their Oath.
Farewell sad Isle! Farewell! thy fatal Glory
Is Sum'd, Cast up, and Cancelled in this Story.
AN ELEGY. Upon King CHARLES the first, murdered publicly by his Subjects.
WEre not my Faith buoyed up by sacred blood,
It might be drowned in this prodigious flood;
Which reasons highest ground does so exceed,
It leaves my soul no Anch'rage, but my Creed;
Where my Faith resting on the Original;
Supports it self in this the Copies fall;
So while my Faith floats on that Bloody wood,
My reason's cast away in this Red flood,
Which never o'reflows us all: Those showers past
Made but Land-floods, which did some valleys wast;
This stroke has cut the only neck of land
Which between us, and this Red Sea did stand,
That covers now our world, which cursed lies
At once with two of Aegypts prodigies;
O're-cast with darkness, and with blood o're-run,
And justly, since our hearts have theirs outdone;
The Inchanter led them to a less known ill,
To act his sin, then 'twas their King to kill:
Which crime has widdowed our whole Nation,
Voided all Forms, left but Privation
In Church and State; inverting every right;
Brought in Hells State of fire without light;
No wonder then, if all good eyes look red,
Washing their Loyal hearts from blood so shed;
The which deserves each pore should turn an eye,
To weep out, even a bloody Agony.
Let naught then pass for Music, but sad cries,
For Beauty, bloudless cheeks, and bloud-shot eyes.
All colors soil but black, all odours have
Ill scent but Myrrh, incensed upon this Grave:
It notes a Jew, not to believe as much,
The cleaner made by a Religious touch
Of their Dead Body, whom to judge to dye,
Seems the Judaical Impiety.
To kill the King, the Spirit Legion paints
His rage with Law, the Temple and the Saints:
But the truth is, He feared and did repine,
To be cast out, and back into the Swine:
And the case holds, in that the Spirit bends
His malice in this Act against his ends:
For it is like, the sooner he will be sent
Out of that body, He would still torment;
Let Christians then use otherwise this blood,
Detest the Act, yet turn it to their good;
Thinking how like a King of Death He dies;
We easily may the world and death despise:
Death had no sting for him, and its sharp arm,
Only of all the troop, meant him no harm.
And so he looked upon the Axe, as one
Weapon yet left, to guard Him to his Throne;
In His great Name then may His Subjects cry,
Death thou art swallowed up in Victory.
If this our loss a comfort can admit,
It Is that his narrowed Crown is grown unfit
For his enlarged Head, since his distress
Had greatned this, as it made that the less;
His Crown was fallen unto too low a thing
For him, who was become so great a King;
So the same hands enthroned him in that Crown,
They had exalted from Him, not pulled down;
And thus Gods truth by them has rendered more
Than e're men's falsehood promised to restore;
Which, since by Death, alone he could attain,
Was yet exempt from weakness, and from pain;
Death was enjoined by God, to touch a part,
Might make his passage quick, never move his heart;
Which even expiring was so far from death,
It seemed but to command away his breath.
And thus his Soul, of this her triumph proud,
Broke, like a flash of lightning, through the cloud
Of flesh and blood; and from the highest line
Of humane virtue, passed to be divine:
Nor is it much less his virtues to relate,
Than the high glories of his present state;
Since both then pass all Acts but of belief,
Silence may praise the one, the other grief.
And since, upon the Diamond, no less
Than Diamonds, will serve us to impresse,
I Will only wish that for his Elegy,
This our Josias had a Jeremie.
AN ELEGY On The best of Men, The meekest of Martyrs, CHARLES the First, etc.

DOe^ not the Sun call in his light, and day
Like a thin exhalation melt away?
Both wrapping up their Beams in Clouds, to be
Themselves Close Mourners at the Obsequie
Of this great Monarch? does his Royal Blood,
Which The Earth late drunk in so profuse a flood,
Not shoot through her affrightned womb, and make
All her convulsed Arteries to shake
So long, till all those hinges that sustain,
Like Nerves, the frame of nature shrink again
Into a shuffled Chaos? Does the Sun
Not suck it from its liquid Mansion,
And Still it in^o vap'rous Clouds, which may
Themselves in bearded Meteors display,
Whose s^aggy and disheveled Beams may be
The Tapers at this black Solemnity?
You seed of Marble in the Womb accursed,
Rocked by some storm, or by some Tigress nursed,
Fed by some Plague, which in blind mists was hurld,
To strew infection on the tainted World;
What fury charmed your hands to Act a deed,
Tyrants to think on would not weep, but bleed?
And Rocks by instinct so resent this Fact,
They'ld into Springs of easy tears be slack'd.
Say sons of tumult since you think it good,
Still to keep up the trade, and Bath in Blood
Your guilty hands, why did you then not state
Your Slaughters at some cheap and common rate?
Your gluttonous and lavish Blades might have
Devoted Myriads to one public Grave;
And lop'd off thousands of some base allay,
Whilst the same Sexton that interred their clay,
In the same Urne their Names too might entomb,
But when on him you fixed your fatal Doom,
You gave a blow to Nature, since even all*
The ^^ock of man now bleeds too in his fall.
Could not Religion, which you often have made
A specious gloss your black designs to shade,
Teach you, that we come nearest Heaven when we
Are suppled into acts of Clemency?
And copy out the Deity again,
When we distill our mercies upon men?
But why do I deplore this ruin? He
Only shook off his frail Humanity,
And with such calmnesse fell, he seemed to be,
Even less unmoved and unconcerned than we;
And forced us from our Throes of Grief to say,
We only died, he only lived that Day:
So that his Tomb is now his Throne become,
T'invest him with the Crown of Martyrdom;
And death the shade of nature did not shroud
His Soul in Mists, but its clear Beams uncloud,
That who a Star in our Meridian shone,
In Heaven might shine a Constellation.
On the Death of his Royal Majesty, CHARLES late King of ENGLAND, etc.
WHat went you out to see? a dying King?
Nay more, I fear an Angel suffering.
But what went you to see? a Prophet slain?
Nay that and more, a Martyred Sovereign.
Peace to that sacred dust! Great Sir, our fears
Have left us nothing but obedient tears
To court your hearse, and in those pious floods
We live, the poor remainder of our goods.
Accept us in these latter Obsequies,
The unplundred riches of our hearts and eyes;
For in these faithful streams, and emanations,
We Are Subjects still beyond all Sequestrations.
Here we cry more than Conquerors: malice may
Murder Estates, but hearts will still obey;
These as your glory's yet above the reach
Of such whose purple lines confusion preach.
And now, ( Dear Sir) vouchsafe us to admire
With envy your arrival, and that Quire
Of Cherubims and Angels that supplied
Our duties at your triumphs: where you ride
With full caelestial Joys, and Ovations,
Rich as the Conquest of three ruined Nations.
But 'twas the heavenly plot that snatched you hence,
To crown your Soul with that magnificence,
And bounden rites of honor, that poor earth
Could only wish and stangle in the birth.
Such pitied emulation stopped the blush
Of our ambitious shame, nonsuited us.
For where souls act beyond mortality,
Heaven only can perform that Jubilee.
We wrestle then no more, but bless your day,
And mourn the anguish of our sad delay:
That since we cannot add we yet stay here
Fette^ed in clay: Yet longing to appear
Spectators of your bliss, that being shown
Once more, you may embrace us as your own;
Where never envy shall divide us more,
Nor City tumults, nor the worlds uproar;
But an eternal hush, a quiet peace
As without end, so still in the increase,
Shall lull humanity asleep, and bring
Us equal Subjects to the Heavenly King.
Till then I Will turn Recusant, and forswear
All Calvin, for there is Purgatory here.
AN EPITAPH.
STay Passenger: Behold and see
The widowed Grave of Majesty.
Why tremblest thou? Here Is that will make
All but our stupid souls to shake.
Here lies entombed the sacred dust
Of Peace and Piety, Right and Just.
The blood (O start'st not thou to hear?)
Of a King, 'twixt hope and fear
Shed and hurried hence to be
The miracle of misery.
Add the ills that Rome can boast,
Shrift the world in every coast,
Mix the fire of Earth and Seas
With humane spleen and practices,
To puny the records of time,
By one grand Gygantick crime,
Then swell it bigger till it squeeze
The Globe to crooked hams and knees,
Here Is that shall make it seem to be
But modest Christianity.
The Lawgiver, amongst his own,
Sentenced by a Law unknown.
Voted Monarchy to death
By the course Plebeian breath.
The Sovereign of all command,
Suffering by a Common hand.
A Prince, to make the odium more,
Offered at his very door.
The Head cut off, O death to see it!
In obedience to the feet.
And that by Justice you must know,
If you have Faith to think it so.
We'll stir no further then this Sacred Clay,
But let it slumber till the Judgment day:
Of all the Kings on Earth, it is not denied,
Here lies the first that for Religion dyed.
The Engagement stated.
Begone Expositor: the Text is plain,
No Church, no Lord, no Law, no Sovereign.
Away with mental reservations, and
Senses of Oaths in files out-vy the Strand:
Here Is Hell trussed in a thimble, in a breath,
Dares face the hazard of the second death.
The Saints are grown Laconians, and can twist
Perjury up in Pills, like Leyden grist:
But hold precize Doponents: though the heat
Of Zeal in Cataracts digest^ such meat,
My cold concoction shrinks, and my advance
Drives slowly to approach your Ordinance.
The sign's in Cancer, and the Zodiac turns
Leonick, roul'd in curls, while Terra burns.
What though your fancies are sublimed to reach
Those fatal reins? Success and will can teach
But rash Divinity: a sad renown,
Where one man fell to see a million drown.
When neither Arts nor Arms can serve to fight
And wrest a Title from its Law and Right,
Must Malice piece the Trangum, and make clear
The scruple? Else we will resolve to swear?
Nay out-swear all that we have sworn before,
And make good lesser crimes by acting more
And more sublime? This, this extends the Line*
And shames the puny soul of Cataline.
On this account all those whose Fortune's crossed,
And want estates, may turn Knights of the Post.
Vaulx we out-vy'd thee, since thy plot fell lame,
We found a closer Celler for the same,
Piling the fatal Powder in our mouths,
Which in an Oath discharged blew up the House.
Maugre Mounteagle, Aspes not thoroughly slain,
Their poison in an age may live again.
Good Demas cuff your Bear, then let us see
The mystery of your iniquity.
May a Man course a Cur? and freely box
The Question? or the formal Paradox?
But as in Physic, so in this device
This que^k of policy the point is nice.
For he that in this model means to thrive,
Must first subscribe to the Preparative;
Like Witches compact countermarch his faith
And soak up all what ere the Spirit says;
Then seal and sign. Scylla threw three Bars short,
He a had Sword indeed, but no Text for it.
Old Rome lam^nt thy infancy in sin,
We perfect what thou trembledst to begin,
Blush then to see thy self outdone. But all
The world may grieve, it is epidemical.
Heaven frowns indeed. But what makes Hell enraged?
Sweet Pluto be at Peace, we have Engaged.
On the happy Memory of Alderman Hoyle that hanged himself.
ALL hail fair fruit! may every Crab-tree bear
Such blossoms, and so lovely every year!
Call ye me this the slip? marry it is well,
Zacheus slipped to Heaven, the Thief to Hell:
But if the Saints thus give's the slip, it is need
To look about us to preserve the breed.
They Are of the Running game, and thus to post
In nooses, blanks the reckning with their Host.
Here Is more than Trussum cordum I suppose
That knit this knot: guilt seldom singly goes!
A wounded soul close coupled with the sense
Of sin, pays home its proper recompense.
But hark you Sir, if have can grant the time?
See you the danger yet what it is to climb
In Kings Prerogatives? things beyond just,
When Law seems bribed to doom them, must be trussed.
But O I smell your Plot strong through your Hose,
'Twas but to cheat the Hangman of your Clothes*
Else your more active hands had fairly stayed
The leisure of a Psalm: Judas has prayed.
But later crimes cannot admit the pause,
They run upon effects more than the cause.
Yet let me ask one question, why alone?
One Member of a Corporation?
It Is clear amongst Divines, Bodies and Souls
As jointly active, so their judgment rowles
Concordant in the Sentence; why not so
In earthly Sufferings? States attended go.
But I perceive the Knack: Old women say
And be it approved, each Dog should have his day.
Hence sweep the Almanac: Lilly make room,
And blanks enough for the new Saints to come,
All in Red letters: as their faults have bin
Scarlet, so limb their Anniverse of sin.
And to their Childrens credits and their Wives
Be it still said, they leap fair for their lives.
The States New Coin.
1.
SAw you the States money new come from the Mint?
Some People do say it is wondrous fine;
And that you may read a great mystery in it,
Of mighty King Nol, the Lord of the Coin.
2.
They have quite omitted his Politic head,
His worshipful face, and his excellent Nose;
But the better to tempt the sisters to bed,
They have fixed upon it the print of his Hose.
3.
For, if they had set up his Picture there,
They needs must have crowned him in Charles his stead;
But 'twas cunningly done, that they did forbear,
And rather would set up his Ar -- than his head.
4
It Is monstrous strange, and yet it is true,
In this Reformation we should have such luck,
That Crosses were always disdained by you,
Who before pulled them down, should now set them up.
5.
On this side they have circumscribed God with us,
And in this stamp and Coin they confide;
Commonwealth on the other, by which we may guess
That God and the States were not both of a side.
6.
On this side they have Cross and Harp,
And only a Cross on the other set forth;
By which we may learn it falls to our part
Two Crosses to have for one fit of Mirth.
7.
A Countryman hearing this, straight way did think,
That he would procure such a piece of his own;
And knowing it like his Wifes Butter-print,
She should have it for a Token when as he came home.
8.
Then since that this is the Parliament coin,
Now Lilly by thy mysterious charms,
Or Heralds, pray tell us if these have not been
Carmen or Fiddlers before by their Arms.
The Rebellion.
NOw, thanks to the Powers below,
We have even done our do,
The Myter is down, and so is the Crown,
And with them the Corronet too:
All is now the Peoples, and then
What is theirs is ours we know;
There is no such thing as a Bishop or K --
Or Peer, but in name or show;
Come Clowns, and come Boys, come Hoberdehoys,
Come Females of each degree,
Stretch out your throats, bring in your Votes,
And make good the Anarchy;
Then thus it shall be, says Alse,
Nay, thus it shall be, says Amie,
Nay, thus it shall go, says Taffie,! trow,
Nay, thus it shall go, says Jemmy.
Oh but the truth, good People all, the truth is is such a thing.
For it will undo both Church and State too,
And pull out the throat of our King;
No, nor the Spirit, nor the new Light
Can make the Point so clear,
But we must bring out the defiled Coat,
What thing the truth is, and where,
Speak Abraham, speak Hester,
Speak Judith, speak K^ster,
Speak tag and rag, short coat and long:
Truth is the spell that made us rebel,
And murder and plunder ding dong;
Sure I have the truth, says Numphs,
Nay, I have the truth, says Clem,
Nay, I have the truth, says reverend Ruth,
Nay, I have the truth, says Nem.
Well, let the truth be whose it will,
There is something else in ours,
Yet this devotion in our Religions
May chance to abate our Powers:
Then let us agree on some new way,
It skills not much how true,
Take P -- and his club, or Smec and his tub
Or any Sect, old or new;
The Devil is in the pack, if choice you can lack*
We are fourscore Religions strong,
Then take your choice, the Major voice
Shall carry't right or wrong;
Then let us have King Charles, says George,
Nay, we will have his Son, says Hugh;
Nay, then let us have none, says gabbering Jone,
Nay, we will be all Kings, says Prue.
Nay, but neighbors and friends, one word more,
There Is something else behind,
And wise though you be, you do not well see
In which door fits the wind;
And for Religion, to speak truth,
And in both Houses sense,
The matter is all one, if any or none,
If it were not for the pretense;
Now here does lurk the key of the work,
And how to dispose of the Crown
Dexteriously, and as it may be
For your behalf and our own;
Then we will be of this, says Meg,
Nay, we will be of this, says Tib,
Come, we'll be of all, says pitiful Paul,
Nay, we will be of none, says Gib.
Oh we shall have, if we go on
In Plunder, Excise, and Blood,
But few folks, and poor, to domineer over,
And that will not be good;
Then let us agree on some new way,
Some new and happy course,
The Country is grown sad, the City is Horn mad,
And both the Houses are worse;
The Synod has writ, the General has shit,
And both to like purpose, for
Religion, Laws, the Truth, and the Cause
We talk on, but nothing we do;
Come, then let us have peace, says Nel,
No, no, but we will not says Meg,
But I say we will, says fiery-face Phil,
We will, and we will not, says Hodge.
Thus from the Rout who can expect
Ought but confusion,
Since the Unity with good Monarchy
Begin and end in one?
If then when all is thought their own,
And lies at their belief,
These popular pates, reap naught but debates
From these many round-headed beast;
Come Royalists then, do you play the men,
And Cavaliers give the word,
And now let us see what you will be,
And whether you can accord;
A health to King Charles, says Tom,
Up with it, says Ralph, like a man,
God bless him, says Doll, and raise him, says Moll,
And send him his own, says Nan.
But now for these prudent Wights,
That sit without end, and to none,
And their Committees in Towns and Cities
Fill with confusion;
For the bold Troops of Sectaries,
The Scots, and their Partakers,
Our new British States, Col. Burges and his Mates,
The Covenant and its Makers:
For all these we will pray, and in such a way,
That if it might granted be,
Both Jack and Gill, and Moll and Will,
And all the world will agree:
El^e Pox take them all, says Bess,
And a Plague too says Mary,
The Devil, says Dick, and his Dam too, says Nick,
Amen and amen say we.
On Britannicus his leap three Story high, and his escape from London.
PAul from Damascus in a basket slides,
Cran'd by the faithful Brethren down the sides
O^ their embattel'd walls; Britannicus
As loath to trust the Brethrens God with us,
Slides too, but yet more desperate, and yet thrives
In his descent; needs must! the Devil drives.
Their Cause was both the same, and herein meet,
Only their fall was not with equal feet,
Which makes the Case Iambick: thus we see
How much News falls short of Divinity.
Truth was their crying crime: One takes the night,
The other the advantage of the New-sprung Light
To mantle his escape: how different be
The Pristin and the Modern Policy?
Have Ages their Antipodes? Yet still
Close in the Propagation of ill?
Hence flows this use and doctrine from the thump
I last sustained (beloved) Good wits may Jump.
An Epigram on the People of England.
SWeating and chafing hot Ardelio cries
A Boat a Boat, else farewell all the prize.
But having once set foot upon the deep
Hot-spur Ardelio fell fast asleep.
So we, on fire with zealous discontent,
Called out a Parliament, a Parliament;
Which being obtained at last, what did they do?
Even squeez the Wool-packs, and lie snorting too.
Another.
BRitain a lovely Orchard seemed to be
Furnished with natures choice variety,
Temptations golden fruit of every sort,
The Hesperian Garden fanned from fein'd report;
Great boys and small together in we brake,
No matter what disdained Priapus spoke:
Up, up, we lift the great boys in the trees,
Hoping a common share to sympathize:
But they no sooner there, neglected straight
The shoulders that so raised them to this height;
And fell to stuffing of their own bags first,
And as their treasure grew, so did their thirst.
Whiles we in lean expectance gaping stand,
For one shake from their charitable hand.
But all in vain, the dropsy of desire
So scortch'd them, three Realms could not quench the fire.
Be wise then in your Ale, bold youths, for fear
The Gardner catch us as Moss caught his Mare.
Upon report there should be no more Terms kept at Westminster.
Is It possible? will no Terms then prevail?
And must the Gown and Bag jog on to sale?
The Bills and Answers in our Courts become
Converted to the taring use of Drum?
And shall no more Confederacies pass
'Twixt Midsomer and dying Michaelmas?
Though they deprive us of Old An Attorney.
Hillary,
It Is fit they should allow the Trinity;
But that is denied too: this Alteration
Contracts our whole time to a long Vacation.
Now farewell the The Scotch Alehouse in Harts-horne Lane.
Brown bowl, and Bonny Ale,
The Sanguine Herring, and its merry tail;
Clerks of the Exchequer, that used to drink their Mornings Draughts there.
Higgenian Quibbles, and the Harpean Lyre,
Fentonian Sweetness, and the Towering Fire;
Our They called one another so.
Host and Hostess too, they are both Vxorums,
As Hermophraditus is, in Sex Duorums:
Weep To Westminster.] Places there where Clerks in Term time usually break
their Fast.
Heaven, lament thy loss, and thou Hell rore,
Thy Furnace scarce will ere be heated more;
Of Pleasure, Paradise, thou must be barren,
And Purgatory furnished but with Carrion:
Th'Abomination of the A Bawdy House.
Hole in the Wall,
Now June is past, cry Pamphlets in the Hall;
And she that is left but the remnant of a Nose,
Who to a Surgeon (as men do suppose)
Did pawn the other part for cure of this,
Turn Zealot, and be Martyred when she p --
All Trades, and all Societies lament
Your wants in us, you will find cause to repent
The setting up your Idol Parliament:
For though on these Terms they will no profit give
To Us, we'll try on other Terms to live.
Upon the Cavaliers departing out of London.
NOw fare thee well London,
Thou next must be undone,
'Cause thou have undone us before;
This Cause and this Tyrant,
Had never played this high rant,
Were It not for thy argent and Or.
2.
Now we must desert thee,
With the lines that begirt thee,
And the Red-coated Saints domineer;
Who with liberty fool thee,
While a Monster does rule thee,
And thou feel'st what before thou did fear.
3.
Now Justice and Freedom,
With the Laws that did breed 'um,
Are sent to Jamaica for gold;
And those that upheld 'um,
Have power but seldom,
For Justice is bartered and sold.
4.
Now the Christian Religion
Must seek a new Region,
And the old Saints give way to the new;
And we that are Loyal,
Vail to those that destroy all,
When the Christian gives place to the Jew.
5.
But this is our glory
In this wretched story,
Calamities fall on the best;
And those that destroy us
Do better employ us,
To sing till they are suppressed.
On Col. Pride.
OF Giants and Knights, and their wonderful fights
We have stories enough in Romances,
But I Will tell you one new, that is strange and yet true,
Though the other are nothing but fancies.
2.
A Knight lately made, of the Governing trade,
Whose name he will not have to be known;
Has been trucking with fame, to purchase a name,
For it is said he had none of his own.
3.
He by Fortunes design, should have been a Divine,
And a Pillar no doubt of the Church;
Whom a Sexton (God wot) in the Bellfry begot,
And his Mother did pig in the Porch.
4.
And next for his breeding, 'twas learned Hog-feeding,
With which he so long did converse,
That his manners and feature, was so like their nature,
You Would scarce know his sweetness from theirs.
5.
But observe the device, of this Noblemans rise,
How he hurried from trade to trade,
From the grains he would aspire, to the yest, and then higher,
Till at length he a Drayman was made.
6.
Then his dray-horse and he, in the streets we did see,
With his hanger, his sling, and his jacket;
Long time he did watch, to meet with his match,
For he would ever a mind to the Placket.
7.
At length he did find, out a Trull to his mind,
And Vrsula was her name;
Oh Vrsl^ quoth he, and oh Tom then quoth she,
And so they began their game.
8.
But as soon as they met, O such Babes they did get,
And Blood Royal in 'um did place,
From a swineheard they came, a she-bear was their Dam,
They were suckled as Romulus was.
9.
At last when the Rout, with their head did fall out,
And the Wars thereupon did fall in,
He went to the field, with a sword, but no shield,
Strong drink was his buckler within.
10
But when he did spy, how they dropped down and dye,
And did hear the bullets to sing;
His arms he flung down, and run fairly to town,
And exchanged his sword for his sling.
11.
Yet he claimed his share, in such honors as were
Belonging to nobler spirits;
That ventured their lives, while this Buffon survives
To receive the reward of their merits.
12.
When the Wars were all done, he his fighting begun,
And would needs show his valor in peace,
Then his fury he flings, at poor conquered things,
And frets like a hog in his grease.
13.
For his first feat of all, on a Wit he did fall,
A Wit as some say, and some not,
Because he would an art, to rhyme on the quart,
But never did care for the pot.
14.
And next on the Cocks, he fell like an Ox,
Took them and their Masters together;
But the combs and the spurs, kept himself and his Sirs,
Who are to have both or neither.
15.
The cause of his spite, was because they would fight,
And because he durst not, he did take on;
And said they were fit, for the pot, not the spit,
And would serve to be eaten with Bacon.
16.
But fleshed with these spoils, the next of his toils,
Was to fall with wild-beasts by the ears,
To the Bearward he goes, and then opened his mouth,
And said, Oh! are you there with your bears.
17.
Our stories are dull, of a Cock and a Bull,
But such was his valor and care;
Since he bears the Bell, the tales that we tell,
Must be of a Cock and a Bear.
18.
The crime of the Bears, was, they were Cavaliers,
And had formerly fought for the King;
And pulled by the Burrs, the Round-headed Cur^,
That they made their ears to ring.
19.
Our successor of Kings, like blind fortune flings
Upon him both honor and store;
Who has as much right, to make Tom a Knight,
As Tom has desert, and no more.
20.
But Fortune that Whore, still attended this Brewer,
And did all his Achievements reward;
And blindly did fling, on this lubberly thing,
More Honor, and made him a Lord.
21.
Now he walks with his spurs, and a couple of curs
At his heels, which he calls Squires;
So when Honor is thrown, on the head of a Clown,
It Is by Parasites held up, and Liars.
22.
The rest of his pranks, will merit new thanks,
With his death, if we did but know it;
But we will leave him and it, to a time and place fit,
And Greg. shall be funeral Poet.
Upon the General Pardon past by the RUMP, 1653.
Rejoice, rejoice, ye Cavaliers,
For here comes that expells your fears;
A General Pardon is now past,
What was long looked for, comes at last.
It Pardons all that are undone;
The Pope never granted such a one:
So long, so large, so full, so free;
O what a gracious State have we!
Yet do not joy too much (my friends)
First see how well this pardon ends,
For though it has a Glorious face,
I fear there is in it but little grace.
It Is said the Mountains once brought forth,
And what brought they? a Mouse in troth;
Our States have done the like, I doubt,
In this their Pardon now set out.
We'll look it over then if you please,
And see wherein it brings us ease;
And first, it Pardons words I find
Against our State, words are but wind.
Has any prayed for The King of late?
And wished confusion to our State?
And called them Rebels? he come in
And plead this Pardon for that sin.
Has any called King Charles that is dead
A Martyr? He that lost his Head?
And Villains those that did the Fact?
That man is pardoned by this Act.
Has any said our Parliament
Is such a one as God never sent?
Or has he writ, or put in Print
That he believes the Devil's in it?
Or has he said there never were
Such Tyrants any where as here?
Though this offense of his be high,
He Is pardoned for his Blasphemy.
You see how large this Pardon is,
It Pardons all our Mercuries,
And Poets too, for you know they
Are poor, and have not ought to pay.
For where there is money to be got,
I find this Pardon pardons not;
Malignants that were rich before,
Shall not be pardoned till they are poor.
Has any one been true to the Crown.
And for that paid his money down;
By this new Act he shall be free,
And pardoned for his Loyalty.
Who have their Lands confiscate quite,
For not Compounding when they might;
If that they know not how to digg,
This Pardon gives them leave to beg.
Before this Act came out in print,
We thought there had been comfort in it;
We drank some Healths to the Higher Powers,
But now we have seen't they would need drink ours.
For by this Act it is thought fit
That no man shall have benefit,
Unless he first engage to be
A Rebel to eternity.
Thus in this Pardon it is clear,
That nothing's here, and nothing's there,
I think our States do mean to choke us
With this new Act of Hocus Pocus.
Well, since this Act's not worth a pin,
We'll pray our States to call it in,
For most men think it ought to be
Burnt by the hand of Gregory.
Then to conclude, here is little joy
For those that pray Vive le Roy:
But since they will not forget our Crimes,
We Will keep our mirth till better times.
Upon Olivers dissolving the Parliament in 1653.
1.
WIll you hear a strange thing scarce heard of before,
A ballad of News without any lies,
The Parliament men are turned out of doors,
And so are the Council of State likewise.
2.
Brave Oliver came to the House like a Spright,
His fiery looks struck the Speaker dumb;
You must be gone hence, quoth he, by this light,
Do you mean to sit here till Doomsday come?
3.
With that the Speaker looked pale for fear,
As though he had been with the nightmare rid,
Insomuch that some did think that were there,
That he had even done as the Alderman did.
4.
But Oliver though he be Doctor of Law,
Yet he seemed to play the Physician there;
His Physic so wrought on the Speakers maw,
That he gave him a stool instead of a Chair.
5.
Harry Martyn wondered to see such a thing,
Done by a Saint of such high degree;
'Twas an act he did not expect from a King,
Much less from such a dry bone as he.
6.
But Oliver laid his hand on his sword,
And upbraided him with his Adultery;
To which Harry answered never a word,
Saving, humbly thanking his Majesty.
7.
Allen the Coppersmith was in great fear,
He did as much harm since the Wars began;
A broken Citizen many a year,
And now he is a broken Parliament Man.
8.
Bradshaw that President proud as the Pope,
That loves upon Kings and Princes to trample;
Now the house is dissolved I cannot but hope,
To see such a President made an example.
9.
And were I one of the Council of War,
I Will tell you what my Vote should be,
Upon his own Turret at Westminster,
To be hanged up for all comers to see.
10.
My Masters I wonder you could not agree,
You that have been so long Brethren in evil;
A dissolution you might think there would be,
When the Devil's divided against the Devil.
11.
Then room for the Speaker without his Mace,
And room for the rest of the Rabble-rout;
My Masters methinks it is a pitiful case,
Like the snuff of a Candle thus to go out.
12.
Now some like this change, and some like it not,
Some think it was not done in due season;
Some think it was but a Jesuits plot,
To blow up the House like a Gun-powder-treason,
13.
Some think that Oliver and Charles are agreed,
And sure it were good policy if it were so;
Lest the Hollander, French, the Dane, and the Swede,
Should bring him in whether he would or no.
14.
And now I would gladly conclude my Song,
With a Prayer as Ballads are used to do,
But yet I Will forbear, for I think er't be long,
We shall have a King and a Parliament too.
Admiral Deans Funeral.
1.
NIck Culpepper, and William Lilly,
Though you were pleased to say they were silly,
Yet something these prophesi'd true, I tell ye,
Which no body can deny.
2.
In the month of May, I tell you truly,
Which neither was in June nor July,
The Dutch began to be unruly,
Which no body can deny.
3.
Betwixt our England and their Holland,
Which neither was in France nor Poland,
But on the Sea, where there was no Land,
Which no body can deny.
4.
There joined the Dutch, and the English Fleet,
Our Authors opinion then they did meet,
Some saw't that never more shall see it,
Which no body can deny.
5.
There were many men's hearts as heavy as lead,
Yet would not believe Dick Dean to be dead,
Till they saw his Body take leave of his head,
Which no body can deny.
6.
Then after the sad departure of him,
There was many a man lost a Leg or a Lim,
And many were drow'd 'cause they could not swim,
Which no body can deny.
7.
One cries, lend me thy hand good friend,
Although he knew it was to no end,
I think, quoth he, I am going to the Fiend,
Which no body can deny.
8.
Some, 'twas reported, were killed with a Gun,
And some stood that knew not whether to run,
There was old taking leave of Father and Son,
Which no body can deny.
9
There Is a rumor also, if we may believe,
We have many gay Widows now given to grieve,
'Cause unmannerly Husbands nere came to take leave.
Which no body can deny.
10.
The ^itty is sad of our Dean to sing;
To say truth, it was a pitiful thing
To take off his head and not leave him a ring,
Which no body can deny.
11.
From Greenwich toward the Bear at Bridgefoot
He was wafted with wind that had water to it,
But I think they brought the Devil to boot,
Which no body can deny.
12.
The heads on London Bridge upon Poles,
That once had bodies, and honester souls
Than has the Master of the Roules,
Which no body can deny.
13.
They grieved for this great man of command,
Yet would not his head amongst theirs should stand;
He died on the Water, and they on the Land,
Which no body can deny.
14*
I cannot say, they looked wisely upon him,
Because People cursed that parcel was on him;
He has fed fish and worms, if they do not wrong him,
Which no body can deny.
15.
The Old Swan as he passed by,
Said, she would sing him a dirge, and lie down and di^;
Will thou sing to a bit of a body, quoth I?
Which no body can deny.
16.
The Globe on the Bank, I mean, on the Ferry,
Where Gentle and Simple might come and be merry,
Admired at the change from a Ship to a Wherry,
Which no body can deny.
17.
Tom Godfreys Bears began for to roar,
Hearing such moans one side of the shore,
They knew they should never see Dean any more,
Which no body can deny.
18.
Queen-hithe, Pauls-Wharf, and the Friars also,
Where now the Players have little to do,
Let him pass without any tokens of woe,
Which no body can deny.
19.
Quoth the Students of the Temple, I know not their names,
Looking out of their Chambers into the Thames,
The Barge fits him better than did the great James,
Which no body can deny.
20.
Essex House, late called Cuckolds Hall,
The folk in the Garden staring over the wall,
Said, they knew that once Pride would have a fall.
Which no body can deny.
21.
At Strand Gate, a little farther then,
Where mighty Guns numbered to sixty and ten,
Which neither hurt Children* Women nor Men,
Which no body can deny.
22.
They were shot over times one, two, three, or four,
It Is thought one might 'heard the bounce to the Tower,
Folk report, the din made the Buttermilk sower,
Which no body can deny.
23.
Had old Goodman Lenthal or All^n but heard 'um,
The noise worse than Olivers voice would have feared 'um,
And out of their small wits would have scared um
Which no body can deny.
24.
Sommerset House, where once did the Queen lie,
And afterward Ireton in black, and not green, by,
The Canon clattered the Windows really
Which no body can deny.
25.
The Savoys mortified spitled Crew,
If I lie, as Falstaff says, I am a Jew,
Gave the Hearse such a look it would make a man spew,
Which no body can deny.
26.
The House of S -- that Fool and Knave,
Had so much wit left lamentation to save
From accompanying a traytorly Rogue to his grave,
Which no body can deny.
27.
The Exchange, and the ruins of Durham house eke
Wished such sights might be seen each day in the week,
A General's Carcass without a Cheek,
Which no body can deny.
28.
The House that lately Great Buckinghams was,
Which now Sir Thomas Fairfax has,
Wished it might be Sir Thomas's fate so to pass,
Which no body can deny.
29.
Howards House, Suffolks great Duke of Yore,
Sent him one single sad wish, and no more,
He might flote by Whitehall in purple gore,
Which no body can deny.
30.
Some^hing I should of White Hall say,
^ut the Story is so sad, and so bad, by my fay,
That it turns my wits another way,
Which no body can deny.
31.
To VV^stminster, to the Bridge of the Kings.
The water the Barge, and the Barge-men brings
The small remain of the worst of things,
Which no body can deny.
32.
They interred him in triumph, like Lewis the eleven,
In the famous Chapel of Henry the seven,
But his soul is scarce gone the right way to heaven,
Which no body can deny.
The merry Goodfellow.
WHy should we not laugh and be jolly,
Since all the World now is grown mad?
And lulled in a dull melancholy;
He that wallows in store
Is still gaping for more,
And that makes him as poor,
As the Wretch that never any thing had.
How mad is that damned Money-monger?
That to purchase to him and his heirs,
Grows shriviled with thirst and hunger;
While we that are bonny,
Buy Sack with ready-mony,
And never trouble the Scriveners, nor Lawyers.
Those guts that by scraping and toyling,
Do swell their Revenues so fast,
Get nothing by all their turmoiling,
But are marks of each tax,
While they load their own backs
With the heavier packs,
And lie down galled and weary at last.
While we that do traffic in tipple,
Can baffle the Gown and the Sword,
Whose jaws are so hungry and gripple;
We never trouble our heads
With Indentures or Deeds,
And our Wills are composed in a word.
Our money shall never indite us,
Nor drag us to Goldsmiths Hall,
No Pirates nor wracks can affright us;
We, that have no Estates,
Fear no plunder nor rates,
We can sleep with open gates,
He that lies on the ground cannot fall.
We laugh at those Fools whose endeavors
Do but fit them for Prisons and Fines,
When we that spend all are the savers;
For if Thieves do break in,
They go out empty agin,
Nay, the Plunderers lose their designs.
Then let us not think on to morrow,
But tipple and laugh while we may,
To wash from our hearts all sorrow;
Those Cormorants which
Are troubled with an itch,
To be mighty and rich,
Do but toil for the wealth which they borrow.
The Mayor of the Town with his Ruff on,
What a pox is he better than we?
He must vail to the man with the Buff on;
Though he Custard may eat,
And such lubbardly meat,
Yet our Sack makes us merrier than he.
The Rebels Reign.
NOw we are met in a knot, let us take the other pot,
And chirp over a cup of Nectar;
Let Us think on a charm, to keep us from harm,
From the Fiend, and the new Protector.
Heretofore at a brunt, a Cross would have don't,
But now they have taken courses,
With their Laws and their theft, there is not a Cross left
In the Church, nor the Farmers Purses.
They Are with you to bring, for stuffing at a King,
For now you must make no dainty,
To have your Nose ground, on a stone turned round
By Noll, and one and twenty.
But our Rights are kept for us, in Oliver's storehouse,
'Twere as good they were set in the Stocks:
They are just in the pickle, in the thirtieth Article,
Like Jack in a Juglers box.
We are loath for to look, for the Saints in a book,
But would not a man be vexed,
To see them so rough with their blades and their buff,
But not a word on it in the Text.
We have been twelve years together by the ears
To prepare for a spiritual reign:
Men were never so spic'd, with the Scepter of Christ
In the hands of a Saint in grain.
'Twas brewed in their Hives by Citizens wives,
Who ventured their husbands far,
With Robin the fool, there was never such a tool
To lead in the women's War.
He was ill at Command, but worse at a stand,
So they sought out another more able:
Then Fair* undertakes, but Nol keeps the stakes,
And sends away Fax with a bauble.
Will, Conqueror the second, without his host reckoned,
And so did B -- billet his Mate;
They made a great noise, amongst women and boys,
But now they are both out of date.
Cowardly W -- had but a foul Fortune,
And wanted a knife to scrape it,
When his Oriphice ran, there was no mortal man,
But omnibus horis sapit.
Bradshaw, the Knave, sent the King to his grave,
And on the Blood Royal did trample,
For which the next Lent, he was made President,
And ere long may be made an example.
Dorislaus did steer, to Hans mine here,
And Askew to Don at Madril,
Ere a man could have scratcht, they were both dispatched,
Yet there they lie Ledger still.
Martin and St. John's, and more with a Vengeance,
Had each a finger in the pie:
Some for the Money, and some for the Conny,
And some for they knew not why.
The Parliament sat as snug as a Cat,
And were playing for mine and yours:
Sweep-stakes was their Game, till Oliver came,
And turned it to Knave out of doors.
Then a new one was cast, and made up in have,
But alas they could do no more
Than empty our purse, and empty us worse
Than e're we were married before.
But in a good hour, they gave up their power
To one that was wiser than they;
By common consent, 'twas the first Parliament
That ever was felo de se.
After all this Jeer, we are never the near,
There sits one at the Helm commanding;
One that does us nick, with a trick for our trick,
And the stone in our foot notwithstanding
He Will not relax, one groat of the Tax,
Though it come to more then he need,
He may keep it in store, till his need be more;
It Is an Article of our new Creed.
So well he has wrought, that now he has brought
The Realm to the manner he it meant;
The fishes, and the foul, and the Devil and all,
And the monthly pay his high rent.
All this we must bear, but 'twould make a man swear
When they call us a Reformed Nation:
It can never sink into my head for to think
That this is a Reformation.
It Is the man in the Moon, or the Devil as soon,
Our Laws are asleep upon shelves:
Our Charter and Freedom, we may bid God speed um,
It Is well we can beg for our selves.
Since Nol has bereft us, and nothing has left us,
Not a Horse or an Ox to plough land,
Let Oliver pass, come fill up my Glass,
And here is a good health to Rowland.
The Resolve.
1.
There Is no Man so worthy of Envy as he,
Drinks Sack, and is free,
Can draw down his mind to his present Condition,
And at that ebb, can
Show himself a better man,
Then his Enemy at his full tide of Ambition;
Has a breast so well Manned, he fears not the thunder
Of those Bastards of fame,
That have got a Name
By Rapine and Plunder;
But bravely despises,
The Mock-Sun that rises:
He that is quiet within, what need he to care,
Though not worth a groat, h'as the whole world to spare.
2.
He Is armed against the Chances and Changes of State,
And still meets his Fate,
With a Conquering Cup of the stoutest Canary,
Drinks healths to the best,
And he Wrastles with the rest,
Yet never is foiled, 'less his liquor miscarry;
His thoughts are more soft then the bed that he lies on;
Who puts his cares to flight,
A Prince is over Night,
And next Morn does rise one;
Let th'Fates do what they will,
He Is the self-same Man still:
Scepters have Palfies, and Crowns too are shaking,
Who soundly does sleep, need not keep others waking.
3.
Then give us the Sack, let the Hen-hearted Cit,
Drink Whey, and submit,
His Cucumber Courage does never well till beaten;
He, Camel-like, kneels,
And his Burden never feels,
Till his back become galled, and his carcass near eaten;
Has a spirit so poor, that every Fool rides him;
He Is soul-lesse, alone;
At best, but a Drone,
And no Man abides him;
He Is a compact of Clay,
That will yield any way:
It Is Sack and good Company sets the Soul free,
Like the Music of that there is no Harmony.
Upon Cromwell's pulling out the Long Parliament. 1653.
The Alligory.
1.
AS Plutarch does write, (a Man of known Credit)
A Serpent there was had a Mutinous Tail,
Rebelled against the Head, that so often had fed it,
And would not permit it to lead, or prevail:
Is It not fit that by turns we Leaders should be
Quoth the Tail? follow me, as I Have followed thee.
2.
Now, the Body being grown too strong for the Head,
Quoth the Head, if it must be, then let it be so;
For quietness sake I yield to be lead,
But fear that from hence some mischief will grow;
A thing so un-naturall never was read,
As the Head to turn Tail, and the Tail to turn Head.
3.
A Monster like this, but of stranger Conditions,
Engendered there was in the year thirty nine;
Rebelled against the Head, but with fawning Petitions,
To have him his Power and his Right to resign;
This Monster (the truth on it to speak) was begot
By a Mongrell Parson, and that Hagg the Scot.
4.
So large and so mighty this Tail grew in length,
That where ere it came, it swept all before it;
There was no resisting so powerful a strength,
The Head at the last was forced to implore it:
All our Castles and Towns this Tail did subdue,
A sad tale to tell, but believe me it is true.
5.
Above seven years Conflict this Head did endure,
With that Monsterous Tail, and the Spawn it begot:
During which time no Man's life was secure,
Our Goods and our Cattle all went to the Pot:
At last came a Champion with an Iron stayle,
And ended the strife 'twixt the Head, and the Tail*
6.
The Head being departed the Body began
To consult with the Tail what wa^ best to do;
St. George (quoth the Body) it is said was a Man,
But what can this thing be is called St. O.
Why he (quoth the Tail) was one of our Rout,
And it is wondrous strange he should turn Tail about.
7.
While thus they did argue in rusht our St. O.
With Courage more keen then the Sword that he wore;
Quoth he, ye are vile things, not fit here to grow,
Such Fiends never was known in this place heretofore,
The wealth and the fat of the Country does feed you,
And now I do guess it is high time to bleed you.
8.
Some say that this Tail wore the mark of a P,
O, is a Letter in rank known before it;
How e're 't makes no matter, it is all one to me,
Save this, that I Am sure the O had the more wit;
There Is no Man so blind, but may easily see
He has added unto his small O, a tall P.
9.
My Story now ended come viva St. George,
That old true blew Lad, and Hospitable-Saint,
Bring a Butt of good Sack to fill up my Gorge,
At this tale of Head and Tail I almost faint;
However let it pass; if you studdy upon it,
I hope you will neither make Head or Tail on it.
The Advice.
1.
Never trouble thy self at the Times nor their turnings,
Afflictions run circular, and wheel about,
Away with these Murmurings, and, these Heart-burnings,
With the Juice of the Grape we will quench the Fire out,
Never chain, nor imprison thy Soul up in sorrow,
What fails us to day, may befriend us to morrow,
We Will scorn our Content from others to borrow.
2.
Though Fortune has left us we will strive to regain her,
And court her with Cupps till her Favorite come,
Then with a Courage untamed we will maintain her,
And silence the noise of the Enemies Drum,
We Will link her unto the Man most deserving,
Shall keep her at work, as well as from starving,
She shall not hereafter be at her own Carving.
3.
I hold him a Novice in Humane affairs,
Thinks whirlings in State a wondrous thing,
To daub up old Ruins with dirty repairs,
And instead of a Scepter to set up a Sling.
Such Atoms of Greatness are but Fortune's laughter,
She fattens them up 'till they are fitted for slaughter,
Then leaves them at Tiburn to Tittar and Tauter.
Sharers in the Government. A MEDLEY. To 8. several Tunes.
SOme say the World is but a Cheat,
Troth we see it
For the feet
Still rebel against the Head,
When Antipodian Rulers sway,
Who Will obey?
Thus some say,
Shall we not his own steps tread?
Pray were we not in the late Quarrel,
All pickled up in the same Barrel?
Then why that? or why this?
Our hearts are as great as his.
Harrison.
Here is One that claims a share
In the Scepter, and the Chair,
Though he cries Religion down,
He Is Ambitious for a Crown;
Fain he would have his Head to shine
Where his Father ^ngs his Sign,
So he should, had I the Power
In the twinkling of an how're
I, of his disease would cure him.
Blake
What think you of the Man of War,
Whose Muzle is the Sea-mans Star?
He Is Armed within, and Walled without
To give the Rout, if that we dare;
But faith the Dutch will hem him in,
And make him either sink or swim;
This is the News brought Mr. P --
To which he lent scarce half an Ear.
There is one, and a sly one,
In Scotland, lurks to quarter with the Lion,
He is your comeing Man sir,
Will lead the Van sir, Pick out the meaning if you can.
Upon the least Commotion;
He wears a Coat with double-colours faced,
On one side whereof the States is gravely placed,
But on the other the Cavies rudely raced;
Hold Ambodexter whither will thou go?
Lambert.
Then comes a stout Heart,
A Man very pert,
Reaking with Revenge, for Disgrace;
He swore he was true
To give the Devil his due,
And as firm as the Nose on his Face.
Ludlow.
Another puts in
To be a States Pin,
Good reason it should be so,
He can Circumvent
A Parliament;
Then why not Our Oliver O?
Some talk this, and some talk that,
Some talk of New wars, and some they know not what,
But well fare the Cavalier, for at a bare word,
He Is scarce left either Tongue or Sword.
John Lilborn.
Then Turbulent-spirited Jack bring up the Reere,
For thou have a Spleen far keener than any one here;
Thou spurn'st at Authority, art Ambition's Minion,
And boy^'^t like thy Soap to advance a Newfangled Opinion;
Promotion's thy drift, to rule does make thy Wits roame,
But a Gibbet it is thought will stand betwixt thee and home.
Upon Cromwell's refusing the Kingly Power.
1.
HOw poor is his Spirit? how lost is his Name,
Deceives Opinion, and Curtailes his Fame?
When a^ his Designs come near to their height,
'Twixt shall I and shall I, suspect their own weight,
He has traffiqu'd for Honor, but lost the whole Freight:
He that is stout in the Front, not so in the Rear,
Does forfeit his Fame, and is Cowed out by Fear.
2.
A small part of Honor to him does belong,
Consults not the Glory, but faints in the throng;
That dares not embrace what his own Soul does Vote,
But yields up Our Liberties to a Red-coat;
Sure Midsommer's near, and some Men does dote:
I like the bold Romans, (whose Fame ever rings)
That kept in Subjection such pitiful things.
3.
He that will be Bug-bea^'d, is turned again Child,
A Reed than a Scepteris fitter to weild;
Examine the Story, no Story you will find,
Saving the Story, that Kat will to kind,
The World is deluded, the Commonwealth blind;
These false stamps of Honor prove but Copper-Mettle,
And Fame sounds as loud from a Tinkers old Kettle.
4.
He that past has the Pikes, and found Canon-free,
Which shows that noe Curse from his Parents could be,
Had a Soul so devout, it made Killing a Trade;
And now to retreat at the sent of a Blade
Does show of what Mold our Knight Errant was made*
He that flagges in his Flight, when is Ambition sores high,
Does stabb his own Merit, and gives Fame the lie.
5.
Then Cicero-like, yea Gown-men drench Cares,
O^re-whelm'd with your Own, and your Countries Affairs;
And Pulpit-men too be as Airy as We;
Do you but preach Sack up, we will never disagree,
That Commonwealth's best that is the most free:
Then fret not, nor care not, when the Sack's in our Crown,
We can fancy a King up, or fancy Him down.
The Encounter. A SONG.
1.
HAng the Presbyters Gill,
Bring a Pint of Sack Will,
More O^thodox of the two;
Though a slender dispute
Will strike the Elfe mute,
He Is one of the honester Crew.
2.
In a Pint there is small heart,
Sir^ah, bring us a Quart,
There Is substance and vigor met,
'Twill hold us in Play,
Some part of the day,
But we'll suck him before Sunset.
3.
The dareing old Pottle
Does now bid us Battle;
Let Us try what his strength can do;
Keep your Ranks and your Files:
And for all his Wiles,
We Will tumble him down Stairs too.
4
The Stout-breasted Lumberd,
His Brains never encumbered
With drinking of Gallous three;
Tricongius was named,
And by Caesar ^amed,
Who dubbed him Knight Cap-a-pe.
5.
If then Honor be in it,
Why a pox should we stint
Our selves of the fullness it bears?
H' has less wit than an Ape
In the blood of the Grape,
Will not plunge himself over head and ears.
6.
Then summon the Gallon,
A stout Foe, and a tall One,
And likely to hold us to it;
Keep Coin in your Purse,
The Word is disburse,
I Will warrant he falls at your foot.
7.
See, the bold Foe appears,
May he falls that him fears;
Keep you but close Order, and then
We will give him the Rout,
Be he never so stout,
And prepare for his Rallying again.
8.
We Will dreyn the whole Cellar,
Pipes, Butts, and the Dweller,
If the Wine does flow no faster;
Will, when thou do slack us,
By Warrant from Bacchus,
We Will Cane thy Tun-belly'd Master.
The Good Old Cause.
NOw Lambert's sunk, and valiant M --
Does ape his General Cromwell,
And Arthur's Court, 'cause time is short,
Does rage like Devils from Hell;
Let Us mark the fate and course of State,
Who rises when the other is sinking,
And believe when this is past
'Twill be our turn at last
To bring the Good Old Cause by drinking.
First, red nosed Nol he swallowed all,
His color showed he loved it:
But Dick his Son, as he were none,
Gav't off, and has reproved it;
But that his foes made bridge of's nose,
And cried him down for a Protector,
Proving him to be a fool, that would undertake to rule,
And not drink and fight like Hector.
The Grecian Lad, he drank like mad,
Minding no work above it;
And Sans question killed Ephestion,
Because he would not approve it;
He got command, where God had land,
And like a Maudlin Yonker,
When he tippled all and wept, he laid him down to sleep,
Having no more Worlds to conquer.
Rump-Parliament would needs invent
An Oath of Abjuration,
But Obedience and Allegiance are now come into fashion:
Then here is a boul, with a heart and soul
To Charles, and let all men say Amen to it,
Though they brought the Father down
From a triple Kingdom Crown,
We Will drink the Son up again to it.
The Protecting Brewer.
A Brewer may be a Burgess grave,
And carry the matter so fine and so brave,
That he the better may play the Knave,
Which no body can deny.
A Brewer may be a Parliament Man,
For there the Knavery first began,
And brew most cunning Plots he can,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer may put on a Nabal face,
And march to the Wars with such a grace,
That he may get a Captains place,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer may speak so wondrous well,
That he may raise strange things to tell,
And so to be made a Colonel,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer may make his foes to flee,
And raise his Fortunes, so that he
Lieutenant General may be,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer he may be all in all,
And raise his Powers both great and small,
That he may be a Lord General,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer may be like a Fox in a Cub,
And teach a Lecture out of a Tub,
And give the wicked world a rub,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer by's Excize and Rate,
Will promise his Army he knows what,
And set it upon the Colledge-gate,
Which no body, etc.
Methinks I hear one say to me,
Pray why may not a Brewer be,
Lord-Chancellor of the University,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer may be as bold as Hector,
When as he has drunk off his cup of Nectar,
And a Brewer may be a Lord Protector.
Which no body, etc.
Now here remans the strangest thing,
How this Brewer about his Liquor did bring,
To be an Emperor, or a King,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer may do what he will,
And rob the Church and State, to sell
His soul unto the devil of hell,
Which no body can deny.
The Power of the Sword.
LAY by your Pleading, Law lies a bleeding,
Burn all your Studies down, and throw away your Reading;
Small power the Word has, and can afford us
Not half so many Privileges as the Sword has:
It fosters your Masters, it plasters Disasters,
And makes your Servants, quickly greater than their Masters;
It venters, it enters, it circles, it centers,
And makes a Prentice free in spite of his Indentures.
This takes off tall things, and sets up small things,
This masters Money, though Money masters all things;
It Is not in season, to talk of Reason,
Or call it Legal, when the Sword will have it Treason;
It conquers the Crown too, the Furs and the Gown too,
This set up a Presbyter, and this pulled him down too;
This subtle Deceiver, turned Bonnet to Beaver,
Down drops a Bishop, and up starts a Weaver.
This fits a Layman to preach and pray man,
It Is this can make a Lord of him that was a Drayman;
Forth from the dull pit, of Follies full pit,
This brought an Hebrew Iron-monger to the Pulpit;
Such pitiful things be, more happier than Kings be,
This got the Herauldry of Thimblebee and Slingsbee;
No Gospel can guide it, no Law can decide it,
In Church or State, until the Sword has sanctified it.
Down goes the Law-tricks, for from that Matrix
Sprung holy Hewson's power, and tumbled down St. Patricks;
The Sword prevails so highly in Wales too,
Shinkin ap Powel cries, and swears Cuts-plutteranails too;
In Scotland this Waster, did make such disaster,
They sent their Money back for which they sold their Master;
It battered so their Dunkirke, and did so the Don firke,
That he is fled, and swears, the Devil is in Dunkirke.
He that can tower over him that is lower,
Would be but thought a Fool to put away his Power;
Take Books and rent 'um, who would invent 'um,
When as the Sword replies, Negatur argumentum?
Your grand College Butlers, must stoop to your Sutlers,
There Is not a Library living like the Cutlers;
The blood that is spilt, Sir, has gained all the gilt, Sir,
Thus have you seen me run the Sword up to the hilt, Sir.
Cromwell's Coronation.
OLiver, Oliver, take up thy Crown,
For now thou have made three Kingdoms thine own;
Call thee a Conclave of thy own creation,
To ride us to ruin, who dare thee oppose:
Whilst we thy good people are at thy Devotion,
To fall down and worship thy terrible Nose.
To thee and thy Mermydons, Oliver, we,
Do tender our homage as fits thy degree,
We'll pay the Excise and Taxes, God bless us,
With fear and contrition, as penitents should,
Whilst you, great Sir, vouchsafe to oppress us,
Not daring so much as in private to soold.
We bow down, as cowed down, to thee and thy Sword,
For now thou have made thy self Englands sole Lord,
By Mandate of Scripture, and Heavenly warrant,
The Oath of Allegiance, and Covenant too;
To Charles and his Kingdoms thou art Heir apparent,
And born to rule over the Turk and the Jew.
Then Oliver, Oliver, get up and ride,
Whilst Lords, Knights, and Gentry do run by thy side;
The Maulsters and Brewers account it their glory,
Great God of the Grain-tub's compared to thee:
All Rebels of old are lost in their story,
Till thou plod'st along to the Padington-tree.
The BREWER.
To the Tune of the Blacksmith.
THere many a Clinching Verse is made
In honor of the Black-smiths trade,
But more of the Brewer may be said,
Which no body can deny.
I need not much of this repeat,
The Blacksmith cannot be complete,
Unless the Brewer do give him a heat,
Which no body can deny.
When Smug unto the forge does come,
Unless the Brew^r does liquor him home,
He Will never strike thy pot and my pot Tom.
Which no body can deny.
Of all professions in the town
The Brewers trade has gained renown,
His liquor reaches up to the Crown,
Which no body can deny.
Many new Lords from him there did spring,
Of all the trades he still was their King,
For the Brewer had the world in a sling,
Which no body can deny.
He scorneth all Laws and Martial stops,
But whips an Army as round as tops,
And cuts off his foes as thick as hops,
Which no body can deny.
He dives for Riches down to the bottom,
And cries, my Masters, when he had got um,
Let every tub stand upon his own bottom,
Which no body can deny.
In Warlike acts he scorns to stoop,
For when his Army begins to droop,
He draws them up us round as a hoop,
Which no body can deny.
The Jewish Scots that scorns to eat
The flesh of Swine, and Brewers beat,
'Twas the sight of this hogs-head made 'um retreat,
Which no body can deny.
Poor Jockie and his basket hilt
Was beaten, and much blood was spilt,
And their bodies like barrels did run a tilt,
Which no body can deny.
Though Jemy gave the first assault,
The Brewer at last made them to halt,
And left them what the Cat left in the Malt.
Which no body can deny.
They cried that Antichrist came to settle
Religion in a Cooler and a Kettle,
For his Nose and Copper were both of one mettle,
Which no body can deny.
Some Christian King began to quake,
And said, with the Brewer no quarrels we'll make,
We'll let him alone, as he Brews let him Bake,
Which no body can deny.
He has a strong and very stout heart,
And thought to be made an Emperor for it,
But the Devil put a spoke in his Cart,
Which no body can deny.
If any intended to do him disgrace,
His fury would take off his head in the place,
He always did carry his Furnesse in his face,
Which no body can deny.
But yet by the way you must understand,
He kept his foes so under command,
That Pride could never get the upper hand,
Which no body can deny.
He was a stout Brewer, of whom we may brag,
But now he is hurried away with a hag;
He brewed in a bottle, and baked in a bag,
Which no body can deny.
And now may all stout Soldiers say,
Farewell the glory of the day,
For the Brewer himself is turned to clay,
Which no body can deny.
Thus fell the brave Brewer, the bold son of slaughter,
We need not to fear what shall follow after,
For he dealt all his life time in fire and water,
Which no body can deny.
And if his Successor had had but his might,
We had not been in a pitiful plight,
But he was found many grains too light,
Which no body can deny.
Let Us leave off singing, and drink off our Bub,
We Will call for a Reckoning, and every man Club,
For I think I have told you a Tale of a Tub.
Which no body can deny.
In imitation of Come my Daphne, a Dialogue between Pluto and Oliver.
Pluto. COme Imp Royal, come away,
Into black night we will turn bright day.

Oliver. It Is Pluto calls, what would my Sire?

Pluto. Come, follow to the Stygian fire,
Where Ireton does wait
To welcome thee in state.

Oliver. Were I in bed with Lamberts wife,
I Would quit those joys for such a life.

Pluto. My Princely Nol make have,
For thee we keep a Fast.

Oliver. In these dismal shades will I
Unto thee unfold my Villainy.

Pluto. In my bosom I Will thee lay,
For thy sake we will all keep holyday.

Chorus. We Will rage and roar, and fry in flames,
And Charles himself shall see
How damn'dly we agree,
Yet scorn to change our Chains
For his eternal diety.

A Quarrel betwixt Tower Hill and Tyburn.
I WILL tell you a Story that never was told,
A tale that has both head and heel,
And though by no Recorder enrolled,
I know you will find it as true as steel.
When General Monck was come to the Town,
A little time after the Rump had the rout,
When Loyalty rose, and Rebellion fell down,
They say, that Tower Hill and Tyburne fell out.
Q^oth terrible Tyburne to lofty Tower Hill,
Thy longed-for days are come at last,
And now thou will daily thy belly fulfill
With King-killers blood whilst I must fast.
The High Court of Justice will come to the Bar,
There to be cooked and dressed for thee,
Whilst I, that live out of Town so far,
Must only be fed by Felony.
If Treason be counted the foulest fact,
And dying be a Traytor's due,
Then why should you all the glory exact?
You know, they are sitter for me than you.
To speak the plain truth, I have groaned for them long,
For when they had routed the Royal Root,
And done the Kingdom so much wrong,
I knew at the last they would come to it*
When Titchburne sat upon the Ben^h,
Twirling his Chain in high degree,
With a Beardless Chin, like a withered Wench,
Thought I, the Bar is fitter for thee.
But then, with stately composed face,
Tower Hill to Tyburne made reply,
Do not complain, in such a Case
Thou shall have thy share as well as I.
There are a sort of Mongrils, which
My Lordly Scaffold will disgrace:
I know Hugh Peter's his fingers itch
To make a Pulpit of the place.
But t^ke him Tyburn, he is thine own,
Divide his quarter^ with thy ^^ife,
Who did pollute with f^^sh and ^e
The quarters of the Butchers wife.
The next among these Petticoat-Peers
Is Harry Martin, take him thither,
But he has been addle so many years,
That I fear he will hardly hang together.
There Is Hacker, zealous Tom Harrison too,
That boldly defends the bloody deed,
He practizeth what the Jesuits do,
To murder his King, as a part of his Creed.
There Is single-eyed Hewson the Cobbler of Fate,
Translated into Buff and Feather,
But bootless are all his seams of State
When the soul is unript from the upper-leather.
Is this profane mechanical Brood
For me, that have been dignfy'd
With loyal Land and Straffords blood,
And holy Hewet, who lately died?
Do thou contrive with deadly Dun
To send them to the River of Stix,
It Is pity, since those Saints are gone,
That Martyrs and Murderers blood should mix.
Then do not fear me that I will
Deprive thee of that fatal Day:
It Is fit those that their King did kill
Sold hang up in the Kings highway.
My Privilege, though I know it is large,
Into thy hand I Will freely give it,
For there is Cook that read the Kings Charge,
Is only fit for the Devils tribute.
Then taunting Tyburn, in great scorn,
Did make Tower Hill this rude reply:
So much rank blood my stomach will turn,
And thou shall be sick as well as I.
These Traitors made those Martyrs bleed
Upon the Block, that thou do bear,
And there it is fit they should dye for the deed;
But Tower Hill cried, they shall not come there.
With that grim Tyburn began to fret,
And Tower Hill did look very grim:
And sure as a Club they both would have met,
But that the City did step between.
The Bloody Bed-roll, or Treason displayed in its Colors.
Triumphing News for Cavaliers,
The Rump smells strong, cast out by the Peers.

OLd OLIVER's gone to the Dogs,
Oh! No I do mistake,
He Is gone in a Wherry
Over the Ferry,
Is called the Stygian Lake.
But Cerberus that Great Porter
Did read him such a Lecture,
That made him to roar
When he came a-shoar
For being Lord Protector.
News, news, news,
Brave Cavaliers be merry,
Cheer up your sad souls
With Bacchus Bowls,
Of Claret, White, and Sherry.
Where is that Cursed Crew
Were of the last King^ Jury,
By thy damned soul
Go fetch them Nol
Quoth ^luto in his fury.
Where is old Joan thy wife?
Her Highness I would see,
Come let her in
She shall be my Queen,
For a Cuckold thou shall be.
News, news, etc.
Make room for a Ramping Lady,
One of the Devils race,
This ugly Witch,
And nasty Bitch
Spat in the King's sweet face.
I^le make her a Lady of Honor,
Q^oth Pluto let her in,
And open the door;
For this old Whore
Shall wait upon my Queen.
News, n^ws, etc.
Here comes Sir HENRY MARTYN
As good as ever pist,
This wenching beast
Had Whores at least
A thousand on his lift:
This made the Devils laugh,
So good a friend to see,
At Pluto's Court
There Is better sport,
Come thou shall dwell with me.
News, news, etc.
Bid Caron bring his Boat,
Here comes a man of fame,
Who has waited here
Above a year,
JACK BRADSHAW is his name,
O ho quoth Pluto then,
As loud as he could yawl,
By Oliver's Nose
I did suppose
Thou had been at White Hall.
News, news, etc.
You Are welcome to my Court,
Here on my Scroul I find,
I have in store
A thousand more
As Arrant Rogues behind.
Why art thou sad quoth Pluto?
My Servants must appear,
Then do not grudge
I Will made thee Judge
Of all my Subjects here.
News, news, etc.
Here comes a friend of mine,
Make room for the Lord LISLE,
His guests at last
Did come so fast
That made old Pluto smile.
Thou must along with me,
Now it is too late to rue it,
Thy damned Soul
Is on my Scroul,
Remember Doctor Hewet.
News, news, etc.
What is the Cause Sir ARTHUR
Your Pulses go so quick?
It Is Bishops Lands
That Is in your hands
Which makes them beat so thick.
Thy Oath of Abjuration
Was far a worser thing,
For the Devil and thou
Did study how
We should abjure our KING.
News, news, etc.
Next comes Sir HENRY MILDMAY
As good as ever twang'd,
What Laws had we
When he escaped free
And honest men were hanged?
Perhaps the KING's good grace
May pardon what is past,
But that is all one
At Pluto's Throne
Thou must appear at last,
News, news, etc,
Shall Traitors be concealed?
Oh! no Sir HENRY VANE,
It Is a pitiful thing
For our good KING
When Traitors are in grain.
If thou will take the pains,
Then pray thee go and look,
For I am told
Thou art enrol'd
In Pluto's bloody Book.
News, news, etc.
Here comes the Learned SPEAKER,
Whose baggs of Gold do rust,
Who would not hear
A Cavalier
Though his Cause were nere so just.
Corruption bears the sway
Where Justice is denied,
The Devil take him,
And Mr. PYM,
And likewise Colonel PRIDE.
News, news, etc.
Make room for one-ey'd HEWSON,
A Lord of such account,
'Twas a pretty Jest
That such a Beast
Should to such honor mount.
When Cobblers were in fashion,
And Nigherds in such grace;
'Twas sport to see
How PRIDE and he
Did justle for the Place.
News, news, etc.
What dreadful show is this?
It Is PRIDEAUX or his Ghost,
He makes such have,
And comes so fast,
I think He Is riding Post.
A Lawyer if thou art,
Amongst the damned souls,
At Pluto's Bar,
It Is better far
Then pleading at the Roles.
News, news, etc.
Oh welcome Dr. PETER'S,
And Co^ne^ ^OYCE also,
One of these twain
Was worse than Cain
That gave the deadly blow:
One of these Cursed Rogues
Was he that did the feat,
But some men say
'Twas that Lord GRAY
That made the work complete.
News, news, etc.
A Boat for this Old Doctor
To cross the River Styx,
For Pluto he
Desired to see
Some of his Antic tricks;
My Chaplain thou shall be,
What more can be desired?
Oh! quoth he
That cannot be,
My Lease is not expired.
News, news, etc.
Oh! my Rump, my Rump, my Rump,
My Rump smells wondrous strong,
The blisters rise
About my Thighs
With voting here so long,
My Rump is grown so sore,
I can no longer sit,
Hold up thy Bum,
The Devil is come
With a Plaster to cure it.
News, news, etc.
When Pluto keeps his feast,
The Rogues must all appear,
And Mr. SCOT
I had forgot,
Must taste of this good Cheer.
Find out the Man, quoth Pluto,
That is the greatest sinner,
If COOK be he
Then COOK shall be
The Cook to Cook my dinner,
News, news, etc.
God bless the KINGS good grace,
And keep him from his foes,
I wish the rather
Because his Father,
Had too too many of those.
God bless the Duke of YORK,
His Sister, and Another,
Accursed be those
That do oppose
The sending for their Mother.
News, news, news,
Brave Cavaliers be merry,
Cheer up your sad souls
With Bacchus Bowls,
Of Claret, White, and Sherry.
The four Legged Elder; or a Relation of a Horrible Dog and an Elders Maid.
To the Tune of The Ladies fall; Or Gather your Rose Buds, and 50 other Tunes.
1.
ALL Christians, and Lay Elders too,
For shame amend your Lives,
I Will tell you of a Dog-trick now,
Which much concerns your wives.
An Elder's Maid near Temple Bar
(Ah what a Queen was she!)
Did take an ugly Mastiff Cur
Where Christians use to be.
Help House of Commons, House of Peers!
Oh now or never help!
The Assembly having sat four years
Have now brought forth a whelp!
2.
One Evening late she stepped aside,
Pretending to fetch Eggs,
And there she made her self a Bride
To one that had four legs:
Her Master heard a Rumblement,
And wondered she did tarry,
Not dreaming (without his consent)
His Dog would ever marry.
Help House of Commons, etc.
3.
He went to peep, but was afraid,
And hastily did run
To fetch a Staff to help his Maid,
Not knowing what was done;
He took his Ruling Elder's Cane,
And cried out, Help, help here!
For Swash our Mastiff and poor Jane
Are now, fight Dog, fight Bear.
Oh House of Commons, etc.
4.
But when he came he was full sorry,
For he perceived their strife,
That according to the Directory
These two were Dog and Wife:
Ah (then he said) thou cruel Queen,
Why have thou me beguiled?
I wondered Swash was grown so lean,
Poor Dog he is almost spoiled.
Oh House of Commons, etc.
5.
I thought thou had no carnal sense
But what is in other Lasses,
And could have quenched thy Cupiscence
According to the Classis;
But all the Parish see it plain,
Since thou art in this pickle,
Thou art an Independent Queen,
And love a Conventicle.
Oh House of Commons, etc.
6.
Alas now each Malignant Rogue
Will all the world persuade
That she that is Spouse unto a Dog,
May be an Elder's Maid;
They Will jeer us if abroad we stir,
Good Master Elder stay,
Sir, of what Classis is your Cur;
And then what can we say?
Oh House of Commons, etc.
7.
They Will many graceless Ballads sing
Of a Presbyterian,
That a Lay-Elder is a thing
Made up half-Dog half-Man:
Out, out, (said he, and smote her down)
Was Mankind grown so scant?
There Is scarce another Dog in town
Had took the Covenant.
Oh House of Commons, etc.
8.
Then Swash began to look full grim,
And Jane did thus reply,
Sir, you thought naught too good for him,
You fed your Dog too high:
It Is true, he took me in the lurch,
And leapt into my arm,
But (as I hope to come to Church)
I did your Dog no harm.
Oh House of Commons, etc.
9.
Then she was brought to Newgate Gaol,
And there was naked stripped,
They whipped her till the Cord did fail,
As Dogs use to be whipped:
Poor City Maids shed many a tear
When she was lashed and banged,
And had she been a Cavalier,
Surely she had been hanged.
Oh House of Commons, etc.
10.
Here Is was but Fornication found,
For which she felt the lash,
But his was Buggery presumed,
Therefore they hanged Swash.
What will become of Bishops then,
Or Independency,
For now we find both Dogs and Men
Stand for Presbytery.
Oh House of Commons, etc.
11.
She might have took a Sow-gelder,
With Synod-men good store,
But she would have a Lay-Elder
With two legs, and two more.
Go tell the Assembly of Divines,
Tell Adoniram Blew,
Tell Burges, Marshall, Case, and Vines,
Tell Now-and-Anon-too.
Oh House of Commons, etc.
12.
Some said she was a Scottish Girl,
Or else (at least) a Witch;
But she was born in Colchester,
Was ever such a Bitch!
Take heed all Christian Virgins now,
The Dog Star now prevails;
Ladies beware your Monkeys too,
For Monkeys have long tails.
Oh House of Commons, etc.
13.
Bless King and Queen, and send us peace,
As we had seven years since,
For we remember no Dog-dayes
While we enjoyed our Prince:
Bless sweet Prince Charles, two Dukes, three Girls,
O save His Majesty!
Grant that his Commons, Lords, and Earls,
May lead such lives as He
Oh House of Commons, House of Peers!
Oh now or never help!
The Assembly having sat four years,
Have now brought forth a whelp!
News from Colchester.
Or, A Proper new Ballad of certain Carnal passages betwixt a Quaker and a
Colt, at Horsley near Colchester in Essex. To the Tune of Tom of Bedlam.
1.
ALL in the Land of Essex,
Near Colchester the Zealous,
On the side of a bank,
Was played such a Prank,
As would make a Stone-horse jealous.
2.
Help Woodcock Fox, and Nailor,
For Brother Green's a Stallion,
Now alas what hope
Of converting the Pope,
When a Quaker turns Italian!
3.
Even to our whole profession
A scandal 'twill be counted,
When it is talked with disdain
Amongst the Profane,
How Brother Green was mounted.
4.
And in the Good time of Christmas,
Which though our Saints have damned all,
Yet when did they hear
That a damned Cavalier
Ere played such a Christmas gamball?
5.
Had thy flesh, O Green, been pampered
With any Cates unhallowed,
Had thou sweetened thy Gums
With Pottage of Plums,
Or profane minced Pie had swallowed.
6.
Rolled up in wanton Swine's-flesh,
The Fiend might have crept into thee,
Then fulness of gut
Might have made thee rut,
And the Devil have so rid through thee.
7.
But alas, he had been feasted
With a Spiritual Collation,
By our frugal Mayor,
Who can dine on a Prayer,
And sup on an Exhortation.
8.
'Twas mere impulse of Spirit,
Though he used the weapon carnal,
Filly Foal, quoth he,
My Bride thou shall be:
And how this is lawful, learn all.
9.
For if no respect of Persons
Be due amongst the sons of Adam,
In a large extent,
Thereby may be meant
That a Mare's as good as a Madam.
10.
Then without more Ceremony,
Not Bonnet veiled, nor Kissed her,
But took her by force,
For better for worse,
And used her like a Sister.
11.
Now when in such a Saddle
A Saint will needs be riding,
Though we dare not say
It Is a falling away,
May there not be some backsliding?
12.
No surely, quoth James Nailor,
'Twas but an insurrection
Of the Carnal part,
For a Quaker in heart
Can never lose perfection.
13.
For (as our Masters teach us)
The intent being well directed,
Though the Devil trapan
The Adamical man,
The Saint stands un-infected.
14.
But alas a Pagan Jury
Never judges what is intended,
Then say what we can,
Brother Green's out-ward man
I fear will be suspended.
15.
And our Adopted Sister
Will find no better quarter,
But when him we inroul
For a Saint, Filly Foal
Shall pass her self for a Martyr.
16.
Rome that Spiritual Sodom,
No longer is thy debtor,
O Colchester, now
Who Is Sodom but thou,
Even according to the Letter?
The Four-legg'd Quaker.
To the Tune of The Four-legg'd Elder.
1.
ALL that have two or but one ear,
(I dare not tell ye half)
You of an Essex Colt shall hear
Will shame their very Calf.
In Horsley Fields near Colchester
A Quaker would turn Trooper;
He caught a Foal and mounted her
(O base!) below the Crupper.
Help Lords, and Commons, once more help,
O send us Knives and Daggers!
For if the Quakers be not gelt
Your Troops will have the Staggers.
2.
Ralph Green (it was this Varlet's name)
Of Colchester you will swear,
For thence the Four-legg'd Elder came,
Was ever such a Pair!
But though 'twas foul 'tween Swash and Jane,
Yet this is ten times worse;
For then a Dog did play the Man,
But Man now played the Horse.
Help, etc.
3.
The Owner of the Colt was nigh,
(Observing their Embrace)
And drawing nearer did espy
The Quaker's sorrel Face:
My Foal is ravished (then he cries,
And fiercely at him ran)
Thou Rogue, I Will have thee haltered twice,
As Horse and eke as Man!
Help, etc.
4.
Ah Devil, do thou tremble? now
It Is sore against thy will;
For Mares and preaching Ladies know
Thou have a Colts tooth still:
But mine is not guilty of this Fact,
She was by thee compelled;
Poor thing, whom no man ever backed
Thou wickedly have Bellied.
Help, etc.
5.
O Friend (said Green, with sighs and groans)
Let this thy wrath appease!
(And gave him then eight new Half-crowns
To make him hold his peace)
The man replied, though I for this
Conceal thy Hugger Mugger,
Do think it lawful for a Piece
A silly Foal to Bugger?
Help, etc.
6.
The Master saw his Colt defiled,
Which vexed his Soul with doubt;
For if his Filly proved with Child
He knew All would come out:
Then he afresh began to rave,
(For all his Money taking)
Neighbors, said he, I took this Knave
'Ith' very act of Quaking.
Help, etc.
7.
Then to the Pinfold (Gaol I mean)
They dragged him by the Mane,
They called him Beast, and called her Queen,
As if she had been Jane.
O stone him (all the Women cried)
Nay geld him (which is worse)
Who scorned us all, and took a Bride
That Is Daughter to a Horse!
Help, etc.
8.
The Colt was silent all this while,
And therefore 'twas no Rape,
The Virgin foal he did beguile,
And so intends to escape:
For though he caught her in a Ditch
Where she could not revolt,
Yet he had no Scott'sh spurr nor Switch
To ride the willing Colt
Help, etc.
9.
O Essex, Essex, England's pride,
Go burn this long-tail'd Queen,
For though the Thames runs by thy side,
It cannot wash thee clean!
It Is not thy Bleating Sonn's complaints,
Hold forth such wanton courses,
Thy Oysters hint the very Saint
To horn the very Horses.
Help, etc.
10.
Though they salute not in the Street
(Because they are our Masters)
It Is now revealed why Quakers meet
In Meadows, Woods, and Pastures.
But Hors-men, Mare-men, all and some
Who Man and Beast perplex,
Not only from East-Horsley come,
But from West-Middle-Sex.
Help, etc.
11.
This was not GREEN the Feltmaker,
Nor Willow GREEN the Baker,
Nor GEORGE the Seagreen Mariner,
But RALPH the Grasse-GREEN Quaker,
Had GREEN the Sow-gelder but known,
And done his Office duly,
Though RALPH was GREEN when he came on,
He had come off most blewly.
Help, etc.
12.
Alas you know by Man's flesh came
The Foul-disease to Naples,
And now we fear the very same
Is broke into our Stable^;
For Death has stolen so many Steeds
From Prince and Peer, and Carrier,
That this new Murrain rather needs
a Physician to the Earl of Pembrook, who is no Quaker nor Quacker.
FARRAR than a Farrier
Help, etc.
13.
Nay if this GREEN within the walls
Of Colchester left forces,
Those Cavaliers were Caniballs,
Eating his Humane Horses!
But some make Man their second course,
(In cool Blood will not spare)
Who butcher Men and favor Horse
Will couple with a Mare.
Help, etc.
14.
This Centaur, unquoth Other thing,
Will make a dreadful Breach:
Yet though an Ass may speak or A new Sect of young Men and Women, who pray,
eat and sing ex tempore.
sing,
O let not Horses preach!
But bridle such wild Colts who can
When they will obey no Summons,
For things begot 'tween Mare and Man
Are neither Lords nor Commons.
Help, etc.
15.
O Elders, Independants too,
Though all your Power's combined*
Quakers will grow too strong for you
Now Horse and Man are joined:
While Cavaliers, poor foolish Rogues,
Know only Maids Affairs,
She-Presbyters can deal with Dogs,
And Quaking-men with Mares.
Help, etc.
16.
Now as when Milan Town was reared,
A Monstrous Sow untamed,
With Back half Hair half Wool appeared,
'Twas Mediolanum named:
So Colchester must have recourse
To some such four-legg'd Sister,
For sure as Horsley came from Horse,
From Colt 'twas called Col-chester.
Help, Lords and Commons, etc.
A JOLT on Michaelmas day 1654.
To the Tune of To himself that has fooled
More than Mahomet could, etc.

1.
IT fell on a day,
When good People say
St. Michael beat the Dragon,
My Lord the Protector
Did drive (like a Hector)
A Coach instead of a Londinium petere solebat gestatorio, se^ vehiculo communi.
Wagon.
2.
Because he did hear
The Chareteer
Did anciently wear a Crown,
Up went the Horse-heels,
Round round went the Wheels,
'Till his Highness came headlong down.
3.
He reigned them so hard,
They looked back and were scared
To see him so red and so grim
Away then they fled,
And though he used to lead,
This new-modell'd Horse would lead him.
4.
But O how they snuff
When his Pistol flew off,
For which all the Saints suspect him,
Does Providence attend him,
Thirty thousand defend him,
Yet a poor Pocket-pistol protect him;
5.
How many a Hurl
Had poor Mr. Vocem (...) THURLO rithmice respondentem nostrates desiderant:
nomen itaque (ipsius homulli instar crucis) hanc (...) patitur; nostroque vel
versiculo, ac ipso curru, huc illuc impellitur.
Thurl --
-- Lo! He in the Coach did prank it:
He thought he had sat
Chief Secretary of State,
But was tossed like a Dog in a Blanket.
6.
Nay had they run faster
He Would follow his Master
Through all the Sceans of this Mad-show:
A Brewer, a Colonel,
A Preacher a General,
A Protector, a King -- then comes Bradshaw.
7.
They slander my Lord
With a bugbear Word,
That he did like Phaeton drive;
But his Highness tried
Six Horses to guide,
And Phaeton had now five.
8.
Mad Phaeton hurled
Fire all over the World,
Then dead in a River was found:
But my Lord had no aim
To set all in a flame,
And never was born to be drowned.
9.
'Twas Nero did strive
Such Charets to drive,
And publicly showed his Work;
But when my Lord sticks
Up his Bills to show tricks,
He Will undo the other dancing Turk.
10.
But if you look high,
There Is some reason why
These Jades did so fling and skip,
For though we afford
Him the power of the Sword,
He had no command of the Whip.
11.
Enthroned in his Chair
(What a pox did He there?)
He took such Protectorly courses,
He seemed Horse and Mule,
But it is easier to rule
Three Kingdoms, than six Horses.
12.
Not a day nor an hour
But we felt his Power,
And now he would show us his Art:
His first Reproach
Is a fall from a Coach,
And his last will be from a Cart.
The House out of Doors. April 20. 1653.
To the Tune of Cook Laurel.
1.
YOu saw Eleven Members turned out of Doors,
And 200. more were driven from home,
And then their own Lords were voted down stairs,
(When some of them crept into the Lower room:)
We purged and we purged, but all would not do it,
The Body had got such a damnable Paunch)
'Till OLIVER fell upon Branch and Root,
Then down with it, down with it, down Root and Branch.
With a hey down, down a down down,
Sing ho down down to make up the Ditty,
With a hey down down a down down,
The Parliament's broke as well as the City.
2.
These Remnant Members began to say
Their General was fit to be had in suspicion;
And offered to Vote his Commission away,
As if (forsooth) they had given him his Commission:
He did (yet did not) make use of his Sword,
On Men that could vote, and vote, but no more;
He showed them his Hilt, and spoke but a word,
And that word blew the whole House out of door.
With a hey down, etc.
The Parliament's broke as well as the City.
3.
This day was Strafford all-to-be-Traytor'd,
Because (they say) He had an Intent
(As this day Nol the Members scattered) April 20. 1641 April 20. 1653

By an Army to force the Parliament.
At which old VANE now rants and raves,
For Strafford's blood is not yet grown cold)
And yet we must say while we speak of Knaves,
The Old is the Young, and the Young is the Old.
With a hey down, etc.
The Parliament's broke as well as the City.
4.
Sir MILDMAY then with his hand on his groin,
(As fit for a Knave of the Diamonds) stood:
He eat the Kings Bread, and drank the Kings Wine,
So long till at last he drank of his Blood.
So did CORNELIUS HOLLAND too,
Whose share in the Revenue does fill three Pages,
But now when the House is broke up (you know)
It Is fit Household Servants be paid their Wages.
With a hey down, etc.
The Parliament's broke as well as the City.
5.
The Judge of Morocco (Treason HILL)
Devoured at a Morsel all Taunton Dean,
He keeps five Chambers in the Temple, but will
(Now the House is pulled down) be a Hillock again.
And the Devil too for his BOND does call,
Though Dennis from Chamber to Chamber did hop,
He sat Lord President at Whitehall,
But now must go home to fit in his shop.
With a hey, etc.
The Parliament's broke as well a^ the City.
6.
Now Alderman Fustian cocks not his Beaver,
Who changed his Name from Perry to PVRY,
A Dean and a Bishop made out of a Weaver,
That had been refused to be of a Jury:
He vowed to leave not a Gentleman,
Though every House were as big as Rome:
In all bloody Votes he highest ran;
But now may run down to his Bottom and Loom.
With a hey, etc,
The Parliament's broke as well as the City.
7.
Now look to your Wives, for I am informed
That carnal SCOT is again broke loose;
But the House that sheltered his Lust is Reformed
As he did the Hall of Lambeth-house;
(For he knew the High Commission sat there)
Both King and Cromwell he openly cursed,
But Oliver now will pay his Arrear,
For of all kind of Scots the English is worst.
With a hey down, down a down down,
Sing ho down down to make up the Ditty,
With a hey down down a down down,
The Parliament's broke as well as the City.
The RUMP. December 26. 1659.
To the Tune of The Blacksmith.
NOw Master and Prentice for Rimes must pump
On Hab, St. John's.
Noll, Arthur, and Lawson Vantrump,
A Long Parliament of a Short Rump.
Which no body can deny.
For Wits and No-Wits now have an Itch
To prepare some damnable tearing Switch
For them whose very Face is a Breech.
Which, etc.
Twelve years they sat above Kings and Queens,
Full twelve, and then had entered their teens
When Oliver came to out-sin their Sins.
Which, etc.
And yet after all his signal Septembers,
Both he and his Babe, and his Other-House Members
Saw Rump was but asleep in its Embers.
Which, etc.
For up it rose, then out 'twas blown,
For Lambert and Rump like my Lady and Joan,
Blew in and out till Rump blew out John.
Which, etc*
And then it swelled with such monstrous growth
That by and by it broke out in the South,
From whence it was called PORTS-MOUTH.
Which, etc.
From thence to London it rode tan-tivy,
(Though London then wore Holly and Ivy)
And sat at Whitehall in a Council-Privy.
Which, etc.
Then suddenly Fleetwood fell from Grace,
And now cries Heaven has spit in his face,
Though he smelt it came from another place.
Which, etc.
Janizary Desbrow then looked pale,
For, said he, if this Rump prevail,
'Twill blow me back to my old Plough-tayl,
Which, etc.
But when he felt his own Regiment kick,
Oh, quoth he, this was my own Trick
Against my Brother Nol and my Nephew Dick.
Which, etc.
Now whom the Devil does Rump represent?
'Twas This that Sir Thomas Jermyn meant
When he called it a Whipping Parliament.
Which, etc.
We Are stripped of all shelter from the long Robe,
As rich and warm as the Devil left Job,
For Satan Rump sits Lord of the Globe.
Which, etc.
And yet when all is examined and pondered,
You Will find three Kingdoms enslaved and plundered,
For saying Forty is less than Four hundred.
Which, etc.
And now behold the Sign is in Clune,
But if Monck be honest or wise, then soon he
Makes Rump but the Italian's Domo Communi.
Which, etc.
Heaven bless the King, with his two brave Brothers,
From Rumps and Lords of the House called Others,
And hang these Rumping Sons of their Mothers.
Which, etc.
And that He may bless both Us and our Heirs,
Let all the Members of Commons and Peers,
Turn honest as He that wants his Ears.
Which no body can deny.
Sir Eglamor and the Dragon: Or a Relation how General George Monck slew a
most Cruel Dragon Febr. 11. 1659.
To the Tune of Sir Eglamor.
1.
General George that Valiant wight,
He took his Sword and he would go fight,
And as he rode through London Town,
Men, Women, Posts, and Gates, fell down.
2.
But turning about toward Westminster,
He saw it must come to Fight Dog, Fight Bear,
For there an old Dragon sat in its Den,
Had devoured (God knows how many) brave Men.
3.
This Dragon it was and a monstrous Beast,
With forty or fifty heads at least,
And still as this Dragon drank down Blood,
Those heads would wag and cry good -- good -- good!
4.
No Hidra nor Leviathan,
For every Head looked like a Man,
And yet they all grew Hidra-wise,
For cut off one and another would rise
5.
Besides it had most Devilish claws,
Called Committees of the Good Old Cause;
But Devil and his Dam had no such Paunch
As this which swallowed Root and Branch.
6.
It swallowed Churches, Palaces,
Forests, Islands, Lands, and Seas,
Cathedral Choires it made but a Sallad,
And left not a man to sing a Ballad.
7.
But that which made this Dragon prevail,
Was a damnable Sting stuck in its Tail,
This Tail against Christendom made Wars,
And swept down all St. Georges Stars.
8.
Then Aegypts Plagues we understood,
Darkness, Rivers turned to Blood,
Upstart Vermin thick as wool,
And Frogs and Locusts Pulpits full.
9.
Yet that which most did Plague these Isles,
Three Kingdoms lay so sick of the Piles,
For every man in doleful dump
Was tortured with a Bloody Rump.
10.
But as in its Den this Dragon did sit,
George gave it many a gay good hit,
Though then he had no Sword nor Sithe on,
But fought as Phoebus slew old Python.
11.
For George shot at him a flaming Letter,
(Which some then thought might have been better
He wipe'd the Rump away with a Paper,
And out it flew like a stinking Vapor.
12.
Now London had her own desire,
For every Street was paved with fire,
All Men and Bells with many a thump,
Cried Rump-Rump-Rump-Rump-Rump-Rump-R.
13.
Six thousand fifty Bone-fires then,
(By twenty more thenth' Army had Men)
O monstrous Rump, that thus requires
(Though but half broyl'd) six thousand Fires*
14.
This very day that Rump was burned,
Old Magna Charta was confirmed;
This day they Voted that monstrous thing, Febr. 11. 1647.

That no Addresses be made to the King.
15.
Now God bless Charles, and York, and Gloucester,
From many or from one Impostor,
May Kings, and Peers, and Commons join
To save us both from Rump and Loyn.
The Cities Feast to the Lord Protector.
To the Tune of Cook Laurel.
SIR Mayor invites his Highness his guest,
And bids him to Grocers-Hall to dinner,
There never was Saint at so great a Feast
Provided him at the Charge of a Sinner.
With a ran tan the Devil is dead.
And what was the day do you think, without jesting,
Of all the year it was Ash Wednesday,
This pious Reformer set apart for his Feasting,
When all good Christians should Fast and Pray.
With a ran tan the Devil is dead.
The Soldiers in clusters thronged for place,
To see this Monster of their own making,
And said it was a Protectors grace,
But that it wanted not much of A King.
With a ran tan the Devil is dead.
The Bucks of the City in herds were met,
And were paled in with a very good fence,
But what their Does did, I cannot tell yet,
Of that ye may hear three quarters hence.
With a ran tan the Devil is dead.
With that the Recorder marched up to the Hall
With a dish of Divinity dressed for his palate,
And laid before him a shoulder of Saul,
With a savory simily by for a salate.
With a ran tan the Devil is dead.
His Highness commanded to lay it by,
'Twas fit for his people he would make it known,
And they should have it, good reason why,
For they wanted more shoulders than their own.
With a ran tan the Devil is dead.
A dish of Delinquents heads in a Charger
Was sent as a present from Goldsmiths Hall,
He wished his stomach ten times larger,
Yet made a long neck and poach'd them all.
With a ran tan the Divil is dead.
A Prelate was next, and to him he buckles,
With a Bishopric trussed before and behind,
His Highness was in with him up to the knuckles,
And to his own kitchen the skuers assigned.
With a ran tan the Devil is dead.
His Highness then calld' for a boule of Canary,
And drank so deep that it made him reel,
He tossed it to Lambert, and Lambert to Harry,
And Harry to the Mayor, and the Mayor to Steel.
With a ran tan the Devil is dead.
When Dinner was ended, away to the banquet,
Where snatching of Sugar-plums one from another,
H^l filled up his pockets, and said God be thanked,
And carried them home to his Lady Mother.
With a ran tan the Devil is dead.
Then his Highness commanded the Mayor to kneel,
The Beast of the City was soon on his knees,
He made him a Knight with iron and steel,
And bid him rise up, and pay him his fees.
With a ran tan the Devil is dead.
Up rose my Lords worship and made him a leg,
With that the Knight-maker did give him the Sword;
His Highness did spice him without a nutmeg,
When he made a bad Knight of a pitiful Lord.
With a ran tan the Devil is dead.
When he left the City he broke a jest,
His words were pithy, and I Will repeat them,
Farewell (quoth his Highness) thou spur-gall'd Beast,
Fools make the Feasts, and wise men eat them.
With a ran tan the Devil is dead.
FINIS.
RUMP SONGS. The Second Part.
The Re-resurrection of the RUMP. Or, Rebellion and Tyranny revived.
To the Tune of the Blacksmith.
IF none be offended with the scent,
Though I foul my mouth, I Will be content,
To sing of the Rump of a Parliament.
Which no body can deny.
I have sometimes fed on a Rump in Sowse,
And a man may imagine the Rump of a Lowse;
But till now was never heard of the Rump of a House.
Which no body can deny.
There Is a Rump of Beef, and the Rump of a Goose,
And a Rump whose neck was hanged in a Noose;
But ours is a Rump can play fast and loose.
Which no body can deny.
A Rump had Jane Shore, and a Rump Messaleen,
And a Rump had Antonies resolute Queen;
But such a Rump as ours is, never was seen,
Which no body can deny.
Two short years together we English have scarce
Been rid of thy Rampant Nose (Old Mars)
But now thou have got a prodigious Arse.
Which no body can deny
When the parts of the Body did all fall out,
Some Votes it is like did pass for the Snout;
But that the Rump should be King was never a doubt.
Which no body can deny.
A Cat has a Rump, and a Cat has nine Lives,
Yet when her Head's off, her Rump never strives;
But our Rump from the Grave has made two Retrives.
Which no body can deny.
That the Rump may all their Enemies quail,
They Will borrow the Devils Coat of Mayl,
And all to defend their Estate in Tail.
Which no body can deny.
But though their scale now seems to be the upper,
There Is no need of the charge of a Thanksgiving, supper,
For if they be the Rump, the Armi's their Crupper.
Which no body can deny.
There Is a Saying belongs to the Rump,
Which is good although it be worn to the stump,
That on the Buttocks I Will give thee a Thump.
Which no body can deny.
There Is a Proverb in which the Rump claims a part,
Which has in it more of Sense than of Art,
That for all you can do I care not a Fart.
Which no body can deny.
There Is another Proverb gives the Rump for his Crest,
But Alderman Atkins made it a Jest,
That of all kind of Lucks, shitten Luck is the best.
Which no body can deny.
There Is another Proverb that never will fail,
That the good the Rump will do when they prevail
Is to give us a Flop with a Fox-tail.
Which no body can deny.
There is a Saying which is made by no Fools,
I never can hear on it, but my heart it cools,
That the Rump will spend all we have in Close-stools.
Which no body can deny.
There Is an Observation wise and deep,
Which without an Onion will make me to weep,
That Flies will blow Maggots in the Rump of a Sheep.
Which no body can deny.
And some that can see the wood from the trees,
Say, this sanctified Rump in time we may leese;
For the Cooks do challenge the Rumps for their Fees.
Which no body can deny.
When the Rump do sit we will make it our Moan,
That a Reason be enacted if there be not one,
Why a Fart has a tongue, and a Fyest has none.
Which no body can deny.
And whilst within the Walls they lurk,
To satisfy us, will be a good work,
Who has most Religion, the Rump or the Turk.
Which no body can deny.
A Rump's a Fag-end, like the baulk of a Furrow,
And is to the whole like the Jail to the Borough,
It Is the Bran that is left when the Meal is run thorough.
Which no body can deny.
Consider the World, the Heaven is the Head on it,
The Earth is the middle, and we men are fed on it;
But Hell is the Rump, and no more can be sed on it.
Which no body can deny.
Flectere si nequeunt Superos Acharonta movebunt.
A New-Years-Gift for the RUMP.
YOu may have heard of the Politic Snout,
Or a tale of a Tub with the bottom out,
But scarce of a Parliament in a shitten Clout.
Whih no body can deny.
'Twas Atkins first served this Rump in with Mustard,
The sauce was a compound of Courage and Custard,
Sir Vane blessed the Creature: Nol snufled and blusterd.
Which no body can deny.
The Right was then in Old Olivers Nose,
But when the Devil of that did dispose,
It descended from thence to the Rump in the cloze.
Which no body can deny.
Nor is it likely there to stay long,
The Retentive Faculties being gone,
The Juggle is stale, and Money there is none.
Which no body can deny.
The Secluded Members made a Trial
To Enter, but them the Rump did defy all
By the Ordinance of Self-denial.
Which no body can deny.
Our Politic Doctors do us Teach,
That a Blood-sucking Red-coat's as good as a Leech,
To Relieve the Head, if applied to the Breech.
Which no body can deny.
But never was such a Worm as Vane;
When the State scoured last, it voided him then,
Yet now he is crept into the Rump again.
Which no body can deny.
Ludlow's Fart, was a Prophetique Trump:
(There was never any thing so Jump)
It Was the very Type, of a Vote of this Rump.
Which no body can deny.
They say it is good Luck, when a Body rises
With the Rump upward; but he that advises
To Live in that Posture is none of the wisest.
Which no body can deny.
The Reason is worse, though the rhyme be untoward,
When things proceed with the wrong end forward;
But they talk of sad news to the Rump from the Norward.
Which no body can deny.
'Twas a wonderful thing the strength of that Part,
At a Blast, it will take you a Team from a Cart;
And Blow a Man's Head away with a Fart.
Which no body can deny.
When our Brains are Sunck below the Middle,
And our Consciences steered by the hey down-diddle,
Then things will go round without a Fiddle.
Which no body can deny.
You may order the City with a Hand-Granado,
Or the General with a Bastonado,
But no way for a Rump like a Carbonado.
Which no body can deny.
To make us as famous in Counsel, as Wars,
Here Is Lenthal, a Speaker for mine --
And Fleetwood is a Man of Mars.
Which no body can deny.
It Is pity that Nedhams Fallen into Disgrace,
For he orders a Bum with a marvailous Grace,
And ought to attend the Rump by his Place.
Which no body can deny.
Yet this in despite of all Disasters,
Although he has Broken the Heads of his Masters,
It Is still his Profession, to give 'em all Plasters.
Which no body can deny.
Let 'em cry down the Pope, till their Throats are sore,
Their Design was to bring him in at the back door,
For the Rump has a mind to the Scarlet-whore.
Which no body can deny.
And this is a truth at all hands confessed,
However unskillfull in any of the rest;
The Rump speaks the Language of the Beast.
Which no body can deny.
They talk that Lambert is like to be tried
For Treason, and Buggery beside,
Because that he did the Rump bestride.
Which no body can deny.
The Rump's an old Story, if well understood
It Is a thing dressed up in a Parliaments Hood,
And liked; but the Tail stands where the Head should.
Which no body can deny.
'Twould make a man scratch where it does not itch,
To see forty Fools heads in one Politic breech,
And that -- hugging the Nation as the Devil did the VVitch.
Which no body can deny.
From rotten Members preserve our Wives:
From the mercy of a Rump, our Estates and our Lives,
For they must needs go, whom the Devil drives.
Which no body can deny.
A New Ballad.
To an Old Tune, Tom of Bedlam.
Make room for an honest Red-coat,
(And that you will says a wonder)
The Gun, and the Blade,
Are his Tools, -- and his Trade,
Is for Pay, to Kill and Plunder.
Then away with the Laws,
And the Good Old Cause,
Never talk of the Rump or the Charter,
It Is the Cash does the feat,
All the rest 's but a Cheat,
Without That, there is no Faith nor Quarter.
It Is the Mark of our Coin, GOD WITH US,
And the Grace of the Lord go along with it,
When the Georges are flown,
Then the Cause goes down,
For the Lord is departed from it.
Then away, etc.
For Rome, or for Geneva,
For the Table, or the Altar,
This spawn of a Vote,
He cares not a Groat --
For the Pence, he is your dog in a Halter.
Then away, etc.
Though the Name of King or Bishop,
To Nostrils pure may be Loathsome,
Yet many there are,
That agree with the Mayor,
That their Lands are wondrous toothsom.
Then away, etc.
When our Masters are Poor, we Leave 'em,
It Is the Golden Calf we bow too;
We kill, and we slay,
Not for Conscience, but Pay;
Give us That, we will fight for you too:
Then away, etc.
'Twas That first turned the King out;
The Lords, next: then, the Commons:
'Twas that kept up Nol,
Till the Devil fetched his Soul;
And then it set the Bum on's.
Then away, etc.
Drunken Dick was a Lame Protector,
And Fleetwood a Backslider:
These we served as the rest,
But the City's the Beast
That will never cast her Rider.
Then away, etc:
When the Mayor holds the Stirrup,
And the Shreeves cry, God speed your Honors:
Then it is but a Jump,
And up goes the Rump,
That will spur to the Devil upon us.
Then away, etc.
And now for a fling at your Thimbles,
Your Bodkins, Rings, and VVhistles,
In truck for your Toys,
We'll fit you with Boys:
('It Is the doctrine of Hugh's Epistles.)
Then away, etc.
When your Plate is gone, and your Jewels,
You must next be entreated
To part with your Bags,
And strip you to Rags,
And yet not think you are cheated.
Then away, etc.
The truth is, the Town deserves it;
It Is a Brainless, Heartless Monster:
At a Clubb they may Bawl,
Or Declare at their Hall,
And yet at a push, not one stir.
Then away, etc.
Sir Arthur vows he will treat 'em,
Far worse than the Men of Chester,
He Is Bold, now they are Cowed,
But was nothing so Loud
When he lay in the ditch at Lester.
Then away, etc.
The Lord has left John Lambert,
And the Spirit, Feaks Anointed,
But why oh Lord,
Have thou sheathed thy Sword?
Lo, thy Saints are disappointed.
Then away, etc.
Though Sir Henry be departed:
Sir John makes good the place now,
And to help on the work
Of the Glorious Kirk,
Our Brethren march apace too.
Then away, etc.
While Divines, and Statesmen wrangle,
Let the Rump-ridden Nation bite on it,
There are none but we
That are sure to go free,
For the Soldier's still in the right on it.
Then away, etc.
If our Masters will not supply us,
With Money, Food, and Clothing:
Let the State look to it,
We'll have one that will do it,
Let him live, -- we'll not damn for nothing
Then away with the Laws,
And the Good Old Cause,
Never talk of the Rump or the Charter
It Is the Cash does the Feat,
All the rest 's but a Cheat,
Without That there is no Faith, nor Quarter.
The Breech washed by a Friend to the RUMP.
To the Tune of Old Simon the King.
IN an humor of late I was,
Yeleped a doleful dump.
Thought I -- we are at a fine pass;
Not a man stands up for the Rump:
But lets be lashed o'r and o'r.
While it lies like a senceless Fop. --
'Twould make a man a Whore,
To see a Tail tew'd like a Top.
Though a Rump be a dangerous bit,
And many a Knave runs mad on it,
Yet verily as it may hit,
An honest man may be glad on it.
To abuse a poor, Blind Creature --
I had like to have said and a Dumb;
But now it has gotten a Speaker,
And Say is the Mouth of the Bum,
When Besse ruled the Land there was no man
Complained, and yet now they rail:
I beseech you what differs a Woman
From a thing that is all Tongue, and Tail?
Though a Rump, etc.
The Charter we have sworn to defend,
And propagate the Cause.
What call ye those of the Rump-end
But Fundamental Laws?
The Case is as clear as the Day,
There had been no Reformation,
If the Rump had clawed it away,
You had had no Propagation.
Though a Rump, etc.
As a Body's the better for a Purge,
Though the Guts may be troubled with Gripes:
So the Nation will mend with a Scourge,
Though the Tail may be sick of the Stripes.
Ill humors to conveigh,
When the State has taken a Looseness,
(Who can hold what will away?
The Rump must do the Business.
Though a Rump, etc.
The bold Cavalier, in the Field,
That laughs at your Sword, and Gunshot,
An Ord'nance makes him to yield,
And he is glad to turn Tail to Bum-shot.
Old Oliver was a Teazer,
And waged war with the Stump;
But Alexander, and Caesar
Did both submit to the Rump.
Though a Rump, etc.
Let no man be further misled
By an Error, past Debate;
For Sedgwick has proved it the Head,
As well of the Church as the State;
Honest Hugh; that still turns up the Tippets,
When he Kneels to Administer;
Says -- a Rump, with Skippons sippets,
Is a Dish for a Holy Sister.
Though a Rump, etc.
We Are all the better for it,
It Is the Fountain of Love, and of Life.
It Is that makes the sport,
Keeps the peace betwixt Man, and Wife.
Oh; -- happy all they that have spent
Their Blood, and Estates on the Breech,
For they are sure, at last to Repent;
And they would better dye Honest than Rich!
Though a Rump, etc.
Through Pride of Flesh, or State,
Poor Souls are overthrown:
How happy then is our Fate?
VVe've a Rump to take us down:
In matters of Faith it is true,
Some differings there may be,
But give the Saints their due,
In the Rump they all agree.
Though a Rump, etc.
It Is good at Bed, and at Board;
It gives us Pleasure and Ease,
Will you have the rest in a word?
It Is good for the new disease,
(The Tumult of the Guts;)
It Is a Recipe for the Kings Evil,
Wash the Members as sweet as Nuts,
And then throw them all to the Devil.
Though a Rump be a dangerous Bit,
And many a Knave runs mad on it,
Yet, verily, as it may hit,
An honest man may be glad on it.
Chipps of the Old Block; or, Hercules Cleansing the Augaean Stable.
To the Tune of The Sword.
1.
NOw by your good leave Sirs,
Shall see the Rump can cleave Sirs,
And what Chips from this Treacherous Block
Will come you may conceive Sirs.
2.
Lenthall's the first of the Lump sure,
A Fart and he may jump sure,
For both do stink, and both we know
Are Speakers of the Rump sure.
3.
That Mine of Fraud Sir Arthur,
His Soul for Lands will barter,
And if you would ride to Hell in a Wayn
He Is fit to make your Carter,
4.
Sir Harry Vane, God bless us,
To Popery he would press us,
And for the Devils Dinner he,
The Roman way would dress us.
5.
Harry Martin never mist-a
To love the wanton Twist-a,
And lustful Aretines bawdy Leaves
Are his Evangelist-a.
6.
Harry Nevill's no Wigeon,
His Practice truly stygian
Makes it a Masterpiece of wit
To be of no Religion.
7.
But my good Lord Glyn Man,
Pride is a deadly sin Man,
Cots plultera nails few Traitors be
Like you of all your kin Man.
8.
If Saint-John be a Saint Sir,
He has a devilish Taynt Sir,
While Straffords blood in Heavens High Court
Of Justice makes complaint Sir.
9.
Doctor Palmers all day sleeping,
And into his Heart never peeping,
It Is ill he that neglects his own,
Should have All Souls in keeping
10.
Will Bruertons a sinner,
And, Croyden knows, a Winner,
But O take heed least he do eat
The Rump all at one Dinner.
11.
Robin Andrews is a Miser,
Of Cobblers no despiser,
And could they vamp him a new head,
Perhaps he would be Wiser.
12.
But Baron VVild come out here,
Show your Ferret Face and Snout here,
For you being both a Fool and Knave
Are a Monster in the Rout here.
13.
Nick Lechmere Loyalty needs still,
And on Weather-Cocks he feeds still,
If Heathen, Turk or Jew should come,
So he would change his Creed still.
14.
There Is half-witted Will Say too,
A right fool in the Play too,
That would make a perfect Ass,
If he could learn to Bray too.
15.
Cornelius thou were a Link-boy,
And born it is like, in a Sink boy,
I Would tell thy Knavery to the World,
But thy pitch sticks in my ink boy.
16.
Baron Hill was but a Valley,
And born scarce to an Alley,
But now is Lord of Taunton Dean
And thousands he can Ralley.
17.
But if you ask the Nation,
Whence came his Elevation?
They Will say he was not raised by God,
But by our inundation.
18.
Lord Fines he will not Mall men,
For he likes not death of all men,
And his heart does go to Pit to Pat,
When to Battle he should call men.
19.
Perfideous VVhitlock ever,
Has mischiefs under's Beaver,
And for his ends will put the World
Into a burning Feavour.
20.
Ashley Cowper knew a Reason,
That Treachery was in season,
When at the first he turned his coat
From Loyalty to Treason.
21.
And gouty Master Wallop,
Now thinks he has the Ballop,
But though he trotted to the Rump,
He Will run away a Gallop.
22.
There Is Carew Rawleigh by him,
All good men do defy him,
And they that think him not a Knave,
I wish they would but try him.
23.
Luke Robinson that Clownado,
Though his heart be a Granado,
Yet a High-shooe with his hands in his Poke,
Is his most perfect shadow.
24.
Salloway with Tobacco,
Inspired, turned State Quacko;
And got more by his feigned zeal,
Then by his What de'e lack ho.
25.
But Lisle is half forgotten,
Who often is over-shotten,
For just like Harp and Gridiron
His brains with Law do Gotten.
26.
Lord Monson's next the Bencher,
Who waited with a Trencher,
Now his tail is jerk'd at home and abroad,
For he is a feeble Wencher.
27.
We hear from Sir John Lenthall,
Though his gouty Lord has spent all,
His Rump's placed wrong, but it is his face
That is right Fundamental*
28.
What Knaves are more to be vexed, Sirs,
You Will hear when I sing next, Sirs,
For now my Muse is tired with this
Abominable text, Sirs.
Ridentem dicere verum, Quid vetat?
Rump Rampant, or the Sweet Old Cause in Sippets.
To the Tune of, Last Parliament sat as snug as a Cat.
IN the name of the fiend,
What the Rump up agin,
The Delk, and the Good Old Cause,
If they settle agin,
Which to think were a sin,
Good night to Religion and Laws.
First Tithes must go down
Like a sprig of the Crown,
Although J. Presbyter grumble;
Already they tell's
Our Lead and our Bells
They Will sell, next our Churches must tumble*
This poor English Nation,
By this Generation,
Has been grieved 11. years and more,
But in that season,
And not without reason,
They have thrice been turned out of door.
Which they please to call force,
Yet themselves can do worse,
For this Parcel of a House
Dare keep out of door,
Thrice as many more,
And value the Law not a Louse.
First by Owl-light they met,
And by that light they set,
The reason of it mark,
Their Acts and the light,
Do differ quite,
Their deeds do best with the dark.
Esquire Lenthall had swore,
He Would fit there no more,
Unless in with Oxen they drew him,
That he once might speak true,
They picked him out two,
Sent Pembrook and Salisbury to him.
When these Gamesters were packed,
The first gracious act
Was for pence for their friends of the Army,
Who for any side fight,
Except't be the right;
Sixscore thousand a month will not harm ye.
Yet many there be,
Say the House is not free,
When I am sure of that,
TO one another they are so free,
That the Nation do see,
They Are too free for us to be fat.
Religion they waved,
Now they had us enslaved,
And got us sure in their Claw,
They pulled off their mask,
And set us our task,
Which is next to make Brick without straw.
The next Act they made
Was for helping of Trade,
So they settled again the Excise,
Which the City must pay,
For ever and aye,
Yet might have chose had they been wise.
To pull down their King,
Their plate they could bring,
And other precious things,
So that Sedgwick and Peter's,
Were no small getters
By their Bodkins, thimbles and rings.
But when for the good
Of the Nation 'twas stood
Half ruined and forlorn,
Though It lay in their power,
To redeem't in an hour,
Not a Citizen put out his horn.
They had manacled their hands
With King and Bishops Lands,
And ruined the whole Nation,
So that no body cares
Though they and their Heirs,
Be cornute to the third Generation.
May their wives on them frown,
But laugh and lie down,
To any one else turn up Trump;
To mend the breed,
As I think there is need,
Be rid like their men by the Rump.
And may these wise Sophees,
Pay again for their Trophies,
For I hope the Parliament means
(Now they have been at the costs
To set up the posts)
To make them pay well for the Chains.
Fortunate Rising: or, The Rump Upward.
GOod people, and you that have been undone
By Guns, and Drums and the Trumpets tone,
And new hard words since Forty and One.
Which no body can deny*
Here is a word that will plague you more
Then any that ever went before,
It Is the Rump of Harry Martins Whore,
Which, etc.
The Cause was at first a pretty conceit
To create a durty Rebel great;
But now that has left the imperial Seat,
Which, etc.
A General was a glorious Name,
Till Essex his Member spoilt his fame;
For a Soldier ought to be good at the Game,
Which, etc.
The Communication Line was a Jigg,
And as good as the Bath to make women big,
Who never were so, till they learnt to digg,
Which, etc.
Artillery was a thundering word,
Where many appeared with Musket and Sword,
To fright poor Atkins out of a turd,
Which, etc.
Cavalier was a name of as great a Force,
As Centaure, that is both Man and Horse,
And for Ravishing suffered many a curse,
Which, etc.
Yet every Woman that had this fear,
Although in her heart a Roundhead she were,
In her belly she wished a Cavalier,
Which, etc.
Sequestration scared Men out of their Plate,
Excise drew potent Ale out of date,
And the Corpse de Guard broke many of pate,
Which, etc.
The Plunderers made men hide their money,
And women their jewels, if they had any;
And one there was, hid Gold in her Cunny,
Which, etc.
A Commonwealth is a Citizens trust,
And by his wife adored it must,
As a Topique to prove adultery just,
Which, etc.
The Protector stormed with all mankind,
Made Kings, and Princes walk behind,
Till the Devil out-ranted him in a wind,
Which, etc.
The Committee of Safety threw the Dye;
But some body spit in his face from on high,
And made the valiant Fleetwood cry,
Which, etc.
But the Rump is a word of such a power,
Pronounced, your beer, like thunder, 'twill sour,
And after make you squitter an howr,
Which, etc.
The squirting at Epsom's not worth a louse,
Rump out-does all, that comes there to carouse;
For it shit from Portsmouth to Wallingford house,
Which, etc.
If Booth were no Knave, a Fool let him be,
To keep such a stir for Liberty,
When the Rump sets all it is Tenants Free,
Which, etc.
He that could imitate sounds in a fart,
And speak from behind with a wondrous Art,
Were he living now, should take Lenthals part,
Which, etc.
And then a Fart for the Cities forces,
For Monk that is coming with all his Horses,
And a T -- for Fairfax too, that worse is,
Which, etc.
A Parson once in a frolic Divine,
Exhausted Glasses, twenty and nine,
For Turkey's Rump in Canary wine,
Which, etc.
And sure he received a Revelation,
When to preach he left his first Vocation,
That a Rump in time should rule the Nation,
Which, etc.
Montelions Diall's a drolling Mock,
With a stick in the Country Fellows dock,
And fitter now than the Palace clock,
Which, etc.
Morlay a joint of the Rump grew bigg,
And swelling; but politic Haslerigg,
Has sent him for Physic to Doctor Trigg,
Which, etc.
Mad Vane was Anointed King, and said,
He received a Crown that burdened his Head,
For which the Rump sent him home to Bed,
Which, etc.
The Abjuring Oath made the Speaker Sick,
Which Haslerigg taking in the Nick,
For his feigned one showed him a real Trick,
Which, etc.
Thus, what for aliment is unfit,
The Tail by a virtue guiding it,
Excludes, and leaves it self beshit,
Which, etc.
Let no man pretend any Cause,
Against the Rump to open his Jaws,
For it rules by the Fundamental Laws,
Which no body can deny.
A proper New Ballad on the Old Parliaament, or the Second Part of Knave out of
Doors.
To the Tune of Hei ho my honey,
My heart shall never rue,
Four and twenty now for your Money,
And yet a hard pennyworth too.

GOod morrow my Neighbors all,
What news is this I heard tell?
As I past through Westminster Hall,
By the house that is near to Hell:
They told me John Lambert was there,
With his Bears, and deeply did swear:
(As Cromwell had done before)
Those Vermin should fit there no more.
Sing hi ho Will. Lenthall,
Who shall our General be?
For the House to the Devil is sent all,
And follow gid faith mun ye.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Then Muse strike up a Sonnet,
Come piper and play us a spring;
For now I think upon it,
These Rs turned out their King.
But now it must come about,
That once again they must turn out:
And not without Justice and Reason,
That every one home to his Prison.
Sing hi ho Harry Martin,
A Burgess of the Bench,
There Is nothing here is certain,
You must back and leave your VVench.
Sing hi ho, etc.
He there with the buffle head,
Is called Lord, and of the same house,
Who (as I have heard it said)
Was chastis'd by his Lady-Spouse.
Because he run at sheep,
She and her Maid gave him the Whip;
And beat his head so addle;
You Would think he had a knock in the Cradle,
Sing hi ho Lord Mounson,
You have got a park of the Kings,
One day you will hang like a hounson,
For this and other things.
Sing hi ho, etc.
It was by their Masters order
At first together they met,
Whom piously they did murder,
And since by their own they did set.
The cause of this Disaster,
Is 'cause they were false to their Master.
Nor can their Gensd'armes blame,
For serving them the same.
Sing hi ho Sir Arthur,
No more in the house you shall prate;
For all you kept such a quarter,
You are out of the Council of State.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Old Noll gave them once a purge
(Forgetting Occidisti,)
(The Furies be his scourge)
So of the cure mist he.
And yet the drug he well knew it,
For he gave it to Dr. Huit.
Had he given it them he had done it,
And they had not turned out his son yet.
Sing hi ho brave Dick,
L. Hall and Lady Joan,
Who did against Loyalty kick,
Is now for a New-years-gift gone.
Sing hi ho, etc.
For had old Noll been alive,
He had pulled them out by the ears.
Or else had fired their Hive,
And kicked him down the stairs;
Because they were so bold,
To vex his righteous soul.
When he so deeply had swore,
That there they should never fit more.
But hi ho Nol 's dead,
And stunk long since above ground,
Though lapt in spices and lead,
That cost us many a pound.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Indeed Brother Burgess your Ling
Did never stink half so bad;
Nor did your Habberdin,
When it no Pease-straw had.
Ye were both chose together,
'Cause ye wore stuff-cloaks in hard weather.
And Cambridge needs would have
A Burgess, Fool, and Knave.
Sing hi ho J. Lowry,
Concerning Abberdine,
No Member spoke before ye,
Yet ye near spoke again.
Sing hi ho my honey,
My heart shall never rue,
Here Is all picked ware for your money,
And yet a hard penyworth too.
Ned Prideaux he went post
To tell the Protector the news,
That Fleetwood ruled the roast,
Having taken off Dicks shoes.
And that he did believe,
Lambert would him deceive;
As he his brother had gulled,
And Cromwell Fairfax bull'd.
Sing hi ho the Attorney
Was still at your command,
In flames together burn ye,
Still dancing hand in hand.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Who Is that that would hide his face?
And his neck from the collar pull?
He must appear in his place,
If his Cap be made of Wool.
Who is it with a vengeance?
It is the good Lord Saint John's!
Who made Gods House to fall,
To build his own withal.
Sing hi ho who comes there?
Who it is I must not say;
But by this dark-lanthorn I swear
He Is as good in the night as day.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Edge Brethren, room for one,
That looks as big as the best;
It Is pity to leave him alone,
For he is as good as the rest.
No Picklock of the Laws,
He builds among the Daws.
If you have any more Kings to murder,
For a President look no further.
Sing hi ho J. Bradshaw,
In blood none further engages;
The Devil from whom he had's law,
Will shortly pay him his wages.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Next Peagoose Wild come in,
To show your weezle face,
And tell us Burleys sin,
Whose blood bought you your place.
When Loyalty was a crime,
He lived in a dangerous time,
Was forced to pay his neck,
To make you Baron of the Cheque.
Sing hi ho Jack Straw,
We Will put it in the Margent,
'Twas not for Justice or Law
That you were made a Sergeant.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Noll served not Satan faster,
Nor with him did better accord;
For he was my good Master,
And the devil was his good Lord.
Both Slingsby, Gerrard, and Hewit,
Were sure enough to go to it,
According to his intent,
That chose me President.
Sing hi ho Lord Lisle,
Sure Law had got a wrench,
And where was Justice the while,
When you sat on the Bench?
Sing hi ho, etc.
Next comes the good Lord Keble,
Of the triumvirate
Of the seal, in Law but feeble,
Though on the Bench he sat.
For when one puts him a case,
I wish him out of the place;
And if it were not a sin,
An abler Lawyer in.
Sing give the seal about,
I Would have it so the rather,
Because we might get out,
The Knave my Lord my Father.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Pull out the other there,
It is Nathaniel Fines,
(Who Bristol lost for fear)
We Will not leave him behind's;
It Is a Chip of that good old block,
Who to Loyalty gave the first knock.
Then stole away to Lundey,
Whence the foul fiend fetches him one day.
Sing hi ho Canting Fines,
You and the rest to mend 'um,
Would you were served in your kinds,
With an ense rescidendum.
Sing hi ho, etc.
He that comes now down stairs,
Is Lord Chief Justice Glin.
If no man for him cares,
He cares as little again.
The reason too I know it,
He help to cut Straffords throat,
And take away his life,
Though with a cleaner knife.
Sing hi ho Britain bold,
Straight to the bar you get,
Where it is not so cold
As where your Justice set.
Sing hi ho, etc.
He that shall next come in,
Was long of the Council of State;
Though hardly a hair on his chin,
When first in the Council he sat:
He was sometime in Italy,
And learned their fashions prettily
Then came back to's own Nation
To help up Reformation.
Sing hi ho Harry Nevil,
I prithee be not too rash,
With Atheism to court the Devil,
You Are too bold to be his Bardash.
Sing hi ho, etc.
He there with ingratitude blackt,
Is one Cornelius Holland:
Who but for the Kings house lackt,
Wherewith to appease his Colon.
The case is well amended,
Since that time, as I think,
When at Court gate he tended,
With a little stick and a short link.
Sing hi ho Cornelius,
Your zeal cannot delude us,
The reason pray now tell us,
Why thus you played the Judas?
Sing hi ho, etc.
At first he was a Grocer,
Who now we Major call:
Although you would think no sir,
If you saw him in White Hall.
Where he has great command,
And looks for cap in hand;
And if our eggs be not addle,
Shall be of the next new Moddle.
Sing hi ho Mr. Saloway,
The Lord in Heaven does know
When that from Heaven you shall away,
Where to the Devil you will go.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Little Hill since set in the House,
Is to a Mountain grown:
Nor that which brought forth the Mouse,
But thousands the year of his own,
The purchase that I mean,
Where else but at Taunton Dean?
Five thousand pound per annum,
A sum not known to his Granam.
Sing hi the Good Old Cause,
It Is old although not true,
You have got more by that then the Laws,
So a Good Old Cause to you.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Master Cecil pray come behind,
Because on your own accord
The other House you declined,
You shall be no longer a Lord.
The reason as I guess
You silently did confess,
Such Lords deserved ill,
The other House to fill.
Sing hi ho Mr. Cecil,
Your honor now is gone,
Such Lords are not worth a whistle,
We made better Lords of our own.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Luke Robinson shall go before ye,
That snarling Northern tike,
Be sure he will not adore ye,
For honor he does not like.
He cannot honor inherit,
And he knows he can never merit:
And therefore he cannot bear it,
That any one else should wear it:
Sing hi ho envious lown,
You're of the Beagles kind,
Who always barked at the Moon,
Because in the dark it shined.
Sing hi ho, etc.
It Is this that vengeance rouses,
That while you make long prayers,
You eat up widows houses,
And drank the Orphans tears.
Long time you kept a great noise,
Of God and the Good Old Cause;
But if God to you be so kind,
Then I am of the Indians mind,
Sing hi ho Sir Harry,
We see by your demeanor,
If longer here you tarry,
You Will be Sir Harry Vane Senior.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Now, if your zeal do warm ye,
Pray loud for fairer weather,
Swear to live and die with the Army,
For these Birds are flown together.
The House is turned out a door,
(And I think it was no sin too)
If we take them there any more,
We'll throw the House out of the window.
Bing hi ho Tom Scot,
You lent the Devil your hand:
I wonder he helped you not,
But suffered you to be trapand.
Sing hi ho, etc.
They Are once again conduced,
And we freed from the evil
To which we long were used,
God bless us next from the Devil!
If they had not been outed,
The Army had been routed,
And then this rotten Rump,
Had sat until the last trump.
^ut hi ho Lambert 's here,
The Protectors Instrument bore:
And many there be that swear
His Lady had done it before.
Sing hi ho, etc.
Come here then honest Peter's,
Say Grace for the second course:
So long as these your betters,
Must patience have upon force.
Long time ye kept a great noise,
With God and the Good Old Cause,
But if God own such as these,
Then where is the Devils fees.
Sing hi ho Hugo,
I hear thou art not dead,
Where now to the Devil will you go,
Your Patrons being fled.
Sing hi ho my honey,
My heart shall never rue:
Four and twenty now for a penny,
And into the bargain HUGH.
A City Ballad.
To the Tune of Down in a Bottom.
1
SInce the Realm lost its head
All our trading is dead,
And our Money and Credit is flown;
We have tried many new,
But find it too true,
That no Head fits so well as our own.
2.
The Drum and the Trump
Devoured all to the Rump,
And then they drank healths for that,
But that yielding no grease,
They next came to squeeze
The City because it was fat.
3.
The City declared
That they were afeard,
And they their Militia would settle;
But, except the Boys,
They made only a noise,
Their Votes were in dock out nettle.
4.
The Mayor and his Peers
Durst not for their ears
Assert the Militia's power:
Though once he seemed for it,
He does now abhor it,
And Revolted in less then an hour.
5.
It Is that cursed wedge
That took off his edge,
For he looks like a jolly Clubber;
If he had but the life
And spirit of his Wife,
He would not lie still like a Lubber.
6.
Our pair of new Sheriffs
Hang by them like sleeves,
Their valor will never be their sin;
So they be high and rich
They do not care which
Side looses, if they may but win.
7.
That Earwigg that does write
Himself Lord and Knight,
(And is one as much as the other)
Does so still undermine,
That he spoils our design,
By the help of old Besse his Brother.
8.
He cares not a pin,
So as he may get in,
Who ere he keep out of his right,
He Will turn and return,
But be hanged ere he will burn,
For he dares neither suffer nor fight.
9.
His Ambition him thrust
Into a Pageant at first,
And up to the Pulpit next;
And then into the Chair
Of our City Lord Mayor,
Which he better improved then his Text.
10.
O there did he squeeze
Out the Fines and the Fees,
Nor the Church nor the Laity escapes,
Had he staid another Year,
At which he did lear,
He had pressed us like Canaans Grapes.
11.
There Is just such another
May well be called Brother,
A Colonel stout, and a Knight,
And an Alderman too,
As now Aldermen go,
That will neither take wrong nor do right.
12.
We never yet did know
That he durst meet a foe,
And his pale color speaks him afraid
Yet in story we read
He did one valiant deed,
Which was to his Masters Maid.
13.
Then to get an Estate,
He found out a Mate,
Which was an old Usurers Daughter,
Supplanted the Son,
And then he begun
To be Wealthy, and Worshipful after.
14.
There are more besides him
Stands for the back Limb,
A crew of such Harlotry tools,
That who is not more blind
Then Fortune, may find
That he raises some besides Fools.
15
Some are wary grave Sirs,
In their Chains and their Furs,
That dare not declare their opinion,
If hanged they were all,
One tear would not fall
Without the help of an Onion.
16.
There Is one kin to a Miter,
That Is no Presbyter,
But loyal and honest and free,
Had we took down the Mayor,
And placed him in the Chair,
Up some body had gone and we.
17.
There Is another, a Wit,
Was for all he could get,
But now wheels about and is true;
He may win all our hearts
Would he use his best parts
With our foes as he did with the Jew.
18.
The rest of the Court
Are a mixed colored sort,
Rank Presbyter, rank Independent,
They do still so prevail
For the Westminster tail,
It Is feared we shall never have an end on it.
19.
But our Counsel of Commons
Are valiant old Romans,
And stand for our peace and freedom,
If that Dog that sells Leather,
And the Salesman together
Would either be honest or be dumb.
20.
But yet we cannot see
Any reason why we
Should all be so much at their becks,
If we chains must forbear,
Pray why should they wear
A Militia about their necks?
21
Our Town Clerk we took,
Has a serious look,
And his silence did show him a wit,
But we discern him no more
Than the Court heretofore
Did that sullen Mask which he writ.
22.
The late Petticoat Squire
From his shop mounted higher
To the Sword, and from that he did start
By his money and grace
To a Remembrances place
Now reports when the Rump let a fart.
23.
Their Chaplain that praid
Now recants what he said,
And walks by a perfecter light:
The cause why he straid
Was he wincked when he praid,
Now his eyes are open he is right.
24.
What ere the Cause be
We clearly may see,
No good thing proposed for the City's,
But men's policy bends
It to their private ends,
That it is spoiled by the close Committee.
25.
And it needs must be so,
For we all do well know
It Is for wealth men are put into office;
And he that has store
Domineers over the poor,
Whether Fool, Knave, Elder, or Novice.
26.
We our Members have sent,
But the quick Parliament
Had first sent their Members we find,
Yet no body knows,
With which side Monk will close
Or will stand for before, or behind.
27.
He Is a Soldier no doubt
Both skillful and stout
But had need be more than a Stalian,
If his love should extend
To the hindermost end,
And use us like Italian.
28.
A thousand a year
If he could but tell where,
They thought would have made him to mind 'em;
But they promise still,
As Diego made his will,
Great things, but none knows where to find 'em.
29.
In this prodigal trick
They have outdone old Nick,
For what he did give he did show.
Their title's the same,
And so is their aim
For ought any man does know.
30.
Let it go as it will,
We are Citizens still,
And free to this side, or that
We may prate, and may Vote,
But when it comes to it,
We Will be true to no body knows what.
31.
But this we see plain
'Twas for honor and gain
That we at the first did fall out,
And were not public lands
Got in private men's hands
The times would soon turn about.
33.
And now we do find,
These Saints in their kind,
Those are mad that to aid them in flocks come,
And he that will fight
To keep us all from our right
Shall be chronicled for a Coxcomb.
The RUMP Dockt.
TIll it be understood
What is under Monck's Hood,
The City dare not show his horns:
Till ten days be out,
The Speaker's sick of the Gout,
And the Rump does sit upon thorns.
If Monck be turned Scot,
The Rump goes to pot,
And the Good Old Cause will miscarry;
Like coals out of embers,
Revive the Old Members:
Off goes the Rump, like Dick and Harry.
Then In come the Lords,
Who drew Parliament Swords,
With Robes lined through with Ermin;
But Peers without Kings
Are very useless things,
And their Lordships counted but Vermin.
Now Morley and Fagg
May be put in a bagg,
And that doughty Man Sir Arthur,
In despair of his Foil,
With Alderman Hoyle,
Will become a Knight of the Garter.
That Knave in Grain
Sir Harry Vane
His Case then most men's is sadder;
There is little hope
He can escape the rope,
For the Rump turned him over the Ladder.
That precious Saint Scot
Shall not be forgot,
According to his own desires;
Instead of Neck-verse
Shall have it writ on his Hearse,
Here hangs one of the Kings Tryers.
Those nine sons of Mars,
That whipped the Rumps Arse,
I mean the Commanders War-lick;
If the Rump smell strong
With hanging too long,
Shall serve to stuff it with Garlic.
That parcel of man
In length but a span,
Whose wifes Eggs always are addle
Must quit the Lifeguard,
As he did when scared
By Lambert out of the saddle.
Lambert may now turn Florist,
Being come off the poorest
That ever did Man of the Sword:
The Rump let a Fart
Which took away his heart,
And made him a Equire of a Lord.
His Cheshire glory
Is a pitiful story,
There the Saints triumphed without battle;
But now Monck and his Friars
Have driven him into the Briers,
As he did Booth and his Cattle.
For the rest of the Rump,
Together in a Lump,
It Is too late to cry, Peccavi;
Ye have sinned all or most
Against the Holy Ghost,
And therefore the Devil must have ye.
But now valiant City,
Whether must thy Ditty
Be sung in Verse, or in Prose,
For till the Rump stunk
For fear of Monck,
Thy Militia durst not show its Nose.
Base Cowards and Knaves,
That first made us Slaves,
Very Rascals from the beginning;
Only unto Moncks Sword
The Nation must afford
The honor of bringing the King in.
Arsy Versy, or The Second Martyrdom of the RUMP.
To the Tune of The Blind Beggar of Bednall-green.
1.
MY Muse, to prevent lest an after-clap come,
If the wind should once more turn about for the Bum,
As a preface of honor, and not as a frump,
First with a Sirreverence ushers the Rump,
2.
I shall not dispute whether Long-tails of Kent,
Or Papist this name of disgrace did invent;
Whose Legend of lies, do defame us the more,
Has entailed on us Rumps never heard on before.
3.
But now on its Pedigree longer to think,
(For the more it is stirred the more it will stink)
It Is agreed the Rumps first report in the Town
Did arise from the wooden invention of Brown.
4.
Old Oliver's nose had taken in snuff,
When it sat long ago, some unsavory puff;
Then up went the Rump, and was ferkt to the quick,
But it settled in spite of the teeth of poor Dick.
5.
Then the Knight of the Pestle, King Lambert, and Vane,
With a Scepter of Iron did over it reign:
But the Rump soon re-setled, and to their disgrace,
Like Excrements voided them out of the place.
6.
It did now, like a Truant's well-disciplin'd Bum,
With the rod of affliction harder become;
Or else like the Image in Daniel it was,
Whose Head was of Gold, but whose Tail was of brass.
7.
It endured the first heat, and proved no starter,
But sung in the midst of the flames like a Martyr,
And whisk'd the Tail like a terrible Farter,
And sounded most cheerfully, Vive Sir Arthur.
8.
But the next fire Ordeal put into a dump,
Sir Orlando the furious chief joint of the Rump,
That he looked like the picture of Richard the Third*
Or like an ejected and frost-bitten T --
9
It Is said that his Durindana he drew,
And a Wight on the Road most manfully slew?
But, pardoned by Charles, made good what they tell us,
How ill it is to save a thief from the Gallows.
10.
Being now to be burned, he soon did expire,
For he was but a flash, and would quickly take fire,
So that their fuel upon him to spend,
What was it but Coals to Newcastle to send?
11.
To bring 'em to the stake as in order they lie,
Harry Martyn the next place must occupy;
'Twas expected in vain he should blaze, for he swore,
That he had been burnt to the stumps before.
12.
Tom Scot for the Bum most stiffly did stand*
Though once by a Bum he was foully trapand;
But time and his office of Secretary
Had learnt him his Business more private to carry
13.
Some thought he arrived at his dignity first,
By being so well in iniquity verst,
The mystery of which he has practiced of late
In his Function, which was, to be Baud to the State.
14.
Hob Morley in silence did suffer the loss
Of his Rump, and with patience took up the Cross,
That to see him so singed and so scorcht you would swear
No Camel more meekly his burden could bear.
15.
The Speaker was thought to the Rump to be true,
Because like a Fart at first he burnt blew;
But straight he was cunningly seen to retire,
For ^ear to endanger the Rolls in the fire.
16.
St. John a mortal of flesh and of blood,
Swore by St. H^ has a great kindness for that Saint, not because of his
Keys, (which he knew he should never make use of) but in reference to
Peterborough Minster, the stones of which built his new house
Peter the example was good:
So facing about and shifting his station,
He turned over a new leaf in St. John's Revelations.
17.
Harry Nevil that looks like a Mahomets pigeon,
Accused to be of a State-mans Religion,
Is left to his choice what process he will have,
To be burnt for an Atheist, or hanged for a Knave.
18.
Now stop thy Nose reader, for Atkins does come,
That shame to the Breeches as well as the Bum.
To wish he was burnt were an idle desire,
For he comes provided to shit out the fire.
19.
But least he without a Companion should be,
Here Is Lisle that comes next stinks worser then he;
So foully corrupt, you may placed in your Creed,
Such a Rump could alone such a Fistula breed.
20.
Poor Ludlow was bogg'd in Ireland of late,
And to purge himself came to the Rump of the State;
But gravely they told him he had acted amiss,
When he sought to betray the Rump with a kiss.
21.
Ned Harby was sure an herb John in the pot,
Yet could he not escape the disasterous lot:
Scarce Church'd of the Gout was the trusty old Squire,
But he hopt from the F^ying-pan into the fire.
22
Robin Andrews was laid on last as they tell us,
For a log to keep down the rest of his fellows;
Though he spent on the City, like one of the Roysters,
Each morning his Some Authors hold that it was but three half pence, but
Poetry will not admit broken number.
two pence in Sack and in Oysters.
23
Next Praise-God, although of the Rump he was none,
Was for his Petition burnt to the Bare-bone:
So Praise-God and Rump, like true Joseph's together,
Did suffer; but Praise-God lost the more Courteous Reader, he is a Leather
seller.
leather:
24
There Is Lawson another dag-lock of the tail,
That the water to avoid, to the water did sail;
And in Godly simplicity means (as they say)
To manage the Stern, though the Rump's out of play.
25.
But Overton most with wonder does seize us,
By securing of Hull for no less than Christ Jesus,
Hoping (as it by the story appears)
To be there his Lieutenant for one thousand years.
26.
Lord Mounson? Oh Venus! what do you here?
I little thought you were a Rumper I swear:
But an impotent Lord will thus far avail,
He will serve for a Cloak to cover the tail.
27.
To burnish his Star Mr. Salisburie's come,
With the Atmos of gold that fall from the Bum;
Sure 'twas but a Meteor, for I must tell ye,
It smelt as 'twere turning to the Aldermans jelly.
28.
Brother Pembroke comes last, and does not disdain
Though despised by the world, to bear up the train:
But after New-lights so long he did run,
That they brought him to Not Bethlehem in Juda (for he is none of the Magi)
Bethlehem before they had done.
29.
Thus the Foxes of Sampson that carried a brand
In their tails, to destroy and to burn up the land;
In the flames they had kindled themselves to expire,
And the Dee'l give them Brimstone unto their fire.
A Christmas Song, when the RUMP was first dissolved.
To the Tune of I tell the Dick.
THis Christmas time, it is fit that we
Should Feast and Sing and merry be
It is a time of mirth;
For never since the world began,
More joyful news was brought to man,
Then at our Saviors birth.
But such have been these times of late,
That Holy days are out of date,
And holiness to boot;
For they that do despise, and scorn
To keep the day that Christ was born,
Want holiness no doubt.
That Parliament that took away
The observation of that day,
We know it was not free;
For if it had, such Acts as those
Had never been seen in verse or prose,
You may conclude with me.
'Twas that Assembly did maintain
'Twas Law to kill their Sovereign,
Who by that Law must dye,
Though Gods anointed ones are such,
Which Subjects should not dare to touch,
Much less to Crucify.
'Twas that which turned our Bishops out
Of house and home both branch and root,
And gave no reason why*
And all our Clergy did expel,
That would not do like that Rebel.
This no man can deny.
It was that Parliament that took
Out of our Churches our Service Book,
A Book without compare;
And made Gods house, (to all our griefs)
That house of Prayer, a Deu of Thiefs,
Both here and every where.
They had no head for many years
Nor heart (I mean the House of Peers)
And yet it did not dies
Of these long since it was bereft,
And nothing but the Tail was left,
You know it as well as I.
And in this Tail there was a tongue,
Lenthall I mean, whose fame has wrung
In Country and in City;
Not for his worth or eloquence,
^t for a Rebel to his Prince,
And neither wise nor witty.
This Speakers words must needs be wind,
Since they proceeded from behind;
Besides, you may remember,
From thence no Act could be discreet,
Nor could the sense of the House be sweet,
Where Atkins was a Member.
This tale's now done, the Speakers dumb,
Thanks to the Trumpet and the Drum;
And now I hope to see
A Parliament that will restore
All things that were undone before,
That we may Christians be.
Bum-Fodder: or, Waste-Paper, proper to wipe the Nations RUMP with* or your Own.
FRee Quarter in the North is grown so scarce,
That Lambert with all his men of Mars,
Have submitted to kiss the Parliaments Arse,
Which no body can deny.
If this should prove true (as we do suppose)
It Is such a wipe as the RVMP and all is Foes
Could never give to Old Olivers Nose,
Which no body can deny.
There Is a Proverb come to my mind not unfit,
When the Head shall see the RVMP all be-shit,
Sure this must prove a most lucky hit,
Which, etc.
There is another proverb which every Noddy,
Will jeer the RVMP with, and cry Hoddy-doddy
Here Is a Parliament all Arse and no Body,
Which, etc.
It Is a likely matter the World will mend
When so much blood and Treasure we spend,
And yet begin at the wrong end,
Which, etc.
We have been round, and round about twirl'd
And through much sad confusion hurled,
And now we are got into the Arse of the World,
Which, etc.
But it is not all this our courage will quail,
Or make the brave Seamen to the RVMP strike sail,
If we can have no head we will have no tail,
Which, etc.
Then let a Free Parliament be turned trump,
And never think any longer the Nation to mump
With your pocky, perjured, damned old RVMP,
Which, etc.
But what does Rebel RVMP make here,
When their proper place (as W -- P -- does swear)
^t the Devils Arse in Derb^shire.
Which, etc.
Then thither let us send them a tilt,
For if they stay longer, they will us beguilt
With a Government that is loose in the hilt,
Which, etc.
You Will find it set down in the Harrington's Moddle
Whose Brains a Commonwealth does so coddle,
That 't has made a Rotation in his Noddle,
Which, etc.
It Is a pitiful pass you men of the Sword
Have brought your selves to, that the Rum^'s your Lord,
And Arsie Versie must be the word,
Which, etc.
Our Powder and Shot you did freely spend,
That the Head you might from the Body rend,
And now you are at Wars with the But-end,
Which, etc.
Old Martin and Scot have all such an itch,
That they will with the Rump try the other twitch,
And Lenthal can grease a fat Sow in the Britch,
Which, etc.
That Is a thing would please the Butchers and Cooks,
To see this stinking Rump quite off the hooks,
And Jackdaw go to pot with the Rooks,
Which, etc.
This froward Sir John (who the Rump did never fail)
Against Charles Stuart in a Speech did rail,
But men say it was without head or tail,
Which, etc.
Just such is the Government we live under,
Of a Parliament thrice cut in sunder;
And this has made us the Worlds wonder,
Which, etc.
Old Noll when we talked of Magna Charta,
Did prophecy well we should all smart-a;
And now we have found his Rump's Magna Fart-a,
Which, etc.
But I cannot think Monck (though a Soldier and Sloven)
To be kin to the Fiend whose feet are cloven,
Nor will creep in the Rumps Arse to bake in their Oven,
Which, etc.
Then since he is coming, e'ne let him come
From the North to the South, with Sword and Drum,
To beat up the Quarters of this lewd Bum,
Which, etc.
And now of this Rump I Will say no more,
Nor had I begun, but upon this score,
There was something behind, which was not before.
Which, etc.
A Vindication of the RUMP: or The RUMP Re-advanced.
To the Tune of Up tails all.
FUll many a Ballad has been Penned,
And scoffing Poem writ
Against the RUMP; but I intend
To speak in Praise of it.
Come Jove and Apollo, come Venu^ and Mars,
And lend your assistance: to speak of the A --
Will require a prodigious wit,
There Is scarce a Lady to be found
That loves either Pear or Plum
One half so well, if she be sound,
As tabering at her B --
It may be, you will say, I Am wide of the Case,
Since that Musick's made in a distant place:
I answer the breadth of your Thumb.
When Alderman Atkins did bemar
His Hose through a Panick fear,
And Captain Rea that man of War,
Oh! what a Hogo was there?
If you ask me, what praise is in this? at a word,
The Captain so senced himself by a T --
That his Enemies could not come near.
There is not a Lawyer in Country or Town,
Whose Rhetoric does prevail,
Although he has purchased Fee simple by the Gown,
But loves to be dealing in Tail;
And I may well swear by Apollo or Mars,
That at a Place called, the Oven's Arse,
Often times I have drunk good Ale.
And when you are dallying with a young Maid,
Would you not her Buttocks bethump?
And I have been often well apaid
With a Goose both fat and plump:
The Body being eaten, we strive for the Tail,
Each man with his Kan'kn of nappy brown Ale,
Does box it about for the RVMP.
The RVMP of a Coney I often have seen
Most piteously clawed by a Ferret,
And a Capons Rump is a bit for a Queen,
Although she is a Person of merit.
In preaching and praying who spends the whole day,
At night keeps a Rump wherewithal for to play,
Be he never so full of the spirit.
I wonder who first called the Parliament RVMP,
Some say, that it was Jack Hobby,
And some, fiery P -- good wits will jump;
Now I write not this to bob ye,
But only to tell ye that good Mr. P --
For all that he is cropped, yet he could not get in,
But was fain to remain in the Lobby*
The other day I was going in haste,
(To think on it it grieves my heart)
I saw a poor Fellow all naked to the waste,
And whipped at the Arse of a Cart:
His Rump ('it is true) suffered the Rout. But I would
Fain know who it was, that durst be so hold,
As to call Mr. Speaker Sir F --
He might as well have styled him Anus,
Since he was the mouth of the RVMP.
As cunning a Fox as Romes Sejanus:
But I do not love for to frump;
Or else I could tell ye, my Friends, to an Ace,
What good can acrew to the Land by a Mace,
As long as the Knave's the great'st Trump,
Our zealous sticklers for Reformation
Will edify on the Rump of a Sister,
And it will never grow out of fashion
To Physic the Tail with a Glister.
But beware that Monk does not come with a bitter
Purge to the Rump which will make her beshit her
For she has already bepist her.
The RUMP roughly but righteously handled: In a New Ballad.
To the Tune of Cook Laurel.
1.
MOre Sacks to the Mill, here comes a fresh Wit,
That means without Mittens (as you shall see)
To handle a RUMP that is all to beshit,
Sirreverence of the Company.
2.
And let other sinners that love a whole skin,
Keep out of my reach for fear of a Stone;
For I Am like the Hangman, who (when is hand was in)
Said he had as good truss up forty as one.
3.
First I Will tell you whence this Rump-regnant came,
When England to Faction and Schism was bent,
By means of long peace to settle the same,
Our noble King summoned a Parliament.
4.
A Parliament which may make old men grieve,
And Children that never shall be born complain;
I mean such as died before they did live,
Like Harrington's Rota or the Engine of Vane.
5.
This Parliament, like a wild skitish Tit,
Unmanned and unback'd, and unapt to obey,
Would let neither Prince, Peer, nor Prelate sit,
Yet stammel'd nosed OLIVER smelt out a way.
6.
With Pistol and Musket he brought the Beast under,
And awed it so much, and so far did prevail,
That tamely he dockt it, and (to all men's wonder)
He cast off the Colt and sadled the Tail:
7
Which shortly began to kick at's Command,
And restive it grew, and left its true pacing,
Which made him resolve on his own Legs to stand,
And turn the RUMP out of the stable a grasing.
8.
The Red-coats, with breath like my Lady's Bumblast,
This Parliament-snuff blew twice out and in;
But North and West-winds will so out it at last,
That naught but Hell fire shall light it again.
9.
Though now they tempt Monk with a 1000. per annum,
In hopes that to worship, his face he will fall flat on;
Yet he is wise enough to resist and disdain 'em,
And cry, Get behind me, thou Bob-tail of Satan.
10.
Right pat with St. George's this Story will jump,
Poor England's the Damsel appointed for slaughter,
And Monk the St. George to kill Dragon RVMP,
And safely restore to the King his fair Daughter.
11.
The Rump thus in gross no more shall be played on,
But now I will whet my Pen (if it please ye)
To joint it, and show what foul parts it is made on,
God grant that our Stomachs prove not over-queasie.
12.
Here Is Lenthal once Mouth to the Parliaments mind,
Though he at length acted the Fundament's part,
Whose Speech was not breaking of Silence but Wind,
And's giving the Thanks of the House, but a Fart.
13.
But many I find this Opinion are firm in,
That he has no real distemper at all,
But feigns it; and like a Prophetical Vermin,
Runs from an old House that is ready to fall.
14.
If Ludlow the state of Grace he had been in,
And kept himself safe fro' the Committee of Safety,
For's Fathers sake, Deputy Fart he had been,
Instead of the Frost, they call Say the crafty.
15.
Next comes the Rump's Gad-fly, the Jehu-like driver,
King-abjuring ARTHVR; Sir, you (if I ken you)
OF the Bishop's Vriah-like fall were Contriver,
To get the fair Bersheba of their Revenue.
16.
But 'twas a more carnal concupiscence,
That at Bristol-Vicaridge set you a neighing,
Which you enjoyed and occupy'd in the sense
Which puts pretty Maids to pishing and fying.
17.
Nay you like the Trojan-Adulterer swore,
To those that once saved you from the King's Fury,
That rather than Helen of Duresm restore,
Their Troynovant in its own ashes you would bury.
18.
But I dare no farther his passion provoke
For fear of a prejudice which it may do me
For with his own Choler should he chance to choke,
The Hangman in Action of Trespass might sue me.
19.
Then have at Sir Harry the Interest Refiner,
Who Is not of the Church, but Society of JESUS,
And can make Divinity's Self-Diviner,
And model new Heavens, and new Earths to please us.
20.
'Twas he that injected the sublimd matter
To late Lady Lambert, and she to the Squire,
Which made him Protector, and Parliament-hater,
And to be Fifth Monarch devoutly aspire.
21.
Like Grub from Sheeps tails, since the Rump does him throw,
He Will creep to some placket of Sanctification,
And come forth a Flesh-flye next Summer, and blow
New Maggots in's Church, of more whimsical fashion.
22.
Me^hinks in his eyes the waters do gather,
As if the Lord Straffords Death troubled his sight;
Perhaps he repents and means (like his Father)
Even in his own Garter to do his Ghost right.
23.
There goes the twice treacherous Banquerout Salloway
From Westminster Wolves, to Tower Lions bound,
Cause he from one Treason to another did fall away,
And will fall again, but not quite to the ground.
24.
The next is a Politic Penman that got-land
By's Knavery more then his Birth, and it is his-hope
That Lambeth shall ever and ever be Scot-land,
And seat of an Arch-one, but not of a Bishop.
25.
Here Is Nevil (who to be made in Scot's stead
A State-Secretary) did practice a New art,
To the Office, (by Letters unto the House read)
He courted himself in the name of Charles Stuart*
26.
Now see with a POX, where Martin comes on,
The seed of corrupt and sinful Loins,
Who a worthy had been, if as near Solomon
In Wisdom, as number of Concubines.
27.
If in utter darkness there should be a failing
Of Horror, the Rump may furnish it with
Squire Fleetwood to help out the weeping and wailing,
And Sir William Brereton for gnashing of teeth.
28.
Now Mildmay, and Whitlock, and Lisle I might call in,
And Master Lord Salisbury (from Noble house
Who seems not descended, so much as down fallen)
And others, which well may serve a fresh Muse.
29.
And now the Rump's set in the Salt, and Monck
Has offered full fairly his own for to make it,
But finding himself by the Devil out-drunk,
He honestly cries, Nay then let him take it.
30.
But for 'em when hence they go, (such were their follies)
Above nor beneath, there no quiet place is,
King Charles in Heaven, in Hell Tyrant NOL is,
Who (as God used Fleetwood) will spit in their faces.
31.
Now mark what sweet Morsells Hell swallowed of late,
There Is Cromwell, and Prideaux, and Bradshaw, and there is
He that made Old Nick (when he entered his Gate)
Cry, Oh my Bon Pride, are you there with your Bears?
32.
And now I no longer will rake in this sink,
But shortly the RVMP is for Tyburn, and then
I Will tell you more of it; but you (as I think)
Do now stop your Noses, and I Will stop my Pen.
The She-Citizens Delight.
To the Tune of Cuckolds all a Row.
YOu Cow-hearted Citizens
What is your damned pretense,
To keep your selves within your beds*
And not fight for your Prince;
Whose Majesty should you behold,
Your shame will breed your woe,
And then like fools you will cry out*
Cuckolds all a row.
There Is some of you whose Bishops Lands
Do so much clog their heels,
That now they cannot stir, whereas
Else would they run on wheels:
But yet I hope a time will come
When you shall be made know,
And told unto their faces that
You Are Cuckolds all a row.
But yet for one most reverent Act
You are to be commended,
That through your Rams-Head zeal you have
Your Brother Rump Befriended,
To seat them in the Parliament House,
Their wisdoms forth to show,
But they and you are all alike
Cuckolds all a row.
But I advise you set this RUMP
In salt for fear of stinking,
'Twill fall unto the Devils share,
Because it is his by drinking;
In spite of all their Acts and Laws
He Will car' them down below,
Then Hell and City all alike
Cuckolds all a row.
Alas poor Lambert is undone,
And now he may go Preach,
Since it is the English Al-a-mode
For every Rogue to Teach;
He Will nose it bravely in a Tub,
And let his Brethren know
That they are Damned unless they dip
Cuckolds all a row.
But where is your mighty Fleetwood now,
His honor'^ worn to the stump,
He Will serve Ambassador to hell
To make room for the Rump,
And thus King-killers one by one
Shall to the Devil go
Upon the City Asses pack
Cuckolds all a row.
And now Cow-hearts look to your shops,
The Red-coats will you fright,
And plunder you because they know
Your horns hang in your light;
Not matter, for you have been the cause
Of all the Kingdoms woe,
And do deserve still to be called
Cuckolds all a row.
But if that you would honest grow,
And do a glorious thing,
Which is to rouse and take your Arms,
And fight for Charles our King;
Which Act your Credits will regain,
And all the World shall know
That you shall then no more be called
Cuckolds all a row.
The RUMP Carbonado'd: or A New BALLAD.
To the Tune of the Blacksmith.
LEnd me your ears, not cropped, and I Will sing
Of an hideous Monster, or Parliament thing,
That City and Country does woefully wring,
Which no body can deny.
Take care that no Sectary be in this place,
For if you offend the least Babe of Grace,
The Rump will be ready to fly in your face,
Which, etc.
They framed a Remonstrance, to set all on fire,
Which took with the People, as they did desire,
And forced them to Covenant that they would conspire,
Which, etc.
No sooner exalted was Essex his horn,
But God's law, and man's too the Cuckold did scorn,
To ruin our Country this Rebel was born,
Which, etc.
Take Warwick along, if company you lack,
No Admiral like an old Puritan Jack,
A verier Knave you cannot find in the Pack,
Which, etc.
These armed with Commissions by Sea and by Land,
Did send forth their forces the King to withstand,
Till of all that was good they had soon made an hand,
Which, etc.
In glory and wealth, we once so abounded,
And were in Religion so thoroughly grounded,
That none could have shattered us thus but the Roundhead,
Which, etc.
Which plucked down the King, the Church and the Laws,
To set up an Idol, then Nick-nam'd the Cause,
Like Bell and Dragon to gorge their own Maws,
Which, etc.
They banished all Royallists out of the Line,
And scarce would endure to hear any Divine,
That would not for company cogge, lie, and whine,
Which, etc.
So frantickly zealous they were at that season,
That the five rotten Members impeacht of High Treason,
They guarded against all Right, Law and Reason,
Which, etc.
Will fool was counted the worst of the twain,
Till Tom fool Lord F -- the Cause to maintain,
His Honor and Conscience did fearfully stain,
Which, etc.
Sir William at Run-away-downs had a bout,
Which him and his Lobsters did totally rout,
And his Lady the Conqueror could not help him out,
Which, etc.
Though General B -- do now fawn and beseech,
The Cavaliers found him a blood-sucking Leech,
He would seem a Convert, but he stinks of the Breech,
Which, etc.
All will confess that Saint Oliver Cromwell
Had learned in his Reign the three Nations to cumwell,
Although it be true that he did love a Bum-well,
Which, etc.
But young Dick and Harry, not his Heirs but his Brats:
As if they had less wit and grace than Gib-Cats,
Slunk from their Commands like a pair of drowned Rats,
Which, etc.
The sound of a Rump nere heard of before,
In their addle pates did so whistle and roar,
That straight they betook themselves to the back door,
Which, etc.
When Haslerig of the Rump brought up the rear,
The Army was in such a bodily fear,
That no one commander durst ever appear,
Which, etc.
Down goes the Public, when Knaves usurp Power,
The Rump by one Ordinance can more men devour,
Than all the great Guns shot from the Tower,
Which, etc.
Pennington long since was broken to fitters,
Yet fits with the Rump of Sects to Pig-litters;
And such as come near him, he all to besquitters,
Which, etc.
If Alderman Atkins you keep not in mind,
He Will take it so ill, that he will fly out behind,
And make you remember with every wind,
Which, etc.
Titchborn could preach, pray and prate by the Spirit,
And Ireton little better, who ranged like a Ferret^
And Tyburn thinks long to give them their merit,
Which, etc.
Lord Gourney was right, whom the City betrayed;
Now the City would be right, were the Mayor not a Jade:
Till such as he be made examples, nere look for better Trade,
Which, etc.
Never did any Nation so court their own good,
As we have all offers of mercy withstood,
God's judgment on our rapine, and shedding of blood,
Which, etc.
All wise men and good, say it is a mischievous fate,
A Kingdom to turn to a Popular State;
Yet we will take no warning until it be too late:
Which, etc.
A desperate crew of self-seeking Elves,
Do wilfully force us on quicklands and shelves;
This we see, yet we seek not to safeguard our selves,
Which, etc.
For when the poor Cits are plundered by force,
Their grievances find as little remorse
In The man-beast, the Mayor as in his great horse,
Which, etc.
The Rump yet fits brooding upon their close stool
In labor to bring forth a Knave or a Fool;
Begotten by a new Legislative Tool,
Which, etc.
Sir Henry Vane Prince of the last modeled rout,
Was known as a Traitor, both cunning and stout,
Yet for being too rampant the Rump shit him out,
Which, etc.
James Harrington Knight or Knave, choose you whether,
For in the Rump still Knight and Knave go together,
The times cannot mend till he is tied to his tether,
Which, etc.
Harry Martin and Scot with some thirty eight more
Are resolved on the question to keep us all poor,
Whilst they have the power to Plunder and Whore,
Which, etc.
Who can gainsay that it was a strong fart,
Which blew the Lord Disborough back to his Cart,
And taught silly Fleetwood of crying the Art,
Which, etc.
It Is pity that Hewson the Lord should have died
For piercing his Brother, the Cobler's Hide,
Since the word of Command came from his blind side,
Which, etc.
Luke Robinson wants both his Bristles and Aule
To stitch up his lame Leg, and help him to craule,
Who downright has halted betwixt God and Baal,
Which, etc.
The Prentices once put the Troupers to flight,
And the Red-coats for fear then were ready to shite,
When Lambert the Atheist marched Northward to fight,
Which, etc.
The Greeks that sack Troy from the Belly did come
Of Epriis his Horse; but with Musket and Drum
The War among us is carried on by the Bum,
Which, etc.
Jack Presbyter struts up and down in a jump,
Curtailed on purpose for fear least the Rump
Should sit on his skirts and give him a thump,
Which, etc.
Instead of an Use of divine Consolation,
The Hypocrite published a late Exhortation,
To trapan this poor City, and beggar the Nation,
Which, etc.
For what is called Christian, it is no great matter,
So they may but gather, they care not who scatter;
They cannot be gifted unless they do flatter,
Which, etc.
Since Charles was beheaded we have backward gone,
And now are brought even to the bare Rump-bone,
Which speaks in no other but Atkins his tone,
Which, etc.
It Is hard to say, how much these Arse-wormes do urge us,
We now need no Quack but these Jacks for to purge us,
For resisting our Head the Tail now does scourge us,
Which, etc.
Lenthal now Lords it though the Rabble him mock,
In calling him Speaker, and Speaker to the Dock,
For an hundred pound more he will kiss their very Nock,
Which, etc*
And now if we crave but a Parliament Free,
We are sure to feel Plunder, or Prison to see;
They Will gore us, and bore us, and slaves we must be,
Which, etc.
We are sensible now, that there is no one thing,
Can full satisfaction to all Interest bring,
Till in spite of all Traitors, we fetch in the King,
Which, etc.
Monk like the Oracle plays fast and loose;
We know not yet, whether he is a Fox or a Goose,
He had need look about him, for his neck's in a noose,
Which, etc.
Then to conclude this innocent Song,
Least the Rump should infect you, which smells so strong:
Old Old Nick bless them all, and take them e're long,
Which no body can deny.
A Psalm sung by the People before the Bone-fires, made in and about the City
of London, Febr: 11.
To the Tune of Up tails all.
COme let us take the Rump
And wash it at the Pump,
For it is now in a shitten Case:
Nay if it hang an Arse,
We Will pluck it down the stares,
And roast it at Hell for its grease.
Let the Devil be the Cook,
And the roast overlook,
And lick his own fingers apace;
For that may be born,
(if he take it not in scorn
To lick such a privy place.)
Though we are bereft
Of our Arms, Spits are left,
Whereon the Rump we will roast;
We Will prick it in the Tail,
And bast it with a Flayl,
Till it stink like a Cole-burnt Toast.
It has lain long in brine,
Made by the Peoples eyne,
So it is salt through unsavory meat;
We Will draw it round about
With Welsh Parsley, and no doubt
It will choke Pluto's great Dog to eat.
We will not be mocked,
This Rump has been dockt,
And if our skill does not fail;
To fear it is good,
Or else all the blood
In the Body, will leak out at the Tail.
Then down in your Ire,
With this Rump to the fire,
Get Harrington's Rota to turn it;
If Paper be lackt,
The Assessment Act
You may stick upon'^ lest ye burn it.
But see there my Masters
It rises in blisters,
And looks very big on the matter;
Like a roasting Pigs ear;
It sings, do ye hear?
It Is enough, come quickly the Platter.
Lay Trenchers and Cloth,
And away bring the Erot^,
Did the Devil of the Fag-end make none;
But hold, by your leave
Napkins we must have
To wipe our mouths when we have done.
Come Ladies pray where?
Will you none of our Cheer?
Are ye of such a squeamish nature?
Pray what is the reason?
Are Rumps out of season?
But it is an abuse to the Creature.
Come we will fall on,
Pray cut me a Bone,
The Meat may be healthful and sound;
Fogh! come let us bury^t,
To the hole we must carry't,
This Rump it stinks above ground.
This Fire we will style
The Funeral pile,
The Grave shall be under the Gallows;
The Vane shall be the Scull
Of some Traiterous Fool,
And the Epitaph shall be as follows;
Underneath the Stones
A Rump-Corporate's bones,
Are laid full low in a sink,
And we do implore ye
Let them rest, for the more ye
Do stir them, the more they will stink.
A Display of the Headpiece and Codpiece Valor, of the most Renowned Colonel
Robert Jermy, late of Bafield in the County of Norfolk, Esquire with his Son
Captain Toll by his side; now on their way for New England. Or, the lively
description of a dead-hearted fellow.
To the Tune of a Turd, or the Blacksmith.
DId you never hear of the Baby of Mars,
That charged Fox's wife with a Tars,
For his valor lies all in his Arse,
Which needs must be very strong.
A sanctified Colonel in beaten Buff,
With a Scarlet Jump that is Cudgelled by Mr. Armiger at Wells in Norfolk,
November. 4. 1654.
Cudgel-proof;
And his Son Ran away six miles at Crowland Siege, and never locked behind him.
Crowland Coward of the self-same stuff,
Who got the Wench bigg with young. Probatum est.
He Is a Journey-man Soldier to the States Army,
And it is in his terms, When you fight you must spare me:
So runs the Commission of Colonel Jermy,
If I be informed true.
Upon a Mock-Larm he is sure in the Van,
Where he takes none, and does no more hurt than he can.
He Is a pitiful Soldier, though a cruel man,
Let Us give the Devil his due,
To sacrifice to his fears and his pride,
He caused a He caused Parson Cooper to be ha^^'d by Judge Iermy, for fear he
should beat him.
Church-Champion be murdered and tried
By the Judge of his name, and the Rope on his side;
It Is Pity they ever were parted.
Yet you cannot but say 'twas very well meant,
When he went to the House of Parliament,
In love to his Country before he was sent,
In a Coach, when he might have been Carted.
You must always take the good will for the deed,
Though at He corrupted twenty free Burgherr at Risen, to give their Votes for
him in the last Election for Parliament.
Pisen he had not the luck to speed;
Yet some other place may have very great need,
If the Devil release but his hire.
So dear was his love that he He hired 100. men to come with him to LYN with
swords and guns, for fear Mr. HOWARD, and his two men should beat him.
purchased a throng
Of Seamen, in Lice and Lungs very strong.
Sure he will be some body ere it be long,
If he be not laid in the mire.
How the Sailers did hollow and throw up their Hats,
And the men with wide mouths that used to cry Sprats;
But the brave Spark of Arundel made them look like drowned Rats,
When he Mr. Howard gave him a box on the ear with the back of his hand, and he
fell to the ground with fear.
humbled Tom T^ll for his sin.
That highborn Hero had cudgelled their Swords,
Had they not almost expired at his words;
But the whole design was not worth two half-Turds,
Though you throw the Justice Cremar, Justice Peddar, and Justice Life.
three Justices in.
In his last good service he He took the City of Norwich when the Gates were
open, and no opposition.
took the City,
By an Order from the mistaken Committee,
Where he escaped a scowring, the more was the pity;
For 'twas foul when you have said what you can.
He marched into the Gates with an hundred more,
O brave! he never did the like before;
For he used to sneak in at the Mrs. Foxe's back door.
back door,
As becomes a right modest man.
When they entered the Town they beleagur'd the Mayor,
And with wonderful courage they stormed the Chair;
But they soon were all soul, and ran very fair,
As if they would been bred for the Course.
For the The Bells were rung backward, which alarmed the City, wh^ came in and
had beat him, if he had not run away upon the noise of it.
Bells were rung backward, as he says his Prayers,
And his head went forward with his haste down the stairs,
Like a man of dispatch in the State Affairs,
Thank Fortune it was no worse.
It Is much to be wondered he should leave the Rump,
Though his love to that end has received a Law frump,
But that is his god whatever is Trump;
Yet his Spirit now was blind.
Had the Rump but once fizl'd, 'twas the strongest side,
But a Fart has so routed his Troop in their pride,
Though infallible Iermy's Chaplain that prays, and swears, and fights, and
lies for him in ordinary.
Butler was his guide,
That they are both blown down the wind.
Yet that would be thought a true Let us show our selves true English men, is
his usual saying
Englishman,
Let him make true Latin if he can;
Yet learned men's lives this Rascal will scan,
And when he has done it deny it.
This is Jermy's Forlorn when brave Jacks appear;
He has little of wit, and less of fear,
And swears for his Colonel by the year;
And when he is in, he will ply it.
When the Nation was Jaded with a He that drank so much Asses milk, as, without
the Parliament's mercy, he is like to be a Fool for ever.
Quaker,
This Jipp^e forsooth was a great Undertaker,
And amongst other Trades a Justice-maker,
Two Justices in Norfolk.
Brewer, Tirrell, and Gaffer Life.
We Are made and created by his stinking breath,
To sit on the Bench upon Life and Death.
We'd as good have had a Turd in our teeth,
Without any further strife,
I thought this Colonel would fail,
When he was upon his Codpiece-bail,
He got such a flap with a Fox tail,
As more at large in your Master Armiger has the exemplification of a Verdict
in a Box, wherein Iermy's Baude^y with Foxes wife is set forth.
Box, Sir.
But now if we may believe common fame.
At present they say he is fled for the same,
How poorly this Fellow has played his Game!
But let him not escape without knocks, Sir.
Yet he is such a Coward that I dare say,
He neither dares fight nor yet run away,
And yet he would be glad to stand at a stay,
If he might but have his Quietus.
For tell him his baseness but once to his face,
You Are sure enough he dies on the place,
If he hangs not himself upon this disgrace,
It Is one to a Thousand he will beat us.
A Letany for the New-year.
FRom all and more than I have written here,
I wish you well protected this New-year;
From Civil war, and such uncivil things
As ruin Law and Gospel, Priests and Kings;
From those who for self ends would all betray,
From such new Saints that Pistol when they pray,
From flattering Faces with infernal Souls,
From new Reformers, such as pull down Paul's,
From L^nsy woolsy Lords, from Town betrayers,
From Apron Preachers, and extempore Prayers,
From Pulpit-blasphemy and bold Rebellion,
From Blood and -- somethings else that I could tell ye on,
From new false Teachers which destroy the old,
From those that turn the Gospel into Gold,
From that black Pack where Clu^s are always, Trump
From Bodies Politic and from the Rump,
From those that ruin when they should repair,
From such as cut off Heads instead of Hair,
From twelve Months Taxes and abortive Votes,
From chargeable Nurse-Children in red Coats,
From such as sell their Souls to save their Sums,
From City Charters that make Heads for Drums,
From Magistrates which have no truth or knowledge,
From the red Students now in Gresham College,
From Governments erected by the Rabble,
From sweet Sir Arthurs Knights of the round Table,
From City-Saints whose Anagram is Stains,
From Plots and being choked with our own Chains,
From these, and ten times more which may ensue,
The Poet prays, Good Lord deliver you.
The New State described.
LO here a Glorious Realm subverted stands,
Just Tumbler-like upon the Feet and Hands:
Once Europes Pride and Envy, now their Scoff,
Since the base Entrayles cut the Head on it off,
The Body lost its form, and's turned a Lump;
Now all the Limbs are Vassals to the Rump,
Which all the Nutriture devoured and spent,
Yields nothing back but stink and excrement,
And all returns that ever this does send us,
Serves only to defile us and offend us;
It Is by much pamparing grown a strange Disease,
Which all receives, and gives nor food nor ease
To the pining Body, but is craving still;
And we by feeding it our selves do kill;
Which nothing lives by that has any worth,
But those base vermin which its stink brought forth.
If every Member in this Body would
Withdraw its strength and influence, as they should,
This nasty Highness quickly must abate,
And yield to the Head which only saves the State.
The Devils Arse a Peake: or, Satan's beastly part, or in plain terms, Of the
Posteriors and Fag-end of a Long Parliament.
To be said or sung very comfortably. To the Tune of Cook Laurel.
O Foolish Brittanicks, where are your hearts fled?
What fiend does the Nation bewitch;
That since you like Rogues cut off your own Head,
Your Noses close in with the Britch?
The Britch! such a bit, Nolls paunch could never brook,
For it put him still to his dumps;
And though full meals of Hell-broth he often took,
Yet always he spewed out the Rumps.
Till Lambert the Knave and Fleetwood the fool
(Though Dick persuaded them from it)
Did overturn the Devils Close stool,
And like Dogs return to their Vomit.
No sooner the Council Table was spread
With many a vomited gull
But the Army turned squeazie and turned their Head,
For they soon had their Belly full.
The Red-coats could never this Rumbling digest,
Till advised by Old nick and his train,
(Who good unwittingly often may suggest)
They spewed up their Vomit again.
Their Surreverence was for a while out of sight,
Till Whettam began to deplore 'um,
And Arthur the Knight of the Spur a bold wight,
The Rump of a Rump did restore 'um.
Then a pox light on the pitiful Rump,
That a third time above board vapers,
Which Old Nick blew out; but now turns up Trump,
As Jone farted in and out Tapers.
The House by this Legion was long time possessed,
But at last they were cast out of door;
Yet finding it swept, returned a new guest
Seven-times more a fiend than before.
Away then ye pitiful Citizen slaves,
Who let such enormities pass,
Were you but true men or but errant Knaves,
Fools durst not you ride like an Ass.
Then dare to be Honest, and beat up your Drum,
For when the Rogues hear of your power,
You Will smell what a scent proceeds from the Bum,
From Whitehall, at least to the Tower.
S' foot! what if these Ars-worms with gifts of our gold
Great George to defend them should move
Our goods and our Liberties, then would be sold,
And the Devil a Monk would he prove.
Then pluck up your Spirits, and draw out your Swords,
It Is force that must only prevail,
We have long enough stood out in bare Words,
Let Us now make a stod for their Tail.
Then Vive le Roy let us merrily Sing,
Can any Man well in his Wits,
Think worser of Charles our Noble good KING,
Than those who do govern by Fits?
Search round the great City what ill you can see,
Which the Rascally Rump has not done,
And then you will wish with the Nation and me,
That CHARLES had his Heritage won
For Swearing, Sacrilege, Murder, and Lies,
KING-Killing, Hypocrisy, Cheats,
They make no more of these Sins, then of Flies,
HELL is almost out-damn'd by their Feats.
Then fight ye like men for the good of the Nation
As ye hope to be civilly Drunk,
On free cost at blessed CHARLES Coronation,
Pray hard for the trunesse of Monk.
Heaven bless our good Sovereign, the best of all Men,
Let the King of our Hearts be Trump,
That Peace and Prosperity may come again,
Squire Dun and Old Nick take the Rump.
Then let the Knaves shuffle three Kingdoms awhile
Till each Curr at his Fellow snarles,
Ere long they will Cut, and after the Broyle
The Dealing must fall to KING Charles.
This Flap with a Fox-tail shall have the same lot,
That unhorst his Tumble-down Highness,
For since the rest of the Members are not,
The Rump must shortly have FINIS.
The Committee of Safety.
HEard ye not of the Phanatick Committee
Of Safety, whom London that stiff-necked City
Profanely disturbed, and was not that pity?
Oh blessed Reformation.
This gallant Committee made up of a crew
Of three and twenty bad men and untrue,
Would have made both our Church and our State for to rue.
Still blessed Reformation.
Charles Fleetwood is first and leads up the Van,
Whose counterfeit Zeal turns Cat in the pan,
And dame Sankey will swear he is a valiant man.
Oh, etc.
John Lambert at Oliver's Chair does roar,
And thinks it but reason upon this score,
That Cromwell had sitten in his before.
Still, etc.
Desborough's a Clown, of whom it is sed,
That to be a Statesman he never was bred,
For his Shoulders are far better proof than his Head.
Oh, etc.
But whatever he wants is soundly made up
By subtle Sir Vane, who would bring us to sup
Large draughts from the whore of Babylon's cup.
Still, etc.
And under the arm of that masked Turk
Little Bennet creeps in to help on the good work,
And by voting down Tithes to reform the proud Kirk.
Oh, etc.
The Tobacco-man Salway with a heart full of gall
Puff-down Bells, Steeples, Priests, Churches, and all
As old superstitious Relics of Baal.
Still, etc.
Holland the Link-boy's a worshipful Wight,
For he must stand by to hold them a Light
While they do their works of darkness and night.
Oh, etc.
Next Steel the Recorder, whose politic Noddle
With Outlandish Notions of State does still quoddle,
Would here introduce the Venetian Moddle.
Still, etc.
Brandriffe a harmless and innocent Pigeon
Most zealously moves, that each ignorant Wigeon
May have leave to profess and own any Religion.
Oh, etc.
Wat Strickland him second's that furious Ram,
And swears that when first to Holland he came,
All Sects were permitted in Amsterdam.
Still, etc.
Whitlock that mischievous dangerous Elf
Never sticks to turn sides to promote his own Wealth,
And has Wit enough, Law enough to damn himself.
Oh, etc.
Ludlow's a Saint of the Levelling mold,
And of courage undaunted, for Faith makes him bold,
Since the fort at Duncannon is his strong hold.
Still, etc.
Thompson a Person of noted affection,
Though suspected as guilty of much circumspection,
Yet is one of this Gang for the Peoples correction.
Oh, etc.
Jesuitical Berry can hardly afford
A Gown-man to preach, but will make us accord,
That Mars has best right to the two-edged sword.
Still, etc.
Poor Sidenham would preach and pray too if he could,
But finding he cannot perform what he would,
He is bent and resolved never to do what he should
Oh, etc.
At President Laurence let none dare to scoff
Or abuse his grave Sermons, to call them riff raff,
He Is a Father of England, and the Horsemen thereof.
Still, etc.
Lord Hughson the Cobler's teeth greedily chatter
To carve up a Prentice's Head in a Platter,
For he will go through-stitch with the whole matter.
Oh, etc.
John Clark in his have is all lightning and thunder,
To break all Demuries and weak Scruples asunder,
While his fingers do itch at the Cities rich plunder.
Still, etc.
No marvel that Lilburn is one of this Train,
As frantic as any, and as cross in the grain,
For Robin inherits his Brothers mad Brain.
Oh, etc.
The Mountain did travel and bring forth of late,
What was it but a Mouse? and Sir Harrington's pate
Is pregnant with forms of the Utopian State.
Still, etc.
What? A Scotch Rook among all these English Jack-dawes,
The Lord Warriston's in for the Good Old Cause,
To subvert all Proprieties, Charters and Laws.
Oh, etc.
A brace of sage Aldermen act in the Play,
Ireton and Titchburn who faithlesly may,
The Londoners Counsels and Plottings betray,
Still, etc.
So here is a Committee of Safety compounded
Of Knave and of Fool, of Papist and Roundhead,
On Base's of Treason and Tyranny grounded.
Oh, etc.
These did their Protestant Sovereign kill,
These gloried the blood of the Nobles to spill,
And trampled on Parliaments at their own will.
Still, etc.
These were the Carbuncles of Oliver's Nose,
And the Rump's stinking excrements as we suppose
Bound up in the linings of Atkins's Hose.
Oh, etc.
Tredeskin himself never had such a Show
As this Knack, which would all our Rights overthrow,
And Caligula-like slay three Lands at a blow.
Still, etc.
What Resolves and what Orders were past I shall not tell,
Nor will any longer on this Subject dwell,
E're now an Account is given in Hell,
Where they will make a new Reformation.
For Monck charmed the Goblin, and packt it away
To its properest Place, with black Pluto to stay,
For which let true Englishmen joyfully say
St. George wrought the true Reformation.
The GANG or the Nine Worthies and Champions, Lambert, etc.
To the Tune of Robinhood.
IT was at the Birth of a Winters morn,
With a Hey down down a down down,
Before the Crow had pist,
That nine Hero's in scorn
Of a Parliament forlorn,
Walked out with Sword in fist.
Johnne Lambert was first a dapper Squire,
With a Hey down, etc.
A mickler man of might
Was nere in Yorkshire;
And he did conspire
With Vane Sir Harry a Knight.
Desborough was such a Country Swain,
With a Hey down, etc.
An Easter Sun nere see;
He drove on a main
Without any brain,
Such a jolt-head Knave was he.
Kelsey was a brave Button-maker;
With a Hey down, etc.
As ever set mould upon Skewer;
And this Wise-aker
Was a great pain-taker,
TO make Lambert's Nose look blewer.
The devout and Holy Major Creed,
With a Hey down, etc.
I known't of what Faith or Sect,
Had mounted a ^teed,
And vowed he would bleed
Before Lambert should be checked.
Duckenfi^ld (Steel was nere so true,)
With a Hey down, etc.
And as wise as ever was Toby.
Lay in the Pu^lew,
The Cockpit Av^nue,
To hinder the Speakers Go-by.
A man of Stomach in the next Deal,
With a Hey down, etc.
Was hungry Colonel Cobbet,
He would eat at a Meal
A whole Commonweal,
And make a Joint but a Gobbet.
The following Champion is Barrow,
With a Hey down, etc.
An Ominous name for a Swine-Herd,
He flew like an Arrow,
Thither whence Lord Harry
But durst not draw his Whinyard.
Room for Packer a toyling Ditcher,
With a Hey down, etc.
He had set his Spade an edge,
He hoped to be Richer
By being a Bricher
And Lambert his Stake in the hedge.
For Nobilities sake we may not forget,
With a Hey down, etc.
That Valiant Mars his true Son,
His Cobling Feat
Lackt a Parliament Seat
That Marks-man one-eyed Hewson.
These being aided with Red Coat and Creepers,
With a Hey down, etc.
After a short Dispute
The Liberty Keepers,
Were made Boo-peepers,
And the Speaker stricken Mute.
But well said Sir Arthur, what time of the day?
With a Hey down, etc.
The Parliament's now in the Prime
They stand at a Bay,
And have mist their Prey,
And Cowardly curse the time.
The Second Part.
NOw Johnne is gone to the North Country,
With a Hey down, etc.
And glad he is to retire,
He cries Cramme O Cree,
Have mercy on me
(...) set a-Fire.
And Desborough gotten into his Farm,
With a Hey down, etc.
Until they do him need,
'Meant the House no harm,
But took it for a Barn,
His Lord and he is not agreed.
Kelsey is praying for the Dole,
With a Hey down, etc.
Of the Hospital that is Suttons;
He is out of the Roll,
And has never a Loop-Hole,
And now his Arse makes Buttons.
And Creed will now believe Sir Arthur,
With a Hey down, etc.
His Steed is Chopped for a Jade,
He will be a Carter
Before a Martyr,
And is turned Regenade.
Duckenfield's in a pitiful Case,
With a Hey down, etc.
The Speakers Horses and Coach,
Were at stake with the Mace,
And he is thrown Aums Ace,
Tyburn owes him a reproach.
By being too greedy Colonel Cobbet,
With a Hey down, etc.
Has got a Bone in his throat,
He has sighed and sobbed
And grievously throbbed,
But it will not help the Choke.
Pray take your turn too Mr. Barrow,
With a Hey down, etc.
What think you of your Plot?
Your Sow will not Farrow,
The Hang-man's Harrow,
That Hurdle will be your Lot.
Tie him up DVN, it is Goodman Packer,
With a Hey down, etc.
That would set up another Nose,
Had he been a Backer
As Colonel Hacker,
H'ad lived in spite of his Foes.
H^^son's Companions as scabby a^ Coots,
With a Hey down down a down down.
Have infected him with the mange,
They have pist in his boots,
He must cry roots,
And TVRN OVT to Turnup must change.
Vanity of Vanities, or Sir Harry Vane's Picture.
To the Tune of the JEWS Corant
HAve you not seen a Barthol'mew Baby,
A Pageant of policy as fine as may be,
That Is gone to be Shown at the Manor of Raby,
Which no body can deny.
There was never such a prostitute Sight,
That e're profaned this purer Light,
A Hocus Pocus juggling Knight,
Which, etc.
He was taken for a Delphick Tripus,
Another doubt-solving Oedipus,
But the Parliament made him a very Quibus,
Which, etc.
His cunning State tricks and Oracles,
His lying Wonders and Miracles,
Are turned into Parliament Shackles,
Which, etc.
Goodly great Sir Onesimus VANE,
The Anointed King of Saints not Reign?
I see all Godlyness is not Gain,
Which, etc.
John a Leyden that Munster's Jing,
Was a Fool and an Ass to this pretty Thing,
But the Parliament hated the name of a King,
Which, etc.
This holy Saint has prayed till he wept,
Prophesied and Divined while he slept,
But fell in a T -- when aside he stepped,
Which, etc.
He sat late in the House so discontent,
With his Arms folded and his Brows bent,
Like Achitophel to the Parliament,
Which, etc.
He durst not speak of a Concubine,
Nor gave more Council to any Design,
But was musing on a Hempen Line,
Which, etc.
He see Mr. P -- take a great deal of Pain,
To get in with the rest as Members Again,
But they were Voted as use-less as VANE*
Which, etc.
They gave him a Conge with such a Vote;
'Twas thought they had learned it by Rote,
Ever since he went down to Graves-end by Bote.
Which, etc.
For all his Ceremonious Cringing,
He shall undergo a notable Swinging,
There is now no more need of his Engine,
Which, etc.
When first the English War began
His Father was a Court Trepan,
And 'rose to be a Parliament Man,
Which, etc.
So from the Father came unto the Son,
Whom woe and Misery now do wait upon,
For Counselling Protector John,
Which, etc.
A Gemini they were, Pollux and Castor,
One was a Teacher, the other a Pastor,
And both like R -- betrayed their Master,
Which, etc.
The Devil never see such two Sir Harry's,
Such a pest'lent pair nor near nor far is,
No not at the Jesuits Sorbon of Paris,
Which, etc.
They talked of his having a Cardinals Hat,
They Would send him as soon an old Nun's Twat;
For turning in pan there was nere such a Cat,
Which, etc.
His dainty project of a Select Senate,
Is Damned for a blasphemous Tenet,
'Twas found in the budget ('it is said) of Monk Bennet,
Which, etc.
Of this State and Kingdom he is the Bane,
He shall have the reward of Judas and Cain,
And 'twas he that overthrew Charles his Wain,
Which, etc.
Should he sit where he did with his mischievous brain,
Or if any his Councels behind do remain,
The house may be called the Labor in Vain,
Which no body can deny.
The Glory of the WEST, or, The Tenth Renowned WORTHY, and most Heroic
CHAMPION of this BRITISH ISLAND. Being an unparalled Commemoration of General
MONK'S coming toward the City of LONDON.
TO unperplex the Riddles of our State,
And to discover t'us our hidden part,
Welcome (we cry) Welcome to George the Great,
A joyful sight to see.
Not like the Macedon's impatient sword,
That solved the doubt tied in the Gordian Cord,
Great George does time proportion due afford,
A joyful, etc.
Wisdoms great pattern bred at Bellonaes Breast,
Prudence and Valor joined in one Rest*
No more St. George shall be but George the Blessed,
A joyful, etc.
As Caesar did the affrighted Boat-man learn,
When he sat trembling at the stinking stern,
My fates Embarked that does the world concern,
A joyful, etc.
So the wrackt Vessel of the state distressed,
With Heavens angry blasts, now seeks for rest,
From the Favonian Gales of George of the West,
A joyful, etc.
His great excelling merits in the Scale,
Of our raised hope, nor shall the angry Tail,
Of any Comet against our peace prevail,
A joyful, etc.
Another Fabius, whose wise delays
(Like a misty morn, guilt with the Suns noon'd rays)
Have Crowned him with the Glorious Bays,
A joyful, etc.
He that has marched quite three Kingdoms over,
Subdued his great mind for to make them four,
The signs to bring peace and plenty to our door.
A joyful, etc.
Let all ancient Glory then be a Romance,
Let old Fame, and crazed Time, lie in a Trance,
Nothing new but Honey Soit qui maly pense,
A joyful, etc.
This is the Noble Champion of the Garter,
The Great Defender of the Magna Charter,
The Sovereign Good came from the Northern Quarter,
A joyful, etc.
To settle a Nation without any Blows,
To break down the Bridge of another Nose,
To do what all wish, but no body Knows,
A joyful, etc.
To complete a Design without any Noise,
To amuse the Loud cry of Vive le Roys,
And sport all along with your Common wealth toys,
A joyful, etc.
But all the grand Hero's and wise ones together,
None had such advantage of Wine and Weather,
It Is true he is sprung of a Princely Feather,
A joyful, etc.
Where shall we begin his Trophies to raise?
Or when shall we make an end of his praise?
The blessing and honor and joy of these days.
A joyful, etc.
The untamed Scot (before his glorious time)
Has made t'expiate their treacherous crime,
They own him sole Conqueror of their Clime,
A joyful, etc.
His great and most powerful Influence.
Has restrained them in their Obedience,
As if they owned the Viceroy of their Prince,
A joyful, etc.
The shifting Irish 'bey'd his great command,
The slaughtered Dutch, yet rolling on the sand,
Crave a reflux, to keep them from his hand,
A joyful, etc.
Thrice did he Victory over them repeat,
And the almost wearied State were forced to treat
To save them from a final last defeat,
A joyful, etc.
Whether we conquered are, or we must submit,
By his all-powerfull hand to them that sit,
We are sure to be eased of our present fit,
A joyful, etc.
What if great George should come to the City,
And in all your good humors should presently fit ye,
And I hope he will do; else more is the pity.
A joyful sight, to see.
The City of LONDON'S New Letany.
To the Tune of the Blacksmith.
FRom Rumps that do Rule against Customs and Laws,
From a fardle of Fancies styled a Good Old Cause,
From Wives that have nails which are sharper than Claws,
Good Jove deliver us all.
From men who seek Right where it is not to be had,
From such who seek good where all things are bad,
From wise men far worse than fools or men mad.
Good Jove, etc.
From Soldiers that wrack the poor out of doors,
From Rumps that stuff Coffers to pleasure their Whores,
Which they secretly squeeze from Comm^^wealth scores,
Good Jove, etc.
From Ingrossers of wealth to lie by their walls,
Which they force from poor women for keeping of Stalls,
And choose for to rise by other men's falls.
Good Jove, etc.
From Knaves that do pocket good Subjects Estates,
From such that give Plasters when they have broken our Pates,
From Rumps that do Vote down our Posts, Chains and Gates,
Good Jove, etc
From Statesmen that Court the Thing that they hate,
From woeful Repentance that comes too late,
From those that delight in making of bate,
Good Jove, etc
From Soldiers who mutiny for want of their pay,
And at last go sneeking without it away,
Crying, they hope for a far better day,
Good Jove, etc.
From one who brought Forces to fill up the Town,
That when Rumps were at highest he might pull them down,
Because he himself does aim at the Crown,
Good Jove, etc.
From Commanders who never drew swords but in Schools,
Which were button-pointed to favor such fools,
Who in vapouring words do threaten Joint stools,
Good Jove, etc.
Who to loose drop of blood would faint at the heart,
And in dread of a Gun are scared at a Fart,
If one blows but his Nose it makes them to start.
Good Jove, etc.
Who think every brush of wind an Alarm,
To which they make ready and cry out Arm, Arm,
Yet secretly pray that there may be no harm,
Good Jove, etc.
From a City that lies on its back to be Gelt,
From those that will not stir till famine be felt,
From the Pike, the Gun, the Sword, and the Belt,
Good Jove, etc.
From a simple Mayor not fit to Rule Hoggs,
From such as obey him like Spannel Dogs,
From Summers heat and from winters Foggs,
Good Jove, etc.
From Country Petitions and Declarations,
That will not be drawn one inch from their stations,
But triumph in words for old Reformations.
Good Jove, etc.
From Apprentices valor and threats from the City,
Which would Act great Wonders, yet forbear in pity,
From Fools that conceit themselves very witty,
Good Jove, etc.
From Oaths and Engagements imposed by force,
And broken as fast without any remorse,
Alleging them Ceremonies of course,
Good Jove, etc.
From those whose damned actions with Treason are Crowned
From such that would Law and Gospel confound,
And vow that the City they will burn to the ground,
Good Jove, etc.
From People that murmur with Swords in their hand.
And keep an entreating when they may command,
Yet had rather loose all than Knaves to withstand,
Good Jove, etc.
From Rumps that the Kingdoms Revenue have spent,
From an everlasting Parliament,
And from an Army full of discontent,
Good Jove, etc.
From such who do courtesies with a long pause,
From those who condemn before they hear the Cause,
And from Trades that are worse than picking of straws,
Good Jove, etc.
From a Foes mercy when one lies in his power,
From a Friends anger in an ill hour,
And from a Fool that is Lieutenant of the Tower.
Good Jove, etc.
From men who make use of their Friends in the nick,
And when the Brunt's over against them do kick,
The thoughts of such Varlets do make my Muse sick.
Good night good people all.
The RUMP served in with a Grand Sallet: or, A New Ballad.
To the Tune of the Blacksmith.
1.
POetical Muses have fallen heavy as a Mallet,
Upon the poor Rump for disgusting their Pallet,
To cure the disrellish take now a Grand Sallet,
Which no body can deny.
2.
This RVMP is derived by lineal descent,
As the undoubted Heir, and excrement,
Of the yet perpetual Parliament,
Which, etc.
3.
This was such an Idol, as the Z^alots did strain
Their Purses and Consciences for to maintain,
Though it proved both of Church and Kingdom the bane.
Which, etc.
4.
The tail of the Dragon's not so bad as this Rump,
Which has three such Kingdoms worn to the very stump,
And must leave them for the time a confused Lump,
Which, etc.
5.
Our Laws, Lives, Lands, Liberties, were upon sale,
By this everlasting Rump, Fag-end or tail,
Yea to save our very Souls they refused to take bail.
Which, etc.
6.
A Tail which was eaten up almost of the Pox,
That stunk more like Carrion, than ever did Fox,
Or that which was roasted of late at the stocks.
Which, etc.
7.
A Rump that the People did hate, scorn, and curse*
As a Devil incarnate, or of something that is worse,
Of Schism and Rebellion both Mother and Nurse,
Which, etc.
8.
The Othodox Cler^y was forced for to fly,
They were plundered and sequestered without reason why,
But only because they would not comply,
Which, etc.
9.
Then as guilty of Popery the Common Prayer Book was damned,
And with all kind of News-books the Churches were crammed,
Venting lies, nonsense, blasphemy, and what is not to be named.
Which, etc
10.
Then the Ancient Order of Bishops went down,
Which in the Church Christian was ever of Renown,
The Proverb proves true, No Miter, No Crown,
Which, etc.
11.
In whose stead we planted Elders and Presbyters,
Which empowered, brake Princes and People in fitters,
And with their Classes and Asses them all to besquitters,
Which, etc.
12.
They called then a Synod which scarce could agree.
In The space of three years whether there be a TRINI^Y,
From such pur-pure-blind Levites God bless you and me,
Which, etc.
13.
That Assembly was just like the Members that chose it,
Without Learning and Honesty, all the World knows it,
Fit Jakes-farmers for the Rump, they could twang and nose it,
14.
They combined with the Scots to bring in a Directory,
Tending neither to our Good, nor yet to Gods Glory;
It Is a shame that Tom Fuller should name't in Church-story,
Which, etc.
15.
For whereas a Christian should be taught how to pray,
And both rightly to believe, and humbly to obey,
Nor Lords prayer, nor Creed, nor Decalogue have they,
Which, etc.
16.
Then curse ye Meroz, in each Pulpit did thunder,
To perplex the poor people and keep them in wonder,
Till all the Reins of Government were broken quite asunder,
Which, etc.
17.
Then St. Paul's the Mother Church of this City and Nation,
Was turned to a Stable, O strange Profanation!
Yet this was one of their best fruits of Reformation.
18.
Of all that is Christan they make no great matter,
So they may but gather they care not who scatter;
Their Tryers would approve none but such as bribe and flatter,
Which, etc.
19.
Instead of an Use of Divine Consolation,
These Hypocrites published a late Exhortation,
To trepan and beggar this City and Nation,
Which, etc.
20.
If they be establish^ bid England farewell,
And rather than dwell here in the Suburbs of Hell,
Choose Turkey, or Tartary, or any where to dwell,
Which, etc.
21.
This form will never suit with the English Complexion,
Which is free and too Heroic to yield base Subjection,
Or to take from a Pope in each Parish correction,
Which, etc.
22.
Who ever did Lord it like these self-seeking Elves,
Which have forced us on covenants, vows, oaths, and other shelves,
That should warn us for the future to look to our selves,
Which, etc.
23.
All sober men know that it is a mischievous fate,
A Kingdom to turn into a popular State,
And Episcopy into a Presbyterate,
Which, etc.
24.
Yet the Parliament set (...) the pure Members five
Both of Church and ^ngdom, the downfall to contrive,
That by the Ruins o^ our Sion this their Babel might thrive,
Which, etc.
25.
The Presbyters 3. years were long since expired,
And yet, as if they had not our patience quite tired,
To spur-gall us still afresh they have conspired,
Which, etc.
26.
Then why so many Bonfires of late in this City?
Why such ringing of Bells, and rejoicing? It Is pity
That ye should be so gulled by the Rump, that does out-wit ye,
Which, etc.
27.
For the House is like Hydra, if one head ye kill,
Another starts up, another full as ill;
So, though one Rump is gone, yet another fits still,
Which, etc.
28.
They have altered the scean, the people to please,
Because in commotions they must them appease,
We have thus changed our bed, but not our disease,
Which, etc.
29.
Their shifting and shuffling is but to decoy us,
While Spiders do spin, their Cobwebs annoy us,
If the House ben't swept clean, ere long they will destroy us,
Which, etc.
30.
If they mean as they talk of a Parliament free,
How comes it that such Qualifications we see,
That no one known Royalist can chosen be?
Which, etc.
31.
The best things corrupted do ever prove worst,
Then that the next Parliament make amends for the first,
Let Us choose no more Zealots, le^t in pieces we burst,
Which, etc.
32.
For when as the Schismatics in the House do prevail
Then the head and all the Members are led by the tail,
So that all parts in doing their duty needs must fail,
Which, etc.
33.
Let the Militia be settled e're you part with your Money,
Else you will find them gall and wormwood whom you took for honey,
And the Soldiers will insult 'ore as soon as they have undone ye,
Which, etc.
34.
It Is believed the 3. Generals, Fairfax, Waller, and Brown,
Are sorry now for what they once helped to pull down,
And it is hopt they will redeem it by deeds of Renown,
Which, etc.
35.
We are sensible now that there is no one thing
Can full satisfaction to all Interests bring
But only Charles the second, our known lawful King,
Which, etc.
36.
Let Us dally no longer, but like Britains let us stand,
For GOD and KING CHARLES, and the Laws of the Land;
Let Us up and be doing, let us do it out of hand.
Which no body can deny.
Saint George for England.
To the Tune of Cook Laurel.
THe Westminster Rump has been little at ease,
Of which you have heard enough one would think,
And therefore we will lay it aside if you please,
For the more we do stir in it the more it will stink.
These County resolves for a Parliament fre^,
Makes the Rump smell worse than it did of late,
For now it runs down their heels you may see,
You may call them our Privy-Members of State.
But why should this Rump deal so roughly with Kent?
When England was conquered they were scot-free,
Must they for declaring of all men be shent?
But long-tail and bob-tail can never agree.
It Is much disputed who Antichrist is,
I think it is the Rump, nor am I in jest,
For indeed, although of the number it miss,
Of this I am sure 'thas the mark of the Beast.
I cannot believe that our General Monck
Intends to protect it, he is not such a Fool;
For if he were rightly informed how it stunk,
He never would join with such Grooms of the Stool.
Though It be not whole Antichrist, it is the worst part,
By it both the Pope and the Turk are outdone,
If it be not the head, nor the feet, nor the heart,
It Is the Rump of the Whore of Babylon.
So pocky, so stinking, so cheating to boot,
That he that has got but an eye or a nose,
Would never bestride it; Then why should he do it?
And make the poor Devil his stallionship lose;
If I might advise him, he should not come near it,
The scent of that house is naught for his Gout,
And for his Army too; he might well fear it,
It Is enough to infect both his horse and his foot.
Nor would I wish him to come to White Hall,
For that has been an unfortunate place,
From thence Noll was fetched, and Dick had his fall:
And George may take heed that it be not his Case.
I remember the time when he fought for the King,
And the Cause was good though he did not prevail:
O let not the Boys in the streets now sing,
He was once for the Head, but now for the Tail.
Then George for England strike up thy Drum,
And do they devoir this Rump to destroy,
That Noble King Charles the second may come,
And our Streets may echo with Vive le Roy.
and if He should come by thy Valor and Might,
In that brave exploit thou wilt have more to brag on,
Than e're had Saint George that valiant Knight,
Who rescued the Maid by killing the Dragon.
Then lay by the thought of a Parliament free,
But first bring the King in if you be wise,
For without Kings and Lords there is none can be;
'Twill be but a Rump of a bigger sise.
You know how to do it, and needs not much schooling,
All that you need to say is, let it be done,
Then why should you stand delaying and fooling,
You fought for the Father, why not for the Son?
If you do not do it, much honor you will lose,
Which He and We mean you, for this We do know,
That in spite of the Rump, and all other his Foes,
He will be brought in whether you will or no.
The History of the Second Death of the RUMP.
To the Tune of The Parliament sat as sung as a Cat.
1.
COme buy my fine Ditty
Of News from the City,
As it was told in Devonshire;
The Pimp that whips weekly
Your Breech Politickly
Sells not so much truth in a quire.
2.
Tom Kings-man; near undone
With long stay in London,
Last week to the Country did gallop;
Where he took Cavaliers
With his News by the ears,
As they did the Pot to drink all -- up.
3.
Quoth he, I once went
To the late Parliament,
Whose Members (when I had seen 'em)
Made me think of a Rat,
That was caught by a Cat,
And eat up the tail, that is venom.
4.
But yet to the stump
Of that Poisonous Rump,
The Old Mouth did soder in season;
And when that was done,
Like a Lay-elder Gun,
It stunk at both ends of High Treason.
5.
The Monster did come
Of mere Mouth and Bum,
Most cunningly thus compacted,
That if questioned it were,
For mischief done there,
It might swear, 'twas by no body acted.
6.
OF the nature and name
Of each Member that came
Should I give a full relation,
Youl'd guess by the stink,
That I raked in the sink,
And common-shore of the whole Nation.
7.
Religions you might
Find all there, but the right;
For through the same Sieve they ran,
Which Noll used before
To sift the House over,
Till nothing was left but the Bran.
8.
But of those they had,
Divisions being made
By Fortune's hand, (which is uncertain)
Some Members got many,
Some few, some not any,
As Nevill complained, and Martin.
9.
Indeed from Usurpers
They freed us and our Purse,
And praise of thanks had been their hire,
For taking us thean
Out of the Drying Pan,
Had they not cast us into the fire.
19.
For Cromwell they voted
A Tyrant, though rotted,
'Cause when they first footed their Game,
He Would not let them carry
To prey on the Q^arry,
But gorged himself on the same.
11.
And King Olivers Sons,
(Like Prince-playing Whore-Sons,
That on too high parts had ventured)
They stripped with a hiss
Of their State-properties,
And exeunt two Fools as they entered.
12.
What else they do,
By our Purses we knew,
As well as that scribbling Knave Nedham;
Some good Laws they un-did,
And some bad they founded,
And shortened our Chain for our Freedom.
13.
To quell this fierce Monster,
A Knight did anon-stir,
Who wanted Arms; yet from a Wagon
OF the Popes he would take none,
But from Prester-John,
And so St. George fell by the Dragon.
14.
Then Lambert's Wife chid him,
And (like Cromwell) bid him
Confound it, and mount the Throne Royal,
Your Weapons are long
Quoth she, and as strong,
My self of 'em both have made trial.
15.
He finds the Anabaptist
For his purpose aptist,
And treads the steps of Knipper Dolin,
He fasts, and he prays,
In The new canting phrase,
As if Heaven were taken with drolling.
16*
Some Packs he inveagles,
Of The blood-coated Beagles,
To's party, the Rump-men did so to,
And victualled so well,
The adjacent fort Hell,
As if they no other would go to.
17.
Little John thus did draw,
Against the Outlaw,
(Good King) to try who should have thy Deer,
And thus for both poisons,
A quarrel did rise once
Betwixt the foul Toad and the Spider
18.
Bold Lambert advanced,
He picquier'd and pranced,
And's Party with speeches did urge on.
But though he and Morley
Did snarle and look surly,
They cheated the Devil and the Surgeon.
19.
For soon the Red-coat,
(Who Will not fight, but vote)
When Lamberts side stronger was found,
By (at least) two foot,
And a Trooper to boot,
Did let the Rump fall to the ground.
20.
And with General Lent hall,
The House they over w^natall,
Religion and Laws they n'ere stood on,
But sought still to hold,
Ill got Land and Gold,
Which first made the Old Cause a Good One.
21.
So fell the aged sway,
Of five Months and a Day,
We yet see no Heir apparent,
But from Scabberd pregnant,
Expect Posthume regnant,
If Midwife Monck kindly take care on it.
22.
The Swordmen address to's,
Pleas, and Manifesto's,
Which show 'em less honest than crafty,
Whilst a Tyrannous crew,
Our dangers renew,
That Is called a Committee of Safety.
23.
But Fleetwood and Whitlock,
(The Laws cunning Pick-lock)
With Salloway and Vane, two prime Praters,
Loved Treason so well,
That again to it they fell,
And betrayed even their own Fellow-traytors,
24.
In's villainy Bradshaw,
Of constancy made show,
For scorning Repentance as fickle,
His life he soon ended,
And to hell descended,
This of my Faith is an Article.
25.
Yet Politicus.
(The Devil's Succubus,
To teem for his Commendation)
Advizes us all
To mourn, and we shall,
Whilst that Hell-hound yelps in our Nation.
26.
And now Lambert's Cohorts,
And Monks (which makes woe hearts)
Do seem to contest, but anon,
We ship-wrack't shall be,
When they can agree
From what coast the storm shall fall on.
27.
Whilst Buff and Red-coats
Are sanctified notes
Of Christ's and his Gospel's Protectors,
But among themselves solely,
Do they pass for holy,
As Bessus and's Swordmen for Hectors.
28.
They that heard this story,
First ^ighed, and were sorry
To hear of poor Englands confusion,
Then drank a full Bowl
To that Royal soul
That must settle all in conclusion. Vivat.

The Arraignment of the DEVIL for stealing away President Bradshaw.
To the Tune of, Well-a-day, well-a-day.
2
IF you will hear news that is ill,
Gentlemen, Gentlemen,
Against the Devil: I will
Be the Relator.
Arraigned he must be,
For that felloniously,
'thout due solemnity,
He took a Traitor.
2.
John Bradshaw was his name.
How it stinks, how it stinks,
Who Will make with blacker fame,
Pilate unknown.
This worse than worst of things
Condemned the best of Kings,
And what more guilt yet brings,
Know 'twas his own.
3.
Virtue in Charles did seem,
Eagerly, eagerly,
And villainy in him
To vye for glory;
Majesty so complete,
And impudence so great
Till that time never met,
But to my Story,
4.
Accusers there will be
Bitter ones, bitter ones,
More than one, two, or three,
All full of spite.
Hangman and Tree so tall,
Bridge, Tower, and City-wall,
Kite and Crow, which were all
Robbed of their right.
5.
But Judges none are fit,
Shame it is, shame it is,
That twice seven years did sit
To give Hemp-string dome;
The fiend they would befriend,
That he might in the end
To them like favor lend
In his own Kingdom.
6.
Swordmen it must be you,
Boldly to it, boldly to it,
Must give the Devil his due,
Do it not faintly;
But as you raised by spell
Last Parliament from hell
Omnipotently.
7.
The Charge they wisely frame
(On with it, on with it,)
In that yet unknown name
Of Supreme power.
Which six weeks hence by Vote
Shall be or it shall not,
When Monk's to London got
In a good hour*
8.
But twelve good men and true,
Cavaliers, Cavaliers,
He excepts against you,
Justice he fears.
From Bar and and Pulpit he
Craves such as do for see
Serve all turns: for he will be
Tried by his Peers.
2.
Satan, you are guilty found
By your Peers, by your Peers.
And must dye above ground,
Look for no pity.
Some of our Ministry,
Whose Spirits with yours comply,
As Owen, Caryl, Nigh,
For death shall fit 'ee.
10.
Dread Judges; mine own limb
I but took, I but took.
I was forced without him
To use a Crutch.
Some of the Robe can tell
How to supply full well
His place here, but in hell.
I had none such.
11.
Devil, you are an Ass,
Plain it is, plain it is,
And weakly plead the case;
Your wits are lost.
Some Lawyers will out-do't,
When shortly they come to it,
Your craft, our gold to boot*
They have engrossed.
12.
Should all men take their right,
Well-a-day, well-aday,
We were in a sad plight,
Of The Holy Party.
Such practice has a scent
Of Kingly government;
Against it we are bent,
Out of home-Char'ty.
13.
But if I dye, who am
King of Hell, King of Hell,
You will not quench its flame,
But find it worse:
Confused Anarchy
Will a new torment be;
Never did these Kingdoms three
Feel such a curse.
14.
To our promotion Sir,
There are here, there are here,
Through some confused stir
Does the high-road lie.
In hell we need not fear
Nor King, nor Cavalier,
Who then shall dominere
But we the Godly?
15.
Truth then, Sirs, which of old
Was my shame, was my shame,
Shall now to yours be told,
You caused his death.
The House being broken by
Your selves (there is Burglary)
W^ath entered forcibly,
And stopped his breath.
16.
Sir, as our President
Taught by you, taught by you,
Against the King a way went
Most strange and new:
Charging him with the Guilt
Of all the blood we spilt,
With Swords up to the ^ilt,
So we will serve you.
17.
For mercy then I call,
Good my Lords, good my Lords,
And Traitors I Will leave all
Duly to end it.
Sir, Sir, it is frivolous,
As well for you as us,
To beg for mercy thus,
Our crimes transcend it.
18.
You must dye out of hand,
Satanas, Satanas,
This our Decree shall stand,
Without control,
And we for you will pray,
Because the Scriptures say,
When some men curse you, they
Curse their own soul.
19.
The fiend to Tyburn's gone,
There to dye, there to dye.
Black is the North anon,
Great storms will be,
Therefore together now
I leave him and the Gallow:
So News-man take 'em thou,
Soon they will take thee.
The Rota: Or News from the Common-wealths-Mens- Club,
Written by Mr. Henry Stub;
It Is better than a Syllybub.

1.
AT Westminster where we take boat,
There on the left hand you may note
The sign of the Turks Head and Throat.
2.
What Heads and Thoats therein there be,
If you will have patience to see,
These few lines here shall notify.
3.
Here Harrington breeds up his youth
To the discover of no Truth,
All Common-wealths-men in good sooth.
4.
A question here, though nere so rude,
Is so belabour'd, and so rew'd,
And into sundry pieces hewed.
5.
If un-resolved by I, or Not,
It must be put to the Ballot.
It Is Mr. Harringtons own plot.
6.
The finest thing that ere was seen,
The one side white the other green,
And there you must put in a Bean.
7.
First Harrington does hawk and hum,
And tells a story of old Rome,
Which from his own store never come.
8.
He cites Sigonius and Lampridius,
Authors which to the Club are hideous,
And he in quoting most perfideous.
9*
But there a sad mishap befell,
Which much does grieve me for to tell,
But I am glad it was so well.
10.
The learned man stood up and spoke,
That by two Losses he was broke,
His Reputation and his Cloak.
11.
Quoth he, my Reputation
I hear is tumbled up and down
Much like a Football through the Town.
12.
And for my Cloak, by this good light,
This Rascal Miles but yester-night
With Coffee did it all bedite.
13.
Next Polixfen, that Politician,
Yet surely he is no Hebrician,
And (as I take it) a worse Grecian.
14.
Whom (...) did so fright,
He was not himself again that night,
'Twas thought he did himself beshite.
15.
There Is Poultney too that man of Law,
In Politics he is but raw,
But prattles more than a Jack-daw*
16.
Who speaking once of Injustice,
Made a distinction somewhat nice,
It was between a Sin and Vice.
17.
Next comes in Gold that brazen-face,
If blushing be a sign of grace,
The Youth is in a woeful case.
18.
Whilst he should give us Sol's and Ob's,
He brings us in some simple bobs,
And fathers them on Mr. Hobs.
19.
Nay, he has got the prettiest feat,
Monarchs out of the world to beat,
Thus proves they are all a tacit Cheat.
20.
If man in state of nature be,
And one imparts his right to me,
I cheat him of his property.
21.
The like, if many men possessed,
To one gives all their interest;
He must be deemed a Cheat at best.
22.
We want not an Attorney hight,
Lame Collins (if I name him right)
Oh! it is a very learned Wight.
23.
The subtlest man that ere I saw,
Did arguments from Scripture draw,
Religion was before the Law.
24.
If so Sir Harrington's mistane,
Religion does the Law sustain,
Law property, it is most plain.
35.
A Parson too, of no small note,
His sense as threadbare are his coat;
And neither of them worth a groat.
26.
The man does hope in time to be
Chaplain to the Academy;
He Is fit, for he can scarce tell three.
27.
Morley, who thought to have been one
Of the Committee, but was none;
For had he, they would been all undone.
28.
'Twas well foreseen, for the wise Knot
Thought that the man might have a Plot,
For to have dipped their Ballot.
29.
One in a speech he did rehearse,
Against the Popes land, he was so fierce*
He cut it off at least in a teirce.
30.
He said he would quote Authority,
That the full lengsh of Italy
Contained but threescore miles and three*
31.
A Cambrobritain here god-wot,
Must needs make one of this learned Knot,
But 'twere as good if he were not.
32.
Taf^ Morgan, God he^ Worship save,
Does shit among them very grave,
He Is no great Statesman, but great K --
33.
Last, Skinner of his Chair grown proud,
Does gravely weild the busy crowd,
And still to Orders cries aloud.
34.
To tell you more of Mr. Skinner,
He Would rather talk than eat his Dinner;
It Is that which makes him look the thinner.
35.
But whilst the Man to Strafford cried,
Sir you to Orders must be tied,
Or else you must not here abide.
26.
For our course here, is not to prate
Of things that do too near relate
To the Affairs of present state*
37.
Speak to the question, it is sound,
In what of Government the Ground,
Or the foundation may be found.
38.
Strafford with that did lowly bow,
Good Mr. Speaker calm your brow,
And of my Argument allow.
39.
For had your Question any sense,
I should not take the confidence
To give your Worship ought offense.
40.
But since for nonsense it may pass,
To speak to you in Country-Phasse,
Your Worship is a learned Ass.
41.
Which words he took in so much scorn,
That nothing else would serve his turn,
But presently he must adjourn.
42.
Adjourn, quoth Strafford, in a fright,
Are you a Burgess or a Knight?
Sure I shall to the Tower to night.
43.
But lo, the worst of all disasters,
A Youth stood up, My learned Masters,
All Governments are much like plasters,
44.
Plasters, quoth Strafford, let me dye;
If not this poor Academy,
H^ve not some grand infirmity.
45.
And since it happens to be so,
I may chance be infected too;
Therefore my Masters all, adieu. Exit.
The Cobler's last Will and Testament: or, the Lord Hewson's translation.
1.
TO Christians all I greeting send,
That they may learn their souls to amend
By viewing of my Cobblers end.
2.
First, to the new Lords I would give all,
But that (like me) they are like to fall,
Though heartless Fleetwood has no gall.
3.
Yet he deserves this Legacy,
ROPE take you all, well may I cry,
Hou're Murderers as well as I.
4.
And will thus ( wry-neck) end your race,
Since wilfulful Murder has no place
In the late Parliaments Act of Grace.
5.
My Paring-Knife I Will Lambert give,
He may have use on it if he live,
For's throat as well as his brow I believe.
6.
But Richard and Harry I have forgot,
Shall I give them my Hammers? No, I will not,
For they did not strike while the Iron was hot.
7.
Vane take my Bends, and Wilks my Clue,
Atkins my Hose of Safforn Hue,
But Gregory says my Clothes are his due.
8.
My Cushion will fit Q. Dowager Cromwell,
Whilst Shipton wifes Prophecy she does thumb well,
In Chair of State 'twill ease her Bum well.
8.
For Oliver thou did set me on high,
I aimed not at it, though I winkt of an eye,
Yet I wish not now to come thee nigh.
10.
For sure ere this thou wilt burn with thy Nose,
Which out of thy Nostrils Brimstone throws,
Would thou were here to singe my Foes.
11.
There is another Lord, that is Rich,
To cure the City whose fingers did itch:
But only I went thorough stitch.
12.
And yet they say I was out of my Trade
When as Phlebotomy I Made,
Some Chyrurgion to do it I Would better have paid.
13*
Ill-looking death turn back thy shaft,
If Charon me over Styx should waft,
It would disgrace our Gentle-craft.
14.
In The Good Old Cause I traded st^ll,
But in it my Lordship smelt some ill,
To mend it though, proved past my skill.
15.
Therefore to Tyburn I must ride,
Although it cannot be denied,
But that I have lived single eyed.
16.
And if my Foes will do me right,
They Will say, I Have set the crooked straight,
Why then I am a Man upright.
17.
I wish the Jury find it so,
John Lilburns Jury would say no,
Stitch up the Lord, let the Cobbler go.
18.
But it is no jesting matter I trow?
For I cannot laugh although you do;
Yet may make a wry-mouth, or so.
19
Before, when we debaucht the Nation,
We could have vouched our Reformation,
By a day or two of Humiliation.
20.
Now it is not current Pay, for I
Have wail'd my sins, and yet they cry,
Hang him, he weeps but with one eye.
The Hangman's last Will and Testament, with his Legacy to the Nine Worthies
viz. Col. Lambert, Creed, etc.
I Have lived to see such wretchedness,
When none but Honesty are Crimes,
That my Ropes are turned into Rimes.
I and my Gallows groan.
Things are so carried I cannot tell how,
There Is as many above still as are below,
I have hanged such in shirts as white as snow.
I and my Gallows groan.
Oliver he lived by a Plot,
The Parliament sits still, and why not?
And I fared well by a bow-knot.
I and my Gallows groan.
All my delight was in a Jayl,
My estate was got at a Carts tail,
I know not what these people ayle.
I and my Gallows groan.
Oliver he a Coach would drive,
And was honey in the Parliaments Bee-hive,
Neither he nor I loved a reprive.
I and my Gallows groan.
I wish I had had his Protectors rest,
I Would have laid it an earnest for a jest,
But Sir Harry Vane's worth all the rest,
I and my Gallows groan.
I have chopped off many a worthy Head,
And thanks to the Sheriffs have been well fed.
But that I can dock must never be sed.
I and my Gallows groan.
Lambert I knew was troubled with the yellows,
And more perplexed with his fellows.
Had I lived I Would cured him at the Gallows:
I and my Gallows groan.
Never was any so bad as my Trade,
The Nine Worthies would have made,
As a Drudge before something a Jade,
I and my Gallows groan.
But I had got nothing by the thing,
There Is indemnity against the string,
But my heir may get by a forward Spring,
I and my Gallows groan.
I see John Lilburn at a bar,
And Sir George Booth that man of war,
But could get neither in my Car.
I and my Gallows groan
I think the Ordinaries long Prayer,
Has spoiled frequenting of my fair.
Till all long-winded R -- are there.
I and my Gallows groan.
For half thirteen pence half penny wages
I would have cleared all the Town cages,
And you should have been rid of all the Sages.
I and my Gallows groan.
There was much climbing among the Grandees,
Yet they all I see know the wood from the trees,
And all to cousin me of my fees.
I and my Gallows groan.
The High Court of Justice was out of use.
The Thieves and the Bench had made a Truce,
For want of Authority, a lean excuse.
I and my Gallows groan.
'Twould vex any body to keep an Axe
As long as there are any Alderman Packs,
Or Deshorough eke with his wide Sacks.
I and my Gallows groan.
That Duckenfield, Packer, and Major Creed,
Of my helping hand should have such need,
When I am not able to do the deed,
I and my Gallows groan.
Lambert would also borrow the Block,
As well as my Lady did Olivers Cock,
But like him I must patiently bear this mock.
I and my Gallows groan.
Fleetwood also lacks some of my skill,
And that I cannot do it Folks take it ill,
I Would hang um all, if I could have my will.
I and my Gallows groan.
It Is vain to look for old men's shoes,
Else I had had Hewson in a noose,
But my Successor will not him loose.
I and my Gallows groan.
Tyburn was once in mourning clad,
For a great Man, and I also very sad,
A full bunch will make you all glad.
I and my Gallows groan
A Hymn to the Gen^le Craft: or Hewson's Lamentation.
To the Tune of the Blind Beggar.
LIsten a while to what I shall say
Of a blind Cobbler that is gone astray
Out of the Parliaments High way,
Good people pity the blind.
His name you wot well is Sir John Hewson
Whom I intend to set my Muse on,
As great a Warrior as Sir Miles Lewson,
Good people, etc.
He Would now give all the shoes in his shop
The Parliaments fury for to stop,
Whip Cobbler like any Town-top,
Good people, etc.
He has been in many a bloody field,
And a successful sword did wield,
But now at last is forced to yield,
Good people, etc.
Oliver made him a famous Lord
That he forgot his Cutting Board,
But now his Thred's twisted to a Cord,
Good people, etc.
Crispin and he were nere of kin,
The gentle Craft have a noble Twin,
But he would give Sir Hughs bones to save his skin,
Good people, etc.
Abroad and at home he has cut many a Hide,
A Dog and a Bell must now be his Guide,
They Will lash him smartly on the blind side,
Good people, etc.
Of all his Warlike valiant Feats,
Of his Calves leather and his Neats,
Let him speak um himself when he repeats,
Good people, etc.
I Will only mention one exploit,
For which when he begs, I Will give him a Doit,
How he did the City vex and annoy't,
Good people, etc.
He marched into London with Red-coat and Drum
During the time we had no Bum,
Being right for an Army as a Cows Thum,
Good people, etc.
And there he did the Prentices meet,
Who jeered him as he went through the street,
But he did them very well-favouredly greet,
Good people, etc.
Bears do agree with their own kind,
But he was of such a cruel mind,
He killed his Brother Cob. before he had dined.
Good people, etc.
He strutted then like a Crow in a Gutter,
That no body durst once more Mutter
The Capon-Citizens, 'gan to Flutter,
Good people, etc.
After he had them thus defeated,
To his old Quarters he retreated,
And was by Fleetwood notably treated,
Good people, etc.
He is for this I hear Indicted,
Though the Week before by them Invited,
But Wise Men say they had as good as Shited,
Good people, etc.
He cares not for the Sessions a Lowse,
They reach not a Peer of the other House,
He Is frighted to see that he is a Parliament chouse,
Good people, etc.
And now he is gone the Lord knows whether,
He and this Winter go together,
If he be caught he will loose his Leather,
Good people, etc.
H'ad best get him in some Country Town,
And company keep with Desbrow the Clown,
You see how the World goes up and down.
Good people, etc.
His Coach and his Horses are gone to be lost,
He must vamp it and cart it and thank thee mine host,
There Is no more to be said of an old Toast,
Good people, etc.
Sing Hi Ho Hewson, the State nere went upright,
Since Cobblers could Pray, Preach, Govern and Fight,
We shall see what they will do now you are out of sight,
Good people pity the blind.
The Rump Ululant: or Penitence per force. Being the Recantation of the Old
Rusty-roguy-rebellious-rampant, and now ruinous rotten-rosted RUMP.
To the Tune of Gerrards Mistress.
FArewell
False Honors, and usurped Powers farewell,
For the Great Bell
Of Justice rings in our affrighted ears.
The Gripes
Or wounded Conscience far exceed all stripes,
Yet are small types,
Of those sharp pains Rebellion justly fears.
See how
The unmasked people hiss us out of doors,
And call us Knave.
Because though We, their Servants be,
We made them but our Slaves.
For since
We laid the Country wast like ravenous Boor^,
They seek our bloods,
Our Hands
Because they prize their Liberties,
But to devour their Goods.
We dipped in Royal blood, to take his Lands
At our Commands,
And made 3. Kingdoms headless at one blow.
The strife
We caused was chiefly to cut off his life,
With cursed Knife;
He that was Virtues Friend, must be our foe made
Religion do our Drudgery to base Ends.
But now we find,
They that do sow pretenses, mow
A Harvest of the wind.
And now
When clamorous vengeance calling for amends
Begins our grief,
Our Friend the Devil, with his Evil,
Can give us no relief.
Go search
All Lands beneath the Suns Star-spangled perch,
You Will find no Church
Like ours, while reverend Bishops held the chair.
But those
We know with our designs would never close;
And therefore chose
In their steads to set up Extempore prayer.
Poached Eyes,
And words twang'd through a whining Lecturers Nose
Did fill our Purses,
That many have Rings, and better things,
Which now give only curses.
And thus
Hell was our Text, though Heaven were our Gloze
And Will our Reason,
Religion we made free of Hocus trade,
And voted Loyalty Treason.
Since we
With wicked Arms have made the Crosier flee,
Error is free
To lay her nets, to make weak minds her prize,
All Sects,
Schisms cursed Heresies with stubborn necks,
Corrupt our Texts,
And crane up Scripture to maintain their lies.
You see
The crop-ear'd Anabaptist sowing Tares
In every ground,
Though the Plagues of War, wherever they are
The Church and State confound.
So do
The Roman Noses vend their Popish wares,
By twylight still;
And the Quaker half mad, though he looks so sad,
Grinds in the Jesuits Mill.
Our Drums
Did drown our Process, and our Writs; our Plums
Bid kiss our Bums,
We sent our Laws and Persons to the Tower;
From whence
To be delivered, 'twas in vain to sense
By talking sense;
No Habeas Corpus in the Court of Power.
The Gown
Did stoop the Reverend Velvet to a crew
In short Red-coats,
Who many a day, have made you pay,
For cutting your own throats.
We robbed
The whole of Food to pamper out the few,
Exciz'd your Wares,
And taxed you round, sixpence the pound,
And massacred your Bears.
But now
Despairs black clouds do hang upon our brow,
For all do bow
Their hearts to their true Shepherd,
Charles their King.
And we,
The Wolfish Rulers now must Subjects be
To destiny,
And end our Juncto in a fatal string.
Then learn
All future Traitors by our Tragic doom,
E're it is too late,
Lest when you make Kingdoms to shake,
You copy out your fate.
We know
Our high affronts to Church and State make Room
For us in Hell;
But yet we will hope, till the sad Rope
Says bid the World farewell.
Facit indignatio versum.
The Holy Sisters.
SIx of the Femal sex, and purer sect,
Had conference of late to this effect,
How they might change the Popish Name of Preaching?
Then quoth the first it shall be called Teaching.
The second newly warmed with heavenly Nectar,
Fell to commend the sacred name of Lecture.
The third not half so learned, yet full as wise,
Said, she like it best to called The Exercise.
Nay, quoth the fourth, the Brethren, as I hear,
Do term it Speaking in Northamptonshire.
The fifth with none of these yet did accord,
But termed it purely handling of the Word.
Then, quoth the sixth ( Standing) a name most fit;
For Preachers in the Pulpit seldom sit.
For Application then, quoth they, we fear
Our selves not sufficient the use to bear,
Nor to conceive the meaning of some man;
Some able Brethren we must have, who can,
Being full of Spirit, Minister supply,
And help against our Carnal infirmity;
Repeat the Business, and all faults redress;
Such, who with zeal and heat can fully press
The Point home, that so the Cas^ being clear,
We may remember't sweetly many a year.
And though in Concord Frailties we often fall,
The help of such good men will raise us all,
By putting in New strength and life, whereby
Being edified, We grow and fructify.
Thus the Six Sisters did at last consent,
And so departed thence Incontinent.
The Second Part of Saint George for England.
To the Tune of To drive the cold Winter away.
NOw the Rump is confounded,
There Is an end of the Roundhead,
Who has been such a bane to our Nation,
He has now played his part,
And's gone out, like a fart,
Together with his reformation,
For by his good favor,
He has left a bad savor,
But's no matter, we will trust him no more;
Kings and Queens may appear
Once again in our Sphere,
Now the Knaves are turned out of door.
And drive the cold Winter away.
Se^, Nevil, and Vane,
With the rest of that train,
Are into Oceana fled,
Sir Arthur the brave,
That Is as arrant a Knave,
Has Harrington's Rota in's Head,
But he is now full of cares
For his Foals, and his Mares,
As when he was routed before:
But I think he despairs,
By his Arms, or his Prayers,
To set up the Rump any more.
And drive the cold Winter away.
I should never have thought,
That a Monk could have wrought
Such a Reformation so soon;
That House, which of late
Was the Jaques of our State,
Will ere long be a House of Renown;
How good wits did jump,
In abusing the Rump,
Whilst the House was pressed by the Rabble;
But our Hercules Monk,
Though it grievously stunk,
Now has cleans'd that Augaean stable.
And drive the cold Winter away.
And now Mr. Prynne,
With the rest may come in,
And take their Places again,
For the House is made sweet,
For those Members to meet,
Though part of the Rump yet remain;
Nor need they to fear,
Though the Breeches be there,
Which were wronged both behind and before,
For he says, 'twas a chance,
And forgive him this once,
And He swears he will do so no more.
And drive the cold Winter away.
It Is true there are some,
Who are still for the Bum,
Such Tares will grow up with the Wheat,
And there they will be, till a Parliament come
That can give them a total defeat:
But yet I am told,
That the Rumpers do hold,
That the Saints may swim with the tide:
Nor can it be Treason,
But Scripture and Reason,
Still to close with the stronger side.
And drive the cold Winter away.
Those Lawyers of the House,
As Baron Wild-goose
With treason Hill, Whitlock, and Say,
Were the bane of Laws,
And our Good Old Cause,
And 'twere well if such were away:
Some more there are to blame,
Whom I care not to name,
That are Men of the very same ranks,
Amongst whom there is one,
That to Devil Barebone,
For his ugly Petition gave thanks.
And drive the cold Winter away.
But I hope by this time,
He Will confess 'twas a crime,
To abet such a damnable crew,
Whose Petition was drawn
By Alcoran Vane,
Or else by Corbet the Jew:
By it you may know,
What the Rump meant to do,
And what Religion to frame;
So 'twas time for St. George,
That Rump to disgorge,
And to send it from whence it first came, etc.
And drive the cold Winter away.
A New Kickshaw for the queasie Stomach of Satan and all those that fight
under his Banner.
To the Tune of Cook Laurel.
YOu pitiful Rimers now be you all dumb;
Let no Dames of the Dunghill sing Ditties about
St. George and the Dragon, and little Tom Thumb,
With Wallingford House and the Rump are worn out.
Here Is an Ola Polidra so pleasant and new,
The Tail of the State had n'ere such a Hogooe.
With a hey down down, etc.
Come listen you Cooks and learn my new Dish,
It Is that that will fill your Guests bellyes with laughter,
It Is a meat neither made of flesh nor fish,
But will make all that taste it to lick their lips after.
Here Is an Ola, etc.
First take you three Farts from the Parliament-Breech,
The head of an Onion to rubb on your Platter,
The Hums and the Has of Mr. Scot's speech,
Spoke twice to no purpose, and mince not the matter,
Here Is an Ola, etc.
Take the Linings of Alderman Atkins his Hose,
Some oth' cobling Collonel's Shooe-makers wax,
The juice of Tichburn's and ^reton's Toes,
'Twill settle your Stomachs, and strengthen your Backs.
Here Is an Ola, etc.
If an Independent Sermon you hear,
Be sure you take all that is spoke to the Text,
Some of my Lord Pride his Zeal for a Fear,
And a Prayer by the Spirit made by that Part comes next.
Here Is an Ola, etc.
Take Munson's chaste motions toward a Wench,
The Sword of the Spirit handled by Gough,
The fear of the Judges that sat on the Bench
When the Head of this Isle by the Tail was lopt off.
Here Is an Ola, etc.
Take all the old Speaker's Honesty whole;
For if it be lessened 'twill prove little or none;
And, if you have room, you may stop up the hole
With the Knighthood and Wisdom of Sir John his Son.
Here Is an Ola, etc.
Take one of Sir Arthur's passionate dumps,
Sir Harry Vane's Harry Vane's hearty Prayers for Monck,
The froth of the Good Old Cause worn to the stumps.
And modest Harry Martins discourse for a Punk.
Here Is an Ola, etc.
Of Public Faith an Ounce if you can get it,
Stewed well in an Honest Committee-mans skull,
Then with the Coals of Hugh Peter's Devotion beat it,
'Twill give all the Devils in Hell Belly full.
Here Is an Ola, etc.
Take the Whites of a Puritans lifted-up eyes,
And the Saffron engendered on a Presbyters gums,
Mr William ^illye's Astrogolical Lies,
And the meditations of Salloway biting his thumbs.
Here Is an Ola, etc.
Of Lam^ert's Religion as much as a Nut,
And of his Wive's Honesty much thereabout,
With the spirit that moves holy Brethren to rut,
And makes the holy Sisters hold out.
Here Is an Ola, etc.
Sow it in an Excise-man's Conscience well feared,
And in a French-man's Codpiece 2. hours let it stew,
Then strew it over with a Puritan's beard;
It Is a Dish for the Devil and for his Dam too.
Here Is Ola, etc.
But then if it want a Man to say grace,
It must be done by one that is a Sinner,
An Independent Doctor just turned out on's place,
Must needs be most fit to give thanks for this Dinner.
England's Triumph: or, The Rump Routed by a true Assertor of Englands
Interest, General George Monk.
A SONNET. To the Tune of, Fill up the Parliament full.
WHat makes the Soldiers
To stand to their Arms?
It Is for what they professed,
To keep us from harms,
The Members secluded
Comes in by fwarmes
To fill up the Parliament full, full, full,
To fill up the Parliament full.
You know that the City Gates
Late were thrown down
The Walls too were ordered
By Parliament frown:
But General M^nk has pleased
Soldier and Gown.
And filled up the Parliament full, full, full,
And fill up the Parliament full.
A dispute there was had
By the Members secluded,
Brave Monk was the Umpire
And found them deluded,
But Englands great joy
Is now wholly concluded:
For he is filled up the Parl. full, full, full,
For he is filled up the Parl. full.
Sir Arthur the Valiant
Must make his Speech large,
Left the Members Excluded
Lay Treason to's Charge.
He Would better have dealt
With his New Castle Barge,
Than to s^e the Old P. full, full, full,
Than to see the old P. full.
The Aldermen Grave,
And the Commons of the City
Imprisoned were,
The more is the pity,
But General Monk said,
That I will acquit ye,
For the P. now shall be full, full, full,
For the P. now shall be full.
Have you not seen
Fresh Flowers in the Spring;
And bave you not heard
A Cage-bird to sing?
But if the Cage-Members
Would bring in the King. --
It would fill up the Parl. full, full, full,
It would fill up the Parl. full.
The Parliament now will
Come into their Geers,
For Secluded P --
(That once lost his Ears)
Marched in with his Rapier
For Commons and Peers,
To fill up the Parliament full, full, full,
To fill up the Parliament full.
Whose often Declaring
Has furnished the Nation
With Parliament Arguments
Of the old Fashion,
And would have both
King, Lords and Peers in this Nation
To fill up the Parliament full, full, full,
To fill up the Parliament full.
Our brave General Monk
We bound are to thank,
The Honest Lord Fairfax
Has played (too) his prank,
No thanks to be given
To the Rump nor the Shank
To fill up the Parliament full, full, full,
To fill up the Parliament full.
Had the City never moved,
Nor the Prentices strove,
They Would lost their Old Charter:
But MONK had a love
To challenge the Grand Ones
Which Mischiefs did move;
And so filled up the Parl full, full, full,
And so filled up the Parliament full.
The Parliament-Complment: or, the Readmission of the Secluded Members to the
Discharge of their long retarded Trust.
SInce sixteen hundred forty and odd,
We have soundly been lashed with our own rod
And we have bowed our selves down at a Tyrants nod,
Which no body can deny.
When have seen a new thing called a Council of State,
U^held by a Power that is now out of date,
Put to the Q^estion, by the Members of Forty eight,
Which, etc*
We have seen what we hope we shall never see agin
Now Lambert and Desbrow are snared in the gin,
The tail cunningly pieced unto the skin.
Which, etc.
A sword that has frighted our Laws out of door,
A Back sword I wot, that must cut so no more,
By the honor of Monk now quitting that score,
Which, etc.
A Vote lately called the Judgment of the House,
To be esteemed and reputed not worth a Louse,
And the Grandee of Portsmouth made a fine chouse
Which, etc.
We have seen an Assessment, a thing for Taxes,
Though the Commonwealth wane the private Waxes:
Swords into Plowshares, and such Bills into Axes,
Which, etc.
Another new story of Qualification,
That belonged to no honest man of the Nation,
Like the ill contrived Authors, quite out of Fashion.
Which, etc.
Original sin was damned by that Law,
The Son of a Cavalier made a Jack-straw,
To be chewed again by their ravenous Jaw,
Which, etc.
To fill up the House, and to shuffle the deal,
New Writs issued out, for their new Commonweal,
But it is not worth asking who is it pays the Seal,
Which, etc.
I wonder who pays the late Parliament Printers,
That Place they may hold as many Summers as Winters,
And wish their Presses were broken in splinters,
Which, etc.
A great many Traitors by them lately made,
Makes Treason be thought a Common trade,
Sir George Booth and Jack Lambert a while in the shade,
Which, etc.
We shall now sure give over that word sequester,
Now the tail is cured of that rankling fester,
The twentieth of April is much about Easter,
Which, etc.
How many thanks of the House have been idely spent
Upon people that still have been Malcontent,
But they must fall from those dainties in this shriving Lent,
Which, etc*
That honorable favor no more shall be given
To the factious merit of a Party Hell-driven,
For now our twenty years odds will be even,
Which, etc.
Then room for our Prisoners detained in the Tower,
And away with the new Lieutenants power,
Who Is minting the widdowed Good Old Causes Dower,
Which, etc.
Sir George Booth shall not think this a hit of sat,
Nor Excuse his Keeper whose Warrant's out 'f date,
We shall see them all cry Peccavi too late,
Which, etc.
Eleven years Mischief, tumults and rage,
Are the only Memorials of this Commonwealths age,
And all to be thankt by Hasl^rigg the sage,
Which, etc.
Let our Liberty-keepers be changed to Restorer,
Let our Peace carry Truth and Duty before her,
He Is a Fool and a Knave that else will adore,
Which, etc.
This Janus-like freedom, though it please not all,
And aversly does look on the Scepter and Ball,
Will shut up his Temple at next Common Hall,
Which, etc.
Then let us pray to Great Jove, that made Monk so kind
To our desperate estate, to put him in mind,
With the rest of our Worthies of the Great Thing behind,
Which no body can deny.
The Cock-Crowing at the Approach of a Free-Parliament: Or,
Good news in a Ballot,
More sweet to your Pallat
Than Fig, Raison, or stewed Prune is:
A Country wit made it
Who never got the Trade yet;
And Mad Tom of Bedlam the Tune is.

1.
MOre Wine Boy; to be sober
Is sottish in my Opinion,
When so near we do see
The day that will free
Three Kingdoms and a Dominion.
CHORUS. Then off with your Pots, English, Irish and Scots,
And loyal Cambro-Britains,
From Lobster-like jump
And the Head-playing Rump
You Will soon have an Acquittance.
2.
Though Monk's mind lies not open
To every mind that is busy,
A Free Parliament
Is his intent,
No Noll, nor Lambert is he.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
3.
A Parliament untainted,
(Away with secluded Members:
New flame it might make,
Again to untake,
And stir up rebellious Embers.)
Cho. Then off with, etc.
4.
A Parliament of Members
That in Blood and Estate are no small Boyes^
The devilish Rump-elves
Are for none but themselves,
Those will be (like God) for us all boys.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
5.
Such a Parliament more happy
Then Fishes will create you,
Though no trade you do drive
But to tipple and swive,
You Will be plump in flesh and estate too.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
6.
A Hound and a Hawk no longer
Shall be tokens of disaffection,
A Cock-fight shall cease
To be breach of the Peace,
And an Horse-race an Insurrection.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
7.
The Stages to their Freedom
Shall be restored soon after,
And Poets like Lictors
Shall scourge our Afflictors,
And make our old Sufferings our Laughter,
Cho Then off with, etc.
8.
W -- P -- shall be the Master
Of The Revells (for's contrition,)
His Histrio-mastyx
Was one of his rash tricks,
Ever his early circumcision.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
9.
We Will preach and pray 'thout canting,
In a Language Heaven knows better*
Than ah Lord repeating,
And Hum and Ha bleating
With calves of the Lips in the Letter^
Cho. Then off with, etc.
10.
We Will no more to enslave us
Wear Chains, but to boast our Riches,
We Lobsters will eat,
And not be their meat,
When the right Rump wear^ the Breache^.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
11.
All Nations shall adore us,
Stiff Don at our foot shall tumble,
The Dutchmen shall fear us,
And all to M^jn Here us;
And French cry votre tres-humble.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
12.
The Citizens shall flourish,
Lord Majors, when the office expires,
Shall a Knighthood obtein,
If they are not of the strain
Of Excise, nor Church-land Buyers.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
13.
This London had effected
Ever now, and honor had got so,
But for Knaves Ireton
And Titchburn were known,
When the Drugster's Son was not so.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
14.
Each year shall bring a harvest
To the Plough-man, who was vexed ill
When but every fourth year
By the Tax-Calendar
It came like the Bissextile.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
15.
His Rent he shall pay duly,
Nor to spend shall he want his groate'r;
His Landlord shall be
Of his Beer to him free,
And of's flesh to his Wife and his Daughter.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
16.
But now my furious fancy
A Project is concocting
When God shall have sent
A true Parliament,
What a Rope shall we do with this mocking?
Cho. Then off with, etc.
17.
Like Mare with dock to the Manger,
To show it no cheat at all is
It like one does appear,
But it is none, and where
The head should have been, the tail is:
Cho. Then off with, etc.
19.
Or we will send for the Ghost of Lorrell,
Who choakt so neatly the Peak-feast,
And he will Carbonado
It with little a-doe,
To make the Devil a Breakfast.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
20.
We read of a Rump in St. Austin,
That (before this of ours) out-went all,
Which sounds did let ^ly
As articularly,
As if it had a Lenthal
Cho. Then off with, etc.
20.
But nere poor Rump was firked
Like this by wits, and no wits.
Nor ever was game
So fit as this same
To enter and flesh young Poets.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
21.
More good things I could utter,
But now I find by a token,
That the play will begin,
And good fortune come in
Ever the Prologue be quite spoken.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
22.
Charles Wanes's 'ore the new Chimney,
The Suns near our Horizon,
The Fowls of the night
Are taking their flight,
Ere Cheshire prey they seize on.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
23.
We Will drink and pray no longer
For the King in mystical fashions:
But with Trumpets sound
His Health shall go round,
And our Prayers be Proclamations.
Cho. Then off with, etc.
24.
Now Iockey, Teag, and Shenken,
Shall boast no more of St. Andrew,
St. Patrick, or St. Davie,
But St George, who, to save 'ee,
Against Dragon-Rump like a man drew.
Chorus. Then off with your Pots, English Irish and Scots,
And loyal Cambro-Britains,
From Lobster-like jump,
And the Headplaying Rump
You Will soon have an Acquittance.
Saint George and the Dragon.
To the Tune of, Old Souldjour of the Queens, etc.
NEws, News: -- Here Is the Occurrences, and a new Mercurius:
A Dialogue betwixt Haslerigg the bafled, and Arthur the furious:
With Iretons readings upon Legitimate and Spurious,
Proving that a Saint may be the Son of a Whore; for the satisfaction of the
curious.
From a Rump insatiate as the Sea,
Libera nos Domine.
Here Is the true reason of the Cities infatuation:
Ireton has made it drunk with the cup of abomination:
That is, -- the Cup of the Whore, after the Geneva interpretation:
Which, with the Juice of Tichburn's Grapes, must needs cause Intoxication.
From a Rump, etc.
Here Is the Whipper whipped -- by a friend to George, that whipped Jack, that whipped
the Breech,
That whipped the Nation, as long as he could stand over it: -- After which
It was it self Re -- jerk'd, by the sage Author of this Speech:
Methinks a Rump should go as well with a Scotch spur, as with a Switch.
From a Rump, etc.
This Rump has many a Rotten and unruly Member,
Give the General the Oath, cries one; -- (but his Conscience being a little
tender,)
I Will Abjure you, with a Horse-pox, quoth George, -- and make you remember
The 'Leaventh of February, longer than the Fifth of November.
From a Rump, etc.
With that -- Monk leaves ( in Rump assembled) -- the three Estates.
But oh, -- how the Citizens hugged him for breaking down their Gates,
For tearing up their Posts and Chains, and for clapping-up their Mates,
(When they saw, that he brought them Plasters for their broken Pates.)
From a Rump, etc.
In truth, this ruflle put the Town in great disorder,
Some Knaves (in Office) smiled, -- expecting 'Twould go further;
But at the last -- my life on it, George is no Rumper -- said the Recorder:
For there never was either Honest man, or M^nck of that Order.
From a Rump, etc.
And so it proved, for Gentlemen, says the General,
I Will make you amends;
Our Greeting was a little untoward, but we'll part Friends,
A little time shall show you which way my Design tends,
And that, besides the good of Church and State, I have no other ends.
From a Rump, etc.
His Excellence had no sooner passed this Declaration and Promise,
But in steps Secretary Scot, -- the Rumps man Thomas,
With Luke, their lame Evangelist -- (the Devil keep 'um from us,)
To show Monk what precious Members of Church and State the Bummha's.
From a Rump, etc.
And now comes the Supplication of the Members under the Rod,
Nay, My Lord, (cries the Brewers Clerk) good my Lord, -- for the love of God,
Consider yourself, us, -- and this poor Nation, and that Tyrant abroad;
Don't leave us: -- but George gave him a Shrugg, instead of a Nodd.
From a Rump, etc.
This mortal Silence was followed with a most hideous Noise
Of Free-Parliament Bells, and Rump-confounding Boys:
Crying, Gueld the Rogues, Singe their Tails -- when with a low Voice;
Fire and Sword, by this Light, cries Tom, let us look to our Toys.
From a Rump, etc.
Never were wretched Members in so sad a Plight:
Some were Broyl'd, -- some Toasted, others burnt outright.
Nay against Rumps so Pittylesse was their Rage and Spite,
That not a Citizen would kiss his Wife that Night.
From a Rump, etc.
By this time, Death, and Hell appeared in the ghastly Looks
Of Scot, and Robinson; (those Legislative Rooks)
And it must needs put the Rump most damnably off the Hooks,
To see, that when God has sent Meat, the Devil should send Cooks.
From a Rump, etc.
But Providence, their old Friend, brought these Saints off, at Last,
And through the Pikes and the Flames, un-dismembred they past,
Although (God wot) with many struglings, and much Have.
(For -- Members, -- or no Members was but a measuring Cast)
From a Rump, etc.
Being come to Whitehall; -- there is the dismal moan:
Let Monk be Damned, cries Arthur, in a terrible tone:
That Traitor: -- and those Cukoldly Rogues that set him on.
(But, though the Knight Spits blood, it is observed that he Draws none.
From a Rump, etc.
The Plague Bawle you, cries Harry Martyn, you have brought us to this
Condition,
You must be canting, and be Pox'd, -- with your Bare-bones Petition,
And take in that Bull-headed, splay-footed Member of Circumcision,
That Bacon-fac'd Jew, Corbet: that Son of Perdition.
From a Rump, etc.
Then in steps Driv'ling Mounson, to take up the Squabble:
That Lord; which first taught the use of the Wooden Dagger, and Laddle,
He, -- that out-does Jack Pudding, at a Custard, or a Caudle.
And were the Best Fool in Europe, but that he wants a Bauble.
From a Rump, etc.
More was said, to little Purpose; the next News, is a Declaration
From the Rump; for a Free State, according to the Covenant of the Nation,
And a Free-Parliament, under Oath, and Qualification,
Where none shall be Elect, but Members of Reprobation.
From a Rump, etc.
Here Is the Tail Firk'd; a Piece acted lately with great applause,
With a Plea for the Prerogative Breech, and the Good Old Cause:
Proving, that Rumps, and Members are antienter than Laws:
And that a Bumme Divided, is never the worse for the Flawes.
From a Rump, etc.
But all things have their Period, and Fate,
An Act of Parliament dissolves a Rump of State:
Members grow weak; and Tails themselves runs out of Date:
And yet thou shall not Dye; ( Dear Breech) thy Fame I Will celebrate.
From a Rump, etc.
Here lies a Pack of Cheats, that did their Souls, and Country Sell.
For Dirt: The Devil was their good Lord; him they served well;
By his Advice, they Stood, and Acted; and by his President they fell,
(Like Lucifer) making but one step betwixt Heaven, and Hell.
From a Rump insatiate as the Sea,
Libera nos Domine.
A Free-Parliament Letany.
To the Tune of, An old Soldier of the Queens.
1.
MOre Ballads; -- here is a spick -- and -- span new Supplication;
By Order of a Committee for the Reformation,
To be read in all Churches and Chapels of this Nation,
Upon pain of Slavery, and Sequestration.
From Fools and Knaves, in our Parliament-free
Libera nos Domine.
2.
From those that have more Religion, and less Conscience than their Fellows;
From a Representative, that is fearful, and jealous;
From a starting Jadish People, that is troubled with the yellows,
And a Priest that blows the Cole -- (a Turd in the Bellows.)
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
3.
From Shepherds, that lead their Flocks into the Briers;
And then, Fleece 'um. -- From Vow-breakers, and King-tryers:
Of Church and Crown Lands from both Sellers and Buyers:
From the Children of him, that is the Father of Liars.
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
4.
From the Doctrine and Discipline of Sedgewick
now, and anon;
Preserve us, and our wives: from
John a Nokes.
John T and Saint John a Styles.
John
Like Master, like Man, every way but one:
The Master has a large Conscience and the Man has none.
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
5.
From Major Generals, -- Army -- Officers; and that Phanatique Crew:
From the Parboyl'd Pimp Scot; and from Good-face the Jew:
From old Mildmay, that in Cheapside mistook his Repulsed by a Citizens wife.
Que^e,
And from him that wont Pledge -- give the Devil his due.
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
6.
From long-winded Speeches, and not a wise word,
From a Gospel Ministry settled by the Sword,
From the Act of a Rump, that stinks when it is stirred;
From a Knight of the Post, and a Cobling Lord,
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
7*
From all the Rich People that have made us Poor;
From a Speaker that creeps to the House by a Back-dore:
From that Badger Robinson, (that limps, and bites sore:)
And that dog in a doublet Arthur, -- that will do so no more
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
8.
From a certain Sly Knave with a Beastly name:
From a Parl'ment that is wild, and a People that is tame.
From Skippon, Titchbourne, Ireton, -- and another of the Same;
From a Dunghill Cock, and a Hen of the Game.
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
9.
From all those that sat in the High Court of Justice;
From Usurpers, that style themselves the Peoples Trustees;
From an old Rump, in which neither Profit nor Gust is;
And from the recov'ry of that which now in the Dust is.
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
10.
From a backsliding Saint, that pretends to Acquiesce;
From crossing of Proverbs (let 'um Hang that confess)
From a Sniveli^g Cause in a Pontifical dress:
And two Jacks both.
Lawyer's, with the Devil,
And his Damm in a mess.
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
11.
From those that trouble the Waters to mend the Fishing;
And fight the Lord's Battles, under the Devill's Commission:
Such as eat up the Nation, while the Government's a Dishing,
And from a People when it should be Doing stands Wishing.
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
12.
From an everlasting Mock-Parliament; -- and from none;
From Straffords Old friends, -- Harry, Jack and John.
From the Sollicitor's Wolf Law, deliver our King's Son:
And from the Resurrection of the Rump that is dead and gone.
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
13.
From Foreigne Invasion and Commotions at Home,
From our present Distraction, and from worse to come:
From the same hand again, Smectymnuus or the Bumme:
And from taking Geneva in our way to Rome.
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
14.
From a Hundred thousand pound Tax, to maintain Knaves and Whores:
(But it is well given to These, that turned Those out of Doors)
From undoing our Selves, in plastring old Sores:
He that set them a work, let him pay their Scores.
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
15.
From Saints, and Tender-Consciences in ^uff;
From Mounson in a Foam; and Haslerig in a Huff;
From both Men and Women that think they never have Enough.
And from a Fools Head that looks through a Chain and a Ruff.
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
16.
From those that would divide the General and the City;
From Harry Martins Whore, that was neither Sound nor Pretty;
From a Faction, that has neither Brain nor Pity;
From the Mercy of a Phanatique Committee*
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
17.
Preserve us good Heaven from intrusting those,
That have Much to Get, and Little to Loose;
That Murdered the Father, and the Son would Depose.
(Sure they cannot be Our Friends, that are their Countrey's Foes,)
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
18.
From Bradshaw^'s Presumption, and from Hoyle's Despairs;
From rotten Members; blind Guides; Preaching Aldermen; and false May'rs;
From Long Knives, Long Ears, Long Parliaments, and Long Prayers,
In mercy to this Nation, -- Deliver us and our Heirs.
From Fools and Knaves, etc.
Libera nos Domine.
A Dialogue betwixt TOM and DICK: the former a Countryman, the other a
Citizen^ Presented to his Excellency and the Council of State, at Drapers-Hall
in London, March 28. 1660.
To the Tune of I Will never love thee more.
Tom. NOw would I give my life to see
This wondrous Man of might.

Dick. Do see that Jolly Lad? That Is he;
I Will warrant him he is Right.
There Is a true Trojan in his face:
Observe him over and over.

Dick. Come Tom; If ever George be base, Chorus
Never trust good fellow more.
He Is none of that Phantastique Brood,
That Murder while they Pray;
That Trusse and Cheat us for our Good;
(All in a Godly way,)
He drinks no Blood, and They no Sack
Into their Guts will pour.
But if George does not do the Knack, Cho.
Never trust good fellow more.
His quiet Conscience needs no Guard;
He Is Brave, but full of Pity.

Tom. Yet by your leave he knocked so hard,
H'ad like to awaked the City.

Dick Fool, 'Twas the Rump that let a Fart,
The Chains and Gates it tore,
But if George bears not a true heart, Cho.
Never trust good fellow more.

Tom. Your City blades are cunning Rooks;
How rarely you collog^e him?
But when your Gates flew off the Hooks,
You did as much be-rogue him.

Dick. Pug'h -- 'Twas the Rump did only feel
The blows the City bore.
But if George ben't as true as Steel, Cho.
Never trust good fellow more.

Tom. Come, by this Hand, we will crack a quart,
Thou Wilt pledge his health, I trow.

Tom. Tope boy, Dick -- A lusty dish my heart,
Away w'ot; Tom -- Let it go.
Drench me you slave in a full Bowl,
I Will take it and 'twere a score.

Dick. Nay, if George be'nt a hearty soul, Cho.
Never trust Good Fellow more.

Tom. But hark you, Sirrah, we are too loud,
He Will Hang us by and by.
Me'thinks; he should be vengeance Proud?

Dick. No more than Theee or I.


Tom. Why then I Will give him the best Blade
That e're the Bilbo wore.

Dick. If George prove not a Bonny Lad, Cho.
Never trust Good Fellow more.

Tom. 'Twas well he came, we'd mawl'd the Tail.
-- We Have all thrown up our Farms,
And from the Musket to the Flayl,
Put all our Men in Arms.
The Girls had taken the Members down,
Never saw such things before.

Dick. If George speak not the Town our own, Cho.
Never trust Good Fellow more.

Dick. But prithee, are the Folk so mad?


Tom. So mad say? -- They Are undone,
There Is not a Penny to be had,
And every Mothers Son
M^st fight, if he intend to eat,
Grow Valiant now he is Poor.

Dick. Come -- yet if Geore don't do the feat, Cho.
Never trust Good Fellow more.

Tom. Why Richard, it is a Devilish thing,
We Are not left worth a Groat.
My Doll has sold her Wedding-ring,
And Sue has pawned her Coat.
The Sniv'ling Rogues abused our Squire,
And called our Mistress Whore.

Dick. Yet -- if George don't what we require,
Never trust Good Fellow more.

Tom. By this good day; I did but Speak,
They took my Py-ball'd Mare;
And put the Carri'on Wench to the squeak:
(Things go against the Hair.)
Our Prick-ear'd Cor'nel looks as bigg
Still, as he did before.

Dick. And yet if George don't hum his Gigg, Chapter
Never trust Good Fellow more.
'Faith, Tom our Case is much at one;
We Are broke for want of Trade;
Our City's baffled and undone,
Betwixt the Rump and Blade.
We Have emptied both our Veins and Baggs
Upon a F^ctious Score.
If George compassion not our Rags Cho.
Never trust Good Fellow more.

Tom. But what do thou think should be the Cause
Whence all these Mischiefs spring?

Dick Our damned breach of Oaths and Laws;
Our Murder of the King.
We have been Slaves since Charles his reign*
We lived like Lords before.
If George don't set all right again, Cho.
Never trust Good Fellow more.

Tom. Our Vicar -- (And he is one that knows)
Told me once, -- I know what* --
(And yet the Thief is woundy Close)

Dick. It Is all the better; -- That
H'as too much Honesty and Wit,
To let his Tongue run over;
If this prove not a luchy hit, Chorus.
Never trust Good Fellow more.
Shall's ask him, what he means to do?

Tom. -- 'Good faith, with all my heart;
Thou make the better Leg of the Two:
Take Thou the Better part:
I Will follow, if thou wilt lead the Van.

Dick. Content; -- I Will march before.
If George prove not a gallant man, Chor.
Never trust Good Fellow more.
My Lord; -- in Us the Nation craves
But what you're bound to do.

Tom. -- We have lived Drudges: Ric. -- And we:

Both. We would not dye so too.
Restore us but our Laws again; Chorus
The unborn shall thee adore;
If George denies us his Amen,
Never trust Good Fellow more.

A Psalm of Mercy. Usula, (who cry's Ends of Gold and Silver) reads, and all
the Sisters sing.
To the Tune of, Now thanks to the Powers below* Sing it in the Nose.
WHat a Reprobate crew is here,
Who will not have Jesus Reign?
But send all our Saints
To Bonds and Restraint,
And kill 'um again and again?
Let Us rise in a holy fear,
And fight for our heavenly King*
We will have no power
But Vane in the Tower
To rule us in any thing!
Come Sister, and sing
An Hymn to our King,
Who sits on high Degree;
The Men at Whitehall,
And the wicked shall fall,
And hey, then up go We.
A Match, quoth my sister Joyce;
Contented, quoth Rachel too;
Quoth Abigaile, yea, and Faith, verily,
And Charity, let 't be so.
Our Monarchy is the Fifth,
Shall last for a thousand years;
Of The wicked on earth
There shall be a dearth,
When Jesus himself appears!
And we are the Babes of Grace,
The fruits of an holy Seed;
For old Father Cann
(That Reverend man)
Begat us in Word and Deed.
The earth is our own,
For Title there is none,
But in the right Heirs of Sion;
Then let us be free,
For verily we
No King have but Judah's Lion.
It Is verity, quoth old Joane,
And Sooth, quoth my sister Prue,
It Is manifest truth, quoth mortified Ruth,
And the Gospel is so, says Su.
The Bishops and Bells shall down,
For we have an holy Call;
The Saints are beyond
All Order and Bond
Of duty to Priests of Baal.
Their Pipes and Organs too,
Their Superstitious Shirt,
Their Canons and Bulls,
(To cozen poor Gulls,)
We Will trample 'um in the Dirt.
No Ordinance shall
Command us all,
For we are above their thrall.
We care not a Straw
For Reason or Law;
For Conscience is all in all.
Ay marry, quoth Agatha,
And Temperance, eke also,
Quoth Hanna, it is just, and Mary it must
And shall be, quoth Grace, I trow.
The Steeple-house Lands are ours,
Kings, Queens, Delinquents too,
And James's and all
The Court at White Hall,
And Somerset House also.
For The'balds it is our right,
And Marrow-bone-Park to boot,
And Eltham's our own.
At Endfield there is none,
But our selves that shall grub a root.
And Greenwich shall be
For Tenements, free
For Saint to possess Pell-mell.
And where all the Sport
Is at Hampton Court,
Shall be for our selves to dwell.
It Is blessed, quoth Bathsheba,
And Clemence, w' ar' all agreed;
It Is right, quoth Gartrude, and fit says sweet Jude.
And Th^m^sine yea indeed.
For Husbands we shall have have none,
But Brothers in purity;
We will not be Wives
And tie up our Lives
To Villainous slavery;
But couple in love and fear;
When moved by the spirit to it;
For there is no sin
To let a Saint in,
When he has the grace to do it.
And thus are we taught,
No folly is wrought,
When Brothers will execise*
Both Kiffin and Hills
(No Printer of Bills)
Have proved it in ample wise.
It Is true, quoth Elizabeth,
And it is very good, quoth Pris,
And Aquila too will have it be so,
And so will my Sister Si^.
What though the King Proclaim's
Our Meetings no more shall be;
In private we may
Hold forth the right way,
And be, as we should be, free,
Our Husbands we will make believe,
We go but to take the air,
Or visit a Nurse,
And lighten their Purse
With a little dissembling Prayer.
Or if they be cross,
(Let um stand to the loss)
We Will tempt our Apprentices,
(By writing a Dash,
To cozen the Cash,)
And make 'um mere Novices.
Oh very well said, quoth Con,
And so will I do, says Franck.
And Mercy cry's I, and Mat, really,
And I Am of that mind, quoth Thank.
We Will cut off the wicked Rout,
And bath us all in their Bloods;
Their Houses and Land
We Will have at Command.
And common upon their Good^s
No mortal King nor Priest,
No Lord, nor Duke we will have,
We Will grind 'um to Grist,
And live as we lift,
And we will do wonders brave;
Come Dor^as and Cloe,
With Lois and Zoe,
Young Letice and Beterice and Jane,
Phill, Dorothy, Mawd,
Come troup it abroad,
For now is our time to reign.
Sa, sa, quoth my sister Bab,
And Kill 'um, quoth Margery;
Spare none, cry's old Tib, nor quarter says Sib.
And hey! for our Monarchy.
Let Us all take the Sacrament,
That we to each other be true,
And kill without pity
In Country and City,
The wicked ungodly Crew.
We Will favor no Sex, nor Age,
No Quality, nor Degree;
But all shall to Pot,
Both English and Scot,
That hinder our Liberty.
The Mayor of the Town,
(That terrible Brown,)
And Cox and the Captains all,
We Will torture and slay
In a merciless way,
And mince 'um, like herbs, as small.
Ay, that is the way, quoth Emm,
Quoth Phoebe, we conquer shall;
Says Lucy, it is well; quoth Jylian and Nell,
'Twill make us amend for all.
A Loyal Wish.
What Faith, Hope, and Charity,
Fanatics in Truth profess,
By Germanie's Woe,
And our Rebels or, Sisters, Vtrum, horum, harum.
here too,
Well may we do more than guess
The ar' just like Gadarens Swine,
Which the Devils did drive and bewitch!
An Herd, set on evil,
Will run to the Devil,
And's Dam, when their Brains
Tails do itch:
The let 'um run on!
Says Ned, Tom, and John:
Ay! let 'um be hanged, quoth Mun!
Th'ar' mine quoth old Nick,
And take 'um says Dick,
And well come! quoth worshipful D^.
And God bless King Charles, quoth George,
And save him, says Simon and Sill,
I, I, quoth old Cole, and each loyal Soul*
And Amen, and Amen, cry's Will.
The Honest Men's Resolution.
But what, shall we do with our Wives,
That fi^k up and down the Town?
And one is for Bowls,
And the other for Knowles,
But all against Cox and Brown?
They cheat us all with their looks,
And snivell and snot by roate!
And nothing but sqeak,
For Venner and Feake,
And for a Laced Morning-Coat,
For such a Bell-dam,
Says Sylas and Sam,
Let Us have an Italian Lock!
No, no! It Is far better,
Quoth Robin and Peter,
To take 'um all down in the Dock!
But that will not do, says Nump,
Then nothing, says Roger and Raph!
Let Us lay 'um, says Not, and splay 'um, says Wat,
And then we shall make 'um safe.
But, Faith, you are all out oth' way!
The Sisters have such a Trick!
No Instrument will
Seclude 'um from ill,
But still against P -- 's, they will kick.
What shall we do then? quoth Hall,
Let Us cope up their Lechery!
Says Rowland we may,
Be Masters, that way.
But will not last long, quoth Theophilus.
The.
What shall we do then,
Quoth Cutbert and Ben.
Let Us do 'um like men, quoth Dan,
Let Us fill up their Chincks,
Says Mystical Sphynx.
Quoth Taffie, then I Am your man!
And I am as cut, quoth Cad,
And She^kin, Me ^at-a-whe.
Ap Howel, It Is true, and Morgan and Hug^
Y Cambrie, Dieu, Dal^h-a-whe.
FINIS.

