THE NATURE OF TRUTH Its Union and Unity with the SOUL, Which is One in its
Essence, Faculties, Acts; One with TRUTH.

Discussed by the Right Honorable ROBERT Lord BROOK, in a Letter to a private
Friend.

By whom it is now published for the Public Good.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop, for Samuel Cartwright, at the Bible in
Duck-lane, 1641.

THE PREFACE to the Reader, Showing what first gave Birth to This Discourse of
TRVTH.
READER,
WIthout an Epithet: for, you must expect no complements. I am now a Pleader,
and so am forbid (...) or (...): Yet, with submission to That Severe Court
Areopagus: for, such were the orders for all Pleaders there: Aristotel. Rhet.
lib. 1 Lucian. in Anachars.
, I hope 'twill be no offense, by breaking their First Injunction, to keep
their Second. One Word then by way of Preface, may perhaps not seem
unseasonable, unnecessary, and so not (...).

This Divine Discourse of Truth, coming to me, from so Noble an Hand; I could
not envy it the Public Light: For, what heart could endure to stifle such a
Beauty, at its first Birth, at its first Breath? Nay, though Cruelty should
scorn to take a check, yet Power it self, might plead impotent, for such an
Act. For, where, or who is He, that can resist the struglings of Divine Truth,
forcing its way out from the Womb of Eternity? Where, or who is He that by a
Viperous wrea^he Wi^h such, Juno assayed to kill Hercules in his cradle, as the
Poets say.
, or other assault, can smoother Hercules, though yet but sprawling in his
cradle? View then This newborn Beauty; mark its Feature, proportion,
lineaments; Tell me now, was Its Birth an object of pity? or rather of envy?
at least admiration; for, Envy finds no place in Noble spirits.

One thing yet, I must excuse (which yet indeed needs no excuse) A Second
Conception is here First borne; yet not Abortive; no, but by mature thoughts,
it is again decreed, the elder shall serve the younger. For, That was meant the
Act, This but the Prologue, ushering in That yet more curious Concept (if such
be possible) which was an Embryo before This, but is yet Unborn.

The truth is, This Noble Lord (the Author of this following Discourse) having
dived deep in those Prophetic Mysteries (at which his first lines glaunce,
Matthew. 24. Apocal. 20
in this) was even forced (by that occasion) upon a more exact and abstract
speculation of Truth it self; naked Truth, as in her self, without her gown,
without her crown.

At first view, he saw her sparkle with most glorious luster; But her Rays
daz'led his eyes, so that he durst not, he could not, enough behold, admire,
and adore, her perfect Beauty, exact Proportion, Divine Harmony; yet though
daz'led, he viewed still; remembering that of the Ar^opagite Dionys. de Divinis
Neminib.
, Earthly Bodies are best seen in, and by, Light; But Spiritual Beauties,
(...), in, and by, Divine Clouds, Divine Darkness? This, This is the best
Perspective to Divine Objects; and the Brightest Stars shine best, sparkle
most, in the Darkest, the Blackest Night.

That which ravished his Soul most, and most enforced him more to pry, to adore
more, Was, the experience of that which Plato speaks: When our Souls (says
he) glance first upon Divine Light, Epist. ad Dionys.
they are soon ravished, and cannot but pry more and more, because in it they
see (...), somewhat of Kin to themselves. And this Kindred, if I mistake not,
is the nearest possible; more then Consanguinity; I had almost said more then
Identity it self. For, alas, that Corporal Union in Materials, which we
miscall sometimes Identity, is at best but a cold touch in a point or two; a
most disdainful embrace (at greatest distance) in those Beings which have much
(...), See Plato's Parmenid. and Timeus.
and but little (...), as Plato's Mastet taught him long ago. But in
Spiritual Beings, and in These only, is True Harmony, Exact Convenience,
Entire Identity, Perfect Union, to be found.

Such, even Such, is That near Relation, That near Kindred between the Soul
and Truth; as will fully appear in This following Discourse of Truth; (which
was never meant, nor now published, but as a Prodromus to a Future Treatise
about Prophetic Truth revealed now in Scripture:) Of which I shall only add
this; Read it; if it displease, Read it again, and yet again; and then judge.
It needs not my Apology; if so, I might truly say, When 'twas first Wrote,
'twas intended but a Letter to a private Friend, (not a Critic;) and since its
first writing, and sending, 'twas never so much as perused, much less,
refined, by its Noble Author.

One Word more I must speak, and so have done. If any Ingenuous Reader shall
Dissent (in any Particular of Consequence) and freely, yet ingenuously,
manifest the Reasons of his Dissent: Nothing can be more grateful to This
Noble Lord, who promises the Fairest Answer; for, His Aim is only Search of
Truth; which, His Lordship well knows, is often best found, as Sparks in the
Flint, by much Contusion.

Yet, if any shall wrangle, not dispute: rudely thrust, or strike not like a
Gentleman; His Return will be, only a Rational Neglect.

I. S

REcensui tractatum hunc, qui inscribitur, ( The Nature of Truth,) per
illustrissimum piissimumque Dominum. Robertum D. Brook editum: apprime sane
Doctum, profundisque conceptibus insignitum: quapropter dignissimum arbitror
qui in summam utilitatem typis mandetur.

November. 19. 1640. Johannes Hansley, R. P. Episc. Land. Capell. domest.

THE NATURE OF TRUTH. Discussed in a Letter to a private Friend.
SIR,
I Have according to my poor talent, essayed to find out the true sense of
the Spirit in these Mat. 24. Rev. 20. Expounded, in another Treatise.
two Chapters, and in this Inquest, have improved the labors of the piously
learned; from whom I have received little other favor than this, that they
have not seduced me; they not having approached so near to the truth, as to
dazzle it. I confess, that Reverend, that bright man, Master Brightman, has
clothed his opinion, with such a Sirenian glory, that he had almost been to me
an ignis fatuus. I had almost, in following the old, lost the young, lost the
nest of Lapwings. But, with all respect to his Worth, (if I am not mightily
mistaken) I have escaped that Syrtis; and yet dare I not with the Philosopher
cry out (...); for, 2 Cor. 2.16.
who is fit for these things?

Every truth is Veritas in sundo putei. Democr.
a myste^y; what must that be then, which is purposely veiled by the Spirit?
Jesus Christ, who is styled in Scripture, the Ioh. 14.6.
way, truth, life, light, (and these things are apprehended by sense, and are
common) is to 1 Cor. 1.23.
the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness.

May we not then justly say of him that dares pry into the Arc, with hopes and
thoughts clearly to unfold the mysterious, the prophetical part of Jesus
Christ, to unknit the Gordian knot; May we not say of him, what GOD says of
Job; Who is this that darkeneth wisdom with counsel? Job 38.2.


Alas, are we not all since Adams lapse buried under the shadow of death, and
lost in the region of darkness? Who is there that knows truth? 1 Cor. 8.2
He that thinks he knows any thing, knows nothing as he should.

Moral truth, which (as some think) is yet more within our reach, than those
sacred mysteries, is unknown to us, both in the universal nature, and in the
particular actings of it; Difficilia quae pulchra.

Indeed Truth is that golden apple, which though it has (in some sense) been
offered to the fairest; yet the most refined wits, the most high-raised fancies
of the world, have courted her in vain, these many ages: For whilst they have
sought, with a Palsy hand, this glorious star, through the perspective of
thick reason, they have either mounted too high, A double error in searching
of truth.
and confounding the Creator with the creature, made her God; or descending too
low, and deserting the universal nature, have co^fined their thoughts to some
individual Truth, and restrained her birth to several parcels within the
Chaos.

THE NATURE OF TRUTH. Its union and unity with the SOUL.
CHAP. I. The Understanding and the Truth-understood, are one.
TRUTH is indeed of the seed Royal, of Progeny Divine: yet so, as to be (for I
may say of her, what the Spirit says of Faith) Rom 10.8
near us, to be in us. And when she is pleased to descend into our valleys,
and to converse with us, she erects her own pavilion, and does fix it in
whatsoever is lovely in us.

The Understanding is her throne, there she reigns, and as she is there
seated, as she shines in that part of the soul; she appears to me under two
notions, which are also her measure through the whole sphere of Being; as will
be discovered more hereafter, when these lesser streams shall have emptied
themselves by progress into a larger river.

First, that very Being, which immediately flows from above, and is the rise
or the first and uniforme groundwork in this particular Being which we now
treat of, The Understanding or Truth there, under two notions.
and which under this notion we call the form or substance.

Secondly, those workings which breathe from thence, as all actions and
sayings, which are (in our phrase) the effects of a reasonable soul.

I shall first in few words treat of the first, and then very briefly conclude
with a word or two upon the second part of Truth.

This first Truth is the Understanding in its Essence: An argument proving the
nature of the Understanding to be Truth.
for what is the Understanding other than a Ray of the Divine Nature, warming
and enlivening the Creature, conforming it to the likeness of the Creator? And
is not Truth the same? For the Beauty of Truths character is, that she is a
shadow, a resemblance of the first, the best form; that she is light, the
species, the sparkling of primitive light; that she is life, the sublimation of
light, Vitaest in se reflectio. Sen. Epist. Life a higher degree of light.
that she may reflect upon her self.

That she is light, none will deny; that light in reasonable creatures is the
fountain of life, is manifest. For the form of a reasonable soul is light,
and therefore when the soul informs and gives life to Animal rationale, it
enableth the creature to work according to light, and upon Her accesses the
organs can entertain light, as the eye then beholds the light of the Sun; The
eye by the presence of the soul made able to see light.
upon Her retirements they are dark and useless. Thus whilst life is light,
and light is Truth, and Truth is conformity to God; and the understanding as we
yet discourse of it, is this light to the soul, the Understanding and Truth
can be but one.

CHAP. II. The second Argument, proving that truth is the Nature of the
Understanding.
I Know the learned choose rather to style the understanding, a faculty; Most
call the understanding a faculty.
and so institute a soul recipient; a Being ( scil. Truth) received; and a
faculty, which is the understanding, whereby the soul receives and acts
according to what it does entertain.

But with submission to their better judgment, I should crave leave to make
one Quaere.

Three notions requisite to the constitution of every Being.
Are there not to the constitution of every Being three notions requisite?

First, the Fountain communicating.

Secondly, the Channel entertaining.

Thirdly, the Waters imparted.

I confess, we must not in Metaphysicall Beings expect Physical
subsistencies; yet (...) all learning does allow of. But where shall we find
these in the understanding? The understanding as a faculty affords not these
3. notions.
whilst the intellect passes under the notion of a faculty. Indeed we may
discern the last ( scil.) those sweet beams of light which beat upon us
continually.

But where is the second which entertaineth them? The understanding is not the
subject of truth.
If it be the understanding, then the light which differe^ceth us from the
vegetative and sensitive creatures, lies in the understanding, and not in the
soul; and the soul (which all men hold to be a spiritual Being) is but a
Theca to the intellect, as the body is the Tabernacle of the soul. Or, if the
soul has light as well as the understanding, then are there two enlightened
Beings in one reasonable creature: Non belle quaedam faciunt duo, Marti. l. 5.
epi. 53.
sufficit unus Huic operi. Two reasonable Beings in one Compositum, is too
unreasonable a thing.

Thirdly, Who is it that communicates this light? It is conveyed to the
understanding either from the soul, or some other way.

The understanding receives not truth from the soul.
If from the soul, then the soul does not find the defect of the
understanding. For, if the soul can communicate light, then has it light
already; the same, or more excellent; then can it work, diffuse light, and
enjoy it self; and so this faculty, the understanding, shall be in vain.

If in any other way, it must either be immediately from God, or mediante
Creatura.

If from a creature, Not from any creature
and not from the soul, it must be by some other faculty intervenient. For,
if the soul (which by their consent is a more noble Agent than the
understanding) cannot, according to their Doctrine, act without a faculty; how
shall an inferior Being work, without some such like subservient help? And thus
may you excurrere in infinitum, which, according to the Philosophers, may not
be done; for, Entia non sunt multiplicanda, nisi necessario.

If the truth come from God, Not from God.
then why is it not immediately, intrinsecally, infused into the soul it
self? But however the understanding be enricht with this treasure of Truth,
Deus agit a centro in circumserentiam.
if it be imparted to it, then is it, it self that Truth, that light which I
contend for. For God does not communicate light (by light (which I take in a
Metaphorical sense) I understand some spiritual excellency) and such light (I
say) God does not offer but to light. For, quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad
modum recipientis. Cleopatra her dissolved union would have been to Esops cock
of less value than a barley corn. And if the understanding have not light, In
spiritual giving and receiving there must be a metaphysical union
it cannot take it, unless by being turned into the nature of it. For what
giving and receiving can here be, besides that which makes both to become one
and the self same? Light came into the world, John 1.5.
but it was refused by darkness. Ignoti nulla cupido.

Thus the understanding and light are different in names, may be different in
degrees, but not in nature. For what that Reverend man Doct. of Syn. Dort. p.
25. lin. 12 Neither a quality permanent, nor an act immanent, unless they be
made inherent in the soul, and the latter also produced by it, can be said to
be given to the soul.
Doctor Twist says most acutely of a spiritual gift, I may say of spiritual
light. The soul cannot refuse a spiritual gift (I now speak in his phrase.)
The soul and any spiritual Being do not, as corporeal things, greet each
other by the help of the Loco-motive faculty; but when Grace is given by God to
the soul, there is, as it were ( da veniam voci) an hypostaticall union betwixt
the gift and the soul; and the soul cannot reject it, because they are no
more. Two but one. To receive light is to be light.
So to be in the capacity or act of receiving light, is to be light.

Lastly, how passes this light from the understanding to the soul? Will not
here be left as vast a gulf, as they make between the understanding and the
will, which make them diverse; whence grow those inextricable disputes, How the
the will is made to understand, what the understanding judges fit to be
willed?

CHAP. III. A prosecution of the second Argument, wherein these three notions
are applied to the understanding, being made one with the truth.
ALl these rubs are easily taken out of the way, If you make the understanding
light, you have the three notions which make up every Being.
if you make that which you call the understanding, truth. For then have you,

First, the Father of mercies, dispencing light and truth.

Secondly, light and truth dispensed.

Thirdly, the totum existens, consisting of matter and form, of material and
immateriall Beings (as we distinguish them) called a reasonable creature thus
informed or constituted, which we name the recipient of this light and truth.

Do not tell me, that I thus make the recipient and thing received all one;
that is not strange in emanation divine. In Scripture you have a parallel of
this. The 4. vial mentioned Rev. 16.8. is the thing emptying and emptied upon
it self.
The fourth vial is poured out upon the Sun ( scil.) the Scriptures, and the
Scriptures are the vial it self; the Scripture is emptied upon it self, it
is agent and patient, receiver and received. I know learned Mede to prevent
this, which to him is a difficulty, imagines the Emperor to be the Sun; but
in two words that is thus disproved.

First, the Emperor is no where called the Sun in this book; when he receives
a metaphorical typical title, he is called the Dragon.

Secondly the Scriptures are in the Revelation diverse times set forth to us by
the Sun. So that if you refuse the sense which I fix upon, then you do not
only forsake, but oppose the Scripture Phrase.

But were not this truth mounted in a celestial chariot, Nay in all things
Agent and Patient must be one to him that considers.
Reason it self would evince it. For, consider any individual Being you
please, vegetative or rational, or what you will, No Being but it is the thing
receiving and received
who is it that entertaineth this Being, but the Being it self which is
entertained? Who is it that receives from the womb of Eternity that reasonable
creature, but the creature received?

The vanity of that question, Whether the soul be continens or contentum,
discovered
The ignorance of this Point, has raised that empty Question, Whether the Soul
or the Body be contentum? For if every Being be its own contentum, this
Question will seem to be no more a difficulty. And if there happen any near
union betwixt two Beings, as the Body and the Soul, the first is not
continens, the other contentum; but as husband and wife, each brings his part
toward the making up of the compositum.

Thus without any violalation of Reasons right, I seem justly to conclude,
that the totum existens, consisting of matter and form, the reasonable
creature, is the Recipient of this truth.

CHAP. IIII. This Argument further cleared by more objections propounded and
answered.
BUT still it is demanded, why may not the understanding supply the third
place? why may it not be this Recipient?

To whom I give this answer; The Understanding cannot be the recipient.
That if they make the understanding but a quality, and depending upon some
other Being, it cannot, as I have proved in this Discourse, course, be the
recipient: but if they look upon it as this light, this truth it self, then
the dispute is reconciled.

Some call the Intellect virtus qua.
Some conceive, all these difficulties are cured, if you make the understanding
only virtus qua, concluding with the Philosopher, that ibi subsistendum est,
without inquiry after a further progress. I could Iurare in verbamagistri, I
could acquiesce here, but that I desire to be convinced by reason and not by
terms. I shall therefore humbly ask this question.

The Intellect cannot be virtus qua.
What difference is there betwixt virtus qua and a faculty? as in a knife, the
cutting arises from the sharpness, and this sharpness is virtus qua, or the
faculty whereby the knife does cut.

If it be but a faculty, then I repair to my former answer: but if something
else than a faculty, it must either be a nominall Being, or real existence.

If the first, it bears no weight.

If the second, then I say, it must entertain species (for all spiritual
glories do operate by the communication of their divine species) and then will
you be cast upon the former rock.

Yet still they say, the understanding, being a spiritual Being, receives
light in some way which we know not; and so they proceed to obscure
distinctions and voluminous discourses, concerning intellectus agens and
intellectus patiens or passibilis. But the wiser sort of them, As the Arabians,
Zabarell, etc.
perceiving the thinness, aerialnesse and crazinesse of this Spiders web, have
with greater probability made God to be intellectus agens, by his influence
upon the understanding.

The last objection answered.
Respon. Is not this the Athenian Altar, which groaned under that
Superscription, Act. 17. verse. 23.
To the unknown God? I would I could discover with S. Paul to them this light,
this truth, which they know not, that they might love it and embrace it. But
secondly, I dispute not against things I know not: They know not this. I know
that I may better maintain the other, that the Understanding is not the
Recipient of this light, than they aver that it is, in a way whereof they
never hope to find any footsteps.

CHAP. V. The Soul and truth in the Soul are one.
I May yet be pressed with this objection: All these difficulties may be urged
against the Soul, which have been produced against the Understanding.

Resp. Are not these like the untrue Mother, who will kill the child, because
she cannot call it her own? If these inconveniences be justly urged against the
Soul, it will not deliver the Understanding. But I will deal ingenuously, and
confess that if you take the Soul under any other notion than Truth; If you
deem it, first to be a Being, and then to be light, as God made Adam first (I
mean the body) and then breathed life into him; if, I say, there be first a
Being, and then an infusion of light, you will be pressed with the former
arguments. But if you make the Understa^ding, The Soul, Understanding, Truth,
all but one.
the Soul, Light, Truth, one, then are you quite delivered out of all these
straights, and then is it true which I aver, that, that degree of light,
which we enjoy in the inward man, is the specificall difference, which
distinguishes between us and brutes, deservedly called reason, that ample
Sphere of Truth, which is the All in us, and besides which we are wholly
nothing.

Are not we said to be made after the image of God? An Argument proving the
Soul and Truth to be one.
and if in any thing we are honored with this inscription, it is in the most
noble part? Now God is unus, purus, simplex actus. For (with submission to his
better learning and judgment) I cannot subscribe to D^ Ames his manner of
expression, God and his attributes are not two.
who says, first there is God, and then his attributes are in him, Deo insunt
quasi in esse secundo, ab essentia and inter se distinguuntur non solum ratione
rationante, sed etiam rationata, ita ut fundamentum distinctionis sit in ipso
Deo. Theo. lib. 1. cap. 4. Sect. 27.28.
tanquam in esse secundo. If then we do bear his impresse, quanquam non
passibus aequis, it must be in that which is (as far as we can judge) DEI
formalis ratio, which is to be purus, simplex actus.

In this our shadowy resemblance of the Deity, I shall not challenge
perfection; for though the Scripture say, 1 Ioh. 3. verse. 2.
We shall hereafter be perfect as he is perfect, and does here style us,
partakers of divine nature; yet all this is to be understood according to our
little model. Unity is that wherein we carry some touches, some lineaments of
his Majesty. Unity is Gods Essence. Unity is all what we are. For division
being the birth of nothing, can be nothing. And thus may we raise from our
Microcosme, Truth as it has been described, resembles the Trinity.
a passable Hieroglyphick of the Trinity.

Truth as it is in the breast of Eternity intended to the Sons of men,
resembles Patrem intelligentem; as it descends from above, Filium intellectum;
as it informs the Soul, enjoys and reflecteth upon it self, Spiritum
dilectum. We must not then expect, First, a Being of the Soul: Secondly, a
faculty whereby it works. God and his attributes, are but one; mercy and
justice kiss each other in him; he and they are ens necessarium; And so the
Soul and the Faculty is one, that divine light and truth.

CHAP. VI. All things are this one light or truth, shining from God.
BUt if the Intellect, the Soul, Light and Truth are (from the reasons
alleged) all but one, this argument will press all things that are; then will
all Being fall under the same Predicament.

This is that which I aimed at; and why not? Seeing that* First, all Being is
derived from the same fountain, scil. from him who is uniforme, in all like
himself.

Secondly, All Being is the same in nature, ( scil.) a beam of that excellent
light, and therefore in Metaphysics Vnum, verum, bonum, Ens,
terminiconvertibiles. All being is this truth.
Truth and Being are one.

Thirdly, All Being is entertained in the same manner by every individual
existence, which is the subject receiving this light from above: and all real
true reception is alone by similitude and union of nature.

Yet I shall not agree to confound the names of particular Beings, though I do
conjoyne their natures. For, all Being may be compared to light; in such a body
it is styled the Sun; in another it is called the Moon; in the third it
bears the name of a Star, and under various shapes, the names of various
Stars, as Syrius, Canopus, etc. but all is light, and it is but light. The body
of waters is by us called Seas; when they beat upon such a coast, it bears
one name; when it coasteth upon another soil, it receives a several
denomination. All Being is this light, this truth; but contained within those
Circles, it appears to us under this name; and again, it has another style
when it beats upon a various object.

All Being is but light, communicating it self to us through several
crannies, some greater, some less, whilst all is light.

Vide Platonem in Phile. in Timaeo. Terminus, Insinitum, prima elementa, unde
quin. que genera teru^.
Plato most excellently, most acutely, most truly has made all Being of
Terminus and Infinitum.: The first Being appearing to us in several bounds and
measures amidst the vast infinity of darkness or nothing. Ficin. com. in
Tim^o. Vide Platonem ubique.


The Platonic Philosophers do not err, Omnes numeri in unitate.
who reduce all Beings to number, making one all and the chief, and the other
more or less glorious, as they have two, three, or four, more or less
numbers or degrees.

Whence they had this Maxim, I know not; this I know, Satan, that old Serpent,
is very learned, and can sometimes (as he does, when he calls Jesus the Christ
and son of God) can, I say, sometimes, tell true, that so he may even by
truth entaile to himself a certain interest in such Disciples as refuse any
other allurement than that of golden truth: and it is to be feared, that they
have had too great and free converse with him. For even this sweet point of
learning have they shamefully abused to charms and spells, as that of the
Poet, Virg. in (...).
Numero Deus impare Quia numerus impar, numerus indivisibilis. Ficin. comment.
in Plat. Timae.
gaudet. Two was cursed, because it first departed from unity; Three whereby
unity again returned into it self, became sacred.

But it may be ( and spero meliora) that they received it from the Egyptians,
and the Egyptians from the Hebrews.

Now, if this be true, (which I submit to the judgment of the wise) then all
Being is but one, and all things are more or less excellent, as they partake
more or less of this first Being.

This doctrine of Platonists will not be so unfavory, if we pay unto unity its
due tribute. I confess, according to true Philosophy, Time is but mensura
motus vel ordinis, which both are the same; Number, calculus temporis; One is
principium tantum numeri, and so it is hardly a part of that which is but the
handmaid of circumstance.

CHAP. VII. How unity is all in all things.
BUt I should desire The excellency of unity.
that we might consider whether it does not carry something in it, in nature
more glorious, something that may seem to inform a Being. If I cannot tell
what it is, you will excuse me, knowing how hard a thing it is to find out the
Form of any Being, and how much more hard to discover the Being of a Form.

But from this reason I do seem to collect some glimmering light of what I
now propound.

All Being seems to breath and catch after unity. Gravia do not more
naturally incline downwards, than all Being does naturally seek for unity.

Of Beings there are but two sorts.

Uncreated.

Created.

Uncreated, is God only.

Created, is

Spiritual. Moral. Physical. Mathematical.
In all these you will find Unity as it were the Form of their Being.

My thoughts, my ignorance, my no thoughts of the first, incomprehensible,
inaccessible Majesty, I desire to propound with fear, trembling and reverence.

If John in the midst of revelation, Rev. 22.9.
being overcome with nothing but the glitterings and sparklings of the
creature, did mistake, and worshipped one of his fellow servants; if the Jews
refused to trample upon any contemptible scroul, fearing lest, in them, the
namelesse name of God might be included: surely we in the midst of darkness,
having to do, not with the name, but with the nature of Eternity, ought to
cloathe our spirits with much modesty.

I shall therefore humbly propound this to consideration, Whether unity be not
all in God.

I confess there are three persons in one Godhead (and that is the mystery)
and yet but one God. And more there could not have been; for this God is
infinite, eternal, etc. and only one can be so; there cannot be two
Infinites, two Eternities.

And again, this one cannot not be otherwise, for if he could have been
something else, he had not been infinite.

If then unity be such a necessary (give us leave to speak as we can)
accident, as, without which God could not have been what he is: Unity all in
God.
may it not be said that unity is co-essentiall to him, seeing that the Deity
admits of no accidents? And if of his Essence, then unity is in him all, for
the Essence of God is all in God, and God in his Essence is but one Divinity.

Ob. But so, infinity, power, etc. all attributes are in God his Essence, as
well as unity?

Answ. All other attributes are at length resolved into this of unity. Of this,
can be given no account, but only negative. All explications flow from this,
return to this, that God is one.

Fic. comment. in Plat. Sympos.
What is it to be infinite? Ficinus answers, to have nothing of privation mixed,
to be plenus sui; which is to be One.

The power of God is the unity of all Being in one point. What is this, I am
that I am; but this, I am one? The same we may say of all other the names of
God.

Unity in spiritual Beings.
When we survay the nature of spiritual Beings, we shall find them in Scripture
styled one. For God reduces all the commandments to love. And the Saints, who
are, quatenus Saints, spiritual Beings, (for their Saintship is a spiritual
excellency) are styled, Romans 12.5. one body; and, Gal. 3.16. they are all one
in Jesus Christ.

Christ and his Church are but one body. Now, this union carries certainly
something with it more essential than a figure.

When the three persons are united in one deity, the union is more close than a
figurative union. The conjunction of the humane nature, and the second person
in the Trinity, is a very entire conjunction; and so is that of the Saints with
Christ. There is the union of the whole humane nature with one person. Here is
the union of diverse persons to the whole divine nature. And we may easily allow
a near union to these Metaphysicall Beings: seeing even in natural things,
there is as it were an unity, even of two Physical existences. For GOD says,
You two shall be one flesh; Genesis 2.24.
he says not one, but one flesh. But these are aenigmata, 1 Cor. 13.12.
while we see through glasses of flesh.

Moral.
Seeing Moral Beings are, by general consent, of fraternall alliance to
spiritual, both in nature and operation; I shall not say any thing of them,
but only what is said by all, that virtutes sunt concatenatae.

I shall therefore mind you but of this, Unity in Physical Beings.
how in Physical Beings, every thing does delight in unity. And this is very
plain in the stillicids of water, which, if there be water enough to follow,
will draw themselves into a small thread, because they will not sever: and when
they must disunite, then they cast themselves into round drops, as the figure
most resembling unity.

Whence is that Sympathy in nature between the Earth and the Adamant, but from
hence, that they being of one nature, desire to improve their unity by mutual
embraces?

When have the Sunbeams their vigor and efficacy, beating upon the burning
glass, but when the glass has gathered them all into one?

Where is the power of our five senses, which are in their nature so
honorable, that nihil cadit in intellectum, quod non prius cadit in sensum?
Where is their virtue, but in communis sensus? Nay (if I durst be so bold) but
this I may not now dispute: I conceive all the senses are but one, and that is
I am informed that my Lord Castle. I stand in his book de Veritate, affirms
that there is but one sense: but I am not so happy as to have that book by me,
nor do I remember it since my last reading it, so that I dare not say it
confidently.
Tactus. For their Energie is nothing till the ray from the object to the
organ, and from the organ to the object touch in one.

It is most happily expressed by Sir John Suckling; [Who having drawn the
breasts of wit and fancy dry,
May justly now write Man, must not a Suckling die.]


When he says, The circumambient air does make us all
To be but one bare Individual. Sir John Suckling in his Play, Act 2, Scene 1.



What are the Mathematical sciences, but Unity turning it self into several
forms of Numbers and Figures, yet still remaining entire? Harmony, proportion,
proportionality, which are the subject, the soul of all Knowledge here, are so
many several names of the same unity. Beauty is but one act of grace and
sweetness, Ficin. Comment. in Sympos. Plat.
which seems to us composed of various parcels. Ficin. Comment. in Tim. Plat.
Music is one form resulting from many different sounds. This is that mystery,
which unknown, has confounded the Schools in that Question, whether quantity
be divisibilis in semper divisibile. All things are certainly at last reduced
to an Unity; yea, all things appear to us clothed with one form; yet are we
never able to search out the perfection of this, when we most accurately pursue
it. The glory and majesty thereof is such, that it renders our minds incapable
of any more than a gross view, like that of the Sun in his splendor.

Democritus his definition of Being, is very considerable, Plato in Symp. in
Orat. Erixym.
Est aliquid differens a se, quod sibi convenit: and indeed, all Being is but
one, taking various shapes, sometimes discovering it self under one, sometimes
under another, whereas it is but one Being: and this is light, truth, that (as
I said before) beam of divine glory, which is the spring of all Beings.

To close this discourse, give me leave thus to set forth that Majesty, whereby
Unity wrappeth up all things within itself. There can be no recedence from
Unity, unless by addition of a new, distinct, Unity. But where will you find
This? A simple Unity must be entirely one with the First; if you add any thing
to Unity, whereby it may differ, it remains no more One, but becomes a Duality.

Nominall division of Being requisite for our converse.
Yet do I in no wise reject that division of Being left us by our Masters, when
they teach us, that there is first a Being which is known to Be, but it self
in its Being is insensible.

Secondly, another that is sensible, but knows not its own excellency.

Thirdly, that which knowing its own excellency, can reflect upon it self.
For, I say, this which is called vegetative, sensitive, and rational, is all
of one nature.

CHAP. VIII. The nature of Habits.
ANd whilst I affirm that the soul is nothing but this Truth, I do not
refuse the doctrine of Habits, Habits infused, acquisite.
either Infused or Acquisite.


For when the soul by virtue of its Being, is clear in such a truth, it is
said to be an infused habit. When by frequent action, such a truth is
connaturall to the soul, it may be styled an habit acquisite: though indeed
all is but light more or less glorious, discovering it self frequently or
rarely, and by divine appointment, at such a conjunction of time, and not any
other, not that the soul is informed by its own action; for what has the
stream which it derives not from the source? What can those workings added to
that, from which they receive themselves?

And therefore I wholly subscribe to the Platonists, who make all scientia
nothing but reminiscentia; for when it appears not, it is not; the soul
being but an activity, it must be no more than it acts: and though we seem
by frequent actings to help the soul, and so to create in it acquisite
habits, yet these are but a Phenomenon. This is but the way which God
discloseth to our eye, whereas all the actings are only new discoveries.

Our Philosophers affirm thus boldly of the unreasonable creature, attributing
it all to the instinct, or a new influence.

Why may not, why must not we conclude the same of man, seeing it is a received
truth, that acti agimus, and we are in our strength in regard of God no better
than the most abject creature?

But if all be one; The difference between natural and supernatural habits.
(Soul, Understanding, Habits, all the same:) then neither do faith and
reason differ.

Surely they differ only in degrees, not in nature.

That Reverend holy man, that dexterous cominus-pugnator, seems to aver the
same or more in historical and saving faith Mr Ball. Diverse sorts of Faith.
page 3. Faith signifying belief, is used to note, first an ordinary knowledge
and bare assent to the historical truth of the Speaker, though sometimes
helped by experiments, and other inducements and probabilities of the things:
and this is called Faith Historical, that is, a naked, imperfect, dead assent,
without trust or confidence in the mercies of God, or adherence to the
commandments. Howbeit we must not imagine, that Faith is reputed unsound or
not salvificall, because Historical (rather it is oftentimes unsufficient to
save, because it is not so fully Historical as might be) but the name of
Historical Faith arose hence, that some are said to believe, who did never
embrace Christ as their only Savior with all their hearts, nor confidently
rely upon the promises of mercy; otherwise, justifying Faith does more
certainly believe the truth of the history of the Gospel, and so is more
historical than the Faith called Historical.
.

Mr Huit in his Anatomy of Conscience, clearly affirms it. These means
teach us further to make much of the least beginnings of grace, even those
which Divines commonly call repressing, since they prepare the heart to
conversion, and in some sense be called the inchoation thereof: seeing
temporary and living faith differ not in form, but degrees of perfection;
there is a faith in the true convert, of no better perfection than that in the
temporary, though he stay not there, as the other (being an unwise son) does.
Huit Anat. Conscience page 214.


The first degree is Reason. A second, Historical. A third, Temporary. A
fourth, Saving faith. A fifth, Plerophorie. A sixth, 1 Ioh. 3. verse. 2.
Beatifica visio, that light whereby we shall see as we are seen; these are of
the same nature with that light which a reprobate is partaker of.
And if any man question the truth of this, let him but consider, that the
Donor is the same, our good God.

The Efficient, Isntrumental, and Formal cause, is Jesus Christ.

The subject recipient, the totum existens.

And the Gift it self is light or truth, a spiritual Being.

How can it choose then, but to be one and the same, seeing (as I said before)
such a Recipient cannot entertain any other guest?

The controversy about falling from Grace.
Neither do I at all abett that unhappy opinion of falling away from Grace.

There is in the opinion a liquid nefasti, and therefore I study to shun it.
The propugnators of it are unhappy; for they have not only made a rent amongst
us, but strengthened a common adversary.

The oppugnators also are unhappy; for they have so managed the cause, that
their Adversaries lie almost under invincible darkness: for the oppugnators
fearing to speak plain, have called Spontaneitatem, liberam voluntatem, and
it is impossible to distinguish between Libera voluntas Contra-Remonstrantium,
and liberum arbitrium Remonstrantium.

And whilst the Remonstrants find no difference in this main Tenet, they weigh
all the rest in the same scale, and judge accordingly. For an argument often
alleged by many learned men, if it confuteth not, it does confirm an error;
and thus are they out of the reach of truth.

That learned, that pious man, the first fruit of our Church her resurrection,
famous Calvin, styled it Spontaneitatem, and not liberam voluntatem: For, Deus
and libera voluntas are incompatible, not to be caemented by that distinction
without difference, Libera a necessitate, sed non ab infallibilitate. And
therefore mighty Deo enim, sive scientiam ejus spectemus, quippe omnia scit;
sive voluntatem, quae ad nihil creatum vel creabile est suspensa, sed ab
aeterno determinata, nulla (...) potentia disjunctiva: considerari quidem
potest potentia creata, non considerato divino decreto, and in signo rationis
decretum Dei antecedente. Sed in tali Chimar^^^ consideratione, adversary nobis
litem vitiosa nuce ha^^ emptitandam srustraserunt. Ac vero actu, non est ulla
potentia creata, nisi quae subest aeterno DEI decreto, nisi qu^^ (...) divinae
providentiae renuntiare velit, etc. Rutter Exerc. Apolog. Exerc. 1. c. 1. Sect.
8.
Rutterfort affirms, that posito Dei decreto absoluto (and all things are
under such a decree) insulse quaeritur an potentia libera sub eo decreto sit
indifferens.

But here I am not to, I cannot, dispute this question. Only I say thus much,
it is so unhappy an opinion, that I hope I shall not at all abett it.

For though Reason and Faith be one in nature: yet is not reason that degree of
light, of which the Spirit has said, 1 Ioh. 3.9. Difference betwixt Knowledge
and Faith.
My seed is in you, and you cannot sin. And therefore men cannot lose that
which they never had. And this will be a little more clear, by the answer to
the next objection, which is this.

If Faith and Reason, Object.
if knowledge and grace be all but one light, how comes it to pass, that
some who have less light, have more faith? and those again, who are for
knowledge, as Angels of light, are not partakers of that which is called Saving
faith?

This difficulty is rather mazy, than strong; I shall therefore hope to bring
the Ariadnean thread.

And at first abord, I deny the proposition. I conceive it a mistake. For I do
verily believe, that the weakest Saint knows more of God, than the most
intelligent of those Spirits, who though once in heaven, are now in intolerable
flames.

All men confess thus much, that even the meanest Christian, has more
experimental knowledge of GOD, than Beelzebub the Prince of the air. And does
not this convince them of what I affirm? For what (to speak in their
language) is experiment, Experience, collection of particular lights.
but the daughter of light, gathered by frequent observation? If experiment be
but light, and their experience is more than that of the greatest wits; then
(if I mistake not) by necessary consequence, their light is more and greater.

But I suppose, the error may be cleared by this Simile.

The one is as the man who has studied the Theory, the other the Practicke of
any art of science.

The first may know more in appearance; but the other indeed knows more.

You shall find two unequally learned, Knowledge, real. apparent.
The first is a Gnosticke, a helluo literarum* the other has not read so much,
but has concocted, mastered and subdued all before him. Which now is said to
know more?

Psalm. 14.1.
The fool has said (not, as some expound it, wished) in his heart, there is
no GOD. It is true, now and then he has some glimmering light of a Deity, but
anon again all is shaken, and he faith, there is no God.

Does not the people of Israel say, Psalm. 12.4.
We are our own Lords, who shall control us? We have made a covenant with
death and hell, and none shall reach us. Can these men, these Beings be said to
know God?

If you object the devils age and experience, it cannot help; it is but, as you
call it, a collection of his own lights, and all the stars shining together
make not day.

I should only ask this one question, Can the devils believe or know God to
be all mercy? It is impossible, because they cannot believe him so to
themselves.

Ob. But some say, Neither do the best men believe him so to the wicked.

Resp. Yes, we do, we know him in his nature to be merciful to them.

Besides, God, mercy and sweetness to the devils.
mercy and justice are all but one thing in God; and this those miserable
Creatures cannot consent to, that their ruin is the effect of supreme
perfection, infinite sweetness.

To the confirmation of this, I shall but press this one consideration.

As we know, we love.
If they did know more than the Saints, they must needs love more; and in this I
shall have all those my abettors, who hold that the Will does necessarily
follow the understanding; which whilst Aristotle denies in broad and open
disputes, (...). Arist. Eth. lib 3.c.6. vide etc.7. ci^ca finem.
he does in tacit terms closely yield to.

I do apprehend it an undeniable truth, that what Good soever I know to be
good, I must love. And therefore if wicked men did know more of God, they must
know him needs under the notion of good: and so Seeing goodness in his nature,
they must love him more. What we know, we are.
I might add, what good we know, we are: our act of understanding being an act
of union, which (as before) being Metaphysicall in the soul, must be entire.

CHAP. IX. The difference betwixt Knowledge and affection, discussed.
IT may be that what has been disputed, will be granted: but there is yet an
objection which requires solution.

Ob. If all Being differs only in degrees, not nature; if knowledge,
affection, light, activity, be all one; Whence is it that even amongst
Christian men, holy, spiritual men, men of largest affections, (and the
affections are the activity, the maine of the Soul) I say men of the largest
affections are esteemed to know least of God? And others, whose affections are
as it were benumbed, and all activity is placed in their brain, understand
more of the divine nature?

Does it not appear from hence, say they, that all Being is not one, differing
only in degrees: but that there are even different natures, amongst which one
may excel, whilst the other is deprest?


Sol. I could tell these men, who start the objection, that they deem the
light in the head, more than the love in the heart: and then I shall say,
Affection handmaid to Knowledge according to some.
that with them the head is the higher degree, the heart the lower degree of
light, and so all is but a different light; from whence, affection, being
judgment in its infancy, cease, when Knowledge grows mature: as the heat
and blaze of fire, is but its laboring toward purity and perfection, which
therefore are no more when the clear flame reaches its Element. But other men
think otherwise, and they do pitch all in the affections, and the meaner light
in the understanding; and so turning the table, still one shall be a parcel
of, or a step to the other, Knowledge a step to Affection, according to others.
Knowledge and affection names of different degrees in the same nature.
and each carry along both in equal measure according to reality: how much
true affection, so much knowledge, and vice versa: as I shall show in other two
answers, on which I fix the strength of my thoughts in this point. And
therefore


Affection perfection of Knowledge.
Secondly, I affirm confidently, and, I hope, truly, that he, who soars upon
the wings of Affection, and lays himself in the arms of Jesus Christ, though
he amuse not his head with the mystical nature of the Trinity, with the
procession of the Spirit, with the incarnation of Jesus Christ, attempting to
make that holy oil; Touching the Arc, this glory which is too high for him;
loosing himself, while he laboreth to see how humane nature can be raised so
high; divine condescend so low, as to bring forth the Hypostaticall Union: I
say, such a one knows more of God, than the other.

It is often seen, Knowledge often no Knowledge, but a vain swelling.
a working head is like an over-hot liver, burns up the heart, and so ruineth
both: Whereas sweet humble affections, are the only way to keep the poor
creature in a constancy of spiritual health. And in this care the Apostle to
Titus forbids foolish questions, Tit. 3.6.
endless genealogies, contentions, and brawlings about the Law.

This Law is the rule of life; and if we know not the Law, Knowledge without
power, even in the law forbidden.
we cannot keep the Law, and so we must perish; and yet we find the search of
this forbidden.

Object. Some will say, here is meant the Ceremonial Law.

Answ. I will allow it; but is not the Ceremonial included under the second
precept? Ceremonial law included in the Moral.
The people upon Christ his Sermon, wherein he taught, that He that looks on
a woman to lust after her, Mat. 5.28.
has committed adultery with her in his heart (and so he gave the Law its full
latitude) say, He speaks as one that has authority, Mat. 7.29.
and not as the Scribes and Pharisees: conceiving it their duty and happiness
to know the Law in its utmost limits; and yet we are restrained from any
brainsick, heady, nice inquiry, even into the Law, scil. not to busy our
heads with the knowing part, in overgreat proportion, but labor to bring our
knowledge to practice.

If then all such knowledge (I mean all knowledge of this nature) be
forbidden, it is because it is not good; it is not knowledge, but a vain
tumor in stead of real greatness or growth: and that other of the affection,
has certainly more of God in it, and so more of truth.

The Apostle is so great an enemy to this kind of knowledge, that having
disputed such a point in disdain of gainsayers, he concludes, If any man
lust to be contentious, 1 Cor. 11.16.
we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God.

-- Demonstrat quaelibet herba Deum. He who refreshed with the sweet odours,
pleased with the various comely shapes of a flower, can say, this is sweet,
this is lovely, lovely indeed; Yet Jesus Christ is a bed of spices, Cant. 2.1.
as the Lilly of the field, the Rose of Sharon, sweeter, much sweeter, ten
thousand times more lovely. This man knows God, this man loves God, this man
knows him indeed; and this knowledge, as it is the most pleasant here, so it
will certainly prove the most profitable hereafter, and always declare it
self most real.

Does not the Apostle, does not he most truly, most pathetically cry out;
Though I had the gift of prophecy, 2 Cor. 13.2.
and knew all secrets, all knowledge, yea, if I had all faith, so that I could
remove mountains, I were nothing; I were as sounding brass and a tinckling
Cymbal, if I have not charity. When all these excellencies meet in a Christian,
as happly they may, yet it is charity that makes him what he is, and the other
Beings are but as Phalerae, as trappings which give a handsome set-off, but not
a Being to a Christian.

Love is lovely in Gods eye, God, from whom all light comes, is stil^d Love 1
Ioh 4 16.
he is styled the God of Love, the God Love. And in another place, the
Scripture affirms that in this we have fulfilled the will of God, if we love
one another; for by this we are made one with God, and so dwell in true light.

The two Tables are reduced to Love of God and our neighbor. So that sweet
affections do make the most sweet harmony in Gods ears. Women in greatest
number truly gracious, because most affectionate.
Of the Chorus of Saints, the greatest number will be found amongst the
feminine sex, because these are most naturally capable of affection, and so
most apt to make knowledge real. It is true, I confess, these affections
misguided, led them first into transgression; but these same affections after,
carried them first to the grave, then to the sight of a Savior, gave them the
enwombing of Christ, who (in some sense) might have entertained our nature in
another way (if he had so pleased;) and these affections will one day raise
many of them into the sweet embraces of everlasting joy.

Amongst the ChurchOfficers, the Pastor and the Doctor, according to Timothy,
are more eminent than the rest, because they labor in the word and doctrine. 1 Timothy 5.17
Of these two, the Doctor is always to have his sword always girt about his
thigh, he must enter into the lists with every uncircumcised Goliath. He must
stand continual sentinel, that no herefies be forced upon the Church. He must
beat his brains in dissolving difficilia, and clearing obscura. He must
sometimes faint away in watery cold fits, by picking up, and throwing out
witless, saplesse sophismes, which though they cannot hurt the strong, may
seduce the weak. In the mean time, the Pastor leads the flock into the
sweet and pleasant meadows, The Pastor preferred before the Teacher, because
the truth of truth in the heart lies in the affection.
feeding them by the little brooks of seemingly shallow affections; and yet
this man shall not only receive equal honor with the Doctor, but be
preferred before him; as appears clearly in Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.26. As it
was with the Israelites, so it is here; those who keep the stuff, receive
equal reward with the combatants. I do therefore conclude, He who has the
largest affections, has most of God, most of his image, which is renewed in
knowledge.

Thirdly, Knowledge, where it is eminent in truth as well as appearance, there
affection is equally eminent.
sometimes it happens, that those who have the largest knowledge, have the most
enlarged affections, even to our eye; and this is happiness indeed. I
confess, it does not so seem to an eye that would read it running; but if it
be exactly looked on, if it be presented to our view in the pourtrait of an
example, I think it will be very clear.

David and Solomon compared with Paul.
David and Solomon compared with Paul, will be as a thousand witnesses. The two
first do seem to outstrip all men in affection, they are brim-full, running
over.

For, David is styled the sweet Singer of Israel; in his Psalms he is ever
magnifying the rich mercies of God, singing forth the praises of God, choosing
rather to be a doore-keeper in the house of God, than to dwell in the tents of
Mesech: making his Word to be a light unto his feet, and a lanthorn unto his
paths, placing all his delight in the Law of the Lord.

Solomon is the happy Penman of that Hymn, which by the Spirit is styled the
Song of Songs. Yet for all this, even in this, they are both exceeded by Saint
Paul.

But some, it may be, will imagine those Worthies to be endowed with higher
gifts of Nature and Art, than S. Paul: and then they will give all the glory to
their understanding, and not to their affections.

If it be so, I confess I have not fitly chosen my Opposites; But the truth
will then appear in Them, without comparison distinctly.

For, if in affection they exceed all, and in abilities are as Saul, taller
than their brethren by head and shoulders, then is it manifest in them, that
eftsoone men of the most raised parts, of highest abilities, do superabound in
love.

But, if, in things which are not directly of Faith, I could cease to be a
Sceptique, I should with that most Reverend Worthy, Thomas Goodwin, give Saint
Paul for head and heart, that Throne in heaven which is placed next to Jesus
Christ. But secret things belong to God; let us only compare their eminency
here below. I think it will be out of question, that Saint Paul was the most
excellent. For, though Solomon (there I suppose will be the difficulty) be said
to be the wisest of men, that ever were, that ever should be; yet that is to be
applied only to Government, and (if it may reach so far) to his excellent
skill in natural Philosophy. Solomon's preeminence in knowledge extended to
Politics, and natural Philosophy only.


View but Saint Paul, and see whether he does not excel in every thing. He had
gathered up vast learning at the feet of Gamaliel; for his parts he was
advanced to eminent power in Church and Commonwealth. He says of himself, I
profited in the Jews religion above many my equals in my own nation, being
more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers. And after his
conversion, he was judged the only man fit to contend with the Philosophers at
Athens. For they who seemed to be somewhat, in conference added nothing to him.
And therefore to him was committed the unravelling of all the difficult knots.
It is he that disputes about meats, long hair, divorces, irregular partings
of husband and wife. It is he that opens the nature of prophecy, evinceth
the resurrection from the dead, maintains justification by faith. And that he
may be perfect in knowledge, God is pleased (whether in the flesh or spirit, 2
Cor. 12.3
he knows not) to take him into the third heavens: and there he was so filled
with Revelation, that God was forced to put the Philomela-Thorne under his
breast, that he might not fall into the sleep of sin, and so give himself up
(as Sampson) into the hands of Philistine enemies. And yet this man exceeds all
men in affections, and in his affections surpasses all his other excellencies.
It is he that is often in journies, 2 Cor. 11.26.
in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by his own nation, in
perils amongst the Gentiles, in perils in the city, in perils in the
wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils amongst false Brethren, in
weariness and painfulnesse, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness. And as he says of himself, Who was
weak and I was not weak? who was offended and I did not burn? It is he that
fought with the beasts at Ephesus. He is content not only to be bound, but to
die for Christ.

Good Saint Paul was so tender over his kinsmen according to the flesh, that
for their sakes he could willingly be content to be separated from the love of
the Lord Jesus Christ. And this is greater love than that which Christ
mentions; for no man had then showed greater love than to die; but this holy
Saint will go one step further, he will suffer an eternal death for his
friend.

Thus, if suffering either for the head, or members, for the Church, or Christ,
will discover affection, I suppose he will merit the Garland.

And as a complement and crown of all, if to live be most for Gods glory,
though death be his advantage, he is resolved to submit, making obedience to
Christ in life and death, his gain and triumph.

I confess, when he travelleth through those briery disputes, he cannot
display such sparkling vivid affections: But when he has gotten but a little
above those lime-twigs, how does he mount on high, and there, upon even wings,
disdain all things below, triumphing in the embraces of his Savior, who is to
him more choice than the choicest of ten thousand?

If what I have attempted to prove, be true, as I hope it is, then Consider,

Either those who are eminent in affection, and otherwise know little; or those
who, as they abound in one, are also Masters in the other: True knowledge, true
affection, separated from all appearances or outward advantages of the body, or
the like, are one.
Distinguish appearances from truth; Reading, memory, discourses, effects of
sense or complexion, from that which enters the soul, becomes real there,
acts, flows from thence as a spring: And then will you conclude, that all
knowledglieth in the affection; that all knowledge is but one, differing only
in degrees.

And lastly, that all, whether knowledge or affection, is but the Truth, that
spiritual ray of heavenly light which God is pleased to present to our view
under several shapes, yet is but one and the same Being, scil. light and truth.

CHAP. X. That all the several and particular actings of the soul, are this
one light and truth.
THUS have I dispatched the first discourse of the general form and nature of
the Understanding. Apprehensions, conclusions, affirmations, etc. all one truth
in the soul.
Now concerning the particular and various workings thereof, in conclusions,
simple apprehensions, negations and affirmations, etc. which seem to be the
offspring of the first and original Being; even these, I hope to prove all one
and the same, as with themselves, so with the former, all conjoined in one
Being of light and truth. That is truth in the fountain, this in the streams;
and no man will deny the fountain and stream to make one river. Only,
sometimes it appears in such a shape, sometimes in another, but is still the
same soul.

The operations of the soul are proved one with the essence thereof.
This will appear if we compare the nature of the Soul or Understanding (for
we have proved them both one) with their irradiations, actings and several
emanations. Res enim dignoscendae sunt ex causis. Now, we conceive the first
Being to be no other thing, than activity, so confessed by all. And if you would
know what an activity is, you shall find it to be either potentia agendi, or
ipsa actio, or rather actus primus and actus secundus.

If it be actus, either Primus or Secundus (for primus and secundus are to me
differenced only by time, and so not differenced at all, (of which I will
presently speak a little more) it must be still in work, and is no longer than
it acts. Now, what can this act be in this subject, whereof we discourse, but
the reasonable working of the soul in this or that conclusion? If it be any
other than a work of reason, how can it constitute, or become the form of a
rational soul and humane understanding? If it be such, how differs it from
thought, ratiocination or positions in the mind?

The activity which is the form of the soul, not different from the actions
thereof.
Whilst then these conclusions, sayings, actions, are the form of that truth,
of that universal first truth, they must be that truth. For, forma quae dat
esse, est esse, and whatsoever is the form of any thing, that is the Being of
it. For, Being and Form are but one.

If the form of this activity be not these reasonable workings, it must be
something either of a baser allay, or of a higher stamp.

Not of a higher strain.
If the latter; then you speak of Angels or some other spiritual Being, if there
be any which is more noble than the soul. And then how does this excellency
discover it self? Where or what is it? How is it said that Action is the
perfection of all things?

If the former; Nor of a lower.
then first you descend to some lower degree of existency; for, all Being is
but an activity; and according to the glory or baseness of that activity, does
the Being receive denomination.

Or secondly; Shall the cause be more ignoble than the effects? What then? If
it be neither more excellent, nor lower, Neither can it be various.
is it various, has it less or more of action? still you fall at the same
stone.

But they who approve of the distinction of actus primus and actus secundus,
think they salve all by the distinction of substance and accident; So, with
them, actus primus is the Being, the substance it self: and actus secundus is
the product of that Being or accident belonging to that which they make a
soul; and thus forgetting this, that omnis virtus consistit in action, they
make the soul a mere virtuall Being.

The distinction between actus primus and actus secundus, examined.
But, besides that the former Reasons are not thus everted, of these men I
should ask this question.

What is this their actus primus? What is the form of it? What is with them
the form of a reasonable soul?

Is not Reason? can there then be a soul, till there be reason? And this
Reason is not potentia ratiocinandi, but Ratio. For, if you distinguish between
the act and power, the act must ever be first in order, dignity, and nature.

So then, What is the form of this primus actus? is not some act? if it be, it
must exist; else you will allow it but a bare notionall Being, which lies in
the apprehension. And if it does exist, must it not be this which you call
actus secundus?

If it be not an act, they make it nothing but a power, a faculty depending
upon something else. And if this be the nature of the first, what can the
second Being (which is the effect, and so lower) be, but a bare notion?

The distinction between Substance and Accident called into question.
If here were fit place, I might perhaps set upon the Rack that long-famous
Distinction of Substance and Accident, whereby It should be forced to confess
it self an aged imposture, at least in the general and frequent acceptance.

But the activity consisting in the action, That and It shall both be proved
but one; and so, actus primus and actus secundus are this same truth, this
light which I plead for.

CHAP. XI. An objection answered, in which the nature of Time and Place are
touched.
YEt this does exceedingly stumble men's thoughts; we see various actings of
the soul, distinguished by the circumstances of Time and Place; there are
several distinct actings; are there then so many several souls?

First, I could justly give this answer; When these men can tell me what time
and place is, I do hope I shall find both time and place to dissolve the
difficulties.

Secondly, I shall, I suppose, both by reason and their own assertions in the
like case, prove that time and place are nothing, or alter nothing in this
point; and that, these simile's will a little irradiate.

The nature of Beauty illustrating time and place.
Beauty (if I bring not the exact description of the learned, yet I shall
remember so much as concerns the point in hand) consists in complexion, in
lineaments, and in harmony.

Complexion draws his Being from color, from the subject wherein color is
seated, the spirits which give a Being to this color, etc. and these are
differenced by many circumstances. Lineaments as they are adorned by, so are
they the ornaments of this complexion. And these again are diverse from
themselves, and diverse from Harmony. And yet, by Harmony, these make up one
sweet, one pleasant Being, which we call Beauty.

A Flame rising from diverse thorns, is not many, is but one flame. A stream
filled with various springs, is not various, is but one stream. So is it in
our case.

Those Circumstances of time and place, differencing these various Beings, are
something, or nothing.

If nothing, the objection is answered.

If something, they are a piece of the whole, they serve to make up that
harmony, which we call Beauty, (...). Thus time and place, with all Beings of
the like nature, are either nothing, or else they have a share in the Being,
and make up the totum Compositum.

Time and Place nothing different from the essence of the soul.
The Soul is but one Act distinguished to our notion by several apparitions;
and these intervals, with all variations, either are nothing, or are of the
nature of the Soul, and serve to make up that confort, that truth, that life
that we now discourse of.

And that this is so, I hope by this clear ratiocination to leave you assured.

Time and Place seem to me nothing but an extrinsecall modification of a
thing. I cannot find that the learned have made anything at all of them. Let
us survey them, as they define them, when they treat of them; as they esteem
them, when they meet them occasionally.

How has Aristotle defined Place? The definitions of time and place rejected.
Est superficies concava corporis ambientis; Where is the truth of this in the
highest heaven which incompasseth all the rest? Place.
Has Ramus any whit advanced the cause in his definition? Est subjectum rei
locatae; Idem per Idem! Are not those who propound, and they who entertain such
a definition, justly compared to the Constable and the Country-Justice? The
first having received from some higher power a Warrant, wherein in was this
hard word, Invasion, repaired to his Rabbi for Solution: he, that the question
might seem somewhat obscure, paused a little, that it might not shame him;
after he had consulted, in a stroke or two with his grave-learned beard,
replied; the sense of this word is very plain, it is Invasion, it signifies
Invasion; with which the Constable being fully satisfied, gave him many thanks
and departed. Locus and spatium corporis locati, is little better; what have we
in this definition, of the intrinsecall nature of place? So that, if I be not
wholly blind, they, whilst they treat of it as Scholars, make it nothing: when
they make use of it by the By, it is the same. As, the Soul, they say, is tota
in toto, and tota in qualibet part; whilst they spread and diffuse the soul
over the whole body, from one extremity to the other, Place makes no division
in the soul; it is but one soul, yet extended quite through the body. Angels
are definitive in loco; that place which is within the circumference so
limited, does not at all cause them to make two in this angelical Being.

I may affirm the same of time, Time.
Tempus est mensura motus; What do I know of time by this? how can I from
hence guess time to have so considerable a Being, as that it shall make two of
that whith otherwise would be but one? In the Deity we are sure it can have no
such effect. In the Deity we have creation, preservation, redemption, decree,
and execution of that decree. All these to our apprehension are distinguished
by time: and yet no man will say, that in God they are two: for God is purus
actus, nulla potentia.

But you will say, this is obscurum per obscurius, and not to unmask and
unveile difficulties: Which no Simile taken from the Divinity can do, because
That is all mystical.

To which I answer, Si magnis licet componere parva, we shall find the same
in our selves, we shall find that Time does not at all difference, or any way
act. I suppose it is clear, that Place has lost all place and credit in this
argumentation. Why may not I say the same of Time, seeing by all men's
confessions they are twins of the same womb? But secondly, I affirm this, (and
I hope truly) that if you make Time any thing, All actions nothing, if time be
any thing.
you annihilate all the act of the Creation; that is, you will admit of no one
perfect action. A thought, I confess, passes in a moment; and yet, in this
moment, under this moment, are many subdivisions of Time. We have in an hour,
an half, a quarter, a minute, a second, (the 60 part of a minute:) and how
many subdivisions will a scruple admit of? For ought I know, Time and punctum
Physicum agree in this, that they are divisibilia in insinitum. If then you
will make so many thoughts in a thought, as you have divisions under a scruple,
you will have no perfect thought, no complete act. To shun this, you will
confess that Time does not divide one act alone: but one Act or thought
comprehends many Times. Why may not I say, that if Time does not parcel out
one act, it cannot act upon two, when the duality arises only from Time? This
not being well weighed, has cast our wits upon strange rocks, has raised this
Question,

How does God see things? The difficulty untied, how God sees things.
If in their existencies, then all things are co-eternall with God: if in their
Causes only, then all things are not present with God; but you must admit of
succession, a former and a latter, to eye divine; which is blasphemy. This
dilemma seems strong; but it is because we make Time something: whereas
indeed all things did exist in their Beings with God ab omni aeterno. For,
aeternum and tempus are all one in eternity: and this succession is but to our
apprehension.

Thus, if Time and Place be nothing, I hope the weight of this objection is is
taken off.

But I foresee another objection.

Object. If Time and Place be nothing, if all our Actions are but One: How can
there be evil and good?

Answ. I fully conclude with Aristotle's Adversaries Anaxagoras, Democritus, etc
That Contradictions may be simul and semel in the same Subject, same Instant,
same Notion (not only in two distinct respects, or notions, as one thing may
be causa and effectum, Pater and Filius, respectu diversi; but even in the same
respect, under one and the same Notion.) For, Non ens is nothing; and so, the
Being which it has, may subsist with that which contradicts it. I speak in
their terms.

Now, let us view our actions, either

as Many, in pieces, or, One entire act.

As many; impute Transgression to what you please, either to the effects in the
body, or the Will, and its workings: all these, so far as they have Being,
are good; for, all Being is good. Where then is the sin? Certainly, sin
lies in this, that there is not so full a goodness as there should. Sin is
only a Privation, a Nonentity: But, a Privation, a Nonentity may subsist
(according to the subsistence it has) with Being. Such a co-existence of
Entity and Nonentity, was in his faith, who cried, Lord, I believe, help my
unbelief. This Contradiction (of Entity, Nonentity) must be in the selfsame
Act, (and not in two distinct Acts:) else the Act is perfect, (having complete
Entity, goodness, without admixture of Nonentity:) and so is only the
Creator: or else it is more imperfect than Beelzebub; for, It is Bad, and no
Good, Nonentity wholly, and no Entity, and so no Action.

Thus we see Good and Evil may co-exist in several, in particular Actions;
Why then not so, if all Acts should be but one entire Act, undistinguisht by
Time or Place? If the members composing the Body, have matter and form, why
then not the whole Body? Sin in it self is nothing, only a nonconformity to
Gods Law.

The Twilight has not so much light and so much positive darkness: only it
has not so much light as Noon in clear day. Here Is the defect: and by this
defect, Light and Darkness co-exist in the same point of air.

So, though our Acts be but one, undivided by Time and Place: yet, to our
grief, are not free from Sin.

Thus the Soul, Truth, Light, is always and continually one, though it
appears otherwise to me: and this appearance ought not to dazzle the sight of
the truth; for, as they say of honor, Honor est in honorante: so may I say of
apprehension, Apprehensio est in apprehendente: the thing is still the same,
let my apprehension be what it will be.

The same truth taking varicus shapes in our apprehensions.
I do not reject the phrases of several truths, and several actings of this
truth: for, Loquendum cum vulgo; yet, phrases must not mislead us. For whilst I
confess loquendum esse cum vulgo, I profess that sapiendum est cum paucis.
For, to our apprehension, that truth which is but one, does variegate it self,
and take diverse shapes.

Set forth by a similitude taken from the Sun.
As that Sun which is one and the same, is ruddy in the morning, clear at
nooneday; of a moderate heat early, and at midday rather torrid.

Various colors meeting in the same point, The same act of sense perfectly
one, yet varied unto many forms.
to make up one indivisible act of sense, are by it judged diverse Beings,
whereas they all make up but one Being; they are but one and the same object of
sense. Reason, which is exalted above Sense, tells us it must be so; because
that act of life is but one, and the Sense is not an Ubiquitary; it cannot act
upon any more than one at once.

The Trigonall Glass paints out to us more, A Similitude from the trigonall
glass.
and more lively colors in every object (which as a medium it presents to the
eye) than are in the Iris; yet, This object, may be but some duskish sad thing,
in which there is no change of colors at all.

Sense confuted by Copernicus.
The three leading Senses have confuted Copernicus these many years; for the
eye sees the circulations of the Heavens; we feel our selves upon a stable
and firm foundation; and our ears hear not from the volutations of the Earth
such a black Cant as her heavy rowlings would rumble forth: and yet now if we
will believe our Capernic. Kepler. Gallilaeus de Galil:
new Masters, sense has done as sense will do, misguided our Reason.

When the nimble juglers play their pranks, you see and hear, yet neither see
nor hear. So your sense is no good judge. Thus let the soul be raised to its
supreme height of power, and it will clearly see, that all the actings of
reason which seem several (be they, as we think, distinguished by time and
place) are but one, a fixed entire unity.

CHAP. XII. Another objection is answered, drawn from the falsehood in the
workings of the soul.
BUt if these particular actings of truth, Object.
are truth; then when this Being, which we have so long discoursed of, acts
not truth, it ceafeth to be: and so, where the soul entertaineth or
pronounces a false position, the soul is no more it self.

Grant that it is with the soul in this moment of time, when it acts upon
falsehood, as when it acts not, and so is not; yet you will advance nothing,
till you can prove the succession of moments to have a real being. By former
discourse, Succession of moments, apparent, not real.
I hope it is clear, that Time is but a Nominall Being, and then this
cessation depending on that distinct moment, which is not, is likewise it self
an imagination.

The scule never acts falsely.
But secondly, I will allow it, when any man can show me that Falsehood is a
real being, which the soul or truth can work upon; For, in every
apprehension two things are to be weighed; The Agent it self, and the Subject
acted upon, (I speak now in other men's language; for I conceive the Agent
together with the Subject to be One in the act.) Truth is always truth, Nemine
dubitante; and so it must be true, whilst it acts on a truth. If that be
True, which it acts upon, then all is well; if it be False, it is a vanity, a
lie, a nothing. For, if Falsehood have a Being, then we must either with the
Manichees, make Two sources of Being, or else God must be the author of it;
which no man will affirm.

If then it have no Being, the Soul cannot act in it, and so it cannot be the
act of the Soul; For, how shall the soul or truth act upon nothing?

Object.
But the Soul does act, when it pronounces a false position?

Resp. In false propositions of the soul, so far as it acts, it acts truly:
where it is deceived, it is by not acting.
He that in the twilight, mistaketh a man for a tree, acts right in what he
seeeth; and when he raises a false conclusion upon the premises, he acts
not. For, how is it possible, that a man should act falsehood, a vanity, nothing?

In this action, there are two things; There is the seeing a Being, and the
seeing it under a confused notion. Or, which is the same,

You may observe, first, the opining; secondly, the opining uncertainly or
falsely.

The opining, is a good act, none will deny; to think, let it be what it will
be, is good.

But secondly, the so-thinking, is that which is obscure. Now certainly, the
formalis ratio of this so-thinking, lies in thinking of error, which is
nothing; and in thinking of nothing, the the soul cannot act; for, nothing
produces nothing.

A man, who catches at the shadow of a Hornet, acts rightly in catching, and
stingeth not himself; because he apprehends only the shadow; because so far
he does not act; for to catch a shadow, to catch nothing, and not to act, are
idem. And thus, whilst the soul catches at a false position, it graspeth but
the shadow, which can be nothing, seeing evil is, nothing; ergo, it loses not
truth; for it pronounces nothing but the truth of the position.

Pain has no real Being.
The same may be said for Pain. I conceive, it cannot act upon the soul, nor
the soul upon it, because, it is but a bare privation of spirit and strength.
And upon this ground, I shall subscribe to that opinion propounded by that
reverend, worthy, that quick-sighted Balearian-jaculator, Mr Dr Twisse: Whether
it be not better to be in perpetual pain, than not to be at all. If Pain be
but a bare privation, certainly Any Being is more desirable, than, for fear of
a privation (a notbeing) to become no-Being.

Hic rogo, Mart. lib. 2. Epigr. 80.
non furor est, ne moriare, mori? If any man shall tell me I speak against
sense, I shall modestly ask him this Question: Whether it be not impar
congressus betwixt Sense and Reason: and whether, in that case, Sense be an
equal judge. Reason tells us, that Pain must either be something, or
nothing; if nothing, then it is but a privation; if something, it must be
either good, or evil; if good, it cannot (as has, and will yet appear more
in this Pamphlet) hurt us; if evil, it is either a nominall evil, or real;
if it be named an evil, and is not, it will not be disputed; but if it be a
Real evil, then it is nothing; for, Evil, by consent of all, is nothing but
privation of good. In this case shall Reason or Sense guide, judge You.

CHAP. XIII. Discovering the consequences of this Position, that All things are
one Truth.
SIR,
WHEN you collect your thoughts, and pass sentence upon these unsheaved
gleanings, your gentleness (though the papers merit no such favor) will smile
upon them; and say, here our eyes indeed are pleased with the curiosity of
Pallas her needle: but, what has Reason to work upon? what is the usefulness
of this more than Arachne's web? more than to entangle empty wits withal? What
fruit does it yield better than the Silkworme, which is worn only for
ostentation? Give me leave to plead for my own. Our own (you know, though
black) is comely to Our selves.

If This were well weighed, The happiness of our lives advanced by this
opinion.
that all things are but one emanation from power divine: If this were taken
fully into the Understanding, that we might be said to live upon, to live in
this truth; we should live more Christianly, more cheerfully. Non est vivere,
Mart. li. 6. Ep. 70.
sed valere, vita.
I say more cheerfully, more Christianly, in a few moments, than we do now in
the whole course of our distracted time. And you will more easily consent to
this, if you do consider that our happiness is compounded of two Simples
only, which are so entertwined, as that they may seem One, The first is to
know. The second, to do what is right and good.


Of the former, the Theoreticall part, I shall speak hereafter. In the
Practick, Two things are considerable,

This Unity the fountain of knowledge.
First, that, Action depends wholly upon knowledge. And, of Knowledge, this
is the wellspring and rule, that, Unity is all. The Spirit says, How can you
love whom you do not know? and I may say, How can you do what you know not?

The Not-knowledge of of what is right, withholds from, and wearieth in
action; if perchance we ever have any glimmering of light. Action wholly
depends on knowledge.
For, Ignorance brings this double evil with it.

First, it leads into Error; and Error (simply in the view of it) gives no
content.

Seconly, in the progress it wearieth and distracteth. One who is lost in a
Wood, suffers as much in seeking as losing the way. Whereas, if we Knew
aright, how even and smooth would be the way of action, and how great our
contents therein?

Secondly, not only all our actions turn upon this hinge; but out of this
treasury issues forth the whole complacency that we gather from, or receive
in action. For, if we knew this truth, that all things are one; how
cheerfully, with what modest courage should we undertake any action,
re-incounter any occurrence, knowing that that distinction of misery and
happiness, which now so perplexeth us, has no Being, except in the Brain? We
should not need to check and raise our selves with David's outcries, why art
thou cast down my soul, why art thou disquieted within me? Our Spirits could
with him wait upon God; make him our only rock, and then we should not be
moved. We should not call for Epictetus nor Boethius de consolatione
Philosophica; we might fetch our cures from our own bosoms, if from this one
truth of unity we could conclude these two things.

First, that Misery is nothing, and so cannot hurt.

Secondly, that every thing that is, is good, and good to me: then we might
sing with a joyful spirit, O nimium, nimiumque beati; and upon sure ground;
for, whilst I being a Being, am Good, and that other Being is Good, and these
Two Goods can fall under no other difference, but of degrees; Good and Good,
cannot but agree, and so must be good to me.

Ob.
If any man shall say, that the overflowing of another man's good, may be my
evil; they mis-take; Resp.
for, such a though is a falsehood; and, as I have already proved, Falsehood is
nothing, and so cannot hurt.

That such a thought is falsehood, I suppose this will clear it.

The Philosophers fancy to themselves animam mundi, and say every parcel is as
a Simple contributing to the existence of that Compositum. But Christians know,
and I have (if I mistake not) evinced, that, all Being is but one emanation
from above, diversified only in our apprehension. How can then one piece of
that Being impeach the other, All things one piece.
one part of the Soul quarrel with the other? As the will (speaking in their
terms) with the sensitive faculty; or the Eye with the Belly: the vanity
whereof Esop has taught us long ago. So, of necessity, if either my envy, or
another folly, lay me low, because my brother is exalted, this must be a lie,
and so cannot hurt. E contrario, the Good of another, being the perfection of
the whole, is my advantage. If with this eye you view that Scripture, you will
see it in its glory, Is thine eye evil, Mat. 20.15
because thy brothers good increases?

The rule, you see is, that I should rejoice at the welfare of another. Now
what is the reason of the rule? Propriety makes lovely.
Philosophy teaches us, that it is not only (...), but (...), that is,
lovely. If then I must rejoice, I rejoice because of some propriety, and this
propriety arises from Unity; this Alkermes of Unity, cheereth the drooping
spirit, cures the atra bilis of Melancholy. The same potion eases the heart
of envyings, censurings and whisperings. So he, who knows that injuries,
because they are nothing, cannot hurt; and good things, though another, do
serve him; cannot cherish such viperous starvelings in his thoughts.

CHAP. XIIII. The benefit which Knowledge and all Sciences receive from this
assertion.
I Have in a word shown how Unity untyeth all difficulties, unites all
happiness in practical things. Permit me to discover what influence it has
upon that other simple, which makes up the compound of our happiness, (Scil.)
Theorie.

Tully says of Epicurus, The vanity of dividing knowledge into many Sciences.
Frangit, non dividit; The breaking of learning into so many Sciences, is but
making so many miles, that so the Master may have more hire for his posthorse.
They forget, that, vita est brevis, whilst ars est longae. It were much better
if all Learning were like the chain fastened at Jupiters Throne, all of a
piece: Or the Beam, which from the Sun by a continual tract of irradiation
touches the treasures of the earth.

To the effecting of this, that learned, that mighty man Comenius does happily
and rationally endeavor to reduce all into one. Why do we make Philosophy
and Divinity two Sciences? What is True Philosophy but Divinity? and if it be
not True, it is not Philosophy.

Confusions from division in knowledge.
Do but see a little in particulars, the fruit of such like divisions.

In the knowledge of Beings, we must observe

First, Knowledge double, of Beings, and of their Causes.
Being is:

Secondly, What it is.

There is the (...), and the (...). What a tedious work does this very division
lay upon us? Knowledge of Beings twofold, of their existencies, and their
natures.
Alas, the very first, the easiest part of it, will take up all our time; and
to ascend to causes before we know that there are effects, is to mount the
highest round, before we ascend the first. And therefore that learned wit, Sir
Francis Bacon, in his natural Philosophy, brings only experiments, leaving
the search of causes to those, who are content, with Icarus, to burn their
wings at a fire too hot for them. Indeed, sometimes as an imbellishment of his
discourse, that he may please stirring fancy, he interlaceth some causes, yet
gently and modestly propounds them, but as for entertainment. If now our
humble spirits could be content to see all things, as they are, but one, only
bearing different shapes, we should according to that rule, Noli altum sapere,
improve in what we know, and there sit down. But our spirits are mighty
Nimrods, hunting after knowledge, venturing all, to eat of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil. Which curiosity of ours, is wittily reproved by
Sir John Davies; Why did my Parents send me to the Schools,
That I with knowledge might enrich my mind:
When the desire to know, first made men fools.
And did corrupt the root of all mankind.
And for this reason we lose with Esops Dog, the substance, and get not the
shadow.

Causes we cannot, Knowledge of existencies necessary, but altogether uncertain.
neither shall ever find out: The knowledge of existencies we omit; they are
too voluminous, if we did attempt; and so much doubted of by men, that what to
think, we know not. View all Learning, and see how the very Being of things, is
questioned in Natural Philosophy. Amongst the Quadrupedes, we question the
existence of the Unicorne: inter volatilia, the Phoenix, and the Bird of
Paradise: amongst Fishes, the Mer-maid. When we seek into Minerals, we find
not Ebur fossile; the incomparable virtues of it we meet with in all
Physicians: but the subject of so many excellencies, we doubtfully hope for. Of
herbs and plants, Books name many which gardens, meadows, rivers afford not:
If they ever were, we may give them to Pancirolla, that he may reckon them with
perpetuum mobile, the Philosophers stone, cum multis alijs, inter Inventa
perdita: For every age interreth old things, and is again fertile of new
births.

If we were mighty men, as Adam, Knowledge of the natures more uncertain than
the existencies.
that all the creatures would come and present themselves to our view: yet
(which is the second part of this first Question) we could not give them their
names according to their natures. For when we do know that any Being does
exist, we do not know what their forms, their several qualities and
temperaments are. We altogether are ignorant of herbs and plants; which are
hot and cold, in how many degrees they are so. For in these, how many, how
eternal are the debates? Some deny the healing virtue to Dictamnum. Some
question the nature of that killing-saving Indian herb, Hen-man-bane, Tobacco:
whose insolence is such, as to make That part of man a chimny, an outlet of her
smoky birth (expressed happily by Doctor Thory in these words, Inque tubo
genitas haurire and reddere nubes:) I say, to make That an outlet of her smoky
birth, by which the old Romans (in this their Proverb, Est homo nasutus)
discovered their judgments of gifts and wit. Some say it is hot, and some say
it is cold. Few of the Learned, consent about the degrees of heat and cold in
any Simple, and so are forced to palliate all with the gaudy mantle of occulta
qualitas; Yet what are all these but matter of observation? manifest effects,
which Sense teaches the plowman, the Countryman, yea the bruites themselves,
as familiarly, as warmth in the Sunshine, and wet in the Rain. I could name
many questions in As all those laws concerning slaves, whereas a slave indeed
is non ens, for if any man have given away, with Esau, his birth* right, yet he
has not lost it; because manhood and religion are not mei juris; they are
talents which God has entrusted me with, and are no more deputable, than
places of jud catu^e. Et sic de caeteris.
Politickes, Oeconomickes, Ethickes, etc. the very subject whereof are in
dispute. But they will more happily fall in, when I discover our ignorance in
causes.

Thus you see in what a Maze you are Meandred, In what sense Knowledge of Beings
is to be wished.
if you admit of any division. The very knowledge of the Being of things, is
more than we are capable of. And as yet that is necessary, so we keep our
selves still to this principle, that those things are all of one nature,
variegated only in our apprehension: and this knowledge I must consent to.

But if men once seek into the Causes of Subsistencies, I see no reason but
they should suffer as Rei laesae Majestatis. For these are Arcana Imperii,
which to meddle with, is no less than high Treason.

CHAP. XV. Confusion in the knowledge of Causes, discovered, and redressed by
this Unity.
IF we are thus at a stand, in these very beginnings, what shall we be, when
we enquire after Causes? Two lie open to our view. Two only causes received,
God, and emanation from God.
First, our great and good God, the fountain of all Being, and this the
Ancients styled Fatum.

Secondly, there is that Emanation from him, Aristotle's materia prima brought
to light.
which is the first created cause of all Being, and this was Aristotle's
materia prima, so far as sensible things extend. Which because it is the
substance of all things, and the variations of it make all forms; therefore in
it self, he described it to be neither quid, quale, nor quantum.

All other causes are better known by name, than in the natures of them. They
make many, as Efficient, Final, Material, Formal; with diverse
subdistinctions; as instrumental, exemplary, etc. All these have matter and
form. Matter and Form have their matter and form, both of which meet in the
emanation.
For, there is a matter, and form of a material cause, and form and matter
of formal causes. For in a table of of wood, the material cause is not the
matter, wood: wood is the subject, upon which this material cause brings
forth that effect, a Table. It may be the material cause shall not be
Physical matter; we shall by and by find it another name.

Of the form of a material cause, I shall say nothing, and so for formal
causes.

Faith is said to be the form of a Christian, and faith has its form. The
soul is by many deemed (which I understand not) the form of the reasonable
creature, and it has a particular individual form. And thus both material
and formal causes have matter and form.

Matter again, is either Physical and substantial, or metaphorical and
metaphysicall. And this is the name I promised even now.

Forms are either intrinsecall, or extrinsecall: the intrinsecall are
Logical, Metaphysicall, etc.

Now have you various and several kinds of forms; but who knows the least
considerable part of matter or form? Who will not clearly lose himself in
such an inquest? May we not say of these, what one says wittily of the Soul?

For, Her true form, how can my spark discern,
Which dim by nature, Art did never clear:
When the great wits, of whom all skill we learn,
Are ignorant, both what she is, and where?
Do but survey the Physical Beings of our Philosophers, with what impossible,
with what unnecessary scrutinies of causes, The vain search of causes in
Physics.
do they weary themselves, and their Disciples?

Till numeri Platonici cease to be a Proverb, I must remain a Sceptick,
although one undertake to teach me, how and whence it is, that various rowlings
of the tongue, shall send forth so many articulate voices, and so many several
languages.

Till it be known, how all numbers gather themselves into an Unity, I must not
give credence to another, who promises an account of the estuation of the Sea.

I know some surrender Neptunes Trident to the Moon, and there six the reason
of Thetis her uncertain ebbings. Others Platonici; who make the world animal
magnum. Vide Gal. in System. Ptolem. and Co. pernic. Keplers Harmo.
give the world a good pair of lungs, and from these Bellows expect the
causes of what they inquire for. Others take a dish of water, and shaking it up
and down, think to clear this difficulty. But these their ratiocinations
discover clearly, that with NOAH'S Dove, through overmuch water, they can find
no ground for footing. For veritas non quaerit angulos. And if the reason were
ready, they would not have disputed; and yet they are very confident; and why
may not they be so, who dare venture to give (before they prove any Orbs) the
government of the Orbs to a band of celestial intelligences?

I shall not wonder, if these men every where find an Euripus, and at its
banks imitate their Grandy's Aristot.
outcry, Quia ego non possum te capere, tu me capias.

How does the Spirit befoole these men? First he tells them, that they are
so far from finding out the Causes, that they are ignorant of the Effects:
Know thou the time when the wild Goats of the rock bring forth? or can
thou mark when the Hindes do calve? Can thou number the months that they
fulfill, or know thou the time when they bring forth?

Solomon says, There are three things too wonderful for me; yea, four which
I know not. Prove. 30. 18.19.
The way of an Eagle in the air, the way of a serpent upon a rock, the way of
a ship in the midst of the sea, and the way of a man with a maid.

See Aristot. de mundo, de coelo etc.
How does our great Master perplexe himself in the inquiry of causes? Sometimes
he makes the principia of natural things, to be contraria: whereas, neither
the heavens, nor the stars, nor anything that is by univocall generation, is
that way produced. Sometimes he allows three principia, Privatio, Materia, and
Forma; forgetting his own principle, that Ex nihilo nihil fit, not remembering
that when he has matter and form, he is yet to seek for the Rock and Pit,
out of which matter and form are dug and hewed; and therefore instituteth
two several authors, one of matter, another of form.

I confess, his Commentators do file of some rust from these Tenets, but not
so clearly as to make him give the right cause of Being.

Romance's and New-Atlantides, I shall gladly embrace as pleasant and glorious
entertainements from specious and Ambrosian wits. Like Plato's and sir Francis
Bacon's.
But for true knowledge of causes, having no cause to expect, I will not hope.

Sis Walter Raleigh says exceeding well, that the Cheese-wife knows that
Runnet curdleth Cheese, but the Philosoher knows not how.

All this while I do not reject an industrious search after wisdom, though
the wisest of men says, He that increases wisdom, increases grief.

Verulan: Augment. Scient.
I do only, with Sir Francis Bacon, condemn doctrinam phantasticam,
litigiosam, fucatam, and mollem; a nice, unnecessary, prying into those things
which profit not.

Too great exactness in this Learning, has caused our Meteorologists to blush
when their confidence has proved but a Vapor. Too great hopes of discovering
the mystery of nature, has caused some, contrary to the authority of
Scripture contrary to the opinion of Julius Caesar, Picus Mirandula, Cornelius
a Lapide, Joan. Barclaius, cum multis aliis, to attribute an unwarranted power
to the stars over our bodies.

But this ensues, while we follow, for learning, what is not. And so, that
noble comprehensive activity, the soul of man, is hindered from entertaining
in its place more generous, more useful, and sublimated Truths.

How would the soul improve, if all Aristotle's Materia prima, Plato's Men's
Platonica, Hermes Trismegistus his (...), were converted into some spiritual
light? the soul might soar and raise it self up to Universal Being, bathe
it self in those stately, deep, and glorious streams of of Unity, see God in
Jesus Christ, the first, chief, and sole cause of all Being: It would not then
contain it self within particular rivulets, in whose shallow waters it can
encounter nothing but sand or pebbles, seeing it may fully delight it self in
the first rise of all delight, Jesus Christ.

Thus, when you see the face of Beauty, you will perfectly be assured how many
the several pieces which make it up, must be, what their nature, and their
several proportions. So shall you with certainty descend to knowledge of
existences, essences, when you shall rest in one universal cause: and
Metaphysics, Mathematics, and Logic will happily prove one, while they teach
the variations of Unity through several numbers. All particular Sciences will
be subordinate, and particular applications of these. So all shall be,
according to Ficinus, Circulus boni per bonum in bonum rediens; and the face of
divine Beauty shall be unveiled through all.

CHAP. XVI. The unhappy fruits of Division, in other parts of Learning, made
manifest.
CAst your eye on Moral Philosophy, and see how the truth is darkened by
distinctions and divisions; How our Masters have set up in the same soul, Two
fountains of Reason, the Will, and the Understanding. Have they not virtutes
Intellectuales and Morales? Is it not a great question, Vtrum Prudentia sit
virtus Moralis? Vtrum Summum Bonum sit in Intellectu, an Voluntate? Vtrum
Prudentia possit separari a virtute Morali? Vtrum virtus Moralis sita sit in
Appetitu Rationali, an Sensitivo?

I say, these questions, especially the dividing of the soul into so many
faculties enthrones many reasonable Beings in the soul. Many reasonable
Beings, placed by Philosophy in the Soul.
For, when the will entertaineth or rejects the proposition of the
understanding, she must do it one of these three ways: Either by an
instinct; and this men will not have; for, hoc est brutum. Or by chance; and
this many reject; for then she has no liberty. Or by discourse; and this most
pitch upon; for then she does exercise vim illam imperatricem, which I read of
amongst them, but understand not.

Now, if they conclude upon this third way. What is this Discourse, but the
Work of an Understanding? if the Will act that way, which is, or ought to be to
the Understanding proprium quarto modo; Is not then the will an Understanding?

Thus like an unskillfull Artist, they mince with distinctions; they whet, till
there be no more Steel: and whilst they would sharpen, they annihilate: Whilst
they would enlarge, they overthrow the Soul. They create names, and say, with
Ajax, Eurip. Tragaed.
they are Ulysses, and so fight with them. They do, as one faith very well,
giving Passion eyes, make Reason blind; raising the will, they ruin the
Understanding. Termini nullos habent terminos. The poor Soul oppressed with
black Melancholy, believes some part of his body as big as a house: and no man
can, in his thought, pass, unless he remove it: Even so do those men.

But what may not be expected from That happy Inventer, and bold Abetter of
errors, who with much confidence maintains the eternity of the World, against
Hermes, Museus, Orpheus, Anaxagoras, Linus, etc. Yet that they may insanire cum
ratione, they say, that if you raise not up some faculty to contend with the
Understanding, the Understanding seeing right, must ever do right, and that we
by woeful experience know to be otherwise.

I confess, whilst the Understanding sees light and right (I now discourse of
the Understanding, Will, Affections, etc. in their terms) it does right;
Seeing and doing one in the Soul as knowing and willing.
for, seeing and doing is all one; for the act of the Soul is but seeing or
discerning. But that Understanding, which now did see right perfectly, at the
same instant is blind, even in a gross, absurd thing: and so the effect and
birth of it is but darkness and folly.

Vanity of dispures in Metaphysics.
In Metaphysics, with what curious nets do they entangle their hearers?
certainly, that should be styled the Art or Science of Disputes and quaere's
for the very Being and subjectum Metaphysices, is strongly disputed. Some will
have ens tanium, the universal nature of Being: Others, substances abstract
from matter, as Angels, Spirits, Souls of men, to be the subject of this
Learning; And as it begins* so it grows into thousands of disputes.

As, Vtrum differentiae possunt esse sub eodem genere cum illo quod differ
faciunt? Vtrum universale sit aliquid reale, ^n notionale tantum? Vnde rerum
individuatio exoriatur?

If I should go through Logic, Mediocrem artem, Mathematical Sciences: I
should but weary you with variety of opinions.

Even Divinity it self is darkened with mists of inextricable questions.
Darkness in Divinity through the ignorance of unity.
The questions about Faith and Love, are sufficient to fill the world with
perpetual quarrels; Faith and Repentance coevall.
As, whether Faith precedeth Repentance? which learned Master Pemble has
sweetly determined by making both Faith and Repentance fruits of semen
vivisicum. Whether Faith be a particular application of Christ to my self, or
only a bare spiritual belief, that Christ is the Son of God? Which Reverend,
holy, learned Master Cotton, has most acutely, most truly cleared, by proving
that Faith can be nothing but a laying hold of that promise which God has
made. The general promise, the object of faith.
Now, that promise is, That, he that believes that Christ is the Son of God,
shall be saved.

Whether faith be a believing that I am saved, or depending upon God for
salvation? And here Bellarmine has with mighty wit assaulted our side; for,
faith he, if belief be to believe I am saved, I was saved without faith. If
belief be to believe that God will give me grace to be saved, I believe before
I have grace, before I have faith. Which knot, I know not how to dissolve, but
by opening with Reverend Mr. Cotton That (and this is another Quaere.)

Declarative
We are saved by faith, only declarative. I am saved, not only in the eternal
decree, without faith, by Gods free gift (that all consent to) but even in the
execution. And when God has pleased to take me out of eternal darkness; then
faith discovers to me that I am to be saved; and so, making faith to be a
manifestation of that to me, that I am saved, Bellarmines objection is answered.

There are many other Questions, but I dare not so much as mention them.

If we should but survey the disciplinable part of Divinity, we should be
confounded with Chiliads of disputes, all which I will wrap up in one, scil.

Whether there be a prescript form of Church Government? The ill consequence
of the division between doctrine and discipline.


Are not the two Testaments expositors of the two Tables? Do they leave us any
latitude in any other of the Commandments? why should we then think, that That
Commandment which God has honored in the second place, should be forgotten?
Truly, had the Learned Papists so done, they would never have expunged it.

Are not we as unable to prescribe the manner as the matter of Gods worship? If
we were left to our selves, should we not institute cringings, crouchings, all
those ceremonies of Willworship, which carry a voluntary outward visible show
of humility, but give the heart leave to play the Trewant? Doctrine of matter
inworship; Discipline of manner, both are Doctrine, both prescribed by the same
God.
If ever distinctions did harm, here they have been deadly poison: for,
Doctrine and Discipline are all one. For, what is Discipline but that Doctrine
of the manner of Gods worship? wherein we ought to be as faithful, as in any
point of Divinity: and this will certainly appear one day, when God shall
with pittylesse holy scorn, ask some, Who has required these things at your
hands?

The monstrous effects of division made manifest in other pieces of Divinity.
But, to conclude; give me leave to show you how these exorbitant wits have
raised a Babel, have cast Pelion upon Ossa; and from thence discharged the
Balistae of their ignorance, against the Throne of Eternity, against God
himself.

The Schools for many ages, The weakness of the distinction Scientia
simplicis intelligentiae, and purae visionis.
have looked upon the way of Gods knowledge of things, under two notions;
simplicis intelligentiae, and purae visionis. I confess, I see not the end of
this distinction. For, if Gods Power and Will be all one, (which I think no man
dispureth) all the ways of knowledge, that can be in God, must be confined
in that one notion of simplicis intelligentiae.

I do seem (if I mistake not) to maintain this position by an evident
demonstration, thus;

Is there any that denies God to be purus actus? does not every body say, that
in God there is no potentia? If God then be actus, and not potentia, all
things were, that ever shall be, ab aeterno under a decree; and so, what he
could do, he did do, and can do no more.

Yet, that Truths may come more clearly and easily to our apprehension, I
shall allow the use of the distinction, so that they improve it only for
memory, and do not expectany reality from it.

But some, not content with this distinction, have found out another, which
discovers a mean parentage, by the very name, it is called Media scientia.
Scientia maedia discussed.
I will not contend with it in the power of those arguments, whereby our
Divines have so often left it spiritlesse and helpless. I shall only from this
point of Unity, show the vanity of it.

If this sciencia be one with that which we allow, then is it but nominall and
vain. If it be different, you make two in God: for, if I overvalue not my
former ratiocination, I have proved it clearly that scientia simplicis
intelligentiae carries forth as much of God as is discernable to our
darkness; and making two in God, you exalt two Gods; and whilst you find two
Gods, you lose the true God, which is but only one, an eternal Unity. And thus
whilst men gaze continually in search of causes, they blind themselves, and
know not effects.

CHAP. XVII. A Recapitulation of former instances, with some additions of a
question or two more.
In what sense intermediate causes may be allowed.
I Confess there is a secondary intermediate Being, which you may call a Cause;
which in our language, does precede and produce another; the observation of
which, is very fitting, so that we search and puzzle not our selves with the
grounds and Reasons of this precedence.

As, apply fire to combustible matter, and it will burn; and if you call (which
in some sense you may call) this application, the cause of burning: I dispute
not only the search into the nature of wood and fire, and how the fire does
work upon the wood, and how the wood can be both passive and active, Simul and
Semel; for, they say, Nulla est actio quin sit reactio, this is That I desire
to shun; for, intus exstens prohibet alienum; whilst we entertain our selves
with these poor Sophismes of wit, we lose that glory which the immortal soul
thirsts after.

But if our spirits, and the light of our reason be dim; Let us go to the
forge of the Philistines, and sharpen our inventions, our apprehensions there;
Division the policy of the Prince of darkness.
Let us learn from the Prince of the air, who (knowing well, that, dissolve
the fasciculus, and Iugurtha his prophecy to his children will prove true)
taught his Scholars this lesson for these many ages, Divide and impera;
Divisions and distractions, being the great road of all error.

And if you long, with the Israelites, to have a King, as your neighbors have;
and you desire to speak in their language: When the soul entertaineth light,
say it does understand. When it does exercise any moral virtue, say it
wills. When you see some things precede others, call the one a cause, the
other an effect: but travel not far in the search of the source of this cause.
Do not make the will and the understanding two faculties, Fratrum concordia
rara; Recapitulation of all.
Jacob will supplant Esau in the Womb. Make therefore the several Actings of
the soul, as Rays of this one soul; make these rays, and the soul sending
forth these rays, a perpetual emanation Divine: and so by these degrees of
truth, mount up into the arms of Eternity, and he will take care of you, that
you shall not dash your feet against the stone of free will: that you shall
not overthrow all faith, by starting so many nice questions in the point of
faith.

If you follow this rule, and see all things in the glass of Unity, you will
not lose all Arts and Sciences in the Wood of Divisions and Subdivisions in
infinitum; you shall be more substantial, than to make Substance and Accidents
Two; neither will it ever happen, that you maintain transubstantiation, by
affirming that Accidents can haerere in nullo subjecto.

You shall not make to your self a God of contradiction, dividing the will and
power of God. Both which in God, is God; and so but one. You will not maintain
two Covenants, one of works, another of grace, seeing grace is graceless
without works, and Works worthless without grace.

If God shall give you to walk by this light, practical questions will be
laid aside, as well as Theoreticall: you will not dispute whether you ought to
be more holy on one day (as at a Sacrament) then at other times; for, you will
then know, that these Scriptures express fully the rule you must walk by;
Pray continually; rejoice evermore: blessed is he that fears always: Be ye
holy [not by fits and starts, but] as I am holy; serving me always, with all
your heart, your might, your affections. So that every day, every duty, is to
you an holy day, an ordinance divine.

The sense of the Sabbaths command.
And if any man shall say, Why does God add this parcel, Remember that thou
keep holy the Sabbath day, etc. and this strict injunction, before you approach
the Table of the Lord, Let every man examine himself, and so let him eat?

You will be able to answer, that you ought not to be more holy in one day, in
one duty, than in another; for, you must be all one, Semper idem.

And secondly, you will be able to prove, that the weight of this injunction,
is not to add any other holiness to the day, or the ordinance, than a
holiness of separation.

For, a holiness of inhaerence, cannot fall any where, but upon a reasonable
creature. The Temple had no more.

For, with the leave of learned and holy Master Cawdry, Time and Place are
incapable of any other sanctification.

But the stresse of these and the like precepts, lies here. We ought indeed
always to keep a Sabbath. All things Ordinances.
Every bread and every water, ought to be a confirmation of our faith and of
our graces.

But God considering that we are lower than the Angels (and them he has
charged with folly; The intention of special Ordinances.
) that we are infirm; that we cannot always keep the bow bent: If we cannot
be holy all the week, if we cannot be pure at our own Tables; as who can? yet,
if we will remember the Sabbath, and if we will come to that feast of marrow
and fatness with a wedding garment, and at other times do our best (though
weak) endeavors, he will behold no iniquity in us.

We shall not be perplexed, how far we ought to mourn for the sins of
others, the sins of the times, or our own lives. [And these are intangling
questions to many sweet spirits.] For, drawing all things to an unity, we shall
know that sorrow and joy may meet in the same subject at once; Mourning and joy
reconciled.
they must be both in the actings of faith. We must not sorrow as without
hope; We may not lose our Faith in our tears; Our tears must be tears of
joy; We may think, that we have sinned, and so sigh; but at the same instant,
we must know we have a Savior, and so triumph. And if I were now all gore
blood, would I not now go to the Chirurgians? Truly the greater my sin, the
sooner ought to be my return, the higher my Faith. But great and enlarged
Faith, cannot be without exultation and magnificats.

Thus could we lay aside foolish questions, could we seek into our hearts,
according to the Poets advice, Ne te quaesiveris extra, and not into the
causes, and the Being of causes, things too high for us; We might have an
Heaven here, we might see how Christ is one with GOD, and we one with Christ;
so we in Christ, one with God.

If we cannot reach the perfection of this knowledge, yet let us come as near
it as we can, for the true knowledge of God in Christ, is life everlasting.

A Postscript.
AND now, Sir, I have with what brevity I can, run through, what I never
intended to speak of. I had prepared a little in lieu of This, upon the nature
of Prophecy, which I now shall reserve for a Discourse upon the fourteenth
Chapter of the second to Corinth: But it was with me in this case, as it is
with the soul, prostrating it self at the throne of grace. It designs to
breath it self out in confession, but is suddenly raised up into to sweet
exultation. It intends a Magnificat, but by some unexpected irresistible power,
it is dissolved into tears; which never did, nor ever can happen in a Form,
as might appear by ventilating the opposite arguments, if opportunity prevailed
as well as reason.

I had nothing in my resolution, but, by a word or two, to mediate in the
behalf of these lines, a free and a friendly access, to Your more serious and
useful studies. But ( quo fato nescio) I have let fall my plummet into waters
too deep, that if you lend not your favorable construction in the perusal, I
must suffer. I confess my confidence in your Gentleness is great; I shall
therefore, without any further plea, after this long Parenthesis, give you a
short account of what these papers bear.

You have here my poor thoughts upon the twentyfourth Chap. of Matthew. that I
was forced to, because I quote it, more than once, in sense differing from our
Commentators: yea, I was necessitated to run through the whole Chapter. It will
appear in costly robes, adorned with lofty and glorious language, sweetened by
many a pleasant and clear Simile, quickened by diverse acute and learned
Criticismes: These, none of these are mine: My Cabinet enshrineth no such
Treasure. I confess, to save the labor of contending with Pareus, and others,
I delivered to a Friend of Yours, and Mine, only the substratum of the
Discourse, desiring him, from those principles to undertake my adversaries. In
lieu of this, he returned me the Chapter Matthew. 24
, imbellished with so much wit and learning, that I durst not call it mine, and
so thought to have suppressed it; and Had done so, but that from the Law of
friendship, you may challenge a share in what is His; and from that reason it
lives now, and is presented to Your view, hoping (for his sake, not for mine)
to find grace in your eyes.

You have also, my Thoughts, upon the twentieth of Revelations, because therein
I have done Two things.

First, According to my Model, answered your three Quaeries.

Secondly, Various sorts of Millenaries.
Discovered my opinion concerning the Millenaries. I find That point
entertained by many learned and pious men, under various and different notions.

The first who were of that opinion, The first too earnall.
lived immediately after St. John, as Papias, Irenaeus, and so on; in after
ages, Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, cum multis alijs: these men did a little
Alcoranize; for, with Mahomet, they cast all the glory of it, into the outward
pomp the Church should then enjoy: which is but as the body of that other
spiritual beauty, wherein the Church of God shall at that time be more than
exceedingly resplendent. Yet these men have happily fixed upon the due Season,
expecting them at the pouring out of the seventh Vial, a thousand years before
the end of the World.

The second only Spiritual.
Of latter days, most famous and glorious Lights, as Calvin, Beza, Iunius,
Tremelius, Broughton, etc. have wrapped up all the glory under a spiritual
notion, robbing both it and other Scriptures, of that sweetness; whereon even
Our Souls, but especially Our children shall feed as upon Marrow and Fatness;
wherewith we shall be refreshed as with Wine refined upon the lees. Contraries
may sometimes (in some sense) be Errors; the others erred because they have not
the spiritual; and these have mistaken, not observing the temporal glory of
this thousand years.

These last men are succeeded by a generation of Worthies, A third sort, in
some things too literal.
who have come nearer to the Truth; yet (if I mistake not) have missed it; and
some of these are Alstedius, (who justly meriteth the Anagram of Sedulitas)
Mede, and some others; who indeed expect a time of glory, confuting the first
men, because they made theirs too carnal. Yet do they fail themselves, by
placing the time after the burning of the world with material fire, spoken of
in Peter; and joining with it their opinion, of the resurrection of the
Martyrs, which I do not wholly condemn, though therein I am not yet so clear.

Lastly, we have the Reverend man Mr. Brightman, against whom I will not now
dispute, whose opinion, seeing I must oppose it, when I mention it, I will not
now name. For he ought always a me non sine honor nominari. Pliny says
Venerabilis Catonis' ebrietas, and so say I of Brightman, The very Errors (if
errors) of Brightman have their beauty: I must confess, if God has been
pleased to discover light to me, I have borrowed from him. If there be any
thing of sweet, I have gathered it from the strong. And I do seriously protest
I have not with Scaliger the Soldier; undertaken Cardan, that his ruins may
be my rise.

No, no, I honor his very Urne, and do believe that one day I shall see the
Jews very zealous in raising to him some stately Mausoleum, who has been the
first means of quickening the affections of Christians to pray for their
return.

Sir, I have overtired your Gentleness, and your Patience, therefore now give
me leave to refresh your spirits; Let me in a word say here, what I prove more
amply elsewhere; the days are at hand; We shall see the Laying of the first
stone, if not the rearing of the structure to some good height.

I know there is a Great Reader, who, though he has Lynx his eyes, yet using
overmuch the Septuagenary Spectacles of antiquate Antiquity, loses to
himself, and, by his justly-merited authority, robs others of, this sweet
truth, of the Church her approaching glory, which is in my apprehension, as
blood to the veins, as life to the blood, as spirit to the life, as all to the
Spirit. But certainly, while he thinks the Witnesses, to be yet unburied, he
does bury two witnesses, which are as able to bring Christ to his Espousals, as
the two post-knights were to nail him to the Cross.

I know there is another worthy, who has for many years stayed Christ's
sainting Spouse with flagons of Generous and Good Wine, who adjourneth our
happiness by expecting the sad downfull of the two Witnesses. But (as I have,
I hope, clearly proved elsewhere) That is past. Macte ergo gaudio, Tune up
your ten-stringed instrument: Let us hear that pleasant melody of a Christian
Hymen; O Hymenaee! Let Your sweet spirit sing, and We will dance: For certainly
ere long, all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes, and perfect fruition of
Love will cast out Fear.

And now, I commit You, and Your Hopeful, Flourishing Studies, to the
expectation, and advancement of these glories which make way for the coming of
our Savior.

And to Him alone be the glory

FINIS.
The Contents of the several Chapters handled in this TREATISE of TRUTH.
CHAP. I. The Understanding, and the Truth-understood, are one. page 1. CHAP.
II. The second Argument, proving that Truth is the Nature of the Understanding.
p. 5. CHAP. III. A prosecution of the second Argument, wherein all Requisites
to a Being are applied to the understanding, being made one with the truth. p.
13. CHAP. IIII. This Argument further cleared by more objections propounded and
answered. p. 17. CHAP. V. The whole Soul and truth in the Soul are one. p.
21. CHAP. VI. All things are this one light or truth, shining from God. p. 26.
CHAP. VII. How unity is all in all things. p. 31. CHHP. VIII. The nature of
Habits. p. 45. CHAP. IX. The difference betwixt Knowledge and affection,
discussed. p. 59. CHAP. X. That all the several and particular actings of the
soul, are this one light and truth. p. 81. CHAP. XI. An Objection answered, in
which the nature of time and place are touched. p. 88 CHAP. XII. Another
Objection is answered, drawn from the falsehood in the working of the soul. p.
109 CHAP. XIII. Discovering the consequences of this position, that All things
are one Truth. p. 114 CHAP. XIIII. The benefit which Knowledge and all Sciences
receive from this assertion. p. 123 CHAP. XV. Confusion in the knowledge of
Causes, discovered, and redressed by this Unity. p. 133 CHAP. XVI. The unhappy
fruits of Division, in other parts of Learning, made manifest. p. 146 CHAP.
XVII. A Recapitulation of former instances, with some additions of a question
or two more. p. 160
FINIS.

