THE GUILTLESS CRIES AND WARNINGS of the INNOCENT: AGAINST INJUSTICE,
OPPRESSION, CRUELTY; False-Swearers, Envious Men, and such like Witnesses,
arisen up against A PLAIN MAN. OR, A Living and True WITNESS condemned,
through want of sound (yet through Unjust) Judgment. together with the unequal
and unreasonable Proceedings of HUMPHRY WILDEY, Mayor; and EDWARD SOLLEY, and
ROBERT SOLLERS, Aldermen, and Justices of the CITY WORCESTER, as may plainly
appear by what follows: besides the unjust Sufferings of the GUILTLESS. From
whom a clear, true Sound, and many certain Warnings, and wholesome
Exhortations, have been, (as a Trumpet) sounded forth, and directed to the ears
and hearts of thy chief Magistrate and Rulers, O CITY: together with the
multititude of the Inhabitants within thy bowels, fenced Walls, strong Holds,
Borders, and Territories, O wicked CITY. From the Hand, Mouth, and very Heart
of a true FRIEND, and not an Enemy to the Person, or well-being of any Man,
Woman, or Child, within thee, O CITY, or upon the Face of the Earth,
throughout the whole Creation of God, or of that which lies under the cruel
Bondage of Death and Corruption, for which I suffer, and labor, and travail;
with, and among many Brethren, for its perfect Freedom, and Restoration, into
the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God (as in the beginning) whose Servant,
Witness, and Prisoner for the Elects sake, I am, Called by men DANIEL BAKER,
by Scorners, A Quaker.

To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness unto the Truth. Every one that is of the Truth hears my
voice, says Jesus, John 18.37. As a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb, so he
opens not his mouth. (Lo) he was taken from prison, and from Judgment, And
who shall delare his Generation? Isaiah 53. Ver. 7, 8. Printed for R. Wilson,
at the black-spread-Eagle in Martins, 1660.

A COPY of what was delivered to the Major of the CITY of Worchester, for Him
and the Aldermen to read.
Friends,
IS it not the Honor of a Good Magistrate, wisely, with a Good Understanding,
to make diligent Inquiry, and search into the Nature and Ground of a Matter, or
Controversy between a Man and his Neighbor, that so True and Sound Judgment
may be ministered without Respect of Persons, and that the Cause of the Poor may
be heard, as well as the Rich; and so Judgment, or Sentence to be passed
according to Equity, and Mercy, that the Sword may be laid in its due Place,
(even upon the Head of the Transgressor) lest the Guitless, (whom God will
Justify) be smitten, and Equity, Sound Judgment, and Good Laws be perverted
to a wrong end, which will draw down Vengeance, a Curse, and wrath from the
Lord God of Judgment, and not Blessing.

Hearken ye Rulers, and consider your Proceedings past against me, and let the
Light of Jesus in your Consciences, give Sentence, and answer me, whether ye
did not respect persons in judgment, (which you ought not) when as ye compelled
me to stand bare headed at the Bar, and my Accuser John VVinnington sat upon
the Bench, beside one of your Rulers? And, Whether you did well, after John
VVinninton had spoke forth the Words of his False Testimony the first time, and
varied in his Second Speech, contrary to his first, which I immediately showed
you, but ye did not heed it, but suffered, or caused a Pen, Ink, and Paper to
be given to the False Witness, to write down what he pleased, as he sat by one
of you upon the Bench: And, if ye remember, I questioned, Whether it were
according to the Law of the Nation, what ye suffered him to do then, the matter
being so weighty, as I laid it before you, saying, For ought I know, my Life
lay as it were at the stake?

And, Is this a Shame, or an Honor to you Rulers? Consider of it: And I cry
even unto You, Repent while Ye have a Day, and quit Your Selves like Men of
Truth, fearing God, to clear the Guiltless, and Your Selves also, while ye
have time, and it is in your power: But this I tell you in plainness, That if
Deliverance come some other way, the Weight of False Judgment and Guilt will
lie heavy upon your Consciences, before the Lord God in his Day, and of your
Account.

Consider, I say, whether ye have done well, or whether ye have not had respect
of Persons, in Judgment, and condemned the Guiltless, when Ye had an
Opportunity put into Your hands, to do Justice, and Judgment, which I expected
from You: But Behold Oppression, and the Needy is turned aside from Judgment:
And, Is it not Joy to the Just to do Judgment? but Destruction shall be to the
Workers of Iniquity, says Wisdom; and Woe unto them that seek deep to hide
their Counsel from the Lord, whose Works are in the dark, and they say, Who
sees us? Surely, Your turning of things upside down, shall be esteemed as the
Potters Clay, See Isaiah 29.15, 16.

Worcester Prison, this 8th Month, the 24th Day, 1660. From the hand of a Lover
of the whole Creation of God, whose Prisoner I am, D. B.


Hearken, You that are called Christians, and profess the Scripture your Rule,
and Paul's words, that read this; Foelix (whom some call a Heathen) was so noble
to Paul) when he was a Prisoner, commanded to let him have Liberty, and that
none of his acquaintance should be forbidden to minister, or come unto him.
Now, If any be ready to say to me, Thy Case is not Paul's. My Answer is, Paul
was innocent of the things he was falsely accused of; and so am I, God is my
Witness, whether Men believe or not; and, Let such, called Christian
Governors take heed, lest those called Heathen Rulers arise up in Judgment,
against them, and condemn them.

The Sheriff had a Coppie of this.

The SHERIFF sent sundry times since, to order that I may have more Liberty, as
to let Friends come to me, the City Hall being as it were under my
Prison-Chamber, I having sometime Liberty to go down; and once, when the
Justices were present upon the Bench, I spoke these words to them, and said,
Blessed shall they be that without Respect of Persons do Justice, and Judgment,
but Eternal Woe from the Living God will be on them that do it not; and they
shut me up more close.

To the Major, and for the Aldermen to read also.
Friend,
TAke heed (as thou will answer before the Throne of the Majesty on High, even
the Lord God of Judgment, who from Generation to Generation did and does, and
yet will plead the Cause of the Guiltless, whether men do it or not) that thou
yet pursue not Evil to thine own Destruction, in consenting to, or joining with
any in Testimony, or Judgment, against the Innocent, lest the weight of
innocent Blood lie heavy upon thy Conscience: The Living God, (behold I
testify) has an Eternal Witness, that is true, in thy Conscience; And in
love, (whether thou hear or forbear) I warn thee also, that thou take heed of
justifying any thing, or Witness, or Testimony, which the Everlasting
Witness, (the Light of Jesus) in thee condemns; or, on the contrary, that thou
persist not to condemn any thing which the Pure and True Witness of the God of
Truth in thee justifyeth: For he was a wise Man, that said by the Spirit of the
Lord, He that condemns the Just, and justifies the Wicked, even They both
are an Abomination to the Lord.

And, O Ye Rulers, wisely consider, whether you are so, or a praise to the
Lord, who is our All, God, blessed for ever. I commend my Testimony freely to
the witness of God in Your consciences, to be answered in the Day of God
whether you now hear or forbear: Know Ye, that I am a Servant of the Living
God, and a Friend, and not an Enemy to any one man's Person, upon the Face of
the whole Earth, therefore not an enemy to the King God is my Witness, that I
am a Friend also to sound Justice, and Judgment, Good Magistrates, Good
Government, Good Laws, and am subject to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords
sake, called of men, (who am clear of Your Guilt, and False Accusations, and
Swearings.)

DANIEL BAKER, by Scorners called QUAKER.
Worcester Prison, This 22d of the 8th Month, 1660. From the Lords Prisoner for
the Testimony of Truth. D. B.

To the MAYOR of the CITY. etc.
Friend,
FOr so much that thou art chosen and called MAYOR, or Chief Magistratte of the
CITY, bear with me a little, and suffer the eye and ear of a good and perfect
understanding (in the Spirit of Meekness, as a Man of Truth) to be opened in
thee, that from henceforth, if happily the Almighty God (in whose hand thy breath
is) lengthen the Days of this Life, to the end thou may glorify, fear, and
honor him only, that thou also may be honored with the true honor, which
comes from him who is the Eternal Fountain of Life; for which end Life and
Breath is freely given to all men; and not that any man, or any in the
Authority of God, (especially of them called Christian Magistrates) should
dishonor him, or turn aside the needy from (or have respect of Persons in)
Judgment, or condemn the Just, and justify the Wicked, or hearken to Lies;
neither to let a False Witness go unpunished; or to do, speak, or act, or
consent to any of these, or such like Abominations. And Friend, let me ask thee
again, Was not he a wise Man, that spoke by the Spirit of the Lord in his
Wisdom, saying, He that Condemns the Just, and he that Justifies the Wicked,
even they both are an Abomination to the Lord? (Mark that) who is my Witness,
that I am as Innocent, and as clear (whether thou can believe me or nay) even
as a suckling Child.

Now in the fear and dread of the living God (who is higher than the highest)
Consider whether thou, O man, and them that sat on the Judgment Seat by thee,
have been a praise to God, to good, just, reasonable men; or not a good savor
in your Proceedings: And concerning the matters falsely Charged against me,
which as yet you have not Condemned, and the very Truth and Reason is through
neglect, or for want of making diligent Inquiry and Search into the Nature and
Ground of the matter, as it becomes men of Truth so to do; but on the contrary,
have you not Justified evil envious men, that fear not the true God, by casting
my Body into Prison, and, as it were, gladly receiving false Testimonies from
false Swearers and ungodlike men, as it were in the dark, and behind my back
also? and this was not right, when as the Accusers, and the Accused, men of
Truth, would have caused to appear face to face; and some called Heathen
Rulers, stand Justified before the Lord, and in the sight of good men, in such
matters; But behold how you have erred in this matter, and Lo its not hid from
the God of Heaven, who will certainly bring you to Judgment, and plead the
Cause of the Guiltless, and not Condemned; although ye do, and yet may
(through evil counsel, prejudice or enmity, which proceeds not from the Spirit
of Life of Innocence) make light of, and condemn it.

Wherefore I yet Cry to you, Repent, and suffer Gods faithful and true
Witness, even the Light of the Lord Jesus, in every of your Consciences, to
arise and answer me; for to that only can I freely commend my Testimony,
because even in that, true and sound Judgment is placed: And, O ye Rulers, how
well would it be with you, were ye in all things subject to, and freely guided
by it; even in you, and in all men its to have its Authority and Pre-eminence,
to Guide, Order, Direct and Teach them in all true, sound, right, wholesome
words, ways and actions. For according to its Testimony in every man (Male or
Female) which is, was, and for ever will be the same (to wit Truth) so shall
every man's Words, Thoughts, Ways and Actions be Tried and Judged, Justified or
Condemned, according to the Nature, End and Ground of all the Deeds done in the
Body (of Male or Female) for this is the everlasting Truth, from which I speak.

And its an undeniable saying (to wit) That evil is joined to within, before it
come forth either into Word or Action: Wherefore I Cry in the dread of the
living God, Let all be warned to cleave to the Good, and eschew, or abstain
from the Evil in its first appearance; for certainly, so shall be the reward of
every man (Male or Female) And this is not contrary, but according to the true
and faithful sayings of Jesus, and the holy Scriptures of Truth, And lo, every
Tongue shall confess to the Equity and Justice of the Pure God (who is Light)
and to the Spiritual and Eternal Light of the Lord Jesus, the faithful and true
Witness, Gods Righteousness that Justifies not, but Condemns the sin where
it is joined to, or conceived (to wit) in the flesh, where the Prince of
Darkness of the power of the Air has his Seat or Throne; but the Light of the
Lord Jesus reveals, or makes him manifest, and comes to Dis-throne, Overturn,
and Destroy both him (to wit) the Devil and his works in man. And behold, these
are the true and faithful sayings of the living God, Whether you, O you Rulers,
or any to whom this shall come, can receive or believe them or not, or hear or
forbear; Lo, its love to the Meek, Innocent Spirit, yet Oppressed and
Imprisoned, even in you, of which this Body, in which I am, is a true figure,
if ye can read with a good and noble Understanding, and believe in the Truth,
which yet lies hid in you, and if you have Ears to hear, you may hear the Cry
of the Poor and Needy, the Prisoner of Hope, the Oppressed within and without
you, whose Cause is but one, which the God of Heaven will certainly Plead,
whether the lofty Oppressors hear, or forbear.

And Friend, Behold I yet call unto thee, to hear me patiently, who have had
Four or Five false Witnesses arose up against me, and have laid things to my
Charge, which was not in my heart (concerning which I am as a Babe) And I know
thou, O man, and you, before whom I did appear the 20th Day of the 8th Month,
are not altogether Ignorant of it, that its even so: And lo, I say again, They
have Sworn, and laid such things to my Charge, which I knew not; neither came
such sayings into my heart (or mind) from which I speak the Truth, even from my
very heart (the most true living God, who searches it, is my witness) before
you Rulers.

And if so, thou, O man, had been faithful to the Light, or true Testimony of
God in thy Conscience, it would not have suffered thee to have Condemned, or at
least to have Consented to the thing in condemning the Guiltless, of which thou
are found truly guilty of, and others with thee, before the Lord of Heaven,
although ye may seem to hide it, as it may be, before men; yet verily the most
secret works of Darkness cannot be hid from the Eternal Eye that beholds all
the secret Actions of the ungodlike men, that cannot save you from the Terrors
of the dreadful God, or from the terrible stroke of his Hand, when it is lifted
up to smite, or from the Arrows of the Almighty, when his Bow is bent, or from
the glittering powerful Sword of his Strength, who is the mighty God of Jacobs
life, the plain man that dwelt in his Tent, and as a Prince prevailed with the
most High; who, if he put forth but his Finger, when his long-suffering, as it
were, is come to an end, and then smite the life of your vanity. Alas, Woe, and
Alas for you, you are but men that shall die, and come to Judgment before the
Throne of Gods Lamb, slain since the Foundation of the World of the ungodly.

Wherefore I cry unto thee, O man, and unto you, O Rulers again, That you
suffer the fear and dread of the living God to possess and be set up even in
your hearts, and by it see that you Repent, and bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance, lest you die in your sins. If so, then eternal Woe and Torment will
be your Portion, with the Beast and false Prophet, in the Lake that burns,
where all Liars, and false Accusers, and Swearers, and Drunkards, and all that
forget God, shall be turned together with the fearful and unbelieving,
Covetous, Idolaters, shall have their part in the same.

Wherefore Friend, and Friends, see you to it from henceforth, Behold, I warn
you freely, in the name of the Lord, as formerly, whether ye can believe me, or
nay, (viz.) That Ye justify not any thing in any case or controversy, between
Brother and Brother, Neighbor and Neighbor, whether Poor or Rich, and not to
have respect to Persons, to pervert sound Judgment, which the faithful and
true witness of God in your consciences condemns, or testifies against: Or,
on the contrary, that You in the least, or in any wise join not in Judgment
with any false witness, Liar, or Swearer, although they are or may be never so
High, or Potent in the Earth; to turn aside the Needy from Equity, Mercy, and
sound Judgment, or to condemn the Poor and Needy, the Innocent and Guiltless,
that cannot swear, nor lie, nor respect Persons, but keeps in the Doctrine of
Christ, in whose mouth was found no guile, and is a perfect Example to him in
these things, neither can he give flattering Titles to any man, or secretly
respect the person of any man, but speak the Truth from his very heart, though
it may return to his own hurt: Such a one does and will the God of Heaven and
Earth justify, (and plead, and not condemn) his cause from Generation to
Generation, even for ever: although unreasonable men, through unmercifulness,
prejudice, Enmity or false Judgment, may condemn the Generation of the
Righteous, yet will not the Lord, who is my God, who judges righteously. And
know thou, O man, and hearken ye Magistrates of this City, Worcester, and
listen, O all ye Inhabitants within the bowels thereof: Behold, I have
Freedom and also boldness, in the Eternal Truth of the Living God, where I
dwell, to give forth these words of my Testimony. And, Know ye, that my
Innocence is a true and living VVitness against the Man of Enmity, (and them
that joined with him) who so wickedly, a False Witness, with many others are
arisen up against me, and having not the fear of the true God before their
eyes, have impudently forsworn themselves against me.

And, as concerning the matter, John Winnington, so wickedly and falsely has
sworn, who is known to be a disorderly ungodlike man, as, That I should say,
concerning CHARLES the late, second King of England, as I passed along the
Streets of the City, is wickedly false; and that I said not these words, it is
true, and I am innocent. He that searches mine and every man's heart knows, I
speak Truth from my heart, that its even so, as I also declared in the
presence, and before the faces of you Rulers; and that I am as a babe of
Yesterdayes bringing forth, concerning this false Charge of the Envious man,
with the Rest, which also are as false as the former. And contrary to this
behold I give forth my Testimony, And let the Inhabitants throughout the Land,
and of the whole Earth know, That this is our sure, sound, steadfast, and
eternal Principle, for which we have so deeply suffered on every hand
hitherto, since we were a People, raised up by the Almighty Arm of the Lord,
who is the Everlasting Light, and Salvation of us, that Christ Jesus is the
true Light that lights every man that comes into the World; and that a
manifestation of this true, Holy, Spiritual, and Eternal Light, or Spirit of
the Everlasting God, who is Light, that a manifestation of it is given to every
man, to profit withal, and that it is in every man that comes into the world,
and well should it be with all men in whom it comes, or may come, to have its
Right Noble, and honorable Authoriy, and Pre-eminence; otherwise it cannot go
well with them.

And another, a Baptist so called, according to the Deposition written, has
falsely sworn, (although some of his fellowship owned him not in this matter)
saying, He rode about the streets, when as I had not passed through one Street,
as before expressed, saying, most of the Inhabitants of this City was in a worse
condition than Turks and Heathens, except they repented: Now, as to these
words, they do somewhat agree to the words of my Testimony, sounded forth in
the City. And again, Winnington falsely swore, as the other, (Mark) that he
heard me say, That this City would be as a Sodom and Gomorrah, or words to this
effect: This also is false. But, what if I had said so? Was the crying sins
of Sodom and Gomorrah, that suffered the vengeance of Eternal Fire, greater?
Let the Wise in heart consider and judge, and let all be warned, as once and
again, yea and many times, (within thy Cities and Towns, and chief Places of
concourse (O England.) In singleness and uprightness of my heart, in obedience
to the Lord of Heaven, with my precious life in my hand, which often, through
the loving kindness of the Lord, I have received power to lay it down, and to
take it again, according to the perfect Example of the Captain of my Salvation,
and Elder Brother, to cry Repentance: I say it to the end, that all may be
warned to bring forth fruits meet for Repentance unto life, as it becomes all
that make mention of the Name of the Lord, which I also freely cried within thy
Gates (O City). And what is this Crime worthy of Bonds, or Imprisonments,
within thy bowels, O Nation? How often has the Scripture been fulfilled within
thy Borders, Truth is fallen in the Streets, and Equity cannot enter, and
Judgment is turned away backward, and he that departs from evil, and
reproves Sin in the Gate, makes himself a prey, and becomes a sign and a
wonder to an evil gainsaying and adulterous Generation: And the Lord saw it:
yea, and has seen it; and it displeased, and yet displeases him, because
there is no judgment, as in the Ancient days; A Lamentation, Woe, and Alas for
thee, O England.

O Shrewsbury! Lo thy crying Sins (together with the multitude and variety of
thy Abominations) have reached Heaven, even up to the very Throne of God: and
verily his Eternal Eye from above has beheld, and looked down, and to his
wounding has long (and many a) time refrained himself, and sent his Word of
Life, in his Lambs, freely to warn and visit thee, to Eternal Judgment and
Salvation; Wherefore

Let the Wild, Brutish, Unstable, Double-minded, Hardhearted Inhabitants,
within their Dark Habitations of Cruelty, and of thy strong Holds, O SALLOP; O
Sodom, Remember, and forget it not, if happily yet it may be for their good;
Before your Day pass away over your heads, even as the Wind, which blows
where it lists (and Lo the sound you have heard) yet it obeys the Lord:
But, Do Ye yet know, (O Ye Men, without a good and perfect understanding, whom
my soul pittieth) from whence it comes, or whether it goes? Yet, Blessed are,
and shall they be, that Read, and lay it to heart for good.

But to return to what I was speaking of before, Know Ye, O Magistrates, and
Inhabitants of this City, again, That the Testimonies of the Swearers that rise
up against me are wickedly false, and therefore judged and condemned with the
True, Eternal, and Spiritual Light, Christ in me, and not any other, but the
same that lights every man that comes into the World; and the True Living
God who is Light knows, and behold I testify again, that I had not, no not
so much as an evil thought in my heart against any man, from the time I began
to sound forth my Message, which the God of heaven put into my heart, to sound
freely forth (whether people can believe me or not) which, in obedience to the
Lord I freely did declare, till I was violently pulled off the Beast I rode on,
nay, nor then neither: But as to what these Wicked men have falsely sworn
against me, again I say, Lo, I am even as a Babe born as it were but yesterday,
and its my desire in the truth and nakedness of my heart, if happily they may
find a place of Repentance unto Life, and that they, and all may be warned from
henceforth not to do, act, or speak contrary to the Light of Jesus in their
Consciences; and that what these men have done against me may not then be laid
to their charge, who simply have not known what they have done; for they have
hated me without cause, Father forgive them that know not what they do; and let
them know, My Innocence stands justified, and not condemned, before the pure
presence and Throne of God, the Light, the Judge of all. Whether you, O men, can
believe me, or not, its even so; though I am with, and among many Brethren,
Sons and Daughters of the same Family, or Household of Faith condemned of
wicked, ungodlike, unreasonable men, who are out of the Faith of Gods Elect,
that's a Mystery held in a pure conscience, and respects no man's persons without
which Faith its impossible to please the Living God: and thus it has happened
from Generation to Generation, they who were out of the Faith of Gods Elect, in
the respect of persons, giving and receiving honor, with flattering Titles,
one to another, which is from beneath, earthly and sensual, and not that which
is from above, True, Heavenly, Eternal, and Spiritual, always since the
beginning hated, and persecuted them that were born of the Spiritual Birth,
from above; and so it is at this day, That which is born of the Flesh is Flesh,
and from beneath, persecutes, that Birth that is born of the Spirit, which is
Spiritual, Heavenly, and from above and not from beneath, or of the world, that
lies in wickedness; and therefore do they hate us without a cause, even as
they did Gods Lamb, who is our perfect and complete Example, and Captain, even
of our Salvation: So that we marvel not at the matter, to see or feel the Birth
born of the Flesh, Death, and Hell, that's from beneath, persecute that of the
Spirit of Life, from above.

And behold, it comes to pass, That the true Witness in your Consciences,
and also in many more in Englands Nation, (the Land of my Nativity, or Place
where my first birth was begotten, and brought forth, and as a cloud consumed
away, and dyed, yet behold I live) shall be awakened, and arise to justify,
and not condemn; and answer to the words of my Testimony, given forth, and
declared now, and within thy Gates, O City Worcester, wherein I delivered forth
the Message which the Lord of heaven had put into my heart, to give forth A
certain sound and warning to thy Inhabitants, O bloody City, of the mighty,
terrible, and Glorious Day of God come, and coming, even a Resurrection Day:
and behold, its begun to dawn, and break forth in England first, and it is
shining forth over all Nations, (Blessed is the eye that beholds it.) And this
Day is and will be a day of joy, a day of peace, a day of Gladness of heart,
and of eternal Life to all the upright in heart, that turns from Ungodliness
(the Darkness:) But, on the contrary, it is a Day, and yet will be a Day of
Vengeance, a Day of Calamity and Distress, and Perplexity, a Day of Woe, and
Misery, a Day of Blackness and Darkness, and of Astonishment ^^art; yea, a
Day of burning, even in the bowels of such that reject the day of their
visitation, who turn not from Ungodliness, and so bring not forth Fruits meet
for Repentance, which I also freely cried within thy Gates, O City: And this is
the message of the Lord, in the Name of the Lord, and not in my own, to the
Inhabitants of this City, as I declared, to be fulfilled in its season: And
furthermore, this Day of the Lord, which is the Light of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the true Light by whom the World was made, who lights every man that comes
into the world, (and is the way prepared before the face of all People,) and
this everlasting Light of the Lord Jesus Christ, as I declared, is breaking
forth, and shining over all the Nations, and is to awaken the Witness of God
in every man's Conscience; So that, according to its Testimony, in every man,
even so shall every man's words, thoughts, and ways, and Actions be tried and
judged, justified or condemned. Wherefore, as I said, and yet say, The Witness
of God (which is the Light of Jesus, and not of the Natural man, carnal, or
darkness) in every Conscience of the Inhabitants of this City, and of the
Nations of the Earth is to, and may be awakened, and arise to judgment, and to
guide people in the way of Peace, Love, and Unity with God, and one with
another, and with the whole Creation, and to do unto all men (in this good old
way the Light) as they would be done by, and to speak the Truth every man from
his heart to his Neighbor: And verily, if people come not to be exercised in
this good old way of Light, and Life, whatsoever they do and may profess, or be
called in words, all their Religion is and may be vain, for this is the Law of
the Prophets, according to the saying of Jesus, Matthew 7. and the Love that
fulfills it, is the Light in the Heart, and the Light is of God, and that which
may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them; and
so the people shall all be taught of God, who is a Spirit, to worship him in
it, who is Light, to walk in it, who is Love, to love God again, and one
another; and not to kill, or devour, but to love neighbor as self, as says
the Holy Scripture.

And, Moreover the time is a at hand, and behold it comes to pass, That it
will be more tolerable for them called Turks, Infidels, and Heathens, then for
many of the Inhabitants of this City; and of Englands professing and profane
Inhabitants, whose life does not show it self like the Apostles; and let as
many as desire to have a right and good Understanding, to discern the ground
and cause of my Sufferings.

Together with many more of my Dear Friends in this City, and throughout the
Nation, let Them with a meek Spirit, and in the fear of the Lord, deliberately
(and not hastily) read this throughout, and suffer the True Witness to arise,
to answer to the same Testimony from whence the words come; and know, that
according to, and after this manner, the words of my Testimony was declared in
the 8th Month, the 20th day, without and within thy Gates, O City: And after
that, Men that feared not God, did beat, and also wickedly threatened often to
take away my Life, as one called Captain Thornbury did, many times, with his
sword drawn, directed and put toward my breast, and to thrust it into my Guts,
as he threatened many and diverse times, with wicked and desperate swearing, and
cursing, not becoming a Soldier, or the Spirit of a man, an Englishman, to a
naked man that neither spoke nor thought evil against any one man, woman, or
childs person, upon the face of the whole earth; He that searches my heart
knows its even so. And while he, the said Captain Thornbury (so called) had
caused my body to be halled, dragged, and abused, and to be thrown from place
to place in the Street of the City, breathing out his cruel, vile threatenings,
together with bloody Oaths, and cursed Speakings which thereby strengthened the
hands of many wild,brutish and ungodlike men, women, and Children, whilst I
was among them in the meekness, and strength of God, even as a Lamb, among a
company of Ravenous, Wilde-beasts, Bears, Lions, and devouring Wolves, bereaved
of their whelps; and as they were after this manner drawing me before the
Judgment Seat, some crying out, Knock out his brains before he goes any
further, and many such like cruel threatenings and revilings, doing violence. O
ye Rulers, forget not, but remember the wickedness acted by them called
Mountebanks, many days acting wickedness, within the City, notwithstanding
they were warned by sundry of the servants of the Lord, in the 8th Month, 1660.
who were halled, bearen, and abused for the same. Furthermore, one of these,
called Mountebanks, acting wickedness after their accustomed manner, folly, and
madness, upon a stage, in the open street, of the City, with his face almost
all black, with a Crown upon his head. And what is this, a honor, or dishonor
to the King, O Ye Magistrates? But what has, your sword been laid upon this
Transgressor yet? And, Is not this, and Bull-baiting, together with the abuse
of the poor Creatures of God, and such like madness, and Revellings, and
Abominations. Are not these things a great dishonor to the God of Heaven, to
the King, to you, and your City. O ye Rulers, in meckness Consider, and hold
forth your sword, and let your eyes be open to see, where to lay it, lest the
Lord require it at your hands. These are the words of God to Ye, through his
Prisoner. D. B.
A lamentation sounded in my heart for the, Sober Inhabitants of this City:
And, Lo, the Spirit of the Lord within me showed me, how it was with Jonah and
the Nenivites; how that they suffered him to deliver his Message, and to cry,
when he entered into the great City Ninevy, a days journey: and behold, The
Profane Inhabitants of this City would not suffer me, with my precious life in
my hand (which I had received power to lay it down, and to take it again) to
obey the Lord of Heaven, hardly half an hour to cry against Sin, and to declare
Glad-Tidings, and to warn them freely to Repentance, as before expressed. And,
Whilst my mind was thus meditating in the Counsel of God, whilst they were
threatening and drawing this body in which I am before the Judgment Seat, the
good Spirit of the Lord, the Holy God, in me, rather justified the men of
Ninevy, than the hard-hearted, blood-thirsty men of this City. And Lo, this Cry
immediately run through me, (viz.) That the men of Ninevy shall arise up in
Judgment against this Generation.

And Friend, and Friends, Know Ye again, That after this manner the words of my
Testimony were sounded forth through me, even as the good Spirit of the Lord,
in my heart gave me utterance, to which my Soul is become subject (Glory to the
God of Truth) and (Lo) I rather chose to fear, and obey God, than man that
shall dye, and to be condemned of the world that lies in wickedness, rather
than to be condemned of the Lord by his Witness, the Light of Everlasting
Life, of Righteousness revealed in me: Yet I am subject to every Ordinance of
Man, for the Lords sake, Active or Passive; (to be plain, thus) Active, in
obedience to the Ordinances of Man, that are Just, Equal, or Equitable,
Wholesome, and Reasonable, founded on, and according to the Righteous, Equal,
Royal Law of God, which is so just; and also Passive, by suffering under the
contrary, as a Testimony against it, and them that ministers it forth, in its
many and Various Appearances: And, This many Hundreds that fear and obey the
God of Truth with me, (in the strength of Jesus, the Light that saves us from
Sins) Do even for the Lords sake.

And through thy Gate, and Street, O CITY, the sound words of the Living
Testimony of God, in this his mighty Day has entered, and even into the Ears
and Hearts also of many of thy Inhabitants, whether they love to retain or keep
the wholesome Sayings, or not, or hear or forbear; yet, bear with me, and listen
O Ye Inhabitants of this CITY, and hearken, O all ye Inhabitants of ENGLAND,
and of the NATIONS afarr off, to whom this shall come, and give ear to the
words of a True Friend, even to the whole Creation of God, and to the soul of
every Man, of Male or Female, that lies under the Bondage of Corruption, and
groans for Deliverance, to be brought into the Glorious Liberty, which is the
true Liberty, the same that was in the Beginning, the Dominion, and Perfect
Freedom of the Sons of God. Let the Meek, Wise in heart answer me.

Worcester Prison, this 9th Month, the 12th Day, at even: and of the Year
accounted, 1660. D. B.

Here follows a true Relation of several Persons, who heard what was declared
by Daniel Baker, the 20th of the Month called October, (1660) through part of
this City, some of which heard him from the beginning until he was forced off
the Beast that he did ride on; and their Testimonies are as follows.
Imprimis, FRances, the Wife of John Rose heard him declare from the beginning
unto the end: And her Testimony is, That he did warn the people to Repent, for
Destruction and Misery was near at hand, and such like sound Exhortations, but
not any thing against the King, or any other Person.

Anne, the Wife of John VVinfield, heard him speak, thar The Dreadful Day, or
a Terrible Day was near at hand, or to this purpose; but not any thing that was
hurtful to any man's person.

Henry Dyson, his Testimony is, that he spoke to this purpose that, A Gloomy
and Dark Day was at hand, but a Day of Gladness to them that fear the Lord; and
exhorted people to repent.

William Till heard him speak to this purpose, that, Woe is to the Wicked, or to
such who love Sin, but unto them that did deny Ungodliness, a Day of Peace;
with many other Godly Admonitions.

Robert Smith heard him say, that, A Day of woe and Astonishment was at hand,
but a day of Gladness and joy to the Upright in heart: witness, Elizabeth Smith.

Richard Till said, that he heard him counsel the people, to Repent, for the
Kingdom of God was at hand: but not any thing touching the Rulers of this
Kingdom.

Philip Bearcroft and Edborough his Wife heard him exhort the Inhabitants to be
awakened, for the day of God was nigh.

I Robert Edwards restifie, That the Man that declared in the Street, from the
Cross to the Place where he was pulled off the Horse, I was an Eyewitness, an
ear witness of his riding, and of his behavior, in his declaring, as I went
from the Cross, near to him, within the hearing of him all the way. And he
spoke nothing touching the King nor of his Majesty, nor of Tyrant, nor Usurper,
nor of the Nation, nor Nations, nor Government, nor Governors, Rob. Edwards.

Dorothy Martine, and Margaret Drue, they heard him say, That the Light was a
shining forth, and that it would shine forth more and more, and that the Day of
the Lord was at hand: But nothing against the King, His Government, or any ones
person.

Thomas Garret's Testimony is this, that he heard him say, that, Christ was a
shining forth in the Nation: and that, he warned people to Repent: and that,
the Day of Judgment was at hand, but nothing against the King, his Government,
or any man's person.

And diverse others, who were VVitnesses of what D. B. said, their Testimony may
be produced, who heard him speak words to the same purpose, who heard nothing
spoken by him against the King, or Government, or the person of any one.

D. B.

THE END.

